

HONI^SOIT QVI MAL^Y PENCE
BATMAN upon Bartholome, His Book De Proprietatibus Rerum, Newly corrected,
enlarged and amended: with such Additions as are requisite, unto every several
Book:

Taken forth of the most approved Authors, the like heretofore not translated
in English.

Profitable for all Estates, as well for the benefit of the Mind as the Body.
1582.

LONDON Imprinted by Thomas East, dwelling by Paul's wharfe.



CONSERVA ME DOMINE


THe Bat unknown, yet this his native soil,
And bears, that Parents had, by Martial prowess toil,
From Swoll as may appear, of Germane race in deed,
By Emprour Charels he, that gave each one his meede.
The Moon increasing shows, that Justice (aye) must grow
And AEgles wings, of white, and red, the Laws to use below,
The mecke and mild to guide, the wicked to displaie,
As heretofore (when virtue shall) restore that did decaie,
The Stars, triangled set, declares not one, but all,
Should know their Prince, their Land, their Friend, least over soon they fall.
The Shield of glittering Gold, reports a Gift of Grace,
And Stars above the Moon, foretells some noble race:
So borne in one Field, as the Athuauncer will
By light of light, (even God above) whose power continues still.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Lord, Henry Carry, of the most noble order of the
Garter Knight, Baron of Hunsdon, governor of the Queens Majesty's town of
Barwicke, and Lord Warden of the East Marches of England, anemptest Scotland,
and one of the Queens majesty's honorable Counsel, his singular good Lord:
Stephan Batman wishes; the fervent zeal of Gods truth, and long continuance
of prosperous health, with the increase of much honor.
THE prudent and most wise king of the world, Solomon, in his Proverbs, among
many sentences of profound sapience, says, that those which be wise shall have
honor in possession: Also that the prosperity of the right Honorable shall not
decay, because they shall be had in an everlasting remembrance, O happy birth
whereunto many are borne, to double honor: among men on Earth, among Angels
in Heaven. Seeing therefore that wisdom is the only preferrour to honor, how
much is he, to be had in special reverence, who in very deed says. I Wisdom
dwell with Counsel, Pro. 8.
and find out Knowledge and Understanding. By me Princes reign, bear rule,
and Noble men do judge the Earth, I have been from everlasting, I was before
the foundations were laid, therefore harken unto me: Do justice, hear the
oppressed, defend the innocent, forget not to do good to al men, but specially
to those, that are of the householde of Faith: let not your hands be open to
receive, and shut when you should give: Be merciful, for our heavenly Father
is merciful, who in very deed is the Wisdom, whereof I have spoken, and the
same, from whom all actions of good directions proceeds: by whose
incomprehensible grace I have been made able to renew and finish an old
ancient book, containing the properties of sundry things, the description of
Countries, dispositions of creatures, operation of Elements, effects of
simples, and such like, no less needful then profitable, as shall appear, by
perusal thereof: Beseeching your honor to accept this my Dedication, (not as
a defendour of some frivolous fantasy) but as this book shall deserve, being
read over, wherein I doubt not, but that your honor shall find many things to
your contentation. This I end, depending on your honorable furtheraunce, when
Oppertuniti shall minister Occasion, and in the mean time, I shall not cease to
pray unto God, whose merciful providence guide you, with his endless
prosperity, and all Christian magistrates.

Your Honors Chaplain, at commandment. S.B.M.
Vesper. Accept the travail of him that wishes prosperity to his Country:
for the gift of knowledge is greater, then the patrimony of many friends.



TO THE READER.
Itale in his description of Britain, printed Ana. 1548. reherseth
Barthelmevv, but not Gla^tuile, to be in Edward the 3. time.
THIS book, being first set forth, in the year of our Lord God. 1360. The
Author whereof is reported to be a Franciscan Friar, of the noble family of
the Earls of Suffolk, (named Barthelmew Glantuile) who studeously gathered
this singular work, for the most part, of the properties of those things the
which he had found written in the Bible, to the only benefit of his Country:
which book, was had in great estimation among the learned, as well beyond the
seas as at home, until within 60, years past, there sprang up famous, and
worthy persons, of singular perseverance and learning: which from the course of
ancient beginnings, set forth the same that was formally written of, with
additions aunswerable to time present, using new Titles, whereunto is added so
much as has been brought to light by the travail of others, as Conradus
Gesner of Tygure, Physician, writing of the nature of beasts, birds, fishes,
and Serpents, Fuchsius, Mathiolus, Theophrastus, Paracelsus, and Dodoneus,
these wrote of the natures, operations and effects of Herbs, Plants, Trees,
Fruit, Seeds, Mettalls and Mineralls. Sebastian Munster, Henry Cornelius
Agrippa, and others of Astronomy and Cosmographie. Abraham Ortelius of
Antwarpe for maps and discriptions: all which works has done great good in
diverse and sundry Common wealths. I have therefore as an imitator of the
learned, for the good will I bare to my country, collected forth of these
aforesaid Authors, the like devises, which they in times past gathered of their
elders, and so renewing the whole book, as is apparent by additions, is brought
home, the Master, the Pilot, and the profit thereto belonging, desiring the
well acceptance of the same, and the friendly correction, if any words shall
happen to be mistearmed in the imprinting (hoping that there will be found very
few.) Farewell in the Lord Jesus, from whose magnificence flows the
spiritual knowledge of our perfection, both here and in the world to come.

Stephan Batman, professor in Divinity.
THE PROLOGVE of the Translator.
TRue it is, that after the noble and expert doctrine of wise and well learned
Philosophers, left and remaining with us in writing, we know that the
properties of things follow and ensue their substannce. Heerefore it is, that
after the order and the distinction of substaunces, the order and the
distinction of the properties of things shall be and ensue. Of the which
things, this work of all the books ensuing, by the grace, help and
assistaunce of Almighty God, is compiled and made. Marvel not ye witty and
eloquent readers, that I thiu of wit, and boid of running, have translated this
book from latin into our vulgar language, as a thing profitable to me, and
peradventure to many other, which understand not Latin, nor have not the
knowledge of the properties of things, which things be approved by the books
of great and cunning Clearkes, and by the experience of most witty and noble
Philosophers. All these properties of things be necessary and of great value,
to them that will be desirous to understand the obscurities or darkness of
holy Scriptures, which are given to us under figures, under parables and
se^blance or likelihoods of things naturalls and artificialls. S. Denis that
great philosopher and solemyne Clearke, in his book named, The heavenly
Hierarchies of Angels, testifies and witnesses the same, saying in this
manner: Whatsoever any man will coniect, feign, imagine, suppose, or say: it is
a thing impossible, that the light of the heavenly divine brightness covered
and closed in the Deity or in the Godhead, should shine upon us: if it were
not by the diversities of holy couertures. Also it is not possible, that our
wit or intendement might ascend unto the contemplation of the heavenly
Hierarchies immaterials, if our wit be not led by some material thing, as a
man is led by the hand: so by these forms visibles, our wit may he led to
the consideration of ye greatness or magnitude of the most excellent beauteous
claretie, divine and invisible. Also, the blessed Apostles Paul in his
Epistles recites this, saying: that by these things visibles, which are made
and be visible, man may see and know by his inward sight intellectual, the
divine, celestial, and godly things, which are inuisibles to this our
natural sight. Devout Doctors of Theology or Divinity, for this
consideration, prudently and wisely read and use natural philosophy and
moral, and Poets in their fictions and feigned informations, unto this fine and
end, so that by the lykelihoode or similitude of things visible, our wit or our
understanding spiritually, by clear and skillful vtteraunce of words, may be
so well ordered and uttered, that these things corporalls may be coupled with
things spiritualls, and these things visibles may be conjoined with things
inuisibles. Excited by these causes to the edifieng of the people contained in
our Christian faith of Almighty Christ Jesus, whose majesty divine is
incomprehensible, and of whom to speak it becomes no man but with great
excellent worship and honor, and with an inward breadfull fear. Loath so
offend, I purpose to say somewhat under the correction of excellent learned
Doctors, and wise men: what every creature reasonable ought to believe in this
our blessed christian faith.

FINIS PROLOGI.
The names of the Authors to this Book, in what time, and of what profession,
AVgustine the famous Doctor in Christ's Church, born in Affricke, in a town
called Gathensis, was of such excellent wit, that in his childhoode, he
learned all the seven lyberall Sciences without an instructour. He was
wonderfully learned, especially in the doctrine of Plato, whereby he was the
rather induced to embrace the Christian faith. He favored the errors of the
Maniches, but by the continual prayer of his good mother Monica, and the
persuasion of Saint Ambrose, he was at last converted to the true faith. They
both replenished with the holy ghost did sing together the psalm Te Deum,
aunswering mutually one to the other. Afterward in prayer, writing and
preaching, he so profited, that he was had in great reverence of all men, and
wrote more Books then ever did any in ye Church of the Latins. He lived
seauentie six years, and was Bishop of Hippone a City in Affricke forty
years, and dyed in the year of our Lord, four hundred thirty seven.

Amandus, was Bishop of Traiecte^sis in Vascouia, a man learned and of godly
life, about the year, four hundred eighty.

Ambrose was Bishop of Millaine, the year of our Lord three hundred seauentie
and three: a Roman borne, of a noble and ancient house, and had been Consul.
As this man (being sent by Valentinianus ye Emperor to Millaine, to pacify a
sedition) persuaded the people to concord, suddenly the voice of an Infant was
heard of all men, which cried: Ambrose is worthy to be Bishop. Which voice so
fervently stirred the people, that they all condescended to make him their
Bishop, notwithstanding he was not yet baptized, but newlye instructed in the
faith, they compelled him to take the Office, and forthwith all the people of
Lumbardie agreeed in one opinion of the Faith: a rare form of election. He
was of singular holiness, gentleness, wisdom and lerning, etc.

Thomas de Aquinus, borne in Sicilia Doctor, of the order of a Friar preacher,
Disciple to Albertus Magnus, in the Province of Apulia, descended of noble
Parentage, an excellent Divine. He wrote four Books of Sentences, and was
called the Angelical Doctor. Many preposterous fables have been written of
him, only this, that he was notwithstanding his learning, very superstitious.
He fl^urished about the year 1274. After Lanquet, one thousand two hundred
fifty and eight.

Ancelme was Archbishop of Caunterburie, Eng.
first a Muncke, in which time he wrote diverse Books, Cur Deus Homo, De libero
Arbitrio, De similitudinibus, Monologyon, De praedestinatione, etc. This man
was simple in show, and subtle in disputation, a special favorer of the
Roman relygion, He flourished about the year of Christ one thousand one
hundred and six, after Lanquet. This Ancelme is said to be the cause of
Cleargies divorce from their wives.

Aristotle Son of Nicomachus the Physician, borne in Stragera in Greece,
consuming his youth ryotouslye: he was after Scholar to the noble Plato
twentye years continuallye. He excelled all men in sharpness of wit, and
knowledge in diverse Sciences: wherefore King Philip of Macedonia, sent him his
Son Alexander to teach, saying: He thanked God that he had a Son borne
in his time. This man began a seete, the followers whereof, were called
Peripatetici. He taught in Athens after Platoes death four and twenty
years. He was bannished out of Athens, because it was supposed he deemed not
well of their Gods. It is written, that he dyed by this occasion: as he
went by the sea side among fishermen, they told him a Riddle, which when by
long study he could not assoyle, for shame and sorrow he dyed. He was
little of personage, crook backed, ill shapen, and stutting. He was three
hundred forty five years before Christ's Incarnation.

Auicen or Abicen, a famous Physician, whom some suppose to be of a City in
Spain called Hispalis, or Civil. He was excellently learned, and wrote in the
Arabic tongue many noble works of Philosophy, natural and Metaphisicke. He
comprehended Physic in five Uolumes, wherein he calls himself, the
Interpretour of Galen: he was about the year of our Lord 1151, and was (as
some suppose, poisoned by Auerois, whom he slew before he died.

Auerois a great Philosopher, and Physician enemy to Auicen, and also to
Christ, and for his great Commen^es written upon Aristotle, he is named
Commentator. He was about the year of our Lord 1145.

Appollonius, borne in Greece, about the year of our Lord 90. He profited so
in learning that being but a child, was a learned Philosopher, he followed the
sect of Pythagoras, going always in linen, and never eating any thing that had
life. Notwithstanding his great learning, yet trauayled he into Egypt, Persia,
Aethiopia, and Judea, and returned into Greece, and Rome. After a while about
the age of 80. years in great assemblye of people was suddenly conveyed away,
no man knows how nor whether, as Philostratus who wrote his life says. There
were other also of the same name.

Eng.
Alfredus Anglicus of Beuerley priest, a man of singular vtteraunce, learned in
Divinity, Philosophy, History, and Mathematickes. He flourished about the
year of our Lord. 1087. as says John Bale, a worthy Historiographer of late
memory.

Asclepiades a famous Physician. Also a Philosopher, the time when he flourished
is not certain.

Basilius a man of great virtue and lerning, borne in Cappadocia, of a noble
house, being very skilful in Rhetoric, Logic and Philosophy, disputing at
Athens, and there obtained such fame, as in proceeding farther he became Bishop
of Caesarea, and taught the people the true faith. He was exiled by Valens the
Emperor, but revoked from exile. He flourished about the year of our Lord,
367. and dyed the year of Christ. 387. There were two other of ye same name.
Alley.

Beda Angliae, a famous learned man: Eng.
for his modesty, virtuous life and learning, surnamed, Worshipful Bid. He
wrote the historye of the Saxons apart, whose hystoricall method, diverse
writers since have followed. He flourished about the year of our Lord 724.
after Lanquet. After William Alleye Bishop of Exceter in his Miscellenca, Beda
was an Englishman, and lived in the time of Justinian the second, he was also
in the time of John ye 6. Bishop of Rome, When the Sarazens arrived out of
Africa to invade Spain, then Bid with his letters, solicited the Princes to
recover it again. He wrote many works both in the Greek and Latin,
especially one notable work, De Natura, and temporibus, which is divided into
three books, he wrote above an hundred books, of which some be fained in
his name, he had two brethren learned, whose names were Strabo and Haimo. He
trauayled other countries, twenty nine years, and being of the (...) of 72.
dyed Anno. 734.

Bernard, was borne in Burgondy, in the Castle of Fountaynes, of noble lyguage,
he became a Muncke in the Monestarie of Clareuallencis, gane himself so
study, and wrote diverse Books, as De Consideratione, ad Eugenium Papam, De
Cantica canticorum, De amore Dei, Librum meditacionum, and many other
Homelies, Epistles and Sermons. He was about Anno. 1112. and lived to the
years of 63. After the Legenda, deceased. Anno. 1156.

Boecius a learned man and Senator of Rome, who lived in the time of
Theodoricus and Odeacer, Kings of the Ostrogothes, that is East Goths, now
under the government of the kings of Denmark. Gothia, an I Will by Denmark
called Gutland, not far from Norway. This said Boethius, (the friend of
Manlius Seuerinus) a Poet and Philosopher, among diverse excellent works he
wrote De consolatione Philosophiae, De trinitate and de vnitate Christi, de
Topicis, he flourished about Anno Domini. 473. he dyed about 520. Croni.

Basis a Philosopher.

Busus a Physician.

Ciprianus of Carthage in Africa, was there Bishop, in whose youth he was
dedicated by his parents to the devil, as Iacobus de voragine, Henricus de
Eufordia, and Voleteranus do write, he was converted from the law of the
Pagans, he was an excellent Rethoritian, a careful Bishop, and a faithful
ouerseer of the Church, he took great pains in delivering and helping of
Martires, for being absent, he would write unto his Priests and Deacons, that
they should with care and diligence embrace and make much of the Martires,
which were captive. The fortitude and godly stoutnesse of his mind in
executing of his office, the third Epistle of his first book do declare ^
neither did there lack in hint, wisdom and circumspcaion. Besides this; he
was of a singular modesty, for he would take upon him to do nothing, without
the consent of his fellows in office. He was beneficial and kind toward his
poor brethren, and such as were strangers, etc. He had not withstanding his
virtues, errors, as appears in Sermo. de lapsis. 5. in Sermo de Elcemofina.
He called Tertulians works his Master: he suffered many dangerous conflictes:
he inueighed earnestly against Heresles and Idols, he wrote a pleasant style.
He was banished to exile by Valerianus. Emperor of ye Romans. Paternus the
Proconsull being dead, Galeanus Maximus who succeeded Patemus, commanded his
servant, to carrye Cyprian in a Carte to the place of punishment, where the
Lieuetenaunt being about to do sacrifice unto his Gods, brake out into these
words. Thou have lived a great while being of a pestiferous mind, and have
gathered unto thee, men of a wicked conspiracy, and have been an open enemy
unto the Roman Gods, and their holy laws: neither could the godly and sacred
Princes, Valerianus and Galenus, reduce thee by any means unto the sect of
their ceremonies: after which words he was slain with the sword. At this time
Sixtu, was bishop of Rome (as Eusebius writes) in the year of our Lord, two
hundred fifty and nine. Alleye.

Cicero a Senator among the Romans, in his youth of a meruaylous pregnacie of
wit, whom the excellent Orator Appolonius, greatly extolleth, for what
subtlety was in Logic, what commodity in moral Philosophy, what secret
knowledge in Philosophy natural, he knew it. After many verations and
conspiracies against him, one Herenius the homicide of Antonie, as Cicero fled,
ouertooke him, and smote of his head and hands, and brought them to Antonie
etc. He flourished about fortye years before the Incarnation of Christ.

Cato was not first a surname, but a name of merit: for the ancient Romans
called him Cato, that was wise by much experience. Of this name, two there were
most excellent for their learning, government and wisdom.

For the one being made Consul, wan more Cities in Spain, then he had aboden
days in that Country: in which journey, he retained to himself, nothing of
all that was found there, but meat and drink only. He made his soldiers
rich, giving to every of them, for reward, a pound wayght of Silver, saying:
Better it were that may Romans returned again to Rome with Silver, than a
few with gold. This Cato was before Incarnation of Christ, one hundred
eighty and two years.

The other Cato, was called Vticensis, because he slew himself in the Town
Vtica: he dyed before the Incarnation 44. years. D. Cooper.

Scipio Affricanus, was of a wonderful towardness: this drove Anniball out of
Affrike: he subdued the city of Carthage: he after many learned and wise
persuasions, grievously took ye unkind dealing of the Senate, went from the
City of Rome, to a manner place, which he had at Linternum, and there ended his
life, when he had lived 54. years, before the incarnation of Christ, about
145. years, that year was Corinth in Greece destroyed.

Constantine, a Physician, of ye name many, forth of diverse provinces.

Chaldeus, an Astronomer of ye country of Assyria, Solmus and Pliny name that
country Chaldae, where the great City of Babylon stood.

Damascen a D. in Divinity very famous, called John, of Damacenum Monach, for
his Angular wisdom, was had in great estimation of Theodosius, Emperor of
Constantinople, the year of Christ's incarnation 440. as says the Author of
Supplimentum supplimenti cronicarum, foli. 168. liber. 9. He wrote 4. books of
sentences, also a book tituled, No man has seen God at any time: Defide, of
faith: of Christian baptism: Item Cur Deus and Homo sit: In two books, he
wrote of Mettalls and Physic. In the third part of Lanquets chronicle, fol.
242. is expressed of one Damacenus, a Philosopher who flourished 1352. The
first of these, I take to be the Author to Glantuyle.

Damascius an hystoriographer, which in ye time of Herodotus, wrote of things
done, before the war of Peloponnesus, about Anno.452.

Demosthenes a Prince among the Grecians, and a singular Philosopher, about
Anno.345. before Christ. He was disciple to Plato: he stammered in his speech,
he put small stones in his mouth, and inforceing to speak treatablye, at last
attained to pronounce very plainly. He was also an excellent Orator.

Dioscorides called also Pedacius, and Phacas, a worshipful knight of Egypt,
who joining learning with chiualrye' being in the Romans Host in diverse
countries, in times vacant from Battle, made diligent search for ye figures
and virtues of diverse herbs, and other things necessary for medicin, and wrote
most truly of them in Greek, as Galen testifies. He lived under Cleopatra and
Antonius, about Anno before Christ. 47.

Democritus, an excellent Philosopher, being a child, learned of the wise men
of Chalda, Astronomy, and their Divinity: after he went into Persia, to
learn Geometry. After, he returned to Athens, where he gave his possessions
and riches innumerable, unto the weal publyke, reserving a little garden, where
in he might at more liberty, search out the secrets of nature. He wrought many
wonderful works in natural philosophy and Physic. When he beheld the
Citizens of Athens, he continuallye laughed at their foolish diligence, which
spared no pains to get ^uthoritye and riches, that they were not sure to
keep: which labored to get their children great possessions, who either died
before their Fathers, or else over living them, shortly spent away, al yt their
fathers left them. But the Athenians not percepuing the cause of his laughter,
thinking him mad, caused Hipocrates the Physician to go unto him, who
perceiving the occasion of his laughter, said: Democritus is not mad, but the
Athenians be mad, at whom he does laugh. He was before the Incarnation of
Christ. 492. years.

Donatus, a Gramarian, Master to Saint Hierome. About Anno.350. another Donatus
martired under Julian the Apostate, or forsworn Christian. Also Donatus a
notable Heretic, that held opinion Christians to be no where but of their
Congregation. Of the same opinion are the Heretics of the Familye of love:
Donatus was a Numidian, about the year of our Lord three hundred fifty and
three. Another Donatus Aretinus Bishop of Etruriae, a man of holy life,
persecuted under Iulianus.

Dionysius Areopagita, a famous Philosopher of Athens, and Disciple to Saint
Paul. He only, of all the Heathen Philosophers, believed Saint Paul
preaching of Jesus Christ.

And before, when as he was in Egypt, whether he went for learning sake, and
being there, together with Appollophanes who was his Instructour, beyond all
compass of reason did see the Eclipse that was at the death of Christ: Either
(said he) the God of Nature suffers vyolence, or else the Frame of this world
will be now dissolved. He wrote to Timotheus Bishop of Ephesus, twelve books
De Diuinis nominibus, of the heavenly Hierarchy, and many other excellent
works, as Suydas witnesses.

Escicius or Euscicius. Disciple to Gregorius Nazianzenus.

Eusebius Pamphilius, Bishop of Caesarea in Palaestine, wrote ten Books of
the Ecclesiastical Historye. He was about the year of our Lord, after
Sebastian Munster, three hundred flue, after Cronicarum, three hundred seven.

Eraclytus, or Heraclytus, a Philosopher, which always wept when he beheld
the People, considering how busy they were to gather treasure, and how
negligent in the well bringing up of their children: his works, of purpose
were obscure, and hard to be understood. When he was old, he fell into a
Dropsy, in which, neglecting Physicians, he wrapped himself in Cow dounge,
and so lyeng a sleep in the Sun, was torn and devoured of Dogs. He had no
master, but by his own nature and dilygence prevailed to great knowledge: he
lived in the time of the last Darius, and wrote many things of Philosophy in
vearses. Aristotle does often use his testimony. He was about the year before
Christ's incarnation, four hundred eighty, Sebas. Munster.

Epinus.

Euclides, the name of a famous Geometrician, Scholar to Socrates, of
Megarensis, a Country in Achaia, about the year four hundred twenty and
two, before Christ's Incarnation.

Egidius, a Greek Philosopher. Also a Physician, and a Monarke, who wrote
diverse Books, among the which he tituled one, De venis. He flourished about
the year of our Lord, seven hundred fourteen.

Fulgencius, of the Nation of Apher in Aphrica, Bishop of Rupensis or
Ruspensis, an excellent Doctor. To these three Provinces he trauayled, in
Sardinia, in Africa, and among the Vandales, to establish the Christian faith,
both by teaching, preaching, and persuading. He wrote three special Books. De
Trinitate, De libero arbitrio, De regulis fidei, with diverse others. He
flourished about the year of Christ 500.

Fisiologus.

Gregorius called Nazianzen, leaving his study of Philosophy, with all
natural Sciences, did with Basilius of Cappadocia, fall to the reading of holy
Scriptures. He was of noble Parentage, and a Roman borne. He wrote to
Procopius, that he never saw a good end of any of the Counsayles, among the
Bishops of Rome. Therefore affirming that all of them had evil ends he left
not much authority to be attributed unto their Decrees and Counsayles. Alley,
and Legenda, Authors.

Gilbertus Magnus, a very learned Writer, who flourished about the year of
our Lord, nine hundred ninetye and two. There was also another of that name,
being called Gilbertus Anti Papa, that contended against Gregorye the Pope, in
the year one thousand seauentie and six. For the Papacy betwirte these two
Prelated and their assistauntes, as it appears in Supplimentum Supplimenti
Cronicarum, was much slaughter, blood shed, and discord. Libro. 12.

Galenus the son of Nicon a famous Geometritian: In Physic he was so
excellent, as he may justly seem to be raised by divine providence, at that
time to make perfect that noble art, and to confound the manyfold sects and
errors, with which as then it was defaced, until he was fifteen years of
age, he was brought up by his Father in Gramer, Logic, and Arethmetike,
after he gave himself to more grauer studyes of Philosophy, wherein he
profited. After 18. years old, his Father by a dream was admonished to set
his son to study Physic, in which art within five years, he so notablye
prevailed, that he not only passed all his equalles, but his masters also
that taught him, he was adorned with the ornament of honor and good
government. In teaching he used an excellent order and method, that his
works are wonderouslye esteemed of all that know what learning means: So
much he tendered his own Country, being borne in Pergamos, a famous and
rich City in Asia the less, that he chose rather in his later time, to live
there in mean estate, then with the Emperors of Rome in great estimation and
dignity, he lived (as some do write) near an hundred years, he flourished
in the time of Marcus Comodus, and dyed only for feebleness of age, after
the incarnation of Christ, about 160. years.

Galen makes report of one special medicine (that happened to him by
chance) to cure the Gout, which is to take old, sour, or tart Cheese, and
with a Gammon of Bacon to be sodde together, and to be pownd in a mortar,
until it be flat like a pla^ster, this said to the aching joints, diminishes
the knots, and aswageth the pain.

Hugutio was Duke of Pisan in Greece, it seems because he is let by
Bartholome for an Author, that he wrote of the nature of some thing: he
vanquished the people of Hetruria, at the mountain called Catinum, this man
flourished about Anno Domini. 1320. Of this Hugution the Author of Sup. Siph.
Cronicar. calls him Hugutio Flagiolanus of Pisan and Lucensium, the Tyrant,
he was a scourge to the Florentines: it may be that there was some other of
that name, but I find no sufficient Author to avouch it.

Hysidorus or Isidorus, was Bishop after Leander of Hispalensis, now called
Sibilia or Siuile in Spain, a man of singular learning and cloquence, he
wrote diverse books, Ethimologarum, de summo bono, Allegoriarum, De
Astronomia, Domino and silio, Deum and homo, De viris illustribus, and
voca^^lis Grammatices, Historiarum quoque ab Adam, vsque ad haec tempora, that
is until that time in the which he wrote. De gestis Longabardorum, with
others, he flourished about Anno Domini. 615.

Innocentius, because there are diverse of that name, if there were any worthy
the name of learned, I suppose the first and second that were Bishops of Rome,
etc.

Iosath a Caldean Hystoriographer.

Ipartus or Hypareas Mathematicus, he was about the years before Christ, 368.

Iuuenall, a Roman Poet, which wrote Satyrs, flourished about the years after
Christ. 88.

Iohannicus.

Kalixtus, Graecus sieve Atheniensis, (because of his learning and study) borne
at Rauena, a city in Italy, being after Bishop of Rome, ordained the four
yearly fasts, about Anno Domini. 220. if mine author have not mistaken this
Kalixtus for some other.

Lentippus.

Michael Scotus, I find not of what country or profession, only of Johannes
Scotus, two of that name, the one flourished about 890. borne in Scotland, a
man had in great estimation of Carolus. 3. Emperor of the Romans, for his
learning and wisdom, the other was a friar of the order of the Minorites. and
Preather, who flourished about Anno. 1030. and was called John Dunus or Dunce,
otherwise Scotus.

Macrobius the name of an old writer, a Philosopher about the year of our
Lord. 156.

Mercurio, Miselake, Astrologus.

Nazarenus of Nazareth, if signifies a man dedicated only to the service of
God, in the time of the persecution of the Christians, there was one Nazarius
converted to the faith by Linus Bishop of Mediolanum (ye chief city in
Lumbardie called Millane) and after dyed a martyr about Anno Domini. 70.
Another Nazarius a Rethoritian, in Anno Domini. 334. some take Mediolanium, for
Mediolamum, which is the name of Orlyance in France: also a city in Westphalia
in Almaine, called Munster.

Ninus Delphicus of Delphos, in Greece, from whence was heard the Oracle of
Apollo, it may be the name of some writer, not lately recorded.

Origin called also Adamantius, (borne at Alexandria in Egypt) was son of
Leonides ye Martyr, a man of most excellent doctrine and virtue from his
childhood, (Saint Hierome writes, that Origin wrote, 6000, books, which he
testifies himself to have seen) when he came to the age of. 79. years (as
Nitephorus writes) he dyed, it seems he dyed in great misery and poverty
at the City of Tyrus, and was there buried.

Orosius the Historiographer flourished about Anno Christi. 400. a reverend
Priest, borne in Spain, expert in Histories, he wrote. 7. books against them
that said, that the decay of the common wealth of Rome, happened by the doctrine
of Christ, he was sent by S. Augustine to S. Hierome, who was then in Judea, to
learn of him the reason of the state of the soul.

Ouidius, surnamed Naso, borne in Sulmo (a town in the country of Peligna) in
Italy, brought up in Rome, and diligently instructed in Latin letters from his
tender age, he gave most diligent study to the making of vearses, from the
which he was withdrawn by his Father, and put to learn Rethorike, wherein he
so profited, that he shortly after became equal with the best Orators of
that time, and was advanced to be Senator, notwithstanding be gave his study
to Poetry: wherein by nature he was excellent, he was in good favor with the
Emperor Augustus, of whom at the last he was exiled so Pontus, where he spent
the rest of his life, in a town called Tomos, the cause of his exile, was for
abusing Iulia the Emperors daughter, as some suppose, and for making of the
book of the craft of love, whereby young minds might be stirred to wantonness:
he lived at the time that Christ our Savior was conversant with us here on
Earth.

Oribasius Medicus of the Country of Sardus or Pergamus, which flourished in
the year after Christ. 369. when Ausonius the Poet, Eutropius, Sextu, Rufus,
and Ammianus, Historiographers, were likewise in estimation.

Petrus Seuerus, whether the Apostle, or Alexandrinus, that virtuous Bishop and
Martyr, or any of the 60. Peter's, whereof the last is called Petrus Medices, I
refer at this present.

Pamphilius (the name of Neocles son) a Philosopher of Athens, Platos Scholar.
Also a Priest of Caesaria, which was martired about Anno Christi. 280. a very
eloquent man, in life a true Philosopher, he was the famousest man in that
time, a Grecian borne.

Patricius borne in Wales, At Pendias.
for a time had his above in Scotland, and was after Bishop in Ireland: the
first yt brought the Irish men to the Christian says. There is another named
Patricius, Saint Martines sisters son, which I suppose is but the only
Patricke, because the author in Super^^. and Sebastian Munster agree both on
one computation, Anno Christi. 429. This Patricke was a zealons Christian, and
died at Glastonbury in Somerset sheere, notwithstanding many fabulous and
superstitious toys the wicked have fathered on that good man. Chester says in
Policronicon, that Saint Patricke in his time was borne, whose Father had to
name Calprum, which was a Priest and a Deacons son, that was named Fodun,
Patriks mothers name was Couches, Martines sister of Gallia, that is France, he
was called Patricke for his temperance and wisdom, that is to say, father of
Citizens, he lived the age of. 122. years, until the time of Aurelius
Ambrose, king of ye Britans.

Papias a notable Gramarian of Lumbardie, very learned in the Greek tongue,
wrote a book tituled Vocabilorum, and flourished about Anno Christi. 1199. as
says Seb. Munster.

Papias also Bishop ^ of Hieropolitanus, a City in Asia, being over against
Laoditia, who was said to be the Disciple of Saint John the Apostle and
Evangelist, a man of singular learning, about the year after Christ. 132.

Plato, the Prince of Philosophers (in wisdom, knowledge, virtue, and
eloquence, far exceeding all other Gentiles) was borne in Athens, his Father
was named Ariston, being of an ancient and honorable house, his mother
Parectonia, descended from the lignage of the grane Solon, lyeng in his Cradle,
Bees were found to bring Honnie into his mouth, without hurting the child:
his diuinours did interpret to signify, that from him there should flow
eloquence most sweet and delectable.

Before I pass farther to speak of this Heathen Philosopher, I do much
marvel (yet under the discipline of the lerneder sort) why diverse other
famous men, concerning their learnings and wisdoms of later years (and also
Christians) notwithstanding no less superstitious then those Pagan Bentiles
were Idolatrous, why many be left out and not repeated as Authors, as well as
these ^arre fetched Philosophers, seeing that they deserve by the ballaunce of
equitye no less renown, as if they were learned and wise, yet were they no
Christians, or believing Jews. If those of our time (as by my Cataloge shall
appear) were as learned, wise, and discreet concerning writing, and yet
superstitions: as you refuse not the Gentile because of his Idolatrye, refuse
not the Christian because he is superstitious, for in disdayning the
superstition of the one, and accepting the Idolatrye of the other, you do then
maintain the old error and condemn the new vice, take therefore of both of
them that which is requisite concerning knowledge and learning, and refuse both
(as it is necessary) concerning Idolatry and superstition. As for example,
betwixt Plato and Patrike, Rabanus and Pythagoras, etc. I omit here the
wonderful dream of Platoes Father, and likewise Platoes amorous vearses,
which after he came to hear Socrates, he threw into the fire and burned, he
heard the Philosophers and Geometritians of Greece, and afterward went into
Italy, Affrik, and Egypt, to hear the divine and mystical sciences, and it
is also thought that he heard some of the Prophets, (about which tune was
Jesus the son of Sirach,) since there he found in his works sentences not
abhorring from our Catholyke faith, he was expert in martial affairs, he
chose a place by Athens called Accademia, where he taught, and therefore his
Disciples were called Accademici, there was in him a meruaiteus sharpness of
wit, with an incomperable dexterity in disputing, and making aunsweres, etc.
He dyed writing, of the age of 81. years, before the incarnation of Christ.
342. years.

Plateaurius Medicus.

Permenides or Parmenides a Philosopher of Athens, about the year before.
Christ three hundred and fiftye years, the Disciple of Anaxagoras, he was a
Philosopher of noble parentage.

Plautus a Comicall Poet, borne in Vmbria, a part of Italy, when he had spent
all his substance on players garments, and thereby was brought to extreme
pouertye, he was feign for his living to serve a Baker, in tourning a Querne
of hand mill, yet wrote he eloquent and pleasant Comedyes, he was in the time
of Cato Censorius, an hundred ninetye and three years before Christ.

Persius the name of two learned Romans. Also there was one Persius, a
Satyricall Poet, Flaccus Aulus, the son of Flaccus and Fulu^a of Ethrurie or
Hetruscum, which is the Country of Tuscan, (...)nes sent (...) of ligh(...)in
the firmoment, (...), such affiaunce had (...) these days to Prodiges, he was
at the time of the Evangelists about 47. or 55. years after Christ, he was
buried in Rome, at the age of 66. years.

Plinius Minor, or secnodus Veronensis, a Philosopher and Physician, the elder
Pliny wrote ye most excellent work, called the History of Nature, the other
wrote eloquent Epistles, supposed after Christ. 72. years: the young Pliny
was also called Cocilius Plinius, nephew to the first Pliny by his sister, who
wrote an Oration to Traiane the Emperor, in his commendation, which Oration is
named Panegericus. In the which he gives thanks to Traian, who made him
Consul.

Percianus.

Pythagoras Samius, Philosopher about Anno before Christ. 534. in the later end
of the fourth age of the world, a famous Philosopher in his time, whose School
was not occupied in naturalls and Astronomy, as others, but in Arethmetike,
Geometry, and Music, which he reduced first into sciences, and albeit in his
time none was comperable to him in wisdom, yet would he not be called a wise
man, but a Philosopher, that is, a lover of wisdom, his doctrine is said to
be divine, those whom he taught he joined to keep silence five years, the
occasion supposed was, that in those five years they might as well by
experience of private practice, as reading, become the more able to teach in
their common wealth. (It were not a miss if in the Church of England, those
green brains which come from the Uniuersities at 18.19.20.21.22.23. and 24.
years, having passed the Gramer, and proceeded Batthelers of Art, should by
and by be suffered to take the place of experienced and elder persons (to
become Preachers of the sacred Gospel of Christ) until they had farther
studied privately, and had conference with the elders, the want of such good
order is the cause of so many contentions in the Church, as is to be
lamented,) he never would do sacrifice with any blood, he would eat nothing
that had lyse, he continued his life in wonderful abstinence. After the
computation of Seb. Munster he lived about Anno. 590. before Christ.

Rabanus was a Monacke and Archbishop of Moguntinus, Mentes, a German
borne, but first he was Abbot of Fuldenzis, he wrote certain books in
Divinity upon the Chronicles and Machabees, beside certain Sermons: It
seems that he wrote some feastiuall of Saints days, he flourished about Anno
Christi. 840.

Robertus Lincoln called Grosted, Did by an Epistle reprove Pope Innocent,
affirming that the preching friars and minorit friars were infected with
heresy.
in Henry. 3. time, Anno Christi. 1253. a man so singularly learned, that of
his own coasts and charges, he sent over sea into diverse places far and
near for Hebrew books, Greek books, and others, wherein consisted any
matter for the establishing of christian faith, and was able to translate the
same into Latin.

Richard de sancto Victore, ordirus regularum, of Saint Augustine, a Doctor in
Paris, the chief City of France, said to be (as those which deserve praise
of later times) he wrote. 39. several books, as says my Author Sipli. Cron.
fol. 217. he lived about Anno Christi. 1130.

Simon Little.

Stephanus Strabus a Monacke of the Region of France, flourished about Anno.
844. the Commentator of the works of ( Rabanus the German monacke,
Archbishop of Mentes) he wrote a book De officijs Ecclesia, unto Lodowick the
Emperor.

Solinus an historian and Orator, about the time of Julius Caesar, before
Christ about fifty years.

Symonides a Poet of Greece, borne in the I Will called Caea, who was the first
that invented the vearses called Lyrici, he was about the years before Christ.
663.

Termegistus.

Theophrastus the old Philosopher, a prndent person. 170. years before Christ.

Titus Liuius an excellent Historian, or writer of Historyes, about Anno. 180
before Christ. Also there was Titus Liuius Magnus, an Hystoriographer, about
the time of Ouidius Naso, which I suppose to be the excellentest writer: he
flourished. 20. years before Christ. He lived 80. years, buried at Patauium:
he dyed about the fourth year of Tiberius Caesar, Patauium a city in Italy
called Padua or Pauie, nigh unto Venice. Also a City in Bithinia, now called
Polmen.

Theophilus Medicus, de vrinis.

Ptholome the name of many famous men, whereof Philadelphus, Disciple to Strabo
the Philosopher, builded the notable Library at Alexandria, and was there
burned of the Romans, the other restored the Mathematical sciences, he was
in the time of Antonie the Emperor, he also wrote diverse works.

Varro a noble Roman, also singularly learned, before Christ's incarnation. 4^.

Virgil the famous Port of Mantua, a noble City in Lumbardie, where Virgil was
borne, with whom flourished Horace, Ovid, Salust, Liuius, Hortensius,
Antenodorus, with many others. These men were in the happy time of Jesus
Christ, his coming in the flesh.

Gilhelmus Couches.

Ypocras a Philosopher.

Ysaac.

The first inuenter of Legike
Zeno a Philosopher, called Zeno Eloates, by adoption became Permenides son,
about. 340. before Christ's incarnation. This being taken of Nearchus the
tyrant, was stamped to death in a mortar, whose constancy for his countries
safety was invincible.

Zoroastes Magnus, a king of the Bactrians, in the time of Ninus, and was
before the wars of Troya. 400. years, he first, as Pliny writes, invented
Magical arts, and was in many other things excellently well learned, he left
books written, he was slain with fire from heaven. This was that Zoroastes
that laughed the same day in the which he was borne.

Andrew Board of Physic Doctor, an English man, The Breuiary of health,
printed Anno. 1547.

Andrew Theuet his Antarctike or new found world, printed, and from the French
translated. Anno. 1568.

Barnadine of Escalanta, of the realm of Galisia Priest, his discourse of the
East Indias, Anno. 1579.

Sir Humferie Gilbert Knight, his discourse to Cataia. 1579.

Ortelius, otherwise Abraham Hortelius, his universal description of ye whole
world. A Dutch man.

Hernan Lopes, a Portingall of Castaneda, his discovery of the East Indias,
translated into English by Nicholas Lichfield, gentleman, 1582.

Cornelius Agrippa forth of his secrets of Philosophy. A Spaniard of excellent
learning. Anno. 1530. he was a knight in the court of Charles, the 5. Emperor,
and had to name Henry Cornelius.

Doctor Turner Physician, Anno. 1551. one that for his travails in foreign
countries, for the only benefit of this our realm of England, deserves
perpetual praise.

Sir Thomas Eliot knight, in his book The Castle of health. 1541.

Thomas Lanquet Historiographer, whose work was afterward finished by T. Cooper.

Thomas Cooper, Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Lincoln, who set forth the
great Dictionary called Thesaurus linguae Romanae and Britanicae, an excellent
work printed Anno. 1578.

Anthonius Roberger, his Chronicle printed Anno. 1493.

John Stow, in his last abridgement.

FINIS.
A GENERAL TABLE, CONTAINING THE number of the Chapters in every several
book, and how to find the especial matters contained in the same.
Liber primus.
OF the Trinity. fol. 1. Of one and his unity. fol. 2.
Liber Secundus, contains 20. chapters.
The first of Angels. 2. What Angel is, after Damascenus. 3. Why an Angel in
bodyly shape is painted. 4 How Angels be described. 5 How Angels be compared
to material things. 6 of the order of Angels Hierarchies. 7 of three
Hierarchies. 8 of the order of Seraphin. 9 of the order of Cherubin. 10 of the
order of Thrones. 11 of the middle Hierarchy. 12 of the order of dominaons. 13
of the order of Principatus. 14 of the order of Potestates, or potentates. 15
of the third Hierarchy. 16 of the order of virtues. 17 of the order of
Archangells. 18 of the order of Angels. 19 of evil Angels. 20 of perverse
Angels.
Liber tertius, containing Chapters. 24. Of the properties of the soul.
1 of the description of man. 2 of the inner man. 3 of the soul. 4 How the
soul is decribed of the Philosophers. 5 How the soul took name. 6 Of the
powers of the soul. 7 The same to be Vegetabilis in working, Sensibilis
through life, Rationalis by perceiving. 8 of the soul Vegetabile. 9 of the
soul sensible. 10 of the inner sense. 11 of the virtue of sensitive
imagination. 12 of the virtue motive. 13 of the reasonable soul. 14 of the
virtues of the soul. 15 of the vital virtue. 16 of the Animal virtue. 17 of
the visible virtue. 18 of hearing. 19 of Smelling. 20 of the taste. 21 of
touching. 22 of those things that are required to the perfection of nature. 23
The pulses. 24 of the diversity of pulses.
Liber quartus contains chapters. 11.
1 Of the four qualities Elementaries. 2 of coldness. 3 of drouth. 4 of
moisture. 5 of meat and drink. 6 of humors, of the generation, effect, and
working of them. 7 of blood. 8 of the evil propertye of blood. 9 of Fleame. 10
of Cholar. 11 of Melancholy.
Liber quintus contains chapters. 66.
1 of the properties of the members in general. 2 of the propertyes of the
head. 3 of the brain. 4 of Caluaria, the skull. 5 of the eyes. 6 of the
disposition of the eyes. 7 of the black of the eye. 8 of the eye liddes. 9 of
the brows. 10 of the forehead. 11 of the Temples. 12 of the Ears. 13 of the
nose. 14 of the cheeks. 15 of the beard. 16 of the i^^es. 17 of the lips. 18
of the chinne. 19 of the mouth. 20 of the teeth. 21 The properties of Spettle.
22 of the voice. 23 of the throat. 24 of the neck. 25 of the shoulders. 26 of
the arms. 27 28 of the hands. 29 of the fingers. 30 of the nails. 31 of the
side. 32 of the back. 33 of the breast. 34 of the Paps. 35 of the lungs. 36 of
the heart. 37 of the breath. 38 of the stomach. 39 of the liver. 40 of the
gall. 41 of the spleen. 42 of the bowels. 43 of the kidneyes. 44 of the
bladder. 45 46 of the urine. 47 of the belly. 48 of the navel. 49 of the
genitalls of both kinds. 50 of the buttockes. 51 of the thighs. 52 of the
knees. 53 of the legs. 54 of the seete. 55 of the sole of the foot. 56 of
the heel: 57 of the bones. 58 of the marrow. 59 of the gristle. 60 of the
sinews. 61 of the veins. 62 of the Flesh. 63 of fatness. 64 of the skin.
65 of the hair about the body. 66 of the hair on the head.
Liber sextus, contains 30. Chapter.
1 Of age. 2 of death. 3 of the dignity of man. 4 of the creation of the
child. 5 of the little child. 6 of a child. 7 of the maid. 8 of the mother. 9
of the daughter. 10 of a Nurse. 11 of a midwife. 12 of a servant woman. 13 of a
male. 14 of a man. 15 of a father. 16 of a servant man. 17 of an evil servant.
18 The conditions of a good servant. 19 of a good Lord. 20 of an evil Lord or
lordship. 21 of meat. 22 of drink. 23 of dinner and fasting. 24 of Supper. 25
of sleep. 26 of sleep, what it is. 26 of waking. 27. 27 of dreaming. 28 of
the operation of dreaming, tituled Addition. 29 of travail. 30 of rest.
Liber septimus contains 72. Chapters.
1 Of infirmities. 2 of head ach, and of the causes and signs thereof. 3 of
medicines and remedies for ach and pain of the head. 4 of the pose, rume, or
sneeuell. 5 of the frenzy, and their causes. 6 of madness, and the causes
and signs thereof. 7 of gnawring, dizinesse, and forgetfulness. 8 of
giddiness or light witted. 9 of waking. 10 of the falling sickness. 11 of
sneesing. 12 of head aching. 13 of the crampe. 14 of the palsy. 15 of the
disease of the eyes. 16 of the web in the eye. 17 of the infection of the
eye. 18 of running of tears. 19 of default of sight. 20 of blindness 21 of
deafness. 22 of Polipus, superfluous flesh. 23 of the disease of the
nosethrills. 24 Of stinking of the mouth. 25 of the tooth ach. 26 of the tongue
and lack of speech. 27 of hoarsnesse. 28 of squinacie and strangling of the
throat. 29 of the difficulty of breathing 30 of corrupt Spettle. 31 of the
Tisike. 32 of heart quaking. 33 of the fever. 34 of the fever E^^^mera. 35 of
the fever Etike. 36 of the fever putrida. 37 of the tokens of fever putrida.
38 of the fever quotidian. 39 of the Tercian. 40 of the fever quartane. 41 of
the fever quotidian. 42 of Fleagme. 43 of neesing. 44 of loathing or fainting.
45 of vnmoderate appetite 46 of yoxing. 47 of spuing. 48 of ache of the belly.
49 of torment. 50 of Dissenteria. 51 of Lienteria. 52 of the dropsy. 53 of the
Iaundise. 54 of the Emeroides. 55 of the ache of the reins. 56 of Hernia. 57
of Arthetica passio. 58 of Gutta sciatica. 59 of Podagre. 60 of a Postume. 61
of Blaines. 62 of Pustules or wheales. 63 of scabs. 64 of dry scabbes and itch.
65 of Lepra or meselry. 66 of the French pox. 67 of the morphew. 68 of
venomous worms. 69 of the biting of a mad dog. 70 the remedy against the
biting of a mad dog. 71 of medicines. 72 Drawing medicines.
Liber octauus. Chap. 45.
1 What the world is. 2 of the distinction of heaven. 3 Of the Christaline and
watery heaven. 4 Of heaven Imperial. 5 of shining. 6 of the Sphere. 7 Of the
circles of heaven. 8 of the circle Galaxia. 9 of the Zodiake. 10 of the sign
Aries. 11 of the sign Taurus. 12 of Gemini. 13 of Cancer. 14 of Leo. 15 of
Virgo. 16 of Libra. 17 of Scorpio. 18 of Sagittarius. 19 of Capricornus. 20 of
Aquarius. 21 of Pisces. 22 of double moving of the Planets. 23 of Saturn. 24
of Jupiter. 25 of Mars. 26 of Venus. 27 of Mercurius. 28 of the Sun. 29 of
the Moon. 30 of certain priuities of the Moon. 31 of the head and tail of
the Dragon. 32 of the Star Cometa. 33 of fixed Stars. 34 of Polus. 35 of
Arcthurus. 36 of Orion. 37 of Hiades. 38 of Pliades. 39 of Canteula. 40 of
Light. 41 of shining. 42 by shining. 43 of the light beam. 44 of shadow. 45 of
darkness.
Liber nonus contuneth 34. Chapters.
1 Of the division of time. 2 of Time. 3 of the year Solare and Equinoctial.
4 of the year Lunare. 5 of the spring time. 6 of Summer. 7 of Harvest. 8 of
Winter. 9 of January. 10 of February. 11 of March. 12 of April. 13 of May. 14
of June. 15 of July. 16 of August. 17 of September. 18 of October. 19 of
November. 20 of December. 21 of Weeks. 22 of the dawning. 23 of midday. 24 of
the evening tide. 25 of the night. 26 of the Sabbath. 27 of the time of the new
Moon called Neomia. 28 of Septuagesima. 29 of Quinquegessima. 30 Of
Quadragessuna, Lent Of fasting. 31 of Easter. 32 of Penticost or Whitsontide.
33 of Cenophegia, a feast in September. 34 of Eucenia, what it is.
Liber decimus, wherein is contained 10. Chapters.
1 De materia et forma, of Elements. 2 of form. 3 of Elements. 4 of fire. 5 of
Flame. 6 of Smoke. 7 of Coal. 8 of a Spark. 9 of Ashes. 10 of Ashes.
Liber vndecrimus contains 16. Chapters. Of Air and his impressions.
1 of fire perpendicular. 2 of winds in general. 3 of winds oriental. 4 of
Clouds. 5 of the Rainebow. 6 of the Dew. 7 of Rain. 8 of a drop. 9 of hoare
Frost. 10 of t^^le. 11 of Snow. 12 of Mist. 13 of Thunder. 14 of coruscation
and lightening. 15 of Fulmine, another kind of lightening. 16 of light wind.
Cap. 3. Of the four Elements, and the qualityes, forth of Henry Cornelius
Agrippa
4 of the consideration of Elements. 5 of the wonderful natures of fire. 6 of
the wonderful nature of the water, the air, and the winds. 7 of the kinds
of things compound. 8 How the Elements are in the Sturs, in spirits, in
Angels, and finallye in God himself. 9 of the virtues of natural things,
next of all depending of the Elements. 10 of the hidden virtues of things. 11
How hidden virtues are powered into the kind of things from the Idee, etc. 12
How to get ones own Genius, and to seek out his nature. 12 13 That every man
has three keepers, and from whence each of them proceeds. 12 14 How diverse
virtues are infused into diverse medicinalls, even of one self kind. 13 15
Stones, from whence the hidden virtues do proceed. 14 16 of the spirit of
the world, etc. 15 17 How we ought to seek and make trial of the virtues of
things, etc. 16 18 How the operation of diverse virtues are powered out etc. 17
19 How by strife and friendship the virtues of things are to be found out,
and experienced.
Liber duodecimus, contuneth 38. Chapters.
1 Of the Eagle. 2 of the Golhauke. 3 of Alieto, the Faulkon. 4 of Bees. 5 of
the Owl. 6 of the Dove or Culuer. 7 of the Curlew. 8 of the Storke. 9 of the
Crow. 10 of the Raven. 11 of the Swanne. 12 of the Gnat. 13 of Cicada, the
grassehopper. 14 of the Phoenix. 15 of the Cra^e. 16 of the Cock. 17 of the
Capon. 18 of the Hen. 19 of the Gripe, or Grisson. 20 of the Gerfaulcon. 21 of
the Swallow. 22 of the Kaladrius. 23 of Laurus, the sea cob. 24 of Locusta. 25
of the Coote. 26 of the Kite. 27 of the night crow. 28 of the Miredrumble. 29
of the Pelican. 30 of the Partridge. 31 of the Pecocke. 32 of Sparrowes. 33 of
the Estridge. 34 of the Turtle. 35 of the Vulture. 36 of the Vlula. 37 of the
Lapwing. 38 of the Reremouse.
Liber. 13. contains chapters. 29.
1 Of water and his property. 2 of pit water. 3 of a river. 4 of Arnnis, a
river. 5 of the river Gion. 6 of Tigris. 7 of Euphrates. 8 of the river Dorix.
9 of Jordan. 10 of the river Alba. 11 of the river Gaza. 12 of a Lake. 13 of
the lake Aspalti. 14 Of the lake Tiberiadis. 15 of the ponde Genesareth. 16 of
a Pond. 17 of a Lake. 18 of Waves. 19 of Whirle-pooles. 20 of Streams. 21 of
Alluniont. 22 of deepnesse, 23 of the sea. 25 24 of Mare magno mediteraneo. 26
of Pelago. 27 of a Drop. 28 of Foame. 29 of Fish. Of the Fish Remora that
stays a ship. Read in folio 199. b. Of the Tiburon and the Manate, and the
great Tortuse, in fol. 201.
Liber 14. contains Chapters. 57.
1 Of the Earth, and his parts. 2 of an hill. 3 of Arrarath. 4 of Bethel. 5 of
Caucasus. 6 of Heball. 7 of Hermon. 8 of Ebron. 9 of Aethiopia. 10 of Aetna. 11
of the hill Esau. 12 of the hill Ephraim. 13 of the hill Phasga. 14 of the hill
Gosor. 15 of the hill Galaad. 16 of the hill Garasin. 17 of the hill Gelboe. 18
of Golgotha. 19 of Gaas. 20 of Ebron. 21 of the hills of Israel. 22 of the
hills Hiperborei. 23 Of the Hill Camelo. 24 Of the Hill Libano. 25 Of the hill
Moria. 26 of the hill Nebo. 27 of the hill Hor. 28 Of the Mount Oliuet. 29 Of
the Hill Olympo. 30 of the hills Oreb. 31 of the hill Pernassus. 32 of the hill
Ripher. 33 of the high cragges. 34 Of the hill Sephara. 35 of the hill Segor.
36 of the hill Sinay. 37 of the hill Sion. 38 of the hill Selmon. 39 of the
hill Sophu. 40 of the hill Saron. 41 of the hill Seon. 42 of the hill Semeron.
43 of the hill Seir. 44 of the hill Thabor. 45 of the hill Ziph. 46 of a Down.
47 of a Valley. 48 of a field Campus. 49 of Ager, a field. 50 of Perdium. 51 of
a Mede. 52 (of a Desert. 53 Concerning the same.) 54 of a Cave. 55 of a Ditch.
56 of a Den. 57 of a Quarrey.
The.15 book contains in Chapters. 177. unto the description of the whole
world, by Ortelius, and that part contains 7. Chapters.
1 Of the world. 2 of Asia. 3 of Assiria. 4 of Arabia. 5 of Armenia. 6 of
Aradia. 7 of Albania. 8 of Attica. 9 of Achaia. 10 of Archadia. 11 of Alania.
12 of Amazonia.
The addition of the Amazons.
13 Almania. 14 Anglia. 15 Aqiutania. 16 Andegauia. 17 Aluernia. 18 Apulia. 19
Africa. 20 Asturia. 21 Arragonia 22 Babylonia. 23 Bactria. 24 Braciana. 25
Brabancia. 26 Belgica. 27 Bithinia. 28 Britania.
Of Britania also.
29 Boctia. 30 Boemia. 31 Burgundia. 32 Capadocia. 33 Caldea. 34 Cedar. 35
Cancia. 36 Cantabria. 37 Chananea. 38 Campania. 39 Cauda. 40 Cilicia. 41
Cipris. 42 Creta. 43 Ciclades. 44 Choa. 45 Corcica. 46 Dalmacia. 47 Dacia. 48
Delos. 49 Dedan. 50 Europa. 51 Eulath. 52 Aethiopia. 53 Egypt. 54 Ellade. 55
Eola. 56 Franconia. 57 Francia. 58 Flandria. 59 Fenicia. 60 Phrigia. 61 Fricia.
62 Insules fortunatis. 63 Galike. 64 Galatia. 65 Gallicia. 66 Gallia. 67 Gadis.
68 Gretia, with the Addition. 69 Gethulia. 70 Gorgones. 71 Gothia. 72 Gnido. 73
India, with the Addition. 74 Hircania. 75 Idumea. 76 Judea. 77 Iberia. 78
Italia. 79 Hispania. 80 Hibernia. 81 Icaria. 82 Island. 83 Caria. 84 Carthage.
85 Carinthia. 86 Cathay. 87 Corscica. 88 Lacedemonia. 89 Lectonia. 90 Liuonia.
91 Licia. 92 Lidia. 93 Libia. 94 Lothoringia. 95 Lucitania. 96 Mauritania. 97
Macedonia. 98 Magnetia. 99 Messia. 100 Mesopotamia. 101 Media. 102 Melos. 103
Midia. 104 Misena. 105 Moscouia. 106 Mithilene. 107 Nabathea. 108 Norwegia, and
Normania. 109 Numidia. 110 Narbonia. 111 Ophir. 112 Hollandia. 113 Orchada. 114
Paradiso. 115 Parthia. 116 Palestine. 117 Pamphilia. 118 Pannonia Hungaria. 119
Paron. 120 Pentapoli. 121 Percia. 122 Pirenca. 123 Pigmea. 124 Pictauia. 125
Picardi. 126 Ramathea. 127 Rencia. 128 Riualia. 129 Reinconia. 130 Roma
prouincia. 131 Romania. 132 Rodo. 133 Ruthia. 134 Saba. 135 Samaria. 136
Sambia. 137 Sabaudia. 138 Sardinia. 139 Sarinata. 140 Samo. 141 Saxonia. 142
Sclauia. 143 Sparta. 144 Seres. 145 Selandia. 146 Semigallia. 147 Gallia
Senonensis. 148 Siria. 149 Sichmea. 150 Scithia. 151 Sicionia. 152 Sicilia. 153
Sirtes. 154 Scotia. 155 Suetia 156 Scondia. 157 Sueuia and Tanatos. 158
Trapobana. 159 Thracia. 160 Traconitida. 161 Thessalia. 162 Tenedos. 163 Thile.
164 Tripolitana. 165 Trogodia. 166 Troiana. 167 Thuscia. 168 Thuringia. 169
Thuronia. 170 Vasconia. 171 Venetia. 172 Westualia. 173 Vironia. 174 Winlandia.
175 Vitria. 167 Island 177 Zeugia.
Next follows forth of Ortelius, the last description.
The Introduction of Vesper. Orbis terrarum, the map of the whole world.
America. Asia. Africa. Europa. Of India. The Empire of Turkey.
The 16. book contains Chapters. 104. of stones.
1 Of Arena. 2 of Clay. 3 of Alabaster. 4 of Gold. 5 of Laten. 6 of
Auripigmentum. 7 of silver. 8 of quick silver. 9 of Adamant. 10 of Amatist. 11
of Achate. 12 of Abeston. 13 of Absciso. 14 of Alabandia. 15 of Argirit. 16 of
Astrione. 17 of Alectoria. 18 of Asterides. 19 of Amatites. 20 of Bitumino. 21
of Berill. 22 of Calculo. 23 of a Whetstone. 24 of Calce. 25 of Cemento, 26 of
Carbunculo. 27 of Crisoprasso. 28 of Calcidonia. 29 of Crisolito. 30 of
Celidonia. 31 of Crystal. 32 of Ceraunio. 33 of Corallo. 34 of Corncolo. 35
of Dioniso. 36 of Diadoco. 37 of Ere. 38 of Electro. 39 of Echit. 40 of
Emachit. 41 of Eliotropia. 42 of Enidros. 43 of Episte. 44 of Excoleceros. 45
of Iron. 46 of Ferrugino. 47 of Gleba. 48 of Gemma. 49 of Gagat. 50 of
Galectile. 51 of Gelatia. 52 of Geraticen. 53 of Iaspis. 54 of Iacincto. 55 of
Irido. 56 of Ienia. 57 of Kamau. 58 of Kalbrate. 59 of Kalcophano. 60 of
Ligorio. 61 of Lippario. 62 of Margarite. 63 of Magnete. 64 of Menolite. 65 of
Menophit. 66 of Mirite. 67 of Medo. 68 of Merchite. 69 of Marmore. 70 of Nitro.
71 of Noset. 72 of Ochino. 73 of Optallio. 74 of Orite. 75 of Petra. 76 of
Pario. 77 of Prassio. 78 of Pirite. 79 of Pionite. 80 of Panteron. 81 of
Plumbo, lead. 82 of Puluere. 83 of Quirin. 84 of Quandros. 85 of Rabri and
Rubies. 86 of Reyben. 87 of Saphyro. 88 of Smaragdo. 89 of Sardio. 90 of
Sardonice. 91 of Solis gemma. 92 of Silenite. 93 of Stanno. 94 of Sulphur. 95
of Sale, salt. 96 of Topazio. 97 of Turquesses. 98 of Turgote. 99 of Terra
sigillata, and Tartara. 100 Of Vitro, Glass. 101 of Ydaci. 102 of Yrachite.
103 of Zimiech. 104 of Zingutte.
The 17. Book contains 197. chapters, of trees and herbs.
1 OF a tree. 2 Of Arbor Aromatica. 3 of an Almond tree. 4 of Fur tree. 5 of
Aloe. 6 Aloe, the Addition. 7 of a reed. 8 of Amomum. 9 of Aneto. 10 of Aniso,
11 of Allio. 12 of Wormwood. 13 of Apium. 14 of Aristologia. 15 of Agnus
castus. 16 of Artemisia. 17 of Oats. 18 of Balsamum. 19 of Bidellio. 20 of
Buxus. 21 of Balaustia. 22 of Beta. 23 of Cedar. 24 of Cipressus. 25 of Ciprus.
26 of Cinamomum. 27 of Casia. 28 of Casia fistula. 29 of Calamus. 30 of Calamus
vsualis. 31 of Calamus scripturalis. 32 of Caparis. 33 of Cardamomum. 34 of
Calameent. 35 of Carix. 36 of Carduo. 37 of Carica. 38 of Comin. 39 of
Coriander. 40 of Coloquintida. 41 of Co^u^. 42 of Crocus. 43 of Cep^. 44 of
Cepe canino 44 of Cucumere. 45 of Cucurbita. 46 of Celidonia. 47 of Centaurio.
48 of Daphni. 49 of Diptanno. 50 of Draguntea. 51 of Dragantum. 52 of Ebenus.
53 of Edera. 54 of Elitropium. 55 of Eleborus. 56 of Esula. 57 of Eruca. 58 of
Enula. 59 of Epithimum. 60 of Ebulus. 61 of Ficus. 62 of Fraxinus. 63 of Fagus.
64 of Faba. 65 of Frumentum. 66 of Farrea. 67 of Farina. 68 of Fermentum. 69 of
Fumo terrae. 70 of Foeniculum. 71 of Ferula. 72 of Foenum. 73 of Flagella. 74
of Fructum. 75 of Germen. 76 of Gramen. 77 of Galbanum. 78 of Gutta. 79 of
Gariophilum. 80 of Gemisca. 81 of Grano. 82 of Gith. 83 of Ilex. 84 of
Iuniperus. 85 Of Isopus, and Iaceros. 86 of Iacinctus. 87 of Iusquianus. 88 of
Castanea. 89 of Lauro. 90 of Lentiscus. 91 of Lilium. 92 of Lactuca. 93 of
Lappa. 94 of Lappates. 95 of Legumina. 96 of Lens. 97 of Lino. 98 of Malus. 99
Of Malus Granatus. 100 of Morus. 101 of Mutus. 102 of Mirra. 103 of Mirrum. 104
of Mandragora. 105 of Milium. 106 of Menta. 107 of Malua. 108 of Nux. 109 of
Auellana. 110 of Nardus. 111 of Oleum. 112 of Oleum Oliuetum. 113 of Oleaster.
114 of Olus. 115 of Ordeum. 116 of Palma. 117 of Palms. 118 of Propago. 119 of
Platinus. 120 of Populus. 121 of Pino. 122 of Pinea. 123 of Pice. 124 of Pirus.
125 of Prumus. 126 of Papyrus. 127 of Paliurus. 128 of Papauer. 129 of
Plantago. 130 of Petroselium. 131 of Piper. 132 of Pulegio. 133 of Porro. Of
Polanda. 134 Of Quercus. 135 of Quisquilie. 136 Of Rofa. 137 of Radix. 138 of
Rampuo. 139 of Resina. 140 of Rubus. 141 of Ruta. 142 Of Saltus. 143 of Salix.
144 of Sambucus. 145 of Saliunca. 146 of Stacten. 147 of Storax. 148 of
Sicomorus. 149 of Spina. 150 of lignis Sethim. 151 of Sentrix. 152 of Sepes.
153 of Sudes. 154 of Siliqua. 155 of Sinapis. 156 of Semen. 157 of Stipula. 158
of Simila. 159 of Scopa. 160 of Stupa. 161 Of Taxus. 162 of Tabula. 163 of
Trabes. 164 of Terebinthinus. 165 of Thina. 166 of Tirsus. 167 of Tignis. 168
of Triticum. 169 of Tisana. 170 of Tribulus. 171 of Thimus. 172 of Thimiama.
173 of Thus. 174 Of Vimen. 175 of Virga. 176 of Virgultum. 177 of Vitis. 178 of
Labrusca. 179 of Vitulamen. 180 of Vinea. 181 of Vua. 182 of Vua immatura. 183
of Vua passa. 184 of Vinum. 185 of Vinum rubrum. 186 of Mustum. 187 of Wine
compound. 188 of corrupt wine. 189 of new pressed wine. 190 Of the place where
wine is pressed. 191 of violets. 192 of the Elm tree. 193 of the nettle. 194
of Darnell or Zizania. 195 of Ginger. 196 of Zedoariun. 197 of Sugar.
Liber 18. contains 117. chapters, of Beasts, and their qualities.
1 OF Beasts in general. 2 Of Beasts in special. 3 Of the Ram. 4 of the
Lamb. 5 of the Sheep. 6 of the Female their disease. Of Alce the India^ Buck.
7 of the Boar. 8 of the Ass. 9 of serpents and Adders. 10 Of Aspide. 11 of
Arena, spiders. 12 of the Be. 13 of the Ox. 14 of Bubulcus. 15 of Buffe. 16
of the Cockatrice. 17 Of the Rubeta or Frog and of the toades stone, as big as
a pease, and not as a peach. 18 of the Bombax or silk worm. 19 of the
Camelion. 20 of the Camelioperd. 21 of the Camelion worm 22 of the wild
Goat. 23 of the tame Goats. 24 of Goats. 25 of hounds. 26 of Bitches. 27 of
all sorts of dogs. 28 of whelps. 29 of the Beauer. 30 of the Heart. 31 of
Ceraste. 32 of a horn. Of the addition of Conies. 33 of the Crocodile. 34 of
Adders. 35 of Dear. 36 of the Dromedarie. 37 of the serpent Dipsas. 38 of the
Dragon. 39 of the Horse. 40 of the Mare. 41 of the Colte. 42 of the Elephant.
43 of the Elephants. 44 of Elephants teeth. 45 of Elephants virtue. (In what
coast Elephants breed, and of the country of Presbiter John, after Hortelius
description.) 46 of a Kidde. 47 of the Malshrag. 48 of Fauni and Satiri. 49 of
Foemina. 50 of Foetante. 51 of Foetu, birth. 52 of Ficarius. 53 of the Ampt. 54
of Formicaleon. 55 of the drone Fly. 56 of the Gripe. 57 of Bats. 58 of
Flindermice also. 59 of Hinnulus. 60 of the Goat. 61 of Hiena. 62 of the
Porcapine. 63 of the Hedgehog. 64 of the young Steer. 65 of the Lion. 66 Of
the Lioness. 67 of the Leoperd. 68 of the Hare. 69 of the Linx. 70 of the
Snaile. 71 of the Woolse. 72 of the Mule. 73 of the Mouse. 74 of the Weasell.
75 of the Fyrtet, 76 of the Cat. 77 of Noctiluca, and of Odonta. 78 of the
wild Ass. 79 of the Onocentaura. 80 of Orix. 81 of a Sheep and their
profit. 82 of the Panther. 83 of the Parde. 84 De Pilofis, wild men. 85 of
the P^oe Bucke, 86 of the Pigmeis. 87 of Swine. 88 of a Lowce or Lyce. 89 of
Fleas. 90 of the Rhinoceros. 91 of Frogs. 92 of the Salamander. 93 of water
leach^^. 94 of the Lizard. 95 of Serpents. 96 of the Ape. 97 of Mermaides. 98
of Scorpions. 99 of a Sow. 100 of a Bull. 101 of a Goat bucke. 102 of a
Moale. 103 of the Badger. 104 of the Tiger. 105 of a Mothe. 106 of worms. 107
of snailes. 108 of the Tortuse. 109 of a Cave. 110 Idem. 111 of a Calfe. 112 of
a Bear. 113 of the female Bear. 114 of a Fox. 115 of Worms: 116 of little
wo^mes. 117 of viperous serpents. The Addition of Vipers.
Liber 19, contains 37. chapters.
1 Of colors. 2 of the Materia of colors, 3 of the generation of colors. 4
of White. 5 of Russet. 6 of hot and cold. 7 Colors in general. 8 of seven
colors, and the Addition. 9 of changeable colors. 10 of colors in the eye.
The rest entreats in 27. parts of colors.
The Addition of colors to limne with, and how they must be used.
38 of odors and perfumes. 39 of the effects of odoures. 40 of stinking
vapor. 41.42 Idem. 43 of sweet savor, and his effects unto the 52. 53 of
liquors. 54 of Honic and his properties. 55 of the Honic comb. 57 of Meede. 58
of Claret, a drink compound. 59 of Pigmentum. 60 of Oximell. 61 of Wax. 62 of
milk, unto 71. 72 of Whey. 73 of Butter. 74 of Cheese.75.76. 77 of the virtues
of diverse things. 78 of rottenness. 79 of Eggs. The rest concern weights and
measures.
Finis huius Tabulae.
Another Table containing the principal matters in this Book, and where to
find them.
Liber. 1. 2.
OF Contrition, confession, and satisfaction. folio. 2 Of the aeternitie. fol.
2. Scala vnitatis. Presumption the work of Disorder. chapt. 7. folio. 5 Of
Archangels that are above Ang. fo. 9 Of the soul, cap. 18. folio. 10.
Addition.
Liber. 3.
Of the soul to be, to be well, to be best, cap. 3. folio^ 16 The sight of the
eye, cap. 17 folio. 18 When instruments sound best, ca. 18. fo. 19 Naturalis,
Vitalis, Animalis, cap. 22. fol. 22.
Liber. 4.
The equalitio of elements, cap. 4. fol. 27 Cause of Surfeit, cap. 5. fol: 28.
Addition. 3. Of the ceremonies of the dead, ca. 7. Addition. fo. 2 Agilitie of
women, cap. 7. folio. 30
Liber. 5.
Lamiae or night consumers, cap. 2. fol. 36 The place of imagination, cap. 3.
fol. 36. b Tokens of the brain distepred, ca. 3. fo. 37 Of forgetfulness, ca.
5. fol. 38. Addition. To know if the sick shall dye, ca. 7. fo. 39 A token of
death, cap. 13. folio. 42. The benefit of concert is spea^h, ^^^9 folio. 44
Madness and forgetfulness, ca. 21. fo. 46 Man's fasting spettle does kill
Serpent, cap. 21. folio. 46.b Flies have none other sound but by their wings,
cap. 22. folio. 47 Cause of blood, cap. 24. folio. 48 Humors, cap. 26. folio.
49 Of four kinds of leprosy, ca. 28. foli. 50 The Gout in the feet, Idem.
folio.b Of consumption, cap. 32. foli. 53 Of untimely birth, cap. 34 fol. 53.b
Anoyance of the heart, cap. 36. 55.b The harmony of the elemental humors, cap.
41. 58 Carnal lust, cap. 49. fol. 62. Addition. Corruption of the Flesh, cap.
62. 67.b
Liber. 6.
Of conception, cap. 4. folio. 72 Of choosing wholesome Nurses, ca. 5. 72.b Of
taking heed of matching with an unclean Stock, cap. 6. fol. 73 Against
drunkenness, cap. 20. 78.b Of modest Music, cap. 23. 81 A disquiet mind is
enemy to digestion, cap. 24. 81.b
Liber. 7.
Hemicranis, the megrime, cap. 3. folio. 87 A hot impostume, cap. 5. 88 Three
kinds of falling Evils, chapt. 10 folio. 90. Addition. Four kinds of
crampes, cap. 13. Addition. 91. Deptiuation of fight, cap. 20. 93 Of stinking
breath, cap. 23. 95 Man's body is of spirit, humor, and members, cap. 33. 98.b
Of Dropsies in the belly, cap. 52. 107 Gout in the joints, cap. 57. 109 About
what time the French Pox began, cap. 66. 114
Liber. 8.
The celestial world, cap. 1. folio. 118 Concerning the heavens, ca. 3. 122.
Ad. Castor and Pollux, cap. 12. 126 Why the Planets were called by proper
names, cap. 23. 130. Addition. The Sun eight times as big as the earth, cap.
28. 133 Of the twelve orders of blessed spirits, cap. 45. 140. Addition.
Lib. 9.
Man's life is comprehended in seven triumphs, cap. 2. folio, 142. Addition.
Note all the Additions unto the eleue^th chapter folio 146. and Addition. 146.
Four manner of resisting temptations, cap. 50. 150
Liber. 10.
Contains the operation of fire.
Liber. 11.
That the clouds be nearer to the earth, then to heaven, cap. 4. folio. 160.b
Of the renewing of the Rain-bow^ ca. 5, Idem folio. That the Rainbow shall not
be seen forty years before the Dome. 161. A note of great secret. 167
Liber. 12.
The Grashoper makes noise, not by voice, but with his legs, ca. 13. fo.
183.
Liber. 12.
Those springs whose current is toward the rising of the Sun are
wholsommest, cap. 3, folio. 191 Of Scilla and Charibdin, ca. 23. 196. Eeles
grow of deaw in May, ca. 29. 198
Liber.14.
the first Table expresses.
Liber. 15.
Of Athiens, cap. 5. folio. 213 The original of the Amazons, ca. 62. 215 Of
Antwerpie, ca. 13. folio. 215. Addition. Of Britain added. folio. 219. Read all the Addition of this book.
Liber. 16.
Of precious stones. Read also all the Ad.
Liber. 17.
Of herbs and trees, whose special virtues are disclosed in their Additions.
Liber. 18.
Of the pith in the ridge bone of a man, comes a serpent, cap. 9. folio. 344.
The Basiliske. Addition. cap. 16. 351 The Crocodile, cap. 33. folio. 359. Add.
Of English Grypes, cap. 56. 368. Of Sheep and their discommoditie, ca. 81.
folio. 376. Addition. Read also the Additi. to the chapters of this book.
Liber. 19.
Addition of the 117. chapter, of Vipers and ingraters of markets. Of Linning
in the 19. book, which is the skillful placing of colors. Of Measures in fol.
418. newly added.
A necessary Catalogue, of the most hardest old English words, how they may
be truly understood after our usual speaking, as well in all other old Copies,
as in this book: next unto every such word, is the known English.
Angels inwit, heavenly knowledge. Araied, furnished, skilled, or beautified.
Attercop, a spider. Arerid, lifted up. A spiracle, a lofty sentence or a
quickening conceit. Arbalastes, crosse-bowes. Anon, speedely or shortly after.
A sees, that is an atonement. Again, again. A swap, a blow or stroke on any
part of the body, dusset signifeith the same, and also a cuffe. Benimmeth,
witholde or keep. Botraces, venomous frogs. Bounching, bending or swelling.
Blenching, mixing, and sometime dazeling. Beshine, to give light unto, or
illuminate. Beshined, lightened, or beautified. Burgening, when the young twigge
appears. Buffing, stutting or stammering, sometime it signifies bosting.
Bloonesse, yale or wan. Bolisme, immoderate appetite. Botchy, swelling up or
cockeling. Behoteth, promises. Breechme^, Mariners or sailors. Boistous,
gross, or stubberne. Bedes, petitions.

Cleeretie, brightness. Couenable, needful, Couth, that is know or knew.
Curtels, Nerves and small rinmes in the body. Clight, closed or fastened
togethers. Cleping, promising.

Descriued, revealed. Doom distributive, particular judgment. Dole, sorrow.
Deeming, to suppose. Drastes, refuse or loes of wine, or of humor. Dens,
caves or holow places, distingweth, divides. Deal, to bestow or part. Dread,
to be in fear. Decorate, to beautify. Defieng, to digest. Dunch, deaf or
herd of hearing. Dulcet, sweet, pleasant or dainty. Dunder, thunder or tempest.

Exciteth, stirs or inlardgeth. Encheso^, forfait. Ensinement, perseverance.
Eleingnesse, waiward and solitary. Eald, old. Fundement, foundation or
beginning: it is taken for the longation: which is termed the ^art hoale, or
arse gut, it may be called the venticle for the stomach. Feat, neat or
clenly. Feruor, serue^t or earnest. Gendrid, begotten. Gastnes, apparations.
Grolle^g, wallowing of ye stomach. Gostes, spirits. Gropeng, feeling. Griesely,
fearful to behold. Goushes, streams. Grees, degrees, qualities or parts.
Gnaureng, forgetfulness. Gabbing, prating, or unseemly speaking. Highted,
beautified, or to make handsome. Houen, to advance or set up. Hearingles,
deaf. Hirelings, servants. Hiew, shape or seemlinesse. Horie, mouldie or
fended. Hele, to cover or o^ucreast. Hem, them. Intelligence, understanding.
Inwit, conceit of mind. Insundid, confounded. Innermore, before written.

K^^, cut off.

Leden, guide, Lore, still. Leches, surgeons. Lendes the flanks and thigh.
Melling, conioyning. Malshragges, Caterpillars Palmers, and Cankers. Menace, to
threten. Misticke, secret. Much, is taken for quantity. Meede, reward. Nemped,
disclosed. Neneeuen, Temperance. Nenet, will not. Nesh, soft.

Obstacle, stubborn or wilful. Onid, mixed and joined. Out take, except.

Pampination, pulling leaves, that grow too thick. Partner, pertaker, sometime
for a companion. Percase, likelihood.

Quitted, to discharge.

Ruthe, pity or compassion. Ripe men, haruesters, and learned men. Rock,
shake. Rabbish, fool hardy, or malepart, and snatching. Reeses, waves of the
sea. Renleth, mixed together. Reling, muldering or ready to fall a sunder.

Stretchable, upright. Siker, safe. Spirituelte, puruie or well meaning.
Shapes, differences of bodies. Stempnes, subiections. Stable, steadfast.
Sturdie, stout, strong or valiant. Stithe, afrend or clime. Stammering,
^ue^t^ull. Stalking, s^ew going. Speedfull, ready. Squitter, menstruall, or
matter corrupt: sternes, stercenesse, or stubborn. Sauation, salvation, or
preservation. Spended, consumed. Smacke, taaste. Seecheth, seeks, shaad,
shadow. Siketly, warely or safelye. Signeth, expresses.

Thraldom, Bondage, Thyted, cut, as with a knife. Tourmentes, Engines. Trow,
suppose or deem. Thirleth, pearceth, entermixeth or set^eleth.

Uncunning, wanting skill. Vnweuid, imperfect work. Violaceus, fretting.
Vores, for owes of land. Vindi^^ation, gathering ripe grapes. Uneath, scarely
Welthfull. fruitful. Witty, disceete: Wreche, revenge. Wosen, the strot boll,
or entrance to the stomach. Woodnes, madness. Ween, to think. Wappeng,
quaking. Woos, vapor. Woo, grief of mind. Welkin, the bright air above the
clouds.

FINIS.


INCIPIT LIBER PRIMVS DE TRINITATE.
THe Father, the Son, the holy Ghost, be three persons by personal
properties, but the absolute properties be common to all three persons, but
some of these properties be more appropried to one then to another: As thus,
power is appropried to the Father, to the Son, wisdom is attributed, and to
the holy Ghost is attributed grace. The Father is God, ye Son is God, the
holy Ghost is God: And these three persons be not three Gods, but one very God
everlasting, one essence, or one being, ever perdurable, or during without
measure, not chaungeable, almighty, one substance, and in one nature simple.
The Father is of nothing precedent, the son is of the Father, the holy Ghost
is of the Father and of the some proc^eding; without beginning of time; and
without end. The three persons be one substance together, with one
perdurabilitie together, and one is equal to the other in all manner of
perfection, and each one is Omnipotent or Almighty, and one beginning of all
things, created of nothing: or made of nothing: creator of all creatures,
vise^^es or inuisibles, spiritualls or corporalls. The which creator by a
mighty virtue, from the beginning of time; created together the creature
angelike, and the worldly nature, of nothing, or of no matter precedent. This
creator then made man, and nature humane common to the first two natures: for
man is of body corporal, and of soul he is made spiritual^. From this holy
trinity, at confusion vial mittion of pershifs is voided, For the Father is
another, the Son is another, the holy Ghost is another: nor the father may
not be the son, nor the holy Ghost: nor the son may not be the Father,
nor the holy Ghost: nor the holy Ghost may not be the Father nor the son: but
to these three persons is one essence or being, and one nature common, the
which is the beginning of all things, and out of this beginning there is no
beginning: These three persons be one God, one essence indivisible or unable to
be divided, one substance and one nature. The Father ^^^ no greater, nor of
greater power then is the son: nor then the holy Ghost is, for the unity of
the divine essence or being, is equal or like in power to the Father, to the
son, and to the holy Ghost, and this holy trinity is one God, the first
beginning, without beginning, not created nor begotten, not passible, nor
mortal: mighty of power to make all things without number, and without end,
fountain of all goodness, and of all virtue, which by his incomprehensible
knowledge knows all things present, and to be, and may we every thing that
he will, but he will not do every thing that he may, for he might destroys
all the world, and yet he will not do it^ howbeit that his divine essence, or
being, may not be pertia lie known or compreh^rtoe^ by any reasonable and
mortal creature, yet there is not any imortall person; having the ^vre of
discreation, but that he will confess there is a God, which is the cause and
beginning of all things, howbeit there is no man of (...), and ^^^one
understanding, that can sufficiently seadeth or find what thing God is
properlye, after the greatness of his most excellent majesty, but only the
Father, the Son, the holy Ghost, be one trinity in one unity, one unity
in nature and in essence, one trinity in three persons, so named trinity, as
one unity of three persons, which be united together in one nature. Under this
form rehearsed, it suffices to every christian creature to know the
trinity, and in especially to them which be of the common sort or state.
The knowledge of the names of GOD is not required as necessary to every man
to know, for they be many in number, and every name that is of God, it
shows or signifies the godly essence or being, or it signifies the godly or
divine perfection, or it shows the divine or godly persons. The names
signifieng or betokening the divine essence or being, Essentials
be called names Essentialls.

The names which betoken or signify divine or godly perfection, be called
names Perfectionals. Perfectionalls.
The names showing, betokening, or specifieng the godly or divine persons, are
naiued Personalls, Personals Vocalls.
or Uocalls. These three manners of names be divided into many other manners
of names which of necessity be to be learned of these great and cunning
Doctors of Theology or Divinity, which be to us, or of right ought to be,
teachers and Preachers of the word of God incornate, and to show us ensample
of good life by their virtuous living, and ever to be strong and mighty, and
ready defendours of our Christen faith, and on the holy Church or Congregation
by their excellent perfect science and ^unning. It is right necessary to us
that live in this but Christian faith, to excess truly, and sl^d^a^^lye to
believe, that the Son of the Father of Heaven, which is without beginning
coeternall to his Father and to the holy Ghost: by the whole consent: of this,
blessed Trinity, and ^ore unity, and bye the cooperation of the holy Ghost,
he entered into the womb all the most pure, most immaculate, most clean, most
virtuous, most humble, and most meek Uirgin Marie, in whom was neither spot
nor riuell of sin, after the salutation of Gabriel the Archangel when she
had answered these words of meekness: Behold the hand maid of the Lord, be
it done to me after thy word.

Thus this blessed son of God, not leaving or forsaking the Godhead, took
mankind unto the Godhead, and is perfect God, one with his Father in godhead,
he is also perfect man, and in his ma^head he is less the^ his father is, and
in his manhead he is in Hebrewe named Jesus, in the Greek tongue he is
called Sother, Jesus. Sother. Saluator.
and in the Latin, he is called Saluator: and every name of these three, in
our language, is to say, our Savior.

He is also named Emanuel, which name by interpretation of our language, is to
say, God is with us. After his most blessed Natiuitye, he proved in his
humanitye, that he was perfect God, for he could all Science without any
teacher. He also changed pure Water into Wine, he gave: sight to the man that
was borne blind, he said openly to the Jews and to the Pharesies, I, which
speak to you am the beginning.

He sedde many thousands of people with few Loves of bread, and with few
Fishes, the Wind and the Sea obeyed to his commandment, he raised Lazarus
from death to life, which was four days dead, and stinking in his grave, in
these, and in many more excellent miracles, he showed that he is perfect God.

He also showed that he is perfect man, for he eat and drank, and slepte,
and so took increase in nature as man does, he wept, he fasted, he suffered
all the miseryes and wretchedness of man, except sin.

It lyked him also to fulfill, to perform and to accomplishs all the words
that the holy Patriar^es and Prophets had uttered and spoken of him long
before: Also he tooked our humanity, and sol^to fulfill the prop^esies, be
suffered, that his humane nature should be taken by the kissing of his unkind
disciple, and most horrible traitor Judas. And by the cruel persecution of
the Jews, after many punishments, they blasphemed God, before Pilate, cried
wickedly: Crucify, crucify him: and so under Poncius Pilate he suffered to be
crucified, and upon the Cross he died in his humanity, and was interred and
buried. And notwithstanding that his Sepulcher or grave was sealed and signed,
and kept with Knights, yet the third day by his Godhead or divinity, he rose
in his humanity, and the. xl. day ensewing, he ascended into heaven, and
sits there at the right hand of his father: and he from thence perfect God
and perfect man, is to come, and to judge the living and dead. In the dead is
understood the body, which has been mortal, and in the living is understood
the soul which is spiritual and immortal.

Before this Judge Christ Jesus, which is God and man sitting in his throne of
judgment, all reasonable creatures shall stand. And he shall set all the godly
on his right side, and all the wicked on his left side, and all shall be judged
after their ^tes and deeds, and after their thoughts, as they have been guided
in their bodies, well or evil: then the good shall have bliss eternal, and
the evil and accursed, shall have and suffer everlasting pain. Wherefore every
christen man and woman have this blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son and
the holy Ghost, steadfastly grounded in their faith, as one perfect unity. To
this Unity in Trinity, and to this Trinity in one Unity, mankind be never
unkind, for this blessed Jesus our Savior, the second person of the
Trinity, which with his father and with the Holy ghost is one God, one
essence, and one unity: which Jesus also of his infinite goodness, of his
excellent pity, and of his most plentuous mercy, suffered patiently most
horrible pain and passion, and death in his humanity, for to redeem all
mankind. And for this his unsearchable good, not able to be spoken, and
inenarrable or not able to be talked or told great excellent and mighty
kindness, he desires of man but this gift, saying thus: Give me thy heart,
and it suffices me. Man if thou love almighty God, thou beleeuest and
trustest in God: and thy true and steadfast belief is but a thing dead without
good works, Because good works proceed of faith, as by good works each faith
is expressed. Addition
Therefore every man and woman do ever good deeds, and have good thoughts, and
let thy language be good: and whereas that by humane fragilitie or frailty,
thou trespassest against the commandment of almighty God, yet see that thou
despair not: for the good Lord of his aboundaunt grace, has given a law for
trespassors in this present life, that is to say, Contrition, Contrition, that
is thine own consciece judging thy sin. Confession, thy declaration for thy
conscience to God. that thou have sinned. Satisfaction, in that faith assu^eth
from a penitent heart, that thou art forgiven of thy sin.
Confession, and Satisfaction. And every reasonable creature taking this way,
may be sure that almighty Christ Jesus very God and man, is Mediator in his
perfect humanity to the highest and most blessed and inestimable divinity or
deity, for all mankind.

Since it is perilous to every earthly man, and in especially to him that has
a thin wit, and little coming, as I know that I have, to wade deep in these
matters of Divinity, I will treat no farther thereof at this time. The holy
trinity give us grace, that we may truly and faithfullye believe, and
stedfastlye stand in our belief, and that charity may reign among us
Christen people.

I have thought good for the father expressing of God, to set before thee, the
first Ladder of Henry Cornelius Agrippa, taken forth of his book, tituled, De
occulta Philosophia.

NOw let us perticularlye determine of the numbers themselves, because number
is nothing but a repetition of one or unity. Let us first consider what one
is, for one does most simply pearce every number, and being the common
measure, original, and fountain of all numbers, does contain every number
only joined in him, void of all greatness, always the self same, and
unchangeable, wherefore being multiplied in it self, does bring forth nothing
but it self: it is indivisible void of all parts, but if at any time it serne
to be divided, it is not cut a sunder, but multiplied, to wit, into unities,
yet none of these unities is greater or less, then the whole unity, even as
part is less then the whole. Wherefore it is multiplied, not into parts, but
into it self, and therefore some have called this Concord, some Piety, some
friendship, because it is so knit, yt it cannot be cut into parts, and
Marcianus after Aristotle affirms, that Cupid is so named, because it is one
alone, and would ever have himself to be sought, and has nothing besides, but
being void of all elation or couple, does wrest his own heates to himself:
wherefore one, is the beginning, and end of all things, having no beginning nor
end, nothing is before one, one is the beginning of all things, and all things
are even unto one, and beyond it there is nothing, and things that are, desire
the very one, because all things proceed of one, and to the end, that al things
may be one, it must needs be, that they participate from that one, and as al
things proceed from that one into many, so every thing that indeauoureth to
that one from whom they proceed, must of necessity put of multitude, wherefore
one is referred to almighty God, who forasmuch as he is one, and innumerable,
does create innumerable things of himself, and contains them within
himself: wherefore there is one God, one world of one God, one Sun of one
world, and one Phaenix in the world: one king among Bees: one Bel-weather
among sheep: one leader in the herd: and Cranes follow one, and many other
creatures worship the unity. Among the members of the body, there is one
beginning, of who^ the residue are ruled, whether it be the head, or as some
would have it, yt heart. There is one Element ouercomming and pearcing all
things, which is fire. There is one thing created of God, ye subject of all
wonderfulnes, which is in heaven and earth, it is in act Animal, Vigitable,
and Mineral, found every where, known of very few, expressed of none with his
propet name, but covered with innumerable figures and ridles, without the
which, neither Alcami, neither natural magic, are able to attain to their
perfect end: from one man Adam all were brought forth, through him alone all
died: Through Jesus Christ alone they were again born a new. And as the Apostle
Paul says, Ephe. 4.
One Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and father of all, one medi^tour of
God and men, and one most high creator, which is above all, through all
things, and in us al, for there is one God the father, from who^ all things
are, and we in him, one God, Jesus Christ, by whom all things are, and we by
hi^, one God the holy Gohst, into whom all things, are, and we into him.

Scala vnitatis.
IOD.
IN the world bearing the platform of all.

There is one divine essence, the fountain of all virtue, and power, and his
name is expressed in one most simple letter.

The Intellectual world.

Soul of the world by the which all things lives.

One most high intelligence the first creature, the fountain of lives.

SOL.
In the Celestial world. In the Elementall world.

The Sun. The Philosophers stone.

One King of stars, fountain of light. One substance of all virtues natural
and supernatural.

COR.
In the lesser world. In the world Internal.

The heart. Lucifer.

One first living, and last dieng. One chiestaine of the rebellion of Angels
and darkness.

The rest of the Ladders shall be divided into those places requisite, for the
setting forth the names of God, and knowledge of hidden mysteries.

INCIPIT LIBER SECVNDVS.
Of Angels. Chap. 1.
MAlach in Hebrew, Angelus in Greek, Nuncius in Latin, is to be understood,
a messenger in English. For by warning of Angels men know Gods will, and so
Angelus is a name of office and not of kind. And Angelus is a Spirit: but when
God sends him forth, then he is first properly named Angelus. Painters paint
Angels with wings because of their swiftness of flight. And so simple men
know the swift working of Angels by that manner of painting. And for the same
cause in the old time, Poettes painted the wind with wings, as says Isid.
lib. 7. Chap. 7.

What Angel is after Damascenes mind. Chap. 2.
DAmascene says, that Angel is Substantia intellectualis, always moveable,
free, and bodilesse, serving God by grace, and not by kind, and is pertaker of
immortality. For he may not die. Of this description of Angels kind, many
manner properties of Angels be to us showed and known. An Angel is said,
Substantia intellectualis. For by reason of the spirituality of his substance,
and of the singular purity he perceives in himself all forms intelligible,
that is to understand, all shapes and likeness that he needs to have. For
to have cunning and knowledge of things he apprehends shapes and liknesse
intellectual, that may move his understanding to wit and wisdom. And
inasmuch as he is far from the bondage of earthly matter, insomuch he is
the more perfect in contemplation of spiritual and vnmateriall things: So it
is said plainly in Libro Causarum. For spirits that he also named
understanding, be full of shapes and likeness, because they have knowledge and
cunning. Therefore in them shines all manner of understanding, as in the
bodies of men their secret motions do declare in the wit to have knowledge
of things. Intelligence of Angela is a singular freedom not subject to
temptations.
Sicut ibidem dicitur consequenter. Moreover, Angels kind passes all bodilye
kind in subtlety of his Essentia in simplicity, and in cleernesse of his
conceit, and ability of his free aduisement. This Angels kind has no succor
of bodily matter. Therefore material corruption may in no wise be according to
him. Therefore no knowledge by bodily wits may let this fore knowledge that is
godly, for an Angel has forseeing in a manner as God has. Therefore he is
above time, and understands all at once: and not one thing after another, or
one thing of another, as the conclusion of the premises, as man's understanding
and assurance of the mind, gathers knowledge of some thing, through, or of
the knowledge of other things. It seems that such comparison as is between a
simple thing and a thing compound, either else between a point and a line in
being, That which is simple is one thing and that which is co^pound, is
diverse or many things.
such is the comparison between Angels knowledge, and man's perseueraunce, in
understanding and deeming Also no malice withdraws nor turns away the will
of an Angel from the service of his Creator. Therefore inasmuch as the
substance of an Angel is the simpler, and more far from all condition of
matter. Insomuch, the lykenes of God shiueth yt more express in him, and in
him as it were in a full clear mirror, the shining of God appearth the more
clear. And the influence of bliss is the more worthy, insomuch as the Angel
joins him by his own will, the more perfectly to the apparent truth, that
may not be changed, as Gregory says: Almighty God made the kind of good
Angels good, but mutable. So that they that would abide, might be assured of
grace, and by so much the more increase reward, in how much they setteled the
effect of their will with study, without changing in God: also Saint Gregory
says: Angel in the contemplation of his Creator is above the thing that may
be changed, but in that he is a creature, he has subiections of changing.
Denis says, In Angels three things must be had in consideration, Essencia,
by the which they have being: virtue by the which they have might: and
working, by the which they are exercised. The Essencia of them is simple and
vnmateriall, pure, distinct, and discreet. This virtue of them is free,
understanding, loving, and without ceasing. They have might and power freely to
choose, to understand, and to love: and to God to be joined without changing:
also they have a virtue of working, for they do all thing without abiding or
tarrieng, they put of al adversity without withstanding, and without
withsayeng: always they be nigh us, and serve us without ceasing: and their
working, is willing, sodeine, profitable, and honest.

For they serve GOD without constraining, and do his heastes sodeinly and in
an instaunt, and put not off till on the morrow: all good and profit they
procure with great heed taking: they be occupied in lawful deeds and
honest, that be without blame: then it is truth that in an Angel is three
manner virtues, of knowing, of working, and of being. For he knows God
above himself, in a mirror of everlasting during, without any intermission.
He sees always the face of the Father. Matthew. 18 Angels always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven. Psalm. 10. He apprehends all things that
is without himself, without any collection, and holds in mind within
himself, without forgetting, all that he apprehends. Angels have this
virtue of working, mightily, swiftly, and profitably, and without ceasing: and
they also have virtue to be steadfast, in the simplicity of their kind. For
they are not altered by deedly subiections, neither they have no
contrariousnesse of passibilitie, neither be let with charge of flesh. They
be also in steadfastnesse of grace and of bliss. For they be subjects to the
laws of God, and be not contrary thereto by none affection nor deed.

They be godly and not tormented with the prick of envy: and forasmuch as
they be pure and clean, they be not defiled with any affection: and they be
steadfast in the dignity of office. They are the substance of well minding,
and therefore contrary to evil doing and they that be Souereignes be
Princes over the other without tyranny: also Angels kind is joined nigh to
the first light, that is God, and therefore it is full of more copious light:
and so much the more deeper it draws of the Well of life, the more near it
joins it self to the first light in beholding the mind: and it receives
always the more principal Theophanias, that is light and shining of GOD,
insomuch as it tourneth it the more perfectlye to the highest good by love,
that changes not: and so that light, that is everlasting, first it comes
upon Angels, and by Angels it comes down to vs^ and therefore by Angels
law came to men: Genesis 18 Exo. 3
and for that first shining comes to Angels from the Father of light. Denis
calls Angels Algamatha, that is, most clear myrrours, receiving the light
of GOD. Vnde in libro de diuinis nominibus. Chap 6. Denis says in this manner.
An Angel is the Image of GOD, the showing of hid light, a myrrour pure and
most bright, without spot, without wemme, or other defiling.

And if it were lawful to say, he receives in himself all the fayrenesse
of the well shape, godly formitie and of pure declaration in himself, as it
is possible to take and declare goodness that is hid. He is named the Image
of God, for likeness and shape in understanding and readiness: For like as
God sees all things without advice and conference, so does Angels, for they
see not by mean, neither apprehend by bodily wit. Also he is called the
showing of hid light: for he takes by influence the sight of the Godhead,
that is in it self incomprehensible and hid, and sends it forth, and
shows it to other, and makes it known to them that are lower. And he is
called a myrrour, for he is able to receive the light of God, and is called a
pure myrrour, for the kindly pureness of his substance, for he has no
bodily filth, he is immaculate, he has no went of original sin, he is not
defiled with contagion of deadlye sin, he is without spot of venial sin.
He is said receiving fairness of the likeness of the Godhead.

In a special manner of knowing, he is like to the Godhead, and also he
declares to them that are lower the incomprehensible and hid: sweetness of
the goodness of God. For what he takes in contemplation and tasting by the
gift of God, he sends it forth, and makes it known to them that are lower.

John Damascene a Monace or Monk, about Anno 400.
Dumascene in his second Book and third Chapter says, That Angels are
lights intellectual, having light of the first light, and they need no tongue
neither ears: but without words and voice they understand and know every
others thought and will. And they are not contained in a bodily place, not
within walls neither cloister bodily enclosed, and be not bodily long,
neither broad, neither thick, but they be intellectuallye nigh and present,
and work in every place where God bids them. Also they are spirits
kindlye strong and swifte to do Gods will: and they are sodainelye found in
every place, where God wills and bethinketh, dispensing those things that be
about us, and helping us after Gods own will. They are above us, and
nevertheless about God. It were hard to move them to evil, for thereto they
are contrary: and that is of grace, though it be not of ^inde.

And as it is possible, they be in contemplation of God, and have their
delyght and lyking in him: and seeing they are spiritual and bodilesse, they
need neither, wedding nor corporal joining.

How an Angel in bodily shape is painted. Chap. 3.
ALso though Angels kind have no matter neither lyneations and shape of
body, yet by a moral devise, many things are imagined, as God like an old
man: even so Angels be painted in bodily likeness, and Scripture makes
mention, that they have diverse lymmes and shapes. But by denominations of
lymmes that are seen, unseen workings of heavenly perseueraunces, are then
thereby understood. For when Angels are painted with long locks and crispe
hair, thereby is understood their clean affections and ordinate thoughts.
For the hair of the head betokens thoughts and affections that do spring
out of the root of thought and mind. A comparison.


Men say that they have cares, because they receive the inspiration of God,
and that they know and understand. Paynters make to them nosethrilles, and
not without cause: For they void vices and: sins as it were stinking
things: and they love virtues, as it were sweet smelles. And they separate
truth from falsehood, making distinction between clean and unclean, stinking
and sweet smellyng.

Often men make mention that they have mouths, tongues, and lyppes, because
they show, ^ou us as it were inspeaking the priuities of God: and they are
always busy waiting and attending in the praising of God.

And they be painted beardles: for to take consideration and heed, that they
pass never the state of youth, neither ware feeble in virtues, neither fa^lc
for age. Men say that they have teeth, because grace, that they receive of
God, they use to part and deal it to other, as it were chewing and grinding,
and thereby their might and power is betokened. They have arms and hands, for
by their might in working they sustain our infirmities. And cease not to hold
up and defend good men, that God has chosen. Men say, that they have hearts
and breasts, for because they have life like to the life of God, and work
openly to help us to receive the grace of life, and such life as God has.
They have ribs and sides, for they have safelye in themselves all the gifts
of grace, and by keeping of them all thing is sure and safe in good men. Men
say, that they have flanks and thighs, but hid with clothing, for they have
within themselves, grace and virtue, hid from fleshly men. ^eete they have, but
as it were always bare, for the moving of their affection to Godward is
sequestered from all deadly lyking.

How Angels be described. Cap. 4.
ALso Angels be painted in many manner shapes wonderfully altered, as Saint
Denis touches in the end of the Angelical Hierarchy. Truly they be painted
feathered and winged: for that they are of contrary cause and clenne from all
earthlye cogitation. And they be lifted up in effect and knowledge, and
ravished to the innermost contemplation of the love of God.

They are clothed in flerie read clothes, for that they be wrapped in the
light and mantell of the knowledge and love of God. They be clothed with
light as with a garment. Psalm. 104. They are gyrde with golden girdles, for
that they be so clipped with the habit of virtues, that they never slide to
vice neither to sin. They bear in hand authorities and scepters, for after
God they give all rightful judgments, and rule and govern rightfullye all
that is in this world, that we know with utter wits. They bear in their
hands swords and spears: for by virtue that is given to them, they war,
and destroy the vproares and the enforcings of ^iends, and of other that are
rebellyous. They be seen to have Trowells, and hanging plommets, and measures,
and workemens tools: For by provision of Angels, God uses to turn evil
men to good, and moves them that they might be made the habitation of the
Holy ghost.

They have in their hands, rule, lyn^s, and measures, for they divide, meat,
and weigh all men's works good and evil. And they are said to have Phyals with
sweet smelling things: for by doing of them our wounds are brought to grace of
health. And it is read, that they be girde as they were appa^rayled ready to
go and walk forth on their way: for by their help and guyding, godly
disposed men be always brought home into bliss! Also they be said to bear
pennars and ink horns, and other instruments of Writers: For that, that
through their doing, the priuitie of Gods will, is oftentimes revealed and
known.

They be furnished in arms, and weapon of battle and of war: For that by
help of them, good men are often succored and defended, in war and in
battle of body and of soul. And the^ harp: For that they that are worthy
to be comforted, by their help and prayers, fall not into sorrow of
despair, and so to be without hope.

They bear Trumpettes in their hands, for that they call and comfort and
excite us to profit always in goodness. Many such manner things are written
of the array and doing of Angels, that betoken their meruaylous works.

How Angels be compared to material things. Cap. 5.
ALso they be likened to other things, that be taken and trans^mpt of naturalls
Appearing in that shape that they are not.
For to signify and declare their profound and secret workings: example. They
be likened to winds, for yt they fly and pass suddenly, so their deeds and
works. They be called clouds, for that they be ravished toward God by very
contemplation. They be lykened to fire, for that they be wholly inflamed with
burning love of God, and as fire they shine in knowledge, and burn in love.

Now they are named gold; now silver, and now latten, for they have pure
shining, as light, and be adorned with the wisdom of God. They be lykened to
Carbuncles and Saphires, and to other precious stones that be sad and bright,
for because they be firm in the grace of God, and confirmed in the bliss: and
by their presence, all that is in heaven and in earth, is wonderfully
beautified. They are called Lions, for that they be grisly and dreadful
against wicked spirits and to sinful men: or else as the Commentor upon the
Hierarchy Angelical says, because when they aspire to the contemplation of
God, A good note.
that was known before, is wiped out of mind: when cleerenesse that is
desired, is openly known, to the souls that desires: for a Lion uses to
wype away his own steps with his tail. They are called Oxen, for an Ore
eareth the land, and makes it able to bear fruit: So Angels make men's
souls able to receive grains of virtues and of gifts. They are called Eagles,
for that they behold straight and stiffelye in God, that is the Sun of
righteousness, without dazelyng of their eyes With a steadfast ^aith.
. They are called Horses for by the Law of obedience, they be subject to God,
that is Lord above them. Sometime also they are called white Horses, for the
bright and clear knowing of God. And sometime black Horses, for they may not
comprehend the Majesty of God at the full: for blacknes is dark color and
dim. Sometime read Horses, for they show dread of righteousness and
equity. And some time of diverse colors, for the variable use of power that
they have received. The uttermost colors are mixed together, and by the
perfect virtue of Angels, the first are joined and turned to the second, and
the second to the first, and be turned either into others love. And they be
called fiery Rivers, because they receive streams or flowings of divine grace,
and they shed out plenteouslye that never fails of fresh streams of Gods
grace, and power out to other in plenty of life: and therefore they are
lykened to a fiery River. Also they be called Chariots, for in a Charyot is
many things carried at once: For they be by one assent borne up, associate
and coupled togethers, in the joyful company of God.

They be also called Wheels: For as a Wheel windeth and tourneth about, and
moves always about the self Center: so Angels are in contemplation, and
move about that thing, that belongs to God, as it were about the center or
point in the mids of a compass intellectual: for their desire may not be
quenched, and what they desire, passes their ^uit^e and might. And therefore
also they are lykened to Chariots and fiery wheels. For that they come down
to subjects, and illuminate them, and so go up again, and guiding evermore
by contemplation. And they present to our Lord, prayers and inward
cogitations of good men: and bring dead men's souls into Abraham's bosom, and
into the Country of bliss. And they are called Surgeons and Physicians,
because they cure and heal souls.

And they be also called Smithes, for that they prepare for us ghostlye weapons.

They be called watchmen and wardeins, for they being never overcome with
sleep of wanting skill, warn men of perils that may fall or come to pass.
And they also be named Haruesters, for they gather the people that is chosen
into the Garner of the kingdom of Heaven. And they be called Soldiers, for
they war and fight for us against wicked fiendes. And they be called Dukes
and Leaders, both because they teach us the manner of fighting against Ghostly
enimyes: and also for they show and teach us the way to the country of bliss.

In these and many other figures and lykenesses, Angels virtues be tokened to
us, and understood in Scriptures, touching the substance, virtue, and working
of them. But these few that be set here for example shall suffice at this time.

Of the orders of Angels Hierarchies, and of their offices. Chap. 6.
SEeing that the properties of Angels be in part rehearsed and determined in
general, as it belongs to this work, we shall entreat of all the
Hierarchies of the orders of Angels: that we may know the office,
conuenience, and difference of all the orders by their proper conditions.

Of the three Hierarchies. Chap. 7.
THE holy man Saint Denis speaks of three Hierarchies, the first is above
heaven, and stands in three persons, the second in heaven, and stands in
holy Angels, the third under heaven, and stands in Prelates. Denis says,
that a Hierarchy is an ordained power and might of holy things: and
reasonable, holding a due principalitye over Subjects. Three Hierarchies be
in heaven, the highest, that is called in Greek Epiphania, and is described of
Denis in this manner.

Epiphania is in the burning hot affection in the highness of high motion and
understanding, and in the ballaunce of the particular judgment. And this
Hierarchy contains three orders. Scraphin, that passes other in burning of
love: and Cherubin, that is joyful in privilege of cunning: Thrones, that
pass other in perpending of righteousness. And of the other two Hierarchies,
we shall speak hereafter in their own place. In every Hierarchy needs
three things, order, cunning, and working. For as Denis says, a Hierarchy is
a godly order, cunning, and work, like God, as it is possible likening and
supposing thereto the illuminations by proportion, taking heed to the
likeness of God. Lo he sets three in the description of an Hierarchy,
order, cunning, and working: for if one of these three should want, it is no
Hierarchy. Therefore a Hierarchy is said a godly order, as it were a might
that is ordained and disposed after Gods own will. Therefore in order is
office noted, in cunning, readiness, in working service. A good note.
Without order presumption is the work, without work negligence is the order,
without cunning, the work is then reprouable, and the order is unprofitable.
And therefore as well in order as in cunning and working, every. Hierarchy
follows the conformity and likeness of God: And by the manner and measure
of his illuminating that God gives thereto, be profit^th in his order, and
supposing rightlye, and working well, to the following of God as near as is
possible, he ascends up.

Such is the disposition between the Angels of the order of Hierarchies. They
that be of the higher orders, receive more plenteous light of God. And then to
those that be lower then they in order, they transfound and depart the light,
they received. For this law is holden and kept in the order of Angels in
participation of grace and of bliss. Some be the first, and some the second,
and some the last: as they the which in order and in receiving and taking of
kind are peerless: they be also unlike and not equal in taking and
receiving of bliss. Therefore Saint Denis says, that it needs that the
higher Angels always teach and lead the nether and lower Angels, that they
may bring them to the divine brightness and illumination, abduction, and
communication, and induction by conversation, in illumination by knowledge, in
knowledge by perception. For as Saint Gregory. 1. Mor. says, Some are nigh God
by contemplation, and some go outward by service and working: and yet they
that go outward, pass not away from the inner contemplation. For always they
see him, that is present in every place that they come in.

The excellency of orders is assigned by the worthiness of gifts, for by
diverse simplicity of kind and Essencia, and cleerenesse of kindly wit and
wisdom, and by different freedom of aduisement, the orders receive and have
diversity. For they that he more subtle in kind^, and have more clear
perseueraunce and wisdom, the gift of larger grace, they are more worthy
than the other. Therefore all the orders of Hierarchies have proper gifts by
the which they work, and proper qualities, by the which they rule their
works, for no Angel has leave to take upon him a work or deed, that
belongs not to his order, and to his office. The perfection of the order of
Hierarchies stands in such a point, that they that be clear beautifieth
other, and they that be pourged, pourge other: and they that be made perfect,
make other perfect. For the order is such, that they that ^e first purged, ^e
afterward, illumined and beautified; and then made perfect. For after
purgation follows illumination, and after illumination the consummation of
perfection, and so the higher orders immediatelye receive of God purgation,
that they may be clean and clear: and perfection, that they may be perfect.
And then by order of the disposition of God, the higher Angels cleanse,
illumine, and make perfect the lower Angels. But their purgation is not to be
understood of corruption of vices and of sin, but more verily imperfection
of goodness. For Saint Denis says, to the likeness of him that has no
contagion neither uncleanness, it needs that Angels be clean of
uncleanness and confusion, shining in holiness and truth, and perfect in
goodness. Amongst these most holy orders, some be the first, and some be in
the middle, and some the last and lowest. The first illumine, the last be
illumined, the middle illumine^h the last, and be illumined of the first.

Of the order of Seraphin. Cap. 8.
AS of the more worthy, first we shall begin to treat of the first order,
that is Seraphin. Thereof speaks Isidore. li. 7. and says, Seraphin is a
multitude of Angels, that is to understand, burning or setting a fire, for
between them and God, be no Angels mean.

And therefore the nearer they be to God, so much the more they are inflamed
and lightened in the clear brightness of the light of God. And therefore men
say that they veil and wrap the face and the feet of our Lord. For the
other Angels see not the majesty of our Lord more cleerelye than these do.
And therefore they be inuyroned with so-much the more brightness, in how much
they be inflamed in burning affection of the inward love. And so the proper
office of these Angels is to burn in themselves, and to move other to burn
in the love of God.

We may take the principal and special properties of this Order of Denis
words, that says learnedlye in this manner. The first Hierarchy of Heaven
is hallowed with well excellent Essencies, and have an Order higher then other,
sitting next God.

And therefore the first workings of knowing of God be born into this
Hierarchy, as into the Hierarchy that is next God, and it follows. Seraphin
is always moveable about things divine, and is hot, without ceasing, sharp and
passing seruent, always of busy motion that boweth not, the bringer again of
subjects, actiuely exemplicatiue, making them hot, and rai^^ng them into the
likeness of fiery love of heaven, cleansing offering not intermixed, and may
not be quenched, and has lightness of light, and property to give light to
make darkness known, and to pursue it. These words be full divine, and pass
all men's wit, touching the dark and mystical meaning of them. But yet as I
may, though it be doubtful and beyond common skill, I shall undertake somewhat
to declare the meaning of these words. For it seems that Denis has meant
that the disclosing of the properties and office, makes known to diverse,
discreation and participation of grace in the Angels that be named Seraphin.
For the name of Seraphin means moveable, and says so by liklyhoode, the
kind of fiery love, by the which the affection of an Angel, is moved and
ravished, retourneth into God. But this moving is quiet, causing, augmenting,
and fulfilling. Also he moves incessably, for such a love falls never,
neither resseth to desire him, that he loves. He is called hot; for ye
strength of love exciteth and moves, as it were heat, to the feeling of
sweetness. And therefore he puts to Acutum, sharp. For the strength of
love pearceth into the innest of the maker and creator. And so: Acutum,
sharp, betokens a manner violence of love, that enters and pearceth into
the thing that is loved Also he says, Super feru^dum, passing fervent, for
though the love stretch into the innest of the Godhead, yet he reaseth not to
see all about by affection: So that the thing that he takes not at the full by
the inwit, he comprehends somewhat by taste of contemplation. As a thing that
boileth by strength welmeth and leapeth, and throws and sheddeth it self all
about: So the affection of an Angel forsakes nothing, that he takes heed
of, but the more he knows, the more he desires to know. He says also,
Inflexibilis motionis, moving that fails not, for though Angels love move
into God, yet he is inflexible, steadfast, and fails not. For he will not lose
in no manner wise that thing that he loves: and so he is moveable and cease
not, and that intentive and inwardly. For he sets his intent into the inward
of God. And so he is always moveable and rests not in himself: but he is
busy to set his intent in God, but inwardly that he fleet not outward, and he
is in all, wise, inflexible and stable, and turns never from him, to things
that be without him. Also he says, Suppositorum reductiuum, able to bring
again the nether. For an Angels love stretches always to the over, that is,
to that above from whence the cause of his love comes: but he goes not away
from the love of the nether. But he calls and brings the nether orders to
be partners of the illumination and brightness of God. Also he says, Docere
actiuum et exemplificatiuum, he desires to teach and give good ensample: For
his intent is not only to bring the nether orders to love God, that is
highest: but also by example he shows them that be of the nether orders, how
and in what manner, he that is most good, should be beloved above all things.
And how men shall turn to God by love, and do all thing after his will.
Therefore he says, that the love of them is heating and rearing up into such a
manner heat. For therefore they travail, that the nether orders burn and be
seruent, though not all alike, but differently. And he says not that, as
though the lower Angels were cold or dead, but it is said, because the subject
orders are excited and stirred by them to the more larger affection of love.
And therefore it follows. Igneum celitus and holocaustomatis purgatiuum. A
fiery thing of heaven, that pourgeth offering. For the fire of God lights the
first Angels, that they may light other, and lighteneth them, from whose light
other are become bright shining also, and purges them, that they may cleanse
other. For the fire of God burns softly and sweetly, and burns not to
wasting neither to apparing, but to cleansing and to pourging. Therefore he
faith, That he cleanses offering: For as he is the luminator at full, so he
cleanses at full. And he cleanses not from infection of any vice or sin:
but from the imperfection of goodness. For that is perfect purgation, where no
correction is, but all perfection. Also Seraphin is said, virtues, Multi^moda
and multi fida, a virtue of many ways and of many faiths. So said, because
our redeptio^ stands by the gift of faith.
Of many ways, in that he is moved in desire and working many manner wise.
Many faiths in that he is beutified in possessing: many ways, in that he
passes forth searching: many faiths, in that he pearceth and finds. He
passes forth by many ways and diverse affections, and comes to one God, and
one life comprehends all things together. Also the name of Seraphin, means
the thing that is not put by, neither intermixed: for without any vayling of
figure or of creature set between, he loves to see God: and of the plenty of
the well of everlasting light he is brightened without any mean set between,
that he may brighten other: and he is lightened, that he may light other. And
so the Angels of that order, are more worthy then other, for they take the
influence of their perfection of God, without any mean set between: and
gives the same forth to other without withdrawing, and have it in possession,
and keep it without leesing. They slack never, neither withdraw them from
that love of God, neither tourneth their intent from GOD. And they lead the
nether orders toward God, and cease not for travail, neither for annoye.
This may suffice of the properties of Seraphin.

Of the order of Cherubin. Cap. 9.
THe second order is called Cherubin, and is to understand, plenty of cunning.
Isidore lib. 7. says, Duly excepted Seraphin, Cherubin are the highest
companies of Angels. For the nearer they be set to the wisdom of God, the
more large gift in them appears of the fullness of God. Therefore worthily
the order of Cherubin are ordained after the order of Seraphin. For after the
gift of Charity, of which gift Seraphin has the name, the most excellent
gift is the gift of wit and wisdom, and of the knowing of the dignity of
God: of the which gift Cherubin has the name. For the beam of the light of
God, shines principally in the Angels of this order, touching the far
exceeding participation of the knowing of God. Therefore Denis shows the
properties and effects of the Angels of this order. cap. 7. where he says,
That the knowing of Cherubin teaches what he knows. And these words
signify, that Angels of this order are called Angels that know and be
knowing, for they pass other in the gift of the wisdom of God: also he
names them De^ vidi, God seeing, for the excellent sight that they have of
God. For they have a more clear contemplation, then other have of Gods
majesty: and they be said, Altissime dacio racionis luminum accepturi: Of the
highest gift of reason receivers of light. Thereby he means, that the order
of Cherubin, is passing other filled of the light to God. Also these Angels
have the gift of the fairness of God in the first virtue that works: for by
the light of divine wisdom, they be in conte^plation of ye fairnee of god.
Also thereby he means, that in them and by them the first virtue ye works,
yt is to say God, is seen most clearly. Also he is called, Sapientifica
traditione repleti, full of giving of wit and of wisdom, for by the wise
tradition of the Creator, they deal the gift of divine wisdom, to some
more, and to some less. Also they have communicatiue cunning. For the light of
wisdom, that they receive largelye, it passes by them, to diverse others. For
the fullness of light that they receive, they give forth and commit to other.

And also they are named takers of light of pure contemplation and of
simplicity without mean. He calls the light the illumination and
glistering, by the which light he comes to ye pure and clear contemplation,
where the virtue of God is, not in image, in figure, or in any mean creature:
but by it self, and in it self. Also they are called filled of the food of
God, and of his house, and of the unity that gives life of the feeding of
God. For in that they be fed with the light of knowledge, they be refreshed
with the sweetness of love. For it were no great profit to inspire with
knowing, but there followed therewith soode of the holy spirit, that is, of
feeding by love. Also this feeding is called household, lively, and only
refection. Household, for that it is prepared for friends and so; meynie,
belonging to ye house. And it is said lyuelye, because it makes and gives
life to each, that is fed with such meat. And it is only and singular: for
it is not tasted with strange lyking, that is to mean, not with fleshly
sweetness. And though it be only feeding or meat, yet many manner of
feeding is found in this only meat.

That when this one meat is taken, The rai^^de sa^^ ^m God, is (...) feeding.
full and very feeding is found.

Of the order of Thrones. Chap. 10.
THe third order is the order of Thrones, and this order has the name of the
gift of dome. For that God sits in them, and gives his sentence of
judgment, and by them he disposes all subjects, as says Isidore. Therefore
the virtue of Gods equity is lykened to a fiery throne in Daniel, yt is to
mean, for c^^erenesse of knowledge, for by them, God foreseeing every thing,
discusseth readely all things, and for swiftenesse that nothing may withstand
or let. Then these Angels, in which righteousness of Gods judgment specially
shines, he called Thrones, of Isidore. And therefore Denis calls them the
highest seats, for they be high up authority of God, as it were instruments
of Gods Justice, ordained to govern: higher, for that they follow the rule of
the righteousness of God in judgment, but highest, for that they be ^^re the
presence of God, in the disposition of the Hierarchies. Strongly placed, for
that they are couenablye and conuenientlye joined, touching the ioynture and
conuenience of the judgments of God. For it is determined and convenient, that
every man receive for trespass pain, and for righteousness bliss, and such
reward as his work asks, acception or reiection: and therefore pain
accords couenably to trespass, and bliss to righteousness. For if trepasse
and bliss, pain and righteousness agree not, they should not have a seat
ordained couenablye togethers. For compa^ion and upright judgment is the
rightfulnesse of Domes. The seats are free of all shameful subjection: For
ever the more subject they be to GOD that is above them, the more worthy they
are to be made high by him, and in him, Seeds De^ se^re, seats that bear
God, for they bear God that is above them, and they set forth and show the
might of God by divine mouings, in creatures that he subject.

Seats that belong to the coming of God, that is above vnmateriall, and above
worldly taking. For they take the knowledge of God without study and
weariness, and sends it forth to the lower, without grievous sufferaunce,
and without withdrawing.

Whereby they teach us ghostlye, that we putting aparte material and earthlye
things should appoint and make us meet to receive things that euerlas^eth.

Also these seats are without end, that is to understand, without beginning
and end. For in God, to whom they are nigh, is found neither beginning
neither end. So the Thrones receive the virtue of God, and sen^eth the same to
the lower. They make themselves subject to God obedientlye and not of any
necessity, but by very freedom, they show themselves subject in all deeds.

Of the middle Hierarchy. Cap. 11.
ISidore says, That the middle Hierarchy contains these three orders,
Principatus, Potestates, and Dominationes. Denis calls this Hierarchy
Epiphonomia, that is divine brightness with reverence, their parteners setting
forth, and teaching the use of the Lordship, and putting away of a thing that
is contrary. The first difference is said for Principatus, that have the gift
of reverence passing other: whose office is to teach, to exercise, and to do
reverence to them that be worthy, after the diverse degrees of Prelacie, as it
is written: Cui honorein, honorein, Honor to who^ honor pertains. Romans 13.
But the use of Lordship belongs to Dominations, which teach ye lower to
govern, not by lyking and desire to be above and over other, but after Gods
own will, to rule one another: for God will that men be above other men for
profit, and not for pride, that they may teach and inform them in the faith
and in good manner of living, and not to be outrageous in the gifts that are
freelye given to the Lordship. Constraining of might and power belongs to the
order of Potentates, that mightily put off fiendes, that they grieve us not so
much as they would, Addition
Preventing ungodly desires, and unlawful lusts. And so is the disposition of
the middle Hierarchy set: though it seem otherwise ordained, after Isidore
and Gregory, but that belongs not to this work.

Of the order of Dominations. Cap. 12.
THe fourth order is Dominations, as Isidore says, which are above and excel
other in powers and virtues, for they be above other companies of Angels and
Lords, and are called Dominations. Gregory says, The office of this order, is
to teach and inform men, what is needful in spiritual battle, to use in
the office of Prelacie. Also they inform Prelates of the Clergy, how they
shall behave themselves in governing of subjects, without oppression and
tyranny. Denis says, That the service of these Angels, is to put of distrust
and dread, and turn to God, without bending to worldly profit, and serve
him without ceasing: which by a singular excellency, shape only a behest and
commandment, a sure information and warning in the nether order. The Angels
of this order be free of all manner oppressing and ouersetting, that they may
freelye be reared up to God ward, and be subject to none that is lower the^
God: and so they be subject to none other, but to him alone, and by an
universal excellency they are far above all subjection: yet so yt no vyolence
of tyranny bends them to oppress and ouerset the nether Angels. Therefore
Denis says, That they use their Lordship with vnlykenes of tyranny. They have
severity in might, and with severity, freedom in goodness: and whiles the time
of Dominations, power, and might is used, freedom is not taken away in their
doing, about the nether orders, yet by this liberality their might is no
manner of wise diminished. But conforming themselves to God, as much as is
possible, they follow the rule and law of their president. They never turn
them to vanity, but always to the highest God, that Denis calls ( One) that
is to understand, Uniuersall. On him they set their eyes, and turn not away
the sight of their understanding, from him that is Lord of all: and therefore
they are parteners, as it may be of the form and likeness of God, as Denis
says. And so Dominations are the first in the second Hierarchy.

The order of Principatus. Cap. 13.
THe fifth order is called Principatus: and holy men declare, that this order
teaches men of low estate to do reverence to them that be greater and in
higher estate of dignity, as to Kings, Princes, and Prelates. Of the Angels
of this order Denis says, that to Principatus belongs leading to bring
kingdoms to the likeness of God. For it belongs to these Angels of their
office, to teach and bring the other more lower ordinately to God, and to
teach the lowest person to be reverenced in himself, and in his neighbor,
and specially in a Prelate. Denis says, That therefore they are called
Principatus, for that to them it belongs to turn or bring other to ye first
and principal beginning, that is to God: the which they follow as it is
possible, and as far forth as it is lawful in office of presidence, they be
lykened to the Prince. For Isidore lib. 7. says, That Principatus are they
that be over the companies of Angels, for that they ordain and dispose the
lower Angels to fulfill the divine service. They have the name of
Principatus: some there be that serve, and some that stand by, Psa. 68. 17
Thousands of thousands served him, and ten hundred thousand stood by. Dan.
7.9.10.

Of the order of Potestates. Cap. 14.
THe sixth order is the order of Potestates, and they are called Potestates, as
Isidore says, for the evil Angels be subject to them. And they have ye name
of Potestates, for by their might, the evil spirits be restrained, that they
do not so much harm as they would. Gregory says, That the office of these
Angels is to comfort them that travail and fight in ghostly battle, and to
defend them, that they be not vyolently overcome of their enemies, and to
help mightily that good men have the victory. Heerto Denis accords and
says, That the service of Potestates is to keep warelye, that no wicked thing
grieve, neither annoye good men.

And Gregorye says, That Potestates in their Order, perceive more mightily,
that evil spirits are subject to their disposition, the which be restrained
by Potestates, that they grieve not men so much as they would.

Of this Potencial virtue, Denis says. This holy Potestates have equal might
with Dominations, and receive and keep meekely the same divine gifts in their
degree without confusion. For they tyrannouslye command nothing contrary to
the lower: they assay to do nothing by vyolence and force: but calls
ordinately the lower Angels to the likeness of GOD. And cease not ^o bring
the^, Ad Potentificam and causalem potenciam, that is to God, that may all
thing, and is cause of all thing intellectually, far passing worldly doing.
So that by these properties of the likeness of God, the middle dispositions of
the supernall knowledge, may be illumined and beautified, pourged and made
perfect.

Also as these Potestates are turned to the likeness of God by mean of the
higher Angels: so by their mean the nether Angels are brought also to the
likeness of God. So that all the orders, highest, middlemost, and lowest, be
made partakers of dark and mystical purgations, illuminations, shinings, and
perfections.

Of the third Hierarchy. Cap. 15.
THe third Hierarchy is called Ephionia, and contains three lower orders,
that is to suppose, Uertues, Archangelles, and Angels. And thereto according
the lower Hierarchy is described in this manner. The lower Hierarchy, is a
godly principle of nature, meeting with the laws of kind, and showing secrets
as he may take discreet of nature, meeting with the laws of kind. This
pertayneth to Uertues: for they have might to do miracles, and to heal sorrow
and sicknesses above Natures skill. Showing mysteries: this belongs to
Archangells and to Angels, by a marvelous discreet pass, from the one to the
other: this is referred to the difference of Archangells and Angels. For the
greater, as Archangels reveal greater mysteries, and the less, as Angels,
show the less screcies.

For by Archangells were showed, the greater secrets unto Prophets, us this:
Esaias. 7. 14.
Ecce virgo concipiet, etc. Behold a virgin shall bear a son, and thou shall
call his name Emanuel. And by Angels is showed the besse, Psalm. 68.
as this: Episcopatum e^^s accipiat, etc. His habitation be void, and no man
be dwelling therein, and his Bishop right let another take. And this was said
of Judas the traitor that hung himself: Acts. 8.
and Mathias was chosen Apostle in his steed. Ephionia is said of Ephi, that
is, under, and Phanos, that is, showing. For the likeness of God is showed in
a lower manner in orders of this Hierarchy, then in other orders of the higher
Hierarchy.

Of the order of Virtues. Cap. 16.
THe seventh order is of virtues. Uertues be a company of Angels, and their
service is to virtues and to do miracles, in them principally the virtue of God
shines: and therefore they be called virtues as Isidore says. The Angels of
this order, receive illumination, purgation, and perfection of the orders of
the middle Hierarchy. Therefore Denis says, that virtues have strength to
work as God grants them, yt which strength changes not. In this they be
formed and like to God: for they have taken unchangeable strength of virtue, to
do all ^^edes. And therefore Denis touching the working virtue of these
spirits says, That the name of these holy virtues, means a mighty
strength, that changes not, that is given them asset the likeness of God,
the which is never ^^ble ^^^uer unsteadfast to receive the illuminations and
showing of God: as though-he-would mean, In yt these Angels be called
virtues, it is known that they are confirmed and like to God: for the virtue
of God is strong and mighty to ^^^ and which not for difficulty of ^^ty
work, and ^^ unsteadfast to dure and ^^^ and wearieth no^, neither feebleth for
so long (...)ing ^ of (...). So these Angels ^^ like for they are found
strong, and incom^^table to do all deeds. Therefore they be virtuous, not
only in working, but also in receiving of light and of brightness. For the
virtue of these Angels, though it seem feeble and unsteadfast, is likened to
the virtue of God, and is not feeble, but by grace they are likened to the
virtue of God^ They be feeble concerning their unableness without God, by
condition of kind, but they are not feeble by any ^^^ruption: but they receive
all that is due to a creature, that is to mean, sufficient strength according
to the kind there of. Therefore Denis says, that the^ have motion like to God,
that bears them steadfastly, into the passing Essence of God, for by that
virtue, they and us to God w^^^: and therefore their virtue is borne up, into
the passing virtue of the Creator, therefore the likeness of the Image of God
is found in them. The likeness of that they resolve, they send it forth to the
nether Angels, they take by gift, and give forth by example. Denis says,
that the office of these. Angels is to teach Prelates to do the office of
Prela^ie, profitably, and p^^elys, and steadfastly, that they may bear their
sharp patiently: Gregory. 4. Mor, says. That the office of these Angels, is
to teach them that have virtue, how they should in themselves repair the image
of God: and reform it, and keep it, and ^^^e it mightily. ^^^ so by the
service of these Angels the virtue of doing miracles, is granted to the
perfect, that they may be brought to the first state, in the which God made man
to his own Image and likeness. By such miracles showed, the Angels of this
order see always and behold the virtue of God, and tremble an contemplation
thereof: but this fear, in^^red (...) fliring to set forth the will of God,
as not painful, but it is rather wonderful, and not dreadful fear, as says
Gregory in Mor. li. 4.

Of the order of Archangells. Cap. 17.
THe eight order is of Archangels that is to be (...), highest messengers, or
Princes of messenges, as says Isidore. For they hold the Principate among
Angels, termed Dukes, leaders, and Princes. For under their order, to every of
the Angels their offices are assigned: Zat. 2.3.4.
For Archangells be above Angels, The Angel that talked with me vve^ sorth
and an other Angel went out to meet him and said unto him: run, speak to this
young man, and say Jerusalem shall be inhabited with out wales.
as it is said in Zachary, where the greater Angel said to the less: Go and
teach this child, etc. For if it were so in the office of Angels, that the
greater ap^ointed not the lower, they would not hade said so, speaking as to a
man: it seems therefore that one Angel learneth of another. These
Archangelles are often known by their proper names, so that by their names,
their conditions and works be showed. Luke 1. 19. 16.
For I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to speak
unto thee etc.
Gabriel was sent to the holy Uirgin, to give warning that he was coming,
that should have the victory against ye stends, that are called, Aere
Potestates. Gabriel signifies ye Fortitude of God. Tob. 12. 15 I am Rapha^lone
of the 7. holy Angels. which presents the prayers of the saints etc.
And Raphael, the Medicine of God, and was sent to Toby, and did lay medicines
to Tobies eyes, and healed him of his blindness, and so of other, Hitherto
speaks Isidore. lib. 7. cap. 5. Gregory says: that the office of these
Angels is to teach good men, and help them of those things that concern
their faith, as of the coming of Gods son, and of his deeds and laws.
Denis faith, that it belongs in Archangells, to show Prophecies to Prophets,
and to put off friends that have mastrie buenmen, that they grieve them no
more: as it belongs to Potestates to put off evil Angels, that they take not
upon them things that belongs to God. Also Archangells are more worthy then
the inferior Angels, and they be seen before other in message, because they
be more perfect, so that both great and less, be serviceable to the setting
forth of the glory of God: and by their dilygence the lower Angels are
informed toward God, as much as is possible. Also they consent in one unity,
gathering Angels to that chief Principium, in teaching of the Angels under
them by ordinate leadings and use, by the which it belongs to teach and to
lead the other nether. Angels that follow. Also these Archangells be in the
mids, among the orders of the neathermost. Hierarchy: and therefore they take
illuminations and shinings of the higher Angels, and the same show and teach
forth to the nether Angels: in the which Angels of all Angels, the
disposition Hierarchy is perfectlye constitute, fulfilled and complete of
three ternaries of the orders of Heaven.

Of the order of Angels. Cap. 18.
THe ninth and the last order of Angels. Angelus in Greeke^ Malach in
Hebrewe, Nuncius in Latin: and is to understand a Messenger in Englysh and in
French. For Angels were wont to come in message, and give prophets warning of
our Lords will. Angelus is a name of office, and not of kind: for an Angel is
always a spirit, and is named Angelus first; when he is sent in message.
Paynters paynt Angels with feathers and with wings, to be token their swifte
passing and moving, as Fables of Poettes tell that Winds have feathers, as it
is written, Psa. 104.3
Qui ambulat super pennas ventorum. Hitherto be Isidores words, lib. 7. cap. 5.

Denis says, that the Angels of the nether order, be not partners of the
illuminations of ye higher orders: for they part not with the^, but they take
part of the^. For ye higher Angels first take illuminations of God, and then
bear they illuminations forth to the knowledge of other, and be called the
first messengers: and the other be called after, and the last messengers. Also
Denis says, that Angels lift up or inspyre, and bring men to the knowing of
GOD, and teach and inform them that they may live righteouslye.

Therefore, though these Angels have no other lower Angels under them, and
are not above any other Angelles^ not they have under them the Orders of men,
over whom they are ordayners and disposed of them.

Addition
For the soul being the bodies life is the watch by the which the bodies
expresses the works of nature, charged for a time while the body is
apparaunt: the course run, the soul: retourneth subject to motions diverse,
by higher Angels.

They be stirred up by the love of God in themselves, and be formed by ye ward
of them, and pass forward under themselves by defense of them that they shall
rule. Act. 12.7. 8.9 Peter was delivered by ye Angel forth of prison. 2. Re.
19. ^ The Angel awoke Eliah under the Ginepertree. and said, Arise and eat.
These Angels have many manner effects: For the Angels that be ordained
singularly to our keeping, prick us to good, and wake us that we sleep not in
sins and in vices. Act. 12. Also they refresh us Ghostlye, that we fall not
under the burden of the way into our country. 3. Reg. 9. Also they put off
fiendes, that they hurt us not. Tobie. and And they inform us in doubts, ^
make us certain. Dan. 11. 10. Dan. 9. 21 22. As Daniel was in prayer. Gabriel
spak unto him, saying, I am eo^e forth to give thee knowledge and
understanding.
Also an Angel leads us that we wander not out of the way. Tobie. 5. Exodus
32. Also he comes to us and comfort us in sorrow and in woe. Luke. 23.
Genesis 16. Where it is read that an Angel comforted Agar that wept full sore:
also they have compassion of us when we sin, least we fall in despair and
vain hope. Esaias. 24. Iudic. 2. And they assist us quicklye least we should
fall. Esaias. 24. And they help us against enimyes that we be not overcome.
Genesis 32. and secundo Macohebrum penul. Also they heal our wounds that we dye
not.

Tobities. Toby. 5. 4. When he vve^t sorth to seek a man, he found Raphael
the Angel which accompanied him in his journey.
And they bring our sins to mind, that we should be ashamed thereof. Iosu.
2. And they warn us of Gods will, that we may do thereafter. Luke. 2. And
they put away lets, that we may serve our Lord, Exodus 23. Exodus ^ the Lord
promised to send an Angel before his people.
Sed precedet te, etc. And they visit us often, and warn us, that we trespass
not. Esaias. 40. Secundum penam, etc. And they be always in the presence of God
to have contemplation. Luke. 1. and Dan. 7. Decres centena millia, etc. Also in
prayeng they get us remission. Job. 33. Sicut fuerie. And they cease never to
worship and praise God. Esaias. 6. Apoc. 5. Non habient reqdiem, etc.

And they behold God face to face without veil put between. Mat. 18. Angeli
little, etc. And in their substance and virtue, they be not grieved with the
weight or peise of the body. Luke. vlti. Spiritus carnem et ossa, etc. Also
he is above tune, and works in time. For as Dems says, the secret
understanding of an Angel is like to God, and works sodeinly. Therefore he
understands and knows sodeinly without circumstaunce or conference of one
thing to an other: and by the virtue of his substance he does all his deeds in
one instant: an instaunt is a during that abides not. For an instaunt is, and
never was, neither shall be. The Philosopher calls an Angel Intelligencia ^
and in Libro de Causis, it is written, That an Angel is made in the Orizont of
time, and eternity everlasting. TREVISA. Orizont is a strange term and much
used in Astronomy: and to inquire and know, what the Orizont signifies, What
an Orizontis
take heed if a man stand on a great hill, either in a great plain and large,
so that he see the Firmament or Sky all about without any let, he shall
seem that the Sky touches the earth all about him on every side, and that a
Circle of the Sky compasses the earth all abouts, as far as his sight
comprehends. That Circle is called Orizont, and is the middle Circle between
the part that we see of Heaven, and the part that we see not: and this Circle
is between the foresaid parts, and is the neathermost of that one, and
ouermost of that other: and so is Angels kind and mankind over those things
that he made, and pass, and fall by passing of time, and never in degree of
everlasting.

Then consider of the endless greatness of God, that ever was, and ever shall
be, without beginning and without ending. For euerys Angel shall but ever
without ending: and no Angel than ever without beginning ^ ^^^ ^^^ye Angel
was made. Also if men be affraide with the sodeine presence of an Angel,
consider that ^^^nd Angel ^^^eth comfort unto them, with sweet dooinges, and
sweet shewings, as says Ambrose. Lu. ^.ibi. Ve timeas Zacharias, etc. A fiend
or evil Angel does the contrary, for whom he affraieth with his presence,
he smites them with more dreadful fear, as says Ambrose. Also an Angel is
seen when he will. And when he will he is hid from man's sight, as says S.
Ambrose in the same place. Also an Angel when he will takes a body couenable
to his working, that he may be seen: and when he has done his office, he
seaueth that body that he took. Iud. 13. 25 idem cap. 14.19 Sampson.
Iud. 14. Eua^uit, etc. And the spirit of the Lord began to strengthen him in
the host of Dan, And the spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he went down
to Ascalon. Also though an Angel took a body for any needful doing, he
does not quicken that body, neither gives thereto life, but only he moves
it. And so sometime it seems, that he eats and drinks as a man, and yet
be eats not neither drinks: But by his might he destroieth and washes the
meat, as appears. Tobie. 12. Where it is said. It seemed that the Angel
eat and drank, etc. Also an Angel eats for no need, but only by might.
For as Austen says upon Luke, the last Chapter. The Sun beam wastes the
water by might, but the earth swalloweth by necessity, And so eating was by
might touching the showing of the meat and the wasting, but it was not
needful to the feeding of the body. So these light things and plain, that be
said of good Angels shall suffice at this time.

Of evil Angels. Chap. 19.
Of this government of Angels many have disliked, but seeing that bodies he
guided by spirits, and spirit by Angels, and Angels
AS a good Angel is given to men for help and keeping, so to every man is
given an evil Angel to assailing and attempting. The head of these evil
spirits and leader, is Lucifer, the which as Gregory says, has that same,
for he was made more clear and height then other Angels. For the first Angel
was beautified as a precious stone for whilst he was above all the compa^^es
of Angels, by comparison he was the more bright and clear then they. But he
waring proud against his Creator, lost light and cleerenesse, and fairness:
by God, it is a rare question.
and as he was worthy, he gate him a foul dark shape of Apostacy. Thereof
speaks Damas. li. 1. Chap. 18. Of these virtues of Angels, he that was
above other, and to whom God had committed the charge of the earth, was not
made evil by kind, but good, and of the maker, no fire of maltice in himself,
not suffering the illumination and worship, that the maker had given him: by
election and choice of his own free aduisement, he turned out of kind into a
thing that is above kind: and became a rebel against God, and failing of the
first good, came into evil. Et infra. He was of the creator made light, and by
his own will he became darkness. Also with him was sent out an endless
multitude of Angels, that followed him, and were ordained under him, and
wilfullye became evil, and fell out of good into evil. Also it is said, that
they have no power neither virtue against men, except it be granted by the
disposition and sufferaunce of God: But by sufferance of God they disguise
themselves, and take what manner Image, figure, or shape them likes. Then it
seems that all malice and unclean thoughts come of their doing, the which
they may put in man's thought: But they may not do to: men by violence and
strength. Also that death of men is a change of life, the alterations of
Angels loss of son. After fliding, Angels lack the clear prose^ce of God, as
after death men lack life. Hitherto be Damascenes words. Also Gregory says,
that grace has forsaken him, and he abides obstinate in malice, so that by
his will, he will nothing that is good. He has free aduisement, but it is
borne down, and bends always to evil, without ceasing: So that always he
forsakes the good and chooses the evil. Therefore it happened as Cassidore
says, he willed and coueted to vsurp over the Godhead; and thereby lost
prosperity: also because he in an undue manner coueted highness, that
belonged not to him, therefore by a right decree he fell down into a low
place.

As he that bare himself not rightfully in the highest place, should now by
the order of righteousness hold himself in the lowest place. Therefore
Saints call him Diabolus, a Devil, as it were Deorsum ruens, falling down.
Deorsum rucus.
And he has many other names, by the which his wickedness is known by
signification of names. He is called Demon, and Plato in Thimeo calls him
Cacodemon, that is to understand, knowing evil. For Demon is to understand,
knowing. And he is called so for sharpness that he has of kindly wit. He is
sharp in wit of kind, and by experience of time, in knowing and understanding
of Scriptures, as says Beda, and also Damascene. Chap. 18. Hereof speaks
Isidore. lib. 7. chap. vltimo, and says that the Greeks call fiendes wise,
that is, cunning. For they know before many things that shall fall and come
after. Therefore they be wont to give many aunsweres. For in them is more
knowledge of things then is in men, and that is the more because of subtilnesse
of wit, and for long continuance and experience, and somewhat they know by
reuealations of good Angels, by the commandment of God. These fiendes be
nigh in kind to the bodies of the air: For before they trespassed they had
heavenly bodies. And fithence their sliding and fall, they be turned into
quality of air. And they be suffered to hold these spaces of the dark
air, that is to them a prison unto the dome. These be the Angels that
trespassed, and their Prince is the Devil. Also he is called Satan, that is
to say, contrary, or an adversary. For by corruption of malice he is
contrary to God, as says Hierome. By desperate attempting he takes more
upon him then he may do, as says the Gloss. Esaias. 16. Mayor est arrogancia
eius, etc. His brag and his boast is more then his might. For as Hierome
says: He had leauer be, then not be, because he would fight against God,
though he know, that his harm should increase thereby.

Also he is called Beemoth. Job. 40. Ecce Beemoth, Beemoth is as much to say,
as an Ox, or a beast. Of some taken for the ^^^uncerot and Elephant, beasts of
great force and hignes. signifieng the whale or furious dragon.
The fiende, as an Ox desires to ^a^e heye, with the tooth of his temptaion,
seeks to chewe and to frette the clean life of good men. The fiende loves
fleshlye likinges. Also he is called Leuiathan, that is, a thing put to. Job.
40. For as Gregorye says, he puts harm to harm, and cease not to put
pain to pain. Always as the trespass of him and of his, increases, so the
pain increases also. Also he is called Appollion in Greek, that is, a
destroyer, as appears Apocalipsis. 15. For by malice that stirs him, he
desires to destroy the goodness of virtues that God planteth in the holy
Church, and among good souls, as it is said in the Psalm, Psa. 80. 13
Exterminauit eam aper de silua, etc.

Also he is commonly called Diabolus, that is, fleeting downward, by
understanding in Hebrewe. For he despised to stand in peace in the highness
of Heaven, he was worthy to fall downward by the weight of his pride. And he
is called Criminator in Greek, a curser and blamer, either for that he
intiseth or inflameth unto offenses and sins, or else for that he infecteth
innocently good men with blame and false accusations, as it is said
Apocalipsis. 12. Proiectus est accusator, etc. and as says Isidore. Ethimol.
^^. 8. Tobie ^. The accuser of me^ is cast down.
Also beside these names in holy writ, his malice is many ways noted. For
he is called a Serpent or a Dragon, for his venomous and guisefull cruelnesse.
Apocalipsis. 12. He is called a Lion for his open violence. 1. Pet. vltimo.

Tanquam Leo rugiens. And he is called a Boar, for he is obstinate and rooted
in shrewdenesse. Esare. 25. And he is called a crooked and waywarde Addar, for
his looking in the dark air. And therefore Austen rehearses Platoes opinion
of fiendes, that he called Cacodemones, super Genesisliber. 8. and habet.
liber. 5. sieve distinctione. 8. Caput. primo. And says, that Fiendes be
called ayrelye beasts, for they live in bodies that be airely.

And therefore not to be overcome by death. For the element that is more able
to suffer then to work, has the masterie in those manner of bodies. Also
Austen in the work De ciuitale Dei. li. 8. says, That is, by signification,
as when a man in conscience is grieved, and cannot utter the ag^nie of his mind.
Demones, fiends be beasts that suffer in the hidden intelligence, reasonable
in thought, everlasting in during, airely in body. Austen says in this manner,
rehearsing the opinion, and means, how the fiend was put out of the place
that is called Coelum Imperium. Blessed heaven, out of the bright place of
light, into this dark air, and is prisoned therein to suffer w^ and sorrow:
when God suffers him, he takes a body of the air, that the life of men be
haunted and stirred to business by his doing or tempting. Therefore Esaye
calls him a Smith blowing coals, and shaping vessel to his work. For by his
haunting and assayling, the life of good men, that be vessels of grace, are
assaied and proved. Esa. 54. 16.17. I have made a Smith, etc. Thus he is called
by these names, and by many other, by the which his venomous woodnesse is
showed. Beda in the gloss upon this place. 1. Pe. vlti. Circuit querens quem
deuoret. He goes about and seeks whom he may devour and eat, says: He
goes about as an enemy besieging closed walls, and spieth where he may enter
and come in by the feeblest side. He shows unlawful shapes to the eien: to
the intent that by the sight he might destroy chastity. He tempts the cares
by song and melody, that he might make the christian strength feeble and
faint: he provoke the tongue by rebuke and soul reproach. And to take
revenge, he tempts the hand of them that suffers wrong, and stirs
thereto, he promises worldly worship, that he might cause the honor due to
Heaven to be set at naught. If he may not deceive with slow temptings, he
puts too fearful appearaunces and doubting. He is g^ilefull and deceiuable
in peace, and violent in persecution. Therefore the wit should be as ready
prepared to withstand him, as he is to impugn and assail, Hitherto he the
words of the Gloss.

Of perverse Angels. Chap. 20.
Evil Angels consenting to the will of Lucifer, that fell down, he closed in
this dark air, as it were in prison without recovery. They fell out of light
into darkness, out of love into hate and envy, out of most high health into
wretchedness, as says Gregorye. Also fiends, as they have more perseverance
or less, some be souereignes over fiends, and some be subjects to other
fiends, as says Ambrose upon Luke. For though fiends be obstinate in evil,
yet they are not spoiled utterly of sharp wit. For as Isidore says, they have
three manner of sharpness. For some things they know by the subtlety of
kind, and some by experience and during of times, and some things they know by
reuealation, and showing of holy spirits. Also ye fiends as Austen says, by
sharpness of wit know virtues seruiall of things, that we know not. The
which seeds they sow by couenable and temporate commixtions of Elements, and
so they bring forth things of diverse kind. For what that kind may do by it
self in due time, the same the devil may do sodeinly by swift hasting of the
work of kind. So by craft of fiends Pharaos witches made sodeinly serpents
and frogs, as says the Gloss, super Exodus

Also all the intent of fiends is to do evil, and to molest and disquiet good
men. And therefore often they trouble the Elements, and make tempests in the Sea,
and in the air. They corrupt and destroy the fruit of the earth, as appears
Apoc. 7. And much more harm would they do, were it not the good Angels ye
withstand their malice: and therefore because they trespass continuallye
wheresoever they go, they bear alwaie with them their pain, as says
Gregory. Also Gregory. li. Mo. 32. says, Fiends desire always ye woe and sorrow
of good men. But if they have no power of God, they be not They can do no more
the^ is permitted them.
sufficient to the article of temptation. Therefore when they have done one hurt
or evil, they sodeinly make them ready to do another. And so when fiends
should be put out of that men that they were in, they ^raied that they might
enter into swine. For to the end they might fulfill their malice, they desire
also to grieve brute beasts, when the might of God lets them, that they may
not molest m^n^al^ so li. 14. after the diverse complections of sendry men, they
ordeine whiles of temtation to catch them. For they tempt light conceited men
to lechery, and evil disposed men to discordt and strife, and fearful men to
vain hope, and proud men to take too much upon them: Also in li. 22. First
the old certain tempts, as it were counsailing, he entiseth liking attempts
and unlawful, after he draws to delectation, and at the last so consent: and
when he has a man in, he ouersetteth him with a violent usage and custom:
wherefore of him it is said: Job. 41. Str^^g^t caudam, etc. Also Gregory says,
li. 32. The guilefull entin^^ overcomes no man by might, but by guile of
venomous persuasions, and by the guilfull counsels he slaieth. For while
liking things appear or seem pleasantly, they bend the heart to evil. Item.
li. 25. Now he appears to men as he is lost. And now as an Angel of light;
he shows himself, Item. li. 34. In the end of the world, he shall be so
much the more seruent to madness, through mastre, that he is so nigh to ye
do^^e, and to paint internals. Item. ibidem. Their the false cann^t shall seek
and bethink wickedly all that he with, then wilt he adu^^^ce the^ proud
folk an high: (...)
and by him man shall be dampened by his o^^ne deeds, and he shall wickedly show
all the evil that he can. Item ibidem. li. 34. When all the company of heaven
comes to judgment, then ye old enemy the diuel^, the gris^y beast: streng,
shall be brought forth before the doing as a prisoner. And he shall be put into
the fire of hell without end, and his inherents with him: Where shall be a
wonderful sight when this huge of grislye beast shall be showed to ye eyes of
good me^. These few of full many properties of evil spirits, and of the
effect of them spoken, shall suffice for to pass shortly. And who that
desires to know the properties, works, and prive false accusations of this
Sathanas, let him thoroughly read Gregory's book upon Job. And specially the
two last Chapters. 40. and. 41.

FINIS SECVNDI LIBRI.
INCIPIT LIBER TERTIVS
Of the properties of the soul reasonable.
BY the help of Jesus Christ, in the foresaid books, we have brought in
brieflye some properties of bodilesse substance, of ye essence of God, and
quality of Angels: Now with his help we shall turn our s^^le to bodily
creatures, and we shall begin at the worthiest of creatures, that to man, that
has kind and property as well of bodies as of spirits.

Of the description of man. Chap. 1.
A Man is of all other creatures nearest in likeness unto God, Isidorus.
mild after kind by the law of reason, receiving doctrine and skill, having
the Image of God by the might of knowledge, and the likeness in power of
loving. Farther to the intent the properties of men should be the more openly
known to unlearned me^ and simple, of his parties, of yt which he is made and
composed, we shall shortly begin to entreat: and first of ye worthier kind, yt
is the soul, by the which man agrieth with Angels. For by the soul man is
lift up to heavenly things, above the kind of body. For as Isidore says,
by a miss use, Homo, a man, has ye name of Homo, the earth: since that he is
not made only of body, but composed of body and of soul. And therefore a man
is called Antropos in Greek: Antropos. of Ants. and Tropeo: Homo conuersus. A
man growing with his head or root vpvvard.
By Antropos is understood vprightlye formed. For the spirit is lifted up by
governance, to the contemplation of God his maker: wherefore the Poet says.

Pronaque cum spectant animalia ectera terra^,
Os homini sublime dedit coelumque videre.
Iussit and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
The meaning is thus, other beasts look downward to the earth. And God gave
to man an high mouth, and commanded him to look up and behold heaven: and he
gave to men visages looking upward toward the stars. And also a man should
seek heaven, and not put his thought in the earth, and be obedient to the
womb as a beast. Isidore speaks of a double manner man, That is, to void
excess.
of the inner man, and utter man. And first we shall treat and proceed of
the inner man.

Of the inner man, the soul, Chap. 2.
FIrst it is to understand, what thing the reasonable soul is, and of what
disposition, and what is the meaning of the Etim^logie, and the pronouncing of
this name, Anima, a soul. Then of the might and virtue thereof. And thirdly of
the effect and working thereof. Fourthly, of the perfection and comparison, that
is to wit, what is the property thereof, when it is joined to the body, and
when it is departed from the body. The reasonable soul, of the which we
intend here to speak, is defined of some Saints and Philosophers, as a
spirit: And of some other, as Anima et spiritus, soul and spirit. In that the
soul has the kind of a spirit, S. Austen defines it in libro de motu cordis.

Yet of the Soul. Chap. 3.
A Soul is an vnbodilye substance intellectual, that receives light of the
first, by the last relation: By this definition we know the first and chief
property of the soul. For man's spirit receives the light of God next after
Angels. Also in that it is a soul, it is defined in two manners. For it is
joined to the body in two manners, that is to understand, a mouer to the thing
that is moved, and also as a shipman is setteled to the ship. And thereto
according Remigius defines a soul in this manner. A soul is a bodilesse
substance ruling a body. And Saint Austen in the book De anima et spiritu,
says in this manner. A Soul is a certain substance, partener of reason,
betaken to a body that shall be ruled. Of the which definition some property
is taken: That is, that the soul by a certain necessity of love and
governance is kindly given to the ruling of the body, that is joined thereto.
And hereby it appears, that the soul is not streighted, neither spread in
length, neither in breadth in the body, that he rules and governs: but by
the virtue of the soul the body all about is ruled and moved. As Calcidius
puts example in Commento super Thimeum, of the Spider that sits in the
middle of the web, and feels all manner of moving, and touches the web
either within or without: So the soul, abiding in the middle of the heart,
without spreading of it self, gives life to all the body, and governs and
rules the moving of all the luns. In that it is compared to the body, that it
is joined unto, as form and perfection. It is defined of the Philosopher in
lib. de Anima, in this manner. A soul is Endelichia, that is, the first act or
perfection of a kindly body, that has lims and might to have life. By which
definition it is manifest, that though the soul be joined to the body, it may
not be fastened to all manner of bodies, but only to a kindly body, that has
lummes, and is first kindlye disposed to receive a reasonable soul. Also in ye
it is a soul and spirit, it is defined four manner of waye^. First in
comparison to creatures generally, as in the book De anima and spiritu, Austen
says in this manner: A soul is made to the likeness of all wisdom, and
bears in it self the liknesse of all things. For it is like to the earth by
Essentia: to water, by imagination: to Air, by reason: to the Firmament, by
understanding: to the knowledge of heavenly joys. In the sixth manner it is
defined in comparison to God, as to his maker, thus. A soul is like to God, a
quickening of life. Hereby we know that the soul is not begotten of the
father and mother, but it is compound and created of God to the living of the
body. Also in the seventh manner it is described in comparison to God, as to
the end that he is made, thus: A soul is a spirit intellectual, ordained to
bliss in it self. Hereof shines the propertye of the soul, that is to
mean, that the soul being departed from the body is not only beautified
with Angels, or as an Angel is, but the felicity thereof is enlarged, and
in the body glorified. Iohannis Damascene. Homel. 26. comprehends all these
differences and definitions under a general description, and says, That a
soul is a substance living, simple, and bodilesse, in his own kind vnleene
with bodilye eyes, neither shall die, and is the reasonable understanding,
without shape of limbs. And it uses a body, and gives thereto heart of
life, and of growing and of begetting, and has none other understanding, but
in it self it is most pure and clean. And as the eye is in the body, so is
the intellect understanding in the soul, and it has free aduisement and will,
and is chaungeable by couenable will. For it may freelye take either refuse.
All these the spirit takes of his grace, that made him, and of him he has
being a^^ kind. Hitherto speaks John Damascene. Bernard describes a right
such properties and says. O thou soul, beautified and made fair with the
Image and likeness of God, spoused in spirit, with Faith: bought with Christ's
own blood, assisted with Angels, pertaker of bliss, heir of salvation, and
partener of reason. What have thou to do with the flesh? By which thou
suffer much. By these many and diverse definions, and descriptions, diverse
and sundry properties of the soul be known, touching his being of kind and
of grace.

How the soul is of Philosophers described. Chap. 4.
BUT what thing a Soul is, it is unknown to many men. For in this matter we
read, that old Philosophers gave diverse, and as it were contrary
determinations. In liber de Anima, Aristotle rehearses the Plato said, that a
soul is a being moving it self. And Zeno says, that a soul is a number
that moves it self. Pythagoras calls the soul Harmony, a concord of
melody. Paphinons calls it Idea, a manner example. And Asolepides calls it
a manner of cord, that sets the five wits a work. Hipocras calls it a
subtle spirit spread through all the body. Eraclius the Philosopher, calls
the soul a light, or a sparcle of being. Democritus calls it an uncertain
spirits Athomis, a little thing, as it were of the meats in the Sun beam,
and so he says, that all the body of the soul is such a little thing.
Permenides says, that it is made of earth and of fire. Epicurus says, that
the soul is a manner kind of fire and air. Ipertus says, the soul is a
firye strength. Iuxta illud: Igneus est illis vigor et coelestis origo. Since
that wise men have spoken so many ways, and so diuersely of the soul: at this
time only this shall suffice that is said of holy men. That the soul is a
manner of spiritual and reasonable substance, that GOD makes of naught for to
give life and perfection to man's body. And because it is a substance that may
receive contraryes: It receives understanding, and yet is subject to
forgetting, virtue and malice without changing or leesing of his substance.
And because it is bodilesse, it is not spread in length neither in breadth in
the bodily wits. Inasmuch as it is simple in kind, therefore it may grow and
ware, neither more neither less one time then at an other. And therefore in
the greater body it is no greater, nor in the lesser body lesser, as says
Austen. Also though it be simple and not chaungeable in his substance, yet it
has many sundry mights and virtue. For multitude in might and virtue, makes
him neither more ne less in kind, but the multitude of might and virtue
belongs to the dooinges and effects. And so he is not more in three virtues
then in one, neither less in one then in three: And thus it is known, that ye
soul has many propertyes and definitions, touching what thing the Soul is,
and the condition of the Soul shall be more cleerelye known by the setting
of the name.

How the Soul took name of the Gentiles. Chap. 5.
ISidore says, that Anima the Soul, was named of the Gentiles: For that by
their opinion it is wind and breath: For we by drawing of air at the mouth
seem to live. But this opinion is openly falsee, for the Soul is put into
the body, long before the air be taken at the mouth. For it lives being in
the mothers womb, when our Lord makes the Soul, and puts it therein. And
it is called Soul because it lives, and it gives life to the body, that it
is put in. And it is called spirit, because it has in it self, spiritual,
animal, and kindlye life: And because it makes the body Spirare, that is, to
breath. Also the same thing is Anima and Animus: but Anima leads the life by
reason, and Animus by counsel and guiding. Therefore Philosophers say, that
Anima, that is a life, abides with Animus, that is counsel. Also Anima the
Soul, is called Men's, the Mind, because it app^areth above as head, or
because it minds. By the Soul, man is the Image of God. Also many names of
the soul be so coupled together, so that oftentimes one name is put for
another, and the Soul that is one, is called by diverse names in diverse
respects. It is called Anima, while it is in the body and gives it life.
Men's whilst it has mind, Animus, whilst it has will: Racio while it
deemeth or judges rightfully: Spiritus while it breaths: Sensus while it
feels. And for these propertyes of the Soul, cunning, that is the qualytie
of the Soul, is called Sciencia, and has the name of Sensus, feeling.
Hitherto speaks Isidore. liber. 15. Chap. 14.

Of the powers of the Soul. Chap. 6.
THE Soul is one in substance, and has many virtues, and many manner of
workings: thereby it needs to show diverse parting of his might and virtues.
The Soul is compared to the body, and to this end, and to this act. Touching
the comparison to the body, the Soul has fine manner of mightes and virtues.
The first whereof, as Austen says, is feeling, and by that virtue the Soul is
moved, and takes heed to the bodylye wits, and desires those things, that
belong to the body. By this virtue a beast is moved to desire the thing that
is lyking, and to eschew the thing that is grievous. The second power is wit:
that is the virtue of the soul, whereby she knows things sensible and
corporal, when they be present. The third is imagination, whereby the Soul
beholds the lyekenesse of bodylye things when they be absent. The fourth is
Racio, Reason, that deemeth and judges between good and evil, truth and
falsenesse. The fifte is Intellectus, understanding and inwit. The which
comprehends things not material but intelligible, as God, Angel, and other
such. The three first virtues, feeling, bodily wit, and imagination, are
s^ituate in the soul, that it is coupled to the body, and gives life and
innerwit and utter wit to perfection of the body. And these three virtues be
common to men and to other beasts: But the other virtues, ^acio and
Intellectus, be in the soul, in that it may be departed from the body, and
abide departed as an Angel, and that by two manner of respects. For it
beholds the higher things and so it is called Intellectus: and beholds the
nether things, and so it is called Racio. In that the soul is compared to
this end, it has three manner of virtues, one is Racionalis, whereby it takes
heed to the thing that is true: The other is called Concupisubilis, whereby it
takes heed to the thing that is good, the third is called Irascibilis, and
thereby it takes heed ye thing that is great and huge, and to the thing that
is everlasting. In the Rationali is knowledge of the truth, in Concupiscibili,
will and desire of good thing: in Irascibili is flight of contrary, that is, of
evil. And so every virtue thus considered takes in this manner knowledge of
the truth, either that it desires good, either indeuoureth to fly harm. All
the wits come of that virtue Rational and apprehensiue. All affections and
desire, of Concupiscibili and Irascibili. Which affections be four, that is
to say, Joy, Hope, Dread and Sorrow. The first two come of Concupiscibili,
for of the thing that we covet and desire, we have joy, and in ioying we hope.
The other two, dread and sorrow, come of the Irascibili. For of things that we
hate we have sorrow, and in sorrowing we dread. These four affections be the
matter of all manner vices and virtues, as it is in another place showed, and
that appears by Austen in the book De A^^ma and spiritu, where all those
things are declared.

Of the powers of the soul. Chap. 7.
IF we take heed to the soul in comparison to his working, we find three
manner of virtues, Vegetabilis, that gives life, Sensibilis, that gives
feeling, Racionalis, that gives reason. In diverse bodies the soul is said
to be three fold, that is to say, Vegetabilis that gives life, and no
feeling, and that is in plants and roots, Sensibilis, that gives life and
feeling, and not reason, that is in unskillful beasts, Racionalis that gives
life, feeling, and reason, and this is in men. The Philosopher lykeneth the
soul that is called Vegitabilis, to a Triangle. For as a Triangle has three
corners, this manner soul has three virtues, of begetting, of nourishing, and
of growing. And this soul Vegetabilis is like to a Triangle in Geometry. And
he lykeneth the soul Sensibilis, to a quadrangle square, and four cornerd.
For in a Quadrangle is a line drawn from one corner to another, before it
makes two Triangles and ye soul sensible makes two triangles of virtues. For
where ever the soul sensible is, there is also the soul Vegetabilis, but not
backwarde. And he lykeneth the soul Racionabilis to a Circle, because of his
perfection and containing. For of all the figures that be called Isoperimetra,
that is of all the figures of the same length the Circle is most, and most
contains.

Though the soul reasonable be made perfect in cunning and virtues, as it is
said in Liber de Anima: it is most perfect, and most may contain in the
manner of a Circle, touching the kindly virtues. And therefore who that has
the soul reasonable, has also the power Sensibilis and Vegetabilis, but not
contrariwise.

Of the Soul Vegetable. Chap. 8.
THen the Soul Uegetable, that gives life, has virtue of begetting, that is
needful to multiplye and bring forth his kind, virtue of nourishing to keep
a singular thing in kind, and virtue of waring and growing, to the perfection
thereof. Also to this virtue Vegetabilis: that gives life, serve four
virtues, that is to be understood.

The virtue of appetite, that takes what is needful to food: the virtue of
Digestion, that parts the thing that is couenable, from a thing that is not
couenable in food: retentiue, which transmitteth or conueieth it, that is
convenient in food, to all the parts in beasts, and to all the boughs,
twigges, springs, and plants, and fastened to them, to restore the lust or
liking say or juice as well in plants, as in beasts: The virtue Expulsive is,
which expels and puts away that that is inconvenient and hurtful to
kind. Also there be other virtues that serve and minister to the virtue
Vegetabilis, Immutatiue, Informatiue, Assimulatiue, Perforabilis, Aspera,
Leuis: the differences of which is not our intent to pursue: For they be openly
known in Liber Iohannicij. Chap. 2.

Therefore gather you shortly of this that is said, that the soul by the
virtue Vegetable in plants, brings forth other of the same kind, and
multiplieth and keeps that that is brought forth in kind. And whatsoever is
needful to food, it desires, receives, incorporateth, and inioyeth. And it
puts and excludes away that that is not according. Also by the virtue
Generatiue, to whom serves Pas^itiue, it multiplyeth and brings forth
things of kind. And by the virtue Nutritive, it comfort and feeds kinds
that be multiplied. Also by the virtue that is called Augmentatiua, it makes
the body increase and grow, and brings it to a due statute and quantity,
and makes it perfect.

Also by age and passing of time this manner soul fails, and at the last
when the body dies, it consumes. And these things that be said here of the
soul, called Anima Vegetatiua, shall suffice.

Of the soul sensible. Chap. 9.
DE Anima sensibili, of the Soul that gives feeling, somewhat shall shortly
be said, touching the diversity of the might and virtues thereof. For the
virtue of feeling has place in the most subtle Chambers of the brain, and
gives quick moving and feeling in all the limbs, and that by sinews and
small veins that spring out of the brain, and spreads into all the parts
of the beast. The Soul sensible, that gives feeling, has double might and
virtue, that is to wit, of apprehending and of moving. The virtue of
apprehending, that is a manner knowing, is departed in twain: into common or
innerwitte, and into particular or utter wit. The utter wit contains the
sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching. And this wit in his Organes is
brought to effect in this manner. There is a sinew that in the craft of
Anathomia, is called Obticus, Neruis Obticus.
and is an hollow sinewe, and comes from the brain to the eyes, or to the
black of the eien, parting.

And an other comes to the ears: and the third to the nosethrilles: the
fourth to the tongue, and to the roof of the mouth, and the fifte brauncheth
and comes in cords to the instruments of touching, and spreads through
all the body. By these sinews the spirit of feeling is dispearsed into all
the body: and by virtue thereof all the body is able to feel and to move.
And so by virtue of spreading and of shedding of that spirit into all the
sinews, arterye veins or Muscles, all the matching or making of the body, is
found able to move.

Of the inner Sense. Chap. 10.
THE inner virtue is parted in three, by three divisions in the brain. For in
the brain be three small celles, that is to say, the foremost in which the
virtue Imaginatiua works. There those things that the utter wit comprehends
without, be ordained and put togethers within, as says Job. Job. 1
The middle chamber termed Logica: therein the reason sensible or virtue
Estimatiua is a master. The third and the last, which is Memoratiua, the
virtue of the mind. That virtue holds and keeps in the treasure of the
mind, and known by imagination and reason.

The virtue of the sensitive imagination and memory. Chap. 11.
THE virtue of feeling that comes of the soul sensible, is a virtue, by
which the soul knows and judges of colors, of savors, and of other
objects that be known by the utter wits. The virtue imaginatiue is it, whereby
we apprehend likeness and shapes of things of perticulars received, though
they be absent: As when it seems that we see golden hills, either else when
through the similitude of other hills we dream of the hill Pernasus. The
virtue Estimatiue, or the reason sensible is it, whereby in being heedfull to
avoid evil, and follow that is good, men be prudent and sage. And this virtue
Estimatiue is common to us and to other beasts: As it is seen in hounds and
also in wolves: but properly to speak, they use no reason, but they use a busy
and strong estimation, but hereof we shall speak in another place. But
Memoratiua is a virtue conseruatiue or recordatiue, whereby the likeness of
things, least they should be forgot, we lay up and safely reserve. Therefore
one said, the Memory is the coffer or chest of reason.

Of the sensible virtue motive. Chap. 12.
Virtue sensible that moves is parted in three. One part is called Naturalis,
the other Vitalis, and the third Animalis. The virtue that is called Naturalis,
moves the humors in the body of a beast by the veins, and has a principal
place in the liver. For that it works there principally. The virtue that is
called Vitalis, is the virtue of life, and has moving by the throat, or artery
pipes, in the which it moves the spirits yt comes from the heart. For this
virtue has place in the heart. And of the heart springs the hollow or artery
pipes, as the veins spring out of the liver. The heart is so hot, yt if it were
not slaked with cold air and breathing, it should be stifeled in it self in
the same heat. Therefore it needs to breath and to draw in air by the lungs
and organe, to slake the heat and the burning thereof. The virtue that is
called Animalis motiua, has place in ye small chambers of the brain. Out of
the brain all the sinews spring by mean of the ridge boane, and of the
marrowe of the bones thereof. This virtue moves all the lims. For first it
moves the sinews, muscles, and brawnes: and these moved, they move other
limbs speedely in every part. And for that, that it moves the hands, it is
called virtue operative working. And for that that it extends to the feet,
and moves them to walk, it is called the virtue progressiue, going. For
thereby beasts have their kindly moving and going. Then gather briefly the
properties of the soul sensible, that belongs to this treatise. The soul
sensible that gives feeling, is a certain spiritual substance more noble
and more worthy then the soul Vegetabelis, that gives life: And less noble
and less worthy then the soul Rationalis, that gives reason. For the being
and the working of this soul, that is Sensibilis, is dependant of the body,
that it is in, and makes it perfect. Therefore when the body dies, the
being and working thereof dies also of the Uegetatiue spirit departed from
the body. But while it is in the body it has many noble workings and
doings. For it makes the bodies of beasts to have feeling, and makes
perfect the inner kind and the utter knowing, as to ye lims require, and
(...)th all ye lims in every part. Also it dea^eth^ spreads his virtue into
all the parts of the body. Also as ye lims be more noble, so it does more noble
deeds in the body. Also it is the cause of sleeping and of waking in beasts.
Also if the virtue thereof be gathered into the inner places of the body, it
works the more strongly. And when it is spread into the utter offices, and
occupied in many places, it works the more feeblye: For while it falls
heed to the sight, it feeblesh and sl^keth in the hearing, and so of other.
Therefore it is said.

Pluribus intentus, minor est, ad singula se^sus.
That is to understand, the wit, that takes heed to many things, takes the
less heed to every thereof. Also in the uttermost and in the more excellent
feelings, the virtue thereof is dulled, but it has liking in meant feelings.
Also the virtue and working thereof is a let, so the spirit sensible, when his
way and passage is foretold and warned by stopping of the ways, poores, and
small holes in the body, as it falls in them that have the Palsy or
Epilepsia, that is the falling Evil, or other such diseases. And the virtue
thereof is dissolved and unloose, by too great heat, that dissolueth and
stretches the poores, or small holes in the body: as by to great cold,
constraining, shutting, or stopping the small holes, it is let to spread it
self into the parts of the body. Also by sweet smelles, the virtue in a
beast, that was lost, is restored: as it is corrupt and grieved by stinking
smells. But now of the virtue sensible this shall suffice.

Of the soul reasonable. Chap. 13.
THe soul reasonable, or the virtue of understanding that is called
Intellectus in Latin, is separated by two chief workinges, in one manner it
is called Intellectus speculatiuus, and in another manner it is called
Intellectus practicus. In that it uses contemplation it is called
Speculatiuus. In that it works it is called Practicus. And by this root man's
life is separated a sunder, that one is called Vita actiua, life of working,
and that other is called Vita contemplatiua, life of contemplation. Then the
reasonable soul is everlasting, incorruptible, and may not die, Wherefore his
principal act and deed, that is Intelligere, to understand, is not dependaunt
of the body. And it lives perfectlye, and understands when it is departed
from the body, yea, and the more it drowneth it self into the body, the more
slowly and the less perfectly it understands. And the more it withdraws
from the bonds and liking of the flesh, the more easilye and clearly it
understands. Here I call drowning, either by imagination of fantasy, or by
liking of the flesh, or by love of worldly alluring. Wherefore Gregorye says.
As a man is made in the middle between Angels and beasts to be lower then
Angels, and higher then other beasts: so he has somewhat that accords
with the highest, and somewhat that agrees with the lowest. With Angel the
spirt has, that he may not die: and with other beasts he has a body, that
must dye. And therefore if the soul by reason turns toward God, it is
adorned, illuminate, and amended, and made perfect. But if it turn by
affections toward creatures, it is made dark, corrupt, and debased. Though
the soul in it self be everlasting, and not deadlye, yet it is passible and
must suffer through the bond of the body, that it is joined to. Therefore in
liber de Anima and spiritu, Austen says, that souls that live in bodies, by
love of sensible things they love bodyly likeness and forms: and when they
pass out of the body, in the same bodilye liknesse, they suffer as it were
bodily pains And therefore there they may be hold in bodily pains: for that
they were not here cleansed of the corruption of the body. Hereby it is
known, that though the soul be clean and pure in his own kind, it takes
uncleanness of the flesh, sish it is originally infected. As wine and other
licour takes infection of a vessel that is sustie. And therefore when it is
departed from the body, it bears with it self the bodies filths. Declaring
that after this life there is no redemption, for in this life all the penitent
are cleansed and newly reuined unto God by grace.

Then gather thou hereof, that among all creatures, the reasonable soul
presents most openly, the likeness of the Image of God: and that because it
has three manner of mights and virtues, though it be one and simple in kind.
Also it contains in it self the lykenes of all things: and therefore the
soul is named the likeness of all things, as Austen says. Also the soul
being once made shall endure evermore in body or out of body. For as Cass.
says, It should never be said, it was made to the Image of God, if it worcester
closed within the bond of death. Also it is the perfection of a kindly body
with lims: and therefore the more verelye it may make all the body perfect in
every part. Also by his own kind it may kindlye determine a lyking to good
and evil, truth or lies. Also by diverse virtues it may know likeness and
shapes of diverse things both present and absent. For it knows things
material, present and absent, by her own natural shapes: and he knows
vnmaterial things, by her own presence, as Austen says. Also by the reflection
of it self above it self, she knows it self, as the Philosopher says. For
seeing and understanding she knows her self. Also as a Table she takes
kindly illuminations and impressions of diverse things, and for that it coueteth
kindlye to be incorporated, and to be joined thereto, it desires kindly the
fellowship we the body. And kindly it desires good and flies evil, though it
choose evil other while for want of aduisement: but by kind it forsakes
evil, and gr^dgeth there against, as Saint Austen says. So the soul
vegetative desires to be, To be.
the sensible desires to be well, To be well.
and the reasonable soul desires to be best: To be best.
and therefore it rests never, till it be joined with the best. For the place
of the reasonable soul is God, to whom ward it is moved, that it may rest in
him. And this moving is not by changing of place but rather by love and desire.
These properties of the soul that be rehearsed before, shall suffice.

Of the virtues of the soul, ca. 14.

NOw after we have circumspectlye spoken of the properties of ye soul, in it
self and in her body: there remains to see and to treat of the virtues, by
the which she is mighty to use working in ye body. This virtue is a might of
the soul essentially given to work and do her deeds in the body. For by
this virtue she gives ye body life, draws togethers, and opens the heart,
the organe, and small ways in the body always, and gives to the body that
has a soul, feelyng and skillful moving, as Con. says lib. 13. Also this
virtue has three parts: one is called natural, and is in the lyner, The liver
the other is called vital, or spiritall, and has place in the heart, The heart
the third is called Animal, and has place in ye brayn. The brain.
In beasts and in plants ye working of the virtue yt is called natural is the
common working, that ingendereth, feeds, and makes to grow, as Constant
says, and her ingendring or generation (as it is here taken) is the changing
and tourning of the substance of the humor, or the seed into the substance
of a beast or of a plant, done by work of kind. And this virtue begins to
work from the time of ingendring to the perfecting of the plant or beast. But
to this kindly generation, two virtues serve, that is to wit, Immutatiue and
Informatiue: For the virtue Immutatiue is she, that turns and changes the
substance of the seed, into the substance of all the parts of the plant or
of the beast. And this virtue makes this changing and turning, by means of
ye four first qualities, yt is to wit, hot, Hot.
cold, Cold.
wet, Wet.
and dry. Dry.
For by heat and wet she works ye softer substance, as flesh in beasts,
flowers and say in trees: by hot and dry, she works the roots in plants,
and the heart in the beasts: by wet and cold, she works leaves in plants,
and hair in beasts: by cold and dry, she works in sinews and boanes of
beasts, and in stocks and ryudes of trees and of plants. But the second
virtue that is named Informatiua, is needful to the kindly working in
generations.

For this virtue ordeyneth and distinguishes the form and shape of things,
that is gendred couenably in all ye parts. For this virtue pearceth what shall
be pierced, and holloweth what shall be hollowed, and smotheth what is rough, and
the ouersmooth makes rough, and shapeth and makes perfect the utmost side of
every part. These two virtues, Immutatiua and Informatiua work no longer then
the thing that is engendered, as beast or plant, be fully brought into being of
kind. And therefore it needs that the virtue Nutritiua follow anon to the
same, and keep the thing that is engendered. For the virtue Nutritiua, is
helper and servant to the virtue Generatiua, and makes the thing that is
engendered, grow and stretch in length, breadth and thickness. And the virtue
Pascitiua helps and serves to the virtue Nutritiua. For she setteleth and
makes like in the lims the meal that the beasts took: and repaireth and
restores what that is dissolved and lost by strength of heat, or by any
passion of ye a^^e. And therefore wonderful kind made this virtue of feeding,
helper to the virtue of nourishing, and made both servant to the virtue of
gendring. Gendring is the begetting cause
Wherefore to this virtue of feeding, four particular virtues serve, that is
to wit, the virtue of appetite, that draws to the synmes kindly food. And to
the food of the flesh it draws temperaunce of blood, to the food of the
brain and of the lunges, temperaunce of sleame, and so of other. Also the
virtue digestive helps thereunto, and departs in the food kindlye from
unkindly, and deuideth pure from vnpure. Also the virtue holding, which keeps
the food that is digested, and it that is now by work of kind concode or
sodde, she sends to all the limbs, and incorporateth and makes it like, and
moves it. Also the virtue Expulsiua, puts off the superfluities, that the
lyms draws to them, and be not worthy to be knit to the lyms. And therefore
as the virtue of appetite works with hot and dry, and the virtue digestive
with heat and wet, and the virtue retentiue with cold and dry: so the virtue
expulsive works with cold and moist.

Of the virtue vital. Cap. 15.
AFter the virtue of kind follows the virtue vital, that gives life to the
body, whose foundation or proper place is the heart: out of the heart comes
life to quicken all the lyms. The virtue of quick and kindly moving, helps
the working of this virtue, whereby the heart and organe, and small ways be
opened and spread, and drawn together. And this dilation or spreading, is
called the moving of the heart from the middle into all the utter parts. And
so contrariwise constriction or the drawing together, is called, the moving
from the utter parties toward the middle of the heart, as it is seen in
belowes of smiths. This virtue of life opens the heart by working of the
lunges, and draws in air to the heart, and sends it forth from the heart
to ye other lyms by small ways. And this virtue by the help of the virtue
that closes and opens the heart, works and makes breathing in a beast.
And by breathing the breast moves continually, but the sinews and fleshly
parts be first moved. But this blast or breath is needful to the slaking of
unkindly heat, and to the food of the spirit of life, and also to the
gendering of the spirit, that is named Animal, that gives feelyng and moving.
For the keeping of the kindly heat, is a temperate indrawing of cold air,
and the keeping of the spirit that is called Spiritus vitalis, of whose
temperaunce the spirit is increased that is called Animalis. And therefore
nothing is more needful to keep and to save the life, than breath well
disposed and ordained in all points. All this says Constantinus in Pantign.
Without meat and drink a beast may live for a time, but without breath drawing
of cold air, a beast may not endure in good case long, but the breath is
corrupt and destroyed by straightning the pores, through the which the beast by
a kind of stranglyng, dies. The breath is corrupt first by evil disposition
of the brain, for if the brain be let of his office in any wise for defaulte
of influence of spirits, then opening and closing of the heart fails: and
then needs must the beast be stiffeled, as it is seen in Apoplexia, and in
other such causes. TREVISA. Apoplexia is an evil, that makes a man leese all
manner feeling. Also the same falls by hurting of the heart, when the humors
be voyded, that should kindly be therein: for so the spirits be voyded, and
the attraction of the air has no place. And it fares so in sudden smiting of
the kind heat into the inner parts of the heart, as it happens in fearful
men in letting blood, that other while sail and sown. And so it happens of
the infection of the liver. For corruption of the liver takes away generation
of clean pured blood, that feeds kindlye heat: and if kind heat fail,
the spirit vital sayleth, and consequently the breath particularly or
universally is let. And so it happens in searching and pearcing of the
lunges, as it fares in them that have the Tisike, in whom the breath
straighted, vanishes away by privy hoales, and is not sufficient to temper
the beat of the heart. And so it fares in all repletion, and specially by
sudden filling of the inner veins of the body: as appears in them that be
sodaynlye stiffeled in the water: in whom the pores being let, the breath by a
vyolent ouercomming and renting of the inner powers is stopped. Also by great
corruption of the air as in pestilence time, and in corrupt air, when the
spirit vital eschewing his contrary, closes himself in the inner parts of
the heart, and so being ouerset with air that is corrupt, may not rule the
heart and other lymmes of the body, but fails in himself, and as it were,
suddenly vanishes always: and then thereof comes death. Also of infection
and corruption of the humors of the breast, and of the breast plate and bone,
as it is seen among those that have the dropsy, pore, scurffe, canker, woolfe,
and leprosy. Also by the stopping of the organe and ways that comes from
the langs, as appears in them that have the pirre and stifles, and be
putrified and thick breathed, and other such. Also by special corruption of
the heart, as by biting of an Adder, or of any other venomous worm: whole
venyme pearcing to the heart, overcomes the kindly heat, and so stops the
way of the breath. Also by too much refraction of hot air, as chances in
over hot stews or bathe, or in the most fervent heat of ye Sun, that
rerefieth and opens the pores over measure, and so makes too great
exhalation and wasting of the kind heat: and so the cold air that is drawn
in, suffices not to slake the heat superfluous, that is not of kind, and so
the breath is let. Also the same chances of the duor cold air yt draws
together ye brawns and the sinews of the breast: and thereby the virtue of
breathing is let, as it chances in them that sleep upon snow. And the same
other while chances by stopping of a vein of the heart, that is called Vena
concaua, the holow vein: when that vein is stopped and closed, the way of the
passage is let, by ye which way and passage, the blood must go from the liver
to the heart, to feed and nourish the spirit vital. For when the heat
wareth abundaunt, and the humor is withdrawn, the beast is stiffeled: for the
breath suffices not to cool the heart. And so it fares by ouerburdening of
cholar on of other humors, in the most subtle, veins of the heart, as
appears in sharp seuers, in the which the breath saileth. Also by over
vyolent strayning of the throat and of the arteries: as we may see in them that
be hanged and strangled, in the which the breath be^^g ^^^ped, the heart
suddenly burns (...) beast dies forthwith. By these (...) and many other,
the virtue, vital (...) by default of breath. Of the virtue spiritual,
comes wrath, fighting, indignation, spite, and such passions, that arise in
brute beasts through moving of the spirital virtue with vehemency, and
without discretion: but in men such passions be ordered and ruled by a certain
reason of wit. And of the virtue spiritall or vital, that is said shall
suffice.

Of the virtue Animal. Cap. 16.
THe virtue that is called Virtus animalis, has seat and place in the
ouermost part of a man, that is to wit, in the brain, and has three parts.
Ordinatiua, sensitiua, and motiua. That part that is named Ordinatiua,
fulfilleth the brain by it self alone. For in the first part in the foremost
chamber it ordeineth the fantasy or imagination: in the middle chamber it
ordains the virtue estimatiue and reason. And again in the uttermost
chamber, it makes perfect the memory, and the memorial ass: For what the
virtue imaginatiue shapeth and imagines, she sends it to the judgment of
reason. And what that reason faketh of the imagination, as a Judge, judges and
defines it sending to the memory: ye memory receives those things that were
put in the intelled or understanding, and keeps and saves the steadfastly,
til she bring them forth in act and in deed. The second virtue that is
Sensitiua, is formed in this manner. By mean of sinews that be very tender,
the spirit Animalis passes forth out of the innermost chambers of the brain,
of whom the sense is formed, and some be sent with the spirit Animalis to the
eyes, to quicken the sight, and some to the nosethrilles to increase the
smelling, and so of the other. Of the wits, the sight is most subtle, for
the kind thereof is firic. The hearing has much of the air, for it is a
sound of ye air, stricken, and then the more subtle is the smelling, for the
kind thereof is smoakie. Then ye taast, the kind thereof is watery. And the
last and most boystous of all, that is the seelyng: for the kind thereof is
earthie, and is needful to feel hard things, as bones and sinews, rough and
smooth, cold and hot. Of these senses, every one has his office, to have ye
likeness and shape of the objects: and what they take of that they feel, they
present to the inwits. TREVISA. The object of the eye, is all that may be
seen: and all that may be heard is object to the hearing: and all that may be
smelled is obiecte to the smelling, and so of the other senses.

Of the virtue visible. Cap. 17.
THe sight is most simple, for it is fiery, Visus.
and diserueth suddenly things that are far off. The sight is formed after
this manner. In the middle of the eye, that is the black thereof, is a
certain humor most pure and clear. The Philosophers call it Christalloides,
for it takes suddenly diverse forms and shapes of colors, as Crystal does.
The sight is a wit of perceiving and knowing of colors, figures, and shapes,
and utter properties. Then to make the sight perfect, these things are
needful, that is to wit, the cause efficient, the lymme of the eye convenient
to the thing that shall be seen, the air that brings the likeness to the
eye and taking heed, and easy moving. The cause efficient, is that virtue
that is called Animalis. The instrument and lymme is the humor like Crystal
in either eye clear and round. It is clear that by the cleerenesse thereof,
the eye may shine about the spirit and air: It is round, that it be stronger
to withstand griefs, for a round shape has no sides or corners, that
contains superfluityes that should grieve it. The utter thing, helping to
work, is the air, without which being a mean, the sight may not be perfect.
In some beasts to profit the sight, needs the cleerenes of air, and in some
the darkness, and in some the mean, not too dark nor too clear. For in Cats
needs darkness, in Reremice, or Bats and in other flieng beasts needs
mean, as it shall be showed hereafter. And it needs to take heed, for if
the soul be occupied about other things then belongs to the sight, the sight
is the less perfect, for it deemeth not of the thing that is seen. And easy
moving is needful, for if the thing that is seen, moves too swiftly, the
sight is combred and disparced with too swifte and continual moving, as it is
in an oar, that seems broken in the water, through the swifte moving of the
water. Likewise also an even long tree moved swiftly seems round. How the
sight is made, old men had diverse opinions.

In pri. cap. Perspectiue, the Philosopher says, that in three manners the
sight is made. One manner by straight lines, upon the which, the likeness of
ye thing that is seen, comes to the sight. Another manner upon lines
rebounded again: when the likeness of a thing comes there from to a shewer,
and is bend, and reboundeth from the shewer to the sight. The third manner is
by lines, the which though they be not bent and rebounded, but stretched
between the thing that is seen and the sight: yet they pass not always
foorthright, but other while they swerve some whether aside from the straight
way. And that is when diverse manner spaces of diverse cleerenesse and
thickness, be put between the sight and the thing that is seen: and sometime
the spaces be of diverse kinds, as when one is thicker, another thinner. And
sometime there comes a mean of another kind, but the beam or bright
likeness is broke, but if it come upon a line that falls straight, and
Perpendiculariter upon the same middle second occurring. And I call a line to
fall Perpendiculariter upon a plain thing, Ad angulos rectos, that is straight
and a cross wise: and upon a round thing, if it fall into the middle thereof.

To the sight, for to speak in the first manner, need nine things principally,
as they be rehearsed there. The first is firmness or good disposition of the
organe or instrument of sight. The second is a thing that may be seen set
before ye sight: for in ye manner the sight sees nothing. The sight of the ere
is a figure of the world:
but if the same thing, from the parts, whereof comes likeness upon ye
straight lines, that fall into the middle of the eye. The whole compass, are
presetation of the endless heaven:
All which lines drawn from all the parts of the thing that is seen, make one
steeple, the point whereof is in the black of the eye, and the broad end in
the thing that is seen as appears in this figure.

The triangle forshevveth ye distance of sight, and end of time.
A and B be the Aristrees, when the seeing direct lie beholds the point, C.
when it beholds ye point D. Then these two B C proceeding from the eyes, be
called axiltrees, for they proceed immediatelye from the eyes, by mean to the
thing seen. The third is distance proportional. The fourth D C is a certain
stead or place, not too farrre from the line of the sight. For though a thing
be right before the eye, if it be too far there from, it is not distinctly
known. Axis visualis is the clear beam or line, the whichlis understood to be
deduct from the middle of the sight, to the point of the thing seen directly
to the opposite, in the mids of the sight, as appears in this figure A B. The
fifth is sadness or thickness of the thing that is seen. For (...) be all
clear and without thickness, (...) the air is, then that is not seen, as
says the Author of the science Perspectiue, that is, the science of the sight.
The sixth, is due greatness of the thing yt is seen. For a thing may be so
little, yt it cannot be seen in no space: for there is no sight but by
appearance shapen top wise, that comes to the eye, yt which if it be very
little, it shall occupy a very small part of the sight, and the sight may not
see, but when a part of the uttermost thereof is changed to the likeness of the
thing that is seen. The vii. is clearness of ye space, that is between the
eye and the thing that is seen: for if the space be thick, it lets the
likeness of that thing, that it may not come lightly and in due manner to the
black of the eye. The viii. is light: for the visible likeness of the thing,
can not change the sight without light. The ninth is time for the sight must
have time, as it is proved in Perspectiue: for though a thing come suddenly
before the sight: it is not known readily and distinctly without some
aduisement had, the which needs time and leisure. And therefore it needs
also that the soul take heed, as it is said before. Also the Philosopher
says, That not only the likeness of the thing seen comes to the sight
after a steeple wise, but also the likeness of the sight, strotcheth to the
thing that is spread, upon such a steeple in the same place. In lib. 19. De
Animalibus, Aristotle says, That seeing is naught else, but that the sight
passes out to the thing that is seen.

And thereto agrees Austen super Genesis, lib. pri. and VI. musice, where he
says, that naught comes from the thing that is seen, but the likeness
thereof, nor from the sight to the thing that is seen, but the likeness of
the sight. For nothing of the substance of the eye comes out, but out of the
eye comes a small appearaunce, that is shapen as a steeple or a top, and the
broad end thereof is spread upon all the utter part of the thing seen. Also
the Author of Perspectiue, li. i.proves, That nothing is seen, but by sight
that arises upon the thing that is seen, and is multiplied speedelye from the
wide thing to the eye. Therefore needs is required the third steeple of the
same light. And of all these three steeples, the points are in the eyes, and
the broad ends in the things that be seen. Therefore when the likeness of
the thing comes to the sight upon these three steeples, then the likeness of
light and color, pass by the small fortells and humors of the eye, even to
the humor that is called Christallinus, like Crystal, and there the soul
begins to give judgment of the thing that is seen by that lykenes, but
there it is not fulfilled and complete, but the likeness is multiplied forth,
even to the sinewe, that is called Obticus, Neruus Obticus,
an hollow sinew, that is hid in the utter part of ye brain: and there is the
virtue of sight in maure and root in the first and principalll subjects, and
is one: for else every thing that is seen should seem two things, because of
the two eyes, if they continued not to one lymnie, in the which is the only
well of the virtue of sight, and springs to the blackness of the eye. The
Author of Perspectiue shows all this. He shows and expresses another
reason of the sight. li. 3. ca. 11. He says, that ye spirit visible, ye eye and
the air, be clear bodies, the whith lyghten every other, and make every like
to other. For the air, that is next the thing that shall be seen, takes a
likeness of the property of that thing: and in that likeness the air
prosereth it self to the eye, whereof the spirit visible takes a likeness.
For this virtue of sight, showing it self to the uttermost part of the black
of the eye, is joined to the air, and is likened and made as it were one
therewith: and by mean of the air, the color is brought and presented to the
judgment of the soul. For the air is lightly changed and likened by
diversity of shapes, that are therein. As we see, that the air that is nigh
the Sun beam, is colored and dyed, by red cloth set between. And
therefore it is no wonder, though ye eye take likeness and shape of a clear
thing that is next thereto. Then touching this work it is now to gather
shortly, that the sight or virtue visible is more subtle and more lively than
the either wits, and Visus, the sight, has the name of Viuacitas, that is,
liveliness, as says Isidore. Also it is more worthy than the other wits, and
therefore it is set above the other. Also in effect, as it were a virtue of
fire, it is more mighty than the other wits: For the other wits knew things
that be nearer, but this wit by his virtue comprehends things farthest of,
under a right corner and steeple sight, judges and discerns after the nobler
kind and disposition of the organe, and discerns in an easy manner between
things to be seen. Wherefore Aristotle lib. 12, says, that good sight and
sharp, is of temperate humor. And therefore Fowls (as the Eagles) with
crooked claws, be sharp of sight. And that is through the pure and subtle
humor, and temperate being, and purifieth that that is in the organe of the
sight. And such Fowls see their pray out of far and more high places. And
such Fowls fiye higher in ye air than other fowls. But Fowls that remain
on ye ground, be not sharp of sight: therefore they see their meat nigh and
not far. Also, Lib. 19. he says, that yeolow eyes be not sharp of sight by
day, nor black by night, for scarsitie of humors. The yeolow eye moves
greatly, and therefore the virtue of sight is feebled. Black cyen move less,
for multitude and plenty of humors, and the sight of the night is feeble, and
the humor by night moves heauely. Therefore the spirit visible is closed in,
and by humor let. Also the sight of old men is not sharp, because their
skins are riueled. Whereby it appears, that the virtue of the sight is feeble
or strong, by goodness or feeblenes of the lymme. And he says, When the eyes of
beasts have lyds, and the humor in the black of the eye is clean and
temperate, and soft moving, and the skin upon the black, tender, supple or
thin, then the sight is sharp and may see far. But yet he discerns not
perfectly far off between colors and difference of the body: but yet the
sight of such beasts is better, than the sight of them that have much humor in
the eyes, and have no heling nor eye lyddes. For by continual opening, the
spirit Visibilis is to diminish, and the black of the eye is lightly grieved
and hurt, and so the sight is let. But in men helyngs and eye lids cause the
contrary. Also there it is said, that cause of a sharp sight, in seeing a
far, is for the place of the eyes: For big and ouerswellyng eyes, be feeble
of sight, and see not so well a far: but deep eyes see perfectlye a far
of. For the moving thereof is not departed, nor consumed, but goes forth
right, and the spirit visible passes straight forth to the things that be
seen. And so if there be no heling nor covering without the eye, needs the
sight must be feebled, and shall not see a far. Hitherto speaks Aristotle
lib. 12, and 19. And this that is said generally of the properties of the
sight, shall suffice at this time. For other things shall be known hereafter,
where we shall treat of the property of the eye.

Of the hearing. Cap. 18.
THe virtue of hearing, has effect and doing in the lims of the ears. Auditus.
And the hering is properly a virtue ye perceives so winds: and to make
perfect hearing, four things at the lest be needful, yt is to wit, the cause
efficient, a couenable lim, a niene space bringing ordinately ye sownd to the
wit, and the soul ^ taking heed thereto. The cause efficient is the virtue
that is called. Animalis audibilis, of feelyng and hearing. The couenable lim
is a gristle bone set in the care, and is hollow and dry and some deal hard,
wound and wrapped as a wispe or wreath. It is hollow, that it may contain the
spirit and arre in the hollownesse thereof. It is woond and wrapped as a
wreath, least the spirit of hearing should be aslomed and hurt by sodam and
strong smiting. And therefore by circularitie of the limme, sownd temperately
received, beats not again the spirit of hearing, but makes it perfect, and
is liking thereto. Also it is hard and dry, that so the smiting of the air
may be made better and stronger, and the sownd the more. As in tabers and
timbrels that sownd better in the Northern wind that is cold and dry, then
in the Southern wind, that is meek, moist and soft, When instruments so^d
best
as Constantinus and Aristotle say. The space that brings is air rebounding,
that goes into the holes of the ears, and smites the gristle bone, that is
the first instrument and lymme of the hearing, and it needs that the soul
take heed, For As vvhe a man is spoken unto: The mind basied another way:
understands not what was spoken.
so long as it is thoughtful and intends to diverse things, it is the less
mighty to do the deed of the virtue of hearing, as we see in many, that be
beset all about: for welnigh they hear nothing, while the thought takes no
heed. And therefore nothing is perceived by hearing. Hearing is made in this
manner. Two sinews come out of the inner part of the brain, and be fastened
in the gristle bone of the ear: by the which sinews, the spirit Animalis is
brought to the foresaid gristle bones, to which gristle bones the utter air
referring the shape and likeness of some sownde is meanlye joined thereto, and
so the air that is smitten, smites those gristle bones, and in them being the
spirit, by the property of the air, that is therein smiting, the sinews is
changed. And so the spirit taking a likeness turns to his Cell fantastike,
and presentoth that likeness to the soul, and so the hearing is made perfect.
Wherefore it appears, that the hearing is air: for always it is multiplied by
rebou^ding. And therefore it is, that kind set, ye ^it of hearing, in the
middle of the round head, as Arist. says li. 12. For ye hearing, as it were
in a manner winding about takes the air, that is smit all about, and not
straight and forthright. Also this wit, like as the other wits be, is grieved
and destroyed with too great noise, and is pleased and preserved with temperate
sowndes. Wherefore in Examiron, Ambrose says, that men of the Country where
the river Nylus arises, are void of hearing, through the horrible roaring and
noise: because that the River falling down from the top of the high hill,
smites into the ears of the men of the Country, and so makes them astonished
and deaf. This wit as the other wits have, has often many griefs. For
sometime it is all lost, and is then called deafness: and sometime it is
diminished, and is then called heaviness of hearing: and sometime it passes
out of course. The cause of the grief comes sometime of default of the
brain, or of a sinewe that is the way of the hearing: and if that sinew be
stopped or grieved with some evil, that lets the office thereof. And also
of default of the ears, for sometime they be corrupt and grieved with diverse
humors, and sometime rotten filth-therein, stops the hollownes thereof. And
sometime gravel and powder falls therein, and lets the passage of the
air, that it may not come to the spirit of hearing. And sometime the sinews
of hearing be grieved by itching and fretting of worms. And sometime the
instruments and lyms of hearing, be infected and grieved with corrupt air, hot
or cold. And sometime it is let by wind and great ventositie closed in the
pores of ye sinews of hearing: as appears in them that seem that they hear
pipes, horns, or belles. By all which things, the hearing is diminished or
lost: as it shall be said after in the treatise of the ears.

Of smelling. Cap. 19.
Olsactu.
THe wit of smellyng, perceives and knows smelles. And to make this wit
perfect, the spirit Animalis is needful, as the cause Efficiens, doing. And
it needs to have the lymme expedient, that is to wit, perfect disposition of
the nosethrills. In the which are small pieces as it were of flesh hanging
downewarde, and shapen as teates, the which be the proper lymmes of the
smellyng, and receive the spirit Animalis, by certain sinews that come
downewarde from the brain. The nosethrills be not properly ye instruments of
smellyng, the which are gristly, and therefore they be insensible, as appears
by them yt have the nosethrills cut away: For though it be cut off, the beast
leeseth not his smell. Likewise if we pass by stinking places, and hold still
our breath, we feel not the stinking air, yt comes in at ye nosthrils: and
that is because those small pieces stopped as it were by a quick moving, they
be strained, and these pieces be hollow, and full of hoales as a spounge. They
be hollow, that in their hollownesse and holes, they may take in the smoke
that is resolved, and comes from the thing that is smelled. And they are full
of holes as a spounge, that the virtue that draws may be strong in them: and
therefore the utter working of ye air, is needful, for to take lykensse of the
air, that comes from the thing that shall be smelled, the which likeness
the air has of the same thing that shall be smelled. And that likeness the
air has of the smoke, that comes of that thing that shall be smelled, and
so the smell is made in this manner. The spirit that is called Animal, is
sent from the brain to these pieces shapen as teates, and comes thereto by
certain sinews, that are called Nerus odorabiles. And the smoke of the body
or sweet smellyng thing being resolved, is meddeled with the air: the which
the small chambers of the brain draw to them by those two small teates, and
change and turn it into their own likeness. And so by that change and
likeness made in that manner by working of the spirit Animalis, the effect of
the smell is made. The sumous smelling belongs to the kind or matter: for
thereby it comes: ye smell is naught else but a substance airis or famous that
comes of a body. This fumous air or vapor, the brain draws to it self,
as needful and liking, as the heart does the breath. And by the drawing of
this air the brain is temperate and comforted, as the heat of the heart is
swayed by drawing of the breath. If the vapor be loathsome, stinking and
corrupt, it corrupts the spirit that is called Animal, and often brings and
gendreth pestilent diseases. And so the virtue of smellyng is oftentimes let
in doing and in working, sometime by the evil complexion of ye brain,
sametime by too great repletion of raw and corrupt humors in the sinews of
smellyng, as appears in them that have the pose and rewme running at the
nosthrills. Sometime for evil dispositions of instruments of smelling, that is
when they be too strayte or too wide: the powers over straight, the smellyng is
hindered, and when too open, the brains is distempered. Sometime by
superfluous stopping of ouergrown flesh, as in byles: sometime by infection of
postumes or of evil and corrupt humors. Sometime by fretting or caruing, that
is when the flesh appears as if it were raced with a pin, as commonly in
March, the wind choppeth the flesh of the face and hands, of some hot and dry
humors, as appears in them that have the canker. And this power of smellyng
through the subtlety thereof if it be well disposed, comfort the virtue
Animal, and cleanses superfluous from fumositie. And contrariwise when it is
infected or corrupted by any hap, the virtue of ye beast is hurt and let in his
workings. In lib.12. Aristotle says, That the sense of smellyng is naught else
but drawing in of the air in a Beast that has a nose, which is a member set
in the middle of the other senses, in the foremost part of the head, for the
help of the breath. Every beast that has lungs, has a nose, other some beak
or bill, in steed of a nose, in help of the breath. Wherefore it appears,
that the instrument of smellyng, is not only in Beasts for hightinesse and
fairness, but also to make perfect the virtue of the spirit, that is called
Animalis, and to help and strengthen the virtue of life that is in the heart.

This virtue of smellyng is in fourt sooted beasts: and so by smellyng only,
they can discern between herbs good and venomous, and specially in Apes,
that know their meat by smelling, as well as by tanst, or rather better. And
this virtue is strongest in Hounds, yt which lead only by the smell, follow
the ^orous or steps of beasts, and by liuelines of smellyng find them out.
Also smelling is in Fowls, and specially in Griphons, the which, as says
Ambrose in Exameron, and Isidore hb. 12. cap. 6. have so quick smell, that
they smell carrion over or beyond the sea. In these and other works and
conditions of kind, men may wonder of the wisdom of God, that makes us by
these and by other such things to know somewhat and to understand: how by
these things that be felt and material, we shall excite the inner doing of
our heart to know by little and little the spiritual things that be above our
common intelligence: and that to do in this work is principally my end and
mine intent. And this that is said of the smelling shall suffice.

Of the taast. Cap. 20.
THe taast is properlye a virtue of knowing savors. Gustu.
The which taast sensibly to make perfect these causales, are necessary,
effectiue, material, and informatiue, the which are spoken of in other senses
of perseueraunce in nature. For the virtue that is called, Animalis, is cause
efficient doing and making: The cause material and isntrumental is properly
the tongue, with his arteries: and that makes the virtue of taste perfect. The
tongue, touching the complexion of the substance thereof is hollow, moist,
and unsavory. It is hollow, to receive in the hollownesse thereof the humors
that come of the thing that shall be tasted, it is full of holes, to the intent
that that is thick or subtle of the thing, that must be tasted, may enter
freely to the sinews of the tongue: and that the virtue that draws should
be more strong to make the doing perfect.

It is moist, that it may help to the dissolution of things received. As if
any things that are put too the tongue, either to the roof of the mouth, be
hard or dry, by the moisture of the tongue, they shall be the easilier
tempered, to be ate and couenable to all manner digestion and resolution. The
tongue also is sauourlesse, that it may the better take all manner savor of
things, as the water, the which if it had a determined savor, it might not
take the savor of another thing. Last is made in this manner: Two sinews be
placed in the middle of the tongue, yt which are spread into many boughs
called Radices, and branches to the uttermost sides and parts of the tongue:
and by these sinews the spirit that is called, Animalis, is brought into the
tongue. Therefore when the thing that must be tasted, enters into the tongue,
either into poores and holes of the sinews, ye spirit that is named Animalis,
that is therein, takes a likeness of the properties thereof, the which
afterward it presents to the high perseueraunce of the soul. The taast is
more boystous and thick than the smell, as much as sumositie is more subtle
than water. For the smell, of kind is smoakie: but the feelyng of taast, is a
moist waternesse, as says Constantine. This sense is needful to save the body
and the life of a beast. For if the taste be corrupt or fail: the virtue of
feeding fails. And so the substance of the beast fails by little and
little. The taast is corrupt, when his instruments are hurt and grieved, or
when corrupt humors have mastrie in them, and that is, when it feels not the
savor of things, either when it feels not that savor as it is. And that
falls, if a singular humor has masterie in the substance of the tongue. As
by example: If red cholar have masterie, all seems bitter: and if salt fleme
has masterie, all thing seems salt: and so of other. As it fares of them
that have the feauers, in whom the masterie of a corrupt humor, corrupts and
destroys the taast. Also it is changed, and hurt by the mallyce of the
thing that is tasted: as it fares in the taast of an Aloe, and other things
that be passing bitter, for by the force or vnsauerinesse thereof, the taast is
very much grieved. The taast has lyking in sweet things, for that likeness
that it has with sweetness. For that sweetness that stands in hot and
moist, is like to all the members yt be most specially fed with sweet food.
For sweet food nourishes much, and is lightly lykened to the members and
lims, as says Isaac. in Det.

Of touching. Cap. 21.
TOuching is the wit of knowing diverse things, Tactus.
that are to be touched, for by the virtue of touching, the soul knows hot
and wet, cold and dry, soft and hard, smooth and rough. Or as Auicen says,
The touching is a virtue, ordained in the sinews of all the body, to know
what he touches. Though this virtue be in all the parts of the body, yet it is
principally in the palm of the hands, and in the soles of the feet, the
which kind temperately for this reason has ordained, that they should the
lyghtlyer perceive and feel things cold and hot. These parts be hollow,
that things to be felt may the better be perceived, and that things to be
held, may the better and more strongly be holden. They feel temperately,
that they may take the lightlyer the lykenes of a thing that is temperate.
Things that may be fealt, may be called the composition of the first
qualyties, and certain conueniences to them, as rough and smoothe, hard and
soft. In the uttermost heerof, the virtue of feelyng is grieved and hurt, as
in the thing that is either too hot or too cold: for kind has lyking in the
mean, as luke warm. To make this virtue perfect, these things needs to the
cause efficient doing, and that is the deriuation of the spirit Animal to
the instruments of feelyng: also a convenient instrument, and that is in two
manners. One is the sinews that comes from the brain, and brings the
spirit Animal, to all the lymmes.

The second instrument, is the flesh, in the which be enclosed and fastened,
the sinews by the which the virtue of feelyng works. For by mean of the
sinews, the likeness of the thing that is felt, is brought to the
perseverance of the soul. Also the third necessary thing is the utter
workings, so that the thing that shall be felt, be nigh the lim of feeling, of
the which thing the spirit animal, that is in the flesh and in the sinews,
takes the likeness, and being like, presents the properties of the thing
touched, to the soul, and so this virtue is complete and perfect in his doing,
as says Constautius. That when all ye other virtues, have a proper member and
organe specially serving to their working, this virtue of feelyng alone, is
generally in all the lims, except ye hair and nails of feet and hands, in
the which is no sinewe, and so consequently no feeling: but every of the
virtues have certain, place, instrument, and lym, to his working and moving,
in all and every virtue. This virtue above all other is much earthly and
boystous, and therefore because of lykenes, it knows and perceives more
perfectly than other virtues, hard and rough, and such other like earthly
passions. Though this virtue by reason of the objects seems to be more
boystous in the subject then other powers: yet it is supposed more profitable
then other virtues. For though the other virtues may in some manner of wise be
without feeling: yet they cannot be complete and perfect, without the virtue of
feeling, as says the philosopher: and so the touching is more general than the
other, both because it is shed into all the parts of the body, and also because
it helps all the other virtues, and specially the taste. These two virtues,
that is to say, the taste and feelyng, be more continually with the heart, and
therefore they be more of the being of the beast, and determine more openly of
things that feel and know. Every lym has one sinewe or two, by which the
virtue of feeling and speedy moving is made complete and perfect: as it is
found in the Anathomia of Constantinus. This virtue of feelyng, is grieved and
hurt sometime, as the other virtues are, and is sometime all lost, where
feelyng and speedy moving sayleth, or is wholly diminished, as it happens in
the lymmes that have the Palsy and be be^. Also it is sometime diminished, as
we see when a lymme is a sleep: when through any stopping or constrayning of
the lymme, the spirit of feelyng may not freely pass by that lymme. Also it
is hurt by evil complexion of the brain, as in them that have the falling
evil, the which, in the hour of the evil, feel not, nor take no heed of
touching of fire. Also it suffers by change of the air without, as when the
fingers be combered and crooked for great cold: in the which expedient moving
is let, and so one finger may not beclippe another. Also by cutting of the
parts of the body: For a joint cut from the body, feels nothing at all,
though it be all to torn or burnt. Also a lymme that remains still in the
body, if it by any chance be dead or rotten loses all feelyng: ye virtue of
feeling is in so much the more grieved, in how much it is the deeper wounded in
the sinews of feelyng. Also when the grief of the virtue vital is joining to
the thing hurtful, by discontinuation of the parties, the thing causing the
grief of the member, specially hurts the feeling, and makes in the body
sore passion and changing. For every thing that is fealt, makes a change in
the lym of ye feelyng. as says the Philosopher. Also things that be felt by
feelyng, make mo chaunges, then things felt by other mouings. The virtue of
feeling, is more boystous and more material then other virtues: and therefore
it holds the more strongly the impressions and putting off things, that
please or grieve. Also because the touching, is an universal living virtue, in
all the parts of a beast: therefore if the power of touching be all lost, the
subject of all the beast is destroyed. It is not so of other powers: For though
the sight be lost, the other virtues of the beast be not therefore destroyed.
Yea, sometime they take the better heed to their working and doing. But if the
feelyng be lost, all the powers are destroyed. And so it appears, that the
virtue of touching, is the ground and the foundation of all the other virtues.
Also when the other four powers, each has his singular and proper sense, and
object, that is to wit, that falls in one sense and not in another, as the
sight knows hiew and color, and the taast knows savor, etc. The touching
alone is the virtue, whereto all the other lims of the virtues, imprinteth
their passions. It is common to all wits to have proper object things and
sensate, in the which they err not by hay. For a particular wit may err for
some thing that falls. For as Aristotle says, Such a thing makes the
fantasy in doubt often, as appears in ye sight, yt deemeth a great star but
small and little, for the farnes of place of and like And the taste yt supposes
bitter to be sweet, through infection of the roof of the mouth, and so it
happens of the other. It is common and general, that all the particular
utter wits, that come from the inner moving, that is called. Sensus communis,
Common moving, proceed as it were lines out of the middle thereof, to every
singular utter power, and makes it perfect, and the instruments thereof, by
diverse dispositions that belong thereto, and brings the likeness thereof to
the full moving. Through ye which agreeing virtues, all the properties of
touching, and the working that belongs thereto, they judge of and the
discern. And this that is said of the properties of the virtues of this
inward working of the senses suffices at this time.

Of those things that are required to the perfection of nature. Cap. 22.
AS wits and virtues are needful to the ruling of kind, so to the perfection
thereof, it must not be without some spirits: by whose benefit and contuiuall
moving, both wits and virtues in man and beasts be ruled to work and do their
offices. For we speak here of a spirit, A spirit is called a certain
substance, subtle, and airie, that stirs and exciteth the virtues of the
body to their doings and works: or as it is written in the book Spiritus and
Animae, A spirit is a subtle body, by the strength of heat multiplyeng in man's
body, giving life by the veins of the body and by the veins and pulses,
gives to beasts, breath, life and pulses, and working voluntary moving and
virtue, by the means of finewes and muscles, in bodies that have souls.
Physicians say, that this spirit is gendered in this manner wise. While by heat
working in the blood, in the liver is caused strong boiling and seething, and
thereof comes a smoke, the which is pured and made subtle of the veins of
the dyuer, and turns into a subtle spiritual substance and airely kind:
and that is called, Spiritus animalis. For kindly by the might thereof, it
makes the blo^^ subtle. And by lyghtnesse thereof it moves ye bleud, and
sends it about into all the lyms. And therefore this spirit properlye rules
and governs the kindly virtue of life, as says Constant. And this same
spirit tourneth toward the heart ^by certain veins. And there by moving and
s^^ting togethers of the parts of ye heart, the spirit is more pured, and turned
into a more subtle kind. And then it is called of physicians Spiritus
vitalis, because that from ye heart, by the organe and veyns, and small ways,
it spreads it self into all ye lims of the body, and increseth ye virtues
spiritual, and rules and keeps ye works thereof. For out of a hollownes of
ye left side of ye heart comes an artery vein, and in his moving is parted
in two bronches: the one thereof goes downward, and spredeth in many boughs
and sprayes. By mean of the which ye spirit Vitalis, is brought to give ye
life, to al ye nether lims of the body. The other bough goes upward, and is
again parted in three branches: the right bough thereof, goes to the right
arm, and the left bough to ye left arm ^galy, and spreads into diverse
sprayes: and so the spirit Vitalis is spread into all ye body. and works in
the artery veins the pulses of life. The middle bough extends it self to
the brain, and other higher parts, and gives life, and spreads the spirit
Vitalis in all the parts about.

The same spirit pearcing and passing forth to the hollow place of the brain,
is there more directed and made subtle and is changed into ye spirit Animal,
which is more subtle then the other. And so this Spiritus animalis is
quickened in the foremost Concauit or hollownesse of the brain, and is somewhat
spread into the limbs of feeling. But yet nevertheless some part thereof
abides in the foresaid cells that Sensus comm^nrs, the common wif, and the
virtue imaginatiue may be made perfect. Then he passes into the middle cell
that is called Logisties, so make the intelligence and understanding perfect.
And when he has informed the intellect, the^ he passes forth to ye place of
memory. And bearing with him ye prints of likeness, which be made in those other
cells, he lays them up in the chamber of Memory. From the hindermost part of
the brain, he pearceth and passes by the marrow of the ridge bone, and
comes to the sinews of moving, that so sedain moving may be of full working
in all the parts of the nether body. Then one and the same spirit corporal,
subtle, and airely, through diverse offices in diverse lims, is named by
diverse names. For by working in ye liver it is called Spiritus Naturalis,
Naturalis.
in the heart Vitalis, Vitalis.
and in the head Spiritus animalis. Animalis.
We may not believe that this spirit is man's reasonable soul: but more truly
the chair or vpholder thereof, and proper instrument. For by mean of such a
spirit, the soul is joined to the body: and without the service of such a
spirit, no act, the soul may perfectly exercise in the body. And therefore if
these spirits beee diminished, or let of their working in any work, the
accord of the body and soul is resolved, the reasonable spirit is let of all
his works in the body. As it is seen in them that be amazed, and mad men
and frantic, and in other that ost leese the use of reason. And that is
because the instrument of the spirit is hurt by some humor either by some
wound. And if these spirits be comforted, the Soul is comforted: And if they
be feebled, either failed, the Soul is feebled in his working, touching the
ruling of the body: as says Constan^inus. And touching this present treatise,
that that is spoken of those spirits shall suffice.

Of the pulses. Chap. 23.
FOr that the pulse is a kindly working and effect of the spirit Vitalis, it
belongs that we declare somewhat of the pulses, and of their properties The
pulse is a moving? uinde by opening and closing of the heart and of the
veins. Then si^h the heart, being in continuall-mouing, from the middle to the
uttermost part, in the moving of the blood and heat, and in the pulse of the
spirit vital is continuallye moved, by such a moving he opens toward the
utter parts. And when he moves backward from the utter parts toward the
middle, then he is constrained and closed. Wherefore the opening of the heart
is to draw in cold air, and the closing thereof is to put out airie
fumositie or smoke, and these two be cause of the pulse. Moreover the pulse is
needful, that the disposition spiritual be understood, and the working
thereof known. The pulse begins at the heart, and spreads by the vains to
the utter parts of the body. And it shows the state of the heart, and the
working thereof. Physicians use to find ye pulse not in all parts of the body,
but commonly in ye arms. And that by moving of the veins. For in some parts,
they may not well be discerned, because they be far from the middle of the
heart, and in some hiding of the heart that rules and governs: and in some
for straightness of the bones: And therefore old wise men chose the veins of
the arm to assaye the pulse, And that because it was more easy, more
profitable, and more honest. More easy, for that fleshly parts hide not the
vain: More profitable, because the vains of the arm be nearer the heart then
the other: More honest for that thereof comes no shame to the Physician,
neither to the sick man. It were unseemly and uncomely to vnheale the privy
lims. The pulse is felt and known by setting to of the fingers upon the place
of the pulse. And that is used with a discreet handling, and that otherwise in
a strong man the^ in a feeble man. For in a strong man and fleshly, with strong
and hard feeling: and in a lean man and feeble, with ease and soft handeling.
Touching this, it is to wit, as Constantions says, that there be many manner
of diversities of pulses, the which be referred or redused to ten. The first is
known by length and breadth of quantity: and this is in three manner ways.
One is a great pulse, when he spreads in length and breadth, and deepnesse
of the vain. And this pulse great and strong comes of the strength of the
spirit: by the which the pulse is spread abroad, and needs to be keeled of
the softness of the limbs, that is, serving to the spreading abroad. Also
some pulse is little, slow and straight, when it returns to the middle, that
is inward toward the heart: And that is for default of virtue, and for
scarcity of heat. And some is temperate, when it draws not to the middle,
neither to the utter sides: This temperature comes of more blood and less
water. Also the pulse is known by the time of moving, and so he is called
swift, slow, and mean: he is called swift because he moves often in short
time, and that comes of strong heat and virtue. And slow, for that he
moves and smites field in long time, and that comes of defalt of virtue and
slacknes of heat: the mean between this is praised. In the third manner, the
pulse is known by the strength of ye virtue. And touching that he is strong,
feeble, and mean. It is strong when it seems that by strength it puts
away from it, the finger that touches it. And that comes of the strength of
virtue and of the softness of the limme that easily moves. He is feeble when
he smites feebly the finger: and comes of feebleness of strength, and of
hardness of the limme that is repugnant. The mean is temperate between those
two. In the fourth manner he is known by the disposition of the lim. And then
he is called hard and soft, and mean. It is hard when it seems that he
withstandeth with a manner sharpness and hardness. And that comes of the
dryness of the vessels thereof. It is soft when the fingers feel it with a
great slownesse of moving: so that it seems yt they pearce it. And that
comes of wet and moisture. The mean between these two is temperate. In the
fifth manner he is known by fullness and mean voidnesse. It is full when it
seems to abound in moisture. And that comes of great repletion of blood
and of spirit. He is void when he seems to be swollen, but yet when it is
touched, the fingers sink in, as it were in a void thing. The mean between
these two is temperate. In the sixth manner, the pulse is known by the quality
of the veins, and so he is departed into hot, cold, and mean. He is hot,
when the fingers feel the substance of veins hot. And that comes of the hot
matter that is therein, that is of the wind and hot blood. The cold pulse is
understood in a contrary manner. The mean between these two is temporate. In
the seventh manner, he is known by working and resting: and so he is departed
in thick, thin, and mean. He is thick, that in his opening smites often the
fingers ends, and sodeinly goes away. And this comes of strength of heat
and default of virtue. The strength of heat seeks remedy of cold and of
keeling: the default of virtue, when it may not once nor twice, nor thrice,
then he trauayleth in appetite of succor. The thin pulse comes of the
contrary cause, that is to wit, of slownes of heat, and of strength of
virtue. The mean between these two is temperate. These seven manner pulses be
notable and easier to know then the other. Of the other three pulses, the first
is departed, and that one part is called Pondus Laudabile, and the other Non
Laudabile. The second is departed, that one part properly Concors, or
according, and that other is equal. And the third is departed by less
discontending. And so that one part is said to be ordinate, and that other
not ordinate. And for the most skillful Physicians may scarcely know these
three pulses, therefore we leave them and pass forth. But yet if there be any
that would know them in lib. Pantegni Constant. Chap. 3. He shall find them
declared cleerelye and expressly at the full: out of ye book we draw what we
express of this matter. There it is disputed largely of the pulse, Caprizante,
Marcellino, Cerino, Neruiculoso, Formidante, Estuante, and Tremente: Of the
which we will not treat at this time. For that the matter is hard, and also
for many singular pulses. And also for yt it seems not greatly needful to
this treatise.

Of the diversity of pulses, Chap. 24.
Pulsatilis Venae.
THE pulses vary in many things: First for diversity of male and female. For
in males that be of stronger kind, the pulse is stronger then in female, that
are feebler of kind. And yt is because kind in females uses often to s^ite
twice to fulfill in females, that he does in males with a strong pulse at once.
Also the pulse varieth by complexion, for if it be hot, it makes the pulse
the stronger, the more, and the swifter. And if it be cold, it makes ye pulse
little, feeble and slow. But if it be moist, it makes the pulse soft and
thick. If it be dry, the pulse is sharp and hard. Also the pulse varyeth
because of diverse dispositions in the body. For the pulse is more strong and
lively in lean men then in fat. And one cause is, that the soft flesh hides
less the veins: or else because kindly heat is more in lean men then in
fat, stronger heat makes stronger pulse. Also the pulse changes, and varieth
for diversity and change of age. For children have swifter pulses then old
men to cool and slake the kindly heat. For in children, heat is stronger
then in old men: For the greatness of heat makes the swiftness of the
pulse, and the feebleness of the virtue that suffices not at full to draw
cold aires at once, as it is said before. Younglings through the aboundaunt
virtue in them, have strong pulses and swift. But old men contrariwise have
the pulse little, feeble, slow, and thin. And that because the complexion of
them is more cold: and therefore it need not to draw so much cold air to
the cooling of the heart: In other ages, as they be near young or old, so
the pulses be more like, both in males, and in females Also through the
changing of time. For in the spring time, through temporaunce of cold and
heat the pulse is strong: and in harvest likewise. For all temporance eases
and helps the virtue of kind. And forasmuch as Summer is hottest, it makes
ye pulse feeble and little, and that through the great opening of the breast,
and of the pores. For by reason of such opening, the virtue vanishes and is
feeble. And therefore the pulse yt is feebled may not be great. In winter
bcause it is cold, the pulse is slow, but yet it is very strong. The
slownesse comes by reason that it needs not to have great cooling. It is
strong by reason the kind heat gathers into the inner parts of the body,
whereby it comfort the pulse, when the heat is not exceeding: But the Summer
heat suppresseth either. Also by reason of diuers^ climates and Countries, for
they that dwell in hot Countries, as in Aethiopia, have swift pulses, as it
were in Summer: And they that dwell in cold Countries have pulses like the
winter pulse. But they that dwell under the line of the evenness of day and
night, have mean pulses, as it were in Spring time or Harvest. Likewise hot
air, cold, dry, or temperate, vary and change the pulse. Also in women
that go with children the pulse is variable and chaungeable. For from the
beginning to the sixte month, the pulse is strong, thick, and swifte. For the
heat of the child, helps the kind heat of the woman: and the strength of
the woman is a mean enen to that time: and the child is yet but little, and
draws but little feeding of her body: and therefore the pulse is yet
temporate. In the seventh month the child is waxed more, and therefore it
needs more feeding. Whereby the kind is grieved, and so the pulse is
feebled. Also for the changing of sleeping and of waking.

For in sleeping the pulse is wont to be little and slow: and after sleep
strong and great. For then the kind heat is comforted: but yet if the sleep be
too long, the pulse waxes thin and feeble. Wherefore if a man be sodeinly
awaked of his sleep, otherwise then kind will, anon ye pulse is found swift
and thick, quaking, and inordinate. And if he take his rest after such fright,
again the pulse turns to his former estate. Also through travail and
business of the body, if it be temporate, it makes the pulse strong, great,
swift, and thick. For by temporate travail the kind heat is stirred. But if
the travail passes temporaunce, the contrary happens, the pulse is little,
hard, slow, and thin. For in them that travail so, the virtue fails, and
kind heat is dissolved, and then the pulse is feebled. Also through use of
often bathing. For they yt has temporatly in hot water, they have the pulse
strong, great, and thick, and that is through the comfort of kind, and of
destroieng of superfluity of moisture. But in them that abide too long in the
water, the pulse is made feeble: But yet the swiftness and thicknes abides as
it was before hand. Also likewise they yt has them temporatly in cold water,
have ye pulse strong and swifte, and that chances through joining togethers
of kindly heat and comfort of the virtue that comes of temporance of the
utter keeling. But to long abiding in such a bath, feebleth the pulse and the
virtue. And that happens more in lean men then in fat, through coldness
that comes to the utter parts to sodeinly. And as it were without let,
pearcing in, and as it were constraining the parts about the heart more then
enough. Also through diverse taking of meat and drink. For too much meal and
undigested feebleth the pulse. But meat moderatly taken and digested, and
spread into the limbs, by stirring up the virtue, augmenteth the pulse. Also
moderate drink, and digested, makes the pulse strong, great, and swift. Hot
drink makes the pulse swift and thick, but cold drink makes the pulse thin
and slow. Also through diverse passions of the soul. For wrath makes ye pulse
swift, strong, and thick: and gladness makes it mean. Also dread or fear
makes the pulse swift, inordinate in quaking: and so does sorrow. And so of
other passions it happens. And this that is said of the properties, virtues,
effects, and working of the might and strength of the soul, touching this
treatise is enough at this time. Now somewhat shall be said, by the help and
grace of God, of the properties of man's body Of the which body the soul is
act and perfection.

FINIS LIBRI TERTII.
INCIPIT LIBER QVARTVS.
Of the properties of the corporal substance.
TO treat of the properties of man's body, and of the parts thereof, we shall
first begin to treat of the qualities of the elements and of the humors, of
the which the body is made.

Of the four qualities Elementarie. Chap. 1.
ELements there are four, and so there be four qualities of Elements, of the
which every body that has a soul, is composed and made, as of matter. And
namely man's body, that is noblest among all the Elements, and most nobly
ordained among all things, that be composed and made of diverse things, as it
that is assigned to ye proper instrument, or organe of the reasonable soul, in
his works, as well of kind as of will. So man's body is made of four
Elements, that is to wit, of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air: every several has
his proper qualities. Four be called the first and principal qualityes, that
is heat, cold, dry, and moist: they be called the first qualities, because
they slide first from the Elements into the things that be made of Elements.
They be also called the principal qualities: for of them come all the
secundarie effects. Two of these qualytyes be called Active, able to work hot,
and coldness. The other two be dry and wetnesse, and be called Passive, able
to suffer. And so as these qualyties prevail and have maisterie, the Elements
be called Active and Passive able to do yande suffer. The first two be
principally called Active, not because they work alone, for the Passive
qualityes work also: for there is none idle qualitye in the body: But
therefore they be called Active, for by the working of them the other be
brought in and kept and saved. For heat sometime brings in and keeps
moistness, and sometime drines, as it is seen in salt flesh. For ye beat of
the Salt dissolueth the parts that be earthly, watery, and airebrand so by
stackening and softening of the heat is induced moistness: Heat brings in
dryness, for the heat working in moystnesse dissolueth it first, and when it
is dissolved consumes it. And so dryness which is the first of heat is
induced, and also kept. Then heat is the quality of Elements most Active, as
it seeneth by ye effect thereof, while it works on any thing, First it
dissolueth the parts thereof, the which when they be dissolved, the thing is
made feebler, that was stronger, by the joining togethers of the parts. And
therefore the act of the thing that works, makes less resistaunce. Also
heat is the subtle, worker of all that is ingendered, and the cause
effectual principally of the whole Generation. Heat is of two manner wise,
heat of the Sun, or heavenly, gendering. And this heat gendereth and
saves. And therefore sometime Frogs be gendered in the Air by the heat of
heaven. That other heat, is the heat of the Elements, and gendered: and this
heat corrupts and destroys, as when the Beams of light comes togethers
in a certain point of a clear body. As if the Beams were compound in a
mirror, there might be kindled and burned cloth or such like, by the
rebounding of the Beams. Also it brings and leads the nether things to
the over. For making moving from the middle to the uttermost, it dissolueth
and turns what is earthlye into watrye, and watrye into airely, and airelye
into fiery. And so brings the nether and the middle into the over. Also it
softeneth and makes soft things that be hard. For working in great boistous
substance, mollisteth it dissoluing: as it is seen in metal that melts
with heat: For dissoluing earthlye things into watrye, makes them tender.
Also soft things and fleeting it makes it hard, as it is seen in an Egg
that is roasted. Of an Egg.
For when the moist and most subtle parts be wasted away, it makes hard
the earthlye parts that abide. And so the Egg waxes hards: and hard and
thick things it makes subtille, while it moves from the middle to the
uttermost parts, by his strength it dissolueth and deals the thing that it
works in, and makes it couenable and agreeable to his working. While it
trauayleth to make a thing simple, it must needs make it subtle, for the
simpleness of a boystous thing, is the subtilnesse that comes in, by
withdrawing of fastness and thickness of parts: as it is seen in Ise, Of
Ise.
that is made subtle when it is thawed by ^ente. Also heat by his virtue
cleanses mettalles, and destroys the ruste thereof, and other filth. For
working in the substance of the same metal dissolueth it. And if it finds
any thing of dross, either of ruste, it departs and destroys it. If if
be an^ Gold, the strength of the heat melts it, but it is not destroyed.
For fine gold though it melt with heat, yet it loses nothing of his weight.
Also heat accidently corrupts, as it happens, when it dissolueth more then
it wastes, then the humors rot and be corrupted. As it fares in a wet moowe
of wheat, where the heat closed therein, resolves and deals the water into
smoke. And the smoke holden close in, softneth the grains, and rotteth and
corrupts it. Also heat makes kindlye heavy things light. For when the
moisture is wasted by heat, the weight is the less. And so the substance of
ye thing is made more light. And by heat working in moisture, smoke is
gendered, the which smoke is made light and purged, and turns into a subtle
and light substance of air, and makes the thing that it is in the more light.
And therefore it is, that the bodies of beasts that be alive, are far more
lighter then the bodies of beasts that be dead, through the heat and spirit
that is contained in the organes and veins: and so bodies of beasts be lighter
after meat, the^ before, for comfort of heat. Also it happens, that with
working, heat makes things heavy. For working in the substance of a thing,
it consumes and wastes the most subtle and light parts: and gross and
ponderous parts abide. And then the thing is more sad, fast; and also the
more heavy. Also by opening of small holes and pores, by strength of the
heat, the spirits be drawn out, by whose absence the body is made lighter,
and by presence of them the body is the more heavier. Also heat gendereth
beauty and red color. For he working in ye matter, resolves ye earthly
parts, and turns them into watrye, and into airely, and firely. And then
firely parts enclose the uttermost parts of the thing, and gives it a likeness.
And so firely colors that is red, be gendered as it is seen in roses.
Wherefore when by heat, hot humors be multiplied in the body, or in the heart,
then by spreding of these hot humors in the uttermost parts of the body, red
color is increased. Also it happens that heat discouloureth a thing. For
by heat opening the pores, humors and spirits go out and vanish. Whose
presence causes good color, and by their absence color is lost: Then
discoulour is gendered, as it is seen in a red rose, that waxes white in the
smoke of Brimstone. And if heat be strong, it slaieth kindlye. For while the
last moving works in the substance, at last it dissolueth it, and in
dissoluing destroys it at the end. And it happens that heat saves the
life: for by heat that gives moving to the heart and to the spirits, the
spirits be restored in the body. And the food is equally dispearsed into the
lims, and so the body has life.

Then of this that is said, gather thou, that heat is an Element in property
most able to work, most pearcing, most moveable to move, gendred of moving of
beams, and multiplyeth it self, and comes to other, and changes into his
own likeness things that he works in. And gives life to things that be
dead and destroyed with cold, As also of flies that be revived by ye heat of
the Sun.
and renueth them: as it is seen in roots and plants, that die in the winter
cold, and reliuen in the heat and springing time. Heat brings the nether
thing to the over, and draws and destroieth superfluities, and cleanses filth
and hoarnesse. And in diverse matters it works diverse effects, and sometime
contraryes. And therefore now it makes thin and soft, and melts, and
opens, and returns: Now it makes thick and hard, and constrains and
makes to shrink, and it stops, and saves: and now it destroieth. And by
his virtue it changes savors. For heat changes sour things and sharp,
into sweet, as it is seen in fruits, and in grapes. Also passing great heat
turns sweet things into bitter and salt. For by passing great heat burning
the blood, the blood tourneth into Colera. And by great heat, water by strong
seething, consuming parts ayrely, and the earth remaining, the water turns
into substannce of Salt. And heat defieth and seetheth raw things, and ripeth
green things, and makes fruit ripe. Therefore in hot Countries fruit so
sooner ripe then in cold, and also more sweet. And heat brings forth
matter, and shape lykenesses that be hid in the matters, as in small beasts
and worms. For by working of heat, gold, silver, and other metals be
brought forth of stones, and be beautified in a more noble shape. And by heat
that dissolueth and cleanses ashes, the ashes turn to glass: And so it
appears, that heat of air and of kind is minister and servant. For by
mean of heat the noblest shapes and likenesses as well of kind as of craft,
that be hid, comes forth in act and in deed. Also heat t^^t is printed in
the air, gendereth rain: and clouds, thundering and lightening, and dew, and
other such. For by the virtue thereof that works and draws diverse vapors,
dry and moist, be drawn up to diverse places and regions of the air, the
which gathered together into clouds, and the heat enclosed alters and
changes them into diverse kinds, which at length it dissolueth: and being
dissolved, some into Snow, some into Hails, and some into rain, sprinckleth
them all about into the earth. And heat raises the body that it is in; from
the middle to the ouermost roundnesse, as it is some in the Elements, in the
which heat has the masterie: as in the Air and in the fire, that is farthest
from the middle of the earth. And also this is seen in Oil, that fleeteth and
swimmeth alone, and in all other things, in which heat has masterie. Also it
shows the disposition and quality of the body that it is in. As appears in
the body, that heat has the masterie over. For as Constantinus says, lib^r.
^. cha. 16. If the body be hot, then is much slash, and little fatness, read
color, much hair black or read, hot touching, good understanding, a man
of great facun^^itie, a quick goer, vardye, wrathful, louelye, lecherous and
desiring much, and hastelye defien^^, or of good digestion, of sharp voice,
shamefast, of strong and swifte pulse, Constant shows these signs, and many
other, by the which an hot body is known. This suffices at this time that is
spoken of the property of heat.

Of Coldness. Chap. 2.
Coldness is a working propertye of an Element qualytie, more weaker in
working then heat. For thereof the moving is from the vter parts, to the
middle. And therefore it makes the parts of the body that it works in, to
draw near togethers. And therefore it works his effect in the body more
slowlye, and with the more difficulty. Also though it cool kindlye, and
makes cold, yet otherwhiles it heateth. We see in the winter, that when
cold stops the holes and powers of the body, the hot f^mositie draws
inward, and has not the free out going, for that they be held within, they
smite togethers and heat themselves. And so other whiles the cold that is
without, makes heat within. And cold makes thick and sad: for cold
makes the parts move toward the middle, and so the parts cleave near
togethers, for the parts were before from the middle far a sunder, by
moisture put between: but by drawing togethers of that moisture, the parts
draw toward the middle, and be near togethers. Also though cold brings
the parts toward the middle, and kindly joins them together: yet it
happens that it departs and deals the parts a sunder, as it is seen in
ye brain that is thrust with cold, by strength of the using the moisture that
is therein, is wrong out, and falls of, by diverse Emun^toryes of the brain,
and is shed or spilt, as appears in them that have the catarre or ruin in
the breast, caused of cold. Also kindlye cold makes sad and rough: for
when by working of cold, the parts come and cleeuie near togethers, all the
thing is made more sad and boystous. Farther by cold thrusting together
fiery parts, then he thicked into airely, and airely, ^^^ watery, and the
watery into earthly, and so the whole is made groser. But it happens cold
makes the thing subtle. For when by cold constraining and thrusting the
parts together, much moisture is thrust and wrong out, the which moisture
contained in small holes and pores, makes the thing sad and boystous. Then if
the moisture be away, the thing is more subtle, as it is seen in a skin
that is washed and wrong. Also though by constraining the parts together, and
wringing out the spirits, makes a thing kindlye heavy: yet if happens that
cold makes a thing light: for by wringing out of ye moisture the which
grieved, all the thing is made light. Also temporate cold keeps and saves
things alive. For while by cold moisture, the incensing and killing of heat
is let, and so as the moisture is resolved little and little by the powers:
even so little and little it is wasted: and so heat is let that it may not
dissolve the thing. Also by the benefit of cold a thing is kept without
stinking, and so in cold places, and caves, ca^^ions without stink, through
cold little and little are wasted. Also small holes and powers be closed by
constraining of cold: and to the rooted hu^^^ be let that they may not draw
the utter to the inner, yet accidentlye cold corrupts and destroys. For
when cold lets defieng and digestion in the stomach, the working of
kindlye heat is let. And corrupt humors be gendered, of the which
follows corruption of the body, while the corrupt humors be incorporate
and knit to the body. And that is seeneth wounds, to the which be laid
cold salues and medicines, which constrain and cause the powers for to be
stopped, and so the new sumosities make the flesh soft within, and fretting
and corrupting it, they make it to rot.

Also by kind, cold causes and makes things so be discouloured ill, as we
see in Winter the heat of the body, or of the heart, voiding his contrary,
and leads the humor and the spirit with him inward. And so the utter side of
the ^al^t made weak, of heat makes evil cou^ea^^o. As it appears in
lips and cheeks. But it happens that cold makes things well colored.
For it constrains and stops the powers. And so the humors and the
spirits be held in, and by their presence the utter side of the skin is
colored. And by kind too great cold slaieth. For if it constrain and stop
to soar, the spirits fail in the heart. And so if the heart be dead, from
the which proceeds life so the other parts, the other parts must needs die.
Also through too great cold, feeble heat is quenched. And so the spirit
Vitalis, of life, lacks food and is stifled. The Scottish ^lacks and puffies
which grovve of rotten wood and salt water
But it is strange in shapes, that cold gives life, as it is seen in a
manner kind of birds that grow out of trees, that springs as it were
swellings, and burgenen out of trees in steed of fruit. But as long as they be
in the tree, they have no life. And the Commentator Super libru^ Vegetabilium
says, that happens through the porrositie of the tree that draws the
sumositie from the rind. But when the holding breaks, the birds fall into
the water. And the cold stops the holes and the powers without, and holds
the sumositie within: the which beat togethers are pured and made subtle, and
are turned into a spirit. And by the multiplieng and spreading of that spirit
into all the parts, she said birds take life, and turn into a manner kind of
birds. The which be much unlike to other birds in complexion and in kind.
They have little flesh and less of blood: and therefore they be couenable, so
says the same Commentatour. But to them that mark it well it ministers
matter of the praising of God ghostly: for spiritually it represents them,
that the spirit of God gendereth by the tree of the cross in the water of
following: Regeneration.
in the which is not great desire of flesh and of blood: the which relieved by
spirit, desire, and covet to fly to heaven with all their might and strength.
But thereof we shall speak after. Also cold is the mother of whiteness and
of palenesse, as heat is the mother of redness and of blackness. And so in
hot Countries black men and brown be borne, as among the Moors. In cold
Countries white men be borne.

As among the Selauons, as says Aristotle in li. de coelo and mundo. And he
tells the reason why, and says, That in cold Countries, the Mothers of women
be disposed to conceive such children. Therefore they bear children with white
skins, that have long, yeolowe, soft, and straight hair. The contrary is in
hot countries. Where women bear children that have black cripse and little
hair, as in the Negroes Country. Then cold shows it self in the body,
that cold has the mastery within. For in the bodies that cold has the
masterie over, the color is white, the hair soft and straight, the wit hard
and forgetful, little appetite, much sleep, heavy in going and slow, as says
Constantinus. li. 1. Chap.17. This shall not always be understood to be in every
cold needelye, but in comparison to the complexion of the heat, that has
mastery, and in proportion of the hot land to the cold region, authors say
these things, and have left them written in their books to them that come
after. This that is said suffices of the properties of cold at this present
time. For other properties be known to the contrary of that is said before of
heat.

Of drought. Chap. 3.
DRought is an Element quality passive able to suffer: and is brought in, now
by heat, and now by cold. But it follows more with heat then with cold.
For drought is the file of heat. Drought is said as it were without moisture:
For drought and moisture be contrary. The principal effect of drought is to
make dry: as the effect of moisture is to make wet, and has many secondarie
effects: as to make thick, rough, and to cause slow moving to consume, to
destroy, and slay. And that property that dries, draws principallye the
moist parts from the utter parts, toward the middle: And for that a moist
thing shonlde not all to shed the substance of it self by fleeting, drought
puts it self as it were a bound, to let the fleeting and shedding: As we
see in Cliffes in the Sea brimmes, the dryness of the Gravel sets abound
to the Sea, and where the kindly dryness of the earth has the masterient
suffers not the sleeting surges or violent waves of the Sea to pass any
father, as says Gregory super. Job.38. Job. 26.
Qui posuit mari terminum, etc. He has set bounds about the waters, until
the day and night come to an end. And Hierome super Jeremy says the same.
Iere. 5.
Posuit arenam terminum mari, etc. Fear ye not me says the Lord, Psa. 22.
or will you not be afraid at my presence, which have placed the sand for the
bounds of the Sea, by the perpetual decree that it cannot pass it, and
though the waters thereof rage, yet can they not prevail, though they roar,
yet can they not pass over it. And the Philosopher says the same more
plainly. Then drines that is not perfectly bound in his alone equality,
reboundeth and thickeneth the moist quality, that is in it superfluous,
fastened and congeled, and is a steadfast heeding of the fleeting thereof. For
dryness is the evil or enemy of heat, that is stirred up by moving, either
by working, it dissolueth and dispearseth the moisture, or by ouerworking it
consumes it altogethers, thus spread in the limbs, it draws forth
moistness and humor, and makes the body dry, and shriueleth the skin
together like a withered skin. Also dryness has sometime moisture: for if it
moves toward the middle, it constrains and draws the limbs togethers:
And so by constraining the wetnesse is wrongen out, the which before was shed
through the body, and so the body seems to be wet, that was before dry.
Also we see upon the kindlye dry hills, herbs grow that be moist of
kind, as the herbs that be called Simbalaria, Vermicularia, Crassula, Hon
slike Prickmadam. Orprone.
and other. And this is no wonder. For the dryness that takes heed by kind
to save the Hill, and keep it in his dryness, and that by dryness that is
like thereto, and by the virtue attractiue, of drawing, it draws too
nourishing, and seedeth things that is drieng.

And hates moisture and fills it, as hid contrary, and puts of anon to
the roots of the herbs that be in the utter part of the hill, and be put out
of the inner party, as it were things superfluous and needless. And so roots
draw to them humors, that be nourished therewith, and made moist. Heereto
accords the Commentours reason super librum Methororum, where he says, that
wels and rivers springs out of mountains, and hills, for mountains be full
os holes, cliffes, and dens: and have within much hot air: And the
mountains draw much things to them, by reason of boydnesse, and also because
of hot air, that is closed therein. And what that is drawn like to the hill
in dryness, is corporate and fastened thereto. And what is unlike or
disagreeing in moisture, is put of, and gathered in one place, and that the
last is put out by heads of Wells. And pearcing, hollowing, and springs
away, and thereof come rivers. Then dryness draws to it self what is
needful, and fasteneth thereto what is like, and puts therefrom things
that be superfluous and unlike thereto. Also dryness by kind makes things
lean in flesh, and barren in ground. For if dryness have the masterie in a
thing, it wastes the moisture that it finds therein, and so that thing
becomes lean. Also dryness makes things hard. For it destroys the
moisture that makes it soft: as we see in many things, especially in clay,
the which when it is dry, is hard. Also dryness working in a subtle thing,
as in airely substance or watrye, makes it more subtle and more clear. As
we see when the Northern wind blows, the air is the more dry and subtle.
It may happen that drines makes things soft. For when the dryness wastes the
moisture that fasteneth the parts together, then follows consequently the
separation and softness of the parts, as we see in old trees and timber when
drought has wasted the moisture thereof, they be soft and fall into powder,
that is soft to handle and to feel. Also kindly dryness makes things rough.
For dryness working wastes the moisture that he finds, and hardneth the
moisture yt he may not wast in the utter parts, and so the utter parts be
uneven with hollownes sunk, and with hardness crumpled, whereof comes
roughness, which is nothing else but an unevenness in a hard thing. But so it
happens, yt sometime it makes things smooth: as when ye heat is sharped by
drines, which heat by his accident dissolueth the humors, and the humors so
dissolved, sweateth outward, and makes the thing soft and smooth. Also
dryness makes slow moving. For by mastery of dryness, the parts that are
airely and watrie be made thick and gross, and turn into earth, and the thing
is more heavy and more slow to moving. Also by too great dryness the spirits
be put out, and by the multitude of them the body moves the more swiftlye,
The vital moistues is decreased by over much dryness.
then when dryness makes the less spirits, the body moves the more slowly.
But sometime dryness helps moving. For dryness moving to the middleward
equally, it leads the utter parts to the middle. And the parts bind about
in a roundnesse that may be rolled. And by reason roundnesse has no corners to
let it, by his rolling is the more able to move. Also moderate drines wasting
the superfluities of moisture, makes spirits subtle and pure, and makes them
more swift. For they being purged from the superfluity that grieved the
body, they make the body more apt and able to the same moving. Also by kind
dryness destroys and wastes the humors: The loss of apetite breeds
leanesse.
it makes the body void and lean, and poor of feeding and wasted. Also by
kind, dryness derstroyeth: Dryness proceeds of heat abou^ding, it kills
and bodies of men and beasts.
for it destroys and constuneth the moisture substantial, that feeds the
body materially, and joins the parts togethers. And destroieng of such
moisture is cause why a body that has a soul, or a body without soul, is
destroyed and wasted. Also specially dryness destroieth bodies that have
souls: for kindly spirits and natural spirits that be of moist smoke it
dissolueth, when that moisture is wasted: then lacking matter and spirit, of
necessitye the body dies.

And so dryness is the worst quality and slaieng, if it exceed, when it is
not clean put out by abundance of moisture: Addition
but yet by hap it gives life. For sometime rumatike humors comes to the
spiritual parts, and stop the ways of the spirit, and be in point to
stifle the body. Then comes dryness or dry medicines, and works and
destroys such humors, and opens the ways of the spirit, and so the body
that is as it were dead, has living. Though dryness be needfall in every
body that is made of Elements, to wast the superfluity of moisture, and to
coarte the same moisture, and also to excite slack heat: yet drines slays,
and is the worst qualytie, when it passes the due proportion in bodies. For it
is wont to gender in bodies full evil sicknesses and hurtful, as the Tisike,
and Etike, and other such evils, the which may scarcely be help by succor of
medicines. Also by consuming and wasting of the humors of feeding it dries
the body, and draws the skin togethers, and makes it riueled, and
hastes: age, and makes the body evil colored and deformed, and is cause
of inordinate thirst. And makes the organes the entrance into the stomarke,
rough, and lets the voice, and makes it hoarse, and spoileth the head of
the hair, and makes it bald, and draws togethers, and makes crooked the
toes and fingers of the feet and hands: as it is seen in leporous men. This
that is said of the effects and properties of dryness is sufficient at this
time.

Of moisture. Chap. 4.
MOisture is an Element quality passive, able to suffer, obedient to working
and printing of the Active, and working qualities, and takes sodeinlye the
working of heat and cold. Moisture feeds all bodies, and specially the
bodies that have souls, and makes them ware and grow, and keeps them, and
restores that which is left in the body. For by moisture and heat all things
be bread, as the Philosopher says, and things ingendered both nourishes and
feeds, as we see in roots and seeds. For the grain that is put in the
earth must first be nourished with moisture of water and of air, and be
spread and opened abroad by kindly heat that is closed therein. And at the
last by kindly working of heat, the moisture being resolved, sends the more
gross and rarthlye parts thereof downewarde to the earth, the which parts the
earth faketh within it self, and mixeth and quaileth them by heat that is
therein. And tourneth them into the kind of a root by conioyning of moisture.
And that moisture of the root left behind, and so bread in the root, the
humor that it finds, draws into the earth like it self. And also it
draws by the drawing virtue of heat that is closed within. And when it has
so drawn, it turns into the feeding thereof, as much as suffices. And heat
dissolueth and deals, and makes subtle that other part, that needs not to
the feeding thereof. And the root sends it upward, and turns it first into
the substance of the chawing, and then into the substance of the stock either
stalk. And at the last into the substance of boughs and twigs, and leaves,
and blossoms, and of fruit. And for moisture it is the seeding and matter of
all thing that lives. It shows that moisture feeds all thing that lives,
and is joined thereto: and moisture by shedding of it self, makes such
things wax and grow in length, deepnesse, breadth and thickness. Also
moisture restores what is lost in bodies that have life and soul. For by
heat working alwaie within and without, bodies be consumed and wasted, and
should bastely and soon be destroyed: but if it were restored again by
moisture. And therefore by continual drawing to of moisture is needful, that
the restoring of what is lost by continuance, the body may be restored and
saved. Also moisture keeps and saves these nether things that be under the
Moon. For by continual gathering of beams and light in the air and earth,
so great should be breeding of heat and of dryness that the air should
fall a fire, and burn the utter side of the earth.

But if the working of heat were not mittigated by the moisture of air and of
water, and were reduced by due proportion to temperatnesse. And therefore God
sets to the well of heat the well of all humor, as Macrobius says, that
the violence of heat might be tempered by the presence of humor set, to
withstand it. And so the shape of the world may be saved: The equality of
elements is the worides cause and continuance.
for else by too great heat it should sodeinly fail. Also moisture joins
togethers the parts of the earth. For the earth is so dry, that every part
thereof should fall from other; if it were not in^istened with moisture of
water.

Therefore kind made mountains and hills hollow, and the earth with caves,
vautes, and cliffes in places, and full of holes. That so by cause of vorvnesse
should be great drawing in of air and of water, to slake the kindly drieng of
the earth, and the parts thereof, that else would fall. And so as blood does,
runuing through the veins of the body, the same does moisture in the vains of
the earth. For it moysteneth the dryness of the earth, and disposes it to
bear fruit. And moisture has certain properties and effects, that be the
first and kindly. And some that be secundarye, and some Casual, as other
qualyties have. By kind moisture is moveable, fleeting, and evil bounding in
it self but yet it is staide by other bound, as says the Philosopher. And it
makes move from the middle outward, and shedding it self in fleeting, it
should destroy whollye his subject; if nothing let the fleeting thereof, the
which should bound his fleeting by reduction to the middle. As we see that
of dryness of gravel to the Sea, cliffes and stronds stopped, and hold in
the stoud of the Sea and turns it somewhat inward. Also by kind, moisture
makes things soft.

For by withdrawing and spreeding thereof, it slacketh and draws abroad, and
makes soft the hard compact parts of the matter. And it happens that
moisture makes hard: as we see in Postumes and Botches, in the which cold
humors come togethers, and smiting the most parts to the cold middlewarde,
they come thick and hard. And oftentimes the parts change into Skliresim,
that is hardness. The same happens of overmuch heat, wasting the moist
parts, the which when they be wasted, the great parts and sad be thrust
togethers, and made hard.

Also by kind, moisture cleanses and: for by softening thereof, and of the
part, by the which it is shadde, it slacketh the senowing parts, and
departs them asunder, and makes them slipper and slidinge, and moves and
washes them away, as it is seen, naistely, in water that is moist, and
washes by kind, and most cleanses hoarie things. And that is specially if
it help the moisture: as it is seen in Branne of Wheat or of Rye; and in the
root of a plant that is named and properly called Bryonie in Latin, and also
in Soap, and in Meal of Beans, and in other such. Bryonie. Vitis Siluestris
Sigilium heatae Mariae.
For all these wash away the falth of the face and of all the body, and makes
pure and clean. Also for he moves kindly from the middle toward the utter
parts, and that moving is not full strong of it self, but stowe in
comparison to the moving of the heat: and so moisture sheddeth it self
principally into the sideward, and stretches not much upward without help of
heat. But other while heat has washerie therein, and works therein, the
most matter being obedient; stretches it self every whether, (...) is
upward, and in length: for the strength of heat bears it upward, and
sheddeth even to the lifter most pa^tes: And so (...) up and ^^ upon in length.
And bodies in the which heat has the (...)ry, kindly and generally they the
higher; longe^^ and more ^^nder, then such bodye^^, ^^ the which much moisture
so^^h the masterye and steel heat: works, contrary the s^^s f^sindo. And
therefore, hot men; ^^ ^ho^ levike, the substantial humor of heat being
obedient to the working, be shore longer, that is to wit, the flumaticke, and
in all extremytyes of the eddye, the other parts and circumstaunces equal
here and there, running together in slenderness and length they be more apt.
If there be much heat and much humor, not too much neither too little to the
working of ye heat, but couenably and measurably, then the bodies every ways
be great, high, long, and broad. They be high through the heat that bears up
to the topwarde, the most subtle parts of the moisture. Broad and thick,
through the virtue of heat that sheddeth the sad parts of the moisture, as it
needs to every side, and unites one part to another: so moisture makes
kindly things smooth and soft: for if moystnesse be shed into the utter parts
of a thing, it fills all the void places thereof, and makes them even and
plain, and so it makes smooth and soft. But yet it happens sometime it
makes rough, as when in some case, hot humors and cold fleeteth and comes
together to one place. The hot humors bear up the uttermost parts of ye thing,
and cold humors bear downwarde the uttermost parts: and so contrary
humors, work contrariousnesse and unevenness, with roughnes in ye utter part
of the body. Also if moisture be in the body temperate, as it needs, it
helps all the working of the soul, and of the body also. For of humors the
spirits that rule the body, be bread and conserved therein. Also the virtues
of the spirits work their effects in all the lyms of the body sensitive and
motive, by ministration and service of humors, as it appears in the virtue
of sight, which by mean of a Christiall humor, works the sight in the eye.
Also the virtue of taaft beemeth neue^ between sauors, but by mean of the
humor of spittle, and so of other. For if the substauntiall moisture be
destroyed or corrupted in the body, all the working of the soul is let. If
there be in all the body, or in any part thereof too much moisture, yt may not
be ruled of kind, then moisture is cause and matter of rotting and of
corruption, and breeds in the body full evil passions and sickness: as it is
seen in Apoplexra, The lass^ of natural seelyng.
in the which evil superfluity of moisture, occupies so all the chambers and
dens of the brain, that the spirit, that is called, Spirits Animalis, may
not pass by the sinews of feelyng, to make the body feel and move: and so
takes from the soul his working in the body: And also it takes from the body
feeling and moving; and brings in at last, stiflyng and death: as says Galen
in the Commente super Aphoris. exponens verhu^ Hippocratis. ^Soluere Apoplexiam
fortem impossible ell: dobilem vero no facile. Moisture of fleame occupieng
all the region of the brain, stops the ways of the sinews, that the
spirit Animalis, may not come to the nether part: and so the breath is
stopped, and the life ended. This moisture defaulteth sometime in qualytie, and
sometime in quantity, and that sometime by an inward cause, and sometime by
outward cause. By inward cause, as by evil complexion, when the hurtful
moisture is rooted in the lymmes, and may not be dissolved and wasted by kindly
heat, neither be changed from his malice: Such moisture in diverse places of
the body breedeth-diuers sicknesses, as it is seen in Ep^^epsia, the falling
Evil, when it comes of the stopping of the powers and bray^e: and also of ye
dropsy; when it comes of evil complexion of the lines. Also of an outward
cause, as of things, that Iohannieus and Ga^e^ rall unkindly things, as air,
meat, and drink, sleeping and waking, fasting, and too much eating and
drinking, working, trauellyng, and rest. All these, if they be taken as kind as
keth, they breed and keep substaunciall moisture, and repair and restore what
is lost. And if they be taken in contrary manner, they have contrary effect
and doing. For then they breed unkind moisture, and cause diverse gross and
heavy humors to increase, or else they corrupt, alter and change kindly
moisture, as says Galen in Aphorismo. Hippocratis particula tertia fuper
illum locum, Immutationes temporum maxim generant morbos, etc. That is, The
often course and changing of times most breeds sicknesses.

Galen says, That Ipocras means, that times of the year breed not sickness,
but chaungings of complexion of the self time. When the complexion of ye
air, which ought to be according to ye time, is turned into the contrary: as
when the complexion of Spring time, that should be hot and moist, turns, and
is made cold and dry, as it were in Harvest time, and so of other. For if the
air of Spring time be generallye cold and dry, and in the Winter before, the
air was as it were in Spring time hot and moist, then it must needs follow,
that many men shall be sick in Spring time. And also women that go with
child, shall be beliuered before their time by little occasion. And Galen
tells this reason: For by the moisture and heat of the Winter that was
arose, much moystnes is bred in bodies, and knitting of fleame. If the air in
Spring time be cold and dry in the beginning: it closes small holes, and
suffers not the fumositie to pass out, and the heat holden in, dissolneth
the superfluity of moisture, that was bred in the Winter. And for yt the heat
is feeble, and may not dissolve it, neither make therein perfect digestion,
nor wast it at the full: it sends that moisture undissolved, now to the over
lymmes, and now to the nether: where being mired, it is cause of diverse
evils: as if it go up to the head, it may be cause of rume and of
hoarcenesse: if it go into the bowels, and the fleame be salt, it breeds
Dissenteriam, a flux, that hides the guts, and so of other. The same reason
may be in women, yt be delivered before their time: for that moisture fleeteth
to the place that is called, the Mother, and grieueth it, and softeneth and
slaketh that that should hold the child, and so the child is borne before the
time. And Auicen assigns another cause, And thus must we understand of other
passions of the air, and of the time: that the quality of that air is
changed by too great heat, that disolueth either wastes too speedely: either
by too little heat that puts not off the superfluity at full. And so we
should understand of too great cold, that closes poores, and holds the
humors, and draws them to soon togethers. But of hot air and cold, this
that is said shall suffice at this time.

Of meat and drink. Cap. 5.
OF meat and drink if appears. For that by withdrawing of feeding of meat
and drink moisture is withdrawn, and dryness comes in, and thereby the
heat is the stronger, and finding not wherein it should work, tourneth it
self to the substancial moisture and working therein, makes it hollow and
wastes it, and returns. Cause of suiset.
If meat or drink passes measure, moisture passes too swifte, and kind
heat feebleth, for it is not sufficient to work digestion, but yet heat does
what it may: For it dissolueth somewhat of the superfluity of the meat yt is
taken. That that is resolved, when it is great smoke and vndefied, it comes
up to the brain, and smiting Miringas, Euaporatio^ to the brain.
the small Curtels thereof, hurts and grieueth them sore, And breeds
sometimes the Migram, An aching in the forepart of the head, Addition
where through the abundaunce of the moist humor, the eyes wax bleare and
dim: and other evil passions of the head. And sometime that malicious smoke
smites to the roots of yt sinews of feelying, and passes into yt innermost
parts of the sinews in his sharpness and force, and lets the spirit of
feelyng that is therein and grieueth him: and so it distempereth the substance
and the use of reason, and takes away the kindlye moving of the tongue, that
tells what reason means, and makes the tongue stammer and fail, as it is
seen in drunken men. Also oftentimes, it lets and destroys altogether
kindly moving: as appears in them that shake and quake, and have the palsy.
And no wonder: For the powers that should rule in the sinews and all the
members and lymmes be ouerset, as ouerflowed with a vapor infecting kindly
iuyee in the body, but that sharp smoke having masterie, and coveting to
subdue yt kindly virtue, purposes and strives to bear downward the member or
lymme. And so of this double contrary moving one heauing upward, and another
thrusting downward, a tremblyng or quaking of the lymmes is often ingendered.
And at last if this virtue of ruling be all overcome, then the palsy or death
has masterie in such bodies. And therefore the wise man's counsel is best,
that says: Hurt not thy self upon all manner of meat. Addition
Many meats have diverse taasts, that breeds sundry operations, and is the
cause of incurable diseases, in nice and dainty mouthed bodies: for in many
manner meats is diverse sickness. Also too much sleeping, breeds the same
evil and sickness in the body. For in sleep the virtues are feebled, and the
working of feeling, and of kind be strengthened within. And so the gates being
closed without, yt heat is comforted and strengthened within, and draws too
many humors, yt which it may not dissolve neither wast.

And then great superfluity having the masterie, the which kinds can not rule,
then of necessity, follows death and stiffeling. Addition
Also licouresnes of meats wastes the powers, and lechery the senses: These
be two delectable Diuelles, that kill the body, beside the soul. As it is
seen in them that sleep after that they have taken medicines, and also in
them that be newly let blood. In them that wake too much, the contrary cause
likewise works. For in them the humors and the spirits be wasted too much,
and therefore often death threateneth or menaceth. Also the same cause of
stifling, is in them, that eat and drink beyond measure: and the same reason
of failing, is in them yt fast more then nature can bear: and be consumed and
wasted. Also be that trauayleth over measure, destroys and wastes himself
by too strong heat, that wastes the humors too sore. In them that rest too
much, the cause is contrary: For in them yt drawing too of moisture, passes
measure. And there is none euaporation, neither deliverance of the
superfluities, neither subtiliation of the spirits. And therefore necessarilye
the superfluity of moisture is disposed to rotting and corruption. In these
manners, and in many other infinite, the elementall qualities be in their
kindly workings hindered. As it is known by the foresaid reasons that we have
shortly gathered of the words of Constantine in Pantegni, and of Galen in
Commento Aphorisio, Hippocratis, and Epidimiarum, of evils yt comes by
overmuch moisture. And therefore we will pass over, and describe the properties
of humors, that be composed of these qualyties: of the which every body is
made, that has a soul and feelyng, either reason.

Of humors, and of the generation, effect and working of them. Cap. 6.
A Humor is a substance actuallye moist, by joining of elementall qualities,
and is apt to nourish and to feed the members, and to comfort the working
thereof kindly, or casually to let the workings thereof. For humor is the
first principal material of bodies that have feeling, and chief help in
their working, and that because of nourishing and feeding. Constantinus says,
That the humors be called the children of the Elements. For every of the
humors comes of the qualytie of the Elements. And there be four humors,
Blood, Fleame, Cholar, and Melancholy: and are called simple in comparison to
the members, though in respect of the Elements, whose children they be, they
be composed. These four humors in quantity and qualytie, observing evenness,
with due proportion, make perfect and keep in due state of health, all bodies
having blood: like as contrariwise, by their vnequalnesse or infection they
engender and cause sickness. These humors be needful to the making of the
body, and to the ruling and keeping thereof: and also to restore what is lost
in the body, as says Galen super Aphoris. The body runs and droppeth, as in
sweating, spitting and other such. Also alteration changes often cold into
heat and returns.

Also the body has corruption, and that comes of too much running and
dropping, and of too long changing. Then to restore in the body what is lost
by running and changing, and amend evil alteration and changing, and some
deal to withstand corruption, the presence of the four humors, is necessary
that the body animally, by their means may be kept safe. These four humors
be bred in this manner. When meat is received in the place of concoction, that
is in the stomach, first the more subtle part and fleeting thereof, that
Physicians call Perusmaria, is drawn by certain veins to the liver. And
there by the working of kindly heat, it is changed into the four humors. The
breeding of the^ is made and begins in the lyner, but it ends not there at
full. First working heat turns what is cold and moist into yt kind of fleme,
and then what is hot and moist, into the kind of blood: and then what is hot
and dry into the kind of Cholera: and then what is cold and dry into the
kind of Melancholia. Then the process is such First, fleame is, bread, as an
humor half sod: second blood, that is perfectly sodde: the third Cholera,
That is over sodde: the last is Melancholia, that is more earthly, and the
dregs of the other. And so such is the over as Auicen says. The breeding of
Elements be straight, and returning into the same. For of air fire is bread,
and of fire air, and every Eleme^t of other. The breeding of and humors is
straight, and not by contrary. By seething blood is bred of fleame, and not
that if retourneth. Likewise blood is made cholar, by great heat drieng and
making subtle the humor, but not that it returns. And by burning of cholar
in like manner Melancholia is made, and not that it retourneth. For it fares
in the breeding of humors, as in the breeding of wine of Must, as says
Constantine. The pleasant taast thereof.
For when Must is fervent, a manner some is brend, that comes up and
fleeteth above, and another earthlye substance goes to the bottom, and the
third is water: and as that is more or less, the Wine is feeble and less
hot. And the elder it is, yt hotter it is, through the resolution of such
watrinesie: And when it is full sodde, then the Wine is most clear. So in the
humors is one part that is light and comes upward, and that is Cholera:
another, as it were drasts, and goes downward, and that is Melancholia: the
third, as it were raw, and that is fleame: the fourth, is bi^ud, remaining in
his pureness, and is cleansed from other humors. But no blood is to clean
pured, but that it is somewhat meddeled with other humors. And therefore by
meddling of other humors, blood changes kind and color: For by meddling
of cholar, How to know by letting of blood the humor of the parue
it seems red and by melanchely it seems black, and by fleame it seems
watrie, and somie.

Of blood. Cap. 7.
ISidore says, The blood has this name Sanguis of Greek, for yt blood
sustaineth strength, helps, and confirms the life: For Sancire, is to
understand, Confirm. While blood is in the body, it is called Sanguis in
Latin: and if it be shed, it is called Cruor, as it were running and
falling. For when blood is shed it runs and falls. Other call blood, as it
were sweet and soft, for it is sweet and soft in taast and in touch. Pure
blood and whole togethers is not but in young folk: for Physicians say that
blood wastes by age: therefore in old men is shaking and quaking for default of
blood. Blood is properlye the governing of wit: therefore it is the manner of
women to scratch their cheks in sorrow. And red clothes be laid upon dead men,
in remembrance of their hardiness and boldness, while they were in their
blood. Hitherto speaks Isidore lio. 4. Cap. 2. It appears in the time of the
Saxons, Addition
that the manner over their dead was a red cloth, as we now use a black. The
Pagans refused black, because it represents darkness, termed the infernal
color: and so did the old English. The red of valianncie, and that was over
Kings, Lords, Knights, and valiant soldiers: white over Clergy men, in
token of their profession and honest life: and over Virgins and Matrones. This
order appears to be beyond 800. years. Constantine says, that among the
four humors blood is most praised and most friend of kind, through even and
perfect seething thereof: the which temperate heat makes of the pure and
airely matter to the norishing of the body. Constantine says, that there is
kindly blood, and some unkindly, and some kindly blood is in the organes and
some in the veins. The blood yt is in the organes, is more hot, more subtle,
more red, more clear, and more sweet in savor then that other blood. It is
more hot, for that it is nigh the heart and spirits: more subtle, for that
the heat of the heart makes it subtle and clear, and that is, for that in
sweating and breathing out by ye thick concauites of the organe; it should
not lightlye slide into other members. It is more clear, through the virtue of
Cholera that is therein. It is more sharp through the a^gmenting of heat. The
blood that is contained ur the veins, is hot and moist, mean between
grosenesse and subtle, and very sweet in savor, without any evil tas:^ as
soon as it is out of ye body, very shortly it co^gealeth, and turns into
clous: and so such blood betokens that the liver is temperate. But if it be
subtle and watrye and not of good smell, nor of sweet savor: it signifies
intermiting of an humor that infecteth the blood. Then it goes out of kind,
and tourneth into unkind blood, which is so called, either because it turns
out of his kind generation, and is corrupt; as in leprous men, or else for
vncoue^able matter, of yt which it is bred, or for a ^^rong humor, with the
which it is me^^iled: A little of Cholera or of another infecting humor midled
with pure blood, infecteth the blood, and draws it to the likeness of his
own qualytie. Hitherto speaks Constant. Pancag. 9. cap. 4. Aristotle lib. 3.
Animal. puts other properties of blood, and says, that every beast that
has blood, has liver and heart: and therefore every beast that has no blood,
is of less body and virtue, then beasts that have blood: and if the flesh be
cut, the blood runs out except the flesh be dead or corrupt. Also in every
beast of good disposition, is temperate blood, not too much in them that drink
new wine: neither too little in them that be fat of body: for beasts that be
very fat of body, have but little blood, for as fatness wareth, the blood
diminishes. Also every body that is sanguine rotteth soon, and specially
nigh the bones: for a man has very subtle blood, in respect of other Beasts,
and other Beasts have blacker blood and thicker then man's blood, and namelye
Bulls and Asses: and in the nether parts of the body blood is thicker and
blacker then in the over parts. Also blood when it breeds in great quantity
is cause of sickness: for it comes thin, and is made watery, and therefore
perchance a man sweateth blood, and that is as I suppose, through much
superfluitye of thin blood: and kind thinks to discharge him of that
superfluity, and so it throws the watery parts to the uttermost of the
skin, and auoydeth them by sweating. Also when a man sleeps, very little
blood appears, and no wonder, for than kind draws it inward to help the
unkindly virtue, that by ye benefit thereof she may do her works: and so
when the blood is far within, then the utter parts of the body are pale and
bloudlesse. And therefore is it, that if a sleeping body be cut or sticked,
there comes not out so much blood, as should if he were waking. There it is
said, that if blood be sodde and distilled, thereof we may make fallowe and
grease. And that perchance is, the vnctuo^^ye thereof by temperate seething is
crudded, and being white, as turned into tallowe or faite. Also if blood be
altered from the course of his kind, and is corrupt: it will go out of the
stomach, and from the nosethrilles.

Also when bloods rotteth in any member, but it be taken out by skill or
kind, it tourneth into venyine and scaba.

Hitherto speaks Constantine lib. 3. and in lib. 12. he says, that the
veins be the vessels of blood, and thereof it follows, that blood is the
last meat of beasts, that have blood. Also blood is friend of Nature: and a
beast that has no blood, is fed with things that accords to blood: as it
is seen in flies and worms that sit on flesh, and suck out the blood, and
take thereof their feeding. And so if a beast be not fed with this meat, he is
lean and of evil disposition, and when he is fed therewith, he wareth, and is
in good disposition, by the effect of food of such meat. And if the blood of
the which ye meat is made, be clerre and good, the body is whole: and if it be
evil, the body is sick. Also, for default of moisture, As when a man after
great heat by over much drink danteth the powers: likewise a Horse whose
grease is molte, by cold water suffocateth, and is choked.
earthly blood congea^^th hastily and soon. And therefore every beast yt has
subtle blood, clean, and hot, has better wit than other beasts: for clean
blood subtle and hot, and of more moving, is more according to the wit and
derstanding. Also a beast yt has no blood, is more fearful, than a beast that
has blood: and therefore he that has clean blood, hot, and light, is but
little moved for dread. Also yt blood of a Bull congealeth and cruddeth more
^^^itily, than ye blood of all other beasts. For the blood of all other beasts
congealeth less or more except the blood of an Heart and of an Hare. and of
beasts that be like to them: of which yt blood congealeth not, as Aristotle
says lib. 3. Se^. 2. The blood of a Bull, cruddeth most swiftly, and that is
because through excess of heat and dryness, and so if Bulls blood be dronken
raw, it slays as venyme: and so it is said of a Philosopher that drank ye
blood of a bull, and slew himself. Themistocles of Athens.
Also Aristotle li. 33. says, that blood is hotter in ye right side, than in
the left side: and therefore for the strength of hot blood that is in that
side, the right hand, is generally more ready and able to work than, the left
hand. Therefore Liber primus Aristotle says That the Lion: moves the right
foot before the left. And Super Aphoris. it is said, That if a woman that is
with child with a Masculine, be sodainelye called, the moves first the right
foot: Agility of a woman
and that proceeds of the hot blood, that works at the sull in her, that
conceiueth a male child. Also in eodem li. it is said, that blood is first and
principal matter of the heart and of the liver: and therefore the heart is
hollow, to receive the more blood, and thick, to save and keep the blood,
and in no member the blood is without veins, but in the heart only, and the
blood goes out of the heart by certain veins to other places of the body,
and the blood comes not from any other places to the heart: For the heart is
the well and beginning of blood, and the first member receiving blood, as it is
known in Anathomia, By incision, scarifieng, and dividing
the craft of knowing the manuer, and order of setting of parts of the body,
and by the manner of generation: For the first breeding of the heart appears
sanguine. Therefore Aristotle says, That the heart is set in the middle, to
shed out the blood, as it were from the middle or center to the utter parts,
and to all the other members. And therefore he says, yt the heart is ye middle
and rhise member of all the beast: and therefore all that have blood, have a
heart, for of necessity the heart is the principal cause of blood, and not
the liver. Aristotle says all this openly li. 13. though it be otherwise
written, of the principal beginning of blood, in books of Physicians, but we
have not to do with that strife: For either position or opinion serve us
touching our meaning. Then of the sentences of the foresaid Authors, gather
shortly: that kindly blood, is pure, hot, moist, subtle, and sweet. And also
it keeps the kind virtue of feeding: and blood is the seat of the soul, and
contains it; and is the perfector of youth, and alterer of complexion, and
keeps and saves ye heart and spirits, and makes them glad and waketh love:
and shedding it self in the utter part of the body, makes it of good color
and hiew and if blood be whole and temperate, if it is peth health, and if it
be corrupt, it breeds corruption, as appears in le^rie, which is corrupt
blood in the wells, and with other humors mingled, and tempreth the malice
thereof, and blood by his virtue swageth smarting of eyes. And as Constantine
says, The blood of Dove, or of a swallow drawn out of ye right wing, and
dropped hot in the eyes, wipeth away the spots of the eyes: Such blood is full
fiery and able to heat and to dissolve, as the Commentator says, In viatico,
in tractatu de pannicul. and macul. oculorum in fine.

Of the evil property of blood, Cap. 8.
OTher properties there be of blood, that be less to praise then the foresaid
properties. For how much blood being well disposed, is more friendlye and
profitable to nature: so much the more when it is corrupt, it is hurtful
thereto, and causes grieous sickness in the body. For malice of other
humors, meddled with blood, is not suddenly felt: for it is hid, because of
friendship that blood has to kind: and therefore kind is not ware of the
malice of other humors that be hid under ye friendship of blood, and so the
kind dreadeth not the grief of the humors that be so hid: as it fares in
feauers that are called Hemitritaeon, Hemitritaeo^, more the a tercian a veting
lever
and other that be meddled. In which, red or burnt cholar meddled with blood, is
not so soon known to kind nor physicians, as Galen says super Aphorls. Also
if there be superfluous blood in ye body, it breeds wonderful evils in men,
except it be ye sooner voyded by kind or by Physic: as it fares in that
blood, that is called, Sanguis menstrualis, the which blood in women through
too great moisture, and for default of heat, if it be holden beyond due time,
is cause and occasion of full great griefs and sickness. For sometime it
stiffeleth ye principal members: sometime it causes dropsy. and sometime the
frenzy, or other open diseases, as that corrupt blood too long held and shut
in, is sent forth so diverse places of the body, as it is more plavnly
contained in lib. Palsionarum Galen. And therefore against such perils, the best
remedy is to void such corrupt blood quickly.

And it is no marvel, if blood thus corrupted, grieve so the body that it is
in, seeing also it changes wonderfully and inserteth other bodies. Me^struall
blood is poison.
For lib. 10. cap. 12. Isidore says, by the touch of the blood menstruall,
fruit grows not, but dries and is burnt, herbs dye, trees loose their
fruit, iron is fret with rust, brass and metal wareth black: if hounds
eat thereof they ware mad. And a thing that is called Glutinum aspalti, is so
hard yt it may not be delaide with water nor with fire. And if yt blood,
Menstrualis touch that Glutinum aspalti, it all to falls, as Isidore says.

This blood is bred in women's bodies, of superfluity of moisture, and
feebleness of heat. And therefore that it should not grieve kind, it is
gendred in the Mother, as into a poumpe, from the which if it be expulsed and
put out in due manner, it cleanses and caseth all the body, and the Mother
disposes and makes able to conceive. And therefore, Aristotle says. lib. 9.

Menstrum in fine mensis in mulieribus maxim viget: et ideo tune vtiliter
expellitur sanguis talis: quia sicut dicit Isid. lib. 16. sanguis menstrualis
non habet certam temporis reuolutionem: sed in maiore part accedit in
diminutione Lunae, and hoc est rectum: quia corpora animaliu^ sunt tune
temporis frigidiora: and alteratur sanguis, and efficitur ex eo superfluitas
menstrualis: quae si tune expellitur, talis euacuatio laudabilis est and
naturalis: quia si vitra tempus, vel propter grossiciem sanguinis, vel propter
altitudinem matricis, vel propter defectum expulsive virtutis retincatur,
multis molestijs periculosis, corpus mulieris aggrauatur.

Quod quidem geueraliser est verum, a quarto decimo anno vsque ad quinquagenum:
quia in iuuenculis meatus sunt angusti, and virtus debilis. A quinquagelimo
veroanno in antea sanguis, minoratur and fi^gescie, calor destiuit and
tepescit: vnde istae duae aetates a tali immundicia sunt immunes, scilicet
senectus vetularis, and iuuentus puellaris, retmet ramen natura sanguinem
menstrualem post mulierum impregnationem ad nutrimentum foetus and conceptus
conseruationem: vnde Arist. li. 15. Menstrum est fanguis non purus: sed indiget
digestione operatiua: hic sanguis mixtus cum spermate, cibus est in animali:
vnde mulier, post conceptionem, frequenter patiens fluxum menstrualem, solet
facere abortiuum: aut enim debiliatur foetus, aut moritur: and hoc propter
nutrimenti subtractionem: vnde retentio sanguinis menstrualis signum est
impregnationis, ex iam dicta causa: quod autem superfluit de sanguine
menstruali, detrahitur ad mammillas, vt inde lac generatur: materia enim
lactis, est sanguis decoctus in mammillis: vt dicit Aristo. lib. 16. and 18.
Lac inquit est sanguis digestus, non corruptus. Item oportet vt fluxus
sanguinis menstrualis actualiter sit in corpore, antequa^ muher impregnetur:
sicut dicit Aristo. li. 15. and Con. sicut oportet arbore^ primo florere, qua^
fructus facere. Item quodo venit talis fluxus, naturaliter semper accidit in
aetate Lunae, aetati etiam mulieris conuenenti. Item aues and animalia non
patiuntur talem fluxum: quia talis superfluitas transit in plumas and in pilos:
vt dicit Arist. Ite^ dicit Ruffus: mulieres nimis se exercentes, and sepius
mouentes, non multu^ menstruant: sed quae quiescunt, and multu^ comedunt,
suauiterque viuunt, tales multa purgatione indigent. Item quando sanguis talis,
vel frigidare, vel crassirie ora venarum constrinengte debito modo non exit, ad
exeundum alias vias querit: vt venas nariu^u, and emorroidarum, quas si clausas
inuenerit, ad alia membra se diffundit, and grauem naturae infert passionem:
nam tales, vt dicit in viatico Constable. defectum appetitus patiuntur: nam cibaria
bona abhorrent: puluerem vero carbonum, and laterum appetunt, and similium: nam
sanguis retentus in maliciosum fumuin terrestrem and ponticum conuertitur: quo
rapto, ad orificium stomachi, appetitus rationalis subuertitur, and
irrationalis generatur. Vnde omnia talia corpora, sunt maximis morbis apparata.

Of fleame. Cap. 9.
IHohannicus says, that ^^eame is an humor half sedde by working of
imperfect heat, of cold matter and moist by kind gendred. And Aristotle lib.
15. says, that fleame is an undissolved superfluity of meat. The same is ye
matter of blood and of fleame: but they be diverse by more seething or less:
and so of fleame is made blood by more strength of working heat, and not
returning. Blood tourneth never into fleame, as cholar changes into
melancholy: but not againward, as says Auicen. Fleme is an humor kindlye
cold, moist and wearish: and kind sends that humor into the members and
lymmes to be made pure, that the body be nourished by that humor defied. It is
to note, that some fleme is unkindly and some kindly. Kindly fleame is cold,
moist, and white in color, and fleeting in substance, of savor somewhat
sweet. in taste, either all wearish and unsavory. It is bred in the liver,
where is the place of heat. And it is apt to be turned and changed into
blood: and when the change is full made, the body is sustained thereby. And
though fleame of it self be thick and unsavory by strength of heat that
changes it, yet it takes the lyknesse and savor of blood, that is sweet:
as appears by the fleame, that is called sweet fleame, And so for the
neerenesse and likeness that fleame has with blood, fleame is needful to
all the lymmes of the body. And therefore provident kind, made fleame to pass
with the blood, through the veins of all the body, both for need and for
profit.

For as Constantine says, If that blood fails, heat dissolueth fleame: For
it takes heed to feed the members and the lymmes thereby. And so Fleame is
nobler than Cholera or Melancholia. For these may not be ruled to the breeding
of blood of them. And by the benefit of blood, all the lymmes of the body
prevail and be fed.

Also the presence of fleame is needful with the blood, yt the fervor and
strength of blood may be tempered: and with the fleeting of fleame, the
thicknes of blood may be kept in temper: so yt the blood may be borne about to
the feeding of all the members more lightly and speedelye. Also fleame is
profitable to make moist the joints and other moveable parts, with the
moisture thereof, that the joints and parts be not let of their office, by heat
of moving, neither by hot blood, neither by dr^nesse that might fall. There be
^ome ^anne, of unkindly, fleames. Same is sower, cold and dry, through
minglyng of melancholy: and some is salt, hot and dry, through infection of
red Cholera: some is sweet, through meddlyng of blood: and some is glassie,
and so called for likeness of color of glass: Such fleame is far from heat,
and therefore it is thicker then other manner flemes, and harder to dissolve,
and to turn into blood. If this humor be corrupt, it bredeth diverse sicknesses
in ye body: ye superfluity of this fleme is known, The flegmatike.
as Constantine says by diverse tokens. For a very fleumaticke man is of body
vnlastie, heavy and slow, dull of wit, and of thought forgetful, soft of
flesh and quauie, of color white in the face, fearful of heart, full of
spitting, s^euelyng and rooking, full of sloth and sleeping, and of little
appetite, and of little thirst, but if the fleame be salt. For then through
medlyng of hot humor, a salt savor is felt in the mouth: soft, yeolow and
straight of hair: soft, great and slow of pulse: his urine is white, thick,
raw, and evil colored: in stature he is fat, great and short, and crooked in
extremities, and his skin is plain and smooth without ha^^e. He dreameth and
has sudden appearances of great ouerflowing of waters and rain, and of
sailing and swimming in cold water.

Men of this complexion have often cold evils, and be payned with them, and
namely in Winter for then the qualyties of fleame, coldness and moisture be
strengthened, as says Constantine. Look before for the properties of cold
and moist.

Of Cholar. Cap. 10.
ISidore says, that Cholera is said, for that that in a cholarick humor,
Calor, that is the heat, passes temperance. Some Cholera is kindly. and some
unkindly. Natural cholar is kindly hot and dry, subtle in substance, clear
and red in color. and bitter in savor, with a certain sharpness: the which the
more hotter it is, the redder it is in color, and ye more bitter: the which
when it is dealed in two parts, of the which one passes forth with the blood,
and the other is sent unto the chest of the gall. That that goes with the
blood, entermixeth with the blood, because of necessity and help. For it is
needful, that it be mingled with the blood, to make it te^per and feed ye
cholarick members for in ye blood it needs yt there be red Cholera indeed,
after the due proportion of th^se members. Also, Cholera helps and makes the
blood subtle, that it may pass ^he more lightly by straight ways, to fade
the inner parts of the body. That other part of Cholera, is drawn to the
S^ybet of the gall, and is sent thereto because of need and of help, for that
is needful for clensing of all the body, and feeding of the gall, and also to
help the stomach, and to heat the bowels, and to prick them that they may
discharge them of superfluities. Therefore of it falls gnawing and passion
Coli^^: for the way is stopped, that is between the gall and bowels. Unkindly
cholar is it that comes of strong humors meddled therewith. For if read
Cholera be mingled with watrie fleame, then is bred Cit^na cholera, that is
less h^t and more noyfull then other Cholars: and if the fleame be more great
and thick, then is bread red and yeolow cholar. These two manner of Cholers be
notable. The third manner Cholera is called Prassiua, Virida.
and is green of color, bitter and sharp, as an herb that is named
Marubium, horehou^d or black archangel ^Sea-girdle, because the (...) blade,
Faci.
or Porrus in Latin: and that manner Cholera is bred in the stomach of the^,
that use continually to rate hot hearts, as leekes, onyons, garlyke, and of
such kind. And if it happen that cholar takes strength of such green herbs
and raw in color, and so it seemed to Galen. Auicen notes, that Praxina is
ge^dred of a yeolow cholar, when it is ouerburnt, for when it is burned,
burning breeds blackness therein, by which blackness meddled with citrine,
green color is gendred. The fourth manner of Cholera is called Erugmosa,
rastie, that is bred of Cholera, that is named, Prassina by more burning: for
when it is so burnt, that the moisture thereof is dried, then it draws the
whitenes of ashen color. For in a moist body, heat breeds first
blackness: and then when the moisture is all destroyed, it breeds a manner
of whiteness, as it fares in trees and wood, that by burning first turn into
coals, and then into ashes. But cold contrariwise, in a moist body breeds
whiteness, and in a dry body blackness: but this last manner of choler, is
worse and more venomous than all the other. The venomous qualytie whereof,
breeds in the body evil passions of pestilence and of death, as Herisipila,
and Noli me tangere, etc. Then this kindly Cholera if it pass not ye bounds of
kind, it makes other humors subtle, and comfort digestion, and cleanses
congealings and corruption, and makes the body stretch in length, breadth, and
thickness, and breeds boldness and hardiness, moving and lyghtnesse, and
stirs to wrath and desire of revenge: and also provoke to ye works of
Venus, and helps the virtue expulsive, and cleereth thick matter, and makes
it to move from the middle to the utter parts, and changes the utter parts,
in color of citrine and black. And so cholaricke men be generally wrathful,
hardy and vnmeeke, light, unstable, unmerciful: in the body long, slender,
and lean: in color brown, in hair black and crispe, hard and stiff, in
touch hot, in pulse, strong and swifte, the vryne of them is thin in
substance and subtle, in color, fair, shining and clear. If this cholar be
corrupt in any part of the body, it breeds evil passions in the body. Of
the which passions, these are the general signs and tokens, as Constantine
says in Pantegni. liber. 9. ca. 2. If corrupt cholar have masterie in the
body, the skin is yeolowe, either citrine, and also there is a default in the
virtue of appetite, bitterness is felt in the mouth, so that sweet things
seem bitter, and sauouey, unsavory. There is pricking and burning in the
stomach of a hot fume, that puncheth and nippeth the sinews of the stomach,
loathing with cholarick spuing, with thirst and dryness of the tongue. The
same hot smoke dries the wosen that is called Trahea, and that humor of
spittle, about the sinnewes of the tongue.

There is also hollownesse of eyes, with moist respect, the pulse is subtle,
swifte and thick: red urine and high of color, sore head ach, waking,
changing of mind, fearful sights in sleep: For such men dream of fire, and
of lyghtening, and of dreadful burning of the air, which is caused of fierye
smoke, that changes stronglye the brain and the virtue imaginatiue. And
this that is spoken of cholar, and of the spices thereof suffices.

Of Melancholy. Cap. 11.
MElancholy is a humor boystous and thick, and is bred of troubled
congealyngs of blood: and has his name of Melon, that is black, and Calor
that is humor: whereupon it is called Melancholia, as it were a black
humor: and so Physicians ^all it, Cholera nigra, black cholar: for the
color thereof declineth toward blacknes. Some melancholy is kindlye and some
unkindly: the kindly melancholy is cold and dry, that is bred in blood, as
the lees is in wine: the substance whereof is thick and earthy, the savor
thereof, is between sweet and ^ower, brackish. This manner melancholy is
divided into two parts, the one abides with the blood, and setteleth
therewith into the members, because of need and of help. If needs that it
be meddeled with blood, to make the blood apt and couenable to feed the
melancholye members: for it thickeneth the blood, that it ^leete not from
digestion, by cleernesse and thinness. The second part is sent to the spleen,
for need and also for help. It needs, both for cleansing of the body and
the spleen: it is a help, that it flow into the mouth of the stomach, and to
make it strong and thick, and make it to itch, and so to wake hunger and
desire of feeding. That part of melanchloy, that is superfluity of blood,
passes to the spleen, and that that goes from the spleen, needs not to the
feeding of the spleen, and as read Cholera helps the stomach to put off
superfluity downward, either inward: so melancholy helps the virtue of
appetite above. It is called the dregs of blood, more verily then Cholera, or
fleame^for it soketh and is separated from blood, as the thickness of vryne,
or dregs of ^yrour. Nothing sweeteth neither comes out of fleame, for the
clamminesse thereof, nor likewise of Cholera, for the substitie and cleerenesse
thereof: and therefore it is not called the dregs of Cholera, neither of
fleame. The vnkindlye melancholy, is not as dregs or grounds of a thing, but
as burning of ashes, and that falls by these means: Heat working overmuch in
ye substance of fleme, burns it: and by overmuch burning, turns it into
burned Cholera. And if the humor be first subtle and watrye, when it is
burnt, it is made salt: and if it be troubled and thick, it draws to
sowrenesse ward: and if the blood be burnt and turned into ashes, the ashes
thereof are salt, with a little sweetness: and when kind melancholy is
burnt, the burning or ashes thereof, is sower as vinegar. And if it fall upon
the earth, it boyleth, and the smell thereof is heavy and sower as vinegar, ye
which flies shun and void for horrible savor thereof, and the sowrest part
thereof is worst. And if the substance thereof be boystous and thick, when
melancholy is burnt the ashes thereof is less sower with a little sharpness,
the which when it falls upon the earth, boyleth less, and grieueth the
members less, and is not so malytious nor so venem^^^, neither s^ayeth so
soon as the first. This black Cholera is c^^^e to kind, and has aptly evil
deedlye analyti^s, and breeds evils incurable, as canker, lepry, and other
such. By burning of fleame, of blood, and of kind melancholy, unkind and
worst melancholy is bread: and when by s^^thing the blood is bred of fleame,
and Cholera of blood by strong heat, and of Cholar, melancholy: and of that
burning, that infecteth the kindly humor, that worst humor is happily bread,
as Coa. says li. pri. ca. 24. Of this humor having masterie in any body,
these be the signs and tokens. First the color of the skin changes into
black or bloo: sower savor, sharp and carthye is felt in the mouth: By the
qualytie of the humor, the patient is faint, and fearful in heart without
cause: and so all that have this passion, are fearful without cause, and often
sorry, and that is through the melancholy humor, yt constrains and closes
the heart: and so if we ask of such heavy folks what they scare, or
wherefore they be ^orye, they have none answer. Some suppose that they
should dye in some sudden vyolence: Some dread emnitie of some man: Some love
and desire death. Wherefore in li. Passion^m Galen says: It is no wonder,
though they that suffer Choleram nigram be very sorry, and have suspicion of
death For nothing is more dreadful outward in the body than darkness. And so
when any obscure thing heleth the brain, as melancholy fleme, the patient must
needs dread: for he bears with him the cause why he should dread. And
therefore he dreameth dreadful dark dreams, and very ill to see, and of
stinking san^^^r and ^^^ll, of which is bred Passio melancholia. Also it
comes of a madness, and of disposition of melancholy, when such have lyking
and laugh always of sorrowful things, and make sorrow and dolor for joyful
things. Also such hold their peace when they should speak, and speak too
much when they should be s^ill. Also some dee^^ themselves that they be earthen
vesse^^, and fear to be touched, lea^t they break. And some think that they
close ye world in their fist, and in their hands to contain all things: and
therefore they put not out their hands to take meat: for they dread that if
they should put forth their hands, part of the world should fall and be lost.
Also some imagine, that an Angel holds up the world, and would for
weariness let the world fall: and therefore they heave their hands and
shoulders to hold up the world, that seems to the^ is in point to fall, and
rore and scrike strongly, and strive if Physicians make the^ hold down their
hands. Also some think that they have no heads: and some ween that they have
leaden heads, or Ass heads, or some other evil sha^en fashion. And there be
other, which if they hear Cocks crow, they lift up their hands and arms,
and smite themselves, and singing think themselves to be Cocks: and at the
last they be hoarce for great crieng, and dumb also. Also some fall into evil
suspicions without recovery: and therefore they hate, blame, and confound their
friends, and sometime they smite and slaye them. Melancholy men fall into all
these and many other wonderful passions, as Galen, Alexander, and many other
Authors say, y^ which passions it were too long to reckon all. And this we see
each day, as it fell late of a Noble man, that fell into such a madness of
melancholy, that he in no wise could be persuaded, but yt he was a Cat, and
therefore he would no where rest, but under beds, where Cats waighted after
Mice. Moreover in punishment of sin, Nabuchodonosor was punished with such a
pain, as it is written in stories, that seven years he thought that he was a
Beast, through diverse shapes, like a Lion, an Eagle, an Ox, and other.

Now have we treated sufficiently of Melancholy, and of other humors kindly and
vnkindlye, as it appertains to this work, at this time.

FINIS LIBRI QVARTI.
INCIPIT LIBER QVINTVS.
FOrasmuch as we have spoken of the properties of humors, we shall speak now
of the disposition of members, that be made of the foresaid humors and first
of the properties thereof in general, and then of each somewhat in special.

Of the properties of members in general. Chap. 1.
AVicen says, that members are bodies made of the first meddlyng of humors.
Either as it is said, Secundum Iohannem, A member is a steadfast and sad
part of a beast, composed of things that be like either unlike, and is
ordained to some special office: and by that it is called a steadfast part, it
is separated from the part that is not steadfast, as a spirit. In that that it
is said to be made of things that be like and unlike, it is understood, double
diversity of members, simple or unlike: and compounded, or of office. For the
members be called members like and simple, the whole parts be of the saure
kind with the whole, as every part of blood is blood, and so of other.

And such simple members, and like, are rather in kind, than the members or
lymmes of office: for the simple, be parts of the lymmes that are composed:
And the simple parts are rather in kind, than the thing that is composed. The
members and the lims be composed to see, to feel, and to move, and be
instrmments of the soul, as hand, foot, and eien, and other such be needful
in diverse qualities to the working of the soul, kind makes instruments of
body couenable to the virtue of ye soul. The soul has diverse virtues, and
therefore diverse members and limbs be needful, as it fares in hands, in the
which be many fingers and diverse in quality and quantie, that they may hold
great things as well as small. And for the soul has three manner workinges,
which be called Animalis, Naturalis, and Spiritualis, Feeling, Kindly, and
Spiritual: the members and limbs be needful to these workings of the Soul:
And so the members that follow the virtue Animal, be called Animata, which
be needful to shape feeling and speedy moving in all beasts, as the brain,
the sinews, the eyes, and other instruments of feeling. The members that be
obedient to the virtue of living, be called spirituallye Vitalia, which be
made to draw breath and spiritual life, to slake heat, and save the life, as
the heart, the lungs, and such other. The members yt serve the virtue of kind,
be called Naturalia, and Nutritiua, of ye which some be Nutratiue, the which
change ye meat into substance of members. As the stomach, the liver, and such
other: and some serve to gendering, and to keep and save the things of kind,
that generally be distinguished by special, and special, by singulars. For
when all the singulars shall be corrupt, it needs that it be restored by the
virtue of the gendering, and so saved in special being, that it be not all
lost. Some other members serve to these members Generatiue, and help them, and
members help either other. And of these members that serve and be profitable
in many manner wise, some make ready, some purge, and cleanse, and some defend,
and some bear about. So the first be they that make ready, as the limbs of
wits that serve the brain, the heart, the lungs, the liver, the stomach,
and the limbs for meat. The second be they that bear, as the sinews, the
which receive the spirit Animal of the brain, and carrye it to every member
to make moving and feeling. Also the organe serves the heart, the veins, and
the liver, for the wosen takes the spirit of the heart, and bears it forth
to make the pulse: and the veins take blood of the liver, to nourish and to
feed the body. The third be they that purge and cleanse, that is to wit, they
that put off superfluities and things that grieve. As the holes of the nose in
the head, and the way by the which the heart sends out superfluity of
smoke to the lungs till it be put all out. Also the case of the gall, and the
spleen cleanse and purge the liver from superfluities of cholar and melancholy,
as the reins cleanse from watery matters. The fourth be they that defend, as
the two skins and the skul defend the brain from grieuing and hurting.
Physicians furthermore call these two skins the hard Mother and the middle
mother. Also the bones of the breast defend the heart, and the brawnes, and the
snailes of the ribs defend the liver. Among the spiritual members, the heart
is chief: for it is the principal well of all the life and foundation of
kindly heat. The lunges, the skin, the brawnes, and wosen, be helpers
thereof, by whose moving air is drawn to cool the heart, and to remove
therefrom fumous superfluous heat. The defense whereof, are the thin
skins, that be within: of the midriefe and other such members of kind, and
of feeding, the liver is chief, therein is digestion made, by the which all
the body is fed. To the service of the liver, the members that be nigh
thereto be ordained. Hereof it follows that some members be principal. For
of other members they be principles, roots, and originalls: and some be the
members of office, that receive of the foresayne members the influence, and
working of virtue: and keeps the best, and also serves every other. And
some be little, that Constantinus calls Onuomeria, that is simple part.

For they be of one kind with their parties touching nature: For every part of
visible flesh is flesh, and every part of fatness is fatness, and so of
other. Then gather thou of those foresaid things, that the membes of kind,
ordained by craft, make the body that has soul perfect, and they take of
the soul, the influence of virtue. Also they be joined together in a
wonderful proportion, that is called Armonica, for ye more be coupled to ye
less, and so the less to the more, with the sinews and other bands. Also
these members serve each other, and know their works and virtues. For the over
give influence and governance to the nether: and the nether hold up the
upper: The middle and the ineane couple, and join the over and the nether in
working For the eye rules the nether members: the feet and the thighs held
and bear up the weight of the other members: and the hands and the arms help
and defend both the head and the feet, the over and the nether. Also as long
as the members be ruled by the soul, they be profitable and whole, to perfect
working and perfection of the body: but if they loose the governance of the
spirits, they be grievous to the other part of the body. Also the members of
clean and pure complexion be more able to be obedient to the working of the
spirits. Therefore Liber 18. Aristotle says. That the head has little flesh,
and little fatness, to have the better wit and understanding. And that one
cause is, because the spirit in the sinews of ^e^ling is much let in his
passing by hardness and greatness of flesh. Also the members be so set
togethers, that for their binding and ^^^ting togethers, every has compassion
of other. And therefore the member that is less grieved, has compassion of the
member that is more grieved. And therefore if one member be hurt, the humor of
the other members run and come to the sore place: as it is said in Aphori.
The greater sore and ach that chances in one member, swageth the ach of
another member, and takes away most part of the ach thereof, as it faceth in
them that have the frenzy, in ye which if yt thighs and arms be hard wrong,
the ach of the head cease. For ye spirits and humors run and come to the
member yt is hard wrong whereby the head is eased. Also the more noble ye
members be of substance, and of making, ye more grievously, and the sooner
they feel the griese of any hurt: As it fares in ye eye yt is more grieved
with a little dust, then the hand or the foot is with a great wound. And yt is
for the nobility and preciousnesse of the eye. For the spirit of feeling has
more masterie in the eye then in other members. And so a very little hurt in ye
joints of the members, in the sinews of feeling, is most grievous. For by
letting of such members, the virtue of feeling and moving is principally and
most hastily let. And the armonie, accord, or joining of all the body is
dissolved: Also by error of kind ingendering of members, sometime it
happens, ye superflueus and monstrous members are made, as is said, Li.
Animal. 17. and that often time beasts are seen with one body and many heads,
nor that is no wonder but because it is seldom seen. Also sometime in the Egg
be two yolks, that be divided in two, and one web and call. And that
happens through coming togethers of two seeds, that draw either to other
in diverse ^imes not long a sunder. He says also that it happens often of such
an Egg comes a member wonderfully shapen, as a chicken with one body, and one
head, and four feet and four wings, as Aristotle says there. And this
wonderful error happens most in sheep and Goats, and in beasts of many
broodes: And therefore he says, that in old (...) and Goat Buck was seen with
bornes in the thighs. This wonderful shape in members superfluous, falls
generally of superfluity of matter, and default of the virtue informatiue, as
he says in the same book. Wherefore we ought to esteem, yt this wonderful
shape in members comes of ye matter: when the virtue of working is strong,
and the matter is little, and by some occassion diminished, then it happens
that many members be seen, and in all his default and lack: for the virtue,
through the default of kind, might not at the full work, as it intended, as
says the same author. The virtue operative strongly working, works nothing
perfectly, or at the full. Augustinus. liber. 16. de Ciuitate Dei. chap. 8.
speaks of men, that be called Cenocephalos, and be wonderfully shaped, and
have hounds heads, and, barking in steed of voice: And of other without nowles
and necks, and with eien in the shoulders. Also he says that in his time was
a child borne, that was two in the over part, and one in the nether part.
For he had two heads, two breasts, and four hands, and one bellye, and two
feet. And many such things Austen there rehearses, in all which is assigned
error of kind. Also among the members is great diuersitye in dignity and in
order. For some give of themselves, and take not of other, as the heart that
takes not of other, as Aristotle says. Nevertheless the heart gives to
other living and moving. And some give and take as the liver and the brain
takes strength of the heart, and be principles of virtues: For they give
virtues to the other members. And some members neither give virtues nor take,
but stand in their own virtue by the skill of Physicians, as the members of
one kind. And some members take and give not, as the members that be
instruments, the which take of the brain the virtue of feeling or of moving,
and sometime of either. But the virtue that they take, they sends not to the
other members: For the eye cannot give the virtue of sight, that it receives
of the brain, to the feet, or hands, or other member: neither the care the
hearing. And nevertheless these members be most needful to the body. For by
their proper office they rule all the other members of the body: except
perchance by some mishap they be let in their working, as hurt, or when they
be corrupt. It is proper to all the members of office, to put themselves in
peril for the principal members, as sometime the hand puts it self
kindlye without all aduisement for the defense of the head or heart. Also a
member that is in good health, helps the member that is sick and sore, and
drawing the matter of the disease to it self, is wont to cleanse and ease the
member that is sick, and so often the whole member is hurt for the sore member.
If a member be rotted, either dead ^ it is grievous to it self and to all the
body. And therefore is there none other remedy, but cut it off, that it
destroy not nor corrupt all the body. And this that is spoken of members in
general shall suffice at this time.

Of the properties of the head. Chap. 2.
AMong the principal members of man, Cephalis Caput.
we shall first begin to treat or the head. For the head is first and
principal part of a man among all the utter members of the body, touching
place and office, the head has the best principate. Isidore liber. 10. chap.
2. says, that the head has this name Caput, of Capere, that is to take: For
all the wits and sinews have and take beginning and spring of the head. Also
out of the head springs all cause and reason, of life, of thirst, and of
feeling. In the head all the wits be seem, and therefore in a manner it
presents the person of the soul, that counsaileth and rules the body. Then
the head is principal place and seat of the wits, Principium, and beginning
of all the senses organike, and the proper house or habitation of the virtue
Animalis, shedding out, and sending forth to all the lower members feeling and
moving: And has seven holes, that be instruments of wits, and answer to the
seven speres of planets, as some men suppose. And so the head is worthyer and
more noble then all the other members. For it is governor and ruler of all the
body, and gives thereto perfection of virtue to do his workings of feeling.
And therefore the head has by kind the highest place of the body, to rule and
dispose all that be there under, by the order of kind as Haly says Super
Tegni Galen. The disposition of all the head is known by three things, that is
to wit, by the quantitye thereof, and by that that comes thereof, and by hair
that grows thereon. For the head should be mean between great and little,
and proportionate in quantity to other members. For if the head be too little,
it is not to praise: for it betokens default of matter, and feebleness of
the virtue informatiue. And likewise if the head be too great, it is not to
praise: for that comes of the default of virtue working, and of superfluity
of matter, as Haly says. Also the shape of the head is round, and that is to
put off griefs and hurts, and for to take and receive the better of the
brain. And nevertheless the head is somewhat euenlong, and about the temples
some deal plain. For the perfection of a good head is, when it is disposed in
roundnesse to the likeness of a ball of wax, thrust together between two
hands, or between two pieces of wood, for such a ball is round. And yet
nevertheless, in either side it is somewhat plain. In the fore part the head
is some deal coming narrow, and high, and that is to withholde the bag of
the brain. In the fore part of the hollownesse of the head, out of the which
come the sinews that make the five wits. In likewise it is some deal narrow
in the hinder part, for to take and receive the bag in the hinder part, out
whereof comes marrow of the ridge bone, and the sinews that make speedi^
moving. Also it is a token of a good head, when the members that come thereof,
and be next adjoining thereto, be of good perfect disposition. As and if the
neck be strong and meanly great, and all the sinews strong, and great, and
of good moving. Also the head is known by hair that grows thereon. For the
disposition and complexion of the head is known by the quality and
quantity, the swiftness or slownesse of growing of the hair. For much hair
and crispe, and soon growing, betokens the heat and the humor of the head.
And againeward, as it shall be said within of the hair. Hair well disposed in
growing on the head, as long as they stick fast to the head, they ^e^y hight,
and defend the head. And if the hair be away and clean plucked from the head,
the head is foul and unseemly, as it fares in balde heads and bare before, or
behind in the nowle or powle. Also the head is made of many bones, and that is
for defense of the brain: for the substance of the brain is tender and soft.
And therefore it might be lightlye hurt, were it not that the skull and other
bones defended it from utter huries and griefs. Also somewhat it has of
fleshnesse, that is needful for the temporance of the bones and sinews, least
too great cold of bones should grieve the tenderness of the brain by some
manner occasion. But the head in his own composition has little fleshnesse
and satte in comparison to other members. And that is for the sharpness of wit
and help of understanding. Aristotle lib. 12. Also the head though it seem
hard in composition of his parts, and namely in ye bones: nevertheless within
it has much softness and marrowe. For all the shape of the body has
moisture of the softness of the brain, that is closed within the bones. Also
the head has many sinews in his first composition: and that was needful, for
the joining and knitting of unlike bones: And also for the working of speedy
moving. For by sinews the soul works moving and feeling in the body. And
without a sinew comuting from the head, is no member coupled to another: But if
that virtue be let that comes by sinews from the head, by vice and corruption
of sinews, the uniting and the joining of all the body fails. And the head
is the chimney and healing of all the body. And therefore it takes and
receives in it self many sumosities, that come out of all the body. Also
kind made all the substance of the head, full of holes and powers privily and
openly: privily, that by the secret powers, the superfluity of privy
sumosities may be voided and put out. Openly, that the open sumosities and
boistous filth may be voyded and cleansed by open and sniting holes. Also the
head has some properties, that betokens default of kind, as it appears in
heads wonderfully shapen. For Aristotle. liber. 12. says, that sometime it
happens, that one heart is in a beast, and yet it seems to have two heads,
or many members. And contrariwise, sometime there seems to be two hearts and
other members, and yet there is but one head. But all this is evil shape. And
that falls not but by error of kind, either superfluity of matter, either
else by sailing of virtue, as Aristotle proves liber. 18. Where he says, that
the cause of such evil shape is not but in the matter. And then it follows.
Such evil shape happens in beasts that gender many broods, and happens
selde in women except it be in women of Egypt, yt bear many children more
then in other Countries, or more then women of other lands, except there, where
other women be like to the women of Egypt. Also when the head, which is the
root of all the body, and of all corporal virtues, the first and principal
foundation, is well disposed and ordered, all that be under the head, be in
ye better disposition and state. And againewarde, if the head be corrupt and
distemporate, with Sinthoma, of corruption of head ach: needs must the nether
members of the body be diseased. Sometime the head is diseased with an inward
cause, as by these passions that breed and come of the brain, with such as
long thereto, as it fares in the head ach, frenzy, and Epilencia, the
falling Evil, and such other. And sometime he is diseased by an outward cause,
as by change of heat, or cold, or otherwise distempered air, or any other
reason. And sometime by joining and binding of other members. As fares in the
stomach, that is full of corrupt humors, for the sumosities delaide, by reason
they be nigh, they covet to come to the brain, and the hollownesse, if they
find any void, to fill: and they thrust and stretch the skins of the
brain, and so pricking, they breed ach in the same skins. Also the same
comes of great fasting and abstinence, as it fares in them, that fast and
wake too much. For as Galen says, long watching breeds head ach. Also the
same comes of great resection, as it happens in dronken men: For the
superfluity of sumositie that comes of wind, comes up to the brain, and
puncheth and pricketh it; and makes the head to ache and suffer many evil
passions. Also Constantine says, that all the ach of the head comes of the
stomach relieved, when the stomach is voyded, and is augmented, when the
stomach is filled with meat, that tourneth into evil qualyties.

Also as Aristotle says liber. 12. Kind has ordained in the head wits and
instruments of wits, by the nobyltye of them, and as it needs to the beast.
And therefore kind has set the eyes in the foremost and upper part of the
head because the beast shall see what is before him. For the wit of sight is
more subtle and more noble then other wits. Kind has set the instruments
of hearing in the midst of the round head: for limbs of hearing, hear not
only forth right, but all about. Kind has set the wit of smelling after the
eyes, as middle and mean between the sight and the taast. For the wit of
smelling is more boistous then the sight, and more substill then the taast. The
tongue is set last, that is the instrument and limme of taast and touch, the
working whereof is about great and boistous substance. And so if the wits be
so ordained, the head is perfect and perfection and ornament of all the body.
And as Aristotle says, the limbs and wits be not so well set in the heads of
four footed and unreasonable beasts. For the ears of such beasts be in the
over parts of the head: and so appears that such a beast is not right,
neither upright of body, but looking downward to the earth. Also sometime
kind goes out of the way and erreth in some men wonderfully shapen, that have
all the body of a man, save only the head. For they have the face like a grim
beast, or as a hound, as Solinus tells. Also kind erreth in some beasts
stra^gly shape^, as it fares in a beast that is called Lamia, Lamie, a kind
of women, by whose sight infants are frighted, and beco^^ Elues, they be also
those that be called Ladies of ye Fairies, which do allure yo^g men to
company carnaly with them, and after those men are consumed by lechery, they
devour the^.
that has as the Gloss says Super Tree. an head as a maid, and body like a
grimme beast. And it is said that when these beasts Lamie, will take any man,
first they flatter with him with a woman's face, and makes him lie by them
while he may endure, and when he may no more accomplish their lechery, then
they rent and draw him with their teeth, and slaieth him, and eat him.

Of the Brain. Chap. 3.
AS Constantine says in Pantegni. li. secundo. ca. 11. Vitalia capitis,
Cerebru^.
the brain is a white body without blood, and has much of spirit and of
marrowe, and is distinguished and departed in three cells or dens, and is the
beginning and principal of the sinews of all the body. And it is closed and
contained within two thin skins, which be named the mild and hard mother:
and is set in the highest place of the head, as in the most excellent place of
the body. The brain is white by kind, for to receive the likeness of all
color, and has much of the spirit for to have much moving therein: and also
has much marrow, to temper and slake the sharpness of heat, that is bread and
comes of moving. And has but little of blood, least it should be infected
and smitten with the color thereof: and so all things that is apprehended
should seem read. Also it is moist and without blood, that it may soon be
changed and likened to the kind of feeling, as says Constantine. And it is
divided in three celles or dens: For the brain has three hollow places,
which Physicians call Ventriculos, small wombes. In the foremost cell and womb
imagination is conformed and made, in the middle, reason: in the hindermost,
recordation and mind. The foremost is called Prora in Latin, as it were a fore
ship. And the hindermost is called Puppis, as it were the after ship. This
Puppis, the hinder part, is the less part. For few sinews come thereof. And
this Puppis is hard, that the sinews of moving may move the easilier and the
sooner. And is cold and dry, and has little of spirit and of marrowe. Cold
for it should hold the better and the sooner. It has little of spirit, to
breeding of rest. It has little of marrowe in comparison to the foremost part,
that it be meanly hard, that the printing of shapes and likeness be therein
the longer holden. Prora the foremost part, is more soft, and hotter, and more
floating. More, that the sinews of feeling may come thereof. Soft, that the
sinews of feeling may be disposed to receive the sooner the doing of feeling.
Hotter, to be the more able to receive the shape and form. More fleeting, and
more moist somewhat, that the sinewe of feeling be the easilyer moned. The cell
and the womb, in the middle between Prora and Puppis, is hot and moist, and
has more of spirit and more of marrow then the other. More of spirit, that
more perfect discreation be made therein by reason, as in other members by
digestion clean and pure, is departed from unclean and vnpure. And has much
of spirit, to have much moving and much marrow, to temper the moving of the
soul, that it may the better deem and know, what it conceiueth. In these
three cells and wombes be three principal workings. For in the first, shape
and likeness of ye things be felt, is gendered in the fantasy or in the
imagination. Then the shape and likeness is sent to the middle cell, and there
be The place of imagination.
domes made. And at the last after dome of reason, that shape and likeness is
sent into the cell and womb of Puppis, and betaken to the virtue of mind. The
brain is round, to be the more able to receive spirits, and also that it be
not lightly hurt. To defend the brain two garments be needful, which be
called the mothers of the brain: the one is great and is called the hard
mother, and it is set under the skull: But in the middle brain, it waxes
great, and is sad to have the more strength: and is not joined to the skull,
but departed therefrom, and beclippeth the brain about: This hard mother is
needful to defend the mild mother that is more tender, from the hardness of
the skull, and to bind togethers the veins and the organe or concauite of the
brain: And also to fulfill the void places, if there be any. The second web
and skin is called Pia matter, the meek mother, that is set under the hard
mother, and is ne^her and softer then the hard mother, and compasses the
substance of the brain, and departs asunder the foresaid cells. And the
mild mother is not superfluous neither to much: for it harbors and holds
togethers the veins of the brain within. And keeps and knitteth the brain
togethers, that it flow not neither fail by ye fleeting and softness thereof.
Also this mild mother helps and beclippeth the brain, and defends it from
the hard mother. Also by veins that it has, it nourishes the brain, and by
the organe and small veins that it contains, it sends spirit thereto. Also
the brain is a member moving and ruling all the lower members of the body,
and gives to all these limbs feeling and moving. If the brain be let, all
that is in the body is let: And if the brain be well, all that is in the body
is the better disposed. Also the brain has this property, that is ^eeleth and
follows the moving of the Moon. For in the waring of the Moon, the brain
wareth: and waneth in substance of virtue in the waning of the Moon. For then
the brain gathers togethers in it self, and is not so fully obedient to the
spirit of feeling, and that is seen in Lunatike, and Epalentike men, that be
most grieved, when the Moon is new, and also when it is old. And that is it
that Aristotle says liber. 12. of the signs good and bad of the brain. Of
the brain he says, When it is too dry either too moist, does not his work
and deed: but makes the body cold, and melts the spirit. And therefore
falls sickness of loosing of wit, and of understanding, and dies at the last.
Also beasts that have too great brain be full slothful, and that
happens by reason of moisture that is resolved and comes thereof, and
changes into smoke, and stops the veins of the brain, and causes
sleep. Also Aristotle says in the same place, that the brain has in it
self no feeling of touching, as the blood nor other superfluities animal, has
no feeling of touch, and is not in the bodies of al beasts but to ye
preservation of kind. And, which is wonder, yt brain gives feeling to all
the parts of the body: and notwithstanding of it self, and in it self it
feels nothing. Also he says in the same place. Every beast that has blood,
has brain, or some other membe in steed of brain, as a beast with many
feet, and other that be like thereto. And though every beast that has blood
has brain, yet the brain contains no blood in the substance of his
marrow, as Aristotle says liber. 3. Also liber. 16. Aristotle says, that the
substance of the brain is cold and moist, and therefore it is set before the
well of heat of the beast, that is to wit, the heart: to moisture and to
temper the superfluity of heat and dryness of the arterves or small veins,
of the which the cau^ of ye brain is wone. For Haly says, that artery, the
small veins come out of the heart: of yt which is made a marvelous cause, in
which the brain is wound and wrapped, and in that cause the spirit of feeling
is laid and ruled: and by that spirit the virtues of the brain pass to other
members. And therefore as Aristotle says there, the brain is the first member
in the making of a beast, and after the making of the heart. But Galen says,
that the brain, that is well complectioned ought to be te^perate in four
qualities, But as Haly says there, the kindlye complexion of the brain ought
to be more cold and moist, then hot and dry. And that is needful to cool
the foresaid cause, and to s^ake the accidental heat of the brain that
comes of the continual moving thereof: also^ liber. 15. Aristotle says,
that among all beasts, to his quantity, only man has most brain, for the
heart is most hot, and therefore by masterye of heat and of good complexion
man is of good wit, and of more understanding then all other beasts. And
children may not long hold up their heads, for greatness and heaviness of the
brain: till it be made lighter by heat of the heart, and of the arteryes and
organe. Good disposition of the brain and evil is known by his deeds, for
if the substance of the brain be soft, thin, and clear: it receives
lightly the feeling and printing of shapes, and lykenesses of things. He that
has such a brain is swift, and good of perseueraunce and teaching. When it is
contrary, the brain is not soft: either if he be troubled, he that has such
a brain receives slowly the feeling and printing of things: But
nevertheless when he has taken and received them, he keeps them long in
mind. And that is sign and token of dryness, as sluxibility and forgetting
is token of moisture, as Haly says. And so it is to understand of other
qualities. Token of a hot brain and dry
Ensample. If a man be busy and mooueable, by usage unstable and variable,
hardy, and wrathful, it seems that such one has a hot brain. And the
contrary betokens the coldness of the brain. And if he be a sluggard and
slow and sorrowful and sleepie, Of a cold brain, moist.
it is a token of a moist brain. And in likewise if he be a great waker, and
strong of mind, it signifies dryness of brain. Dry brain
If there be passing great moisture with heat, then there is much superfluity,
and many diseases chance to ye head. Hot and moist, Moist brain by heat
distempered
grieve such a one, and namely the Southern air, and the Northern wind
helps: such a one is very sleepie, nor he may not wake long time. And when
he sleeps, it happens him to have Subeth, that is, false rest: Unkindly
rest.
and has troubled sight, and vncleere wits. If dryness increases with heat,
there falls and comes worse Synthomata, evils and sicknesses, saving there
be not so many superfluities. Such have their wits sufficiently clear and
clean from superfluities. But they wake more^ then other men, and they be
hardy, great boasters, or vain speakers, and unstable, and such wax bald
after youth, though they have much hair before. Also if cold passes with
dryness, such be wont to have clear wits, and clean ways from
superfluities in youth, and utterly without sickness, but when age comes they
wax feeble for a light cause, and old age comes swiftly. And it appears
soon in ye head, for they have soon hoare hairs. And if the dryness be
stronger then the cold with hoarinesse, they wax balde. And if the cold be
stronger then ye drines then they wax not bald: but when ye cold passes with
moisture, then comes deep sleep. And the wits of such men be evil, and there
is much superfluity. And if the cold either the moisture waxes strong, such
a man falls into Apoplexiam, that is an evil, that withdraws a man's mind
and moving, and feeling: or else he falls into a palsy, either dies. And
he that is so disposed shall not be bald, as Galen says in Tegni. and in the
Comment. Halye says the same. But this suffices that is spoken of the
properties of the head and of the brain.

Of Caluaria. Chap. 4.
CAluaria is the foremost part of the skull, Calua the skin.
and has that name Caluaria, of balde bones for default of hair. And is
called Vertex Vertex, the top or crown of ye head
also. And so Liber decimo, cap. secundo. Isidore says, that Vertex is the
part of the head without, there the hair is kit, there the hair is wounde^.
So Occiput the powle is ye hinder part of ye head, as it were set against
Capitium. The foremost part of ye head waxes soon bald for drines thereof. The
over part latter: but the powle last or never, and that is for superfluity of
humors. Of the properties of the hair, seek more within.

Of the eyes. Chap. 5.
LIbro. 10. chap. 1. Isidore says, Oculi.
That the eyes be said as it were hid. For the liddes cover and hide them,
that no grief come to them or hurt them, or else they be so called because
they have light secretly hid within them. Among all the wits, the eyes be
next to the soul. For in the eyes is all the judgment of the Soul. For in
the eyes is seen and known the disturbaunce and gladness of the Soul. And
also love and wrath, and other passions.

They be called lyghts, for they receive light without, and convey it and send
it forth. The eyes be the instruments of sight, as Constantine says. And
they be two, least if by hap the one were diseased, that other might supplye
the lack thereof. And for the eye is in steed of a write, or a spy, kind
sets them in the highest place of the body. The eye is made of ten
things: Of seven small curtils, and three humors. Among the humors, the first
is Whitish, the second Cristaline, the third Glassie. The seven curtills be
seven skins, either webbes, that beclippe the foresaid humors, and
divides them a sunder. And in the middle of these humors the sight is formed.
And they be of kind so ordinate: togethers, that four be in the foremost
part. Of the which the first is called Tela Aranea, as it were the web of a
Spider. The second Vuea^ Grapic: The third Cornea, Hornie: The fourth
Coniunctiua, Able to join. And three be in the inner part, the which three,
be called Rethina, S^derina, and ^th^^tica, that is, hard, as it shall be
showed hereafter. But among all these, one alone is the instrument of sight,
that is the humor Cristalline. And has that name of Cristall: for it is like
Crystal in color. This humor Christallinus, as Consta^ntine says, is
white, bright, clear and plain without: and is set in the middle of all the
other, that all the other should serve it euenly. It is passable, clear, and
bright, that it may the sooner be changed into colors opposite, and have
and take likeness of all colors indifferently. Also it is round in shape and
substance, that it be not lightly h^^rt and grieved. And also that no
superfluity be gathered in ye corners thereof: by the which superfluity, it
might happily be grieved. And because it should not be too much moveable by
too much roundnesse, it is somewhat plain, to be of measurable swiftness. For
every thing that is all round (hurt) in the sides is unstable, and vnsteadfast,
as Constantine says. And that by this humor the sight is made, it is thus
proved. For it ought to be closed between this humor and the spirit of
fight, as some humor or other thing: the working and the doing of sight is
away and fails. For the spirit of sight may not pearce, and come thereto sor
the let that is between. This humor springs of the ouermost parts of the
brain, that be pure, thin, and bright, that lets not passing of light.
And properly to speak, this is the black of the eye: and is called the middle
of the eye, or the point of the eye, and therein is porperly the virtue of
sight, and of seeing. Wherein unto us beholding near, appear certain Images,
as it were in a mirror: but thereof we shall speak hereafter. This humor is
set in the middle of the other two, between the glass and the white. The
glassie humor is clean, pure, and bright as glass, so ye we may see there
through, and is called Gelados in ye language of Arabia, and helps in two
manners. First and principally it takes blood to nourish the humor
Cristalline, and makes it white and able to turn soon into the substance of
the humor Cristalline. It is not convenient that so clean and pure a humor
should receive vnpure feeding: the which it should do, if ye red blood not
defied, not whited, not made subtle, were by any occasion meddled with the humor
Cristalline. The second wise it helps and defends and keeps the humor
Christalline from touching and sharpness of tunicles: the which in respect
thereof be hard and more boistous. Likewise the humor that is called
Albugineus, the which by another name is called Euagaidos, is in ye further
part: and helps the Cristalline in two manners: for it saves him from
hurting and grieuing, and by his moisture tempereth the Christalline, for the
humor Albugineus in the ^yen is more moist, and the Christalline yt is called
also Christallidos is more dry. Also this humor Albugineus by his thickness
gathers togethers and comfort the spirit of sight. These three parts of ye
eye, though ^^ they be called humors, yet they be not properly humors: for
they be not soft and fleeting as humors be, but they have much more thicknes
in themselves then humors have. They be also living bodies, and have kindly
virtues, the which long to no humor: yet they be called humors: for they have
more softnes and more cleerenesse then other members of ye body. And they be
more obedient to the working of ye spirit and virtue of feeling the^ other lims
of feeling. These three humors be departed a sunder with ye rumes inner and
utter, for they should not be meddled togethers. These seven curtils be ordained
in this manner. Fast by ye humor Christalline in the nether side is ye curtel
that is called Rethina, A rume.
and springs and comes of the veins and hollownesse of the skin that is
called ye middle mother, in manner of a web or ^aul, and bears feeding with
her to the humor Vitreus: and sends feeling by ye sinews thereof to the
Christalline. Next to this Rethina, immediately follows ye second curtel, that
is bread and comes of the middle mother: and feeddeth and defends ye curtel
Rethina, that it be not by any hap broke or hurt. The third curtel follows,
that is called Sclirotica, yt is full hard and comes of the hard mother of the
brain, and defends all the other from the hardness of the bone, and is as
it were the bend of the eye. In the foremost part next to the Christalline
humor, is immediately the curtel that is called Tela aranea, and is called so
for the subtilnesse thereof, that it may be passable to the spirit, and is bread
and comes of that most subtle parts of the curtill that is called Rethina.
This curtil is set between the Christalline humor, and Albugineus: and
keeps that they fret not togethers. This curtil Tela aranea joined with the
inner part Rethina, makes ye first roundnes. For these two curtills close the
humor Christalline within them. After this follows the curtill that is called
Vuea, Grapie, and has that name, for it is like in color to a black grape,
and that by wise counsel of kind. For all the other, that we have spoke of
in the composition of the eye be white and clear, and sheddeth the spirit of
sight. And therefore it needs to have therewith the curtill Vuea, grapy, to
gather light in ye eye by the blackness thereof. For blackness is a color
that gathers sight. And also this rume is full of holes, as a Sponge, and
contains thrids of sinews, as Constantine says, to cleanse and to purge the
humor Christalline, from superfluous moisture. This curtell Vuea, Grapie, is
joined in the farther part of the head, with ye curtel Secundina, in the inner
part: the which so joined, makes ye second roundnesse, and closes the humor
Albugineus, that kind sets there to make the spirit clear, and to give
kind of moisture to ye humor Christalline. After this curtell follows the
curtell that is called Cornea, Hornie, and has that name of the doing thereof.
For it is sul like to a bright horn, and is bright and clear to ye spirit of
sight. And by the brightness and cleernesse thereof: and by the reason of
somewhat of thickness thereof: it helps somewhat the spirit of sight, to
gather ye sight, Also because of strength thereof and sadness, it defends the
inner curtells, that be less strong from utter griefs. And this curtell
Cornea, hornie, is joined to ye inner curtell, that is called Sclirotica, hard,
and makes another roundnesse. For these two curtells, Cornea, the utter, and
Sclirotica, the inner contain and close within themselves all round, the
humor Vitreus, Glassie. At the last in the utter part of the eye without is
set the curtell Coniunctiua, the comes down from the brain pan, and
covers not all the eye, but remains in the corners of the eien, and binds
and holds them, that they abide in a due steadfastness.

The disposition of the eyes. cha. 6.
TO the eye so disposed and perfectly me^bred, the spirit of sight is brought
in this manner. From the foremost part of ye brain come out two hollow
sinews, which be called Optici, which fix themselves in ye substance of the
humor Christalline. These two hollow sinews be pight in ye eien, and come
either overthwart either cross wise, and be joined in a point: and that makes
kind wisely, yt if that one eye be closed or let, the spirit of sight may come
to that other, and do there perfectly his deed, and so the black of the eye in
the art of seeing is comforted by the joining of the virtue of sight, as it
fares in shooters, that close that one eye for to shoot the more even. Also
the spirits Vitalis be therefore joined together, that by susteining of each
other, they may be the more strong. And therefore also they come and meet
together in the bound of touch, that one thing seem not twain, the which
should fall, if either eye a sunder saw his own Image.

Therefore it needs, that the virtue of sight be contained in one limme, in
the which is one well of virtue, that springs into ye black of the eye, as
says the Author of Perspectiue, as it fares in them that set their fingers
under the eyes, in which the black of one eye is borne downewarde, and the
black of the other eye upward. And so the spirit of sight is departed and
dealed, and one thing seems twain. And the cause is, for the light comes
from the one eye upward, and from that other downwarde. And so the beam of
light yt comes from either eye, touching the uttermost part of the thing that
is seen, sets not the space, for the air is between, and so he sees as
it were two bodies, and yet there is but one. Nevertheless every squint looker
sees not so, though his eyes be uneven. For steepely the beam passes by a
right line to the uttermost parts of the thing that is seen, as it is said
before in ye third book, in the Chapter of the sight. A well disposed eye is
considered touching the perperfect composition of his parts, as it is said
before. Also touching the situation: for it challenges the highest place, for
the dignity of his subtlety, and namely for the neerenes it has with the
soul, as says Isidore and Aristotle also. And touching due proportion of
quantity. For the eye ought not be strained too far out, neither lifted up too
high. For that betokneth disturba^ce of discretion: neither to deep in. For y^e
betokens default of matters and of virtue. Then y^e mean is worthy to be
praised: but li. 19 Aristotle says that a deep sight sees a far. For it is
moved and lightened ere it come out of y^e lim, and the light is not departed
neither deled: but the beam of ye sight passes forth right to the things that
are seen, as it is showed before of the sight. Also it is considered by diverse
mouings: for it ought to move meanly: For if ye eye be to much moving, it
betokens excess of heat, and betokens also unsteadfastness of thought and
mutablenesse of affection. If it move too slowly, it betokens the contrary
disposition, that is excess of cold and obstinatnesse of thought and of will.
Then mean moving is to be praised: for it signifies easy perceiving of the
mind, and in things perceived, due fastening. Therefore Aristotle says, li. 12.
that the closing of the eye must be meanly swifte, for if it be of great
opening and of little closing, it betokens shamefastness and folly, as he
says li. 1. But if the opening be too slowly, it betokens default of virtue
and compaction of matter in the sinews: For it is not obedient so ye working
of the spirit, Addition
as it fares in them yt have Lethargia, Forgetfulness, this impediment
comes through cold rume, if not of some over moistered impatience, and does
lie in the hinder part of the head or brain pan. Also the eyes be considered
properly touching the perfection of their working: For if the eye apprehends
well and lightly, without again smiting, and deemeth of that he sees, it
betokens good disposition, as it fares in the eien of Egles, that speedely
behold and see the Sun in roundnes. The working of the eye is deemed and
considered by sharp and dim. For he that has a subtle sight, sees well a far
off and near, because the sight is much, it sees a far: for it is subtle,
it has a full discerning of things that be seen. For an eye of little sight,
as Aristotle says. li. 19. shall not see well a far, for the thick spirit
sees much a far, because of his bigness: but not perfectly because it is
thick. A little spirit and subtle, sees nigh and perfectly, and not a far,
for the scarcity of ye spirit of sight. For when he sees perfectly, yt is by
reason of the subtilty thereof. Little sight and thick sees not a far, and
that is for scarcity thereof, nor sees, not perfectly, for ye thicknes thereof.
For the thicker and the more troubled spirit yt a man has, the feebler and the
vneasier of sight he is. Also the eye is deemed by changing of color: for li.
19. Aristotle says, the eien in the beginning of breeding, be of green
color: and then they change into black, either into yeolow, either into any
mean color seemly thereto. For if there be much humor and little spirit of
sight, disturbed by any hap, the black color therein is strengthened. If
there be little humor and feeble spirit of sight: the color shall be yeolow.
For as Aristotle says, yeolownes of eien is moving of feebleness. And if the
humor be mean, and the spirit te^porate of cause according to whiteness and
blacknes the color is diverse. If ye eien be black, they be of sharp sight
by day, by reason of gathering togethers of light, and of humors in the same
lim of ye sight: and by night they be dim of sight. For the light of the night
is feeble, and the humor of the night is kindly of more heavy moving, as
Aristotle says. A yeolow eye contrariwise is feeble of sight by day and strong
by night. For the matter of yeolownesse that is brighter of it self when it is
joined to the day light, is more dark, and therefore ye spirit of sight, the
light remaining, is feebled in ye deed of fight. By night the spirit of sight
in the eye is help by cleerenes, that is contained within a little humor, and
the day light passes, and there abides in the eye the virtue of seeing and of
deeming some deal in darkness, as it fares in Cats, Also the eye is known
by disposition of the parts that be about it. As of the eye lids and brows.
For if the eye lids yt be the helers and couerers of the eyes, be full of flesh
within, and of superfluity of humors, they hinder sight. For such eye lids by
cause of their little moving, put not of thick air. Liber primo Aristotle
says. If the place of tears that follows to the corner of the eye, be much
fleshie, Of fleshie eyes.
as it fares in the eye of Kites: it signifies wiliness and evil fortune.
Seek for other properties of the eye before in the treatise of sight. And this
that is said of the composition, ffectese, and doings of the eyes, is
sufficient at this time.

The black of the Eye. Chap. 7.
LIber. 12. chap. 2. Isidore says, that the black of the eye, wherein is the
virtue of sight, and is called Pupilla in latin, for the final images that be
seen therein. And small children be called Pupilli. And the black of the
eye, is so called, because it is clean and pure as Puella, a little maid
child. Physicians say, that the Images that we see in eyes, be not seen in
eyes of ye them, that shall die, A secret to know if the sick shall die
three days before. And if the said Images be not seen, it is a certain
token of death. The black has about it a circle yt is called Corona. By ye
Corona the black of the eye is marked and bounded. And the white parts of the
eye departed therefrom. This Corona by the roundnesse thereof highteth the
black of the eye all about. And in this Corona is yt most fayrenesse of the
eye. Hitherto speaks Isidore. Halye says, that in the black of the eye as
in glass appears Images of their things, that be seen in the eye. And all
that is in the eye, of reumes and humors, either they help or serve the
black of the eye: And therefore it sits in the middle, as a Queen. The
black of the eye is little in quantity and most in virtue among all the
members. And therefore as it is least, it takes and comprehends things that
be most of spirit, that comes of the brain within, and takes likeness and
receives without by light. And so by light it takes in it self the likeness
of the thing that is seen, and sends it to the perseueraunce of the Soul.
For from all parts of the thing that is seen, lines come togethers and make a
Pirami in a toppewise,
either in a shield wise, of the which steeple the sharp end is in the black
of the eye, and the broad end in the thing that is seen, as it is showed
before of the sight, look there: this black of the eye perceives and has
discovering of the colors and shape of all things by the utter parts. And
has lyking in the middle colors and figures of shapes, as by the lines
perspectiue are expressed, and is corrupt in the uttermost parts, either at
least is heavy and faint by contrariousnesse, as says the Philosopher. Also
it sees and deemeth al^ things, that is without it, and set before it: but it
never sees it self by lines, upon the which the likeness of the thing that
is seen comes to the sight. But when it sees it self, that happens by
reflection and rebounding of beams, that is, when the likeness of the thing
that is seen, is first multiplied, and reboundeth to the myrrour, and from the
myrrour again to the sight, as says the Author of Perspectiue. And therefore
peradventure the spirit of sight, has lyking in the sight of a myrrour.

For it is somewhat fortified and strengthened: as it were turned again to it
self, by reflection or rebounding of the beams.

Also the black of the eye comprehends all things by a corner: For whether
the lymmes pass out of the black of the eye to things that be seen, either
come to the black of the eye from the thing seen: always they be joined in the
middle or center of the black of ye eye, as it were in a corner, corner wise,
for yt corner is the touch, and meeting of two lines. And for so much as the
lines, by yt which the sight is shapen, are joined, and as it were cornered in
the middle of ye black of the eye: Therefore the Philosopher says well and
properly, that the eye se^eth all things by a corner. Also among all the parts
of the body, the black of the eye most soonest feels: and for the nobilytie
and preciousnesse of the complexion thereof, it is most passible: And
therefore it is soonest grieved and hurt, and worst and hardest and most
dangerous to be healed. And therefore kind has given thereto curtills or
rimnes, and couerings of defense, that it may so the better put off win and
without things that grieve. Of these properties and passions of the eyes, and
of the black thereof, search within, in a special treatise. li. 6.

Of the Eye lyddes. Cap. 8.
THe Eye lyddes be couerings of the eyes, and are called in Latin Cilia, and
has that name of Celare to cover; For they hele and cover the eyes in
sauegard, as says Isidore lib. 11. cap. 2. The eye lyddes be in substance
^nowie and thin, for easy moving. For by their continual moving they put
away the air: and so they keep and defend the eyes without from grieuing
and hurting of the air. These eye lyddes are called Cilia in Latin, and
Palpebre also: for Palpitando, as it were often feelyng: they move always: for
they close vnselye togethers, to feed the busy moving, as says Constantine
and Isidore also. The eye lyddes be warded and kept with rows of hair, to
put off if any thing fail or chance to come near the eyes, when the eyes be
open: and to sleep the more quietly and surely, while the eyes be closed
therein. Also that they meanly may, cutting the air, quicken, keep, and save
the sight clear and bright. Hitherto speak Isidore. cap. sup. Constantine
says that the eye lyddes have hair, not all straight, but somewhat bent and
crooked. And that kind has wisely ordained, to make them more able and
stronger to close themselves, and to put off more mightily grief and hurt if
any fall. Also in growing, these eye lyds have of kind a certain quantity:
and thereof the hair of them spreads not, neither wareth not, as the heat
of the head, but they have a certain poynted proportion. And therefore
Constantine says, that the eye lyds be not soft, neither full of poores, but
rather hard, that the hair that grows thereon: may be hard and somewhat
crooked and bend. And that they should not grow too soon in length, as an
herb yt grows in hard land, is little and upright, and not as that herb
yt grows within soft land. Kind gives these eye liddes the beautye of the
body, and to help the eyes. And therefore Libe. 12. Aristotle says. That
every beast that gendereth only, has hair on the eye liddes, and every
four footed beast, closes the eye with the over lidde.

A bird in steed of an eye lydde, has a heler to cover and keep the sight: A
contrary closing of the eye.
and closes ye eye with a web, ordained therefore in the uttermost parts of the
eye: and for that the kind of the eye is watrie and moist, therefore it
needs such a keeping. Also every bird closes the eye with the nether lydde.
Also every four footed beast that wants eye lyddes, is feeble of sight, as
it fares in Fish, Hares, and such other, as Aristotle says li. 4. etc.

Of the brows. Chap. 9.
THe brows be called Supercilia, because they be set above the eye lids, and
they be furnished with much hair to the intent to help the eyes, to put off
the humor and sweat that comes down from the head. The middle space
between ye brows, bare without hair, is named Intercilium, as Isidore says
lib. 11. The brows help the eye lyds, as says Constantine, to keep that no
grief nor hurt come to yt eyes from without. Also they adorn and make the
person to seem honest and fair. For no man is seemelye without brows. Brows
have a virtue hid, that shows outward the passions of the soul, as says
Aristotle. For when the brows be straight as lines, they signify womanly
softness, either lightness of head. Also hanging brows over measure,
betokens an envious man. As Aristotle says lib. pri. Also high brows and
thick of hair, signify hardiness. And euen-long brows with little hair,
signify towardness. Also if they be thick with long hair, somewhat
shaddowing the sight, they betoken passing excess of heat. Also if they be
much fleshie, and little hair, they signify hard and blunt wit, for the
cold that has masterie in the principal members. Also, if they be without
hair they signify corruption of yt blood within: as it fares in leprous men:
either wasting of kindly humors, as in Ethykes and such other: Febris hectica,
or Hectica passio, the fever Etick a kind of consu^ptio^ by co^suming of blood.
either stopping of the veins of the humors, as it fares in them that are
gelded. And we see that they ware and grow against age, insomuch that they let
the sight, except they be cut or shorn, as says Aristotle. lib. 3. Also he
says there, that in them that use much the service of Venus, hair of their
brows fails, or turns white. That is for wasting of moisture, and for
default of virtue, and for increasing of cold of the brain: for too much
dryness breeds baldnese, and passing cold hoarenesse, as it is said before.

Of the Forehead. Cap. 10.
THe Forhead is called Frons, and has that name of the holes of the eyes, as
Isidore says. And the forhead shows outward the imagination and disposition
of the thought by gladness or heuinesse. Constantine says, that of very
truth and soothnesse, the forhead is above half round, and not full hard
neither full soft. And that is needful that it be temperate yt it hurt not,
neither griue the place that is nigh to the eyes. It is safely warded and
covered with the skin to defend it self, and to continue the other lymmes of
feelyng, and to hight or adorn all the head. The virtue and worthiness of all
the beast shines namely in the head.

The Philosopher says, that the forhead of a man and woman, is the seat of
shame and of worship. And that is for the highness of the virtue imaginatiue.
By the virtue imaginatiue, things that be sorrowful either glad, seemly
either unseemly, are suddenly brought to the perseueraunce of reason, and
there they be deemed. Also the forehead is the tower of defense of all the
sinnewes that come down from the brayve, to make the feelyng somewhat perfect.
Within the hollownesse of the Forehead comes down sinews to all the lymmes
and instruments of the nether powers. By the service of which sinews in the
house of reason, is judgment made of all things that is felt and known.

And therefore Gregory says, That the forehead is the worthiest part of the
utter head, wherein is set the print and token of the Cross, that was sometime
token of pain and of torment, and now has place in the forehead of Emperors.
Then a forhead well disposed shows all things that be said before: but and it
be passing out of kind and out of mean, it signifies and figureth other
things as the Philosopher says. Aristotle says, liber. 1. If the forhead be
too much, it betokens slownesse, or self-will, that draws to follye: and
when it is meanly little, it betokens goodness of virtue. But when it is
too high, and it were round without, it signiefieth excess of cholar and of
fervor, and sharpness: and often such be disposed to the passions of Cholera,
as to frenzy and madness. In comparison to other members of the face, the
forehead has little of flesh and of fatness. And Haly and Aristotle says,
that the cause thereof is: for that much flesh and superfluity of fatness
lets wit and understanding. And therefore too much flesh in the forehead
with a manner shining and stretching of the skin, is a token of corruption,
as it fares in leprous men. Also too much leanness of the forehead, and
riuelyng of the skin, is a token of default of the brain within, and final
wasting of the subtle humor, as it fares in old men, that be beyond help
consumed, spent, or wasted by age, either sickness, and evil of long time.

Of the Temples. Cap. 11.
THe Temples are called the members of the head, that lie in the left and in
the right side of the head, and have that name, because of continual moving.
For they be changed as it were sundry times, as Isidore says lib. 11. cap. 2.
And Constantine says, that they be bones set on either side of the eyes, the
which be somewhat soft and sinewy, and that is needful to make perfect the
moving of the eyes. For the spirit of feelyng is brought to the lymmes of the
senses, by the temples and by sinews. And also, as the science and craft of
Anathoma means, the spirit Vitalis is sent from the heart to the brain by
the temples, and by some organes of veins. And so for gendring of sinews of
feeling, and for the organe and veins of pulse, in the place of the temples,
the temples be passible, and easier to be hurt and grieved: and therefore a
beast stricken in the place of the temples, dies lightly forthwith. For as
Aristotle says lib. 19. the smiling that falls upon the boanes of the
temples is deadly. For if they be wounded, the beast is in peril And that
chances by reason that the humor that is in the Temples passes hastily out
for thinness of the bones. And the temples ware gray soon, for scarcity of
humor, and for dryness that has masterie therein, and because they be able to
be turned to the kind of ^olde. Also the temples have dens and holes
within, therefore they receive the humor that comes from ye brain, and
brings the eyes a sleep. And if the said dens and holes be pressed and
wrong, then by trapping of the humor that is contained within the Temples, the
tears fall out of the eyes.

Of the Ears. Chap. 12.
THe Ear is the Instrument of hearing, and has this name Auris, of Haurio, to
take and catch, and for because he takes and catches ye voice and sound, or
because Greeks call a voice, Audensiden: and so the ears be called as it were
Audes, hearers: for the voice smiting and coming to the windings of the ears,
makes sound and noise: by which the ears take perfection of hearing.

The over most part of the Ear, is called Pinnula in Latin: Did men call it
Pinnum, sharp. Haec Isidorus. The substance of the very ear is griftly for
two causes that are needful to defend the same, that nothing hurtful fall
into the hearing, as the eye lyddes defend them: and also to help the
hearing. For when the voice of the air smiting, comes to the gristle bone,
there it is greatly help and then it enters into the holes that be the proper
instruments of hearing.

Those holes be set in a stony bone, in yt which sinews be fastened that come
from the brain, and brings to the ears feelyng and moving, and brings
lykenes of the voice that is received in the holes to the judgment of the
soul. And these holes be wreathed and wound as a spindle of a press or vice:
and that is, that cold air should not enter too swiftlye, to grieve the
inward celles or ye sinews, and to keep that nothing hurtful fall in, to let
the instrument or lymine of hearing, as it is said in Pantegni. lib. 4. ca. 16.
The ear is grieved in many manners. For sometime by a postume, that is
therein, A materie sabstance of the color of the brain.
and so comes Quitter out of the ear. Also by worms that creep into the
holes of the ears, and by w^^ms bred therein of corrupt humors and rotted:
the token whereof, is itching within the cares and tickelyng, and the moving of
such worms is felt. Also, the ear is grieved by a Worms, like Malshaue, and
by superfluity of flesh, when evil humors be gathered therein, Also it is
grieved by evil disposition of the sinewe that comes and enters into the
ears, as it fares of sounding, ringing, and such things that fall and come of
wind in the skins of the brain, and be closed in part of the sinew Auricularis.
Also it is grieved by thick humors that move therein, and then the head is
grieved with sound and noise in the ears. Also the hering fails, for defalt
of virtue of hering, or by riueling and shrinking of ye sinew of feelyng, as it
fares in old men. Also sometime happens deafness, when the child is bred in
the mothers womb, when kind is wanting and not sufficient to pearce an hoale
in the lymme of hearing: and that is for default of it self, or else for that
the matter is not aunswerable to kind. Also it is grieved by sharp sickness,
when cholaricke humors going up to the brain, lets the hearing. It helps
such, if Cholera be purged by digestion. Wherefore it is said in Aphorism. If
Cholera be wasted in deaf men, deafness is taken away. Huc vsque
Consta^tinus. Also lib. 11. Aristotle says. The lymme of hearing is full of
the kindly spirit. For like as the kindlye spirit makes the moving of the
pulse in the veins, so it makes in the ear the virtue of hearing. And for
that all things be learned by the power of hearing. And it is said there,
that the making of the ears is an open known web and contains things, and
is slender, and that for the subtlety of the self hearing. Also the hearing
is feebled in time of moist complexion: and namely in them, that often serve
Venus. And that through the disturbaunce of the spirits, yt makes the hearing
perfect. For as Aristotle says, too often service of Venus grieueth the body and
the heart: Haly says the same. Aristotle says lib. 12. in a man the ears be
kindlye set in the middle of the round head: for the ear hears not only
straight one ways, but rather all about on every side. In four footed beasts
that have ye head hanging downward to the earth, and body not reared upright:
the ears be in the ouerpart of the head, as it fares in Oren, Asses, and
Horses: and the ears of such beasts move greatly, and that for the high place.
And for yt they move much toward diverse places, they take sownd and noise by
much rebou^ding. Also Ari. says there, that no beast that lays eggs, has
cares growing upright without: But yet such beasts have some privy ways. And
also birds and fowls, which fly, have none ears outward: nevertheless they
have a mean hole, and an open way, by the which they hear perfectly. Also
Concerning nature.
among all these beasts a man's ears move least, and also be shortest in
dimention of seituation and place: but to hear they be most: able and lively:
as it is said lib. pri, and that is through goodness of complexion. Wherefore
if there be great excess in the greatness of the ears of a man, with other
signs and tokens agreeing thereto: it is a token of dullness, and of slow wit
and understanding, as Aristotle says.

Of the Nose. cap. 13.
ISidore says, that the Nose is the instrument of smellyng, and has the name
of the nosethrills. And the nosethrills be so called, for that by them we
smell, sauouring and vital things, and discerns between sweets and stinking.
And so because smellyng remain to us by them: they be called nosethrilles, as
by the contrary, men blockish, careless, unskillful, and ignorant, be called,
as it were without nosethrills. Constantine says, that the nose has two
holes, that is divided a sunder by a manner gristle bone; and one of these two
holes, comes to the hollownesse of ye roof of the mouth: and that other
passes to the skins of the brain, to draw the air to the brain, and to
bring the spirit of feelyng to the nosethrils to make the sense of smellyng
perfect. The first hole is needful to put off superfluities, that come from
the brain: and the other to draw spirit and breath, and to make perfect the
smellyng. But properlye to speak, the instruments of smellyng, be two holow
fleshy pieces, that hang from the nosethrills as it were scales that receive
first in themselves the air that is drawn, and then sends it into the inner
part of the brain. To these teates the utter nosethrilles serve drawing in
air, and closing it within themselves, and making it subtle, that it be
lightlyer and the more perfectlye changed and likened in the lymmes of
smellyng. A sinewe comes from the brain, and enters into the said teates
of the nose, and gives to them the spirit of feelyng, as says Constantine.
Then by mean of the air, the nose draws in a fumositie that joins it
self to the spirit of feelyng, the which spirit takes likeness of that
smoke, and presents it in the brain to the government of the soul.
Therefore Constantine says, that the nose is needful to draw in air
temperately, to cleanse and pourge ye brain by suiting places, and to temper
ye kind heat in the dens and chambers of the brain: and also to give
perseueraunce to know smokes that be resolved and dispearced from what
substance it be, whether it smell sweetly or stink seruently. And therefore
lib. 12. Aristotle says, the wit of smellyng is departed, as is the wit of
hearing. And except it were so, it should not do the act and deed of
smelling, and also the wit of smellyng should not be, but to draw in air in
a beast yt has a nose And this lim, yt nose, is in the middle of ye foremost
part of the head, and for that kind sets the nose in the mids of the
three instruments of f^^lyng, as it were the tongue in the ballaunce: for
moving of the breath that is needful to the other wits. Then gathers briefly by
these-things aforesaid. yt the nose is a member of office, to know and draw,
and to put out air, to deem smellyng, to cleanse and to purge ye brain of
great superfluityes, to serve the spirit of feelyng, and by drawing of air to
open and close the lungs. And therefore as Constantine says, the nosethrills
be set not even before the lungs, but thwart over, that the cold air that
other while comes to the lungs should not grieve them: and if dust or any
other thing enters with the air, it should not annoye the lunges. And also
as Gregory super Cantica says, The Nose beseems most the Face, insomuch,
that if the nose lacks, all the other part of the face is more ungoodly and
unseemly. The disposition of the nose should be mean, so that it pass not
due manner in length, breadth and highness. For if the nosthrills be too thin,
either too wide: then by great drawing in of air, they betoken fierceness of
heart, and indignation of thought. For by disposition of the members of the
body, the affections and will of the soul are foreshewed and deemed, as it is
said, Iu principio Philosophiae: For the accidents of ye soul be often
changed according to the accidents of the body as white wine, takes the
likeness and color of a red glass, that it is poured in. And therefore
means of disposition betokens means of goodness, as the Philosopher says
in libro suo In principio super Pronostica. Gaien says that the nose is let of
this doing and working.

And there he says also, that a sharp nose, and hollow eyes, etc. through
strength of heat that wastes moisture.

A token of death.
And therefore if the nosethrilles ware sharp, and the eyes deep, in sharp
feauers, it is a token of death. And that falls to the nosethrils, as Galen
says, when the kind heat is so feeble, that it may not stretch and spread
it self into the utter parts. And therefore it follows, that the spirit
and blood may not come together to the utter parts. And then through cold
that slays, the lymmes shrink togethers, and the heart is altered, and then
comes sharpness of the nosethrils, that is the worst sign and token, and
the deadliest, of them that have the ague. Also the nose is let other while, as
Constantine says lib. 9. cap. 15. by evil disposition of the brain: Sometime
by stopping of the sinewe of smelling, sometime by fullness and replection of
stinking and corrupt humors in the teates of the nosethrilles. And sometime by
breeding of superfluity and corrupt flesh in the holes of the nose, as in
sniuelards and leapers. And this grieueth not only the smellyng: but also it
decays the voice. And sometime it is grieved by superfluities of humors, that
flitte into the dens and chambers of the brain: and chat comes of
dissolution and dealyng of heat, either of too great constrayning and closing
that comes of cold: as it fares often in a reuine that falls to the breast.
And sometime by repletion and sharpnes of the veins. Nevertheless bleeding at
the nose, is special cause of dissolution of the evil in many sicknesses, and
certain token of recovery and of health, as it fares in sharp Agues, that
end and pass away often by such bleeding. And in Aphoris. it is said, it is
good for a woman Deficientibus men^truis, to bleed at the nose.

Of the Cheeks. cap. 14.
Bucca. Faux. Gena.
THe Cheeks be the nether parts of the eyes, whereof begins yt beard, as
says Isidore li. 11. cap. 2. For Genos in Greek, is Barba in Latin, in
English a beard. The same parts are called Maxilla in Latin Maxilla, is ye
bone of the cheek. Mala, is the round under the eye.
, and have that name of Malis, per diminutionem. Male be called high, and are
parts set under the eyes, for defense of the eyes: and be called Male, either
for that they were round upward to the eyes, which the Greeks call Mala, or else
because they be above Maxillas, the cheeks: and so Maxilla is the Diminutiue
of Male, as Praxillus is the Diminutiue of Palo, as says Isidore. It requires
heedfulnesse, Addition.
to understand of Malae, Malae is the leure or space of the face, which is
close to both sides the nose, from the roof of the mouth, unto the eye brows.
Constantine says, that ye cheeks be made and compounde within, of sinews and
of bones. And the bones thereof be joined to the brain pan, yt which be
therefore compound and made of many diverse pieces, least if one have any hurt,
the other should be grieved. And outwardly they be hot and fleshie, to te^per
and assuage the cold of the bones, and of the gristles of the ears and of the
nosethrills: and also to serve and succor by their heat the limbs of feelyng
that be all about them. And therefore the cheeks be set under the eyes, to
defend and save them. They be set in the middle of the senses, for service of
food. They be hot and fleshie, to slake the cold lymmes of feelyng. They be
white and red to hight the face, and make cheer. The most fairness in man is
in the cheeks, as says Constantine, and in the cheeks the complexion of man
is most known. For if they be much reddie, and meddled with temperate
whiteness, Sanguine hot and moist.
and not fat in substance, but meanlye fleshie, they betoken hot and moist
complexion, and temperatenesse thereof. But if they be of white color,
without meddelyng of redness, Fleame, cold and moist.
and in substance fat, and soft, and quauing: they betoken excess of
superfluity of cold and moisture. And if they be brown in color, Cholar,
hot and dry.
either citrine or peolow, and thin and lean in substance, they betoken
mastery of too great drought and heat, as it fares in cholaricke folks. And
if they be as it were wan and in color bluish, Mela^choly, cold and dry.
and of little flesh in substance, they betoken excess and superfluity of
cold and dryness: as it fares in them that be melancholy. And the cheeks
show not only the diversity of complexion, but also the qualytie of
affection and will of the heart. For after the affections of the heart, by
sudden fear, either joy, they were suddenly pale or red. This says
Constantine.

Of the beard. Cap. 15.
COnstantine says, that the beard is Barba.
the seemlines and ornament of man's face: and so appearing and covering the
cheeks, in one part it beautifieth, and in another it helps: for by the
hairinesse thereof, it defends the sinews of the cheeks from cold air.
And therefore the beard is a needful feature for the cheeks, and the beard is
a token of virtue and strength of kindly heat. And this is ye cause why a man
has a beard, and not a woman: for a man is kindly more hot then a woman. And
therefore in a man the smoke, that is matter of hair, increases more than in
a woman: and for that kind suffices not to wast that smoke, it puts and
drives it out by two places, in the head and in the beard. And therefore
sometime women hot and moist of complexion have herds, and in the wise men of
cold and dry complexion, have little beards, and therefore on men that be
gelded, grow no beards: for they have lost the hot members that should breed
the hot humor and smoke, the matter of hair. And so it follows, that
thickness of the beard is sign and token of heat and of substantial humor,
and of strength, and a certain assay to know difference between men and
women. In children grow no beards, though they be hot and moist: for the
superfluity of the sumositie, that is, the matter of hair, passes and
turns into the waxing and feeding of children. Huc vsque Constant. And
Aristotle says li. 19. that ye hairs of the bearde, like as the hairs of the
head, in the disposition thereof, presents and shows the qualytie of the
vapor or fat humor, of the which they be gendred: for if the humor be
smokie, hot, and dry, the hair as well of the beard as of the head, shall be
crispe and curled. And that falls, because they pass by two contrary ways:
For the earthie parts move toward the nether parts, and the heat moves
toward the nether parts: and so the hair is curled and crispie for
feebleness thereof. And that happens through scarcity of moisture, and
multitude and plenty of the earthy part, and so by great heat they be crispie
and curled. But if the vapor be full moist, the hair shall be soft and long:
for the humor runs making slipperie till it come to the hair. And
therefore the hair of the head and of the beard of them that dwell in Thracia,
Thracia, a Region in Europe, in which stands Constantinople, same time
called Byzantium.
be soft and smoothe: For their complexion is moist, and the arye that they
dwell in is moist. And contrariwise it happens in men that have dry brain,
and dwell in hot regions and countries, for the dryness of the air that they
dwell in. And he says, That the color of the hair of the bearde, changes
by changing of age: and therefore in age the beard wereth hoar, for
feebleness of heat and plenty of cold. And sometime the hair of the beard
falls away, through withdrawing of heat and of moisture, as it f^^eth in men
that be gelded, and sometime through corrupt humors, as it fares in lepers.
For as Aristotle says, The falling of hair, As ye Bay tree, the Box, and
Holme, with others of that kind.
is like to the falling of leaves of trees, and the cause hereof is,
withdrawing of hot humors and fat: and therefore the leaves of trees in which
is fat humor fall not. Huc vsque Arist. lib. 19.

Of the Jaws. Cap. 26.
ISidore says Libro. 11. That Mandibulae the Jaws, Mandibula ae. Gingiua. ae.
have that name Mandibulae of Manducare to cate. Of the jaws, one is the over
iawe, in which the over teeth be fixed: another is the nether iawe, in which
the nether teeth be rooted. And the over iawe has this property, that in
every beast it is steadfast and moves not, except the Crocodile, Crocodile this
deformed beast is bred in Aegipt, and common in the river Nilus
that moves the over iaw against kind of all other beasts, and holds the
nether iawe still, and moves it not, as says Aristotle lib. 3.

The Jaws be made and composed of diverse hard bones, bound and knitte
togethers with diverse sinews and strings. And that is needful for the
centinuall moving, and for need to open and close, as says Constable. And they be
as it were two milstones, that continually to bruise and grind the meat, move
themselves thereto: and so they serve all the body of meat. The jaws be
dypped about and heled with fleshly perceils and sinnewie: which are called
Gingiue, and that is the more to strength the putting and setting of the teeth
in the depth of the jaws, and for to serve the sinews of the teeth of food,
and to slake ye coldness of the teeth. And Isidore says, they have that name
Gingiue, a gignendis dentibus, of gendring of teeth. For the teeth be bred and
nourished in them, and yet they be made to fasten the teeth, and are also
needful to heal the teeth, for if ye teeth were bare they should be loathsome
and not fair. Also they be beclypped about with ye skins of the lips, and that
does kind, for they should not only help ye teeth and the cheeks within, but
also to defend them from outward griefs: and so it happens that the gummes be
corrupt Aluding unto the vncleanlinesse of men.
in beasts, sometime by retchlesnesse, and some time they be infect and corrupt
by rooted humors, and then they breed diverse griefs and diseases, as
strench, falling out or wagging of the teeth.

Of the Lips. Cap. 17.
ISidore says, that Labia the Lyps, Labia.
have that name of Lambendo, to lyeke. The over lyp is called Labium in Latin,
and the nether is named Labrum. Constantine says, that the lyps be needful,
for they defend to hele and cover the teeth. And they be also sinewy, and be
mate of diverse strings, that so they may be more able to seele and to move.
For to the forming of the voice they open and close themselves: For if they be
cut off, either let by stopping, by shrinking, or else by riuelyng, words may
not be perfectlye pronounced.

Also the lyppes are soft and fleshie: and that is needful to temper the
hardness of the teeth. For the teeth and the sinews of them which be cold of
kind, should be too much grieved with air that is cold, if they were not
defended by the covering of the lyppes. Also the utter parts of the lips be
ruddye, and that happens, as Constantine says, through subtlety of the
skin of the lyppes, which casilye receive some deal a ruddye qualytie of a
sanguine beat, and therefore the ruddinesse of the lyps, is a token of clean
and pure complexion, without meddling of troubled blood, and of the inner
virtue: as contrary wise, wanness of lyppes is token of defaulte of virtue and
kindly heat. Also the lyppes be thin in substance, to be the more plyaunt
to moving, and the more able to put in, and for to cut the air, that when it
is drawn so darnly, it griue not with chillness, the inner parts. And
therefore the lips put themselves against the cold air, and pureth and
cleanses it, that it may the more sweeetelye and profitablye be drawn
inward. All this says Constantine.

Aristotle liber 12. about the end, shows like properties, where he says,
That man's lyppes be soft and fleshie, and may be severed and departed for
preservation and keeping of the teeth, and for to be equal to pronounce a word.
And therefore the lyppes have trouble use and service, as the tongue, that is
made to taast moisture and to speak, as Aristotle expressly says, and
therefore it needs that the lyppes be moist. For if the creation of the
lyppes were not of such disposition, the tongue might not reach to the lips
to speak, and to pronounce many manner of letters. For some letters be
pronounced by smiting of the tongue, and some by closing of the lips. And
therefore making of the lyps is needful, that the working of kind should be
best. And therefore man's ^rsh is very soft, for man is of good feelyng and
taaste, more than other beasts. All this tells Aristotle Libro. 12.

Then consider thou, that the lyps be comely lyniments and couerings of the
teeth, to keep and save, and temper the hardness of the teeth, by their
softness, and to shape the voice or speech of al lett^rs; to put off cold and
hot air, and to manifest the default and strength of virtue; by redness and
palenesse of them, and be the proper limbs of virtue interpretiue, to express
the passions of the soul, that is to wit, hatred and friendship, sorrow and
woc. And therefore it is said, that quaking of lyps in frenzy and other sharp
sicknesses-betokeneth death, as it is said in Pronosticis and this suffices at
this time touching the lyppes.

Of the Chin. Cap. 18.
Mentum.
THE Chinne is called as if were the foundation of the jaws, for that they
spring and grow of the chin, as Isidore says. The shinne has two boanes, as
Constable. says, and these said bones be joined togethers in the middle, where the
small teeth are pight, that be Quadrupli and Pares, and the ends of these
bories be departed, and have two forkes or twists: that one is sharp, and the
sharpness thereof is pight therein as a manner bond, which bond stretches
from the side of the temples: and thereby opens and closes the other forke is
great and round, by the roundnesse whereof the chin is soft as says Constable.
For this member is needful for the spring of the jaws, and for the fastening
of the nether teeth, and for kindly or speedy closing and opening of air:
and is also couenable for the complexion of the face, and for the perfect
finishing of the face. And if the chinne be proportionate to the forhead, it
makes fair and seemly all the face. All this says Constable. In the chin of a
beast is the most strength for the hardness of the bone, and for ye hard
compaction of the sinews, and for strong rooting of the teeth. And therefore
beasts suffer not lightly to be handeled by the chinne: For if their chinne be
broke, all their cruelnesse and fircenesse fails, as their weapon were lost.
As it is written 1. Regum. cha. 17. 1 Sa. 17.24 I caught him by ye law, and
smote them and slew him, and so thy servant slevvt he L^ea and ye Bear, etc.
Os.
David brake ye bears chin, and delivered the sheep out of his mouth etc. By
touching the chin of a man is token of love and of trust. 2. Reg. 16. Ioab held
the thin of Amasa, as though he would kiss him, etc.

Of the mouth. chap. 19.
THE mouth is called Os in Latin, for that thereby we put in meat, as it were
by a doors, and put out spittle and breath: either for that out of the mouth
words come, as it were but at a door, as says Isidore. And also Isidore
says, That the mouth is the messenger of the soul. The benefit of conce^^, is
speech.
For we tell out by the mouth, what we conceive beforeth soul and in thought.
Gregory says, That the mouth is closed and compact with many keepings and
wards, as with teeth, and lips, that by so many means the wit and the
soul may determine and abuise first what to speak, ere that any word be
spoken, that the word may rather pass by the lim then by the tongue.
Constantine says, That the instrument of the mouth is needful to receive
feeding and nourishing. For no member in a beast is nourished, but it receive
first nourishing at the mouth. For the mouth first receives meat, and cheweth
and seasoneth it, and makes it able to digestion, and sends it to the
stomach, and therefore kind makes the mouth moist within, to temper and
change the easilyer the dryness of the meat by moisture of the mouth. Also
kind makes the mouth sinewie and meanelye hard and hollow. Sinewie to feel
the easilyer the savor of the meat: Hard, that it be not grieved and hurt
with roughness of the meat: And nevertheless it is not made too hard, but
meanelye hard: least the sense of taast should be lost by too great
hardness. The mouth is hollow and round within, that the meat taken may move
the easilyer hither and thither, and that breath may pass by the teeth without
let. Also the mouth is needful to draw the air and breath. For the air and
breath drawn in by the mouth is changed, purified, and made subtle in the
hollownesse thereof.

And is so sent by the organe of ye lungs, to cool the heart: without coolyng
whereof, the heart should be burnt and destroyed by too great heat. Also the
mouth is needful to shape the voice, and for that intent the roof of the
mouth is hollow, that the doubling of the tongue, may move the easelyer to
shape the voice, and move up and down. Also it is profitable to put out and
east off the great superfluities, that come of the brain to the lunges: the
which superfluities, when they be cast out by the door of ye mouth, in the
heart and the brain of the beast, the spirit vital, does his office more
speedelye. Also it is profitable to discharge the feeding members of
superfluity: for when the stomach is charged with raw humors, kind working
by the virtue of out putting, cleanses the stomach by the office of the
mouth, as says Constantine and Galen super illud Aphoris, says: In spewings
and purgations that be hastily made, if they be made as they should, they
profit and help: and the contrary falls, if they are not made as they
should. Constantine in viatico says, that the mouth is grieved sometime by
forenesse and sickness of the lymmes that be nigh thereto, and is grieved with
pimples and blaynes, and with whelkes and botches, and with such other, and
with corrupt humors that fall to the mouth from other places. And if the mouth
be red and some deal brown, and hot, and aching, and burning: the matter is of
blood and Cholera. And if it be much black, it is the worse and the more
grieueus, and the more to dread least it breed a canker. It happens that
totches breed in the mouths of sucking children: the which totches come of
sharpness of milk and of corruption thereof. Hitherto speaks Constantinus
in viatico, etc.

Of the Teeth. cap. 20.
Dentes
DEntes in Greek be called Edentes, as it were cleaving and dividing all that
comes between them, as says Isid. And Constable. says, that the teeth be a
certain manner of plants sticked and pight by roots and mores in the bones of
the cheeks and of the chin. And Con. says that a man has.xxxii. teeth:
sixteen be set in the cheek bones, four of them be set in the foremost part,
and be called Pares; Pares.
and Quadrupli also. And these teeth be broad and sharp, and Physicians call
them forcutters; for they be able to carue all thing, and all thing that they
reteyne, they brus^ and bite asunder. And there be other two that are called
Camni. and they be set beside the teeth that are named Quadrupli, Quadrupli.
and they be sharp in the ends, and be able is bruise and grynde hard incates.
And Isidore says, That they are called Canini, Boundish, to the likeness of
hounds teeth. And hounds with the said teeth gnaw bones ^ and be stronger and
sharper, longer and rounder, than the teeth that be called keruers: and
therefore some men call them the neck of a maid, and what the first teeth may
not kerue and break with biting, they betake it to these teeth, as to ye
stronger to bruise and to bite. And there be other x. in either part of the over
iawe, that he set beside the keruers: and these be broad and great, and they be
Molares, grinders, and they be apt to grind meat, for the thing that is bitten
and broke by the foreteeth in the mouth, comes between the grinders, as
says Isid. Then in the over iawe are xvi. teeth: four of which are called
Quadrupli and Pares, keruers, and two; which be called Canini, Canini.
houndish, and x. which be called, Molares, Molares.
grinders: and so many be set in the nether iawe, or in the chin. Then touching
their number and office, the teeth be parted and divided in four manners, for
some be keruers, which be four, two above, and two beneth: and these be first
seen. And some are Pares, and they be four, two above and two beneath, and be
set in either side beside ye kerners, and touch each other. And some be called
houndish, which are four: two above and two beneath, striking each other. Some
are called grinders, which be xx. ten above and as many beneth, and they touch
each other, and grind always as milstones, ye meat yt the other teeth began to
kerue. And all these be pight and rooted in the jaws, and be somewhat forked
and twisted, but diuer slye. For the foremost which are called Quadrupli and
Pares the foreteeth, have but one little forke or twist, or one root, Canini
the grinders have three forkes or four, as says Constantine. The qualytie of
a man and of a woman, by common skill, shows ye number of teeth: for a man
has mo teeth then a woman, as says Constantine and Isidore. Also the teeth
be divided and known by age: for Aristotle lib. 2. says. That teeth in old
men and beasts be generally black and not sharp: as it fares in hounds, whose
age is known by the teeth. For young hounds have white teeth and sharp, and
old the contrary. Out of this generality Aristotle exceptoth the teeth of
horses, that ware white by age. Also there it is said, it needs to know, that
beasts with many teeth joined togethers, be of long life: and beasts with few
teeth set thin and a sunder, be of short life. Also there it is said, that
every four footed beast, that gets and gendereth a beast lyk^ to it self,
has teeth. Also man's foreteeth falls in youth, and not the cheek teeth, and
that happens perchance for this cause, for feebleness of the forkes and
twists, and of ye roots: and for the contrary cause, the cheek teeth fall not
so soon. And it is general in other beasts, that there fall not any tooth,
before such other spring and grow in their steed. Also Aristotle li. 12.
says, that every beast that lacks teeth in the over iawe, is dry and of
earthie kind: and every beast that has teeth in ye over saw, is like to
fatnes. Also li. 13. he says, kind does not make any thing, but that that is
best and most perfect. And therefore it needs that yt matter of carthie part
draw in some beasts toward ye over part and turn into teeth, man's hair, and
feathers, and in some beasts into bornes, and therefore a beast with horns,
may not have teeth in either iawe. Also li. 16. he says, Only teeth among
other bones grow while the beast dureth: and that is known in teeth that
ouergrowe, and by leaning and bowing and side, touch each other: and the cause
of the growing of them is for the working of them. For if they should not grow,
they should be soon wasted. And therefore the teeth of beasts that eat much,
and have no great teeth, be soon bruised and wasted: and therefore kind wisely
gathers ye teeth togethers for age and end, else if life dured a thousand
year, always should grow teeth more and more. And so li. 2. he says, Teeth
that grow within the gums, grow not in men and women, but after twenty year,
and in some wise they grow in women after forty years with full fore ach.
Also li. 19. he says, sharp teeth be needful to bite first the meat, for
it needs to bite rather then to grind: and therefore they grow the sooner,
for that they be less: for the less thing grows by heat sooner than the
more thing. Also the heat of milk makes teeth grow soon: and therefore
children that suck better milk have teeth sooner. Also he says there, that
the foreteeth grow in a thin bone and a feeble, and therefore they sail soon.
Hitherto speaks Aristotle. And Constantine there to says in viatico
particula. 2. The help of the teeth is great, and with help, a great
hightinesse of the body, that is to understand, if the teeth be not fore: for
in sore teeth the working is corrupt. And the passions of the teeth be diverse,
which part of diversity is openly known to the sight, as chill, rottenness,
stinking, breaking and brusing, holes mouldring or falling, watring, and such
other. The part not apparing, is hid, as when the teeth ache sore, and yet
they seem to be in good case without.

The cause of such aching is humors that come down from the head, either up
from the stomach, by mean of fumositie, either else by sharp humors and
beating in the gums: and then is sore ach felt with leaping and pricking,
through the mallyre and sharpness of the humors. And if the ach come of the
head, the head is heavy, and aketh in the face, that comes of red blood, or
of Cholera, that comes down to the roots of the teeth. And if the ach come
of the stomach, the aching and pain is felt in the stomach, and there goes
and bursteth out continual belching. Also sometime teeth be pierced with holes
and sometime by worms they be changed into yelow color, green, or blackal
this comes of corrupt and evil humors, that come down of evil meats by
the sinnewes to the strings of the teeth. Also sometime the teeth shake and
wag, and that is for humors that be in ye roots of the teeth. For if the
humdre be sharp, needs the teeth shall have hoales, and stinch and matter
shall breed iu them. And if Worms be the cause, full sore ache is bred: for
they eating, pearce into the subtle sinew, and make the teeth to ache, and
grieve them very sore, by fore humors within either without, that infecteth the
sinews of feelyng, and seems sometime to sleep, because of great cold, as
by snow or ice, that conserayneth the sinews of the teeth. Also sometime, the
teeth fall-out, because of great moisture that loses the striuges of the
teeth. And sometime by great dryness, as it tareth in old men, whose teeth
fall out through withdrawing of moisture of feeding. Constantine rehearses
these and many other passions of the teeth, but these shall suffice. Then
understand, that the teeth be rooted and sticked in the jaws, as in their
preper ground and soundation, and by reason of cold having masterie in them,
they be whiter than other bones, and for that they be hard, they be not easily
hurt. The substance of the teeth ^eeleth not, for they have not powce of
feelyng, as says Constantine. And therefore a broken tooth aketh not: yet it
is said, that a tooth is grieved and aketh, through the sinew of feelyng, that
in the root thereof, is often hurt and grieved. Teeth be bound within with
sinews; and teeth pass the bounds of the flesh; and they feel, no soreness
within themselves; and be closed with lrye, that they be not scene: it is
uncomely when they be seen, except it be in laughing: And the over and the
nether come often togethers, and touch each other: and though the nether move
sometime, the over be steadfast and move not, and be ordinatelye ordeinos,
specially to shape the voice of word and of speaking, and they serve all the
body.

Of the tongue. Cap. 21.
THe tongue is called Lingua in latin, Lingua.
and has that name of Lingere, to lyeke: for it likes meat. Or by the
tongue, the sound of speaking binds words: for as a weast te^preth strings,
so the tongue smites the every, as says Isidore. The tongue is the instrument
of taast and of speaking, as says constable. and is made and composed of soft
flesh, full of hoales like a spounge. It is sinnewie, for feelyng and moving:
it is full of holes, that the savior: may pearce and come the rasilyer to the
sinnewes, that make the taast, to the which ^ome many veynce full of blood,
therefore it is red in color. All this works it by the same skins that
close the space of the mouth and ^oofe a^cue: and on the over side the tongue
is all seen, on the nether side it is seen to the strings, by ye which it is
fastened to the chinne, and so the roots and mores of the tongue, and the
subtle sinews by the which it laketh feelyng and moving of the spirits, be
hid and unseen. As Constable. says, in some the tongue is constrained more than
it needs; insomuch that it may not move into diverse parts, therefore it
needs to ^at the strings to have the larger moving be all the space within
the mouth. The tongue is subject to have many passiers and grieses, as in the
substance thereof, and in the sinews, that come, theet and therefore in Viatico
Cons.says, The tongue of a beast is seth quiet moving, and the use of speking,
the cause thereof comes of defalt of (...) of mani^^ ye brain by stapping of
ye ^^wires, by ye which, ye virtue of feeling passes: sometime of a postume,
either of vlains ye rise on ye tongue: sometime by ye^per defaults in ye
substance of ye tongue, as evil co^plection; by ye which ye feeling (...)
st^pered by too great heat or cold, or monsture, or dryness, or a postume, or
^wolting, and such other. And if the tongue be grieuouslye swollon, it
betokens encosse of heat: and if it be white, it betokecneth coldness; and
if it be soft, it betokens moisture: and if it be dry and rough, it
betokens dryness. And all such things, let the use of the tongue, or take
away all the use or part thereof. If the tongue seems whole and without wemme,
and the speech fails: the default comes of the brain, or of the sinews of
feeling stopped. Sometime loosing of speech comes by loosing of wit, as in
frenzy and Litargi. Madness and forgetfulness.
Hitherto speaks Constantine in viatico. In Pantegni, Constantine assigns
other defaults of the tongue, where he says, That there rise broad blaines
spread into the utter skin of the tongue, as it faceth in children that suck
evil milk: And these blaines be sometime white, and sometime black. And
sometime happens a Postume in the tongue, that makes it greatly swollen, and
passes out of the mouth: and that Postume is called, outlawing of the tongue
is called. And another Postume of the tongue Rana, a Frogge. For because it is
bread as a Frogge under the tongue, and takes away and benimmeth the usage of
the tongue. And so it is called a dumb Frogge, for the effects and deed Also
there is an other postume of the tongue, full of blood, whereby all the tongue
is grieved, and the speath and taste is le^. By gleamie humors, that have
maistery in ye tongue, ye sense of taste is corrupted and changed so that sweet
things seem bitter and wearis^e: and contrariwise as says Galen. Also Galen
says, that sometime it happens, that the tongue stuffeth and flamereth by
too much moisture when the stringes of the tongue may not stretch and spread
into the utter parts thereof for too much moisture, as it fares in dronken
men, that stamer when they be so much in moisture in the brain. Therefore
Galen says, that kindlye stamering men, ^^^ through too much moisture of the
brain, or else through too much moisting of the tongue, or for both. Also that
superfluity of moisture is the cause why that some men may not readilye
pronounce all letters: but sometime sown it for I, other C, for L, as it
fares in children that spel and corrupt many letters, and cannot pronounce
them, All this says ( Galen ^^^er Aphoris. lpod. (...). Ratteling men moist:
for too much moisture of such men, which is cause of ratteling, comes to the
stomach, and makes often the bowels slipper, and breeds Diarrian, Diarrian,
Dialym.
that is the flire of the womb, as says Galen. Also in Paotegi^, Constantine
says, that in the sides of the stringes of the tongue be some veins that
serve the tongue of spittle, and these veins spring out of the beginning of
the tongue. And of these veins come a flumatike moisture, that is called
spittle, and so Physicians call them the veins of spittle, and the hours of
spittle. The beginning of the tongue, whereof the veins come and spring, is
white kirnell flesh, and breeds spittle, that moysteth the tongue, and
tempereth dryness of mea^^^d intreaseth the juice thereof, as it shall be
said after. Aristotle. b. 6. says, that some sheep have white veins under: ye
tongue, and they have white lambs: and some have black veins, and they have
black lambs. Then galyer briefly of that is said, that the tongue is a
substance ^^^ bloody, and holow, and receives the influence of spirit, and is
hot and moist in complexion, and slender and euerlong, in disposition shapen
as a swoorde in the foremost part, read in color, set in a holow and moist
place, to move easily, to fore the speech And voice, to know saviors, to moist
the month by emission of spittle, and to tell the moving of thoughts of the
soul. And it is closed with ye teeth and lips, as with double wall, and in many
beasts concerning the form, it has a diverse shape. For in some beasts it is
short and great, and in some contrary wise. They that have great tongues heuie
holow or sad voice, and contrariwise: and some beasts have tongues meltineable
and healthful, which comes either of the goodilesse of kind and of some
other hidden prope^^^, as the tongue of a hounde, as says Cassioderus: and
some Hane slaieng tongues and venemons, threnath mallise and woodnesse of the
humor has mastery therein, as ye tongues of serpents, adders, drago^s, and of
a wood hound, whose biting is most venomous, his tongue ha^^eth always without
ye mouth, and droppeth veill, corrupts and inketeth ye water, in which it
falls in, and who that drinks of that water shall become mad, as says
Auicen and Constantine in tractu de venenesis animalibus and venenis. And
Aristotle says, that the tongues of Adders be black, wan, or reddish,
speckled, sharp, and in moving most swifte. And that happens through the
mad and venomous humor, the which so swiftly moves the tongue, that one
tongue seems forked and twisted. And though the tongue of an Adder, that is
called Aspis in Latin, is full of deadly venim while it lives in the body of
the Adder: Aspis a serpent whose dead tongue gives warning of venim.
yet when it is taken from the body of the Adder and dried, it loses the
venim: and by it is known when venim is present. Therefore in the presence of
venim such a tongue uses to sweat. Therefore such a tongue is needful and
profitable, and is accounted precious among treasures of kings, though it were
venomous, etc.

The properties of Spittle. Chap. 12.
THe spittle is a flumatike humor, bread in the kindly veins of the tongue,
as says Constantine. Spittle is kindly moist and white in color, and by
continual moving of the tongue, and the spiritual instruments it is fomie,
wearish, and sauourlesse. For it is able to take all manner favor. For if it
had a certain savor of his own, it should not receive other savor. Also
Constantine says, that the spittle is mean between the skill of taste, and
the thing that is tasted. For nothing is tasted by the wit of taste, but if the
savor thereof be presented by the spittle in the limme of taste. Therefore the
Spittle is changed and lykened by the savor of the thing that is taasted.
Constantine says, that Spittle is needful to moist the mouth, that the mouth
be moysted by the benefit of the spittle: and also to prepare the first
digestion. For dry meat taken in the mouth, may not be sent profitablye in
the stomach, except it be wet first, and moysted by the spittle. For without
help of spittle, a dry thing may not be easily swallowed. Also the Spittle is
profitable to either verding of superflu^tie of ye brain, and of the lungs.
For such snitings made hard or clawmie with heat or with cold: cannot so
castlye be spitted and pot out by the door of ye mouth, but if they be first
made able and supper to pass out by help of the humor of spittle. Of fasting
spittle.
Also the spittle of a man fasting: has a manner strength of privy infection.
For it greeueth and hurts the blood of a beast, if it come into a bleeding
wound, and is meddled with ye blood, as in Tractatu de venenis the foresaid
Authors tell. And that peradventure is, as says Auicen by the reason of
rawnes. For raw humor meddled with blood, that has perfect digestion, is
contrary thereto in his quality, and disturbeth the temperance thereof, as
Authors say. And therefore it is that holy men tell. and Plimus says. That
the spittle of a fasting man slays Serpents and Adders, and is venim to
venomous beasts, as says Basilius super illud verbum in exemoron: Man's fasting
spitle does kill serpents.
He shall bruise thine head, and thou shall lie in a wait upon his heels and
steps Genesis 3. Also as Galenus super Aphotis. says, In the spitting of raw
humor and filth, is ^isik and flux bread: And where the spittle is held and
withdrawn, men die, etc.

Tisike men always cough because of the Botch, of the lungs. And by spitting
they discharge themselves of the matter, of the botch of the lungs, as well as
they may. But yet death follows, when they may not spit. For spittle held
and kept in with matter, stops the veins of the holes within: and so men yt
have the Tisicke be stifled and die. Also as Galen says in li. Gil. between.
Sputum and Saliuam, there is difference. For spittle that is called Saliua in
Latin, is the super fluitis of kindly feeding of the breast, and gendereth in
good digestion. And the spittle that is called Sputum, comes to the breast by
diverse kindly courses, and by courses that be not kindly, and is not alwaie
digested and defied. And therefore Sputum, that Spittle in sharp Agues, and
Postumes, if it pass easilye with tokens of digestion, and without trauailous
cough, it betokens strength of virtue, and failing of the evil: and it is
said in Pronostre. and again ward. Therefore Golen and other Commentours
there tell, that in either spitting we shall take heed generallye of three
things: of Color, small, and Savor: For if the spittle be blo^ in color,
Bloo, is a bliewish rawnes of the humor.
it betokens hurting and grieuing of the heart, and of the spiritual
members. And if it be read, meddeled with rotten blood, it betokens Botches
of ye lungs. And if it be stinking in savor it betokens corruption within.
Also if it be bitter either sour in savor, it betokens that corrupt
humors have mastery in the stomach and in the lungs, or else in the
substance of the tongue. Also much spittle is a token of flumatik complexion:
therefore in old men is much great spittle and thick, gleamye, and reaming,
after the strength of cold, and wasting of the substanciall moisture.

Of the voice, Chap. 23.
Vox.
A Uoice is a very thin smiting of the air, and shapen with the wrest of the
tongue, as says Isidore and Priscian. The instruments of the voice be many as
says Constantine, that is to wit, the lungs, the arterye strings, the throat,
and lidde of the organe, the mouth, the teeth, the lips, and the tongue. For
without the service of these, the voice is not shapen. And some of these
receive the voice as the lungs, with the receptacles, organe, and pipes
thereof. And some order the voire, as the lidde of the woson The ^ataunce of
the thro^^
as Constantine says, that makes the voice fair and strong, when it is
proportionate to other instruments: and it tempereth the air that comes in,
and lets and keeps that the air pass not too soon out; and saves and
lets the throat, and the organe from dust, that would fall therein. Some
send out the voice, as the pipes of the lungs and the organe, that be as it
were pipes: the which if they be light, clean, temporate, and smooth: they
make the voice even and temporate. And if they be rough, and over measure
broad, either straight, or else, too much awrye, they make the voice over
sad or slender sown or uneven. Then to shape the voice, the air is received
in the leaves of the lungs, and by ordinate moving of ye organe, the air
comes out of the mouth: and so by swifte moving of the air and by stretching
of the instruments of the voice, the sownd is made; the which in the mouth of a
beast is brought forth, and shapen with the wrest of the tongue, is called of
wise men a voice. Hue vsque constantinns is Pante (...) liber 4. Aristotle
says, that the lungs be the first receivers of the voice. And therefore every
beast that is without lungs, is without voice and speech. Speaking is
distinguishing of voice. And so every beast that has no tongue untied, as he
says- Ibideni. ^ees and Flies have no voice, Flies have none other sound but
by their vvings.
but they make and noisy in flieng, stretching, and drawing, two wings by the
air, that falls between the body and the wings, and so do long Flies. And
by experience they make no sownd sitting, but only flieng, but a Frogge has a
proper voice, and his tongue is applied to the mouth before, And that part of
the tongue that is nigh to the pipe of the lungs is untied. And therefore he
has a proper voice, and it is called coax in Latin. And makes not that, but
in the water only, and namely in the male in time of breeding, when he
calls the female by a voice known. The Frogge multiplyeth the voice, when he
puts the nether iawe into the water, and stretches the over iawe. And by
stretching of the two jaws, they make a noise and voice. And for the great
force of stretching, their eyes shine as Candles. They sing and cry more by
night then by day. For then is the time of their, gendering. Also there he
says, that small birds cry and chatter more then great, and namely in time of
gendering: for then is greatest chattering and crieng of birds. And he says,
that the Cock croweth often after battle and victory.

Also it is so among birds and fowls, that the male cries and not the female.
As the Cock and males of Quails. Speaking is appropried to mankind: Men that
be kindly dombe be deaf they have voice, and all vndistinct as says
Aristotle also in Eodem liber, he says, that all females have smaller and
sharper voice then males, except the cow, that has greater voice then the
bull. Also there he says, that pasting of spearme in males is in the time of
changing of the voice, and that is in the time and end of 14 years yet
sometime the voice changes sooner in some men, which signifies the stirring
of Venus. And there he says. When horse begin to gender, their voice is
greater, and likewise the Mare, but the voice of the Mare is more clear: also
the voice of the Males change when they be enamoured. Also in lib. 8. it is
said, that the voice of all four footed beasts change, and be made like the
voice of women when they be gelded. And liber. 19. it is said, that the cause
of sharpness and of changing of voice, is by chauging of age. For the voice
of young beasts is sharper then the voice of old: and the voice of women is
sharper then the voice of men: and the voice of all beasts is sharper in youth
then in age. And he says, that many females and many younglings cry with a
sharp voice, for by feebless they move but little and scarce air, and that
that is little and scarce, is moved swiftly, and swift is sharp: The
heaviness of the voice follows the slownesse thereof, and much air is
slowly nideed. Males and old men move much air, and therefore they have
greater voice. Males have stronger sinews and strings then females: and old
men have stronger then children, and vngeldod have stronger then gelded.
Hitherto speaks Aristotle. Then an even, close and strong binding and a
pisant voice, mean between heanie and sharp, is good and pleasant. As
contrariwise a voice quaking, hoarse, and rough, feeble, and discording too
heavy, or too sharp, is evil and dispraised. For a discording voice and an
inordinate, troubles the accord of many voices. But according voice sweet
and ordinate gladdeth and moves to love, and she^wesh out the ^umors of the
s^^e, and wishesseth the strength and virtue of the spiritual members, and
shewesh pureness and good speak on of al them, and reserueth (...), and
puts of desease and sorrow. And makes to be known the male and the female,
and get ^^, and w^mneth praising, also chaungesh the affectinn of the hearers
as it said in ye s^bles of one Orpheus, (...)Orpheus a Thracia^ born,
verycunning on the sharp As for his music to trees stones, and beasts, was
Antithecin, it ended to check idle, evil, and enseemely manners.
that pleased trees, woods, hills, and stones with sweet melody of his voice.
Also a far votte is according and friend to kind, and pleases not only
men, but also brute, beasts, as it fares in Oxen that he tired to frauaile
more by weere long of the herd, show by strolies and pricks. Also ^ildes and
fowls have liking in melody of sweet voice, in so much that often by sweet
noise the souls brings them to grinnes and snares, as the Poet says. The
pipe sings sweetly while the soul deceives the bird.

Also by sweet songs of harmony and accord of Music, sick men and frantike
come often to their wit again and health of body. Whereupon Constatinus in
viatico particula. 2. cap. 1. de amore, que dicitus hereos, sie dieit. Fevv
such handle^s of music in these days, for then the Couters, Prisons,
Marshaise, and Kings beneth. would not be so full of poor oppressed debtors. A
preordinaunce of God not common to nature.


Some men have sold that Orpheus reporsed: Emperors desire me to feasts, to
have liking of me, but I have liking of them, which would bend their hearts
from wrath of mildness, from sorrow to gladness, from covetousness, to
largeness, from dread to boldness. This is the ordinance of Musitions, that
is known above the sweetness of the soul. And with sweet melody sometime
friends be put of, and compelled to pass out of bodies: as it fared in Saul,
out of whom an evil spirit was compelled to pass by the voice of David, as it
is written. 2. Reg. 17.

Now it is known by these foresaid things; how profitable As profitable as an
cloquent tongue with good conditions.
is a merry voice and sweet; And contrariwise is of an inordinate voice and
horrible, that gladdeth not, neither comfort: but is noifull and
discomforteth, and grieueth the ears and the wit. Therefore Capitulo supra
dicto Constantine says: That a Philosopher was questioned, why an horrible man
is more heavy then any burden, or wit. Because he wants both speech and
manners.
And men seeing that he answered in this manner. An horrible man is burden to
the soul and wit etc.

This suffices at this time of the voice good and evil: for it is rehearsed
before of things letting the voice in the treatise of the tongue, and yet it
shall be spoken of hereafter.

Of the throat. Chap. 24.
THE throat is the uttermost parts of the pipes of the lungs, Gutter ris
lugulus, Curgulio, and Canna Pulmonis the lung pipe and vvesen.
as says Constantine, and is of double help. The more and the first is to
draw and send air, the second is to receive and bring in meat and drink, and
to make the voice and sownd. The substance of this pipe is gris^lye and hard,
that when the air goes out, the voice should be clear. For the hearsenesse
of the voice comes of the moisture of the organe of the lungs. The voice is
made and composed of three gristells, the first is knottie and bending
outward, and within hollow. The second is more then the first, and is set
fast in the mouth of the stomach. The third gristell is in the middle between
the first and the second. Of these three gristells the throat is made, as it
were cheined togethers, that it may open and close. And all the substance of
the throat is closed within the same clothing and skins that cloth the
tongue and the roose of the mouth. The hollownesse of the throat, in the which
air comes in and out, has a body composed like the tongue, of gristells,
fatness, and skins. And Physicians call it ye tongue of the throat, or
Cataracta: and is the first instrument of the voice, as it is said. And the
voice may not be, but if this Cataracta way be closed. For if the way of
the throat be open, the voice may in no wise be: for the air passes out
little and little. And therefore the ware of the throat is needful to
with-holde and ^ose in the breath. And for that the throat is sometime grieved
by humors, that come down from the head, thereof comes hearsnesse of ye
throat and cough, and sometime it happens by drawing of corrupt and dry
air. And sometime it chances by entering in of dust. Therefore the throat
has nerves and gristels to withstand and let the dust, and other such
grievous things, that they enter not to the lungs: and that is needful to
make the voice fair, strong, and ready. And it releeueth the air that
comes in, and tempereth the coldenesse thereof. Therefore some men die when
that the tongue of the throat is cut: for then too much air enters and
cools the throat and the lungs, then the throat is a needful instrument to
make and shape the voice, and to bring in meat and dislike to the first place
of digestion. that is the stomach: And is long and round to draw in and put
out much air: the more easily to cool the heat of the heart, and it is more
hollow in either end, and straight in the middle to shape the voice the
better. And it is made and composed of diverse gristells, that cover themselves
in a cup, to be the stronger, and to bend it self the easilier, to vary the
voice by tenderness of the gristell. ^inde ordeineth wisely about the
throat, double o^^ce, needful to a beast, and double hollownesse of way. It
has a pipe way to draw the air and breath. And it has an open way to take
meat and drink. And this double way is departed in two, by a covering that
is called Epiglotum: and is in the uttermost part of the throat, as it were
cloth or heeling to cover the two holes of the throat. And when kind desires
meat, the hole of the breath is closed, and the hole of the receiving of the
meat, opens it self. And in likewise when kind desires breath, the other
hole of the throat closes, and stops it self at full. Also the throat is
often grieved by compassion without, and by many griefs, and sometime by unwise
and unware taking of meat and drink. For if the meat some in at the way, by
ye which breath is drawn. ye way of the spirit and breath is lightly closed
and stopped, Greedye apetite is hurtful.
and the beast is choked and stifed. Sometime by gathering of humors and
ruin. The humors come from the head the pipes of the throat, and they makes
there a postume: and if the matter be cholarike and coniealed, it stifleth and
ouer-commeth the body speedely. For as Constantine says, It straighteth the
breath, so that the sick man may scarcely take meat and drink, and is full
of grief and sorrow. And if the matter be of blood, the sick man seems
full of corruption in the body, Cause of blood.
red in the face, the veins be full, and the pulses: the swelling is hot and
sweet by plenty of blood. And if the matter be of read Colera, Of Cholera.
then the forehead aketh, and has great anguish Then is great heat with great
thirst, and bitterness in taste. And if the matter be of Flegma. Flegma
then the tongue not only aketh but swells, and is soft. And if it be of
falt steame, all that comes in the root seems salt: and the voice is made
like as it were the voice of young whelps. For by dryness of the salt steame,
the artery Trachea is made straight, as says Constantine. And it happens,
that this matter is sometime all grieved within the skin, that departs the
way of the breath, that is called Trachea arteria, Trachea arteria, ye vvesand
or throat boll.
from the way of the meat and drink, that is called Isophagus, and bredeth
Squinanci, that slays in one day: For by pressing and thrusling togethers
the way of the breath: the free passage of the air that should come to the
heart, is forbid and let, and by wringing and pressing of Isophagi, the way of
meat and drink is forbid and let. And sometime this matter is gathered
within, and sometime without, and then again it is called ^quinanci and is not
so perilous as the other. And sometime all the matter is without, and is
called Sinancia, and is less perilous. In all these is strong ach of the
throat, and namely in the first with stifling of the voice, and straightness
of breath: and so full the sinews be of Squinantia, and the cheeks have so
the crampe, that uneath the teeth may be opened with an hammer. And the tongue
is so shortened that it is uneath drawn out or never. In all these evils that
grieve the throat, swift breathing is a good token: for: then the way of the
breath is not over pressed. Therefore it is not in danger of stiffling. Nothing
is more to dread in this evil then loosing of breath: For a beast may not be
without breath the. 27. That is the space of a quatet of an house, that is
minutes. and the end 7. after in minutes, in one houie.
part of an hour, without great peril. These evils and many other the
throat inffereth, as Constantine says, as with whelks, pushes, and swellings,
immoderate thirst, hoarsenesse of voice, that comes of so much moisture
shed in the way of the pipe of the throat, and lets the voice: and
sometime takes it away, and roughness of voice that comes of dryness of
air, either of the body, of the meat and of drink, either of dust that
makes the instrument of the voice rough. This that is said of the voice
suffices at this time.

Of the neck. Chap. 25.
THE Neck is called Collum in Latin, Collum.
because it is great and round, and bears and susteineth the head. The
foremost part is called Gula, and the hinder Ceruix, the nowle, as says
Isidore: And has that name, for by that part the marrow comes to the ridge
bone. Therefore Ceruix is said. Quasi via cerebri, as it were the way of the
brain, as says Isidore. The neck is a round member, and racane between the
body and the head, and is bonnie, made and composed of many bones and sinews.
It is boanie to be the more strong to sustain and bear the head. It is sinewy
to make quick moving, and to send feeling to the nether parts of the body.
The neck receives and takes of the brain influence of ye virtue of moving,
and sends it by sinews to the nether parts of the body. The neck ought to
have a concord and proportion with the head. For if the head be temperatye
great, and the nape of the neck in measurable quantity, it betokens
lightness of complexion and disposition, as says Constantine. And if the head
be little, and the neck great, not proportionate to the quantity of the head,
it betokens great superfluity of matter, and default of the virtue
Informatiue of shaping. And such an head is travailed and grieved with head
ach, and ach of the ears, as says Constantine. Aristotle. li. 14. says, that
the disposition of the neck varieth and changes in beasts and in souls. For
in four footed beasts with thick bodies and mean thighs, the neck is short
and great: and much strength of such beasts is in the neck. As it faceth in
Oxen, Bulls, Bears and Wolves, the most strength of the^ is in the bone of the
neck: and therefore Oxen be commonly yoked by the neck. And beasts with long
thighs and great bodies have often long necks, and that is needful for to
pasturs or feed. As it faceth in Horses, Camels, Hearts, and such other
beasts. And the most fairenes of an horse is in the neck. For by the beginesse,
and thickness, and stretching thereof, he is accounted fierts in courage of
many men. Also in eo. li. Ari. says, ye souls yt have crooked bills, has
short necks, as it farth in Goshaukes, Eagles, and Sparhaukes. And souls that
have long bills and straight, have long necks, as it fares in Crames,
Hearnes, Bees and Ganders: and that is for to get then meat in deepenesse of
moeres, fennes, and rivers. Also he says there, that all souls that have long
bills, have great necks and thick, and fly with the necks straight out, and
if they have long neetres and stretching forward, they be^nd and plye them as
it wet folding or pleytes, when they fly. Also he says, that if a beast has
long thighs, he has a long neck: and if he has short thighs, so has a
short neck. Every beast that has a neck, and he breathe not, he has none
air within. Also every beast that has a neck, has lunges, and that beast
that draws no air in, has no neck.

All beasts that forward wind themselves round as a ring, have no neck
distinguished from the body as fist^e^^. Celes, and adders, and such other long
worms that head themselves, and that for they have no shoulders. For nothing
is called the neck, but that member that is between the head and shoulders, as
says Aristotle there.

Of the shoulders. Ca. 26.
Man's shoulders are called Humeri in Latin, Humerus
for distinction between man and other beasts, and so our shoulders be called
Humeri, and have arms, as says Constantine. And the shoulders are composed of
diners bones, of which the Scoptula operta. Scapula ^.
shoulder blades be chief, and are called blades, for ye they be shapen as a
broad sword. Spaton, is to understand, broad, and these bones be needful, as
Con. says, for double cause, either so defend the breast, that it be not
grieved behind by outward things: or else to bind togethers the bones of the
shoulders, that be hollow within, and bending outward. The hollownesse within
is needful to help the ribs, and these bones have knottes, which be called
the eyes of the shoulder blades, as Physicians lay, and have that name of
office: for as the eyes defend and ward all the fortparts of the body, so these
defend and keep behind the breasts and ribs: these eyes be hollow, that the
sharpness of the shoulders may enter. The shoulders blade has two
sharpnesses, that one is behind like to a ravens bill, by the which the
shoulder blade is bound to the forke, that it ^^e not out of his over place
inward: heerto kind sends and sets that other sharpness of the
sho^ulders, that it should not pass our downward. The twisted forkes be
needful to bind the shoulders, and to depart them from the breast. The bones
of them be round without, and hollow within, and bound to the tenderness of the
breast, and behind to the place called, the ravens byll. The bonds of them be
griftly bones, and are called, the heads of the shoulders, and only set to
cheyne or fasten the shoulders lynke wise togethers. Hereof and follows,
that the shoulders be needful to defend the spiritual members, and to bind
and cheyne togethers the boanes of the breast, of the arms, and of the ribs.

Also to bear by the boanes and ioynes of the neck. Also they are needful to
bear burdens and wayghte, for by reason of their boninesse and sinnewinesse,
they be very strong and mighty. Also after the head, the neck is highest of
the body above other lyms, that be set under the head, as it fares in all
beasts. And sometime the shoulders be grieved without by wounds and by diverse
hurtings, and by continuance of great travail and bearing: and then they be
chiefly cured by rest, or by annoynting with some ointments. And Aristotle
says li. 7. that men use to annoint the joints of the Elephaunt with Oil
Olyue, the more easelye to suffer travail and charge of bearing, and to sleep
the better. Also sometime ye shoulders be grieved by flowing of humors, that
come to the joints in the sinews of the shoulders, by the which, the sinnewes
are grieved and let in their effects and doings. And sometime the joints are
full of superfluity of humors, by the sharpness and biting whereof, ache
breeds in the sinewe of feeling.

Of the Arms. Cap. 27.
Brachium
Arms are called Brachia in Latin, and have that name of Darim in Greek, that
is strong as says Isidore. In the arms be brawnes-called Thori, and they be
of great strength, and are called Thori, for that they be defending members, as
says Isidore. Constantine says, That the arm is made of two boanes: one is
above, that is called the over Cubite: and the other is beneath, that is called
the nether Cubite. The nether boane is more than the other; for the bearer
should beee more stronger than the thing yt is born. The arm is cheyned
together with the over shoulder, and is ^^itte with most strong sinews: by
^^cane of which sinnewes, the arm takes feelyng and speedy moving and
sends it after to ye hand. The arms be round, to be more able to work, to
move, and to withstand the better, that they be not lightly grieved. And they
be bending any p^ant in three joints, that is to wit at the hand, at the elboe,
and at the shoulders, to be the more able to quick moving, and more ready to
be obedient to ye commandment of the will. Also in comparison to other lims,
ye arms be less fleshie, and that is through the substance of bones and
sinews, of the which they be composed, and to have ye more virtue and
strength: For in the arms is the most strength of a man, to bear, to lift,
to hold hard, to put from, to fight, and to work. Also the bones of the arms
be great, hard, holow, and full of marow. They be great and hard, that they
break not lightlye: they are hollow, that they should not be too heavy by
massiuenesse. They are full of marrow, to moist the dry and hard bones by
fatness thereof: and that the spirits that come from the sinews and veins be
saved by temperance of marrow, and nourished. They are clothed and covered
with skin, brawne and strings, with flesh among: that they should not be
lightly hurt and grieved by any thing without. And also they are covered in
joints and whirlbones, with gristles, that the sinews of feeling he not grieved
by hardness of bones, that smite and move together, and that the same bones in
their joints, move the more speedely by smoothness and softness of gristle,
and that they be not tarried, neither let by meeting and feeling of roughness.
Also for that the arms are nigh the heart, they take spirit and pulse by
veins and strings and diverse chaungings, for to know and show the state of
default or profit in the veins of pulse. Also for the arms are nigh the
brain, they have a kindly and a privy accord with the head, and take of him
influence of privy vertue^ And therefore for defense of the head by feeling of
kind, and without aduisement, ye ar^^ws put them forth against hard strokes.
Also ye veyns of ye body, and namely they that are about the head and the
heart, and the liver; come together: in the hands and the fingers, and feed
them. And therefore they that feel themselves full of blood and grieved, use
to open some vein of the arms: and so the arms are often times wounded and
grieved to cause the other lims to have the profit of good heal.

Also Physicians say, as it is written in libro de Flebothomia, Flebothomia, is
^ ^ear^e d^ ^^e^ of (...) ^^o^ ^es. Fle^^ and Tema^ that is opening or cutting
of ^ ^aine. In Latin it is named Minucio sanguinis. In English, letting of
blood.
he that is sick on one side of the body shall open the vain on the other
side. And so he that is grieved in the right side is let blood in the left
side, and so of other. Except the matter be venomous, or else post^^ate. For
then the blood should not be drawn to the other side, least the venim of the
matter passing by the heart, either by some other member, that is noble, be
hurt and griued as it is said there. Also the arms for profit of other parts
of the body, serve each other: And for keeping of other members, they be
wounded and stricken and made to bleed, and they faint or yield not, and they
abide strokes. Galen says, that the arms have this property, that what the
heart loves, the arms love and embrace it cheerefullye. And whom they know,
that the heart loves, they be^lip it, and set it as nigh the heart as they
may: Insomuch that if they might, they would print it in the heart all that
the heart loves. Also in Acutis Febribus, A sharp or deadly fever termed the
pestilent Ague.
uncovering and putting out of bare arms is token of death.

This that is spoken of the arms, and of the properties of them suffices.

Of the hands. Chap. 28.
THe hand is called Manus in Latin, for that it is the gift of all the body,
as says Isidore. Manut. Manciola
For the hand serves the mouth of meat, and disposes and does all works.
By the hand we receive and give. And abusiuely the hand is called a craft or
a work: as it is sometime said of a Painter or a writer: He has a good hand,
that is to understand, a good skill of writing, either of painting. Dextera,
the right hand, has that name of Dare, to give. For as Isidore says, Surety
of peace is given with the right hand, and he is witness of faith, trust, and
salvation. And this is that Tully means. I gave publyke faith upon beheast
of the Senators, that is to say the right hand. And the Apostle Gala. 2. When
they perceived the grace that was given unto me, James, Cephas, and John,
which are counted to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of
fellowship, etc. The left hand is said as it were suffering the right hand. For
it suffers the right hand work and has that name Sinistra, of Sinere, to
suffer. And the hand is called Palma, when the fingers be straight cut: and
fist when they be closed in And ye list is called Pugnus in Latin, and has
that name of Pugillus, and is called Palma, when ye hand is straight cut as it
were beauhs and branches spread. Also the hand is a great help and ornament of
the body: and is the proper and principal instrument of touching and of
feeling. For no part of the body touches and feels so surely as the part of
the hand, as says Isiderus, and also Constantine. And Constantine says, that
the hand in the utter part is made of nine small bones and diverse, without
marrow, and be sad bones. And has so many bones to be moveable. The bones be
of diverse shapes: Some be kno^^e, some be hollow, and some straight, that when
they be all joined togethers, they may be as it were one bone. And these bones
stand of two orders, of ye one side with the roots of the fingers, and of that
other side with the two arms they be cheined and strongly bound. The over
cheining have three of these bones that enter into the hollownesse of the
arms: by the which fastening the hand opens and closes sidelong. And the
nether cheining and the less is joined to the inner end of the arm by
sharpness thereof. And this cheining makes moving forward and backward.

The hollownesse of the hand is called Vola, and is the inner part, that the
wit of touching and of feeling, has most working in. And therefore in that
part it is the more fleshie, and more soft, for good touching and feeling:
and has two parts. Pecten the comb is one part, and the other part is the
fingers. Pecten, the Comb, is the space of the hand within the fingers, and
is composed of four boanes: For if it happened that one were hurt: that other
should not be grieved. In the hollownesse of four bones of the Comb, that
commonly be called the Palm, the four fingers be set and closed therein.

And therefore Aristotle. li.. ^ 14. says, that the hand is not one instrument
but many. For kind has given to man instruments according to his virtues: as
the hands, in which be many fingers and diverse, that they may thereby hold
small things and great. For as he says, The making of the hand is
proporcionable to many works, and to contrary workings: and is divided and
straighted into many parts: And a man may use one part alone, or two, or mo, in
diverse manners.

The palm of a man's hand has this property, yt it is never heary within,
though hair grow without on some hands: and that does chance most in hands
of males, and that is for plenty of heat that has the masterie. And the
right hand is of more strong heat, and has more dri^esse then the left hand.
And therefore the right hand is lighter and able to work then the left hand.
Therefore. li. 2. Aristotle says, that four footed beasts that gender beasts
have forefeet in steed of man's hands. And the left foot in such beasts is not
so free, neither so light of moving as the right foot is, as the left hand in
a man is not so able to work as the right hand, except the Elephant. For as
Aristotle says. liber. 1. the Elephant has a long nose like a trump, which he
occupies in steed of hands: and with that nose he takes meat, and puts
it in his mouth, and with that nose he puts drink into his mouth, and no
beast may do yt with his Nose but he. Among Birds and fowls, the Popingay
and the Pelican use ye foot in steed of an hand. For the Popingaye takes
meat with his foot and wetteth it in water, and when it is wet puts it in
his mouth with his foot: and so does the Pelican that is called also
Porphirio. The hand is grieved in many manners, by the Crampe, shrinking of the
sinews, by crookedness, by dryness, by blaines and whelkes, by kitting and
cheines, by fretting of worms, by itching and tickeling, by wrasting and
wrenching of joints, by Chiraga Passio, that is the gout in the hands. The
cause of shrinking and crookednes comes sometime of hot humors and dry,
which dry the sinews: either of cold humors and moist, which infect the
sinews, and closes ye passage of the spirits, as it fares in Paralitisis and
Leprosis, Paralisis Dissolucio, the palsy.
the hands of whom be shronke, and crooked by reason of corrupt humors that
dry and destroy the sinews. Plora, Lepra, the leprosy, it has four names.
The hands be dried by wtdrawing of due feeding. As it fares in old or
^ueraged men, and in men that be defaced and overcome with great travail of
fastings, and ouerfeebled with age, travail, and disease. Elepha^cia, Leoniva.
Tiria, and Alopecia.
And sometime by distemperance of heat and excess, that wastes ye moisture,
as it fares in Tisiks, Ethiks, and such other. And sometime by vice and
default of the veins and of the sinews, yt which he stopped: and so by default
of humors and of spirits, the virtue of ruling is let: whereby yt hands die,
and leeseth strength and fatness. Blaines and swelling bladders be bred and
come of superfluous and corrupt humors, which come to the utter parts: and so
the flesh within is wasted and corrupt in the utter side, and the skin swollen
up is turned and changed into blaines and bladders, clifts and chins, and
other such, come of hot humors and sharp, and of fumosities between the skin
and flesh, that cut the skin, and with their sharpness they divide and pearce
the utter flesh: and first they cause itching, and tickeling, and afterward
great ach and smarting. Also corrupt humor hid in the skin, when it is not
put out neither wasted by kind heat, and little and little, it is corrupt
more and more, and is changed and turned into small worms: The which worms
little and little eat and fret the skin, and cause tickeling and itching.
And breking out of joints sometime happens of falling, either of smitting,
either of hard thrusting and wringing. For by such violence the limme falls
out of joint and of his place: And then comes sore aching and smarting, and
all the hand is made vnmighty to work any works. The same happens also of
some inward cause, as of too much humor cooling and slippering, and slaking
the sinews of the joints. And so lightly the limme falls out of his place.
The passion which is called Podagra in the feet, The gout in ye feet.
is called Cirogra in the hands, and is bread and comes of great humors and
raw, gathered in the joints. Therefore the joints of the toes and fingers wax
hard, and be made as it were knotty. And such sicknesses be called Longa
artherica, and are bred in the hands. And scarcely to be cured or healed, if it
has long endured, as it is said Super Aphoris. Many other diseases occupy
often the hands, as blaines and such other: but this that is said shall suffice
at this time. Save only this would be noted, which is spoken in Aphorisin.
that a woman uses not the left hand and the right all alike. Upon which word
Galen says, that males work alyke with both the hands, which we never saw,
neither heard of no woman. And that comes of default of her kind. For except
she is strong to work with the right hand, so much she may the less with
the left hand. Males have strong sinews and brawnes in either side: and they
have stronger heat then women: and for that cause it happens often, that they
work with the left hand, and with the right hand also.

Of the fingers. Chap. 29.
Digitus.
THE fingers be called Digiti in Latin, and either they have that name of
December, that is the number of ten in English, for they be ten other of this
word December, in English seemly. For they be seemly set and joined, and they
have among themselves a number ^ order right fair, as says Isidore. The first
is called Pol^ex, the thombe: for that among other he has most virtue and
might. The second is called Index and Salutans, and is called Demonstratiuus,
the shewer. For with him we greet, and show, and teach all thing. The third is
the middle finger, and is called Impudicus also. In^amis digitus, of some
called the fools fingers.
The fourth is called Annularis, the ring finger: for thereon the ring is
borne. And also he is called Medicus or Medicinalis, the leech. For with him
they do Colerium about the eye. Colerium is a principal medicine for ye eye.
The fifth is the little finger, and is called Auricularis, the ^are finger, for
with him we clawe and pick the ears, as says Isidore. Constantine says,
that the fingers be composed and made every each of three bones cheined
togethers. And the four fingers be cheined and bound to the said comb of
the hand: and the thombe is joined with the inner cheining of the arm. The
nether pieces and knobbes of the fingers be greater and broader then the over,
as the bearer is stronger then the thing that is borne. They ought to be
broader and more steadfast, as says Con. li. 3. Aristo. says, that the
moueablenes of the fingers is convenient to take and to hold. And the fingers
be proportioned in slenderness and length and departed a sunder. In the ends
they be warded with nails. And the more even that they be, and the more
bending and pliant: the more couenable they be and able to diverse works. They
be but little fleshie, for casinesse of moving and of touching and groping.
For nothing in the body knows and deemeth so easily between things that be
touched and felt, as the ends of the fingers. And that may hap is through the
quick liveliness of the sinews, that be bend again in the ouermost parts of
the fingers: and for softness and smoothness of the skin in the uttermost
parts of the fingers, as says Constantine, and the fingers have these
propertyes: they be greater before meat then after. And therefore a ring that
is straight on a finger, and may scarce be taken of before meat, may easily
be taken of after meat, as it is said Super Aphoris. Aristotle says. liber.
8. that water souls have between their toes and claws, as it were a skin,
and their dwelling is in waters. And fowls with toes, and claws divided, and
cloaue footed, dwell properlye nigh water, and be fed with meat that grows
on the land. And these fowls eat no fish, neither live with rauine, as do
fowls with crooked toes and claws, that eat all beasts yt they may hunt and
take: and they live by blood, and yet they eat not each other: but they spare
fowls of their own kind. And so do not fish, for they eat fish of their own
kind.

Of the Nail. Chap. 30.
Vuguis.
THE nail is the uttermost part of the finger, set in the ouermost part
thereof. And Constantine says, That it is joined very nighe thereto with
flesh and skin: and the bounds thereof be full of strings. And to the nails
come veins and sinews, and arteries, to give them feeling and kindly help.
The nails grow in length and in breadth proportionate to the fingers. And that
that grows over and passes the touch of sinews has no feeling. And
therefore they be cut and pared without feeling of sore and of smarting. For
the growing and feeding of the nail is like to the growing of hair. And
therefore in growing they pass the ends of the fingers, as says Constantine.
The nail is bread of certain fumosities, that are resolved from the heart,
and spread on the fingers ends, where ye fumosities entering in, are dried with
the utter air, and changed into the substance of the nail, as it is said
in the book of Pronosticis, in the comment. And they be made to help and
succor the fingers ends to defend them and save them with hardness, or they
should else for tenderness be lightly hurt and grieved. And so nails help and
strengthen much ye fingers. The nail is softer then a boane, and harder then
flesh or gristell. And has some deal disposition and kind of horn: For they
be clear and plain on the utter part thereof, clean and bright as horn. And
so therein is seen a manner of brightness and shape. And for the nail is bred
of fumositie of the heart, living and dieng of the heart is in the nails most
openly showed. For if the heat of the heart fails, the nails wax black and
pale. And therefore by changing of them, shrinking and riueling, bodeth and
betokens quenching of heat, and dieng and slaieng of kind, as it is said in
Pronosticis. Also Aristotle. li. 7. says, that the claws of Egles wax
crooked and dull when they sit a brood upon Eggs, and feeds their birds:
and their wings wax white and feeble. And the Egle has this property, that
when he sits on a tree and rests the beholds often his claws, and
dreadeth least they wax soft and tender. For he has claws in steed of
wepons. And therefore least his claws should be hurt and grieved, he setleth
not gladly upon a stone. And when he rests, he bends and closes in his
claws, yt so they may be kept and saved without harm and grief: So does the
Lion, and beasts with crooked claws: also li. 8. he says, ye whole footed
fowls drink not, except a few: and al fowls yt have crooked claws, have
crooked bills, and short and great necks, and eat flesh and hunt birds, but
they eat no birds of their own kind, neither pursues, neither prays on
the^, to the intent to eat them, but they fight togethers, and hurt one
another with their bills, and with claws, they tear each other for the
females and for neasts. In all beasts and fowls be diverse manner of claws
and nails, touching their disposition and also their doing. For in a man the
nails ^ence and adorn the hands: and in fowls and birds they fence and arms
the feet. And in some beasts the nails and houes be round and whole, as in
horses, in some they be long and cloven as in swine. li. 13. Aristotle says,
That every beast having stiff standing hair, has cloven feet, as Swine.
And kind sets strength in the claws and nails of beasts: and therefore li.
14. Ar. says, that kind always sets strength in lims and members, that
beasts use, as in feeth that be as it were iron, and in the claws and nails,
for strength and help.

Of the side. Chap. 31.
THe side is called Latus in Latin and has that name of Latere, Latus.
to lurk, either to be hid. For when a man lies, the side is hid. And there
is both the left side and the right side of the body, that is called in Latin
Dextra and Sinistra: and in ye right side is most able moving, but the left
side is more strong and more couenable to ye burthe^s and charges: and therefore
ye left side is called Leua in Latin, and has ye name of Leuare to heave, and
lift: for it is more able to lift and to bear some thing, as says Isidore.
That side bears the shield, and the buckler, sword, the quiver, the knife and
other burdens, that the right hand may be ready at liberty to do what it
shall, as says Isidore. The sides be specially strengthened with the bones of
ribs. And the ribs be called Costae as Isidore says: because the ribs
keep the inner part of the body, and all the softness and tenderness of the
belly, is wisely kept and saved by the office of ye ribs. And the side ribs
be made and compounded of many bones joined and bound to the bones of the
joints of the ridge bone, and of diverse gristles, that join the foresaid
bones together, as says Constantine. And these boanes have the likeness of
half a Circle: and when they be joined togethers to the joints of the ridge
bone and of the breast boane, they seem to make a full circle, as says
Constantine. The boanes be fourteen says he, set in the either side seven,
seven on the one side, and seven on the other, the which be bound togethers to
the closure of the breast, with seven tender boanes, that be as it were of
gristly kind. Of which the ends are tender and gristlye, shapen as the point
of a sword, and set under the mouth of the stomach for defense thereof, and of
the heart. And so in the making or composition of the ribs and breast, in all
be two and thirty bones, of the which fourteen be in the sides, and in the
composition of the breast, ten. Behind in the ridge be eight gristle boanes,
togethers as says Constantine. It happens that the side is often griued,
sometime by cause that is without, as by falling, breaking, smiting, and other
such. And sometime by cause that is within, as by fleeting and concourse, and
coming togethers of the humors to the place and hollownesse of the small
ribs. And sometime a postume is bred therein, as it fares in a plurisie, that is
bred and comes of a postume, that is in ye tenderness of the rybbes. The
tokens thereof be ache of the side, cough, and Febris Acuta, and is specially
known by bloody spittle: if it come of blood, by citrinesse or yeolow: if it
come of Cholera, by white spittle: if it come of fleme, by bloo spittle: if it
come of Melancholia, but it breeds selde of Melancholia, as it is contained
in Practica. Such postumes when they be rooted and pight in the side, then they
be cause of sore ach, stiffeling, and burning, and then he that has that
evil, may not rest upon the side that the postume is on. Therefore it is said
in Pronosticis, that it is a good sign that a sick man in Febribus acutis,
lie on his side, and specially on his right side. For that betokens, that the
nigh places have no postume, and that the spiritual members be free, and have
large place to open and to spread, and so a man breaths the better: for
neither the stomach, nor other members grieueth, neither thirsts the
spiritual members. Also it happens, that under the small ribs in a void
place, wind is gathered and closed within the small skins of the ribs, and
by the stretching thereof is bred sore pricking and ache. And sometime it
happens that the place is stopped and made hard by gathering of great
humors. And so the side places be ha^ed and rent, either made too hard,
either shrunk, either too much heaued up. And therefore it is said in
Pronosticis Hippocratis, In the small ribs if they are without ache and sore,
and if they be soft, and well compounded in every side, it is good. And if
they ache, or have the Crampe, and be drawn togethers, as it fares in the
Crampe: If there be only great quaking and leaping in any of them, it
betokens woe and sorrow, either rauing, etc.

And that is a special token in Febribus Acutis, and specially if the sight of
the eyes be horrible staring and inordinate, as says the same Commentatour.
And if the moving of the Eyes be ordynate, it is not so great dread of rauing
in Acutis, Vt dicit Idem.

Of the Back. Chap. 32.
THe ridge is called Dorsum in latin, Dorsum.
and has that name of hardenesse, for it is the hardest part of the body, as
it were a stone strong to bear, and to suffer durable, as says Isidore. And
the ridge has another name, that is called the back: for thereupon we lie
backward and upright on the earth, and so may a man do, and not other
beasts, for other beasts lie on the womb, either on the side: and therefore
it is improperly said, yt any beasts have backs, as says Isidore. But it may
be called back, for beating and bearing, for it is beaten with diverse manner
of whips: and not only the backs of beasts, but also the backs of men that
be prisoners, as says he. Or as Remigius says, This word Tergum may be said
of Teros in Greek, that is round in Latin: For the ridge of a beast has a
manner of roundnesse, for all the bones in the body be founded in the ridge, as
a ship on the keele. Constantine says and Isidore also, that ye ridge
begins from the nape of the head, and stretches near to the kidneyes: and
the ridge is made and compounded of diverse bones and joints, and that for four
causes. First, for he is the foundation of all other, and thereon all the other
bones be set, as the ship is on the keele. The second, for it is ye defense
and healyng of the inner parts. The third, for it is help and succor of the
sinews, that come from the brain downward to diverse parts of the body, to give
qu^^k moving and feeling in every part. The fourth to bear marrow that comes
down from the brain and to keep the marrowe, and save it from griefs, within
those powers. The ridge boane of a beast is made and compounded of many bones,
that they may the easilyer rise and settle up themselves, and bend, and to
bear more strongly charges and burdens. And the ridge boanes be called
Spondilia in latin, and are hollow, that the marrowe of the ridge bone, that
Physicians call Nucha, may the easilyer be borne and come to the nether
members, to make the quick moving: and the same kind and virtue is as well in
the brain, as in the marrowe of the ridge bone, as says Constantine. And
therefore it is clothed with a double skin, as the brain is, as says he.
And therefore if this marrowe in the ridge bone, be in any wise let either
hurt, the virtue of feeling is hurt in working and doing, as it is when the
brain is hurt, and therefore if this marrowe be hurt, the beast dies lightly,
and therefore kind makes the ridge bones hard and sinewy, and also picked and
sharp, for the more defense of the marrowe, and for the more easy
withstanding and putting off, of hurting and wrong. The skin of the ridge is
harder and thicker than the skin of other parts of a beast, and that is for the
cause aforesaid, and the ridge suffers many griefs within and without. For
without it is beaten and has many griefs. Within it suffers shrinking of
sinews, to much replection of humors, stopping of the veins and the gates of
the spirits, sore pricking and putting, and stopping, and griefs of diverse
goutes and dropsies.

Of the Breast. Cap. 23.
THe breast is the over bonie part between the paypes and teates, and is
called Pectus, Pectus.
because it is next between the head and the paps, as says Isidore. Isidore
and Constantine say also, that the original of the breast is set within the
ridge and is very hollow, to keep and to save, and to defend the inner
members, as the heart and the lunges, with other spiritual members. The great
hallownesse of the breast is needful and profitable, that the lungs may close
and open to cool the hot smoke of the heart. And it is bonie and full of
sinews, for the more strength and stronger defense of the members of life. And
the breast is compassed and defended within with skins, and a manner of
fatness to nourish and to save kindly heat, and to assuage the coldness of
boanes of the breast plate. Constantine says, That in the breast be two
hollownesses departed in twain with some manner skins: and this departing is
needful to keep the breath in one part of the breast, if it happen that it
were lost in the other: and so to save and to keep the life of the beast in
the other part. For if either hollownes were grieved, and the breath stopped,
then the beast should soon dye. Also the heart and the lunges be bound
togethers with skins of the breast, and they be wrapped therein, that they
pas^e not out of their place, as says Constant. li. 2. ca. 15. Then the breast
is the foundation of the paps and nipples: and that is not only for beauty
and fairness, but also for needful help of the breast, with his
fleshinesse, it heals: and tempering the bonie coldness thereof, covers
and defends from outward hurt of cold air. And so the breast is the most
noble member of man: for it is the place and seat of wit and wisdom, and the
house of heat of life and of strength, and if the breast be well disposed and in
good point, with all that is therein, all the strength of ye body is comforted
in his working. And contrary, if the breast be grieved, all the making of the
body is disgraced, and the breast is grieved many ways. Sometime by great
cold, constraining the sinews and strings of the breast bone, they be grieved
and hurt, and be let in their works and deeds. And sometime by great heat and
dryness, wasting the substauntiall humor thereof, and constraining or
shrinking the sinews of the breast, as it fares in Ptisis, the Greek word.
Ptisicis and Eti^is, that be spended and wasted with too great heat. Sometime
by too great moisture of blood, either of fleame, Consu^ptio. a consumption or
vvasting in age Etica. Hectica a consumption in youth, not lightly cured.
coming and fillyng the ways of ye breast, and so sometime follows stifling,
and sometime hoarcenes, and sometime withdrawing and leesing of voice, as says
Constable. Sometime of a corrupt humor gathered in the skins of the breast, that
breeds a postume in ye breast, and lets the breath, and so sometime the
beast is stiffeled. Sometime the breast is grieved by gathering of other members
that be grieved, for if the throat be grieved, or the lungs, or the stomach,
needs must the breast be sore and sharply grieved, and the griefs of the
breast be most perilous, and namely they within, for the nighnesse of ye
heart, that is the place of life: and therefore a little pricking or pinching in
the breast within, is more sore than a great wound in the arm or in the thigh
without. Diverse dispositions of the breast is in men and in fowls, as says
Aristotle. For men have broad breasts and somewhat bending in the right side
and left, and that hollow bending is token of ^oldnes and of strength, and no
beast has paps in the breast, but men and Elephants, as says Aristotle lib.
2. And some beasts have pappes in the side, or in the womb, as Swine, Hounds,
Asses, Bine, Sheep, and other such. A beast that has pappes in the womb
brings forth many more at a time, (as it fares in Hounds and Swine) then
those that have teates in the breast, as it fares in women and Elephants, that
gendreth never but one, as says he lib. 5. And Fowls have generally sharp
breasts, and namelye fowls of pray, with crooked bills and sharp claws,
and little flesh, and good flight and sharp sight: for they see their meat
very far off. And therefore such fowls fly up in the air, much more higher
than other Fowls, and that is for pray, as says Aristotle lib. 2. The
sharpness of breast is a token of boldness and of gentleness, the sowse or
counter mu^e of the Ha^ke.
as says Isidore of a Goshauke, that is of more boldness in breast, than in
bill or claws, and more armed with the breast, than with bill or clawe. And
therefore the Goshauke is bold in the breast, and in the air he smites his
pray to the ground.

Of the Pappe. Cap. 34.
THe pap is called Mammilla in latin, Ma^milla. Sororia. Vber.
and takes that name of roundnes, for Maso in Greek is round in Latin, as
says Isid. The nursing breast.
The teate or nipple is ye head of the pap, The maidens breast The vvoma^s breast.
that the child sucketh and takes between his lips, is called Papilla in
Latin, and has y^ name of Palpare to grope: for ye child often touches it,
and gropeth thereafter. Also ye paps be called Vbera in latin, either for yt
they be full of milk, or of humuors of milk, as it were a bottle. For after ye
birth of a child, if blood be not wasted with feeding, it comes by a kind
way into ye paps, and wareth white by virtue of them, and takes the quality
of milk, as says Isido. And Constant. says, that the pappes be made and
compounded of a manner kernel substance, that is soft, fleshie, and white: as
the kind of milk is. The veins and strings in the kernel substance of the
pappes are meddled: by the which blood with breath is conveyed to the pappes.
The paps be set in the breast to be nigh to the heart, that by decoction of ye
heat of the heart, the blood may the easelyer be turned into the kind of
milk: For blood comes by an hollow vein to the heart, and then to the
breast, and pearceth at last and comes to the pappes, and in the hollow flesh
of the paps, the blood by virtue of heat, tourneth into the substance and
hind of milk. And the flesh of the pappe has dens and holes as a spounge,
and therefore it is meet to breeding of milk to the feeding of any child.
The pappe has this property, as it is said upon Aphoril. That the paps of a
woman that shall have child before her time, ware soft and tender, as says
Hippocrates. Also he says, That if the right pappe of a woman that goes with
two children, A note of untimely birth.
wareth tender and soft, the man child shall be borne before his time: and if
the left pappe wax soft, then the female shall be borne before her time: and
if both the pappes grow tender and soft, both the children shall be borne
before their time. And in Commento Galen tells the cause hereof, and says,
that the smalnesse of the pappe betokens scarsitie of milk: and therefore if
the child has not due feeding, he must needs be dead born before his time.
Also Hippocrates says there, that in women in which superfluity of hot blood
turns to the pappes, betokens madness. Galen tells the cause thereof,
and says, that when superfluity of seruent hot blood comes to the pappes,
if it may not be turned into milk for passing great heat and abundaunce
thereof, then it is dispearced and turned into sharp smoke, and goes up to the
head, and troubles the brain, and so breeds madness. Also he says there:
If thou will make the blood of Menstruum in a woman less, thou shall set a
coppe to ye pap, Copping, or boxing
to ye veyns which come from ye Mother, as says Galen: and by such manner of
drawing, the superfluity of blood, is drawn to the paps, and so the nether
bleeding of Menstruum is diminished, as Galen rehearses. Also he says, If
much milk run out of the pappes of a woman, that goes with child, it is a
token that the child is feeble: and if the pappes be hard, it is a token,
that the child is feeble, for the milk is not diminished, by reason that the
child is feeble to receive and turn it into his feeding. Therefore too great
dropping of the pappes is a token of corruption and imperfection of the child
as says Galen. And if the pappes be meanly hard, it is a token of the childs
health. For too great smalnesse and leanness of the paps after the conception,
is a token that the child is feeble and corrupt, and it is a token that the
child shall be dead born, or else to be borne before the time, as says he. And
if a woman be with child of a man child, the right pappe is more then the
left: and if she be with child of a female, then is the left pappe more than
the right: and that is first known, when the child begins to move
himself, as says Aristotle liber 19. Also as he says, often time by reason of
too much milk and crudding thereof, the pappes ware over hard. And if there
grow any hair while the breasts ^e over hard, there comes a great sickness
and sore, that is called Pilosa, Addition
(A kindly humor lacking heat or moisture, is turned to vlceration, and
begins his swellings like a ball or wenne: but if the humor return
shortly after delyueraunce, then Pilosa dis^olueth into his former kind,) and
the ache cease not till matter and corruption comes out as says Aristotle.
Also he says lib. 6. that beasts with many pappes, bring sorth many at a
time, and they have teates divided, as it fares in a Bitch, and in a Sow.
When a Sow farroweth, she gives the first pappe to the first Pigge, and the
next to the second, and so of the other. And beasts with few teates bring
forth few at a time, as a Woman and an Elephant, Women are little beholding
to Ra^^^olo me, that let a woman betvveene a Sovv and an Elephant.
that has teates set before in the breast.

Then the pappe is a needful member to feed and nourish the child, and to
take menstruall blood to turn into milk: and to cause ye blood that is
vnpured, to dissolve, and to make it white, sweet, and thick, and to defend
the breast and the heart, and to know Sexus and ages, and is shewer of
corruption. And the pappe is round, euenlong, sinewye, fleshre, dennie, and
fully set to the teeth of children.

Of the Lungs. Cap. 35.
Pulmo.
THe lunges be the bellows of ye heart: for in the lungs is a spirit that
blows and moves, and receives and puts out air. Or else, the lungs be
called Pulmo in Latin, because it beats in opening of it self, that it may
take in breath, and thrusting together may: put it out. Addition
Unto the lungs belong the th^ote boll, that is to say, the gul of the throat,
the lung pipe and we^o^ pertaining to the lyghts and to the heart, conueying
air to them both, and divides it self by many pipes within the lungs. The
lungs or lights, are called the bellows of the body, for it draws and
sends forth again the air, with the which, the heart and other members be
te^pered, and fashioned much like an Ox hofe: and is in continual moving, in
drawing in and out of breath, as says Isidor. And the lunges are made of flesh
soft and airely, full like to the foam that is run and crudded, as says Con.
The lunges helps the heart, and beclippeth it al about, and serves the heart
of cold air to make it temperate: also the lunges be the instrument of the
spirit and of the voice. The spirit and breath is needful for the heart to
draw in air to cool the heart, and to put out superfluity and fumositie by
chosing of the lunges. And therefore the lungs be a mean between the heart and
the throat, that cold air break not suddenly into the heart: but rather to
temper the air that is received.

Also the lunges are the likeness of a little fold, that keeps cold air
to swage great heat of the heart, that is needful to make the voice, and
hot air that is needful to the heart and to the breath. For without the
lungs may no voice be formed neither breath, as says Aristotle li. 13. And for
these causes the flesh of the lunges is soft, and smooth, and hollow, to
change the easelyer air into his own kind, that the spirit of life may so
pass easily, into the hollownesse of the heart, to keep and save the life of
a beast: and it is general as Aristotle says, that every breathing beast has
lungs, and all beasts that go does breath, and some water beasts do breath,
as the Dolphin. Also every beast which gendreth has black lunges, and much
blood through ye heat of kind. The lungs of a beast, which lays eggs is
little and dry, and may swell, and is hollow, as says Aristotle. And as he
says lib. 13. some beasts have no lungs, but they have branches in steed of
lungs. Also lib. 16. he says, that every beast that has lunges, is hotter
than a beast that has no lunges: and a beast that has lunges, has much blood
in comparison to a beast that has no lunges. And the lunges be grieved many
ways: Sometime by the reumaticke humor coming to the pipes of ye lungs, and
then be diverse passions bred, by diverse floating of humors to the principles
of the lungs, as Squinancie; tisike, cough, hoarcenesse, hasknesse of the
voice, and such other. And sometime by gendring of humors in the wosen and
pennis of the lunges: and so comes Tisike, and other dreadful passions, as
it fares in them, that spitte blood and corrupt matter, as says Constantine.

Also sometime the lungs be grieved by botches in the substance thereof, and
that comes of sharpness of a humor, which fleeteth to the substance of the
lunges and such a passion is not lightly cured. Vlsuratio^ Pestumation.
For when the substance of the lunges has botches by the sharpnes of the
humor that comes thereto, Congellation.
it may not be lightly closed and cured, for the tenderness and continual
moving of the lunges.

And so then the air drawn in at the hole of the botch broken vanishes
easily away: and therefore it suffices not to temper the heat of the heart,
but often for scarcity of air drawn in, the heart it self faints and dies.
Also libr.13. Aristotle says, that if a beast draws breath in and out, while
that he eats, and so some part of the meat falls into the hollownesse of
the pipes of the lunges, then the beast cougheth, and sometime by mishappe is
strangeled and choked. For coughing is naught els-but moving of ye virtue of
the soul to put out superfluities, that be about the instruments of the
spirit, as says Constant. Then gather ye by these things aforesaid, that the
lunges be the proper instrument of the heart, for it cools the heart, and by
subtlety of his substance changes the air, that is drawn in, and makes
it more subtle. The lungs shapeth the voice, and cease never of moving. For
it closes it self and spredeth, and keeps the air to help the heat in
his dens and holes. And therefore a beast may not live under the water without
stifling, but as long as he may hold in the air that is gathered within.
The lunges by continual moving put off air that is gathered within, either
cleanses and purges it, and ministers continual and couenable feeding to
the vital spirit, and departs the heart from the instruments of feeling, and
breeds fomie humors, and beclyppeth a side half the substance of the
heart. A ha^tening of death.
And when the lungs be grieved by any occasion, it speedeth to death ward, and
lets and disquieteth ye workings of the virtue of life. All these things
says Constantine by order.

Addition
Next unto the lunges, is the middresse, called Diaphragma, Septu^ transuersum,
and Preco^di^, it is a thick skin, which divides the upper part of the body
from the nether part, that is to say, the heart and lunges from the spleen and
liver.

Of the heart. Cap. 36.
Cor. Cardia.
THe heart is termed Cor in Latin, and has that name of Cura, business, for
therein is all business and cause of wit and of knowing: and is nigh the lunges
to be tempered by remedy of the moist lungs, if it be het with wrath. The
heart is set in ye middle of ye body of a beast, to give and to send life and
moving to all ye members of ye body, as says Isid. And Constantine says, That
the heart is a fleshie substance, dennie, hard, hollow, even, long, and round,
and the heart is hollow to keep heat, and the heart is the foundation of
powers to all the body, and it is dennie and hollow, to move it self the more
easily closing and opening: and it is hard, that it be not lightly grieved and
hurt: and it is round, to have therein the more plenty of spirits: and it is
euenlong, shapen as a top, to make the working of kind heat that comes
always into the sharp end, the more strong. And the heart is set between
the two hollownesses of the breast, in the middle of the beast, that the
spirit of life may come from the heart, as it were from the middle of the
utter parts of all the body, and the head of the heart that has the sharp
end, is set in ye left part of a man's body. And for that the sharp end of
the heart, has most strength in that side, and the spirit of life is therein,
therefore in the left arm the pulse is most strongest, and the heart lies
toward the left side of a man, to temper the coldness of the left side by
heat of the heart. And the heart has two hollownesses, one in the left side,
that comes sharp: and one in the right side, that is within, and these two
hollownesses be called the celles of the heart. Celles or concauits


And between these two celles, is one hole, that some men call a vein, other,
an hollow way. And this hole is broad before the right side, and straight before
the left side. And that is needful to make the blood subtle; that comes
from the right womb to the left, and so the spirit of life may be bred the
easelier in the left womb. Augustine in the book, De differencia spiritus and
animae, says, that in the right womb of the heart is more of blood than of
spirit: and in the left womb the contrary. For there the spirit of life is
wedde to give the beast life, and comes by certain veins spread all about.
The left part of the heart has two holes, one within ye ve^^es of the vein
that brings blood from the heart to the lungs: The other hole is it, from the
which comes the greatter artery, that is the shape and form of artery
veins and ways, of all the body. And the pulses thereby be bredde in the
heart, and namely in the left side, for the cause that is said before. Also the
right part has two holes, one comes and enters into the vein which is
called Concaua, and brings blood from the Liver to the holownesse of the
heart. And of the other hole comes ye veyns of the organ and his ways, to
feed the lungs. And these holes be covered with certain small skins, the
which skins open and send blood from the heart. And the^ they close and let
the coming again. In either womb of the heart is a piece formed as an ear
without. And these two pieces be called the ears of ye heart: and in them the
veins, organnes, and stringes he placed The heart has in the breadth thereof
two grystly bones, which be called the seats of the heart. About the heart
goes a manner clothing, that is called the shryne and cofre of the heart. And
this clothing is fastened with the clothings or pa^^cles of the breast.

This clothing is not joined to nigh the heart, least the moving of the heart
should be let, which is needful to the heart for the foundation of kindly
heat, whereby a beast is bred. Special kindeling of kindly heat.
Hue vsque Constantinus. lib 4. cap. 21. Also Aristotle li. 1. says, that
there is no member in which blood is so set as in the heart: Blood is placed in
the lungs, but it is more steadfastly placed in the heart. Also as he says lib.
11 the heart is set of every beast in the myddle of the breast, except man. For
the heart of a man leans toward the left side. And the sharp end of the
heart leans inward to the breast, in all beasts, except fishes. For in them
the sharp end is hanging toward a part of the head, in the place of joining
of the gylls. Also he says there, that every beast that has blood, has liver
and heart. Also libro. xii. he says, that in the heart is the well and the
beginning of the veins and the first virtue which breeds blood: and the
blood of the heart, is clean, clear, hot, and of greater feeling, and
according to wit and understanding. And he says there, that the well or
beginning of feelyng of beasts, is in the heart, and the wits of feelyng, are
continually with the heart. And lib. 13. it is said, that the heart is set in
the foremost part of the breast, in the middle: for it is the well of life, and
all moving and all feeling is therein. The feelyng and moving is not but in the
former part of the heart, and therefore mean and last is distinguished. And
the breath goes first into ye inward part of the heart: and the kind of
making and composition of the heart is of veins, for it is of the kind of
veins. And the situation or place of the heart is convenient, for it is set
in the over place and in the foremost: For because it is more noble, it is more
kindly ordained in the nob^er place. Among all the members, the heat is most
nobiest: and therefore it is set in the middle of the body, as it is most
expedient: for it is the accomplishment and perfection of the beast, and no
member is so needful to the life, as is the heart.

Wherefore if the heart be hurt, ye beast cannot live: and therefore the body
of the heart is in the middle: and the making thereof is in a sad body, and
thick, and kindly hollow. For the well of the veins spring thereof: and it is
hollow to receive blood, and is thick to save it, and is the well of moving,
and in no member is blood without veins, but in the heart alone: for blood
comes out of the heart, and goes into the veins: and no blood comes to
the heart out of other places. For the heart is the beginning and well of
blood, and the first member that has blood, as it is showed in Anathomia. For
the making of the heart seems first of blood, and is the beginning and well of
moving, of liking and of vnliking. And generally of all wits, the moving
begins of the heart, and thereunto resorteth, and the virtue thereof is spread
and straight into all the members, and after one manner. And in some beasts is
a bone found in the heart to sustain the heart, as bones be set in other
members. And in the hearts of beasts of great courage be three wombes or cells.
And in the heart of a beast with a little heart be only two cha^bers. And for
this cause a womb ought to be in the heart of a beast. For the heart must be
the place of receiving of pure blood and temperate in quantity and quality:
and is full hot and moist, for the heart is a member, in the which is the first
virtue. Huc vsque Ari. li. 13. where he speaks much of this matter. Also
liber. 16. he says, that the heart of a beast must be complement, therefore
the heart is made first, because of the heat of the heart, and for the
springing of veins out thereof, kind has set before the heart a cold member,
that is the brain. And therefore the head in generation is created after the
heart. And it happens that the heart is grieved either by binding togethers
of other members (as says Constantine.) Or else by distemperaunce of it self.
For if passing heat have mastrie in the heart, the blood of the heart boyleth
and moves, and so the vital spirit is grieved. For if the heart be
constrained by overmuch cold, Anaoianses of the heart.
the blood is congealed, and therefore comes death. And sometime the heart is
grieved by some Postume, that infecteth the coffer thereof: and then the beast
lives not long. Also the heart sometime quaketh, and that comes of watrie
moisture shed and spread in the skins of the heart, the which moisture
lets the due opening and closing thereof. And so it seems to a sick man,
yt the heart moves from place to place. Also it happens that the heart has
a default that comes of wasting of spirits, and of spiritual virtue and of
passing out of spirits. And this does chance either of too great repletion
that grieueth and confounds the virtue, or else of too great wasting, that
wastes the virtue, as it fares in them that have a Cardiaca, Cardise^ passio,
the cardiacke passion, it is about ^ heart, being dep^^led and overcome with
fatness.
and in some men that sweat too much or drink too sharp drink. Also
sometime the heart is grieved by some sumosities and smoke, corrupt and
venomous entering to the heart, and corrupting the openings of the heart,
whereupon death follows anon. Also sometime the heart is grieved by stopping
of the hollow vain^, whereby the blood that is the feeding of the heart, and
of the vital spirit, is warued. In these manners and in many other the heart
is grieved as says Constant. liber. 9. chap. 23. Galen in Tegni. says, that
the virtue and complexion of the heart is known by these tokens: The
complexion of ^ heart.
That is to wit, by great breathing and blowing, by swifte pulse and thick,
and hasty, by swift working, by wrath, hardiness, and madness: by largeness
of breast and hairenesse thereof. All these be tokens that heat has masterie
in the heart. And all the tokens contrary to those betoken the contrary hereof.
U^pon the which place Haly in his comes says, that in a man the heart is as
a root and a more in a tree. The organe or long pipe that comes of the left
cell of the heart, is like the stock or leg of the tree: the which a good
way runs forth as boughs of a tree into two parts, of the which one goes
upward and that other downward. They spread abroad and divide as it were
spraies or small boughs into all the body, even to the arteries of the head.
And when the heart opens, all the organes and veins open together: and when
the heart closes, they close also: and by opening of them cold air is drawn
from the utter part of the heart to the inward part thereof: and in closing
thereof foul smoke that is bread in them, is wrong out and drawn out some
deal: and by ye drawing out thereof the complexion thereof is made even. And
as he says the virtue of moving that is pight in the heart, runs and
passes by the weson and vains to every part of the body, and brings to every
of them proper life and proper kind heat. The breast serves the heart in
opening of it self, and drawing in of cold air, and closing of it self, and
putting out of smeakye vapor that is bred in the heart. Wherefore if the
breast, weson, and veins, and other instruments of life be safe, the virtues
be concordaunt in their workkings: and if they be sick and grieved, the
virtues be not obedient.

Therefore the goodness and evil of ly^s that serve, either help or let the
heart to work and to do the dades thereof. And therefore when the heart is
strong, and has the members thereto obedient, both in opening and closing well
disposed, then comes from the heart strong breathing, and strong pulse, and
strong working, after the goodness of the member and of the virtue. And when the
virtue is feeble and slack, it may not spread the wosen and veins into every
place of the body, and therefore breathing is lesser, and pulse also. Also if
the heart be too cold and too moist, and the pulse soft, the man is berest of
boldness and hardiness, and is fearful and slow, and bare of hair in the
breast, for scarcity of smokie vapor, of yt which hair is bred. And if the
heart be too dry and cold, it makes the pulse rough, hard, and small, and
slow breath and selde, namely, if the beast be little and straight. Huc vsque
Haly super Tegni Galen.

Addition
The heart is the principal member of a man, and it is the member that has
the first life in man, and it is the last thing that does dye in man. The heart
does viuificate or quicken all other members: and it is sooner decayed of vital
operation, by thought and care, than by distemperaunce of humor or insatiable
su^fet: and yet the gretest of these evils, is to be avoided in time, by a
godly regard and Christian abstinence, And this of the heart suffices.

Of the breath. Cap. 37.
Anheli^us. ^^rinus. P^eumaRespiratio. S^raculu^ Hippaco.
THe breath is the moving of the heart and of the lunges, gendered through
drawing in of cold air, to temper kind heat, and expulsing out of the same
air: for the heart by no means can suffer the lack of drawing of air, for
if the heart should rest a little while of drawing of air, it should be
grieved, or fail. And therefore the heart has contrary mouings: For it
opens the lunges, and draws in air: and closes the lunges, and puts
out air. And so the breath by drawing in of air tempereth the heat of the
heart, and by putting out of air, it cleanses ye heart of smokie vapor, and
also it seedeth and nourishes the spiritual life. Also by strength and
feeblenes of breath is showed the state of the spiritual members: as it is
said before of the properties of the limges. Also in breathing there is more
air drawn in, than is put out. For a great deal turns into the seeding and
nourishing of the spiritual life: and the breath is taken within the lungs,
and the beast lives without st^ffeling, as long as the spirit is cloased
within the instrument of breath. Also when the instruments of the breath be
grieved, the spirits are corrupt, and changes after the qualytie of the
lymme and the instrument that is grieved, as says Constantine.

The breath is sometime grieved by default of virtue that moves and rules the
sinews. Sometime by stopping of the instruments of the spirit, that comes
of great and thick humors, or of great ventositie and wind, that stops
the way of the breath: or else of some postume of the lungs, that grieueth the
clothing and the skins of the heart: or of the great heat of the heart,
having masterie in the substance of the lunges. By reason of all which
diseases, the breath is made feeble and scant. And if the breath be swifte and
little, it betokens strong heat, that stifleth and overcomes the vertne,
and namely if the touch be hot, and if there follows thirst and dryness of
the tongue. And cold breath and little in Febribus acutis, is token of death:
for slownesse of breath betokens default of virtue of out putting: and
coldness betokens quenching of kind heat: and default of virtue in the
substance of the heart, and of the instruments of spirit. Also changing of
breath comes of universal corruption of the inner members, as it fares in
leprosies, in yt which the breath stinketh and is corrupted, and infe^teth the
air that is nigh. Wherefore the blowing of such is wont to infect those that
come near them: it infecteth and corrupts the air near about, like as the
hissing of the Serpent, called, Regulas, whose blowing corrupts the air, and
slaieth the birds ^^eng, as Au^cen and Constantine say.

Of the Stomach. Cap. 38.
Stomachus.
THe stomach is the door of the womb, and takes meat and drink, and sends
it to the guts, as says Isidore. And Constantine says, That the stomach is
round, euenlong, hollow within, rough in the bottom, manifold and fleshly,
and has two mouths, one above and another beneath. And it is rough and
manyfolde to hold the better the meat that it takes: for if it were slipper
and smooth within, by slidernesse thereof the meat should pass out without
digesting. And it is fleshie in the botome to comfort digestion. The flesh of
the stomach is hot and also moist: Ventriculus.
of which qualities the digestion is specially strengthened in the body of the
beast. And it is round to be more able to take and receive the more meat. And
if the stomach were of another shape, three cornerd or such other, ^uill
humors therein should easily be gathered to corruption, and rotting. For such a
shape might not for corners be dried and cleansed of superfluities. It is
euenlong for yt it should not press and thrust the spiritual members by too
great roundnesse thereof, and also that it may the more easilye be joined with
the over and the nether parts. Further the stomach, and specially of man, is
straight in the over part, and wide and broad in the nether part, and that
also is needful. For since a man goes more upright then other beasts, his
meat goes downward always: And therefore the nether breath and wideness of
his stomach is profitable to take therein the more meat and drink. Also it
is sinewie to have the more subtilnesse of feeling and virtue and strength of
appetite. Also it is compassed in with yt liver to have of the liver the more
heat to conco^ and digest the meat and drink. For the liver with his five
pipes beclippeth the stomach, and gives it heat: and takes inyee, grease,
and humors, whereof blood is bred by certain veins, yt the Physicians call
Mise^acas, and turns grease, Attractiue, Nutritive, Con ormatiue, drawing,
nourishing, and comforting the blood.
iu^re and humor into blood by strong working of heat. And Constantine says,
if the stomach be substauntially hot, it digesteth well great and gross chawed
meats, and wastes liking meats, and digesteth too soon, and for likeness
it desires most hot meat, and may not suffer hunger. And if ye stomach be
cold, it defieth not well great meat, and is soon grieved therewith, and
changes them some into sour and corrupt humors. And a dry stomach is soon
a thirst, and a little water suffices not thereto: and if the water be to
much, it makes roaring and rolling in the womb. And if the stomach be moist,
it thirsts not: but it desires moist meat, and desires but little. Hue vsque
Con. li. 1. ca. 13. And he says. li. 9. cha. 26. that to the stomach chance
diverse griefs: as evil digestio^, fumosities, flure, spuing, yering,
blowing, swelling and belking: and these come of diverse causes. For sometime
they chance of evil complexion: sometime of too much emptines: sometime of too
much repletion of meat and drink: sometime of too great sharpness and biting
of humors: sometime of putrefaction of the heart: sometime of default of virtue
digestive: sometime of the quality of ye meat, which if it punch and prick,
the stomach is tormented and pricked, and compels it to pass out: or else
if it bo gleamie the stomach is made slipper, and so the meat passes out
easily: And sometime grief of the stomach comes of the feebleness of the
virtue of outputting: and grief of the stomach comes not only of it self,
Either by vomiting or laske.
but also of company and by means of other members. And the stomach is the
purueiout and husband of all the body, and the stomach takes feeding for all
the members: and serves all the members thereof, as it needs, as says
constantine. Through the pipe called Gula, Addition
and the interior Colli Fistula, the inner pipe or conduct of the neck that
comes from the neck to the stomach, and through it is conveyed the meat and
drink, which by the mouth is sent into the stomach, the upper part of the
stomach is called, Os Stomachi.

Of the Liver. Cap. 39.
Aepar. lecur. epar.
THe Liver is called Epar in Latin, and lecur also, and if has that name for
fire has place therein, that passes up speedely to the brain, and comes
thence to the eden, and to the other wits and lyins. And ye luler by his heat
draws inward sweat and juice, and turns it into blood, and serves the
body and members therewith to the use of feeding: and is called Epar, for that
it feeds such members. In the liver is the place of voluptuousness and
lyking of the flesh, In y^ temples of the pagan Gentiles, the liver was
sacrificed: read more of this in y^ Chronicle of the doom.
the ends of the liver be called Fiber, for they be straight and passing as
tou^gs, and beclyppeth the stomach, and gives heat to digestion of meat and
and they be called Fiber, because the ^igromancers brought them to the Altars
of their God Phoebus, and offered them there, and then they had aunsweres. Huc
vsque Isidorus. Constantine says, that the syuer is a member, hot, hollow, and
slender, set in the right side of the beast, under the stomach, to help the
first digestion with his heat: and also he is ^loudy and ^e^ in color, for
the vnpour thereof is turned into humor of blo^d, by full great heat: and he
is some drale hard, that he be not soon S^uf and grieved, and the liver is
diverse in men in (...) neilie of part, (...)
for in men it is greater, than in other beasts of the same quantisie. The
number of parts thereof, in some is double, and that is at the least: in some
treble, (...)
or quatreble, or at ye most quintreble. And out of the broad hollownesse of
the liver comes a vein, that Physicians call Porta: and this vein, or he
come out, Vena port
is departed in five small veins, entering into parts of the liver. The liver
draws in his hollownesse, the vapor of the first digestion by certain
veins, and by boylyng of kind heat does make digestion: secondly, it
tourneth the bloody lump, into y^ kind of four humors: and what is hot and
moist passes into the kind of blood, and is received and kept in the veins:
and what is hot and dry passes into ye kind of Cholera, and is received
properly in the skibbet of the gall: and what is cold and dry passes into the
kind of Melancholy, and his proper receipt is ye skibbet of the spleen and what
is floting and ^ratrie, passes into fleame, and the receiver thereof is the
kings. Hereof it follows, that the liver is the chief foundation of kindly
virtue, and gretest helper of the first digestion in the stomach: and the
liver makes perfectly the second digestion in the stomach, in the hollownesse
of his own substaiunce, and departs clean and pured, from unclean and
vnpured, and sends feeding to all the members, and excited love or bodily
lust, and receives diverse passions. And the liver is grieved sometime by great
seruent heat, that opens the poores within: by whose opening, the virtue
dimishing away, the liver works more s^acklye. And sometime by overmuch
cold, which lets the vapors that is drawn, to be turned into bloody
kind: and hereof many times comes the dropsy. For the dropsy is nothing
else, (as the Philosopher says) but error of the virtue of digestion in the
hollownes of the liver: for if this virtue erte and fail in his working,
needs the blood is corrupt, and if the blood be undissolved, the body that is
fed therewith swells and stretches, and thereof comes the dropsy. Also
the liver is grieved by evil co^plection of his substance, and that is by ye
distemperance of ye four humors: the which distemperaunce has mastery in the
liver. Also it is grieved by stopping of his veins: for it happens often that
the great humors and gleymie are gathered in the veins of the liver, and so
when the blood is clo^sed, and may not pass out, it causes strayghtnes and
stopping. The same also channeth by too great heat, drying the bloud^e humor,
and making the substance of the veins of the liver straight, that ye blood
may not freely shed it self to feed the other members of the body. The
same may happen sometime by too great cold congealyng the humors, and making
straight the ways of the liver, and testing the passage of blood to feed the
members.

The same also happ^neth by an impostume, grieuing the substance of the liver,
and breeding matter therein. Also the same happens by wind enclosed,
stretching the tender skins of the liver, and also by discordaunce of members
breeding woe and sorrow. Also it is often grieved by unmeasurable passing or
running out of blood, that comes of opening of the veins, that spring out of
the liver: and that comes of too great sharpness of blood, or else of too
great replecion, or feeblensse of virtue of holding, or of too great business
and labor, as Constan, says. And yet of the kind and tokens of complexion
of the liver Galen says in Tegni, a token of ye liver when it is hot, is
largnesse and widenes of the veins that be not pulses. Upon this place Haly
says, when great heat has the masterie in the liver, the liver is more, and
the vein thereof wareth more wide and great: and when that vein is great, all
the veyns that be not veins of the pulse, in all the members be great,
yelowish cholar.
and the blood thereof is hot, and sometime, thereof is bred Citrina Cholera.
And by continuance and passing of time after the state of youth, the citrius
Cholera is burnt, and thereof is made black Cholera, and diverse passions are
bred, increase, and come of such Cholera, And sometime the coldness of the
heart with ^andeth the passing and over great heat of the liver: for the liver
is ruled and governed in his working by ye heart, as by the superior and more
noble and worthier member. And this same says Aristotle lib. 13. where he
sets yt heart before the liver, as ruler and governor thereof. Also Galen
says, that the heat of the heart tempereth ye coldness of ye liver, and sign
and token of coldness and dryness of the liver, is straightness of the
veins and scarsitie of blood: as softnes of veins and much blood, is token of
moisture. Also Haly says, that the liver is the well of moisture of the body,
and therefore if the liver that is the root and well of humor be dry, it may
not worn nor change any member of the body to humor, neither to moisture,
to withstand his dryness.

The dryness and the moisture of the liver is more or less after the
disposition of the heart. Then the liver is a noble and precious member, by
whose alteration the body is altered: and the liver sends feeding and virtues
of feeding to the other members, to the nether without mean, and to the over,
by mean of the heart, as Galen says. Yet contrariwise Aristotle says, lib.
13 that the heart does all that is aforesaid, by mean of the liver; which of
these opinions is of more truth and certainty, and put and leave to the
judgment and discretion of other men.

The liver is none other thing, Addition
than congealed blood, which does ralifie the stomach like the fire under a
pot, and does make digestio^, and as the third principal member in man, in
whom rests the animal spirits. And whereas many affirm, that man's liver
may waste, it is not so: yet may the liver have many and diverse infirmities,
as heat, water gulls, kernells and opilations, with such like diseases. The
liver is hot and dry.

And this that we have treated of at this time is sufficient touching the
properties of the liver.

Of the Gall. Chap. 40.
THe Gall is called Fell in Latin, Fell, chola
for it is a case of a thin sell, and con^ayneth humor that is moist and
bitter, for red Cholera has masterie and domination therein, as says Isidore.
Addition
And the gall receives the refuse and dregs of the blood, and it cleaves
chiefly to the lappes of the liver. For the case of the Gall is a certain
skin, set upon the bounch or rising of the liver, and has two sprayes: by
the one thereof, red Cholera is borne to the guts, to comfort ye virtue of out
putting, yt the guts may be purged and cleansed the better, and the more
easilye, by the sharpness of that Cholera: By the other spraye, Cholera is
brought to the stomach, that it may with heat thereof help the virtue of
digestion.

Then the Gall is a member hot and dry, The Gall hot and dry.
set on the rising part of the liver: and is the propre receiver of red Coler,
and helps to cleanse the blood from^ red Coler. For by the presence of Coler
the blood should be burnt, but if the superfluity thereof had a place within
the case of the Gall, and the Gall by heat thereof helps and susteineth the
seething of meat and drink, and perteth and sucketh by his subtlety, and
poncheth and prycketh by his biting and sharpness, and gnaweth and byteth the
guts, and exepteth and styrreth to put out superfluities and styncking
things: And the Gall for great heat is most bitter, and by medlyng thereof
with sweetness of the blood, changes or alters. Huc vsque Constantinus,
Aristotle, lib. 3. says, that the Dolphyn has no Gall: and all kind of
fowls and of sysh, and all manner of beasts, which lay Eggs, have Galls.
Some have more and some have less: And by some manor of wise it is in subtle
ways, that stretches from the Liver to the guts, by one manner, these ways
stinken: And one manner the Gall is in a gutter diversely, for sometime in the
nether, and sometime in the myddle, and sometime in the over, and some fowls
have Galls privily hyd in a gutte, as Culuours or Doves, and water Crows, and
Swallows. And some have a great Gall on the Liver, and in the womb, and in a
gutte, as in a Goshauke, and in a Kite or Glede.

Also, lib. 14. Aristotle says, that some beasts have no Galls, as Horses,
Mules, Asses, and Olyphants. The Camel has no Gall distinguished, but he has
small veins, in which is gall.

Also some men have great gall in the Liver, and some have not so great. And
the Gall is a certain superfluity, which is gathered as dragges in the Womb:
But yet kind uses superfluity to certain help and succor. In them that
have the kind of the Liver whole and sound, and well disposed and ordered, and
have kyndely sweet blood, no Gall is found: Or if it be found, it is but
little, and that in right small veins. And therefore their. Liver that have no
gall, is of good color, and more sweeter then the other. In a beast that has
Gall, is somewhat, which is of very sweet smell, found under the Gall: For by
gathering of the Gall into one place, the other parts being nigh there about,
are the sweeter and more pleasant.

Also the Gall by his subtlety and sharpness, ^arueth and cutteth great
humors, and wastes them by his dryenesse. And therefore to cleanse the eye
sight, and to make it clear, and to put of the impediment and let of the
spirit of life, and namely the Gall of and ^oshauke; and of other fowls, which
live by rauine, is necessary, as says Con in Viatico. And by continuing hease,
and great boiling of the humor of the Gall, coming again to the Liver, the
blood is infected, which being infected, both after the nourishments that are
sent to feed the members, and apphyreth and enfedeth them: and also makes and
causes the skin to be yelow of color or else green, or black. The tollens
of those passions be these: The infection of all the body, thirst, bytternesse
of ye mouth, ^che of the forhead, rynging in the ears, yelow brine with yelow
some continual yelow spewing. And sometime it happens, that the poo^es of
the case of the Gall be stopped and let: And then Coler infecteth the Liver,
and breeds the same manner of passion. Therefore in Viatico, Con says, that
when the case of the Gal is grieved, that than saylleth the virtue thereof, by
the which he uses to draw out the red Coler of the Liver: And so the Coler
abiding with the blood, the blood is dyed and changed. Also he says, that
when Apostume is bred in the ways by the which Coler passes to the Gall, the
Coler turns to the Liver, and passes about with the blood into all the body.
For if the nether hole be stopped, than Coler passes up to the over way, and
to the stomach, and than the fare is yelow, and the mouth is bitter and dry,
burning and thirst in the stomach.

The Uryne and dyrt comes while, for that Coler is far from the Liver and
the Keynes; where the Uryne is wont to be dyed. And if the over hole be
stopped, than Co^ler dies the nether parts: And tokens be seen that be
contrary to the foresaid tokens, as Constantine says. The gall lies upon the
liver like a bladder, having a skin easy to break, named Cista Fel^s, the
Filme of the Gall.

This that is spoken and treated of the Gall, suffices touching to this matter.

Of the Spleen. Cap. 41.
Splen. Liena.
THe Milt is called Splen in Latin, and has that name of Supplere, to fulfill:
for it supplyeth the left side before the lyner, that it be not emptio. And
some men suppose, The harmony of the Elementall humors.
that the mylt in the cause of laughing. For by the Spleen we are moved to
laugh: by the Gall, we be wroth: by the Heart we be wise: by the Brain, we
feel: by the Liver, we love.

And if these be in good state, whole, and well disposed, the beast is all
whole, as says Isidore. And Constantine says, That the mylt is set in the
left side, and the shape thereof is euenlong, and is somewhat hollow toward the
stomach, and rising up toward the ribs. In these two places it is bound
with certain small clothings. And men say, that the mylt has two veins, by
the one thereof, he draws to him black Cholera, of the blood of the liver,
and by the other he sends that that suffices to the stomach, to comfort the
appetite thereof. The mylt helps to sulfill the default of the body in the
left side, and to a^nswere to the liver in the other side, to the conservation
of ye stomach, to draw to him the dregs of blood, for cleansing of the
liver: and to send what suffices to the appetite and desire to comfort the
stomach. The substance of the mylt is thin and hollow, to draw easelye the
humor of dregs: and he is black, for the likeness of black Cholera, that
he receives and contains: and he is also set in the left side, between the
ribs and the stomach, for temperance and cooling of the left side, and for to
save the heating of the stomach, to whom he is joined. He is somewhat hard,
that he be not lightly hurt by quantity and quality of the burnor of dregs,
that he draws and takes. The mylt is often grieved: sometime by the default
of virtue of containing and holding, and that is, when he may not draw to it
self humor, nor is not able to send it that is drawn to another place. And
sometime by stopping, when great humore and gleymie be gathered, and stops
the ways of the mylt, and let the working thereof. Also sometime, by too great
repletion of humors, for humors fleeng to the mylte are drawn thither, for
kindly working therrof, and may not be doyded at the full, and therefore the
humors increase gleymie and hard in the hollownes of the mylt, insomuch, that
it seems, that the mylte grows bigger. But by the sentence of Hippocrates,
if the spleen be great, the body withers and fades: and if the mylt
diminishes and fades, the body fatteth. Therefore if the mylte be somewhat
more drawing to lyttlenesse, than to muchnesse, it is a sign and token of good
complexion, as says Constantine lib.9. cap. 22.

The mylt is a spongeous substance, Addition
lieng under the short ribbe, in the left side, by which equal of kind, man
is disposed to mirth, otherwise there follow, the passions of sadness.

Of the Bowels. Cap. 42.
THe bowels be commonly called the guts, Viseribus Albegmina. Viseus.
Intestina. Entera.
which are set under and subject to the members of life, as says Isidore. And
they be called Intestina in Latin, and be bounds togethers within with a
bond, and bear a manner service and reverence to the higher members, and he
their necessary instruments, and they be called Viscera in Latin, as it were
having life: for they be near about those places that be nigh the heart, where
the life is bred and engendered. Huc vsque Isidorus. And Constantine says, That
the guts be members, which hold every each other within hollow and round, set
into the womb in length and in breadth, The making and substance of them, is
like to the stomach. And they be nu^bered fire principal guts: three of them
be subtle, and be joined above: and three are gross, and begin from beneath.
The first gut of the three subtle guts, is called, Duodenum, for in his length
by the measure of every man, he contains twelve inches: and this gut
stretches up by the ridge, and bends toward no side. The second gut in
Latin is called leiunium, to understand in English, fasting: for he is always
void of meat and drink. And wise men and practisers tell, that when a beast is
dead, that gutte is always found void and empty: But some men say, as such
as know Anathomia, yt this gut puts of all things from it self, and
holds nothing to his own feeding. The third little gut, is called in Latin
Subtile^, much like to the second, but he is never found without somewhat of
meat. Among ye other great guts, the first is called in Latin, Orbum, and
has a mouth in the subtle end: and that gut has that name, for he is in
rest, as it were made a window, without the other mouth. And when other guts
have two mouths, that gut has but one: and therefore he fares as a sack, for
he receives much, and puts out but little, in comparison to other guts. The
second gut is set under Orbum, which is called the sack, and this second gut
is named ^leon: Of lleon.
For in that gut is the sickness that is called lliaca pasaio gendered. The
third gut is named Colon, in the language of Greek, and is joined fast to the
nether opening of all the body: and in this gut is bred a right grievous
sickness, that is called Cellica p^ssi^, that comes either of great
straightness of that gut, or else of gathering of great and cold humors, that
stop that gut within, as says Constant. and Galen super Aphor. By that that is
before said, it is known whereto the guts be needful. For they change the
meat into feeding, and receive the superfluities in their hollownesse to
discharge kind. And also heereto is needful roundnesse of guts, and swellyng
and solding, as says Constantine, that the meat from the stomach cleave some
part in the hollownesse of the guts, and to put out superfluity, and to hold
what is needful for the beast: and they be round, least any superfluity
gathered of the stomach should abide in any corner, and breed corruption in
the guts. Also the guts be clothed with two full subtle clothes and small,
either wrapped therein, and that is needful: for if the one were grieved, the
other cloth may help. Also the guts be some deal folded and rough within, and
the folding thereof is straight in breadth, to put out the superfluity of
dregs, and to withold couenably what is needful to food. Also the guts be
clustered and bound together, so that the less may have succor of the more,
and small and feeble of the greater and stronger: that the working of the
virtue of kind, be made perfect and coue^able to put out superfluities, and to
withold what is needful. Also liber. 2. Aristotle says, that the kind of
guts varieth and changes in quantity and qualytie by diversity of teeth
in the jaws of a beast. Therefore he says, that in all beasts with teeth in
either ia^, the gut is less than the gut in beasts without teeth, and no beast
has an even strayt gut, except he have teeth in either iawe. And he says
there, that the womb of a serpent is straight and like to a large gut, and if
he be little by kind, he has a gall in the guts, and if he be great, he has a
gal upon ye liver. Also li. 13. he says, That all beasts with large and
straight guts be full great gluttons: for by scarsitie of use of meat and
indigestion, he desires indigest superfluity of meat, and the meat passes
soon out, and therefore he desires much, and seeks meat always.

The guts and bowels are grieved in many manner wise, as says Constantine
libro 9 cap.26. Sometime by a cholariche humor, or by a melancholicke humor,
fretting the guts, and gnawing and breeding the flure that is called
Dissenteria, that is a right evil passion, and often brings to death as it is
said in Aphorsin. If black Cholar come out in the beginning of a Flure, that
Flure is deadlye.

Also sometime by gnawing, punching, and wounding of the guts, and that is by
an utter impostume, breeding matter and punching in the clothing of ye guts: or
else by outward hurting and grieuing. Also they be sometime grieved by wind
enclosed, that haleth and stretches ye clothing and sinews of the guts: and
that is a bitter and grievous pain, so that sometime it seems that the guts
be fretted and wounded: Also sometime by a humor great and sleumatike that
stops the nether parts of the guts, and lets the out passing of the
orders and breeds an Evil, which is called Iliaca passio, or else that evil
which is called Collica passio, Of Colo^.
And each evil is pestilent and deadly, and full seldom healed and cured, and
often slays the second day or the third, except men have succor hastily. For
the other passions of the guts, seek in the Treatise, De infirmitatibus, and
Collica passione.

Of the Kidneyes. Cap. 43.
THe kidneyes are called Renes in Latin: Renes. Nephroi, ye reyns of a man's
back.
for of them springs the humor Seminall, as says Varro, for the veins and
the maraow, sweat out a thin humor into the kidneyes, and that lycour is often
resolved by the heat of Venus, and runs and comes, and sheddeth it self
into the place of gendring as says Isidore. And the place which is in the
sides of the joints of the ridge, in which be the seats of ye kidneyes, be
called the loins: and be called in Latin Lumbi, for lust and liking of the
fleshly act, as says Isidore: For in men the cause of bodily lust, is in the
kidney and loins.

And Constable speaking of the kidneyes says, that they be made to suck watery
humor from the liver, and to cleanse and purify it, and the purgation thereof,
which is the urine, the kidneyes sends to the bladder by the ways of the
urine: and so says Haly also, Super Tegni. And he says, that the highest
maker and Creator has made and ordained two kidneyes to draw watrye moisture
of blood from the liver, and to send it to the bladder to pass out. Aristotle
lib.13. says, That the reins be made for the bladder, that so the working of
the bladder, should be the better and the more perfect: For the reins cleanse
the superfluity of moisture, that runs to the bladder. Also he says, that
the right reyne is higher than the left, in every beast that has reins, and
that because in the right side, the heat is higher and stronger. Also he
says, that in all beasts which have reins, the left reyne is less fatter
than the right, and higher: For kind in the right side is more light, and of
more moving and heat, for heat dissolueth and wastes fatnes. Also the reins
be the uttermost of the inner members, and therefore they need great heat.
Then consider, That the reins are hot, and keep kindly heat, and they temper
the coldness of ye ridge and of the joints of the ridge bone, and drain watery
humors from the liver, and dies and colors blood, and comfort the
virtue of kind, and breeds Seminall humor: and they be fleshly, hollow,
round, and covered with fatness. They are fleshly and powrie, to draw and to
receive the easelier, watrie superfluity: they are round, that they should not
gather no humor to rotting and corruption: and are cloased and warded with
fatness, that they be not grieved with the coldness of the ridge boanes: and
they receive certain veins of the stomach, that come out of the liver. In
the which veins the superfluity of humor in the second digestion is brought
to the reins. Therefore if the said veins be stopped and let in their
office, the reins be grieved and the liver also. Sometime in the reins fail
diverse griefs, as says Constantine lib.2. cap.34. If the veins of the liver
be stopped, the reins lack humor of blend to their feeding, and therefore
they were lean and small. And if the nether ways of them be constrained or
straighted with heat either with cold, then by ye presence of superfluous
humor, that comes into their substance, they be overmuch stretched and
dilated, and so consequently corrupted, or else the humors being fordried, they
putrify and turn into the stone.

Addition
The reins are also sundry ways grieved, with a postumate wind, that
comes of extreme cold, or of a fervent heat.

Of the Bladder. Cap. 44.
THe bladder is called Vesica in Latin, Vesica. Cystis. A man's bladder.
and has that name for taking and receiving of wind, as says Isidore: for
by drawing and receiving of wind, the bladder opens and spredeth: as
contrariwise by sending out of wind it closes and goes togethers. And is
called Vesicula in Latin as it were the diminutiue of Vesica, and it hangs
as it were a birds croppe under the throat, like a purse, in the which the
first meat of the foul is received, and kept therein to the second digestion,
that shall be made in the guysarne or mawe: and the meat is kept in that croppe,
as it were in a proper spense and sellar against hunger that may come. But as
we speak here (as Constantine says) The Bladder is a cauie skin, and
round, and hollow as a sack, close on every side, except the ouermouth alone,
and the substance thereof is hard, that it be not grieved by biting and
sharpness of the Urine, the which is received and taken therein: and it is
close in every side downward, that the lycour that is drawn in, be not
suddenly put out, and vnuoluntarily, and so the urine goth in by an hole, and
out by the same, as it is showed in Anathomia. Also the bladder is round, to
open and spread as the cleansing and purging of blood wareth more, and to be the
more able to receive the pourging and clensing, yt is urine. Also li. 13. Ar^.
says, that every beast that has lungs thirsts much, and for him needs
moist meat more than dry: and therefore ye bladder is needful to receive the
moisture of such superfluity. Also he says, that no beast with feathers, with
scales, with rindes, neither with shells, has bladder, except the Lortell of
the sea and of the land. For in such beasts the superfluity passes into
feeding of feathers, scales, and such like. Also li. 3. he says, that every
beast that gendereth has a bladder, and those which lay eggs have none:
except the kind of Eutes: and moisture comes net out of the bladders of dead
bodies. In one manner, dry superfluity is gendred in the bladder, and thereof
comes the stone. Also li. 6. he says, That in every beast without a bladder
is easy out passing of dirt, and of superfluity of moisture.

The bladder, Addition
receives the urine distilled from the liver and the reins of the back, by
the powers named Vritides or Vrichides, the bladder may have many impediments,
as scabbes, vscerations, inflammations, and also a quaking debilitie, that such
a diseased cannot hold his water.

Of the Urine. Cap. 45.
ISaac says, that urine is the purgation of blood and of humors, Vrina.
and is gendered and bredde by working of kind, for it takes beginning of the
liver, and substance and color in the reins. For watery substance of blood
is sent by certain subtle veins to feed the reins. And so when it comes
to the reins, there it is dried and cleansed, as Ware that is molten and
purified, and made perfect. And by the strength of heat of the liver and of
the reins it is dried and colored, and so it sweateth and passes forth by
certain holes and poores into the bladder, and is gathered and brought into
the hollownesse thereof: and so after y't this moist substance and fleeting is
put out of the bladder, it is urine, and has that name, for it is Vritiua,
burning and biting For as Egidius says, what that the urine touches it
viteth, dries and burns: For if has burning and drieng kind, and therefore
it helps against scabs small and great, against Uleynes and whelks, if the
diseased be washed therewith. Also, li13. Arist. says, that urine dronken
helps Splenetikes, and cleanses rotted wounds and scabbed places. Urine
meddled with the gall of a Goshauke, A medicine for the eyes.
and wisely and warely dropped in the eyes that be anointed therewith,
fretteth, gnaweth, and does away webbes and filth of the eyes, as says
Constantine openly, and Galen also. And therefore men shall not be squeymous of
urine, for in many things it is profitable and needful: and Urine also has
that name of Vrith, a word in Greek, that is to understand, showing, for it
shows and makes the inner parts known: for we have knowledge of the urine,
and be certified, how it stands with the inner powers. For it shows and
makes us know, the state of kindly virtue of the liver, and in other nether
members, and that by the substance and color of urine: and namely by diverse
regions thereof, that Physicians name Iposlasim. For if that region that is in
the bottom of ye vessel be white, fattie, well coued, and not departed: it
betokenctly strength of virtue and full working of kindly heat in the said
members. And by the middle region of the urine, that Physicians call Eueorima,
we deem suppose, and judge, of the heart and of the members that be nigh
thereto. For if the urine in the middle thereof be well disposed in substance
and color, not bloo, nor wanne, neither darkened nor shadowed with mist, it
betokens that the spiritual members be well disposed in substance and
color. And by the over part of the urine, that Physicians call Nephilem, we
deem of strength of the virtue of feelyng, that is in the region of the head:
for if there be a circle, not too great, red, blewe, nor green, not
grauellous, neither, corny, but temperate in color and substance, it
betokens that the brain, and all the other members that serve the virtue of
feelyng, be safe and sound: and if the signs be contrary in the urine, it
betokens contrary disposition of the body. Urine is judged and deemed namely
by the substance and color: for if it be thin in substance, it betokens
dryness of humor that has the masterie: and if it be thick, it betokens
moisture of the humor that has the masterie: and if it be meanly, it
betokens temperatenesse, evenness, and mean disposition. And urine is
deemed by color: for it has many colors, to the number of xx. as says Isaac
and Egidius.

Of the which colors, some betoken strength of heat, or else of cold, and
some feeblenes, and some in a mean. For yeolow color and like to milk, and
such other, betokens feebleness of heat: and a deep red betokens strength
of heat: Dorrey and citrine, and light red, betokens meanly. Also among these
conlours, some betoken death, as black, green and blew: and some default of
digestion, as white, milkish and yeolow: and some beginning of digestion, as
whitish and pale: and some perfect digestion, as citrine and reddish: and some
passing strength of heat, as read, and light red: and some burning, as
passing brownnesse: and some passing burning and death, as black and green Yet
blackness comes sometime of cold, that quenches utterly all kind heat,
and then comes blewnesse before: But when it comes of the last burning, then
comes greenesse before. It longs not to this work, to determine and reckon
the particular circumstance of these colors: but who that will know them, let
him read the books of Isaac, Theophill of Constantine, and of Egidius, in them
it is treated of urine full perfectly.

Vrina is the Latin word, Addition
in Greek Curia: and as Egidius has written, Vrina is derived of Vrith, which
by demonstration is to say, showing: For by the Urine, the humane dispositions
are showed, unto the which belongs sufficient learning, and well acquainted
experience, thereby to discern the hipostasie, the quality and quantity of
vrines, the sex and kind, the youth, aged, and decrepite. And touching
Urines, let this suffice at this time.

Of the Belly. Cap. 47.
ISidore speaks of three manner of wombes, Venture. Aluas.
the one is called Venture in Latin, the other Vterus, and the third Aluus,
Venture is that womb, that takes and digesteth meat and drink, and is seen
outward, and is called Venture, for by Venture the womb, meat and drink,
Venit comes into all the body. Aluus is the womb that takes meat and
drink, and is many times cleansed. Vterus.
Properly to speak Vterus, is the womb of a woman, in which she conceiueth,
and is called Vterus, for that she is conceived and forward with child, as
says Isidore. Then Venture is the womb that takes the feeding of all the
body, as Constant. says, and is ye place of feeding and norishing and
fundament of the first digestion and of the second: and the making thereof is
hot and moist, and that is fleshly because of digestion, and it is wrapped
about with diverse subtle nerves and skins: and that is for the keeping and
saving of the entrayles, whose disposition is round and euen-long: it is round,
for the taking of meat and drink, and for the containing of the members of
feeding: it is euen-long, for easy joining with the over parts and the
nether: and this womb challenges place in the middle of the body, to deal
and send feeding to the over and to the nether members. Then this womb among
all the parts of the body, is most soft and unstable, and is yet more
profitable than other: for as the nourisher of the body, it takes and seetheth
meat and drink, to feed all the members of the body, and sends due feeding
to every member, and gathers many superfluities in it self, for the feeding
of other members, and it puts them out, for it may not sustain them long
time: and has diverse griefs, that come of evil disposition of the members of
feeding, that this womb contains in it self: the which griefs ye neeret
they be then to the belly and members of life, the more perilous they be. The
womb is often grieved by great fullness and repletion. And on the contrary, if
it be grieved by too great auoydance, it is succored by too great repletion,
as it is said in Aphor. Also the workings of ye womb be diverse by diversity
of times. For in Winter kind heat closed in the inner parts of the womb,
works strongly: and therefore in winter is greater appetite and stranger
digestion, as it is said in Aphorism. In Winter and springing time wombes be
hottest of kind, and of longest sleep.

Of the Navel. Cap. 48.
THe Navel is in the middle place of the body, Vmbilicus. Om; halos.
and is called Vmbilicus in Latin, as it were the middle bosse of twain as
the middle place of a buckler as says Isidore. And by the Navel the child is
holden and fed in the mothers womb. Constantine says, that the navel is made
and composed of sinews, veins and issues: and by the navel the child in his
mothers womb draws and sucketh subtle blood, and takes breath by the said
issue. In the birth cre, the child come out, the navel breaks off fast by
the Mother, and comes forth with the child, and the midwiues bind the
navel in the length of four inches: and of that binding comes the uttermost
end and roundnesse of the navel. Huc vsque Constantinus. Et super Ezec. 16.
Hierome says in this manner: It is a kindly thing to children, when they are
first borne, that the nauel be cut, and then to be washed with water, and to
have away the blood. The third to dyre up the humor of ye child in the
Sun: The fourth to be wrapped fast in clothes, that the tender lyms fall not
neither appaire. Also thereon Gregory says, that a child in the mothers womb
takes feeding by the navel, as trees and plants by the roots, with an hid
humor of the earth are fed. And the genitals of women are set in the navel, as
the genitalls of man is set in the loins. And therefore under the name of the
navel is signified lechery. In Job.40. Job. 40.
Behold now (Behemoth) his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the
navel of his belly. Arist. li. 13. speaks of the navel, and says, that
every beast that gendereth with eggs or laiding of eggs, has a navel in
tune of birth, and when the bird is waxed, the navel is hid and not seen, for
it is continued with some gut, by some part of and veins. Also (...)6 he says
that the making of the navel, is not but as it were and rind, that contains
veins and is continued with ye child. And by veins of the navel as it were
by conduits or pipes, blood runs from the place that is called the mother,
to the feeding of the child. Then the child wareth and thriueth well by the
navel, as it is said in the same book.

The navel has diverse impediments, it may fall out by over straining, and
thereby come to Apostumation.

Of the genitalls. Cap. 49.
THe genitalls be the parts of the body, that (as the name teaches) have
virtue of gendring and getting of a child, Pudenda. The members. Genitalia
Membra. Pudica. Verenda.
as says Isidore. Also for shame, these parts are called Pudenda, ye shamely
part^: and therefore they be covered and hid, for that they have not the same
manner of fairness, as other members have that be openly seen: and therefore
they be counted dishonest. Among the genitalls, one is called the pintle,
Veretruth in latin: either because it is only man's member: or else for that it
is a shamefast member, of Verecundo, or else for Virus Sperme comes out
thereof. For properly to speak, the humor that comes out of mankind is
called Virus, as says Isidore. And other members be ground and fundament of ye
virtue of gendring, as ye ballock stones, that are called Tefticuli in Latin,
the diminutiue of Testis witness: their number begin of two, without witness
of which two stones, no man is perfect. These stones serve the pipe and give it
seed, and they take the seed of the marrowe of the ridge bone and of the
reins, to the act of gendring or begettiug. Huc vsque Isidorus. Constantine
says, that the substance of these stones, is made of vddry and cruddic flesh,
white, soft and not full sad and hard and that is for keeping and saving of
heat: and for changing of blood into whitenes, which is done by strong heat,
in their substance that seetheth the blood, and turns and makes it while.
And these stones be called principal members, for they be the proper
instruments of principal working of the kind virtue of gendering. And if they
be cut off, meanelye strength passes, and the male complexion changes into
the female complexion. And therefore li. 3. Aristotle says, yt if men be
gelded Ante pollutione^ in somno, thereafter grows no hair in ye body. And
if they be gelded Post polutionem, then except ye hair of the breast, all the
hair of the body falls away and becomes as it were a woman soft and
feeble of heart and of body. Therefore li. 8. Aristotle says, That the voice
of men when they be gelded, changes, and be as the voice of women: and also
the figure and shape of them changes. And when beasts are gelded in youth
they ware great and large: and if they be gelded after perfection, then then
they increase not. Also if Hearts be gelded after perfection, they increase
not. Also if Hearts be gelded or their horns grow, their horns shall never
grow: Of horns growing.
and if they be gelded after that their horns are grown, then the horns grow
no more, and such Hearts change not, neither cast not their horns, as other
do that be not gelded. Also there it is said, that if Calves be not gelded
soon after one year they shall be little: and he says, that when they be
gelded, the roots of the sinews and strings are drawn out. And if there
breeds a postume in the place of the wound, men shall burn one of the stones
that is cut off, and lay the ashes to the postume. Also some beasts be
gelded only for the gendring stones. as Castors and Bausons: which when the
hunters pursewe them, they bite off their own stones with their teeth, because
the hunters should pursewe them no more. And he says, that the males of the
wild Asses gelde with their to the their Coltes and bite off their stones: but
the females beware, and hide the Coltes from the males, that they be not
gelded. Also lib. 16. it is said, that the stones of Fowls be small after the
time that is ordeained to them to gender by kind, insomuch that then they
appear not: but then they grow full fast, when the time of love draws on,
Then the privy stones with other mee^bers that serve the privy stones be the
head and well of the humor seminall, and first foundation radical thereof.

For as Constantine says, The kindly getting and gendering of beasts God has
ordained and made couenable members, in the which he has set the cause and
the matter of generation: the which may not come forth indeed, and take
effect, without affection of love. In the members genitall God has sown such
an appetite inseparable, that every beast should be stirred and comforted to
conserve and multiply beasts of his own kind: and that is done by moving of
God, least that the gendring together being abhorred, the generation of beasts
should be lost. And to fulfill such generation, it needs that two beasts
come togethers, male and female, of the seed of them every beast is increased:
so that in one of them that is the female, is as if were the cause material
and sufferable, and in the male is the cause formal, and principal working.
Therefore lib.5. Aristotle says, that the generation of beasts has double
cause, that is to wit, male and female. Of the male comes cause of moving and
of shape: The female is as it were the matter: Of the commi^tion of both,
comes the creature, etc. Then God ordayneth the members of them that gender,
that the one should give the matter seminall, and the other should receive it.
And God that is most wise, makes these members to their working, so that they
may not be better neither more perfect, as says Constantine. But truly many
misuse these members, that use them not to ye fruit of generation, but rather
against the order of reason, and law of kind, not to get children, but to
foul first, and filthye liking of lechery. And therefore I let this matter
pass with silence, Ne forte spermatis explanando originem, progressum vel
finem videar carnalibus occasionem cogitandi cornalia exhibere. Of this one
thing I warn all folk. that no man suppose, neither take on him to misuse the
office of the foresaid members by lewd living. For whosoever he be, that
sapeth with the genitall members, and wilfullye uses them in fleshly lyking,
otherwise then is granted by lawful generation of children, he loses God
the Father and beginner of kind: and he shall have no place among the children
of bliss, in the generation of righteous men, except that he do worthelye
repent and amend. For misuse of generation offends and does wrong to the
Father of ^yght, and is worthy great pain and punishment: and besides that,
it resists grace, and wounds kind, and leeseth company of Angels, and
wins the pain of hell, and blemisheth fame, and wastes substance, and is
spoil of endless bliss, as says Saint Ambrose.

Carnal lust is like unto the Horseleach, Addition
whose property is, once tasting of blood that seems pleasant, cease not
drawing of the same until he burst: even so, an unbridled will, fleshly
given, continues so long in wholedome and uncleanness, until the patrimony
be diminished, the body consumed, and the soul confounded. It tourneth
prosperity into beggerye, health into sickness, the soul into sin: to the
bodies covering, the Leprosy, Podegra, the Pox: in stead of Hawk, Hound and
game, the canker, woolfe, nittes and lyceum steed of renown, shame of bodily
seeing, grief of conscience, and contempt of life.

Therefore, let the insatiable minded know, that with the ^nat they fly in
security for a while, by the light of fire until the flame being touched, and
then suddenly is espied the force thereof. The love of the world consist in
these. 3. things, The lust of the flesh, The lust of the eyes, The pride of
life: but as the sweet smell of a perfume, lasts but a while, even so good
counsel takes small root to convert the wicked. Propertius. Scilicet in
insano nemo in amore videt, to live in immodest love, is to be alive in another
body, and dead in their own. The adulterous fornicators seek to see signs
and tokens, they shall perish, and their posterity shall be rooted out at the
last, and their portion is prepared with the Devil and his Angels.

Of the Mother. Cap. 49.
THe Mother in a woman is a singular member, disposed as a bladder, and kind
has ordained that member to take and receive ye humor seminall. Unto the which
the menstruall superfluity of humors, (as it were to a pumpe of the woman's
body) flows, the which for ye menstrual flowing and reflowing thereof, is
called Menstruum. For ye superfluity is wont to follow the course of the
Moon, as says Isid. And it is called Muliebria also and dureth and lasts
kindly in women, as long as they have virtue to conceive children: and when
Muliebria fails, the^ fails the virtue of conceiving. And it is called
Muliebria, for in women alone this infirmity is found. For only a woman is
Animal menstruale, as says Isido. By touching of such blood, fruit springs
not, neither buddeth, herbs die, and trees loose their fruit, etc. Seek the
property and kind of this blood before in the third book, in the treatise of
humors. This Menstruum is the beginning of man's generation, and common food
of rich and poor, of noble and simple in the mother womb, heerewith the field
of our birth is moisted, and the child is fed heerewith while he is in his
mothers womb. And the mothers womb has two cells or hollownesses, the right
cell is it in ye which the man child is bread: And in the left ^ell is the
maid child conceived. The child yt is conceived some deal in both, has
disposition of either sexes male and female. In Anathomia it is said, that the
mothers has three cells in the right side propried to males, and three in the
left side ordained to females: And in the middle is conceived Hermophroditus,
yt has both sexes male and female. That is, when the child has both members.
And the child that is conceived in the Mother is called Fetus in Latin. The
child has that name Fetus of Fouere, that is tenderly fed and nourished. The
thin bag or skin that the child is wrapped in, is called Secundina, which
comes out with the child when it is borne. And if it ha^ that by any chance
Secundina abides in the mother after that the child is borne: thereof comes
great peril, except it be put out and help of kind, or else by medicine. The
mother has many griefs: sometime by containing too much superfluity of
humors, and that is by a clammie humor that stops the mouths of the vains,
or else of cold, that constrains, or else of dryness that wastes. And these
diversities be known by their own proper signs and tokers. Also it is
sometime griued with too much flowing and shedding of menstruall humors: and
that comes either of too great abundance, that kind may not hold, or else
of too great violence of sharpness and biting of humors. And if this evil be
old or of long continuance, scarcely it may be cured and helped. For if the
months of the veins have been long open, it is hard to close them. Also the
mother is grieved with stifling: in that passion it seems to the woman that
she shall be stifled. The cause of sudden s^unding in women.
For the mother presses the spiritual members, and that comes of too great
repletion of humors that stretches the mother in length and breadth: or else
it chances of a corrupt and venomous fumositie, that comes of some corrupt
humuor, and fills the hollownes of the mother, and makes the mother to
ouerstretch in wideness.

The Mother hangs between the spleen and the bladder, Addition
but somewhat higher then the bladder, the bottom or hollownesse is extended
unto the navel, and is the place of the first Fragma, of conception called
Embrion, beware of carnal copulation.

And so ye full mother asks more place, and thrusts upward togethers ye
spiritual members: whereby the woman is nigh stifled. Also the mother sometime
falls too much forward, either to ye right side, or else to the left side:
and sometime goes out of her own place. And ye comes of slaking of sinews,
thereof, and of superfluity of humors, ye charge sore and grieueth ye mother.
And sometime the mother is grieved with sore ach and punching of postumes:
whereupon follows grievous ach pricking and burning. Also when she is
conceived with child, the mother is grieved with ach and stretching of powers
ye comes of moving of the child, The nerer the time of bringing forth the
child, refrain copulatio^^^ stifseleth the powers kills the seed and
ossedeth God.
and namely about the time of travailing of child: For in ye time the child
moves more strongly the^ before. Therefore needs ye mother is grieved: it is most
specially griued in travail, when it thinks to discharge it self, and the
outpassing of the child by some manner hap is let: which sometime happens
through the straightnes of the ways of the Mother: and sometime for too great
fatness of the woman: and sometime for greatness of the child; and
feebleness, and for default of virtue of out putting in the body of the woman
that trauayleth of child. And sometime it happens that the child is dead,
and therefore it may not help it self to come out of the mothers womb. And
sometime the woman supposes that she goes with child: and she bears in her
womb some manner lump wonderfully shapen, as says Aristotle lib 18. Also
after in purgation, it happens women to have an evil, that is called Mola.
Molon, called Mola matricis, an impostumation or lump co^ghitinate or gedred in
ye place of co^ception.
For sometime a man lay by a woman, and after a certain time she thought that
she had gone with child: for her womb began to rise and swell, and tokens of
going with child were seen in the woman: and when the time of birth drew
nigh, she brought forth no child, and the swellyng of her womb abated not,
but she endured so three years: and at last she trauayled, and brought forth a
lump of flesh, so hard, that scarcely it might be cut, either separated with
iron: and such a lump is called Molia in Latin. And there Aristotle says,
that this happens, when the matter that is conceived, is stifled with a vapor
and humor of evil digestion: for then such a lump is bred (that is called
Mola) in the Matrice or Mother, etc. In these mannets and many other, the
wretched Mother is grieved very sore.

Of the Buttockes. Ca. 50.
THe buttockes be called Nates in latin, Clunis. Nates.
and have that name because the body rests on them, while we sit or ride, as
says Isidore. And the flesh in the buttockes is frumpled and knottie: because
they should not ache by wayght and heaviness of the body that sits thereon.
And so the stock of the body is borne up, which begins at the neck, and
stretches to the buttockes, us says Isidore. Constantine says, that the
buttocks be full of sinews, and that is for to bind the joints of the thighs
to the stock of the body: and therefore they be fleshie, to temper the
coldness of the sinews and bones and to defend the feelyng of the sinews as
says Constantine lib. 3. Cap. 8.

The decay of the buttockes, Addition
is unconstant diet, much lechetie, and cold sitting.

Of the Thighs. Cap. 51.
THe thighs be called Femora in Latin, Femora
for in that place of the body is distinction and difference between male and
female: and the thighs stretch from the flank and the chest, and from the
buttockes down to the knees. The thighs move in joints: and the hollow parts
of the said joints are called Vertebra in latin, and Coxae, as it were joined
to an Axell tree. The thighs bend inward and not outward, under, and not above,
as the arms do, and therefore some men call them Suffragines, as says
Isidore. The thighs be made and composed of great bones, as says Constantine.
li. 3. ca. 8. They be all hollow above, and bending before, and have two
sharpnesses: the greatness is needful, either for that they be the foundation
of the bones, or else for that they bear ye great brawnes and sinews, by the
which the feet are plyably moved. Also crookedness and bending of the utter
parts is needful, that the brawnes and sinews may have place: for if they
were within, they should be hurt and grieved. Also these same two bones be some
deal round in the inner side, and that is needful: For if they were crooked
only on one side, then all the body should be crooked and uneven. Also
hollownesse is needful with the inner bending and roundnes, that the peyses
thereof, may be the more steadfast. The hollownes is needful to have some
entering into the hollownes of ye legs Also ye thighs be covered and warded
with flesh and with brawnes, that the bones may have help and succor against
outward hurts and griefs, and also to temper the coldness of the bones,
Further they be ^^^t above, and small beneath: and thus is needful, for they
are mean between: the over, parts and the nether. And therefore they must
have due proportion to every part.

The thigh is the strongest part to the body, Addition
unto the which was assigned by God in Exodus, the. 28. chapter, That not only
the upper covering to the body, but also thou shall make them linen breeches
to cover their priuities, from the loins unto the thighs shall they reach. It
appears in those days, no great choice of apparel, 1519. years before
Christ, notwithstanding of so great antiquity, is the making of apparel,
although Adam and Eues aprons were long before.

Of the knees. chap. 52.
Genibus.
THE knees be the joints of the thighs and legs, and be called in Latin
Genua. For they be shapen in the mother with the cheeks, and they long thereto:
and they be of kin to the eyes, the judges of tears and of weeping. For the
knees have that name Genua of Gen^s the cheeks. For when a child is gendered,
he is so shapen; that the knees be upward. And by just joining of the knees
the eien be shapen and made hollow, either round. Secundum verbum philosophi.
Genua co^primit arta gena. Which is to understand, Men weep the sooner if they
kneel. For kind will that the eyes and knees have mind, where they were
togethers in ye mothers womb in darkness or they came to the light.
Huc^^isque Isidorus. Constantine says, lib. 2. chap. 8. That the knees be a
manner round bones, gristly, and hollow. They be hollow and round, for that the
legs and whirlebones should be the easilyer joined in the hollownesse of
them: They be sinewie, that the legs be not lightly departed from the over
parts: And also they be sinewie that the workings of the spirit of feeling
may be sent to the nether parts to cause moving in them. Also for continual
moving ye knees be slender and poor of flesh and fatness. For if they were
much fleshie, they should be lightly stopped. And so ye working of ye virtue of
feeling should be let by greatness of flesh. And therefore the knees because
they be sinewie, they have great feeling and be lightly hurt, when the sinews
of feeling be grieved outward or inward, as says Constantine.

Of the legs. Chap. 53.
THE legs are called Crura in Latin, and have ye name of Currere, Crus.
Cucibus. the shank or shinne bone, to ye which is the calfe, the featur of the
leg
so run: for with them we go and run. Also they be called Fibie, for they be
like pipes and trumps in shape and length, as says Isidore. And Constantine
says that the legs be mean between the feet and the thighs, and be
cheined to them with sinews and strings, by the which, the influence of going
and moving of the virtue of ruling, passes and comes to the feet. They be
made of full strong bones, and be as it were pillars of the body, able to bear
the weight of the body. And they be covered on the over part within with
brawnes and with flesh: that so in the folding of them with the thighs, they
shall neither grieve nor be grieved of the thighs. And so the flesh of the
legs is set in ye over side within as a pillar, or else as a boteras to hold up
the weight of the body. And also they be sinewie that they may be the more able
and strong to swift moving. And they be full of marrow, yt the lively virtue of
ye beast the which is dealed and spread by the sinews and strings, may be
preserved and kept: And also to moist the dryness of the bones with moisture
of the marow, as says Constantine.

Of the Feet. chap. 54.
A Foot is called Pes in Latin, Pe^. Pous. In the feet grow diverse
impediments, ye gout called Podagra, also Elephancia, which is a swelling and
the cra^pe
and has that name of Podos in Greek as says Isidore. For the feet setting
to the ground one after another go forth. The foot is the uttermost part of a
man and bears up all the body. Constant. says that the foot is made of 44.
bones, of the which bones two be the heels, and two of the cheines or ancle
bones, 10. of the comb, and 30. of the foes. And the sole of the foot is
fleshie and plain, forward and backward, and some deal hollow in the middle.
It is fleshie to defend the sinews, strings and veins from hardness of the
bones. It is plain, to have footing, and to be more ready to bear that is set
thereon. It is hollow, to have succor in the hollow place, if the plain
slide or fail. The bones of the feet be bound with diverse sinews and bonds,
and that is needful to have more strength, for strong sustenaunce of the
body, and also for that the feet should have the more easy moving. Feet of
beasts be diverse: For Aristotle libro. 14. says, That some footed beasts have
feet before and behind, and some have in the sides, as a beast with blood and
with many feet: and the property of that kind of beasts, is to have feet in
the former part of the body, and the cause thereof is, for that the former and
the hinder are joined and houed in one place. Also Ibidem he says, that in
four footed beasts kind has set the fore feet in steed of the hands: the
hinder feet be necessary to bear the wayght of the beasts. And it was much
necessary, that four footed beasts should have four feet, for all the body of
them boweth kindly toward the earth, and also is moved to the earth with all
beastly appetite: and therefore it needs to have so many vndersettings and
vpholders, that such a beast may the more ably and quickly move, and go, and
stamp. Also therefore the hinder feet be needful: for Arist. says, the
fore part of the four footed beast, is more and more large than the hinder
part. And therefore for to rise up and move themselves, and to move lyghtlye
before and behind, the hinder feet are needful. The contrary is in children:
for the over part in children is heauyer than the nether, and therefore they
creep on feet and hands, and use their hands in steed of four feet in
creeping, for they may not rear up their bodies, because ye over part of ye
body is more than the nether. This changes yet in youth, for yet in youth, the
nether part wareth, and the over part wareth less than the nether part of the
body, and so by little and little he reareth himself up an end. But the
disposition of four footed beasts is contrary: for the nether part is first
very great, but in youth the over part wareth and areareth, and therefore the
rearing up of the head and foreparte of horses, is much more than the hinder
part. And there it is said, that the token and sign hereof is, that a colte
touches his own head with his hinder foot: but when he comes to age, he
cannot do it. Also Arist. li. 2. says, that the less foot of such beasts on
the fore parte^ is not so free neither so light in moving, as the left hand of
a man, except the Elephant. Also there it is said, that the Elephant in
sitting, bends and boosteth his feet, but he may not bend his four feet at
once, for heaviness and wayght of his body, but he foldeth and bends the
hinder feet as a man does. Also it is said there that Volatile bends ye
hinder feet backwarde and the wings forward, which be in steed of hands.
Flieng things.
Also there it is said, ye generally in beasts the right foot moves more than
the left, and therefore it is said, That some beasts move first the right
foot when they shall go or step, as the Lion, Camel, and Dromedarie. But yet
sometime some beasts move first the left foot, as the Fore and Woolfe, that
have feet and legs longer in the left side, than on that other. And therefore
they halt always, and rear and rise upward from the left side toward the right
side. Also generally in beasts the right foot has more heat in moving and
strength than the left foot. Super Aphorism. Galen says in taken hereof,
That if a woman which goes with child stand upright, and both her feet
together, if she be with a child Masculyne in her womb, and is suddenly
called, she moves first the right foot to come to the calling: and if it be a
maid child, she moves first the left foot.

Also he says libro 2. and 3. That every beast with many toes in the feet;
have many children, and contrariwise. And the feet of four footed beasts are
made of bones, and sinews, and of little flesh. And also the feet of fowls
and of two footed beasts, except man's feet; which has much flesh beneath, and
that is to defend the manifold and diverse bones and sinews. Also some beasts
use the foot in steed of the hand, as an Ape among four footed beasts, and
the Popingay and the Pellycan among the s^ieng fowls: for they feed
themselves with the foot. And he says lib. 13. that no beast with many
cliftes in the feet have bornes. And yet every beast with long strouting
tuskes in the mouth, is cloue footeed as ye Bore, Also he says lib. 14. that
in ^ees ye hinder feet be more then the former, or middle, for going, and to
rise from the earth when they list to take their flight, and their way. Item
libro. 16. every beast with many clyfts in the foot, gendereth blind
whelps, as the Lion, the Hound, the Wolf, and Fore. Then to have in
remembrance the properties of the foot: the foot is the uttermost part of
the beast, ordained for perfection thereof, and it is long, plain and hollow,
for shape and printing of the Fore: and is distinguished with toes, for his
strong holding: bonie and sinewie for better during. And is needful in
beasts for the rearing of them and moving, and also for ward and defense of
them In fowls cloven feet and crooked claws are needful to get their
living. In fowls closing of the feet is needful for their leading, stirring
and ruling in waters. And this suffices touching the feet.

Of the sole of the foot. Cap. 55.
Planta.
THe sole of the foot is the uttermost part of the beast, and is called Planta
in Latin for it is plain: and it is needful that it be plain, to stick the
faster in the earth, as says Isid. And it is heled and clothed with harder
skin than the other part of the body, least it be suddenly grieved with
thorns, briars, or with other pricks. And therefore of breasts the feet are
wrapped, wound, and armed with claws, hooues and soles, that they are not
lightly hurt with treading. And the soles of the feet bear all the heaviness
and weight of the body. And therefore they need hosen and shoes, deast they
be hurt and grieved, as says Isidore.

Of the Heel. Cap. 56.
THe heel is the hinder part and the nether of the foot, and is called
Calcaneus in Latin: for with them the fores or steps be pight and printed in
the earth as says Isidore. And the heel is round, that it be not lightly
hurt: and it is even long to be fast sticked and printed: and it is sad, that
it be not soon bruised: and it is bound to the anckle bone with soft bonds and
strings, to move the caselyer upward and downward. And hurtings and wounds of
the heel, be hard to heal, both for scarsitie of flesh, and also for
continual moving, as says Constantin lib. 2. cap. 10.

Calcanei, Addition
the heels of a man or woman, may diverse times come by infections, as the
gout, straining, the crampe, the kybes, and such like.

Of the bones. Cap. 57.
Ossibus.
FOr that it is said and treased of the principal members, and of the members
of office, now we purpose to treat of those members, which be made of parts
like, and of their conditions, and first of the bones. As we speak, here is a
thing made of parts like, and has the same name and kind, that the parts
thereof have: as bones be made and composed of bones. The bones be the sadness
of all the body, as says Isidore, for the strength of a beast is in the bones.
The bones be called Ossa in Latin, and they have that name of Vsto, to burn:
for in old time the bones were burnt. Or else as some other suppose, the bones
have that name Ossa in Latin, of Ore, the mouth: For that in the mouth the
bones be seen.

For in every place they be hid or covered with flesh and skin, except the
mouth alone; in the which the bones of the teeth be seen. The bones of the
head are called Compago: for that they be joined togethers and bound with
sinnewes, as it were with glue. The over ends of the bones be called
Verticolae, as it were turnets and winders, or whirlers, and be warred with
great knots.

And they have that name, because they turn and wind in clitching, binding,
and stretching of members, as says Isidore lib. 11. Constantine says lib. 2.
that the boane is the hardest and dryest part of the body of a beast, and that
is needful, either because the boanes be the foundation of all the body, upon
the which, the building of all the body is set, and therefore it needs that
the bones be strong: or else because they defend ye inner parts from griefs
that might hap and fall by diverse things that be without. Many and diverse bones
are in the body, and that is for more sadness and strength of the body, or for
easiness of moving, or to avoid great griefs from the body: and such bindings
and accordes be between the members of the body, that if one be grieved, they
are all grieved. And therefore kind doubleth well nigh all the members, that if
one be grieved, the other may have compassion and help him: and therefore it
needed that many boanes were made, and diverse in quantity, for in great
members be great boanes, and in small members, small bones. Also some bones be
unlike in quantity, and diversely shapen, for some be long, some be round, some
are hollowy, and some massiue and sad. They be sad, for the more steadfastness,
and hollow for the more lightness of moving, for kind because the bones are
great and mouable, makes them hollow: the which bones for two causes are full
of marrowe, one is, least they should break by reason of their hollownesse,
and to be fed by the marrowe. Therefore by the wosing of the marrowe, which
woseth out by the bones at the poores, the flesh that is next the bones is
sweeter than other flesh.

Also the bones are bound and strayned togethers with certain sinews, for that
they should not fall, neither depart asunder by great moving: and for that they
should help each other the more effectually. In the first joining of ye bones
is a manner of glowy and gleymie moisture, because the bones should the more
easily move togethers: and in the ends they be clothed with gristles, for
that they should not be grined with fretting. Huc vsque Constable. li. 2. ca. 51.
Aristotle li. 12. says, that the boanes were created for the sauegard of the
soft body: For the bones thereof are full hard. And in a beast without bones
is a member according to the said bones, and is in ye steed of bones: as small
hairy bones in Fish And as the heart and the liver, be head and well of all the
veins, so the ridge bone is well and head of all other bones: for on the ridge
bone all other bones be mored and sounded, as the ship on the heel is builded.
Also the kind of bones is continued with the ridge bone, because the ridge
bone keeps and saves ye tenderne sof the bodies of beasts: and the bones
that be nigh the womb are little, because they should not let ye rising of the
womb, when beasts eat and drink. Also generally and commonly the bones of
males are stronger and more harder, than the bones of females: and specially
the bones of a Lion, out of yt which, if they be strongly stricken togethers,
fire shall spring and come out, as it were out of stones: and the bones of
fowls, are feebler than of other beasts. Also Arist. li. 3. says, that ye
bones that be cut, grow no more, like as the gristle does not. For the making
of gristles is like to the making of bones: and though horns, nails, and
claws of beasts, and bills of fowls, may be made soft at the fire, crooked,
straight and bended: yet bones may be made neither soft, crooked, nor even,
but bones may be cut, bewen and hacked: Item, idem li. 2. Beasts that have
hairie pricks in steed of boanes, have little blood. Also every beast that
has teeth in every iawe, has bones with marrowe, and the marrow of them is
like to fatness or grease. Some bones be thick and hard, whereby they seem
to be wildout marrowe, as bones of Lions and of Eliphants: for the marrowe of
such beasts lurketh and is hid in the poores of ye bones. Then gather of this
that is spoken, that the bones are the foundation of all the body, and be
cold, hard, and dry. And because cold has masterie in the bones, they be
white, strong, and steadfast. And they be hollow within, and full of marrow, and
are bound togethers with sinewie bonds, and bear every each other
continually. For the less be mored and rooted on the more, and the more be
couenably joined to ye less, by ye wonderful craft of kind. The bones be
covered and clothed with flesh and with skin, and are by the sustentation of
both flexible: and they are bound togethers with joints, with sinews, and
strings and receive temperance of kind, heat of flesh and blood. Also the
bones feel not, but in case the bones be hurt either grieved, they grieve
the body full sore, and namely, if they be broken or sore hurt, and that is,
because they be nigh ye sinews, with whose bonds they be knit together: bones
be sometime grieved by outward doing, as by breaking, cutting, smiting, hewing,
wrasting and falling out of joints, and such other. And sometime by doing and
workings that is within: and that is oftentimes of sretting and gnawing of
wood and enraged matter, as it fares in them that have an evil and disease
that is called Herisipila, which some men call the holy fire.

Addition
Herisipulas is the Greek word, among the Latins named, Apostenia calidum, of
some termed Ignis facer, the shingles, which is a burning humor pricking:
whose blisters are like wheales of white matterie color, and begins in the
neck and shoulders.

Sometime by overmuch gathering and repletion of humors in the joints of the
boanes, as it fares of them that have the gowte. And sometime they are grieved
by corruption of the marrowe that is within, as it falls in Leapers. And
sometime of wasting of humors of the marrowe, as it fares in them which have
the Etike, or be wasted and consumed: and the deeper in the hollownesse of the
boanes, the boane ache is rooted and maured, insomuch it is the more grievous
and perilous: And so the corrupt boanes do corrupt by little and little the
flesh that is next to them, and makes them to rot.

Of the marrowe. Cap. 58.
MEdulla Medulla.
in Latin, is in English, marowe, and has that name, for that it moysteth the
bones, and it comfort and tempreth the coldness of them, as says Isidore.
Constantine says, That the marrowe is in substance hot and moist, and is bred
into the hollownes of the bones, of ye most purest parts and vnetuous humors
of nourishment. And so the marrow by the heat thereof, tempereth and coldeth
the bones, and with his moisture, moysteth the dryness of the bones, and by
his substantial property if feeds, nourishes and saves the virtue of
feeling: for the marrowe receives of the brain influence of spirits, and
namely of the ridge boanes, the which marrowe is called Nucha among Physicians.
And this marrowe by meake of certain veins, serves those members, which are
set beneath the neck, and gives to them feeling and moving, as says
Constantine. lib. 2. cap. 10. Also Isidore says, that the marrow by ye
subtlety and moist vnctuositie thereof, woseth and sweateth out at the beans
a lycour, which is thin, and by the Ueneriall heat, this licour is resolved in
the reins of beasts, and breeds lyking of lone and of lust. Look before in
the Chapter of the reins. And therefore beasts with bones full of marrow, have
great lyking in lust, as says Varro. And beasts that have sad bones and void
of marrow, are seldom moved to bodily lust as the Eliphant. Varro says, That
the marrowe follows the kind of the stone: for it waxes when the Moon
waxes, and when the Moon waneth, it minisheth. And by privy inspiries and
sentings, it feels the virtue and the strength of the Moon, and follows
the Moon in waxing and minishing: as it fares in beasts and in trees, which
have passing plenty of humors and of warrow, in the full of the Moon, and
great scarcity thereof in the new of ye Moon. And therefore in the new of the
Moon it is not good to grass trees: for ye fruit shall be full of worms, and
lightly rot. And this perchance happens by reason of superfluous moisture,
that the graffe then gratfed receives in the say: And the superfluity thereof
may not be ruled, neither have digestion of kind. Therefore such humors sent
to ye fruit is cause of breeding of worms, and of soon rotting. Also
Aristotle, li. 12. says, that a beast which has teeth in either saw, has
the marrow like to fatness: And some beasts have but little marow, as a Lion
which has hard boanes and thick, in whom is but little marrow, and some do
feign, that the Lion has no marrowe at all. Dioscorides says, That marrowe is
full medicinable and also healthful, and namely of fowls and of wild beasts
For it heals breaking out, stripping, chins, cliftes, and whelks of the
lips, and slaketh ache in sore ears: and makes soft the hardness of
kirnells: And heals the blaines of the feet: and ass wageth smarting and
soreness of the throat, and of the breasts. and teates. And it is a
principal remedy for the Tisike and Etike: And it has virtue of recovering.
Therefore it restores to the members the humor that is lost.

Of the gristle, chap. 59.
A Gristle is the tenderness of the bones, and is called Cartilago in Latin,
because it makes no great grief though it be fold and bended, as says
Isidore: as it fares in the Nose and in the ears, and in the ends of the
ribs: For the gristle is harder then the flesh, and softer then the bones And
kind has made such places of such disposition, because they should not break
when they should be folded or bend, as says Constantine. libro. 2. cap. 9.
The Gristle does cloth and arm the ends of the boanes, that they be not
grieved with fretting togethers, and that the boanes should be the easilyer
joined to ye flesh. Aristotle liber. 14. says, That the gristle cut grows
not again. For the making thereof is like to the making of the bones. Also the
gristle has no feeling of it self, but only the sinew joined thereto, is cause
of feeling and of moving, when it feels or moves, as says Constantine. In
the middle of ye heart of a beast is a gristle bone set in the breadth thereof,
and that is called the seat of the heart, as says Constantine. li. 3. cap. 20.

Of the sinews. Chap. 60.
THE sinews be some of the parts of the body, Neruus of ye Greeks is
called Neuerous which may have diverse impedia^^tis, by cutting, straining, by
ye tran^p, and numnesse
and be called Neuros in Greek: because the joints be fast coupled together
with the sinews: And it is certain that the sinews make most virtue and
strength. And the thicker that the sinews be, the more steadfastness comes
of them, as says Isid. And Constantine says, that the sinews be needful,
to bear and to bring feeling and moving to the members, and namely to the
gristles and bones, and to such that have of themselves neither feeling neither
moving. And the brain is chief foundation of the sinews: for it is the well
of wilful moving and feeling. For all sinews spring and come out of the
brain, or else out of the marrowe of the brain, that is of the marrowe of the
ridge boanes. Such a mean is needful, least if they all should come without
mean from the brain, either in breaking they should be griued, or else for
far way from the well of feeling, in the deed of feeling, and in the might
of giving of life, they should lack in might. Then those sinews, which come
and spring out of the brain, be more softer then they which proceed and come
out of the marrowe of the ridge boane, for they be more hard. And those
sinews which come and grow out of the foremost part of the brain, be most
soft: for they bear feeling to the other. For softness changes into
feeling hastily. The sinews which come of the hinder part of ye brain, be
more harder to suffer moning: For soft things break lightly with switt moving.
Six pair of sinews come from the brain. The first pair pass to the eyes;
and to the other lims of feeling, to give to the^ feeling and moving: and these
be more hollow, greater, and softer then other sinews. And they be more
hollow, to give more plentier spirits to the wits: And they be more greater,
that the substance of them break not in the hollownesse: and ye they may have
shut in them the more plenty of spirits. Also they be soft to make feeling in
them the more speedely proceed. In the out passing of the brain the sinews
be nesh and soft, but the farther they be from the brain, the harder they be
in kind.

The second pair of sinews begins behind the first: and that pair comes
out by a certain hole, that is nigh to the hollownesse of the eyes, and gives
moving to the cien. The third pair begins behind the second, and coming
by the ^eate of the head out of the hinder part of the brain, is departed in
four particular sinews, and spread into diverse places in a net wise. The
fourth pair is joined to the first pair before: but being afterward
departed therefrom, spreads into the mild mother, to give thereto feeling of
touching. The fifth pair, in his out going is departed into two sinews. The
one whereof comes into the holes of the ears, and spreads there, and gives
hearing to the ears. That other comes by the care bows to the cheeks, and
spreads and helps the working of members there about. It seems that the
sixth pair comes out of the hinder part. And out of every each of these three
come sinews, to ordeine feeling and moving, and spreads in like upward and
downwarde. And yet besides these paires, there comes one out of the hinder
part of the brain. And of this pair the marrowe of the ridge boane, comes
and springth. This spreads into the parts of the tongue and of the throat,
and gives to them feeling and moving. Except these foresaid sinews, all
other sinews of the body, come out of the brain by mean of the marrowe of
the ridge bone. And the sinews be accounted in all to the number of. 32. pair
and one odd sinew. And all these be spread, dealed, and fastened in every
side to the chinnings of the body, by wonderful craft of kind. Haec vsque
Constantinus. lib. 2. cap. 12. Item liber. 3. Aristotle says, that in the
place of bones is the multitude of sinews: and a sinew stretches kindly in
length and not in breadth, and is greatly stretched out. And about the sinews
is much vn^tuous moisture, which keeps and saves the sinews. And every
beast that has blood has sinews: and a sinewe which is cut a sunder and
detrenched, grows never after, neither the sinew which is slit and cloven,
closes nor joins, like as a vein does. For if a vein be slit and clefte,
it will be soon joined whole again. Also he says. liber. 29. That the most
virtue of a beast is in the sinews, and namely in a Bull: For the elder he is,
the stronger and the harder he is, and the harder be his sinews, and therefore
it may be drawn and stretched in length, and straighted as a cord or rope.
Then gather of this that is said, that a sinew springs and comes out of the
brain. And receiving thereof feeling and moving, does distribute the same to
the other members: And coupleth and binds togethers the other parts of the
body, and is soft in the out coming, and hard forthward. The sinew in the
hollownesse and voidnesse thereof receives spirit, and keeps it. And by the
folding thereof the sinews bend and fold the limbs that be flexible. And as
says Constantine, they endure diverse griefs, as cutting and slitting,
pinching and pricking, and slaking, and stopping, as appears in Pantegm. li.
9. cap. 8. and. li. 11.

Of the veins. Chap. 41.
THE Uaines have that name, Venis, Sthegmos. There be many principal vienes
in man, ^iediana, Cadiaca, Caphalica, Sophena, Basilica, ^patica, Siuatella,
sio^ these chief veins proceed all (...) veins by which (...) body is
cherished.
for that they be Viae, the ways, conduits and streams of the fleeting of
blood, and sheddeth it into all the body. For by the veins all the members be
moysted and fed, as says Isidore. And Constantine says, That the veins
spring out of the liver, as the arteries and wosen do out of the heart, and
the sinews out of the brain. And veins be needful, as vessels of the
blood, to bear and to bring blood from the liver to feed and nourish the
members of the body. Also needely the veins be more tender and soft in
kind then sinews. Therefore that they be nigh to the liver may somewhat
change the blood that comes to them. And all the veins are made of one
curtill, and not of two, as the arteries and wosen. For the arteries receive
spirits, and they keep and save them. And the veins coming out of the liver,
suck thereof, as it were of their own mother, feeding of blood, and deals
and departs that feeding to every member as it needs. And so the veins
spread into all the parts of the body: and by a wonder wit of kind, they do
service each to other. Also among other veins open and privy or secret, there
is a vein that is called Arteria, Artery, be like veins, in ye watch be the
vital spirits, having their beginning of the heart.
which is needful to kind to bear and bring kindly heat from the heart to
all the other members. And these arteryes be made and composed of two small
clothings or skins called curtills: and they be like in shape, and diverse
in substance. The inner have wrinckles and folding overthwart, and their
substance is hard and more boistous then the utter be. And without they have
wrinkles and folding in length, of whom the substance is hard for
needfulnesse of moving, opening, and closing. For by opening does receive it
self from the heart, and that by the wrinklings and folding in length. By
closing it self does put out superfluous sumositie: which is done by wrinkling
and folding the curtelles overthwart in breadth: in the which the spirit is
drawn from the heart: Wherefore they be harder without then all the other
veins, and that is needful, least they break lightly and some. Also these
veins spring out of the left hollownesse of the heart. And two of that side
be called Pulsitiue: Of which, one that is the innermost has a soft skin:
and this vein which is called Pulsitiue, is needful to bring great
quantitye of blood and spirits to the lungs: Of being and vvorking of ^ powers.
and to receive in air, and to rieddle it with blood, to temper the
feruentnesse of the blood. This vein enters into the lungs, and is departed
there in many manner wise.

The other artery is more then the first, and Aristotle calls it (...)e,
this artery comes up from the heart and is divided in twain, and the one
part comes upward, and ^^^^eth blood that is pured and spent of life to the
brain that so the spirit of feeling may be (...), nourished, kept, and saved.
The other part goes downewarde, and is departed in many manner hase toward the
right side and toward the left. Huc vsque Constant. li. 2. cap.12.

Then mark well, that a vain is the bearer and carrier of blood, ^eyer, and
warden of the life of beasts, and contains in himself the four bloody
humors clean and pure, which be ordained for feeding of all the parts of the
body. Moreover a vein is hollower, to receive blood the more easilye, and as
it needs in kind, that one vein bring and give blood to another vein. Also
a vein is messenger of health and of sickness For by the pulse of the
arteries and disposition of the veins, Physicians deem of the feebleness and
strength of the heart. Also if a vain be corrupt, and contains corrupt
blood: it corrupts and infecteth all the body, as it fares in lepers, whose
blood is most corrupt in the veins, of the which the members be fed by
sucking of blood, and takes thereby corruption and sickness incurable. Also
the vein of the arm is often grieved, constrained, and wrong, opened and slit,
and wounded to relieve the sickness of all the body by hurting of that vein.
Also the veins that be overmuch straighted or wrong with farnesse or with
flesh, have less of blood and of spirit then the other veins. And therefore
in the substance of such veins kindly heat fails, and the spirit vital is
lessed. Therefore such beasts live and endure the less time, as says
Constantine. liber. 11. cap. 17. Aristotle. lib.2 says, If a vein be cut or
slit, it may be healed and joined again, and so may not a sinew, Item ibi.
li. 6. Such as the veins be under the tongue of a beast, such is the color
that that beast brings forth. And therefore he says, That sheep with white
veins under ye tongue, have white lambs. And in like wise sheep with black
veins under the tongue, have black lambs. If ye desire to know more of this
matter, seek before in the chapter of the tongue.

Of the flesh. Cap. 62.
Caro, quasi anima carens. Sarx, Creas. The flesh of man is many ways
corrupted, by dropsies and putrefieng of blood.
Flesh is called Caro in Latin, and has that name of Carry, that is matter and
rottenness, as says Remigius. Gregory says, that the flesh is often
changeable, and therefore it rotteth hastily. And Gregory says, That there be
many manners of flesh: For some is flesh of Fish, some of Fowls, and some of
Serpents, and some of Adders. And in this man's flesh is privileged, for man is
formed to the noblest and worthyest, that is to wit, is joined to the
reasonable soul. Therefore it is above wonders, and most wonderful, that in
the last time man's flesh is made Gods flesh, when Gods son became man, and
dwelled among us. When the flesh that was traile and brittle of mankind, was
made highest above other, when it was joined to Gods son, as says Gregory.
Constantine says, That flesh is kindly hot and moist, and feeds kindly
heats, and covers sinews, boanes, and brain, and defends them, and
tempereth the coldness of them. And there is three manner of fleshes, some is
meddled with muscles, sinews, and strings, and is called brawne: the other
manner of flesh is temperate between hard and soft, and is called gristlely,
the third is kirnellye. And pure flesh is most in the ridge and in the gummes.
The flesh that lies in the utter parts of the bones, that rests upon that
flesh, is as it were a needful Tapit of casement for ye said bones. The flesh
of the ridge boane is needful both within and without, for two causes. For it
heateth the marrow of the ridge boane, and fills the hollownesse between the
ridge boanes, and also keeps and saves the sinews that come upward and
downewarde, that they break not nor fail, by reason of the long way, and the
flesh specially desendeth the ridge from distemperate air, and from utter
griefs and harms. The flesh that is between the teeth keeps and saves the
moors and roo^es of them: and feeds these moors and roots, and makes them
steadfast and stable. Knottye flesh has three propertyes. One makes wet and
moist, as the flesh of pappes and tears, and the kirnells under the tongue,
which breeds spittle, for the mouth, the tongue, and the cheeks, that they
be not let of moving with too great dryness. The other part that is
kirnelled and knottie, fills and occupyeth void places, and succoureth the
deines and the sinews, and receive the superfluitye that woseth out of them.
The third part of flesh beclippeth the stomach and the guts: And with this
part is meddled certain ne^tes and causes of sinews, veins, and wosen, which
bring moving and feeling to the inwardes. Nor their way should not be sure,
without this kirnelled flesh were so spread, that the sinews and the arteries
might rest easily thereupon: And also that the sinews and the arteryes may
find a soft place to fly to for succor, if it happened them to meet with
any thing that should grieve them with hardness. Huc vsque Constantinus. li.
2. cap.14. Flesh that is temperate and mean between fat and lean is good and
healthful, namely if it be not meddled with corrupt blood, nor bred thereof, nor
fed therewith. For such flesh is the beginning of corruption, as says
Aristotle. libro.3. And likewise Constantine. libro. 11. cap. 17. Aristotle
liber. 12. says, That too much flesh lets the workings of the spirit. And
therefore the head is not made of much flesh, that it may be of the better
wit and perfect understanding. Item. liber. 1. If the place about the oyen
have much flesh, A sign of evil disposition
it betokens evil disposition, guile, deceit, and evil custom, and default
of virtue Informatiue. And so if there be too much flesh, and the virtue of
formation and shape be feeble: then wonderful passions and evils breed in
the body, as Arist. lib. 16. shows an ensample of a woman, that supposed
that she was with child, and at last she brought forth a grislye lump of
flesh, which is called Mola among Physicians, etc. Also the very pure flesh is
tender and soft: and therefore it will not away with travail. Wherefore
liber. 2. it is said, that the f^^et of a Camel have much-flesh, as the feet
of a Bear, and therefore men make to the Camel strong shoes of hair and of
Leather, when he shall work, to keep him from ach and sore hurting. Also (as
he says Libro. 12.) The flesh is not the first member of feeling, neither a
member conurnient to feeling: But the sinewe, which is within the flesh, is the
limme of feeling. And therefore dead flesh feels nothing, nor flesh which is
cut and detrenched ail of. For it has not the well of feeling of it self, but
of sinews.

Therefore if the sinews be corrupt or stopped at the full, the flesh
feels nothing, as it fares in limbs, which be talten and vexed with the
palsy. All Fowls with crooked bills and sharp claws, be fed with flesh,
and wild beasts also, and flesh is the pray of such Fowls, for need of
meat and of food, as it is said. Liber..14 And fowls of pray that be but
little fleshye, be bold and hardy, and good of flight, and sharp of sight,
as it is there said. And Fowls of great fatness, be slow of moving and
of flight, and they be more fleshie in Winter then in Summer. For in Winter the
powers be closed, and the humors ware thick and tourneth into flesh and
fatness: and also by reason of rest. For then Fowls move less from place to
place, as says Isaac in Dietis.

Of Fatness. Cap. 63.
Pinguedo puueli, words that signify fatnes which comes to pore men through
sloth, refusing law.
Fatness is a moist thing, and sits upon the small celles and places as
says Constantine. For subtle blood and unctuous gathers no fatness in hot
places, there it may enter and pearce. But when it comes to places, that
kindlye are cold, there it congealeth at last, and tourneth into fatness. And
that kind does for right great need, to temper with the moisture of fatness
the sinews and selles, full exercise: unto rich men by too much superfluous
feeding and rest.
which be kindly dry, that they should not lyghtlye break by some hap that
might fall: And also to keep and save with fatness that that is between the
inner parts from cold air that is without, as says Constantinus liber. 2.
cap. 14. And Aristotle. liber.2. says, that fatness is bread in the bodies of
beasts, of blood undigested and vndested, and namely for scarcity of moving.
And the more the fatness increases and waxes, the more the blood minisheth
and vanishes. And therefore in right fat men, is little blood. And he says,
Libro. 16. Moving wastes and destroys fatness, and so does heat also.
Therefore in all beasts the right reine has less fatness then the left
reine, and is higher in place and steed. For in the right side, the heat is
more stronger then in the left side, and of more moving. And Constantine
says, That fat bodies and too full of grease, be worst, and appropried to most
worst evils and sicknesses. For in such bodies often kind heat is stiffeled:
And by stopping of fatness, the way of the spirit is closed and forbarred:
And the influence of the spirits may not come to rule the sinews and
arteryes. And he says, that all fat bodies fall into long sickness, which
be hard and slow to heal: and that is for the great superfluity of humors
gathered together in them. For such bodies charged with fatness, move not
themselves to travel, whereby kindly heat should be augmented. And so the
fatness congeled is dissolved: and then kindly heat fails, and sodeine
death follows, but if there be succor the sooner, as says Constantine
liber. 11. cap..17 Then consider, that fatness by vnctuositie thereof is fire
nutratiue: and for light air that is therein, it passes into the uttermost
part that is of a thing: and diminishes the strength of yt sinews and joints,
and defends them: and flaketh the strength thereof; and makes soft the skirt
and stops the nether pores and keeps and saves kindly heat: and fills
and replenisheth the hollownesse and voidnesse of the body. And stretches out
the wrinkling of the skin: And presses the veins and arteryes of the body,
and lets the working of feeling and reason, and sloweth perfect generation
of beasts. Also it is said in Aph. That a woman yt is too fat, conceiueth not
till-shee become lean: and it is no wonder: Nota.
For the fatness lets and stops the way of the mother. Also grease and
fatness does moist things: and are not soon dry. Wherefore. li. 3. Aristotle
says, That the broth of beasts with much grease renleth not, as the broth of
a horse, or of a Swine. Item, every beast with grease not departed from the
flesh, has but little fatness in the womb. And when the wombes be but
little, the flesh is very fattie. Item he says, that that is nigh the blarke
of the eye in all beasts is full fat, though the eye be hard. And every beast
with much tallowe has little seed: whether it be male or female. And beasts
with teeth in either iawe, have no tallowe. Tallow congealeth anon when it is
taken out of the body and set in cold air. Pinguedo, Adeps, and Aruina, be
all one touching their substance. But Isidore says, Aruina is that fatness,
that cleaves to the skin: Adeps is that fatness that beclippeth the guts,
and keeps and saves the members within. Zirbus is called a thin skin,
unto the which that fatness cleaves that many call Alluta: whereof follows
this verse. Intus adeps, aruina foris, pinguedoque queuis. Which is to
understand, that in the beast is fatness, that is called Adeps, Aruina
without, and both within and without it is called Pinguedo, fatness.

Of the Skin. Chap. 64.
Pellis, Cutis, Chros, Derma. be names for the skin. The skins of men be of
diverse colors, according as to co^plections be, reddish, black, pale,
white, brown, tavvnie greenish, and watery.
THe Skin is the uttermost part of the body of a beast, and is called Cutis
in latin, for it covers the body, and is often cut and coruen as says
Isidore. For Cutin in Greek, is Incisio in Latin, that is, cutting in
English. Also the skin is called Pellis in Latin, and has that name of
Pellere to put of: For it puts off the utter griefs of the body, as wind,
and rain, and suffers Sun burning and other griefs. And when the skin is
flaine, and is drawn of, then it is called Corrium, that is said of Caro in
Latin, flesh. For the flesh is covered with the skin, as says Isidore. Then
the skin is the uttermost part of the body, and beclippeth the flesh and bones,
and covers and defends all the inner parts, and is now stretched out, and
now drawn together, after as the diverse needs of the body axeth. Also for
defense of the inner part of the body the skin puts it sefe forth against
diverse griefs of the air. And the skin has a kindly thinness, as says
Constantine, for that it should not occupy the body over measure. And the skin
is sad to contain the more easily the parts which be within, and also to
let and withstand the utter griefs. In men the skin is more nesher and
softer then in other beasts. And that is for to have good touch and feeling.
For if the skin were hard and thick, as the shell of a fish is, it should
not feel any thing. And if they were rough and hairye, as the skin of an
Ass: then it should feeble and appaire the wit of feeling and of groping.
Therefore in the palm of the hand the utter skin is more and softer then in
other parts of the body, that it should the rather be changed to touching.
And the skin is all full of poores, and namely the skin of the head, and that
is needful to put off superfluous fumositie. For by heat the pores open, and
the superfluity that is between the fell and the flesh, is put out by vapors
and sweating.

Also man's skin is not in all members like: For the skin of the visage is
more tender and thin, and more subtle then other: And that is for the
perfectnes of feeling and showing of fairness. For if the skin of the visage
were too great, men should not see there through the redness of blood: Also if
it were thick, it were not according to ye working of the wits, yt be in ye
visage: and ye skin is so fast joining to ye body, yt it may not easily be
flaine and departed therfrom, and namely in ye soles of ye feet, and in ye
palms of the hands: in the which it cleaneth to the sinews of the heart, and
brawnes as says Constantine. Aristotle li. 3. says, That after the color of
the skin the hair and the nails of beasts vary. For if the skin be black, the
hair and the nails be black. And if the skin be white, the hair and the
nails be white. And every beast that has blood has a skin. And if the
skin be hurt, or if it be flaine off, it has no feeling. And the skin has
this property, that if in a place without flesh, it be cut off, it grows no
more, nor draws not together, as it fares in the Navel, and in the
breadthes of the eye liddes. Also liber.19. In some beasts the skin is small
and thin, and in some great and thick, as the humor small or great has
the masterie. And in a great skin grows great hair, and in a small skin
small hair. And in age the skin waxes great and hard, and shrinketh and
riueleth, for defaults of heat, and consuming of kindlye humor, and then the
beauty changes. Also the skin is often grieved as other members be.
Sometime the cause is without, as with wounds and slitting, with heat of the
Sun, with burning, with hot and cold, wherewith it waxes pale, wanne, and
bliewe, and takes many diverse unseemly colors: Sometime the griefs of the
skin come of a cause that is within, as riueling, which comes of wasting of
the substantial moisture, as it fares in old men and women. Sometime of
infection of humors, as it fares in leprous, and in the^ that have the
Morpheu. For kind puts out from the inward parts the matter that is
infect to the skin: and that matter abides under the skin, and changes and
infecteth the skin.

Sometime it is grieved with scales and sometime with itching, with dry scabs
and wet: Sometime with striping and pilling, and with many another grief. And
skins of beasts be right necessary for men, for right many manners and
diverse uses, as for clowting, and for armor, for writing, for boots and
shoes, and for many other necessaryes, the which were long to reheare.

And scarce is any beast found, but that his skin is couenable to some use of
mankind.

If the skin be white it does come of fleme, Addition
if red, then of blood, if black of black Choler, if Tawnye or shining of
color, adusted, if grayish or greenish, then of melancholy and cold humors.

Of the hair. chap. 65.
THe hair is called Pilus in Latin, Capillus, Thrix. Crinis, Pili.
of Pellis the skin, for the hair comes out of the skin as says
Isidore. And the hair is bred and comes out of a fumositie, hot and dry
as says Constantine. For when the subtle smoke comes out of the powers, it
is dried with the air without, and when the utter soft smoke comes out,
there is not dealed to give it full passage. But the air lets the passage
of this soft smoke, and dries it and tourneth it in to the kind of hair.
The ^ air helps and highteth the body, as says Constable. li. 2. and vltimo.
And liber. 3. Aristotle says, that hair grows not but in the bodies of
beasts, which gender and get beasts. And the hair is diverse by diversity of
skin of the beasts, in the which it grows as it is said, liber. 19. for
beasts that have great skins, have great hair, and that is for the
multitude and plenty of the earthly part, and also for wideness of the veins
and poores. And if the skin be continued and thick, the hair is full thin
and small, for the straightness of the ways. And when the humor of fumositie
that is in the skin dries swiftly, there grows not much hair nor long: And
if that humor be great, thick, and fat, the hair is then contrariwise. And
therefore the hair of man's head is full long, because that humor is fat of
kind, and dries not so soon. And therefore men and women that dwell in moist
countries, and have moist complections, have ^^esh hair and soft, As men and
women in Thracia. Thraciana
And contrary wise, Luteciana
men and women that dwell in hot and dry Countries, Indians.
have hard hair and crispe. Britana.
And namely if they have complections according, for by heat there the hair is
bent, riueled, and pinched, as it is said there. And the hair grows crispe
and coming out of the skin: for it ccommeth out by two contrary ways. For
the earthly part of the hot, fumositie and dry, coming out of the skin
moves downward: and the part hot and light, moves upward: and so the hair
is bowed and bent, riueled, and pinched, and made crooked and crispe. And when
beasts that have hair wax old, then the hair waxes hard and more stiff
then they were before; as feathers of fowls wax ^^^ in age, and that is for
scarcity of s^^^durs. Also there it is said, That ^^^ man is gelded, there
grows the hairs on him never after: and that ^^^ scarcitye of humor, and
through ^i^i^i^tion of hea^e and humor in the principal members. Item,
sometime the hair changes color, that is by reason of some cause without.
For as it is said there. (...). Hot water makes white hair, and cold water
makes black hair. And the cause is, for in hot water is more, spirit then in
cold water. And therefore when the water heateth, thereof comes whiteness.
As it fa^^^ in some. And this change accidentally of ye hair, is as well of
small hairs of the body as of the head. But it comes not always of changing
of hot water or cold.

Of the Hairs of the head. Chap. 66.
Hairs of the head be called Capilli in Latin, as says Isidore, and be made
to hight the head; and to keep and save the brain from cold. Hair shorn is
called Cesaries: Shearing beseems well a man and not a woman. Hair vnkit, is
called Coma in Greek, women's hair is properly called Crines in Latin. For
women's hair is dealed, shed, pleated, and bound with laces. And so the
pleates of women's hair be knitte and bound with laces that be called
Discriminalia in Latin, Huc vs^^^ Isid. And Constable. says, yt the hair of the
head comes out of fumositie thick gross, and hot. And that fumositie comes
of hot, firic, and intensiue humors, and passes out at the pores of the head.
And is dried with air that is without, As it appears after male factors have been excemted, their hair and nails have grevven long, until the moist humor
be diminished.
and so tourneth into the substance of hair, while this humor grows, the
hair grows, that is bread and comes thereof, and is nourished therewith.
And who yt loses this fumositie, loses also ye hair of his head. And ye
hair has ye quality of this fumosity: for if this fumositie be black, ye hair
is black: And there is much hair when ye fumositie is much, and scarcity of
hair, when it is scarce. And when this fumositie fails, the hairs fall off,
and the man is bald, for the hair grows no more. And in this case medicines
help not: and if such fumositie fails not, but is infected or let by some
other humor: then failing and lack of hair is not properly baldness, but a
special evil yt Physicians call Allopecia. Alopecia, a kind of leprosy or
s^^rse
By that evil, ye nourishing of the hair being corrupt, the hair falls,
and the fore part of the head is bare, and the fore skin of the head is ye
fouler. Such men fare as foxes do: for the hair of them fails happily through
immoderate heat. Allopes in Greek and Vulpes in Latin, is called a Fox in
English. For such other passions and causes of failing and default of hair,
search inner in the treatise of the infirmities, of the falling of, and of the
faults of the hair. Of the hoarenesse and the cause thereof seek likewise
there. Also look before in the treatise of the head, where ye shall find the
disposition, kind, and diversity of the complexion of the hair, by the
equdition of Galen, Halye, and Hippocrates. But of hoare hair take heed, as
Constantine and others Authors tell^ For the masterie of cold fleine: and
moist h^eedeth hoarnesse. For of white fumositie and cold comes hoarnesse of
the hair of the head, and of the other hair of the body. Arist. says, that
the hairs of the temples hoareth sooner then the other hair: and that is for
scarcity of humors and for the mastry of the coldness of the boanes thereof.

Then hoarenesse betokens length of life and of age, and the quenching and
passing of fleshly lyking, the stinting and flieng of vices and lyking of
childhood, and ending of this life, and needful tidings of the new life that
comes afterward. Baldenesse is privation and default of hair, and comes of
default of fumositie in the foreparte of the head, as says Constantine. And it
comes sometime of great abstinence, and of default of moist fumositie, that
is the matter of the hair, as Aristotle says liber.3. The often serving of
Venus makes the hair to fall, and broodeth baldness little and little. And
if it fall in youth, it grows again. And if it falls afterward youth is
gone, it grows no more. Then it follows that hair falls in the fore part
of the head, and such falling and default of hair causes baldness commonly.
And it falls off, either for the skin is too thin, or for scarcity of
humors. Hair falls not behind the powle, and that is for sadness and
thickness of the skin, and thickness of pores and of cleaving ofhumour that
is there, whereby the hair is fastened and nourished, as says Galen super
Aphorism. And there it is said, That children and women ware not balde, and
that is for plenty of moisture in their heads. Also gelded men ware not balde:
and that is through changing of their compleition, and for masterye of cold,
that closes and stops the powers of the skin of the head, and holds
togethers ye fumositie that it may not pass nor vapor out, but in women and
in gelded men, either hair falls and ^ayleth, as says Aristotle. lib.19.
Then the hair of the head, keeps, highte^h, defends, and heateth the head.
And if a man be without hair on the head he seems the more unhonest. This
defaulte falls in youth, but most in age: for the foresaid causes and
reasons.

Addition
All manner of hairs come of gross matter or fume, being hot, wherefore this
common Proverb be is used: Vir pilosus semper est luxuriosus, A man that is
full of hair, is lecherous. There are seven several coulous of hairs. The
first Albrone hair, yeolow hair, red hair, black hair, flaxen hair, gray
hair, and white hair.

Alborne hair and yeolowe hair deem a gentle nature, where the condition and
complexion be of like goodness, proceeding of Sanguine, blood.

White and flaxen hair, of Flegmae, read hair, of grole humors and ill
blood.

Black hair, of cholarike humors mixed with melancholy, Gray hair, defection
of natural heat, and corrupt fleame: every hair has a hollownes, forth of
the which the powers streme, the hairs of man have diverse impediments, it may
be eaten with worms, it may fall, it may also stink and wither.

FINIS LIBRI QVINTI.
INCIPIT LIBER SEXTVS.
FOrasmuch as it is said in special of the properties and parts of man, now
it follows to speak of the properties of him in general and in special,
touching the diversity of age and of sexes, and also touching many diversities
of kindly and unkindly things: for by all these diverse and contrary parts, of
man is known.

Of the age. Cap. 1.
REmigius says, That the age of man, is naught else but tenor and during of
kindly virtues in consideration, mean between contrary moving, or else mean
between quiet and rest: for hereby man passes and moves, Ioh. 19
and never abides, in the same state. Or as Isidore says, the age is the
space of the life of a beast, and begins from ye conception, and ends and
sayleth after age. Isidore says and Constantine also, That there are many
diverse ages. The first is called Infancia, childhood without teeth, and lately
got and borne, and dureth seven months, and is yet full tender and soft and
quauie and clammy. Therefore in that age a child needs always tender and
soft keeping and feeding and nourishing. And childhoode that breeds sees
endures and stretches seven years. And such a Child is called Infans, that
is to understand, not speking, for he may not speak nor sound his words
perfectly: for ye teeth be not yet perfectly grown and set in order, as says
Isid. Afterward comes ye second age yt is called Puericia, childhood: which
dureth and lasts other seven year, that is to the end of fourteen year:
and has that name Puericia of Pubertas, or else of Pupilla, the black of ye
eye, for as yet the children are pure, as the black of ye eye is, as Isidore
says. And after that comes the age that is called Adolescentia, the age of a
young striplyng, and dureth the third seventh year, that is, to the end of
one and twenty years, as it is said in Viatico: but Isidore says, that it
endures to the fourth seven years, that is to the end of eight and twenty
years. But Physicians account this age to the end of thirty or five and
thirty years. This age is called Adolescentia, for because it is full age to
get children, as says Isidore: and able to burnish and increase, and has
might and strength. Isidore says, yet in this age the members are soft and
tender, and able to stretch: and therefore they grow by virtue of heat that
has masterye in them, even to the perfection of complement. After this
Adolescentia age, comes the age that is called Iuuentus, and this age is
mean between all ages: and therefore it is strongest, and lasts as Isidore
says, to xlv. or.l. years, and there ends. And Isidore says, this age
Iuuentus has that name of Iuuare, that is to help: for in that age a man is
set in his full increasing, and therefore he is strong to help at need: and
Isidore says, that after this age Iuuentus, comes the age that is called
Senecta: and is the middle age between the age that is called Iuuentus, and
the second age ye Isid. calls heuines or sadness. This age accords to old
men and sad, for to call Iuuentus young. In this age old men draw from youth
to the second age: For such men be not in the second age, but their youth
passes, as says Isidore. And upon this age comes the second age: and some
men suppose, yt this age ends at ixx. year, and some suppose that it ends
in no certain number of years. But after these ages, all the other part of
man's life is accounted Senectus, or Senium, the second or the last age. Isidore
says, that this age is called, Senectus, for passing and sailing of wit: for
by reason of age, old men doat. Isidore says, that Philosophers tell, that
men that have cold blood, be nice and fools: as men in whom hot blood has
masterie, are wise and ready. Therefore old men whose blood wareth cold, and
in whom the blood heateth not can but little good. Also for great age old men
doat and are mad: and for lust, lyking, lightness, and play, children know not
what they should do, as says Isidore. The last part of age is called Senium,
it is so called because it is the last end of age and of life. This age
brings with it many domages, and also profits good and evil, as says
Isidore. Good for it delyuereth us out of the power of mighty men and tirants,
and makes an end of bodilye lust, and breaks the braydes of fleshly lyking,
and has wit and wisdom, and gives good counsel, as many old men do. It
is the end of wretchedness and of worcester, and beginning of wealth, and of joy:
It is ye passage out of peril, and coming to the price: It is the
perfectness of meedfull deeds, and disposition to be perfect. And this age
brings euilles with him, as says Isidore. For it is wretched with
feebleness and noye: For many euilles come, and sickness in age is noyous
and sorrowful, for two things there be, ye destroy yt strength of the body,
sickness and age, as says Isidore. In these old folk kind heat is
quenched, the virtue of governance and of ruling fails, and humor is
dissolved and wasted, might and strength passes and fails, flesh, fatness
and fayrenesse is consumed and spent, the skin riueleth, the sinews shrink,
the body bends and crooketh, form and shape is lost, and fairness of the
body brought to naught, all these fail in need. All men despise the old
person, and are heavy and weary of him. The old man is travailed and grieved
with coughing and spitting, and with other griefs, until the ashes he
resolved into the ashes, and powder into powder. By this space and passing of
time and of age Philosophers describe man's life: in which passing of time and
of age, man changes and draws always toward his end, and to the gates of
death. Huc vsque Isidorus.

Of Death. Cap. 2.
DEath is called Mors, for that it is bitter: or it has that name of Mars,
that is fained to make death. Isid. speaks of three manner deaths. The first
is bitter, the second too soon, the third comes in time. The first is
death of children, the second of striplyngs, the third kindly, and is death
of old men. Every dead body is called Funus or Cadauer, a carrion. It is
called Funus, of Funibus, ropes: for men in old time, bare ropes burning, with
wore: about them, before a poor man's beyre. And Cadauer, carrion has ye name
of Cadere to fall, for the dead body falls and is thrown into the grave. And
it is called than Detunctus, for it has left the office of life. And it is
called ^epultus, put aside, for it is put aside and buried. Hue vsque Isidorus.
li. 16. ca.2. Seek the other properties of death farthermore in the end of
this sixth book, in the chapter treating of the infirmities.

Death is an eternal sleep, Addition
a dissolution of the body, a terior of the rich, a desire of the poor, a
thing inheritable, a pilgrimage uncertain, a separation of the living: Death
is the scorge of all evil, and the chief reward of the good: Secundus.

Of the dignity of man. Ca. 3.
Hereafter it follows to speak of the properties of man, and first of his
childhoode and of his generation and getting. For his making and creation is
more excellent, than the making of other beasts: by so much that man is more
worthy than other beasts, not only in soul, but also in most temperate
complexion of the body. For Aristotle libro.2. says, like as a gobbet or a
piece of gold or of silver, is in comparison to the money with perfect coin,
so be all dispositions of other beasts, in comparison to man, if comparison be
made between them and man. And therefore for that man is the worthiest of all
cretures, kind ordeineth wittely and wisely to give to man diverse members and
noble, to accord to diverse noble workings. Therefore of his creation and making
touching the body, somewhat shortly shall be treated and said.

Of the creation of the child. Cap. 4.
ABout the begetting and generation of a child, it needs to have conenable
matter, and speedefull place, and service and working of kind, that is to wit,
heat, as the cause efficient working and doing, and spirit that gives virtue
to the body^, and governs and rules that virtue. The matter of the child is
humor Seminalis, that is shed, by working of generation, and comes of both
the parts, of the father and the mother. First this matter is shed in the
place of conceiving abroad, and by the drawing of virtue of kind, it is
gathered togethers in the cells of the mother. And is meddled togethers by
working of kind heat. For if the digest blood of the father and mother were
not meddled together, there might be no creation neither shaping of a child. For
ye matter of blood that comes of the male is hot and thick. And therefore
for the great thickness thereof it may not spread it self abroad. And also
for ye passing great heat, the matter of the child should be destroyed and
wasted, but it received te^perance of the woman's blood, that has contrary
qualities. This matter gathered in the cell of the right side of the mother,
falls to a male kind. And in the left side to the kind of a woman a
female. And this diversity falls for mastery of heat in the right side
rather then in the left, as says Galen. Constantine, and Aristotle. liber.
15. If the virtue of the blood of the Fathers side have the masterie, the child
is like to the Father, and so againeward. And if the virtue be like strong in
either of them, the child is like both Father and Mother. This matter is fodde
within by the virtue of kind heat, and is beclipped with a little skin, and
ronleth as milk. Congealeth, as renet does the milk
This skin is the matter of Embrioms, that is the healing and the covering of
the child, and so the child is laid therein in the mothers womb. And this
skin comes out with the child, when it is borne, when the stronges be broke
with the child, with the which the child is tied to the cells of the mother.
And if it hap by any chance, that the skin abide still in the womb, after
the child is borne, then the woman is in peril. Then to the matter conceived,
and by virtue retentiue joined, kind sends forth menstruall blood, and by
heat and humor of that blood ye child that is conceived is fed and
nourished, with such a foment and nourishing the field of our generation and
birth is moisted and sprung. For as Galen and Constantine say: When the seed
ranled and cherneth as milk, when it is full of spirit, and of kind heat, it
draws to it self feeding and nourishing, and that is by veins and arteryes
that breed and spring of the substance of the seed, and be joined to the
menstruall blood. And that is needful, that the matter of the child have
nourishing and feeding that comes thereto by veins and spirit, that comes
thereto by arteries and wosen. By these two, that is to wit, Conueya^nce of air
the matter seminall and humor of nourishing and feeding, kind heat that is
closed within, does shape the members of the body of the child, and that by
might and virtue informatiue of shaping. For of the Essentia of the seed, it
shapeth the brain, bones, griftles, fe^^es, skins, slnewes, veins, and
arteryes, wosen and pipes. And of menstruall blood, kind shapeth the liver and
all the fleshly members, of the which the substance is bred and comes of
blood. And first kind shapeth the principal members, as the heart, the
brain, and liver, which are the foundation of the other members: and in
beginning while these be a lump of blood, they be full nigh togethers, but
afterward they be divided and departed a fonder. Of these three foundations
spring other three: Of the brain spring the sinews, and the marrow of the
ridge bone: of the heart, arteryes, wosen and pipes, spring: and veins of the
liver. When these foundations be made, kind makes and shapeth bones to keep
and save them. As the skull to keep and save the brain, and defend it, and
the ribs of the breast to defend the heart, and the ribbe^ of the side to
defend the lider: and so of other. After these breed and spring other members,
later then these, as the hands a, feet, and such other. These be not shapen
all at once, but little and little one after another. The child is bred and
comes forth in four degrees: The^ first is when the seed is nigh as it were
milk: The second, when the seed is become into blood, yet then is not the
liver nor the heart, nor the brain perfectly shaped, but they be as a lump
of blood, and this degree is called Fetus by Ipocras speech. The third degree
is, when the heart, brain, and liver are shapen, and the other members
vnshapely, and not divided: The last degree is, when all the members be like
even shaped: and this degree is called, Iasans of Ipocras, for now the body is
made and shapen with members and lyins, and disposed to receive the soul. Then
it receives soul and life, and begins to move it self and sprall, and to
put with feet and with hands, and if it be a female, it moves in the left
side, and if it be a male it moves in the right side as says Galen. In the
degree of milk this matter is vii. days, in the degree of blood ix. days in
the degree of a lump of flesh xii. days, and in the fourth degree before full
persection xviii. days, whereof follow these verses: Sep in lacte dies, ter
sunt in sanguine terni. After 46. days the Child has full shape.

Bis seni carnem, ter seni membra figurant.
That is to understand, The matter of the seed abides vii. days in milk,
ix. in blood, and xii. in flesh, and then in xviii. days the members be
shapen. Then from the day of conception to the day of full complicion and the
first life of the child, be xlvi. days, so that the first day and the last
be accounted in ye tale: and by this appears, that in xlvi, days, 6. days
after. 40 days, life enters the continual proportion of the first creation.
the child is alive, and full shape touching the effect and doing of
generation. And in this manner Austen accompteth the buylding of the Temple
under the number and tale of xlvi. year, and compares and likeneth thereto
perfection of the body of Jesus Christ. Super. lo. 9. and li. 4. de Trin. ca. 5.
There among other he says these words, A good note.
xlvi. times vi. days be CC. days and lxxvi, which number of days make ix.
months and vi. days. And it follows in the same chapter, And it is written,
that our Lord was borne in the viii Kalendes of January. Then from
conception, that was from the viii. Kalendes of April, to the day of the
birth, yt was the viii. day of January, be accounted CC days, lxxvi. ye
contains the number of xlvi. times vi. In so many years the Temple was
builded, etc. And li. 3. ca. 34. Constable. says, that a male child that shall be
borne in the viii. month, is formed in thirty days, and full shaped in lxx.
days. Then he says, that a male child of x. months is formed in xlvi. days,
and at the full in lxxxx. In the same place the time is described of the first
life, and full shaping of a maid child, but I pass over shortly, taking
heed hereto, that the female is more slowly formed and shapen at full than a
male child. Therefore the leede that the male comes of, is more stronger and
more, hot, and in more hotter place received, than the seed that the female
comes of. Also Constantine and Galen say super Aphor. that Ipocras says,
That every child moves in eight months, and if he were than so strong,
that he might pass out in any wise, then he should live. And if it purpose to
pass out and may not pass out, then it is feebled and grieved with travel of
that moving, so that when he comes out, in the next month after, he shall not
long live. And if the birth abides to the ninth month, or till the beginning
of the tenth month, then ye child becomes strong, and is born without
peril, as says Constantine li. Pantegni. ca. 34.

Of the little child. Ca. 5.
THe little child is conceived and bred of seeds that have contrary
qualities: and the place of the male is in the right side, and of the female in
the left side. And he is fed and nourished in the mothers womb with blood
me^strual. Of such vile matter and unstable man takes his nourishing and
feeding from the beginning by working of kind, and helping of the virtue of
heat, stretching out all the members that be shaped little and little, and not
all at once. Christ alone was all at once shaped, and distinguished in his
mothers womb, when he was conceived therein as says Austen. When the soul
enters, life is shed in therewith and feeling also, and the child feels the
clipping kindly of a small skin: and when that skin breaks, the child moves,
and with that moving, the mothers womb is stricken and grieved full sore. When
kind has full wrought creation and shaping of the child, if he be whole and
sound, then the eight or ninth or tenth month, he forces himself to come out
of the womb, and in the out-comming, he is beclipped with a skin that is
called ^ecun^^na: and in his out going, the mothers womb is trauayled with
full hard throws and sore, and that happens if the child be too hasty
outward. Then when he comes out into the air that is too hot or too cold,
he is put to wretchedness and to woe: that witnesses openly his kind
wretchedly crieng and weeping. The childs flesh that is newborn, is tender,
soft, quauie, and vnsad: therefore diverse remedies and food be necessary to
the child, as says Constantine li. 3. cap. 32. And he says, that children
that be newborn should be swathed in Roses pouned with salt, that their
members may be comforted and delivered, and cleansed of clammie moisture. Then
the roof of the mouth and gums, should be froted with once fingers wet in
Honey, to cleanse and comfort the inner part of the mouth, and also to excite
and to kindle the childs appetite, with sweetness of the honey. And he
should be often bathed and anointed with Oleo Myrtino or Rosaceo, and all the
lyms should be anointed and rubbed with this Oil, and namely the lyms of
males, the which because of travail, ought to be more hard and sad, than the
lyms of females. And also it is needful, that they should be brought a sleep
in dark places, till their sight be gathered and joined: for a place that is
too bright, departs and divides the sight, and hurts the small eyes, that
be yet full tender, and often makes children to look a squinte. And therefore
they should not be brought nor laid into bright air, least the spirit of sight
be divided and departed. And of all things it needs to beware of evil milk,
and of corrupted nourishing and feeding, that the children be not fed therewith:
for by uncleanness of Nursses, and sucking of clammie milk like glewe,
comes full many sores and griefs, as whelkes, blaines, pimples in the mouth,
spewing, fevers, cramp, the flixe, and such other. And if the child be sick,
medicines shall be given to the Nourse, and not to the child, and she shall be
ruled according to good diet: so that the virtue of the Nourse be in sleede,
supplye, and fulfill the default of the child, as says Constantine there. For
of good disposition of the milk comes good disposition of the child, and
contrariwise. There must be he^de take in choosing wholesome nu^^es, and cleanly.
For of corrupt milk of the Nurse, comes unkindly sores and griefs in the
childs little body: and that is by reason of the tenderness of the childs
kind, and also for the easy changing of milk food. And for tenderness, the
lymmes of the child may easelye and loo^^e boowe and bend, and take diverse
shapes, and therefore childrens members and lyms, be bound with lysts. ^ other
couenable bonds, that they be not crooked neither evil shapen. Seek in the
fifth book of the navel, there it is expounded more largely. Also for that
children take much food, they need to ^are much sleep, that the natural
heat may be received into the inner parts, to make good digestion of their
meat and drink. And therefore by exciting of kind, nurses have a custom to
rock children in cradles, to comfort kind heat, with easy and temperate
moving. And to bring the children softly and lightly on sleep by resolutions
and giving again of fumosities in their brains. Also they use lullings, and
other cradle songs, to please the wits of the child. Heereto Aristotle says
lib. 2. that a child has much brain, and full great in comparison to his
body. Therefore the ever part of a child is greater and heavier than the
nether: and therefore in the beginning of his walking, a child creeps on
feet and hands, and then afterward, he reareth up his body a little: for the
over part minisheth, and wereth more light, and the nether parts were and
become more heavy. Then the age of the first childhood that is within seven
year, ends in the beginning of the second childhoode, that is between
seven and fourteen.

Of a child. Cap. 6.
A Child that is between vii. year and xiiii. is called Puer in Latin, and
has that name of Puritas, cleanness, as says Isidore. And the child is
properly called Puer, when he is wayned from milk, and departed from the
breast, and knows good and evil ^and therefore he is able to receive
chastising and learning, and then he is put and set to learning under tutours,
and compelled to take learning and chastising: Children of this age be hot and
moist of complexion: and in such children for straytnes of veins, moving of
Venus has no great masterie, till they cou^e to the year of Puberte, that is
when ye nether beard hair grows first in the flesh, and therefore for
pureness of kind innocence, such children be called Pueri, as says Isidore.
Then such children are soft of flesh, lythie and plyant of body, able and
light to moving, witty to learn, and lead their lives without thought and
care, and set their courages only on mirth and lyking, and dread no perils
more than beating with a rod, and they love an apple more than gold. In the
time of Puberte when the hair grows on the nether beard, they be not
ashamed to be seen naked and bare, when they be praised, or shamed, or blamed
they set little thereby. Through stirring and moving of the heat of the flesh
and of humors, they be lightly and soon wroth, and soon pleased, and lightly
they forgive: and for tenderness of body they be soon hurt and grieved, and
may not well endure hard travail. For ^^uing of hot humors which have ye
mastrie in the^, they move lightly, and be unsteadfast and unstable. Through
great and strong heat, they desire much meat: and so by reason of superfluity
of meat and of drink, It is very expedient for young people to take heed that
they match not with those that come of a corrupt or leprous stock.
they fall often and many times into diverse sicknesses and evils. And those
children which be gono^ed and gotten of corrupt father and mother take
corruption of them, as it fares in children of leprous men, and of those men
which have the sickness called P^dagre, which of a corrupt humor of the
father and mother, are corrupted with leprosy and with gout. By voice yt la^e,
we perceive between children and men of full age. Therefore libro. 3.
Aristotle says, that in children the voice changes not, until the desiring
of Venus come: For when childrens voice changes it is a token of Puberte, and
then they be able to gender and get children Since all children be tached with
evil manners, and think only on things that be, and regard not of things
that shall be, they love plays, game, and vanity, and forsake winning and
profit: and things most worthy they repute least worthy, and least worthy
most worthy. They desire things that be to them contrary and grievous, and set
more of the image of a child; than of the image of a man, and make more sorrow
and woe, and weep more for the loss of an apple, than for the loss of their
heritage, and the goodness that is done for them, they let it pass out of
mind. They desire all things that they see, and pray and arc with voice and
with hand: They love talking and counsel of such children as they be, and
avoid company of old men: they keep no counsel, but they tell all that
they hear or see. Suddenly they laugh, and suddenly they weep. Always they
cry, iangle, scorn and disdain, that uneath they be still while they sleep.
When they are washed of filthe, anon they ^efile themselves again. When the
mother washes and kometh them, they kick and s^rall, and put with feet and
with hands, and withstandeth with all their might. For they think only on
womb joy, and know not the measure of their wombes: Or ever they be ready
clothed.
They desire to drink always, uneath they are out of bed, when they cry for
meat canone.

Of the maid. Cap. 7.
A Maid child and a ^amoysell is called Puella, as it were clean and pure,
as the black of the eye, as says Isidore. Among all things that be loved in a
maiden, chastity and cleanness be loved most. Men behooue to take heed of
maidens, for they be hot and tender of complexion small, pliant and fair of
disposition of body: shamefast, fearful, and merry touching the affection of
ye mind. Touching outward disposition they be well nurtered, demure and soft
of speech, and well ware what they say, and delycate in their apparel. For as
Seneca says, that seemly clothing beseems to them well, that be chaste
damoisells, etc. Puella is a name of age, of soundness without wem, and also
of honesty, as says Isidore. For commonly we use to call maidens
damoisells, and a maid is called Virgo, and has that name of green ago, as
Virgo a rod is said, as it were V^ndis green: or else a maid has the name.
Virgo, of cleanness without corruption, as it were Virago: For she knows
not the very passion of women, as says Isidore li. 11. and. 12. Arist. says,
that every woman generally has more nesh and soft hair, and more pliaunt
than a man, and longer neck, and the color of women is more white than of
men, and their faces and cheer, is merry, soft, bright, and pleasing, and
have small bodies and straight from the shoulders to the navel, and more large
from the navel to the knees, and longer downward to the soles of the feet.
Their hands and the uttermost part of their members be full subtle and
pliant, their voice small their speech easy and short, l^ght in ^^^ng and
short sheep, and light wit and head, they be soon angry, and they be
merciable and envious, bitter, guilefull, able to learn, and hasty in lyking
of Venus. Therefore li. 8. Aris says, that of all kinds of beasts the female
is more feeble than the male, except the females of Bears and Leopardes: For
then be rounted more cruel and more hardy than the males. And in other kind
of beasts ye females be easier to be taught and be more guilefull, and be more
soft, and more busy about norishing, feeding, and keeping of their young. And
for that a woman is more meeker than a man, she weepeth sooner, and ^^ more
envious, and more laughing and loving, and the malice of the soul is more in a
woman than in a man. And she is of feeble kind, A pretty mixture in a woman.
and she makes more leasings, and is more shamefast, and more slow in working
and in moving than is a man, as says Aristotle. lib. 8.

Of the Mother. Cap. 8.
THe mother is called Matter, Matter.
for she profereth and puts forth the breast to give the child, and is
busy to nourish and so keep it, and the child in the mothers womb is fed
with blood menstruall, but when the child is born, kind sends that blood to
the breasts, and tourneth it to milk to feed the child, and so the child is
more better and kindlye fed with his own mothers milk, than with other milk.
The mother that conceiueth with liking, trauaileth and brings forth her
child with sorrow and woe, and she loves the child tenderly, and clippeth
and kisseth it, and feeds and norisheth it busily. Also after that the mother
is with child, she sheddeth not menstruall blood: for as Arist. says, it
turns into feeding of the child. The mother is less grieved if she go with
a male child, then when she goes with a maid child: and therefore she is
fairer of color, and lighter of moving, as Aristo. says. And Aug. says, The
nearer the time of birth the mother is, the more she is grieved and travailed
with moving of ye child. Arist. says, and Galen also super Aphor. that the
tokens that women go with child, be if they desire diverse things, and change
color, and were wan under the eyes, and the breasts were great, and little and
little the womb arises, and with greatness of the child, the mother is
stretched, their stomachs wamble, and oftentimes they be ready to spewe, they
be very sad, and can away with no labor, in trauails of child they be
compelled to cry and lightly perish, and namely young women with small members
and straight. The more woe and sorrow women have in travel, the more they love
the child, when it is borne ^ and they keep and nourishes, and instrudeth it
the better. The lettes of a woman in conceiving and feeding of a child, sake
before in the fifth book, where is treated of the mother and breasts. Furthermore
in the same it touches of death birth, and of the causes thereof.

Of a Daughter. Cap. 9.
A Daughter is called Filia, Filia.
and has that name like as Filius a son, of Fonere, to succor and feed,
for the mother feeds the daughter, and gives to her matter to feed other,
for the same virtue of conceiving that the mother takes of her father and
mother, she leaves her daughter, as touching the seed of generation. The more
like the daughter is to the mother in discretion of sexes, the more beloved is
she of her. Motherly affection.
A daughter has the same properties that he rehearsed before of a damoysell and
a maid child. Look in the chapter next before.

Of a Nurse. Cap. 10.
A Nurse has that name of norishing, for she is ordained to nourish and to
feed the child. Nutrix.
Isidore says, that in feeding and nourishing of the child, the nurse is in
steed of the mother. And therefore like as the mother, the nurse is glad if
the child be glad, and heavy if the child be sorye, and takes the child up
if it fall, and gives it suck: if it weep she kisseth and lulleth it still,
and gathers the lymmes, and binds them together, and does cleanse and wash
it when it is desiled. And for that it cannot speak, the Nurse lispeth and
sowndeth the same words to teach more easelye the child that cannot speak.
And she uses medicines to bring the child to coupnable estate if it be sick:
and lifts it up now on her shoulders, now on her hands, now on her knees and
lap, and lifts him up if it cry or weep.

Addition
If the nurse have a stinking breath, it is not good to chaw the childs meat
fasting, for if in kissing of young infants a stinking breath infecteth the
tender powers, much more sooner does such chawed food, breed the sou^ding
evil, of the which proceeds the falling sickness. Cold pap made of Rye flower
is also dangerous, and beer that is over bitter with hoppes.

And she chaweth meat in her mouth, and makes it ready to the toothlesse
child, that it may the easilyer swallow that meat, and so she feeds the
child when it is an hungered, and pleases the child with whispering and
so^^^s when it shall sleep, and (...) it in sweet clothes, and righteth and
stretches out his lymmes, and binds them together with cradle bonds to
keep and save the child, yt it have no miscrooked lims. She batheth and
anointeth it with good anoyntments. Seek before Cap. de Infanculo.

Of a Midwife. Cap. 11.
A Midwife is a woman that has craft or skill to help a woman that trauaileth
of child, Obstetrix. Obstetricem.
that she bear and bring forth her child, with the less pain end sorrow,
and for that the child should be borne with the less travail, she anoynteth
and balmeth the mothers womb, and helps and comfort her in that wise.
Also she takes the child out of ye womb, and knitteth his navel four inches
long, with water she washes away the blood of the child, and bayneth him with
salt and honey to dry up the humors, and to comfort his lyms and members, and
swatheth him in clothes and clouts. Seek before in libro. 5. in the chapter of
the navel.

Of a servant. Cap. 12.
A Servant woman is ordained to learn the wives rule, Ancilla.
and is put to office and work of travail, toylyng, and stubbering, and is
fed with gross meat and simple, and is clothed with clothes and kept low
under the yoke of thraldom and of seruage, and if she conceive a child, it
is thrall or it be borne, and is taken from the mothers womb to seruage. Also
if a serving woman be of bond condition, she is not suffered to take a husband
at her own will: and he that weddeth her, if he be free before, he is made
bond after the contract. A bond servant woman is bought and sold like a
beast: and if a bond servant man or woman be made free, and afterward be
unkind, he shall be called and brought again into charge of bondage and of
thraldom. Also a bond servant suffers many wrongs, and is beat with rods,
and constrained and held low with diverse and contrary charges and travails
amongst wretchedness and woe, uneath he is suffered to rest or to take breath.
And therefore among all wretchedness and woe, the condition of bondage and
thraldom is most wretched, as says Rabanus, expounding this word Ier. 9. Ye
shall serve strange Gods, that shall not suffer you to rest day nor night. It
is one property of bond serving women, and of them that be of bond condition,
to grudge and to be rebellious and vnbou^om to their Lords and Ladies, as says
Rabanus. And when they be not held low with dread, their hearts swell and
we^e stout and proud against the commandments of their souereignes: as it
fared of Agar a woman of Egypt, servant of Sara, for when she saw that she
had conceived and was with child, she despised her own Lady, A slovve horse
must have a quick spur: and a malepart servant meat, drink, lodging,
counsel work, and stripes.
Genesis 16. and would not amend her: but then her Lady put her to be scourged
and beaten, and so it is written that Sara chastised her and beat her, etc.
Dread makes bond men and women meek and low, and goodly love makes them
proud and stout, and despitefull, as it is said there. And it is written, he
that nourishes his servant delicately, shall find him rebel at the end.
Seek farthermore in the Chapter Nequam.

Of a male. Cap. 13.
A Male is called Masculus, Masculus.
and Masculus is the diminutiue of Mas, maris. And in all kind of beasts the
male has the principate, touching the worthiness of se^es, that is,
distinction of male and female as says Isidore. The male passes the female in
perfect complexion, in working, in wit, in discretion, in might and in
Lordship. In perfect complexion, for in comparison the male is hotter and
dryer, and the female the contrary.

In the male are virtues formal and shaping, and working, and in the female
material suffering and passive. Therefore Aristotle li. 5. says, that a man
is as it were form and shape, and a woman is as it were patient and suffering.
Also the male passes in kind working: for generally kind working is stronger
in the male than in the female, for in him is more virtue and strength, and
therefore a man is called Vir in Latin, and has that name of passive
strength, as says Isidore, for the sinews and brawnes of men be grounded in
greater strength, and therefore they be apt to strong works and deeds: the
bones of males be stronger, greater, harder and sadder in the ioyutes, and
therefore they be kindly more strong for all manner of works.

Also Constantine says, that in males the hearts be large and great,
therefore they be able to receive much plenty of spirits and of blood: And
therefore through the great abundaunce of spirits and hot blood, a man is more
hardy then a woman, for in her the cause is contrary: And through strength of
heat and virtue of dry complexion, no man hash the passion menstruall as
women have. All superfluities that be bread in men's bodies, are either
consumed by great heat, or else turned into hair, or are voided by business
and travail: Also the conditions of man and woman be diverse in discreation of
wit: For in all kind of beasts the male is more craftye and warye then the
female, to void and to escape ginnes and griefs, and other perils, as says
Aristotle. li. 5. Therefore a man passes a woman in reason and in sharpnes of
wit and understanding, as says Augustine. And by authority of the Apostle he
sets a man before a woman in dignity and worthiness of the Image and
likeness of God: And by reason of this dignity a man passes a woman in
authority and might of souerigntie. The authority of teching and souereignty
is granted to men and denied to women, as for custom and usage 1. Cor. 6. 1.
Cor. 6.
The Apostle says, I suffer not a woman to teach in the Church or
congregation: For it is written: Under man's power thou shall be, and he shall
be thy Lord. Genesis 3. Genesis 3.
Then men be more dry and hot then women, more strong and mighty, more bold
and hardy, more wise and witty, more steadfast and stable, and love women
iealously. And also beasts fight for their wives, as Aristotle says, They be
also more harder of body, more rough and h^tcie, and have a more greater and
groser voice, and be more stern and fearful of looking in all manner kind
of beasts except a ^owe, whose voice is greater than the Bulls, as says
Aristotle. Also in every kind of beasts, the male has mo teeth than the
female, and needs more meat and feeding for the body, and that is for the
great strength of heat yt has ye masterie in males, that wastes soon the
moisture of meat and of drink, as says Aristotle lib. 3.

Of a man. Cap. 14.
A Man is called Vir in Latin, and has that name of might and strength, as
says Isidore. For in might and strength a man passes a woman. A man is the
head of a woman as the Apostle says, and therefore a man is bound to rule his
wife, as the head has cure and rule of the body. And a man is called Maritus,
as it were warding and defending Matrem the mother, for he takes ward and
keeping of his wife, that is mother of the children. And is called Sp^nsus
also, and has that name of Spondere, for he betrotheth and binds himself:
for in the contract of wedding, he plighteth his troth to lead his life with
his wife without departing, and to pay her his debt, and to keep ^^^ and love
her before all other. A man has so great love to his wife, that for her sake he
aduentereth himself to all perils, and sets her love before his mothers
love, for he dwells with his wife, and forsakes father and mother: for so
says God, A man shall forsake father and mother and abide with his wife. Mat
19.
Before wedding yt spouse thinks to win love of her that he w^^eth, with
gifts, and certofieth of his will with letters and messengers, and with diverse
presents, and gives many gifts and much good and cattle, and promises much
more.

And to please her he puts him to diverse plays and games among gathering of
men, and uses often deeds of arms, of might and of masterie, and makes him
gaye and seemly in diverse clothing and array, and all that he is prayed to
give and to do for her love. he gives and does anon with all his might, and
denies no petition that is made in her name and for her love. He speaks to
her pleasantly, and beholds her cheer in the face with pleasing and glad
cheer, and with a sharp eye, and at last alienteth to her, and tells openly
his will in presence of her friends, and spenseth her with a ring, and takes
her to wife, and gives her gifts in token of contract of wedding, and makes
her charters and deeds of graunts and of gifts, He makes reuells and feasts,
and spowsailes, and gives many good gifts to friends and guestes, and
comfort and gladdeth his guests with songs and pipes, and other minstralsie
of music. And afterward when all this is done, he brings her to the
priuities of his chamber, and makes her fellow at bed and at board: and then
he makes her Lady of his money and of his house, and meynie, and then he is no
less diligent and careful for her, then he is for himself: and specially
lovingly he advises her if she do amiss, and takes good heed to keep her
well, and takes heed of her bearing and going, of her speaking and looking,
of her passing and again coming, out and home. No man has more wealth, than
he that has a good woman to his wife: and no man has more wo^, than he that
has an evil wife, crieng and ianglyng, chiding and scolding, dronken,
lecherous and unsteadfast, and contrary to him, costly, stout and gaye,
envious, noyfull, leaping over lands, much suspicious and wrathful.
Fulgencius touches all these things in a certain Sermon that he makes De
nup^^js in Cana Galileae: and so he lykeneth Christ to a good man, an holy
Church to a good wife, and the Synagogue to an evil wife that breaks
spousehoode. In a good spouse and wife behooves these conditions, that she be
busy and denout in Gods service, meek and serviceable to her husband, and
fair speaking and goodly to her meynie, merciable and good to wretches that be
needy, easy and peaceable, to her neighbors, ready, ware and wise in things
that should be avoided, mightifull and patient in suffering, busy and diligent
in her doing, manneilye in clothing, sober in moving, wary in speaking, chaste
in looking, honest in bearing, sad in going, shamefast among the people, merry
and glad with her husband, and chaste in priuitie. Such a wife is worthy to be
praised, that intends more to please her husband with such womanly tewes,
than with her broyded hairs, and desires more to please him with virtues than
with fair and gaye clothes, and uses the goodness of matrimony more
because of children, than of fleshly liking, and has more liking to have
children of grace than of kind. These properties belong to a good wife, which
suffices at this time.

Of a Father. Cap. 15.
Pater. Genitor.
A Father is the well and head of begetting and gendring: and naturally the
father desires to multiply his kind in children, to the end to keep and save
in his children the kind, that he may not keep and save in himself, as says
Con. Therefore by the office of kind he departs and sheddeth out his
substance to the generation of children: and yet for all this lyking and
departing the substance of kind, he receives no diminution. He is no what
the less in be die.
And he gendereth children like to himself in kind and in shape, and namely
if the virtue in the fathers seed passes the virtue in the mothers seed, as
says Aristotle. lib. 8. And therefore by procreation of children the father is
diligent and busy, and loves kindly his child, insomuch, that he spares
his own meat to feed his children. And that is generallye true in all kind
of beasts except few, in whom kind gooeth out of kind, and therefore they
be not busy and careful about their young, but they do beat them away, as
Aristotle libro. 6. says of the Eagle, that with his bill and wings beat and
drive away their young. A man loves his child, and feeds and nourishes
it, and sets it at his own boorde, when it is wayned, and teaches him in
his youth, with speech and words, and chasteth him with beating, and sets him
and puts him to learn under ward and keeping of wardens and tutours. And
the father shows him no glad cheer, least he were proud, and he loves
most the son that is like to him, and looks often on him, and gives to his
children, clothing, meat and drink, as their age requires, and purchases
lands and heritages for his children, and cease not to make it more and
more, and fails his purchases, and leaves it to his heirs. And a father is
called Pater, and has that name of Pascendo to feed, for he feeds his
children in their youth, and is fed of them in his age: Addition
( Very few children feed their parents as they ought, but rather wish them
away, and receiving their goods, and little esteeming their persons: in which
so doing, they purchase highly the vengeance of God.) as it fares in fowls
of ravenous kind, as Aristotle says, for of such fowls, the young feed the
old, when they may not for age get their own meat. Therefore for their
reward and meede, long life is granted them that worship and sustain father
and mother, as says Ambrose. For it is written: Worship thou thy father and
mother, and thou shalt live long upon the earth. Exodus 20. and Ecclesiast. 3.
Exodus 20, Eccle. 3.
He that worshippeth his father, shall have long life. Therefore the Gloss
says: To worship father and mother is the fairest heste in commandment of
the second Table, and so it is a great heste in meede and reward. And to
trespass against that commandment is greatly to be punished. Pro. 30. Pro.
30.
Who so laugheth his father to scorn, and sets his mothers commandment at
naught, the ravens of the valley or brook pick out his eyes, and deuouted be he
of the young Eagles.

Therefore the Fathers curse, grieueth the children, as it fared in Chams
children, that were bond and thrall, for Cham offended his father. Genesis. 9.
Genesis 9
And so children shall worship the father, and sustein and forbear him,
rejoice, defend, magnify, praise him, and hear and follow him, James. 2.
Vt dicit Glo. ibi. If ye be Abraham's children, do Abraham: deeds and works.

The child comes of the substance of father and mother, and takes of them
feeding and nourishing, and profits not neither lives without help of them.
The more the Father loves his child, the more busily he teaches and
chastises him, and holds him the more straight under chastising and lore,
and when the child is most loved of the father, it seems that he loves him
not: for he beats and grieueth him often, least he draw to evil manners and
taches, and the more the child is like to the father, the better the father
loves him. The father is ashamed, if he hear any foul thing told by his
children. The Fathers heart is sore grieved, if his children rebel against him.
In feeding and nourishing of their children stands the most business and
charge of the parents: Heritage is kept for children in hope of issue. Often by
law for grieuing and despising of the Father, the child is punished and
disherited, and none unkindness is more then vnkindne^se of evil children, if
they help not the father and mother in time of need; as they help them
sometime. Often for reverence of the father and mother, men do the child great
worship: and men give them great gifts. Law will that the eldest son have
the more part of the heritage. But for wrong done to the Father, the right of
the eldest son is taken from him, and given to another son, that is more
worthy to have the heritage, and the name and right of the eldest son. As
Hierome says in the Glosa Genesis. 49. Genesis 49
Ruben mine eldest son, etc. Thou have lost the right that thou should
have. By right the first son of the birth should have the heritage,
kingdom, and Priesthood Then children which should by kind be noble, rich,
and free, as the Father and mother be, for their trespass be made vile and
poor servants and thralls. Seek before in the Chapter De malo puero.

Of a servant. Chap. 15.
A Servant is called Seruus in Latin, Seruus.
and has that name of Seruare, to keep: for sometime prisoners were kept
either to be beheaded, or to be raunsomed as says Isid. Or else they have yt
name of Seruire, to serve: for they be put to vile service of office, that be
not couenable to Lords, nor for their children. And Isidore says, That there
be three manner of servants: some servants be bond, and borne in bondage, and
such have many pains by law, for they may not sell nor give away their own
good and cattle, neither make contractes, neither take office of dignity,
neither bear witness without leave of their Lords. Wherefore though they be not
in childhoode, they be often punished with pains of childhoode. Other
servants there be that be called Empticij, the which being taken with
strangers and aliens, and with enemies, be bought and sold, and held low
under the yoke of thraldom. The third manner of servant be bound freelye
by their own good will, and serve for reward and for hire. And these commonly
be called Famuli, and have that name of Famulando, serving, as says Isidore.
Wicked seruante have many evil conditions, the which be rehearsed before in
s^actatu de Ancilla.

Of an evil servant. Chap. 16.
HEereto shall be put the conditions of an evil servant: For he is noyfull as
well to himself as other in many things: When he is dronkenly, he leseth and
spilleth his Lords good and cattle, or else takes it by theft and spends it.
Ec. 19. A dronken workman shall not be rich: also he is slow and idle, and
then he leeseth in idleness the time yt is granted to travail in, as ye
husband said to the servants, why stand ye here all day idle. Ec. 33 Set thy
servant to work yt he be not idle, so it is convenient for him. Eccle 33. Send
thy servant to work that he go not idle, etc.
Also he is a great spender of his Lords good and cattle, and spends and
wastes all. Mat. 18 The rent gatherer was defamed to his Lord, that had wasted
his good and cattle also he is slow, sleepie, and vnlustre, and forgeth all
his Lords needs, and leaves them undone Ecc. 37. it is said. Treat and talk
of work with a slow servant. And Luke 19. it is said, The slow servant
hid his Lords talent in the earth, and went his way. Then it follows, that
an evil servant and head strong, sets more by himself then of his Lord.
Ecclesiast. 10. I have seen servant on horseback, etc. Et Prou. 29 By a
servant when he reigned, etc. Also he is covetous, and turns the winning of
his Lord unto his own use and profit Ensample of Eliseus servant, that asked
money in his Lords name, and took it and hid it. 4. Regum. 5. An evil
servant seeking company of (...) refuses ye ho^^t, and in s^^ling (...)th
the (...) rich and (...)site poor.
Also he is proud and presumptuous, and despises his Lord commandment, as
Miphibos^th ^^^e of his servant Ziba. My Lord and king, my servant despises
me, and would not saddle mine Ass. 2 Reg. 16. Et Job. 19. My servant, etc.
They be hard of heart and malicious, yet they covet and desire to have grace
of other men and when they have it, they show none to other. Math. 18. I
forgave thee al thy debt, because thou praidst me wicked servant. Also he is
unware and unadvised, forgetful and uncunning, he has no mind that he
shall give to his Lord accounts of his outrage. Luke. 12. My Lord tarryeth to
come: also he is wrathful, deceivable, and treacherous, and disturbeth and
grieueth all the meynie. Lu. 13. If a servant begins to drink, and is
dronken, and smites and beats the meinie: his Lord shall come, etc. He is an
evil speker and tale teller of al thing, and namely he speaks evil of his
Lord, as it fared of Ziba, Miphiboseths servant, that accused him to the King.
2. Regum. 15. Ecclesiast. 7 Hear not a servant that speaks ill to thee:
also if he be delicatly used, he presumes and withstandeth his Lord. Prou. 29.
Who that nourishes his servant delicatly, he shall find him rebel: And it
becomes not a servant to have lyking and deinteous things: Also he is full
of fraud and of guile, and lays a wait to entrap his Lord, and sometime
slaieth and spilleth him 4. Regum. 29. The kings servants set a wait upon
him, and slew him in his own house: Also he does his Lord wrong, and flies
srom his Lord, and forsakes him, and goes and serves his Lords aduersarye.
3. Reg. 2 Semey servant fled into Geth: Et primum Reg. 25. Servant
increased that fled from their Lords: And when he is evil and does amiss,
scarcely he leaves his malice for words. Ecclesiast. 23 As a servant arained,
that is to understand, chastised with torments often, amendeth him not of his
trespass, but wereth more angry and wroth: As who says, A servant is not
amended with torments, but rather appayred. For when he is unkind, he knows
not the grace that his Lord does unto him, but he thinks that his Lord does
for him by duty and debt more then by grace. Eccle. 3 Slake thine hand from
thy servant, and he asks freedom: Also though he do amiss, and is blamed
of his Lord without scourging, scarcelye he will knowledge the truth.
Ecclesiast. 42. The worst servants side must blade. Glos. The servant that
is not chastised with words, must be chastised with wounds: And for that he is
guilefull of deceiptes, and hates travail, if he be called to work and
travail, he faineth that he sleeps: and as though he heard not, he tourneth
him from that one side to the other side. Prou. 29. A servant may not be
taught, for he hears what thou say, and has despite to give an answer. Et
Luke. 12. A servant that knows his Lords will, and will not do it, shall be
beaten with many stripes.

The conditions of a good servant. Cap. 18.
THE condition of a good servant stands in diverse doings: For a good
servant will be taught, and is witty and ready to understand. Pro. 28. A wise
servant shall have mastery and Lordship upon nise children. Et Ecclesiast. 7.
If thou have a wise servant, let him be to thee as thine own soul, etc. Also
a good servant is meek and serviceable to do whatsoever becomes him: In
Psalterio. O Lord I am thy servant, and the son of thy serving woman or
handmaide. Philip. 2. He meeked himself and took the shape of a servant.
Also he is merry and glad at meat. It is seemly that a servant be merry and
glad of cheer: For all the service displeases, if the servant have no glad
cheer. Gene. 45. And we shall be glad to serve the King: And Esaye. 60. My
servants shall be glad, and praised for joy and gladness, etc. Also he
is good and gracious to speak with. And servants be well loved, if they be
goodlye and good to speak with: And therefore it is said of David, that
served Saul. 1. Regum. 18. David was loved of all the people, and most of the
Kings servants: And there it is said: Lo thou please the king, and all
his servants love thee: Also he is manly, bold, and hardy, and puts
himself against the enimyes of his Lord. 1. Regum. 15. Let no man's heart
fail for him, I thy servant shall go and fight against the Philistines, etc.
And he is trusty and true in things that is betaken him, and busy to pursue
his Lords needs. Luke 19. Well be thou good and faithful servant. Et Ecclesi.
12. My servant Moses is in all mine house. And he is meek and skillful to
procure the profit of his Lord. For a good servant takes more heed to
multiply and increase his Lords goods and cattle then his own. For in
multiplyeng of his Lords goods and cattle, he procures his own profit.
Luke. 19. Luke. 19. 10. talents supposed to be in value. 100 pounds, every
talent, by ye which is signified many gifts.
The noble man called his servants, and betook them ten Minas: ( Mina is a
certain weight and value) and he said to these servants: Merchaundise with it
till I come, etc. Also a good servant is wise, and ware, and cunning to give
accountes and reconing of what he has received and delivered of his Lords
goods and cattle: For he hops certainly to have mede and reward for making
good accounts. And for such things that be not accounted, he is always in
doubt and in dread: As it is said Luke. 19. Lo Lord thy Mina has made ten
Minas: And his Lord said to him, And be thon having power over ten Cities:
Also a good servant is busy, and studieth with all his heart and thought to
array and ordeine for his Lords profit, rather then for his own, and he
ordeyneth for his Lords meat and drink, and bed, or he dispose himself
to eat or to go to bed, or to take any other rest. A good servant
accounts never profit done to him, while he sees that his Lord,
trauayleth. Luke. 12. Which of you has a servant, and comes out of the
field, and says first to him, Sit thou down. Therefore 2. Regum. 10. Vrias
is commended, that said to David: My Lord Ioab, and my Lords servant
rests on the ground in the fields, and shall I go into mine house and eat
and drink, etc. A true servant that fears his Lord, and knows his
coming disposes not, nor arayeth himself to bed nor to sleep before the
coming of his Lord. Luke. 12. Well is the servant, that his Lord finds him
waking, when he comes: Also a busy servant waketh when other men sleep, to
keep safe his Lord. Therefore David blamed worthily Abner and the other
servants of king Saul, that were sleeping. 1. Regnm. 26. None was waking,
but all a sleep. And it follows: Ye be children of death, that keep not
our Lords commandments: Also a servant that is loving and diligent in his
Lords service, is always ready with his hand, and has a wait upon his Lord to
do what that shall please him, that he has no lack neither default of
service, or to receive some benefi^e of his good lord. Psalmo. As the (...) of
a serving woman is in the hands of her Lady, etc. Also a good servant cease
never of travail, and he is never idle, but always busy about the profit of
his Loode, for when he does eat or fast, sleep or wake, his wit and thought
in always to ordeyne and do the profit of his Lord. Job. 13. As an Heart
desires shadow, and the hired man abides, etc. Also a good servant is never
costly to his Lord in meat and drink neither in clothing, but sometime he
holds him content with an old cloth of his Lords all the year long, he
knows that he shall have more of his Lord when his service comes out. And
therefore in the law it is commanded, that a Lord shall not let his servant
go from him in the seventh year without meat and drink and clothing on his
chief covenant. Exodus 21. Et Deuteronomy. 15. Also a servant that is virtuous and
well taught in manner and conditions, is often gracious and well allowed in the
sight of his Lord. Therefore a wise servant does his business to serve his
Lord curteouslye. For sometime a Lord loves cleanness more then service.
Psalmo. He that goes in the clean way served me. Ec. 7. If thou have a wise
servant, be he to thee as thine own soul, etc. Also a good servant grudgeth
not, neither plaineth not against his Lord, though he blame him, and tell him
his defaultes. For he knows well that a good Lord will not blame his servant
wrongfully, and such blaming tourneth to his profit, etc. Eccle. 10. Free men
and children shall serve a wise servant, and a man that is taught, will not
grudge, though men tell him his defaults, but he is rather very glad. Pro. 9.
Tell a wise man his default, and he will love thee: and tell a fool his
default, and he shall hate thee.

Of a good Lord. Chap. 19.
AS this name servant is a name of subjection, so this name Lord is a name of
souereigntie, of power, and of might. And therefore rightful Lordship is
ordained of that Lord, of whom comes all might and power. For without a Lord
might not the common profit stand saf^ly, neither ye company of men might be
peaceable or quiet: For if power and might of rightful Lords were with-halde
and taken away, then were malice free, and goodness and innocence in no
safety, as says Isidore. Also rightful Lordshippe ouersetteth not his
subjects by tyranny, but defends them, and puts off and bears down
their adversaries and enemies: Also the might of Lords forsakes not
servant, but puts it self for subjects against might and strength, that
is against the subjects. Also Gregory says, and so it is known, that this
name Lord, is a name of might and of right wisenesse. For our Lord is rightful,
and loves right wisenesse, and his face sees equity: And therefore a rightful
Lord by way of rightful law, hears and determines causes, pleas, and
strifes, that be between his subjects, and ordeineth that every man have his
own, and draws his sword against malice, and puts forth his shield of
righteousness, to defend innocents against evil doers, and delivers small
children and such as be fatherless and motherlesse, and widows of them that
ouerseeth them: And he pursues robbers and rouers, thieves, and other evil
doers: and uses his power not after his own will, but he ordeyneth and
disposes it as the law asks: And so this name Lord is a name of equity,
and also a name of freedom and of free heart. For righfull Lords be free,
and meek of heart. And as it is said Hest. 23. When I had subdued all the
world to my Lordshippe, I never misused the greatness of my might and power:
but I would rule my subjects with mildness and softness, etc. Therefore the
very Lord shows himself free of gifts and speech to all men, except evil
dooers: and loves more to be loved, then feared. He knows not that he has
Lordshippe over men that lives rightfully, but over beasts: that is to
understand, over beastiall men that be wicked and evil, as Gregory says upon
Genesis. 9. Yeur dread be upon all beasts, etc. A man, says Gregorye is not
set over reasonable beasts, but over unreasonable beasts, that he should not
only be dreaded of men, but also of beasts. Kind brings forth al men like
in power and might: But for diverse worthiness the dispensation of Gods word
sets some men before other: that he that dredeth not the righteousness of
God, may dread ye punishment of man's strength, and so for dread of our Lord he
shall not be proud: And he commands that they be not busy to win and
get their own joy and stoutnesse, but to save and maintain the right of
subjects: For they have no Lordshippe over men, but over beasts. For in that
part that they be beastiall, they be put under Lordshippe Also this name
Lord is a name of gentleness and of nobleness, as it is said Deuteronomy. pri. I
have taken of your lygnages wise men and noble, and have made them Lords,
Princes, and Tribunes and Centuries: For Lords ought to be noble and gentle of
heart, of flesh, and of thought. Therefore Ambrose says, that among beasts
kind sets them to be chief, which be most noble and most strong, and
makes them kings, Dukes, and leaders of other: As it sareth among beasts and
Fowls, and also among Bees. Among them all, those that have most noble
conditions of the gift of kind, be set before, and have mastry in Lordshippe
over the other. So that man may learn to be a Lord noble by reason and
grace, since that beasts be by kind above other beasts. Also this name Lord,
is a name of worship and of dignity, as the Apostle says, Ad Ephesians. 6.
Servants be ye obedient to your fleshly Lords with fear and dread and
shaking, etc. Rightfully a Lord receives of his subjects worship and
reverence, and by the worthiness of his office he makes his subjects
worthy to have worship: For by reason of one good king and one good Lord,
all a Country is worshipped and dread, and enhaunced also. Also this name Lord
is a name of peace and surety. For a good Lord cease war, battle, and
fighting, and accords them that be in striefe. And so under a good, a
strong, and a peaceable Lord, men of the Country be defended and safe. For
there dare no man assail his Lordshippe, nor in any manner break his peace.

Of an evil Lord or Lordship. Chap. 20.
AS nothing is more profitable to the common profit, then a good rightful
Lord,: So nothing is worse then an evil Lord. For an evil Lord ouersetteth
and pilleth his subjects that he should help, and holds them hard and
straight, that scarcely they abide in office and service. Mich. 2. Ye that
take violentlye the skin of the proud, etc. For gifts and bribes violateth
justice, and deemeth not for the poor. Mich. 3. Harken you Princes that hates
rightful judgment, ye receive of the people rent and tribute, and defend
them not against enemies, that rise upon them. Ecclesiast. 13. He punishes
and scourges them cruelly, which assent not to his malice. Esaias. 19. I shall
give Egypt into the hands of cruel Lords, etc. Ierem. 6. He is full
cruel, etc. He chalengeth other men's good, and thinks that all thing is
his own. 1. Reg. 8. He shall take thy children and thy fields, etc. He
desires more to be feared then loved. Baruch. 6. Showing dread to nations.
Videte ergo. etc. He desires to have reverence and worship of all men.
Daniel. 2. Falls down and worship the Image, etc. He destroieth the laws
and statutes of old men, and ordeyneth his own. Esaias. 10. Woe to them that
make evil laws, and hides their malice and cruelnesse under the likeness
of rightfulnesse. Esaye. 52. Lords travail and ouersette wickedly and often the
people with exactions and tillages: Esaye. 3. Exactours spoiled my people. Et
Daniel. 10. It is said of an evil Lord, that he desires to have occasions
and color to take somewhat by extortion. Esaye. 52. Assure without cause
lays challenge on him, and he loves liars, and privy and evil tale tellers
and backbiters, and boweth his ears to hear their counsels. Proverb. Princes
that hear gladlye words of leasings, etc. To no man he holds faith nor
covenant. 1. Match. 16. The King and Prince swore to them. And then it
follows: He saw the strength and brake anon the oath and truce: He atrayeth
to him deinties and liking meat and drink of other men's travail, Psalmo.
They have devoured my people as meat and bread: Ensample of Baltazar. Daniel.
5. Et Ezech. 19. And he rewarded them worst that served him longest, most
truly and best, as Laban would have rewarded Jacob, that said: But my Fathers
God had been now with me, on this manner thou would have left me naked
and bare. Also he thinks that no man serves him kindly, and therefore he
weeneth that all that is done to him is done of due debte, as it is said
Judith. 3. With these deeds that they did, they might not swage the madness
of his breast. Also when other travail, he occupies him in drinking and in
playeng. Ecclesiast. 10. Woe is the land, that has a child King, and a
Prince that eats early, Et. 3. Regum. 20. The king drank under his tent
mad drink, etc. 3. Kin. 20 Benhadad did drink till he was dro^k, both he
and 32. kings that holp him
Of the properties of man touching the dinersitie of members, of age, and of
sexes, and diverse quality, this is sufficient at this time. Now of some
accidents ye fall about man by kind on other wise also, by the help of Christ
somewhat shall be said: And first of meat and then of drink, then of waking
and sleeping, and then of business, and then of travail.

Of Meat. Chap. 21.
Since we have spoken of the propertyes of man touching those things of the
which man is kindly made: Now we shall speak of the propertyes of those things,
which kindly keep man in being. And they be those, as John says, Air,
business, and travail, rest, meat, and drink, 8. Preservatives.
watch and sleep. For without these man's body is not kept. Dear we follow not
by order, for afterward in their places accordingly we shall speak of these
things. Then speak we first of meat as much as suffices: For as Constantine
says, meat is the substance that is able to be turned into the essence of
the body that is fed, and increases the body, and makes it more, and
feeds and susteineth it: For the heat of the inner and utter members works
alwaie, and dissolueth and wastes: And so thereto needs continual
restanration to restore what is wasted and spended: Meat that is taken turns
into the likeness of the body, and passes into the kind thereof. And so in
meat preparation thereof goes before, and then comes chewing, and then it
is received into the place of digestion: And fourthly digestion is made, and
then departing of the pured part from the vnpured part: Fifthly, that that is
pured is drawn and departed into all the members: Sixthly, it is turned into
the likeness of the kind of members. For if it were not made like to the
members, it should neither be incorporate, neither turned into the kind
thereof. At the last after all this, the meat is incorporated and turned into
the kind of the body. For that which is hot and moist, passes into the
kind of blood and of flesh: And that, which is cold and dry, into the kind
of sinews and of boanes, and so of other: In younglings meat taken and
corporate, nourishes and increases the body: In old men it repaireth kind
heat, and restores that which is spent and wasted, and keeps the body that
it be not all lost. Of meat be many diversities: Some meat tourneth soon
into blood through his substantial moisture and heat, and for likeness that
it has to be blood. And some contrariwise for a contrary cause tourneth later
into blood: Some meat nourishes much, for it breeds much blood. And some
nourishes little, and charge the body more then it feeds: yet somewhat it
refreshes the body. And generally all meat which breeds good blood is more
convenient in ruling of health, yet to men that travail groser meat is
convenient, that breeds thicker blood: Also, all meats that breeds much
blood; have but little superfluitye. And contrariwise the meat that breeds
little blood, breeds much superfluity: and generallye by the diversity of
meats the complexion of members be diversely disposed, and take the
qualities of the body, as says Constantine. liber. 1. About meat of these
things men shall take heed, as men do about dicting, as Galen says Super
Aphorism. That is to wit: Of meat the substantialitie, the quality, the
quantity, the need of him that eats, and of conenable time. It needs also
to know the substance and quality of meats, for the keeping and ruling of men's
bodies. For some meat nourishes purely and changes eastly: And such meat
keeps and saves kind. Some is mean meat, and that is lightly turned into
helping of kind. And some meat is pestilentiall, and corrupts kind, as
venomous meat, which changes all kind, and destroys the body. Therefore
it needs to know the substance and qualytie of meat, that men take not
venim in steed of meat. Qualytie of meat is known either by the remission
and slaking of the qualyties of Elements, that is to understand, by full little
cold, heat, dryness, or moisture, and so meat is cold or hot in the
first degree by the uttermost hugeness of the same qualities, that is by most
heat, dryness, cold, or moisture, and so meat is cold, hot, dry, or moist
in the fourth degree: or else by the mean of those qualyties, and so meat is
in the third degree, or in the second, as it has more or less of those
qualities. Also Constantine says, That men must take heed that some meat is
subtle both in substance and in quality, the which meat is soon digested:
and much thereof naurisheth but little. For as Au^cen says, such meat breeds
subtle blood, which is soon wasted in the members: and therefore it nourishes
but little: as he says.

And some meat is great and hard to de^e, and little thereof nourishes
much. For it breeds gross blond, which is not soon spended neither wasted in
the members. For as Isaac says, small meat and subtle breed small blood and
subtle, and so contrariwise. And some is temporate in substance and in
quality, and that meat which is clean and pure, is commendable, which is not
too great, neither too small, neither too subtle, and is good and wholesome,
and so in contrariwise. Auicen says, That raw and green herbs and fruit are
not full good meat by reason of they: passing moisture, which makes the blood
full watrye, and disposes it to rottenness. And therefore they be rather
medicinable then meat. Meat shall be like and of one manner, which that men
eat at one meal, for diverse meats nourish diversely. For Auicen says, in
taking of diverse meats at one meal, the one manner meat is corrupt, while
another is a digesting, and the stomach is ouerfilled, and is stretched
abroad.

In meat men shall take heed of quantitye of silling and of working For men
shall take heed, Many or diverse sorces of n^eates at one nicle, is not
wholeso^e (...) the (...) iniection
whether it be too little or too much, or else mean between these twain.
For if the meat be too much, then it grieueth kind, and stretches the
stomach, and blows it and breeds fretting and gnawing in the womb, and
increases vnttears and Postumes, and provoke wamblnges and spungs, and it
euentheth and sliseeleth kind heat, as too much Oil queneth the light of a
Lamp: and it breeds the Crampe, and shrinking of sinews, and it procures
Botches, S^^^, and Mostumes, and l^^sleth age and death: against the which
death a man supposes to defend himself with multitude of meat and drink.
If meat be too scarce, it so^bleth kind, and appaireth the sight, and the
other wities, and breeds falling of the hair and baldenesse, and hastes the
diseases called Luike and Etike, and makes the body lean, and it breeds
worse sicknesses and evils, then does too great replecion. In Aphorism it is
said, That in scarcity of diet, sick men fall most. Meandness of meat is
good, for it restores that the which was lost in the body, and keeps and
saves virtue and strength, and increases blood, and tempereth heat, and
sharpeth the wit, and gives virtue of working, and gives and saves health of
body, and breeds sweet sleep soft and lyking, wherefore if the meat
restores more, then was wasted and lost by working of heat, then the meat
increases the body, and makes it more, as it fares in younglings. And if
the wasting and loss be more then the meat restores, then the body wareth
lean, less, and sayleth, as it fares in age. And if the restoring and the
loss by even and like, then it keeps the body in one state, as it fares in
young men. Men should take heed to meat, or to the doing thereof, in comparison
to them that eat thereof.

Addition
The rath and greedy feeding with a licorousnesse to taste of many dishes, for a
present pleasant eating, follows a pining surfeit, or sudden choking.

For one meat accords to a whole man, another to a sick man, one to a young
man, another to an old man:one to him that trauaileth, another to him yt
rests. For many meats be wholesome to an whole man, which be poison to a sick
man. Also in whole men is difference: for Garlic and Pepper is remedy to some
fleamaticke man, and venomous to some cholarike: And lusquianus, Henbane, is
man's bane, and best beloved meat to sparrowes and Curlews, as says Galen. Also
meat shall be diverse, as diverse evils ask. For some meat is wholesome in
the fever quarten, that is poison in the agne. And some that is good in the
beginning of evil, is grievous when the evil is at the highest, for then
little meat shall be given to the sick man, as says Ipocras and Galen. For
then kind is altogether occupied about digestion of the evil, wherefore then
his doing should be lessed and let, if it be occupied about much and great
meat. Also other meat and otherwise given is needful in turning evils, and
long during. And other in contrary evils. For in the beginning it is
dreadful, least virtue sail, and therefore needs the more meat, in
contrary evil it is dread of increasing of the evil: therefore the sick man
shall have the less meat. The feeding shall be after the virtue and strength
of the sick man, and after the quality and substance of ye meat: And hereby
profit of meat is deemed and known. Also in another manner a you^gling shall
be fed, and a young man, and in another manner the old man, The infa^t must
not be sed as the young man, nor ^ middle aged as the old.
For in old men, abstinence of meat is soft and easy, and in children and
young men hard and vncasie, according to the saying of Ipocras. Old men may
most easilye fast, and then sad men, somewhat easilye, and children may
least fast. For in old men kind heat is feeble, and in other strong. And
therefore more meat needs to swage the heat in young men and in children,
and less in old men. And for the same cause resting men shall eat and drink
less then travailing men, for heat is strong in travailing men, and feeble in
resting men, as it shall be showed afterward.

Also in feeding, men should take heed to couenablenesse of time. For men
need greater and larger diet in winter then in Summer, as Ipocras says. The
wombs in springing time and in Winter be kindly full hot, and of long
sleep. Then in those times many meats shall be given, for then kind heat is
much nourishing and feeding, etc. And in Winter is strong appetite and
digestion, for heat is full strong. And in Summer it is contrary. For in
Winter kind heat comes inward, and is gathered within, and in Summer it
draws out, as it were for lyking of likeness of the utter heat: And is
effused, divided, and departed, and is less in the body within. Therefore
Winter time because much is digested, the appetite is much excited and moved,
as it fares in children which have much heat, and therefore great appetite,
and much ^esiring needeeth much meal. And likewise is it in Champions, and
hard and strong, and travailing men, in whem because of strong and hard
travail, the kind heat is the more: And therefore to them needs great
abundaunce and much meat and drink, as Galen sets an ensample there. Then
meat is right necessary and needful to every beast, and most according and
convenient, when it is of one manner, and temporate, and not too much neither
too little. For often too great repletions of meat, is cause of death of
body and of soul, and namely after great hunger, great repletion of meat is
perilous, as says Auicen: For then kind desires more, then it may defy.
And therefore then meat shall be taken against appetite and saturite.

Of drink. Cap. 22.
Drink is a fleeting substance needful to the seeding of a beast, as says
Constantine libro. 5. Capitu, 27. Drink is needful for many manner of causes,
for it moysteth the dry body, and resolves and tempereth what is moist in
the body, and restores the body: and by drink meat is brought into far
place, ye which meat for his thickness and boistousnes may not pass by
narrow ways and straight without help of moisture of drink. And Constantine
says, and Auicen also, that there is three manner diversities of drink. For
some drink is only drink, as water ye nourishes not the body: and some
drink is both drink and meat, as Wine, which as Constantine says, bears
meat and nourishing into all the parts of the body, and nourishes and
beats the spirit and the blood, and comfort kind heat: and some drink
is medicinable, and is not taken by manner and way of drink, but by the law
and rule of medicine, as Sireppes, Drimell, Decisakara, and such other: And as
Constantine says, to keep health, and to heal sickness, water is needful.
And therefore it needs a Physician not to be negligent to know the
conditions and kinds of waters, that he may take good waters: and to beware
of evil waters. Some water is fauourie, and some unsavory. Sauourye water is
clear of substance, of a well that springs Eastwarde, and is light, and
soon hot and soon cold. And such water as Constantine says, is good to
keep and heal, and not grieuing, for it comes soon out of the meat. And
by reason it is clear, it is clean and not meddeled with filth, nor with
hoare: and by reason it is light, it is easy to defy. And for y^ it is soon
hot and soon cold, it is subtle of substance. And so if thou will know of
two waters whether is more subtle in substance and better to drink, wet thou
a linen cloth in that one water, and another clean linen cloth in the other:
and hang them both to dry against the Sun: and which of those two clothes
wareth soonest dry, the water, that it was wet in, is the more subtle water.
Next unto this wholsomenesse is the water that springs Northward, and is set
between the East and the North. For by reason that it springs Northward, it
is open upon the North winds, with the which it is tossed and made subtle
and in winter it is kindly hot, and in Summer cold. For the Northern cold
drives in the heat into the inner parts of the fountains, that lie open
against it. And that heat that is gathered within with stands the cold, and
so it heateth some deny the water of ye well: the contrary is in Su^mer, for
the^ the heat of the air overcomes the cold, and drives it to the heads of
the wells, and so the cold being there gathered and joined, cools the water
as says Machrobius and Constantine. Also the water that springs and runs
strongly and swiftly out of mountains upon clear stones or gravel, has the
second degree in wholesomnesse, as the water of some great rivers, as says
Constantine. And Constantine says, that rain water is better then other
water, more sauourye, more light and clean. Ipocras says, that rain is
smoke of water, that the son draws upward: And for the kind of the Sun is
to draw upward what y^ is most subtle, therefore rain water is better the^
other water and more defied: but for subtlety thereof it will soon putrify.
But yet as Constantine says, it is not to be blamed for rottenness, for it is
worthy of praising for the subtlety and cleerenesse thereof. For all water
that is soon corrupt, is subtle, and grieueth when it is rotted: For it
breeds hoaresnesse and Feauers, and is best if it be not rotted, and
therefore it needs to be well ware of rotting: Also Constantine says, Water
that is gathered of smallest rain seems best, and after that the rain water
that falls with thunder is best. For the thunder with his moving makes the
smoke thereof clear and subtle. And also Constantine says, that who that
drinks often cold water, shall not escape from cold sickness, namely in his
age. Constantine says, that hot water washes ye fasting stomach, and purges
and cleanses it of drasts, of meat and of sleme and of all other rottenness,
and cleanses and laxeth, and purges the womb, and releeueth and comfort
kind. If it be too often used, it noieth and grieueth, for it softeneth the
stomach, and distroubleth and lets the virtue of digestion^ and makes blood
run out at the nosethrills. Also hot water is best, fasting early, and
namely, to them that be ^^onke over night. For Auicen says, That old wise
men witness, that sodden water makes small swelling and peareeth and enters
most. For bodies that be meddled therewith, be dissolved and departed by
working of the fire, and be compelled to go downward: And heereto he says.
That corrupt physicians suppose, that what is subtle breaths and: passes
upward in seething: and that which is great, thick, and not subtle, abides
still: but this false. For all the substance of water is made of one manner
part. But so great seething might be, that nothing should abide but drasts
alone and earthly parts. As it faceth of water, of the which Salt is made by
strong seething And water molten of Snow and of Hail is earthlye and worst of
all, except water of lakes and marreys, beware of all these waters. For as
Constantine says; they make the spleen great, and hurt the humor and the
stomach, and make the skin foul and unseemly, and breed diverse feauers
and stones: and if they may not be all esthewed, by authority of Auicen, they
may be boiled and sodde. In librro Met. Aristotle says; that water of Snow
that is molten with heat, comes not again to the first cleernesse and
subtlety. Four manner of waters be unsavory, as Constantine says. For some
is salt, and some smoketh of brimstone, and some of slime, and some of metal.
And men say, that salt water biteth and fretteth the guts, and taxes and
makes soft the womb. But salt water often dronken wastes humors, and binds
and makes the womb hard. And dries the body, and makes whole Scabbes and
itching: and it helps them that have the dropsy, if it be eat or drunk:
Brimstone water does cause cold evils: it heateth the sinews, and wastes
the humors between the skin and the flesh. Look afterward, ye shall more
plainly understand the virtue of Brimstone. Slunye water and glowie, cools
and dries, and stencheth running of blood, and bealeth Emoroydes. And mettally
water follows the booing and kind of mortal. For the water that passes by
beuis of iron, stop:peth and hardneth the Womb, and comfort the members:
and vnstoppeth the spleen, and helps Postumes. Water of metal of Brass,
helps moisture, and straineth Stranguria. We that has that disease or evil
that is called Stranguria; pisseth often and little. Water of the metal of
silver cools and dries. This manner of waters is not much used in freed of
drink: but it helps only to ye use of the medicine. And some drink is both
meat and drink, as Wine Ehere is diversity in Wines' touching their
substance. Some wine is greater and harder, and more nourishing then other.
And some wine is subtle and of little nourishing, which passes soon out of
the stomach, and withdraws cholarik and head ach, and makes one to piss
fast. And some wine is mean and temporate in working. Without this
consideration of wine touching the substance. Constantine says, That men shall
take heed of wine in sour manners, as by diuersitye of time, by liking of
smell, by sweet savor, and by cleerenesse of color. In time wine is
diverse, for wine ye in new wrong and pressed, passes not the first degree in
heat. In libro de simplics medicina Galen says, That Wine is made of four
substaunces. Of watrye, airye, firye, and earthlye, in longetin ^the wa^trye
part is consumed and wasted, and the airye part is comforted. Did wine is
better and better then other. Also in smell and insauour Wine is diverse. For
some wine smells sweet and nourishes well, and some is strong of smell and
breeds evil blood, and the headache.

Also in taft wine is most diverse: for some wine is sweet in taste, and
nourishes more then other, and moistneth the womb: Some is ponlike, and
comfort the stomach, and malteth hard the womb, and griueth the breast
with the purtenance. Some is sower, other some is bitter, and less hot than
other wines be. Also in color and hiew and heat wine is diverse: for some is
white and less hot than other: and some is citrine, and more hot, and pearceth
through all the members, as Constantine says, and breeds the cholarike
blood, and causes the head ach: and some is brown and more norishing: and
some is read or reddish, and that is more hot than the other. But for it is
more earthly and greater than white or citrine, it is not so pearcing neither
hurting. Wine which is mean in all the foresaid conditions is better than
other, for it comfort kind heat, and nourishes life in all the members,
and breeds gladness and hardiness, and gives virtue to the body. And
voydeth red cholar, with sweat and with urine, and tempereth black cholar,
and restores and moysteth the members that be foredried by the default of
humors, and restores might and virtue, and fatteth the body, and creiteth
appetite, and helps and succoureth the virtue of digestion, and sharpeth the
wit and understanding, and opens the stopping of the spleen, and of the
liver, and destroys and consumes superfluity in the body, and does aware
webbes and blearenesse of the eyes, and causes fair speaking, and breaks
stones in the reins, and sheddeth and brings out gravel of the reins, and
it is good to heal wounds, and helps menstruts, and it is good to whole men
and to sick, if it be taken to every one in due manner, if wine be taken out
of measure, it is no remedy to him that mistaketh it, but death and venim, as
it is said innermore of drunkenness, look there. The third manner drink is
drink and medicine, as Drimel and strops: For such drink is wholesome and
healthful, for it defieth humors in the body, and deals and puts them
out. And sometime it lays, and sometime it binds, and makes hard the
womb, and sometime it cools and dries, and sometime it heateth, softeth,
and moisteth. But I leave to the Physicians those differences of drinks.

Wine as says Cententius, Addition
where it is immoderatly used, makes a sick slomacke, a feeble brain, and an
emptye purse, it stirs to lechery, frenzy and villainy, and brings a man
and woman in hatred of the godly, and contempt of God.

Of Dinner and fasting. Chap. 23.
Meat and drink is ordained and convenient to dinners and to feasts, Con^^^^
Prand^^^.
for at fests, first meat is prepared and made in a readiness, guests be called
togethers, forms, and stools be set in ye hal, and tables, clothes, and
towells be ordained, disposed, and made ready, Guests be set with the Lord
in the chief place of the board, and they sit not down at the board before
the guests wash their hands. Children be set in their place, and servants at a
table by themselves. First knives, spenes and salts, be set on the boorde, and
then bread and drink, and many diverse messes, householde servants busilye
help each other to do every thing dilligently and talk merrily togethers.
Modest music huneslive taken, reuiueth ^ spirits and quickneth appetite.
The guests be gladded with Lutes and Harps. Now Wine and now messes of meat
be brought forth and divided. At the last comes fruit and spices, and when
they have eaten, board clothes and relief be borne always, and gustes wash
and wipe their hands again. The graces be said, and guestes thank the Lord.
Then for gladness and comfort, drink is brought yet again. When all this is
done at meat, men take their leave, and some go to bed and sleep, and some
go home to their own lodgings.

Of the supper. cap. 24.
SUpper is called Cena in Latin, and has that name of Cenon, that is common,
by reason of community of them which supped togethers. In old time men used
to eat togethers in open place, least singularity should breed lechery. A
good note.
But Cena may be said of Cenos, that is shadow. For then for scarcity, men
used to suppe in secret and privy places, as says Papy. And more verily Cena
is said of Scinos, that is an hound: for lacking and defaulting of love and
charity. Each person takes upon him to eat his own supper. 1. Corinthians. 9.
All that is rehearsed before of dinners and of feasts accords to the supper
also. Many things be necessary and worship the Supper, and were all in
Assuerus feasts, as it is written Hest. 1. The first is couenable time: for it
is convenient y^ a supper be made in due time, not to early nor too late. The
second is couenable place, large, pleasant, and healthye. Therefore it was said
of Assuerus, that he made his feast before an Orcharde, which was hewn down.
The third is the heart and glad cheer of him that makes the feast. The supper
is not worthy to be praised, if the Lord of the house be heavy cheered. A
disquiet mind is enemy to digestion.
Hest. 1. When he wereth hot. etc. The fourth is many diverse messes: So that
who that will not of one, may taste of another. Hester. 1. There were brought in
dish upon dish. The fifth be diverse. Wines and drinks: Hester. 1. Wine was
brought, etc. The sixth is courtesy and honesty of servant. Hester. 1. He
ordained of his Princes to be masters over the boords, etc. The seventh is
kind friendship and company of them that sit at the Supper. Hester. 1. He
made a feast unto all the Medes. The eight is mirth of song and of instruments
of music: Noble men use not to make suppers without Harp or simphonie. Luke
15. When he heard the simphony and Cornemuse, etc. The ninth is plenty of
light of Candles, and of Prickets, and of Torches. For it is shame to suppe in
darkness and perilous also for flies and other filth. Therefore Candles and
Prickets be set on Candlestickes, and Chaundelers, Lanternes and lamps, be
necessary to burn. The tenth is the diliciousnesse of all that is set on the
table: For it is not used at supper to serve men with great meat and common,
as it is used at Dinner, but with special light meat and dilicious, and
namely in Lords Courts. The eleventh is long during of the Supper. For men
use after full end of work and of travail to sit long at the Supper. For
meat eaten too hastily, grieueth against night: Therefore at the supper men
should eat by lesure, and not (...) hastily. Therefore Assuerus fest dured by
ye space of. C.(...)aies. The twelfth is surenesse: It shall not be amiss to
use a convenient time at supper, so that greedines forget not ye hungry, and
riot ye needye.
For without harm and damage every man shall be prayed to the supper (...)
supper that is freely given, it is not honest to compel a man to pay his s^^t.
The thirteenth is softness and liking of rest and of sleep. After supper men
shall rest, for then sleep is sweet and liking: And therefore beds of Iuorie
and of gold were spread upon the pauement in Assuerus Pallaice, as it is said
H^st. 1. For as Constantine says, when smoke of meat comes into the brain,
men sleep easily.

Addition
Yet the too curious may be counseled to beware of nisenesse, and prodigality,
which spends credit, and other men's goods, whereby follows too many
bankerouts.

Of sleep. Chap. 25.
ARistotle says, that sleep is the rest of virtues of feeling and of moving,
with strength of natural virtues: For the virtue of feeling and moving is
bound in sleep, and the kindly virtue then most strongly works: That is the
virtue of digestion, that is in sleep comforted and strengthened. In libro de
qua^. ^nime, Austen says otherwise, he says yt sleep is a kindly
vnfeelingnesse, common passion both of body and soul: So is sleep common to
both. For (as he says) sleep is a kindly vnmoueablenes, and a help of ye wits.
That he says, a kindly insensibleness, is said for a difference of those
things, which be against kind: Wherefore he says, yt sleep is the privation
of waking, as blindness is privation of sight: For privation destroieth
virtues and things of kind: But sleep helps and comfort kind, and is as
kindly as waking. Also the soul has no liking in privation, and has liking
in sleep: and so sleep is not privation, but it is a kindly disposition: Sleep
is defined otherwise in this manner. Sleep is a liking passion yt stops the
ways of ye brain, and of the wits, and comfort the kind virtue, and
reduces the kind heat out of the utter parts to the inner parts: In sleep
the inner parts heat, and the utter parts cool: and so when the heat is
deep within, the lymme of the common wit is bounden, the which lymme is
Centrum and middle of all the parts, and all the particular wits spring out
thereof, and stretch as lines drawn from the middle point of a circle to the
roundnesse thereof. Then if that lym be stopped, ye particular virtues may not
stretch to the utter parts of the lymmes of wit and of feelyng. And that makes
kind, because a beast should rest of wilful moving: for it is impossible to
move voluntarily away. Constantine in Panteg. says, that some sleep is
kindly, and some unkindly: but thereof we shall speak nothing at this time.
Kindly sleep comes of temperate moisture of the brain, as of smoke that is
moist and clear, that comes from all the body up to the brain, and that
smoke thicketh the spirits, and ^lleth the sinews, and so binds the wits.
Austen says In predicto li. That sleep comes either of the meats that come
in from without, or else of a temperate humor within, ye which when it is
resolved, coueteth to come to the brain, and there being resolved, the cold
part droppeth downewarde, and the heat passes upward. And the cold
dropping downward swageth the heat of the heart, and lets the process of
workings. And Austen says, and Aristotle also, that the heart is the well of
workings, and all good and evil springs out of the heart. In sleep the
virtues of feelyng and of moving, rest, and the virtues spiritual and natural
be as they were before hand, as it is seen and known by pulse, breathing,
and digestion: for in sleep is best digestion. And Auicen describes sleep,
and says, that for to speak naturally, sleep is the turning again of the
spirit from the lims of feeling and moving to the well, with which well the
instruments of the spirits have spring and beginning. And kind sleep is
again tourning of the spirits from deepenesse and fastness, that meat and
drink may be defied, as it fares in sleep of trauayling men: in them sleep
is dead and fast, for the superfluity of resolution of spirits.

Kind desiring addition in substance of spirits, fasteneth the spirits
deep in the inner parts, and hides him therein: and so in them, the sleep is
more fast and long. And in that manner slept Ezechias, and so they sleep that
be voyded with laxatiues and medicines: For much of the substance of the
spirits, is resolved with the superfluities. This sleep is profitable, and
restores them to their might and virtues as Auicen says. Also Aristotle says
lib.3. Sleep accords to every beast, though it be in some beasts full little
and prime. Heerby it is known, that the material cause of sleep, is a smoke
of indigestion, resolved of the body. The cause formal in the head, is the
common wit, that is the well of sinews of feeling, that be stopped and bound,
and the beast rests, and all the members are recreated. Constantine says,
that the working and doing of sleep, varieth in double manner, touching
quantity and great matter, that is found, in the body. Touching quantity of
the matter, if the matter be too much, the virtue of digestion fails, and the
body is made moist and cold, for humor is departed and dissolved, and so
kind heat is quenched, and fleame is made more, and kind heat less. And if
the matier be too little, the virtue of digestion fails, and the body is
dried, and if the matter and meat be moderate, the meats is well digested, and
the body fattened, the heart comforted, kind heat made more, the humors made
temperate, and wit made clear: also working of sleep varieth by matter yt it
finds: for if the matter be much, and kind heat feeble, by sleep is caused
resolution of more humors, into which kind heat entering is overcome and
quenched. Therefore it is hidden, that they that take drinks and be let blood
should not sleep, least there be so great resolution of humors in the sleep,
that kind may not rule them. But if the meat be temperate and also the humors,
kind heat is gathered inward by sleep, and defieth meat and drink, and makes
the humors temporate and the body moist, hot, and fat.

Then know thou here shortly, that sleep gathers kind heat inward, and
cools the outward parts, and draws blood therefrom, and heateth, and
feeds, and comfort the inner parts, and ripeth and seetheth that, which
is vnpure and raw: and quieteth and comfort the virtues of feelyng and of
moving. And if it be temperate in quality and in quantity, it releeueth the
sick man, and betokens that kind shall have the masterie and the victory
of the evil and good, turning and changing: If sleep does the contrary, it
is suspect, as says Constantine.

Of sleep. Cap. 26.
Hypuos. Sopor. Sompnus
THen in sleep take heed of his will that sleeps, for he disposes him
willingly to sleep: for Auicen faith, that sleep is naught else but appetite
of rest, in the virtue of feelyng. Also of shortness of sleep, for when a man
disposes him and lays him down to sleep, his purpose is to rise soon.
Also of unity, and joining of virtue in sleep: for the virtue that is shed in
waking, is gathered and joined in his body that sleeps, as Auicen says. Also
of his vnfeelingnesse that sleeps, as it is known by things that are before
said: for it happens often that a man sleeps so strongly and so fast, that
uneath he feels any thing without; though he be beaten. Also the sweetness of
rest: for sweetness in sleeping makes him forget all manner of travails
that were, and also be. Also he is in surety that sleeps: for while he
sleeps he dreadeth not the cruelnesse of his enemy. Also changing and
diversity of his shape that sleeps: for without he seems dead, and alive
within: pale without, and ruddie within: cold without, and hot within: without
all the virtue of working sheddeth it self, as it is two contraries, but
within all the virtue gathers it self togethers. Also men shall take heed of
diversity in sleeping, for some beasts sleep with eyes closed, and the lyddes
fast togethers: and all such beasts have sharper sight than other beasts that
sleep with open eyes, and unclosed, as Arist. says: and therefore fish have
feeble sight, for they cloase not their eyes in sleeping, and as he says li.
4. Fish rests in sleep, but that is little, for they wake suddenly and flee.
Seek before lib. 5. in the chapter of the eye lyd and of the eye. Also men
take heed of imaginations, of dreams and of fantasies: for in sleeping, for
meddeling of reason with fantasies, the soul thinks of many fantasies: and
the soul knows some deal by imagination the likeness and the shape
thereof, and has no full judgment of these things and fantasies: and
therefore often when a man waketh, he takes no heed what he sees in his
sleep. Also men shall namely take heed of profit that is in sleep: for if
the sleep be kindly and temperate, it does to the body great profit and many
commodities, as it is said before in ye words of Auicen and of Constantine: and
namely for that then is wrought good digestion, and pure things departed from
things that is vnpured: for that yt is pure and like to the body, is then
joined to the body: and that which is vnpured and unlike to she body, is
severed from the body by working of the virtue expulsive of out putting. Of
evil sleep and unkindly, look farthermore in libro 7. de Litargia.

Much sleeping comes of flegmatike humor and rume: Addition
little sleep comes of great study or weakness of powers.

Of waking. Cap. 26.
WAking is a certain disposition of a beast, Vigilans.
when the spirit is sent and ^ome to the instruments of feelyng and of moving,
that the beast may use the same instruments: and so waking is naught else but
free shedding of spirits into the lyms of feeling and of moving, and doing the
work of the animate virtue in the body. Waking is none other, then lack of
might for to sleep, that is superfluity in waking, and comes of out passing
of ye feeling of kindly disposition. And the cause thereof is sometime heat
and dryness of complexion.

Sometime for heat the spirit moves always outward, and so the beast may
not rest. Sometime for evil matter that grieueth ye br^u^^ as it fares in the^
that be disposed to frenzy and ^o madnes^ sometime for (...) vapor yt
disturbeth ye brain of the nearness that of, as it fares in the^ that be
disposed (...) some dis^emi^teth of ^leyune matter, as moisture that is in the
brain, as it saves in old foreliued men: Sometime the cause is bodily and
spiritual sorrow, and neither of them suffers the spirit to rest. Sometime
the cause is evil digestion and great repletion, that ouersetteth and presses
the spirit of feeling and suffers it not to rest, as if fares in the^ that
be over dron^kes for in them yt sharp smoke of wine sticks and pricketh the
sinews of feeling, and grieueth them, and suffers them not to rest. And such
men be often disposed to death or to woodnesse: but they be soon hok^^n and
brought on sleep either by craft or by kind. Kind waking cools the body
within: for in waking, heat comes outward: therefore it heateth ye
vtter-parts. And if waking passes measned, it increases heat, and makes the
body lean and dry, and grieueth the eyes and the eye lids. and dimme^th and
feebleth the sight, and breeds the head ache, and feebleth all the body, and
destroys it. Measurable waking heateth and moysteth the stomach, and the
utter parts: for heat and moisture comes thereto. And if waking passes
measure, then of strong moving of the spirits, comes heat and dryness, and
wasting within and without, and grieuing of kind. Moderate and measurable
waking accords to trauaylyng men to win and to get the more meed, and to
discover and wait of sudden deceipts of enemies, and to abide their Lord, to
receive him with good cheer, and is comfort to them that receive medicines, yt
it grieve them not: to sick men, and to them that have Litargie, the sleeping
evil, that they may the sooner be whole: to wayfaring men that they forget
not their journey with sleeping: to heardes that they take no harm by wolves
and of other enemies: to praieng men^, that they leese not the crown that is
granted to them that wake. Happy are those servants whom the Lord shall find
waking. Luke 12.

Of Dreaming. Cap. 27.
DReaming is a certain disposition of sleeping men, Somnier^ s
and printeth in their wit by imagination, shape and lykenes of diverse things,
as Gregory says, and also Microbius De so^^o Scipionis: Drem^es comes and
falls in many manner wi^e. For because of binding and joining, that the soul
has with the body, dispositions and passions that spring of the body,
rebounde in the soul by a manner application of the flesh. Therefore often in
sleeping, the soul sees such Images and likeness of things, as it assayeth
sometime waking.

And unreasonable beasts have dreams also, as Aristotle says libro. 3. For an
hound has dreams, as it seems by his barking, and an horie, as it seems
by his neighing. And sometime such dreams come of too great repletion either
of too great lasting; and sometime of great imagination and thought, that is
before in waking. Hereof super Gene, li. 12. Austen speaks and says, that
as flesh that is utterly subject to the spirit is called spiritual, so the
spirit that follows always the flesh is called fleshly and beastiall. And
therefore it is no wonder, though the spirit that follows the flesh, present
in himself carnal images. Also he says there, in sleep we see images and
likeness of things and of bodies, and not the self things: but yet the
likeness of things of that we see in dreams, we call by ye names of ye things,
and apropriate to them the names of the things, for likeness of things. In
waking we comprehend and take in wit ye shape and images of things. But in
sleeping the spirit sees ye images of things. Also sometime dreams be true,
and sometime false: sometime clear and plain, and sometime ironblous. Dreams yt
be true, be sometime open and plain, and sometime wrayped in figurative,
mystical, dim and dark interpretation, as it fared in Phara^^ dreams. Such
impression and printing is made in his wit, that sleeps, by inspiration of
God, and sometime by service of Angels, as it fared of Jacob, that saw in his
sleep popler yeardes, and an Angel that said to him, take those yeardes, etc.
Genesis 30. And sometime by scorn and deceit of evil spirits, as it fares in
fantastisies and false Prophets, and them that be taken. Hereof Austen
speaks there and says, that when a good spirit takes and rauisheth a man's
spirit into these sights, without doubt the said images yt be seen, be images
of some things: and it is good to know the said things, for that knowing is
Gods gift. Sometime Satan's Angel disguiseth him, as though he were an Angel
of light, and makes such Images to beguile and deceive men to his purpose,
when men believe him in doings that be openly good. When such dreams come by
revelation, sober understanding deemeth readyly with help of Gods grace: All
dreams be not true, neither all false. For sometime by dremes God sends
certain warnings and tokens of things that shall befall: Also diverse dreams
come of diverse causes, sometime of complexion, as he that is Sanguine has
glad and liking dreams, Sanguine Melanchuli. Color. Fleame.
the melancholious dremeth of sorrow, yt Cholarike, of fiery things, and the
flematike of Rain, Snow, and of Waters, and of such other watrye things. And
every man dreameth dreams according to his complexion, wit, and age, as
says Constantine. And sometime dreams come of appetite, affection, and
desire, as he that is an hungered dreameth of meat, and a dronken man that is
thirsty, dreameth of drink: and of the contrary thereof, lack and default of
meat and drink. The more such a one dreameth, that he eats or drinks, the
worse he is an hungered or a thirst: when he is waked. Sometime of great study
and thought set on a thing, as a covetous man always dreameth of gold, and
that he counts and tells his money, and makes it less either more:
Sometime of evil disposition of ye brain, as it fares in them that be disposed
to frenzy and to madness: They have wonderful dreams, that never man heard
speak off before. For as vapor infecteth and varyeth the cell of fantasy,
even so the dreams do vary and he diverse. Sometime of corrupt blood: For
they that have infect and corrupt blood, think that they go in corrupt,
stinking, and unclean places. Sometime of likeness and changing of air. For
air disposed to likeness and to changing, changes and lykeneth the body
to his own likeness. And so the smoke that is then resolved and departed,
makes new impression and printings in the brain, and thereof comes unlike
and diverse dreams. Sometime of diverse ages and changing of age: Yet laugh
they in their sleep and make pretty countenances of the liking of something.
small children dream not. Therefore Aristotle. lib.4. says, That among all
beasts, namelye a man dreameth most, and children, dreme not before five
years. And it follows. In old time some men and women had no dremes in
their youth, and after they had dreams in their age, and died soon after, or
had great sickness.

Addition.
AFter the opinion of the learned as follows. Addition
Judge. chap. 7. ver. 3. Behold I dreamed a dream, and lo a cake of Early
bread tumbled from above into the host of Madian, and came even to a tent and
smote it that it fell, it ouerturned it, I say, and the tent fell down, etc.
Heerby we may learn that dreams of prophesieng are by God, given unto the
enemies of godlynes, and to that nation, that afflicted the holy people and the
Church, and this is not the first time, for unto an Ethnike king, namely
Pharao, were fat and beasie kine: full and empty cores of corn showed by
God in a dream: unto the Baker also and Butler, were showed things also that
should come to pass, and afterward Nabuchad-nezar, which lead away the
Israelites captives, saw twice dreams that had significattons: But this is
more marvelous which is here declared, the dream needs no Iosoph or Daniel
for an interpretour: for that which the Soldier by the inspiration of God
dreamed, his fellow Soldier expounded: And his neighbor answered and said.
This is nothing else save the sword of Gedeon, the son of Ioas, a man of
Israel, God has given into his hands Madian and all his host: wherefore God
gave unto ungodly men, both a true dream, and also a faithful interpretation
thereof, and that confirms that free gifts of grace are common, both to the
godly and ungodly. Wherefore it is not meet that any should boast of them, for
they testify not the holiness of men, but only the lyberall bountifulness of
God. As touching dreams, the Ethnikes and Peripatetikes, Aristotle,
Hippocrates, and Galen, and other famous philosophers have written many things,
amongst the^ Aristotle in his little book, De diuinatione per s^mniu^ (if it be
his book) says first, that this kind of divination seems not utterly to be
rejected. A farther discourse of dreams is expressed in ye Commentary upon ye
book of Judges by Doctor Peter Martyr, where he says, that dreams be abscure
and foolish, and idle men do dreme of many vanities, by the means of those
humors that lie inwardly hid. But the cause why they which are a sleep, and
not they which are waking, do by sight faeele the nature of those motions, is
this: because at the beginning they are little, and when we are waking, the
sense of them flies from us: for by stronger motions of outward things which
appear before our eyes, we are drawn another way: but being on sleep, we
cease from outward labors, and are void from the course of gross sensible
things: wherefore the sights and Images which are by the humors continuallye
moved, are better comprehended of the fantasy when wear on sleep, then when
we are waking: and when we sleep, we farte better fee small things, than we
do being waking and whereby it appeare^, because we think that noyses be they
never so small, are great thunders: and if any sweet fleame stick peradventure
unto the tongue or roose of the mouth, it seems to us that we taste honnie,
sugar, sweet wine, and pleasant meats, yea, sometimes we think, yt we gladly
eat and abundantly drink: wherefore those motions of humore which are intal,
are in sleep showed to be as it were wonderful great: for which cause Physicians
do heerby know very many beginnings of diseases. Dreams also are certain
signs of ye affections of ye mind, as of covetousness, hope, joy, and mirth,
and also of qualities: the fearful dream, that they fly danger: the
covetous, yt they embrace riches: the lecherous, that they unbrace those, which
the day before they secretly desired: the wrathful, that they are fighting,
killing, robbing, and brauling: the careless, that they are piping, singing,
whisteling, hawking, hunting, dancing and such like. Yet, with every one of
these vanities, is one complexion touched, but it follows, as the youthful
humors increases and diminishes both in man and woman. Also in sleep many
are molested with Ephialt^e and Hv^hia^ti, that is Iucubi and Succubi, which
some Authors call ^arce, night spirits: rather devils, which I suppose to be
wicked spirits who being not able to prevail in the day, de defile the body in
ye night: ye Physicians do affirm, these are nothing else but a disease, so is
al man's infirmities a disease to ye body, and a disquiet to an honest and chaste
mind As touching what is the outward cause of dreams, by ye color of ye sky
and clouds, or by the craking of ye crows, clustring of flies, bellowing of
cattle, working of pismeres, stones sweating, kennels stinking, and such like,
notwtstanding ye alteration yt follows, yet is it no certain diuinatio^. Homer
and Virgil made two gates of dreams, one of horn, ye other of yuorie: ye of
horn (as they say) pertains to true dreams, and that of yuorie to false,
and they seem yt the gretest part pass through ye gate af yuory, and not
through yt of horn. As touching ye dreams sent of God, or moved by ye devil.
2. things are leguired: ye first, ye manner of ye vision, ye second, judgment,
for ye better vndersla^ding of ye holy and former apperantes: as in Esdras,
Za^hary and Joseph. Tertulian in his book De anima, makes mention of certain
of those dreams yt happened among Ethniks, as ye dream of Astiage^ of his
daughter Madane: also of Philip of Macedon, and of Julius Oct^uius, whom M.
Cicero being yet a boy, thought he saw him in his dream, and being awake, as
soon as he met him, he straight way knew him. Philo a Jew and Cyprian wrote
of dreams, that they are sometimes warnings sent by God, which serve to the
edification of the Church. Augustine in his 12. book De Genesi ad literam the
third Chapter says that there are three kinds of dreams: The first pertain
to the outward sense which is called corporal: The second spiritual, which
consist of Images, and have place about the fantasy, or power of imagination:
The third he names intellectual, because they are comprehended only by
reason and judgment of the mind. The devil is the cause of dreams also,
Augustine says, that one by dreams declared in what hour a Priest would come
unto him, and through what place he would pass. And we are not ignorant that
the Ethnikes had Oracles, where men were all night to obtain visions and
dreams. Such a one was the oracle of Amphiarus son of Oeleus an Argiue, and
a Southsayer, being compelled by Adrastus to go to the City of Thebes, as
soon as he came thither, the earth opened and swallowed him up. Amphilochus a
Philosopher, Trophonius, and Aesculapius, in those places the devil showed
unto those which slept, the remedies and medicines to heal such as were sick,
and therewithal also, gave answer of other matters. Supernatural sleeps
and dreams do come of God from above by good Angels, by ye which God
reuealeth his will to whom it pleseth him, and we understand that those kind
of dreams, do much differ from those that be natural, because they are of
more certainty, and sealed and confirmed from above, so that the verity of
the same cannot be ambiguous or doubtful. S. Augustine in his Epistle to
Euodius the 100. Epistle he says, I would to God I could discern between
dreams which are given to error, and those which are to salvation,
nevertheless we ought to be of good cheer, because God suffers his children
to be tempted, but not to perish. It is also-written by S. Augustine in his
book De Ciuitate Dei, cap. 20. Iucubus does infest and trouble women, and
Succubus does infest men, by the which words it is manifest, that the godly,
chaste, and honest minded, are not free from this gross subsection, although
more commonly the dishonest are molested therewith. Some hold opinion, that
Marline, in the time of Vortiger king of great Britain. 70. years before
Christ, was borne after this manner. Hieronimus Cardanus in his tretise De
rebus contra naturam, seems to be of opinion that spirits or diuel^s may beget
and conceive vnt not after ye common manner, yet he recites a story of a
young damoisell of Scotland which was got with child of an inchaunted devil,
thinking that he had been a fair young man which had layen with her, whereupon
she brought forth so deformed a monster, that he feared the beholders, and was
by them burned. It seems not by any reason of man, that a devil or spirit,
should beget on a natural body either son or daughter, except they in
possessing new slain or dead bodies, use those powers that may come to a form
and shape forth of that body wherein it is infused, or that those spirits be
not of that subtle Materia that the Demones are, but a more gross and earthie
cause, as Nymphae, Dryades, Hobgoblins and Fairies. For that it is no strange
secreat to disclose that in few years here in England, Lyelmaho Enile Narf.
two several persons came acquainted with women as they thought, and knowing
them carnally vanished awa^e and one of the persons kept co^^^ane n^r a few
times, but how he prospered after, there is left no cause of triumph. Edward
F^nton in his book of the secreates of Nature; the seauenth-chaptor, recites
forth of James Roffus in his books Dr conceptu and generatione homiris, that
in his time, there was a wicked spirit, had to do by night with a common
woman, being transformed into the likeness of a man, whereupon she became
immediately with shilde, which when she perceived, she fell into so strange a
kind of disease, that her entrayles fell from her, which could not be helped
or made sound by any devise of Physic.

Wicked spirits are never vnpossessing nor meresing those ye appertain unto
that kind, which is like unto themselves, for women may conceive in evil
thought the formed shapes that the deep impression of the mind is fixed unto,
at conception: and men also diuelishly thinking of filth, beastly and deformed
manners, shapes and forms, in their heat of generation, do power forth to ye
manifesting of Gods high Justice, ye thing no less monstrous by natures
corruption, as also by the present devilish and unclean intention: by the
which it may be said, that devils do in deed beget sons and daughters. I
would to God that the foul lust of such uncleanness, were banished forth of
England, which will never be, until discipline pinch the great as well as the
small: for the one presuming so much of the liberty of the other, both go
without punishment, and the glory of God diminished.

The cause of this impediment.
In the body comes a vaporous humor or fumositie rising from the stomach
to the brain: it may come also through surfeit and drunkenness, and sleeping
upright, these breed dreams and disquieting of the powers, make men to seem
or deem that which is the contrary. Likewise the vapor of gold and silver
do so incense the brain and inflame the stomach, that many times Justice
minds to punish, when he thinks nothing less. Thus ye goodly are
disquieted, by missing of that sight, that they would gladly see, and tho
wicked triumph, as though they were not seen nor perceived.

The remedy.
Keep good and te^perated diet, for some eat too much, and many other would eat
if they had it: as for those that disdain to work, those are worthy to fast.
Also take heed of lieng upright, for too much lieng upright, breeds the cause
of stiffeling of the body, and the endless damnation to both soul and body.

Of travail. Cap. 29.
Travail is needful for keeping and saving of kind, Su^^cre
as it is said in Pantegni: There is double manner travail, of spirit and of
wits, and bodily travail. Of spirit and of wits, as studieng, waking, wrath,
sorrow, business, and such other: if they be proportionate to kind, they
help much the health of body and foul, as it shall be said afterward of the
accidents of the soul, in the end of the seventh book. Sometime bodily
travail is temperate, and sometime not temperate. Te^perate is mean between
feeble and strong, great and little, swift and slow, that does not always
increase in heat or in dryness: Travail that is not temperate, passes this
temperatenesse: and if it passes much, it heateth and dries in the beginning
and if it dure long, by dissolution and wasting of strength and of virtue, and
by euaporation of spirits, it cools and dries. Constantine says, that
three manner profits come of travail: For it exciteth kind heat: and
wastes and destroys superfluity: and makes the members hard and sad.
Sometime bodily travail is universal, and some particular. Uniuersal is, when
all the members move, as in deluing, iournieng, and such other. In particular
travail, some lymmes and members rest, and some move and travel, as in
sewing, writing, and such other. These diverse travails, diversely exercise the
body according to the sundry offices and crafts of men.

Some travail heateth and dries the body, as Smithes craft: for the air
that blows in the forge, is hot and dry, and it heateth and dries the
Smithes. Fishing craft does the contrary: for it cools and moysteth. Some
particular travail is strong, and some feeble, and some mean. In travail men
shall take heed of quality and quantity of time and place: in quantity,
that it be not too much or too little: in quality, that it be not too slow,
or too swifte: but mean travail is good and profitable. Before meat is best
time of travail, that superfluities, that be made slipper and sliding may be
voyded by travail, yt meat and drink be not corrupt with such superfluities.
After meat travail helps the virtue of digestion, to sees and defy meat
and drink, so that the travel be temperate. For too much travel is not
good, for it heateth the inner parts and the utter also. Men shall take heed
of place, for some place is watrie, and cools and moysteth, as the place of
Fishers: and some is dry, and has wood and trees, as the place of hunters:
and so such a place heateth and dries by heat that comes of travail and of
walking about, and so of other. Sometime men asked of a wise man, whereto
travail was needful. And he answered and said in this manner: Honest
travail is the true keeping and ward of man's life, pricking of his kind that
sleeps, the fyle of heat of sleeping, wasting and destroyeng of
superfluities, chastising of vices, death of euilles, and of sickness,
medicine of sorrow and woe, winning of time, debt of youth, crudition of young
folk, joy of age, help of soul, and enemy of idleness, the mother of all
evils: forseeth he alone forsakes travail, that will miss and lack joy of
wealth and lyking. These foresaid words be contained in Fulgencius sermon
that he made against idle men.

There that word is expounded: He eat not idle bread. In that Sermon, he
prayseth much good business of travel, but in the end of the Sermon, he
sets devout idleness of contemplation, before business and travail: and
says, That for idleness of contemplation, Mary shall not be accounted among
idle women, but rather she shall be set before all other. How should she eat
idle bread, that is full of bread of life, and that brake bread to other, which
with good prayers, with ensample of good conversation, and with good words and
teaching, sedde and nourished them that hungered and thyrsted after Justice.

Then Mary that helps with good prayers, and draws other to good living,
with good conversation, and teaches well with preaching, breaks bread, etc.

Of rest. Cap. 30.
REst is ceasing from business and travail: Quittus.
for like as exercise is needful for the keeping and salvation of kind, so
likewise is rest, for rest to the full end of moving and of travail. For
without rest nothing dureth finally, for that which always lacks rest, is not
durable. Therefore heaven, that is most moveable, draws to rest with his
moving. Also the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, fire, air, and water, and
all other things yt move by course of kind, draw finally to rest. Wherefore
Aussen says, That rest has kindly an inclination toward the middle, and
therefore it is the head and disposition of gathering and onyng of parts in
their own place. Joining.
And therefore all that is ordained to rest by course of kind is accounted more
noble and more worthy when it is finallye in rest, then it is when it is in
moving: as the ente is more worthy, than those things that be ordained for the
end. Insomuch as rest is contrary to travail, men shall take as good heed of
rest, as is requisite touching the effect, in as many manner wise, as of
travel. Some rest is of spirits and of wits, and some is bodily rest: and each
of them if they be meet or equal and proportionate to kind, be healthful
and wholesome to body and soul, and saves and keeps man's health: but if
they be not, then is it contrariwise. Also sometime, rest is too much, and then
it breeds, norisheth, and multiplieth evil humors, and brings in
corruption: for water rotteth if it rest too long: and all iron, and all manner
of metal, rusteth, if it be long unused, or too little used. And sometime rest
is too little, and that likewise is vicious. For it refreshes not kind that
is weary, neither releeueth feebleness, neither restores that which is
wasted. Mean between these twain is good: for it comfort kind heat, and
recreateth the wits, and helps digestion, and cleanses some-deale the body.
Also touching qualytie, some is very rest, and is good, if it be not too much:
and some is not very rest, as in them which have the feauers, their rest is not
full good, as it shall be sayve afterward.

Addition
What is the rest of perfection.
Psalms. 4 15, 16.55.
TO use moderate labor, by the exercise of the body, but being guyded with a
conscionable mind, brings forth fruits, acceptable to God and man.

What difference is between the body and the mind.
The same that is betwixt the soul and the body: for the soul works by
motion, and the body by action: the bodily work is not known but by labor,
which requires rest after travel, as abstinence does require saturitie. The
souls immortal rest is, when the labor of the body is discharged by death,
to that pains be diminished, rest is preserved, so the body, from corruption,
to the mind from transgresion, in ye hope of resurrection until spiritual
perfection bring us forth in the spirit, as it did sometime in the flesh: in
earth for a time, in heaven for ever.

EXPLICIT LIBER SEXTVS.
INCIPIT LIBER SEPTIMVS.
DE INFIRMITATIBVS. CAPVT PRIMVS.
AFTER that we have (by the help of God) ended the Treatise of the properties
of things that perform and help, and succor and keep and save man's kind:
we shall speak of those things that fall to man against kind, and that
destroy and corrupt his kind.

Three things there be that grieve man's kind, that is to wit, cause of
sickness, sickness it self, and accident that follows sickness. The
cause of sickness is it, whereof comes evil and unkind disposition in the
body, as evil complexion, or too great repletion: or too great abstinence,
or defaulte of virtue, or changing of qualyties, and dissolution and departing
of continuance. All those be cause or occasion of sickness.

Johannes says, That sickness is the thing, whereby the complexion of the
body is grieved and noyed, as by feauers, and postumes, and such other.
Accident is a thing that follows these passions, that comes and is brought
into the body, whether it be against kind or not, Cephalea. Peripuenmon^a in
slamation of ye lungs
as head ache in Cephatico: or not against kind, as appeain Peripleumonia, the
cheeks were read.

Good disposition of body is called health, by the which man's body in
complexion and composition is in such state, that it may freelye and
persectlye do his works and deeds. And if kind slide out of his
temperatenessie, it falls into evil and sickness. For of distemperaunce and
unevenness of humors, happens like disease, as feauers, dropsy, and such
other. And of evil disposition of members comes sickness and disease, like
as blearinesse in the eye, and gout in the hand, and of evil disposition
both of the humors, and of members comes evil universal, Cancer vniu(...)
Elephans. a kind of lepr^^us, that stineneth the ioints.
as Elephantia or Lepra. Then every evil is like, and infecteth the humors
and members that be like, as Feauers and such other. Other unlike, and lets
the lyms office, or else universal, and corrumpeth and destroys kind, within
and without.

Of head ache, and of the causes and signs thereof. Cap. 2.
Cephalea Dolor capius, dolor ingens in capito. extreme pain of the head.
SOmewhat shall be said of the properties of these evils and sicknesses, of
the causes thereof, of the effects and doing, signs and tokens, and of
remedies of them: not of all, but only of those that holy Writ makes
generallye mind of. Therefore here is no charge of the order of process.

Then first we shall begin of the passione of the head. Esaias p^. Euerich
aching head, etc. Psa. 1. ve. ^.6.
The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy, from the soale of the
foot, unto the head, there is nothing whole therein, but wounds and swelling,
and sores full of corruption: They have not been wrapped, nor bound up, nor
fastened with oil.

Constantine says, that head ache, is named Cephitica, and comes in two
manners, either of things that be without, as of smiting: or of hot air,
that departs, and dissolueth: or else of cold air, that constrayneth. In the
second manner, head ache comes of some cause that is within, and that either
of some private cause, that comes not but of the head, or some of farther
cause, as of the stomach. And if the ache comes of a private cause, either
of the fault of the only qualytie, namely of coldness, or of heat, or else
of vice of humors, as of blood, of fleame, of Cholera, or Melancholia.

Augmenteth and lesseneth
And if this ache comes and goes, it is a token and sign that it comes of
the stomach. Therefore Galen says, if ache be in the head, and comes of no
cause that is without, then sharp humors grieve the stomach, and if the
ache be continual, it comes of humors, and if it come of bleud, the head is
hot, and the forhead heavy. For the sorther part of the head is the siege
and seat of blood, the eyes come reide, and the veins of the face be full.
And if it comes of fumosities of Cholera, heat is felt in the nosethrilles,
and dryness in the tongue, waking and thirst lacks not. Ache is more felt
in the right side than in the left side, for there is the place of Cholera,
the face and eyes be citrine, and the mouth is bitter. yelovvish
If it come of Melancholia, the ache is more on the left side then in the
right side, with cold and waking and heaviness, and the face is of earthly
color and hiewe, the eyes be hollow, with blearinesse, and sowrenesse of the
mouth.

If it com^ieth of fleame, there follows ache that grieueth. Superfluities
come out of the nose and at the mouth, and sometime with cough and beanye
sighings and groanings: the face is pale, and somewhat swollen, the eyes are
bleared, the mouth is wearish and vnsauorye: and the ache more in the hinder
part of the head, for there is the place of fleame, and comes often of fleame
in winter in old men, and comes never by it self, but of some other evil,
that comes before.

For in some evils feeding fleame is ravished to the brain, by working of
heat of feauers, that makes it smooth, and is gathered in the hinder cell,
because of likeness, and breeds a Postume: the signs thereof are continual
Fevers, vryne discouloured, and the said oppressing and wringing of the eyes,
and false sleep: and if the sick man be called, uneath he answers.
Therefore in Libro Institutionum Galen says, That it needs to know, that
the head is departed in three parts or in four. For blood has masterie in the
for^head, and Cholera in the right side, The polle
and fleame in the nolle of the head.

Head ache comes in this manner, and in many other, as of sharpnes and doing
of strong wine, ye smoke whereof pincheth and pricketh the small fells of the
brain, and breeds great disease in the head. Huc vsque Constantinus.

Of medicine and remedies for ache and pain of the head. Cap. 3.
THe head is grieved within with an ache and an evil that Physicians call
Emigranea, as says Constant. Hemicrania, the Megrime, of Hemi, the middle, and
of Craneum the skull: because the pain keeps the middle part of the head,
and so setcher's a compass about the temples, yet sometime the grief will be
more on ye one side, than on the other.
And he says, this ache and evil is most griuous: for who that has that
evil, feels in his head, as it were beating of hammers, and may not suffer
noise, nor voice, nor light, nor shining. And this evil is of cholarike smoke
with hot wind and ventositie, and therefore he feels in his head putting
and pricking, burning and ringing. Also the head is grieved specially without
in the skin with pimples, and whelkes, and scabs, out of the which comes
matter much like to honey, and therefore Constant. calls such a scab, Fauum
an honey rombe: for such whelkes have small hoales, out of the which matter
comes, as honey out of the honey comb. And this evil comes of vicious and
gleymie humor, which comes to the skin of ye head, and breeds therein
pimples and whelks. Also the head is often diseased with a familiar passion,
that children have often, and by Constantin that evil is called Squama, a
scall, and we call that evil Tinea a Mothe: for it fretteth and gnaweth the
over part of the skin of the head, as a Mothe frelteth cloth, and cleaves
thereto without departing, holding the skin right fast. And such an evil
breeds passing great itching and fretting and clawing, of that itching
falls many scalls. This evil comes often to children that have great
plenty of blood, and for softness of the skin, and for plenty of meat and
drink.

This infirmity does come of rume, Addition
and wind intrussed in the head, and cannot get out but by medicines: the
easiest remedy to cure the same, is stemulations and mustard laid to the
temples.

Constantine says, that meat and drink ought to be withdrawn from such
children, and to have it but moderately. Then when the humor is avoided, thero
ought to be done thereto ointments and other remedies. And also Constantine
says, that to children sucking, the best remedy is, to let them blood in the
veins behind in the carrs, and to annoint the sore place with the same blood,
while it is hot and subti^l: for with the heat and sub^^^tie thereof, it
opens the poores, and enters, and departs, and wastes, and destroys
the matter. And because that often these scales cleave to the roots of the
hair, it may not be easily cured and healed, but if the matter be first
drawn out of the head right by the root: the which evil and malady if it be
old, uneath it may be healed and saved. Also uneath such scall or scurffe is
healed, but that some token of scaldnesse or pyldnesse is left and senne always
afterward. Also ye head is grieved without, in losing the highting thereof, as
when the hairs of the head fall away, and the head wereth bald. as it is
rehearsed and said before in the fifte book, in the chapter De Capillis, look
therein diligently. Also the head suffers in the hairs thereof, a fretting,
gnawing, and vnhightinesse, that Phisitious call Furfurisca. For sometime in
the head by the roots of the hair, Dandrufe.
breed scalles, like to branne, and comes of the vice of the brain, either of
the fumositie that comes of the head to nourishing and feeding of the hair:
but this uncleanness must busilye be help with cleansing, washing, and with
medicines: like as lyce, nittes, and small worms must be voyded out of the
head, by needful medicines. Constantine says shortly, that the foresaid
passions of the head be help in this manner. If the ach and sore comes of
evil humors, and of repletion thereof, as of evil blood, or of other evil
humors: we shall let the Patient blood in the vein that is called Cephalica,
A chief vein.
and cleanse the body with couenable medicines and purgatious, and namely if
it be of the matter, that is in the stomach, it is needful to make the
patient spewe, and bring out the matter with couenable medicine, and when the
body is cleansed and purged, then men should pour warm water on the head,
hands, and feet to open the poores, and that ye fumositie may the eas^lyer
pass out of the body: and if the hinder part of the head aketh, then we must
open the broad beyne in the forehead, and draw out blood. And Constantine
says, To rub.
That it is good to garse the legs beneath, that the humoure^, fumositie and
spirits that are cause of the head ache, may be drawn from the head downward
to the nether parts: and if the forther part of the head aketh, we must cause
the nose to bleed: and if the humor be hot and cholaricke, we shall help it
with cold medicines and moist. The temples, the nosethrills, and the veins and
pulses, we shall annoint with water of Roses, and milk of a woman that feeds
a male child, and labor to bring the patient a sleep. And if the matter be
cold and gleynne in the mouth of the stomach, when the matter is defied, we
must give a spoonefull of medicine Co^latura vomitus Patratiue.

Addition
Beware of Garlyke, Onyons, ^hybolls called Scalions, heady wines, hanging
down the head, of Venerius acts, and surfeiting the stomach. And if the matter
be in the ground of the stomach, we must bring it out with couenable medicines,
and use balmes and ointments that be meanly hot, and di^t yt is meanly hot, and
so it is to understand, and so we hele contraries with contraries. Cephalargia.
So^a. and Cepha^a. be in ^e^ p^^nes (...) head.
And if the head ache be without vicious humor, and comes of some passing
qualytie, then the patient needs no purgation but rather alteration. And if
the fault be in qualities: we must use contrary ^^alities. And if the ache
comes of too great repletion of meat or of drink, as it fares in ^lu^tous
or dronke^ men: then the best remedy is to drink hot water in great
quantity, and then with in a while after, busy him for to spew^. If thou will
use strong medicine, go to the Book called, Viati^o Constantins. This
suffices to the readiness of a wise man.

Of the Pose. Cap. 4.
IVdith. 8. Burning heat came upon Manasles head, and he dyed, etc. Manasles
the husband of Judith, Addition
as he was diligent over them that bound sheaues in the fields, the heat
came upon his head, and he dyed at Bethuha his cit^^, and was buried beside his
fathers.

The cause of hasting of Monasses death, was immoderate and passing running of
ru^e out of the head to the inner parts, and by that vyolence of burning heat,
dissoluing and shedding the humors of the head, as ^arnard touches. Such a
running heat as Physicians mean, comes in the head, of many and diverse
causes: sometime of hot air, dissoluing and shedding fleeting humors:
sometime of cold air thrusting and wringing the brain, and wringing out the
parts that are most fleeting: sometime of great abundaunce and plenty of
humors, which run and drop out for straightness of place and of holding,
and that comes of the inner heat, that dis^olueth, and departs, and
sheddeth the humors. Or of cold thrusting and wringing out, or of moist, that
makes slypper and sliding: and sometime of fleeting and running and shedding
themselves: sometime of feebleness of the virtue of h^lding. Catar^^^os is the
(...) called also Catarrus, a Cataru^, Inundai^ or Distill^tio, those comes
of ^ume, the which does distill from the hea^e into ye stomach, and sometime
comes so that the powers a^ stepped.


The running that comes of too great plentye of humors, has such signs and
tokens, The body is plectoricke and repl^ate, the place is some deal swollen
with slype eyes, great superfluity comes out of the nose, and at the mouth:
and the body is heavy. If the running rume comes of dissoluing heat, these
be the signs and tokens, The face is red with read veins namely in the
eyes, there be yet running hot tears biting the eyes, and heating the
skin, and the heat is felt deep within. If it comes of cold thrusting
and wringing, it is known by those tokens: the face is pale, the tears be
cold, and cold is felt deep within.

If it come of fleeting humors and thin, it is known by great superfluity
that comes out of the nose and mouth, and by dropping and gleiming thereof.
Then if superfluity be the cause, the cure is by voiding of superfluity,
namely, if the running humors run to the spiritual members by out thrusting
and wringing. If the running be cold and moist, best remedy is the contrary,
hot and dry, withholding and wasting the humor, as Laudanum, Thus, Storax,
and Castorium. If the running be hot, be it refrained with cold bauming, as
with seething of roses and rain water, and with the same roses held to the
nosethrills. Also as long as the running of such a rume is violent, no plaster
nor ointment shall be done thereto, for then ye dissolution and running should be
the more, as says Constant. nor none other water shall be powered on the head,
but water of roses or of Wi^^ies, if the rume comes of heat. Willows, the
leaves sodden in water.


Of the frenzy, and the causes and remedies thereof. Chap. 5.
DEuterenomij. 28. Our Lord shall smite thee with woodnesse, and loss of wit
and of mind, and with stonings, etc. Here he calls woodnesse frenzy, that
Constantin discribeth in this manner. Frenzy (he says) is an hot postume in
certain skins and tells of the brain, A hot impostume.
and thereupon follows waking and rauing. And so frenzy has that name
Frenesis, of frenes, fells that beclippe the brain. And it comes in two
ma^ners either of the red Cholera chased and made light with heat of it self
and of feauers, and made wood and ravished upward by veins, sinews, wosen,
and pipes, and gathered to a Postume, and so into the kind of ph^ensie: or
else it comes of fumosity and smoke, that comes upward to the brain, and
distroubleth the brain, and is called Perafrenesi, yt is no very frenzy, and
the phrentike person suffers many dreadful accidents, as too great thirst,
dryness, blackness, and roughness of tongue, ^^l great grief and anguish,
and rough, and sowning for default of spirits, and changing of kind hea^e
into unkind. The patient is red, if it come of blood, and Citrine, if it come
of Cholera. This passion comes to hot men and dry in Summer: and al those
have comparison to cholera. Parafrenesis comes of binding togethers and
company of other members, as of a postume of the stomach, or of the mother,
and when these members be brought to their own former state: then the brain
turns again to his own good state: and then this evil Parafrenesi is cured,
and then the man is saved. But if the postume be in the substance of ye brain,
then is the frenzy worst and most grievous: and therefore most perilous.
These be the signs of frenzy, discouloured urine, during the Fever, with
woodnesse and continual waking, moving, and casting about the eyes, raging,
stretching, and casting out of hands, moving and wagging of the head,
grinding, and gnashing togethers of the teeth, always they will arise out of
their bed now they sing, now they laugh, now they weep, and they bit^
gladly, and rent their keeper and Leach, seld be they still, but cry much.
And these be most perillouslye sick, and yet they wot not then that they be
sick. Then they must be soon hol^en least they perish, and that both in
diet and in medicine. The diet shall be full scarce, as crumbs of bread, which
must many times be wet in Water. The medicine is, that in the beginning the
patients head be shaven, and washed in luke warm Uineger, and that he be
well kept or bound in a dark place. Diverse shapes of faces and ^emblaunt of
painting shall not be showed before him, Vexed.
lest he be tarred with woodnesse: all that be about him, shall be commanded to
be still and in silence, men shall not answer to his nise words. In the
beginning of medicine he shall be let blood in a vain of the forhead, and bleed
as much as will fill an Egg shell. Before all thing (if virtue and age suffers)
he shall bleed in the head vain: by medicine digestion shall be procured, and
red Coler ^ue^ched. Over al things with ointme^ts and bauming, me^ shall labor to
bring him asleep. The head that is shaven, shall be plaistered with lungs of a
Swine, or of a Weather, or of a sheep, the temples and forhead shall be
anointed with the juice of Letuse or of Popie. If after these medicines be
laid thus to, the woodnesse dureth three days without sleeping and
discouloured urine: there is no hope of recovering: but if ye urine begin to
take good color, and evil signs wexe less, there is hope of recovering.

Addition.
Addition
AS concerning frenzy or madness, which is a disease very dangerous to cure,
if the vitalls be over ruled by a strong spirit, as all diseases, are spirits
seueralles, so this disease of frenzy is a token of a deep displeasure from
God, when it remains unto the end in the possessed, as plainly appears.
Also the same disease with diverse others, having been a long time, and many
thousand years past, powered on man, declares unto us the great wickedness
of former ages, and as I am assured, to this end, that as we in these latter
ages do abhor so loathsome infections, should also for the avoiding of them,
hate and resist the causes of their continual increasings, which cause is, the
wicked desires of the flesh, no less procuring the same, but rather more then
in times past. Yet such ever has been, that wonderful goodness of God to man
ward, first to bless, forth from whose blessings proceeds great prosperity
to the bodily benifit, as Exaltation, dignity, renown, honor and worship,
to govern not only men, but Devils, in the subduing whereof, the benefit of
the blessing appears, if thus blessed on earth, much more blessed are those
in heaven: Contrary for a just revenge of contempt, follows the curse, and
with it comes deprivation, indignity, bondage, dishonor, and reiection, on
earth unto man, from heaven unto God, on the body, ye Pestilence, ye
Consumption, the Fever ague, the veruent heat, the Sword, blasting, Mildewe,
the heaven shall be a brass, that is, there shall come no moistness to comfort
the earth, the Botch of Egypt, the E^^erodes, the scab, the itch, that thou
can not be healed. And the Lord shall smite thee with madness and with
blindness, and with astonieng of the heart. Phrenitis is a Greek word, and
signifies disguised usage constrained, also Sy^sen or Karabitus, the barbarous
word is Frenisis, in English, a frenzy or madness: an impostumation bread
and ^gendered in the Pellyc^es of the brain, named in Latin Pia matter, the
which Apostumation, does make alienation of man's mind and memory. There is
another accident Phrenyse, the which is joined with another sickness, as a
Frenzy with a Fever, or with a Pluris^e, and such other like, which disease
does commonly come of a bylous humor, oppressing the brain, in some an
inflation, or fume of corrupt air: The accident Frenzy comes two ways,
through hot fume ascending from the stomach to the brain, ye second through
colligation of the nerves and sinews, which the brain has with the
middriffe. If hope of cure be, then let the patient blood forth of Cephalica
vena, restrain the possessed of his will, which commonly is to murder, not
too hot, temporate air, and diet, and for a time darkness, to take away the
imagination that comes by the sight, yet there is one kind of frenzy or
madness that is worse then all these, which is disdain of knowledge of the
truth, wilful affection, ignorance, and hate to be reformed, from the which
miserable bondage, good Lord deliver the oppressed, and comfort the relieved.
Timerousnes is a king of weak distemperaunce, which if it continue, it
breeds Lunacie, frenzy, and madness, the best cause to cure the abundance
of distempered blood, is music, and merry company, little meat, sweet
smells, and cleanlye lodging, because it comes of a gross and watrie humor,
thick, that does stifle the vitalls.

Of Madness and the causes and signs thereof. Chap. 6.
Mania, Insania, Furor. Madness of frenzy, of humor, and of possessing.
AMentia and madness is all one as Plato says, Madness is infection of the
foremost cel of the head, with privation of imagination, like as melancholy is
the infection of the middle cell of the head, with privation of reason, as
Constant. says in libro de Melancolia. Melancholia (says he) is an infection
yt has mastry of the soul, the which comes of dread and of sorrow. And
these passions be diverse after the diversity of the hurt of their workings:
for by madness that is called Mania, principally ye imagination is hurt. And
in the other reason is hurted. Opressed.
And these passions come sometime of mela^choly meats, and sometime of drink, of
strong wine, that burns the humors, and turns them into ashes, sometime of
passions of the soul, as of business and great thoughts, of sorrow, and of
too great study, and of dread: sometime of the biting of a wood hounde, or of
some other venomous beast: sometime of corrupt and pestilent air that is
infect: sometime of the malice of a corrupt humor, that has the mestry in the
body o a man prepared to such sickness: and as the causes be diverse, the
tokens and signs be diverse. Diet cures phre^sie, leting blood cures humor.
and both with earnest pra^er unto God cures possession.
For some cry and leap, and hurt and wound themselves and other men, and
darken and hide themselves in privy and secret places: of whose disposition and
difference it is rehearsed before in the fifth book, where it is treated of
the passion of ye brain. The medicines of them is, yt they be ^ound, that they
hurt not themselves and other men. And namely, such shall be refreshed and
comforted, and withdrawn from cause and matter of dread and busy thoughts.
And they must be gladded with instruments of music, and some deal be
occupied. And at the last, if purgatio^s and electuaries suffice not, they shall
be help with craft of Surgery. Or skill.


Of gauring and forgetfulness. Chap. 7.
Want of perseverance or knowledge.
Deuteronomy. 28. God shall smite thee with blindness. and another letter says
Stupore. And Stupor is called a disease of the soul, and Constatine says,
Stupor is blindness of reason: And it is, as it were sleep within the eyes
closed, when for default of spirits the soul deemeth not nor discerns
things, that be sensible seen: As the Sodomits were s^atten at Lots gates, as
the gloss says Genesis 30. and Sap^. vltimo. Constantine says, that this Stupor
gau^^^g comes in two manners: For either it comes of perturbation that
takes no heed: or it comes of superfluity of humors, that stops and
lets ye ways of the spirits in the brain, as it fares in dronken men: or
else it comes of cold air, that presses and wringeth the sinews of feeling,
as it fares in them that be frosen in Ise, or in Snow. Also it comes of
complexion of all the brain, as it fares of Apoplexia, an evil yt takes
away moving and feeling, and also in Litargia, the sleeping evil. And also
Stupor is called a letting and stunieng of the lims, and a crooking of the
utter parts of the body, when for cold it seems yt the lims shrink and
slee^e. Damascenus speaks otherwise of Stupor, and says that Stupor is a
wondering of a new thing, etc. Here Stupor is taken for a manner sleeping
soberness, the which is a certain disposition of full grievous sickness, and
namely to Litargi^ that is a postume bread in the hinder cell of the head, and
has that name Litargia of Lethos, that is forgetting, for it induces
forgeting. It is often in old men and in winter, and comes of fleme: And it
comes never it self, but it comes always of some former sickness: for in
some sickness fleme is bred by working of a sever heat and boiling, is
ravished up to the brain: And in the hinder cell it is gathered together by
reason of accord and likeness, and gendreth a Postume, whose tokens be
continual ^eauer, urine discouloured and thick, shr^sting of ye eien, false
sleep, and if the patient be called, uneath he answers, and if it hap that
he answers he raueth, and speaks vanity: he lies upright, and if he be
turned for a time to lie ^n his side, by his own rease he turns himself
anon, and lies upright, and is full cold in the utter parts. The remedy of
this is, that the sick man be laid in a light place, and that there be
talking and great speaking and disputation, and that he be drawn and haled
strongly by the hair of his beard and of his head, and that his face be often
washed with cold water^ and his feet froted often under the soles, and that
s^inking thing smoking be put to the nether parts, as Goats horn burnt,
and such other. And over all thing he shall have a clister, and sneesing shall
be excited, the head shall be shaven and froted with things that opens the
poores, and anointed with mustard and with such other: sneesing in this cause
is best token and sign. If sleep continue and quaking, with moving of arms,
and gnashing of teeth follows thereon, it is token soon of death. And take
heed, that if he that has the frenzy falls in Litargi, that is the
worst. And if he that has Litargi, falls into phre^sie, it is good. All this
I have drawn out of Plato and Constantine.

Of Giddiness. Chap. 8.
OUR Lord has meddled spirit of giddiness. Esaye. 19. The Lord has mingled
among them the spirit of errors: and they caused Aepypt to err in every work
thereof, a^ a dronken man staggereth in his vomit, in stead of the spirit of
wisdom the Lord has made them giddy, with the spirit of error. Constantine
says, that giddines is false dome and corruption of the sight and of the
spirit of feeling: For by that dome it seems sodeinlye that all thing goes
about and is dark. The cause thereof is too much plenty of humors with
ventositie meddeled. For those humors move in the head, with ventositie that
comes up from ye body, and from the stomach to the brain. If this evil be
only in the brain, the patient feels heaviness in the head, noise in the
hearing, and corruption in the smell: and such a giddiness passes not
easilye. And if it comes of the stomach, the patient ^eeleth abomination,
and wambling, and ach in the mouth of the stomach: but such giddiness comes
and goes. For when the fumosity comes up, the^ the giddince begins: and
when it comes not up then it cease. The remedy hereof is, if other things
lets not, the patients foot shall be set in hot water. And he shall be let
blood, and use medicines purgative, and forbear wine, for wine dissolueth: and
he shall forbear swelling meats and great. And spewing shall be excited,
Stirred or prouosed
for that is still good.

Of Waking. Chap. 9.
WAking over measure is default of might to sleep, and is an evil of the
brain contrary to Litargi. And this evil comes of too great moving of the
brain, and dryness of read Colera, or black, of intemporate heat, and of
too salt humors. Of all those comes inordinate waking, and anguish
follows, color changes, Surmisings.
and busy thoughts increase, and rauing and unreasonable suspecions, the body
wexeth lean and dry, the virtue of digestion is corrupt, all man's complexion
changes, the eye liddes and face swells, and full evil sicknesses breed in
the body. That these perish not, men shall hastelye provide a medicine to cure
them. Men shall anoint their faces and temples with things that breed sleep,
woman's milk is good to bring them on sleep, the body shall be fed with good
meats. Look before in lib. 6.

Of the Faling sickness. Epilencia.
Chap. 10. Epilepsia. C^u^lcio Morbus co^ma^ialis Morbus sac^^.

HE fell down to the earth foming, etc. Mat. 9. Constantine and other authors
call the falling evil Epilencia, and in old time this evil was called and
named Gods wrath: Morbus ^a^culeus Biotbus Caducus, Morbus Mahometus.
As Constantine says, Epilencia is a meist humor, by the which the chambers
of the brain be not perfectly stopped, the which humor lets the soul that
i^ the spirit of feeling, Ira Dei. Zoilei, so called of Plini, and this d^^l^
is a scheme^ inflammation and
to declare his working and doing, until the way of the brain be unstopped of
that humor. This evil is called in passion Yeranoxon, that is the holy
passion, for it occupies the holy part of the body, that is the head. And it
is called Hercudis also, serning of ye body ^eruents ^umor.
for it is strong as Hercules was. Also it is called the fa^ling evil, and has
that name of yt doing thereof: For it stops the sinews, and makes the
members, that be instruments of virtues, poor of the governance of spirits,
and destroieth them. And therefore in this evil men be compelled to fall. Also
this evil Epilencia is nigh of yt kind of Apoplexia: for one is the place of
both, and the matter, of the which they be bread: for it is cold and
cleaving. And they be diverse in that that Apoplexia stops all the chambers
of the brain, with privation and diminution of feeling, and of moving: And
Epilencia lets not all, but the principal chambers of the brain, and has
the name of Epi, that is above, and Lenpsis, that is hurting: for namely it
grieueth and hurts the over parts, also it is called childrens evil, for often
children have that evil. He that has this evil falls sodeinly, the mouth is
drawn awrye and a side, and the face also, with quaking of the neck, of ye
noll, and of all the body, with grislye grashing of the teeth, and foming at
the mouth, and outputting of many superfluities. Physicians call this falling
evil the little Apoplexia, and comes of three causes, as Constantine says,
either of flematike or melancholyke humors, that breed in the further part
of the brain, or else of ventositie cold and gross that has the mastry over
the brain, or over some other members, or over the stomach. For there is a
humor bread in that member, and the smoke thereof comes unto the brain, and
with the thickness of that smoke, the ways of the spirits of feeling are
stopped, and thereof comes the falling evil. Constantine says, That this
disease comes at a certain time. Therefore Galen says, yt Epilencia, that
comes in ye wering of the Moon, betokens, that the kind thereof is moist.
For all thing that is moist increases, when the Moon wexeth. And the kind of
this evil that comes in waning of the Moon, is most cold, and some deal
moist.

There be three kinds of Epilenci, as there are three manner of places that
it is in. One manner evil of this kind is called Epilepsia, and is in the
head, and comes of matter that is only in the brain, another is called
Analepsia, and comes of matter that is in the stomach, not in the
hollownesse but in the sinews and arteries of the stomach, by mean of which
boiling matter is ravished to the brain. The third is called Catalepsis, and
comes of matter that is in the uttermost parts, as in the hands and ^eet;
and is known by his own signs and tokens. For they that have and be
possessed of that evil Catalepsis, feel and know when the evil comes. For
they feel a manner grudging as it were by the noyeng of Amptes, Stinging of
Pismeres.
or moving of some manner wind of the matter that comes upward: And often
for shrinking and straightness of the utter parts, they be kept from falling,
and as Galen says, often these have the Fevers. For without boiling and
seething, heat of Feauers, uneath may the matter be ravished from the nether
parts to the over. They that have and be possessed of that manner evil that is
called Analepsia, are sore grieved with repletion of the stomach, and namely
in digestion and bolking, and of loathing of meat. And also they be ware before
of their falling. And they that have that evil that is called Epil^psia, they
feel not before hand, when they shall fall, but they travail with continual
grief of the head: These evils come sometime of blood, and of fleame, and often
of Melancholia, and these causes be known by their own signs and tokens,
and namely by disposition of the body, Sanguine, Flematike, or Melancholyke. By
a red face, pale, and wanne, by age, by country, and by diet. If it comes of
melancholy, it grieueth and hu^teth most in the waning of the Moon: If it
comes of blood or of fleme, it shows it self most in the full of the Moon.
These evils be most during, and hard it is to heal them, but yet medicine
and diet helps them. It needs that they abstain themselves and spare evil
meats, and from the service of Venus, and great company and gathering of men:
For in such places often their axes takes them. Grieves
Them needs to use good meats and light and temporate, more in the morrow
tide, and little or naught at even. And they should temporatelye drink wine,
and be purged with medicine, as the humor that is in the fault requires. The
expediment of Plato against Epilence, he says, that men shall by garsing draw
out three drops of blood of the shoulders, Boxing or launcing.
and profer the^ with a ravens egg, to the patient, in the end of his acces.
Also he says, that the Eggs of a raven help much. Whether to eat or to Imel
to he writes not^: Do^ng.
Also he says, ye P^any borne and dronken helps much: and this confirms
Galen, Constantine, and Dioscorydes. And he says, that the Ruynnyn of an Hare
drunk, helps much the Epilentike, that is him that has the falling evil:
for that Ruynnin lets the humor to be dissolved and shed, the which humor
comes up and stops the brain. And he says, that the liver of an Ass
roasted helps, if it be eaten, and the liver of a Goof, if it be given to
them that have that evil, it moves and stirs that evil. Constantine
tells many other experiments, of the which we shall not speak at this time.

Addition
These three kinds of falling evils, Epilepsia, in their falling foame at the
mouth, and this is the common falling, sickness. Analepsia, where they do
fall, they shall defile themselves, and not some at the mouth. Catalepsia,
whether they be taken open eyed, or half closed, yet for the time they shall
see nothing, neither can they move or stir, hear nor speak, and seems dead
for a space: Purge rume, which is the chiefest cause of this infirmity.

Of sneesing. Chap. 11.
JOb. 41. His sneesing, etc. Constantin says, Stern^^atio.
That sneesing is a violent moving of the brain to put out superfluous
fumosities thereof: and it comes of diverse causes. For sometime kind self
works and labors busily to put out of the brain superfluities of smeak
that be cause of evil: or of breeding of some vire. For mane brain is more
moist then the brain of other beasts. And so humors, that be there gathered
be put out with sneesing by help of kind. And sometime sneesing comes of
strength of evil and sickness, more the^ by outputting of kind: as it
happens in Corica and Peripleumonia. So it fares in stopping of the nose by
fifth, and and also in a postume of the lungs. Also sneesing comes sometime
in this manner: The pipes of the man's nosethrils be short: and therefore
hurtful things come soon to ye brain from without, as dust, cold air, heat
of the Sun, and such other. And when such things come to the brain, it moves
to put them of with his moving and strength, and so comes sneesing: The which
if it chance when one is vexed with a sharp ague: or without rume, it is a
good token For it betokens ye kind is comforted, to put off things ye
annoieth it. And if it come with a rume, it is an evil token. For it
betokens plenty of evil matter, and therefore sneesing is Sintenica and
incresing of rume. And therefore in Pluresie (a postume on the ribs within) and
other such evils of evil matter, sneesing is an evil token. Then sneesing
moves the brain, and discharges all the brain, and smites and shakes the
body in his outgoing. And by violent moving of the air, sneesing makes noise
in the pipes of the nosethrills. And if it dureth more then it should, after ye
out moving of superfluity of fumositie, it grieueth. For it makes to great
dissolution, and exciteth sometime, and breeds grieuoues evils and
sickness. Therefore it should be stinted with medicines, as with fumigations
that makes it stint, and repayreth the spirits, and wastes superfluities, as
with Camamell, Mentastrum, Rosa, Ircos, Nigella, and such other.

Sneesing is a good sign in an evil cause, Addition
this impediment comes of dilation of the powers of the brain, or of
coldenesse, or heat in the heart.

Of head aching. cap. 12.
OUr Lord set a token in Cain, that was quaking of head. As Strabus says in
Glo^a. Tremore.
Enerye man (says Strabus) that finds me by quaking of head and moving of
wood heart, shall know that I am guiltye to dye. Constantine calls head
quaking Iactitatio. And head quaking comes of default and feebleness of
virtue Regitiue, in the sinews of the neck bones, and in the brawnes of the
members. In this evil be two contrary moouings, one upward and another
downward, kind works the over, and the disease the nether. The evil
labors to bear down the member lower. And kind that has not forsaken the
governance of the member labors to rule it and set to it in his own steed:
and so kind labors to rear up the member. And therefore quaking comes of
such contrary moving. The cause of the beginning is default of virtue ye
moves the brawnes, as says Constantine: and sometime this virtue fails
because of evil complexion: and for accidents of the soul, as for dread,
for gathering of spirits to the heart. Therefore the members draw downward by
their weight and heaviness. And so for kind has not suffisaunt spirits
coming togrihees, to rule the members, it may act at the full hold the
members steadfastly in their own place: and therefore follows quaking anon.
And such quaking is a manner disposition to Palsy, and namely if sleeping
follows with quaking: the cause whereof is coldness, running and hardening the
substance of the sinews, that the virtue of feeling may not thir^^ it and
pass thereby. And every Palsy with quaking is more easy to heal, Pearse
through.
then the palsy that is without quaking. For in the first, the member has not
lost all kind, as it has in the second. Such quaking with sleeping shall be
cured and healed with medicines, that heat and comfort, and dissolve and
consume and wast, as with Theodoricon, Iralogodion, and such other. Also bethes
be good, and frotings, with hot and opening herbs and fumigations, that the
closing poores may be opened, that the superfluity of humors may be wasted,
the spirits excited, and the sinews comforted.

Of the Crampe. cap. 13.
A Cramp is a violent shrinking of sinews, Spasmos. Co^^ultio Kindly moving.
taking away and hindering wilful moving. And such shrinking comes
sometime of too great repletion, sometime of great abstinence, sometime of too
great cold, Contractio Neruorum. Very cold
as it fares in hands and lips that be sore a cold, that finneth they may
speak or clitch, or stretch their fingers. Such shrinking that comes of
utter cold is help with heat, and needs none other medicine. But yet let
the patient take heed, that he put him not sodeinly to great heat, For of
sodeine smiting of coldness to the utter parts of the sinews comes full
sore ach. And so the utter parts of the limme shall ache full sore. The
shrinking that comes of abstinence has these tokens. Sometime comes before
passing running of blood, or of the womb, or of the mother: sometime travail
or abstinence over his might, that trauayleth or absteineth: Sometime passing
heat, as in a man's body that has a sharp Ague: Sometime deepenesse and ach
of wound, sharpness and strength of medicine taken. In all these the Crampe
comes of too great dryness of kind and of wasting of substantial
moisture. And therefore the sinew shrinketh and riueleth, as Parchment put in
the fire. And therefore the way of spirits in the sinews be stopped, and the
virtue of life and of ruling is let. All such Crampes be deadly, if they endure.

Therefore it is said in Apho. the cramp of cholarik is mortal. In the
beginning hot woman's milk helps this cramy, if it be done hot thereto and if
it be shed all about upon the brawn of the cheeks and upon the ridge bone and
the neck, and the roots of the sinews. Also water with Wool and Oil bound
upon the place of sinews helps. The third manner of Crampe that comes of
repletion, falls often to fat men and fleshly, Corpole^^.
and well fed, and gorrells: And comes of shedding and spreading of the
sinews: and is more easily holp. For it is help with hot ointments, with
baths, and sneesing, and laratiues, as Constantine tracheth. If feauers come
upon this shrinking, that is best remedy. And therefore it is said in Aphor.
Feauers coming upon the crampe, helps the evil. This Cramp has three
manner of lunds, one is called Epitestanus, when the hinder sinews shrink and
have the Crampe: That other is called Eprocustenus, and is when the further
sinews toward the breast shrink: And the third is called Cethanus, and is when
the farther and the hinder shrink. In these three kinds of Crampes is no
perfect cure, when they come of abstinence as it is said.

Addition
There are four kinds of Spasmos or cramps, the first is named
Emprosthotonos, the which is when the head is drawn downward to the breast.
The second is named Thetanos, and that is when the forhead and all the whole
body is drawn so vehemently, that the body is immovable. The third is named
Opisthotonos, and that is when the head is drawn backward, or the mouth is
drawn toward the ear. The fourth kind is named. Spasmos, the which does
draw the sinews very straight and asperusly in the feet and legs.

Of the Palsis. chap. 14.
Paralisia. Dislolutio
Palsy is a hurting of part of man's body with minishing, or with privation of
moving, or of feeling, or of both, and comes sometime of cold constraining:
Sometime of humors stopping: sometime of heat wasting and ruling the sinews
of feeling: Sometime of a wound cutting and departing the sinews. For by these
causes and other the spirit of feeling cannot have his passing to the
instruments of feeling and of moving. And so if the sinews of feeling and of
moving be stopped at the full, or cut, the member l^^seth feeling and
moving. And if the stopping be not full, neither the passing of spirits, not
warned at the full: then comes quaking by reason of the matter bearing
downewarde, and of the virtue of ruling bearing upward, as it is said before.
Palsy comes specially of superfluitei of meat and drink, namely of
drinks: For of meat and drink is great breeding of humors and dissolution
and shedding: and thereof comes needely stopping of the sinews.

Also the Palsy comes of cold constraining and rining the sinews. Sometime
the Palsy comes of another evil, as when the less Apoplexia ends: Some
Palsy is universal, and some particular, the universal occupyeth the half
deal of the sick man, the particular Palsy occupies one part, as the hand
or the foot or the tongue. Also the matter of that stopping that breeds the
Palsy is sometime in the head and well of sinews, and sometime in the member
Peralytike. If the matter and causes be in the head and well of sinews, then
is stonieng and vnfeelingnesse about the places that be nigh thereto, as in
the face, and in the beginning of the ridge. And if the matter and the cause
be in the member Paralitike, then only that member is grieved, and not the
other parts, as Galen says. And he says, that he did sometime away a
Plaster, that Sophista had done upon the hand, and did it upon the neck.
And so it follows, that as the diversity of place of the evil asks, the
manner of medicine is diverse.

Palsy that comes of keruing and cutting of sinews is incurable, and may
not be soon help Also universal palsy in all men, and namely in old men is
uneath curable: but in young men medicine works more swiftly and more
effectually Then to help the Palsy we shall use first medicine, Sosinc^^.
that ^esheth and lareth both within and without: and then medicines that dry
and make hard. For if we did thereto first medicines that dry strongly, then
the fleeting and moist parts should be wasted, and the other deal should be
more hard and thick: And so the hardness is the worse to be tempered,
dissolved, and wasted. And therefore men shall work wisely in the foresaid
manner. Then let the members be purged within with couenable medicine, and
without softened with couenable ointments. And he shall use Sage and Castorie in
seething of Wine. Seech other medicines in Plato and in V^atico Constantine.

Addition
Hemiplexia, Semiapoplexis, Semiapoplexia, are three particular names, for the
Palsy. Also the particular palsy does rest in a particular member, as in the
tongue, head, arm, and leg, consider that all shaking passions be not
palsies. Look in the Chapter Tremore.

Of the diseases of the eyes. Chap. 15.
Passionibus oculorum. Oculu^. Opthalmos.
TEching and smarting of the eien comes sometime of outward things, as of
wounds, departing and dealing the continuance of the eien, and of dust, that
hurts the eien and the tender substance of them: and of smoke that dimmeth
the eien and makes them smart: and of cold wind smiting the spirit of sight:
Also of hot air that dissolueth and departs: also of too great brightness of
the Sun, or of other bright things, that departs and sheddeth the spirit: Of
too great darkness that defoileth the spirit of sight, and of inordinate diet,
and of continual drunkenness that dimmeth the sight: of fleshlye lyking and
often service of Venus, that corrupts and dissolueth the spirits and the
humor Christallin: Sometime of inward matter and causes, as of humors hot or
cold, dry, or moist: and then the first and chief ach and smarting comes of
inward things, which breed a postume upon ye white of the eye, of humors ye
slow and come of the black of the eye, and make a postume. And that comes of
feebleness of the eye, yt it receives, and of plenty or of sharp biting of
humor that fleeteth and comes from the brain. And in such a postume the eye
swells: weepeth and is red and feels ach and pricking, heat: burning,
namly, when (h^^^ is the cause, the^ it seems that the eye were pricked with
needles: and if a cold humor be ye cause, or else ^entositie, ye eye is haled
and grieved by night, and is cla^med: full many humors run and fleet, and be
clammy, and is most pained with humor and sleame. And if blood be the cause,
then is great itching, many tears and hot in the outgoing thereof, light
pricking, more swelling, ach. and smarting most in the forhead, and is most
grieved in ye hour of blood. If this evil comes of outward things, the
patient shall be brought to rest, and sleep with his head areared on high, and
for running of tears, he shall the shining and brightness of light. To void
dissolution and shedding of light, he shall not speak least there be great
dissolution of the brain by forcing of the voice: He shall ^aue cold meat, and
of light digestion, least the fleeting of rame increase: He shall drink clear
hot water: for it wastes smoakes by ye kind of his smoke, and comfort the
sinews, and swageth burning and pricking: He shall use temporate baths of fresh
water. If this be done, there need no other medicines: and if ye ach come of
inner humors yt the default is in, they shall be purged or withdrawn by blood
letting, or by couenable purgation of medicine: Men shall do within binding
medicines, slaking and healing as water of roses, with woman's milk, as
Constant. says. The tears shall be stinted with restrictortes and stintings.
Then in the beginning men shall do thereto light repere^ssiues and swaging
medicines inward, and in the macasing meanly Daslelutiles, and in the end:
Consumtifes, and always with these Confortatifes. About a postume of the eye.
Maturatiues shall never be put, least the tender substance of the eye be
destroyed, if quitter come out. Moreover if ye matter be very hot, and the ach
strong, strong Percussiues shall not be done thereto: for the matter might
sodeinly be smitten to ye sinew Opticum, holow: and by stopping might induce
blindness for ever more Blearinesse of eien is claminy and glewy superfluity
of the eien cleuing to ye lids, and comes of flumatike and melancholik
humors, and begins in the corners of ye eien, and makes the eye lids
great, and over comes them, and this destroieth the hair of the lids, and
makes the eye lids as it were pieces of raw flesh. In bleared eien the black is
whole and sound, as it is said in Glosa Leuit. 21. but the humor falls away,
the eye lids were great: And by often washing thereof, ye eye sight appaireth: and
tokeneth them that have a clear wit in knowldege of truth: but ye work of
fleshlye life makes them dark and dim.

Of the web in the eyes. Chap. 16.
THere is another evil of the eie^, that we call a web, and Constantine
calls it Albugo, or Pannus, and breeds in this manner. First a rume runs
to the eien, and thereof comes an evil that is called Obtalmia, a shrewd
blearinesse and ach, and a postume: Of which, if it be evil voyded, remains
a light spot or infectio^, and in long process of time furneth and grows
into a web, and comes thick, and occupies more place then all ye black of
the eye: This web increases into Pannus by more thickness, and occupies more
place, for it occupies all the black of the eye: and at last it turns into
ye kind of a nail of the hand, and so it is more thick and hard: and every
each of these is incurable, if it be old: But it shall be dealed and deemed as
the place asks, that it is in. If it be about the humor Christallin deep,
during half a year, it is incurable. And in the beginning it may uneath be
help. If it be bound under the kertill of the eye, that is called Co^iunctiua,
or above it, during ten years it may be help. Then when this mole is fresh and
little, red Popie seed suffices to help it, as Constantine says. Red Popie
seed is hot in the first degee, and dry in the second degree: And therefore it
has virtue to make thin, and to wast and to destroy. Also Philosophers tell,
as Constantine says, That the blood drawn out of the right wing of a Coluer,
or of a Swallowe, or of a Wipe, and done in the beginning upon that mole,
clanseth it mightily. For the blood of these fowls heat and dissolve
strongly, by kind of the fowls that it comes of.

Addition
There is a hot impostume in the eye called Ophtalma, Obtalmia, and Hippopia,
which comes of cold rume.

Of infection of the eye through indurate blood, chap. 17.
THE eien have another passion that defiles them, and that is infection of
blood. Constantine ralleth it a croust of blood, and it breeds when blood
comes by any hap to the eyes, and is dried as a croust. Also it happens
that blood woseth out of the veins and of the pipes, and comes to the eyes:
And some veins are broke or be hurt in the kirtell that is called Coniunctiua:
And then such default in the eye comes of blood that comes so to the eye:
Coluer blood or Turtell blood, dissolueth and departs this blood, that is
so renied, as Constantine says: So does woman's milk with insence, and so does
fresh cheese meddled with honey without salt, if it be done thereto. Constantine
teaches many other experiments and assaies.

On the eye lid grows Ordiolus, like a corn, it comes of corrupt blood,
Addition
whose recourse is more to one place then to another.

Of vnlawlawfull running of tears. chap. 18.
VNwilfull or quick mooing of tears fall in the eien sometime of outward
cause, Lactime. Dac^ya.
as of smiting dissolution and departing of hot air, or of constraining of
cold air, or of bi^ing of smoke, or of distroubling of dust, or of smelling of
sharpnes of Onions, and other smell of sharp things: and sometime of inward
causes as of hot humors or of cold, or of ple^tie of humors that fall out for
default of place to abide in, or of feeblenes of virtue Contentiue of the
brain, or of strength and might of the virtue of out putting If hot humors be
the cause, the eien be red, and the tears that drop down, heat and burn
the face. And hot things grieve, and cold help. And if the humors be
cold, the eyes be wanne, and the tears be cold, and bite or fret not ye face.
Cold things grieve and hot help, if the tears come of smiting, and other
outward causes. The chief remedy is clean ware and pure, Coo^min.
with powder of Commin chased and often plaistered for it does away the ach and
tears and wens. If it be with a wound, it is holp with Surgery. To ye other
outward causes suffices comforting or bathing with luke warm water: so that
the warmness draw more to cold then to heat. If it come to running and plenty
of humors, then he shall be purged, and he shall have Diadibam with wine sod
with Frankenscence, and that is principal in this cause. Restraining shall be
made about the temples, and about the forhead, and all these help against
running of tears, that come of hot causes or of cold.

Of the default of sight. Chap. 19.
DEfault of sight in the eien falls and comes of many manner causes:
Sometime of evil complection^ sometime of corruption of fumosity ye comes out
of ye stomach, sometime of stopping of ye sinew yt is called Neruus opticus ye
helow sinewe, and of straight ways of webs, of moles, of the crampe, and of
other such^ Sometime of mordinate diet, of long sickness, of fasting, of
service of Venus, and of many other causes, as of age, and such other. Then the
causes shall be distingued and known by their own signs and tokens. For it the
default comes of fumositie of the stomach, ye default of sight it not
continual, but it comes and goes. For it waxes and waneth by diversity of
meat and drink. If it come of default of the brain, the default is continual
before meat and after. If it come of stopping of the sinew, the substance of
the eye is pure, bright, and clear. Other signs and tokens be known openly.
The^ to put of this default, if it comes of evil humors of ye stomach, ye
stomach shall be cleansed and purged, and all the body, and namely the head: And
then men shall lay too remedies, as the place asks: he which remedies be found
in Vatico, and in other authors.

Of blindness. chap. 20.
Blindness is a privation of sight: De priuatione visus. 1.aecus. Caecitas
and a man is vereft and deprived of his sight, sometime for default of the
members or lims, and for vnproportionated of the black of the eye to the
spirit of sight. For to make and shape the sight, needs due proportion of the
member and lim, that receives the spirit, as it is said before de V^su. li. 3.
Sometime for stopping of the inner sinews, for if the sinew, that is called
Opticus, carries and brings to tho eye the spirit of sight, if that sinewe
be stopped in the beginning thereof, or in ye middle with ouergrowing of
flesh, or with superfluity of some clammye humor, then the virtue of the
sight has no passage to come to the black of the eye, and so blindness is
bred in the eye. And sometime it is caused through consumption and wasting of
humors and of spirits, as it fares in old men, whose eyes first were dim,
and then they have default of sight: and at the last the virtue of sight
fails, and they loose all their sight. Sometime blindness comes of outward
cause, as by wounding of ye eien, and by too great and continual weeping, and
by dissolution and departing of the substance of the eyes, and by thicking and
hardening of the curtills of the eien, and by compaction of humors in the eye.
For then the black of the eye by sodeine swelling and wasting of substauntiall
humor, has no way to the spirit of sight: And therefore such compaction
causes blindness to the eye, by sodeine drieng of ye substantial humor: as
it happens in ye black of the eye in some me^ yt take drenches and be let
blood, Purgatio^s
which falls sometime in peril of blindness through too great bleeding.

Sometime for too sodeine shedding of the spirit of sight, with drieng of the
substantial moisture, as it fares in a ^^are that is as it were sodeinly made
blind with beholding and looking on a bright burning Basin. The cause of his
blindness is the beholding of the bright turning and shining Basin, the which
fity virtue of the Basin destroieth and wastes the cu^^l of the eye, The ^im.
and the humor Christalline. And the brightness thereof is vnproportionate to
the spirit of sight, and departs and sheddeth it, and so of necessity
breeds blindness. Also among all the passions and evils of the wits of
feeling, blindness is most wretched, as Constantine says. For without any
bond, blindness is a prison to the blind: And blindness beguileth ye virtue
imaginatiue in knowing: For in deeming of white, Supposes
the blind weeneth it is black: and againeward. It lets the virtue of
aduisement in deeming. For he deemeth and advises and casts to go Eastward,
and is beguiled in his dome, and goes West ward. And blindness ouerturneth
the virtue of affection and desire. For if men profer the blind a silver penie
and a copper to choose the better, he desires to choose the silver penie, but
he chooses the Copper. The blind man's wretchedness is so much, that it makes
him not only subject to a child, or to a servant for ruling and leading, but
also to an hound. And the blind is often brought to so great need, that to pass
and escape the peril of a Bridge or of a Foorde, he is compelled to trust in a
Bound more then to himself: Also often in perils where all men doubt and dread,
the blind man for he sees no peril, Is void of danger.
the blind is sicker. And in likewise there as is no peril, the blind
dreadeth most He spurneth often in plain way and stumbleth: Often there he should
heave up his foot, he boweth it downward. And in likewise there as he should
set his foot to the ground, he heaueth it upward. He puts forth the hand
all about groping and grasping, he seeks all about his way with his hand and
with his staff. Selde he does ought sickerly, welnigh always he doubts and
dreadeth, Warily.
Also the blind man when he lies or sits thereout, Without doors.
he weeneth yt he is under covert: and often times he thinks himself hid, when
every body sees him. Also when the blind sometime lists up his face and
eyes toward heaven, and to the sun, the cleernesse of heaven comforts not
his eyes: The Sun beam is present to ye blinds eye, but he knows not the
virtue and the effect of ye Sun, as Gregory says. Also sometime the blind
beate^h and smites, and grieueth the child yt leads him, and shall soon
repent the beating by doing of the child: for the child has mind of the
beating, and forsakes him, and leaves him alone in the middle of a bridge, or
in so^e other peril, and techeth him not ye way to void the peril Therefore
the blind is wretched, for in the house he dare nothing trustily do, and in the
way he dreadeth least his fellow will forsake him But yet in this point the
condition of blind men is better the^ the condition of seeing men. For eien be
enemies and thieves, and rob man's inwit, while we follow the desire of eien,
we be made subjects to right cruel enimyes, as the expositour says super
illud trenorum. Mine eye has spoiled and robbed my soul. Better it is to man
to be blind, and have hie eien put out, then to have eyes, and be deceived and
beguiled with pleasures and flatterys thereof, as Gregory says upon that
word. Mat. 9. Better it is for thee to go without eyes into ye life, then to
have eyes, and to be sent into fire without end.

Of Deafness. Chap. 21.
Deafness is privation and let of hearing, Cophosis Surditas Deafness
that is the gate of the inwit, as Constantine says. Sometime it happens,
that the hearing is all withdrawn and lost, and then it is properly called
deafness, and comes of humors, that stop the sinews of hearing, and the
hoales of the ears: Insomuch that no manner noise may come therein: And
sometime by less humors it is some deal taken away, and then it is called
thickness of hearing.

Sometime there is noise therein and ringing, so that the patient weeneth, that
he be fast by a mill, or by organes: and this comes of great and thick
ventositie closed within. And sometime this is continual: and then it comes
of some privy and special cause. And sometime it comes and goes, and then
it comes of some far cause. Sometime for stopping, nothing is heard outward,
but the hearing is set a work with inward things: Thinks or supposes.
so that the patient weeneth, that the noise be without, that he hears,
though it be within, and so the hearing is deceived. In many other wise man's
hearing is let. Sometime in the ear is ache or a postume, and comes of heat
that dissolueth and deals, or of cold that reueth and constrayneth. And if
it come of heat, the ache is sharp, and the place is read: hot things
grieve, and cold helps. And if it come of cold, the ache is heuie and
grievous, and the place is pale: cold things grieve, and hot things help.
Sometime it comes of an hot postume, and then with the foresaid signs and
tokens is a strong fever Always with a postume of ye ear comes a Fever, but
more light and with less ache, when cold is the cause, then when heat is the
cause. Sometime is left in the ear, a wound of an old Postume, and that is
known by ache and by tickelyng, and also by quitter that runs out thereof.
Matter.
Sometime worms breed in the ears, of hot humors and clammy, by enclosing of
the spirit of life: the tokens of worms is itching and tickling, and sometime
they be seen in the ears, if the ear be set in the Sun. Sometime the ach
comes of outward cause, as of entering therein of water or of gravel. And
sometime of smiting, the token whereof is bleeding. But sometime it comes of
superfluity of blood, and straightness of the place. Vnde Constantinus: If
blood comes suddenly out of the ears, and without ache, and without cause
openly known: it betokens that somewhat is in the head, that kind labors
to put out, and trauayleth therefore, then in the beginning it needs that the
ears be cleansed.

Seek other passions of the ears, spoken of before, in li. 3. de Auditu, and
li. 3. de Aure. for there this matter is greatly treated of. Then if the ache
of ye ear, comes of heat and without a postume, the help is with cold
medicines, and alteratiues: for the sore place shall be baumed with oil of
roses or of vyolets, and with such other. Such Oils luke warm shall be
dropped into the ears. And if it come of cold and without a Postume: the cure
is with hot alteratiues, as with Oleo ^^urino, Ruta^io, and other such. And if
it be with a hot Postume: then men must work first with cold maturatiues,
rippings, and then w^^h mundificatiues: and in a contrary cause we must use
contrary medicines. And if the postume be broke, which is known by the running
of the quitter, then first the wound shall be cleansed, and then healed and
closed. The cleansing thereof is with honey meddeled with wine, and dropped
therein. It is healed and closed with powder of Frankencense and Masticke, and
other such. If worms be therein, or come thereto: then bitter joyce shall be
dropped therein, as of persile, or of wormwood, and of leeke. Also bitter oil
of bitter Almondes shall be dropped in, into the ear: with such medicines
Worms be slain, and when they be rotted, they come out with quitter. And if
gravel come into the ear, it must be wiselye drawn out: and if it may not
be, the ears shall be baulmed with hot ointment, and men shall excite
sneesing, or suck it out, or draw it out with an horn, or with a
cupping-cup. To put off deafness or at lest to be relieved, many things
help, that Constantine speaks of: but among all, Balsamum dropped into the
ear helps best, but yet if deafness be from the birth, it is incurable.
Also if it dureth 3. years, uneath it is help. The ringing of the ears that
comes of ventositie, shall be help with things that extenuate ve^tosities,
as with Anneis, Calament, Origon, and such other: with stiffeling thereof
ringing of ears is help. This suffices to speak of the passions of ye
ears, and of remedies at this time.

Addition
Also three causes there are of this impediment that may come to a man: by
nature, if so not curable: the second, by some stroke, which having ouerstunned
the powers, will hardlye be recovered: The third by humor the which does
opilate and stop the Organes of hearing, there is cure, take the gall of an
Hare, mix it with the grease of a Fox, and with black wool, install this
into the ear, also the fat of an E^le, and also take the juice of wormwood,
temper it with a Bulls gall, and so in black wool stop the ear, etc.

Of Polipus superfluous flesh, Cap. 22.
Polipus. Excrecensia carnis in naso, a fleshy humor growing in the nose.
POlypus is superfluity of flesh growing of the nosethrilles, bredde of
superfluity of humors. Always with this passion and evil comes horrible
stink: and yet he that has this evil, feels not the stink, and that is
for stopping of the sinewe of smelling Such one deemeth not between good
smellyng and stinking. But stench of the nosethrills and Polypus comes in
this manner: thick humors and gleymie run and come to the flesh within the
nosethrills, and there were thick, and hard, and turn as it were into the
substance of flesh by long time, and by working of heat: the which matter
being corrupted, a sumositie that is resolved and comes out thereof by
breathing that is meddeled with the air, breeds great stench: and such an
evil is called Polypus. And sometime moisture comes down to the nosethrils,
and the spongie poores of the nosethrills drinks up that moisture, and there
that moisture rooteth, and breeds corruption and stench. And sometime hot
humors by their sharpness breeds whelkes in the nosethrilles, and these
whelkes breeden as it were botches, and fleyn the place: and so as well of
corruption of flesh and of humors, as of straightnes of breathing, when the
brain may not be purged, of necessity there breeds stench. Then the first
remedy against this passion and evil, is, that the head be purged with strong
and couerable medicines: and then the running of humors shall be let.
Secondly, the Patient shall draw and suck in at the nosthrills hot water,
that the gleymie humors may be dissolved and departed, and brought out of
that place. To cleanse the nosethrils helps Pilulae Deacastoriae, with the
juice of rewe, and luke warm wine resolved and put into the nosethrills. To
let the running of the nose, the grains of white Thus helps wonderfully, if
they be often taken. And if this evil Polypus be conformed first with
purgations and with vnstopping powders, and with fretting medicines, it shall
be help that way, or else by cutting and keruing, Launcing. Skill, Addition
as it is more plainlye taught in the craft of Surgerie.

Of two kinds, the one is a bytle nose, sometime as big as a cats head: the
other is, impostumation growing within the nosethrills, and causes the
diseased, to speak in the nose, termed snoching: and the nose swelling
outward, is called a gawdie nose, or a toti nose. The cause comes of gross
humor, or pullyng much the top of the nose. The cure or remedy, the powder of
Dragagant with a little hopie, and make a tent, and put it up into the
nosethrill: or the juice of black iuie, in cotton.

Of the disease of the nosethrills. Cap. 23.
Often the nosethrills have running of blood, and that comes in mal^s, only
of three causes. The running comes from the brain, and then it comes with
sneesing and with ach, and pricking in ye forhead: or it comes from the
liver, and then the ache is in the right side, and bleeding at the right
nosethrilles: or it comes of the mylt, and then the ache is in the left
side, and bleeding in the left nosethrill. Beside all this, in women bleeding
comes of the mother, and then the ache is about the navel. Sometime this
bleeding is profitable, and sometime not profitable. When it happens in a
sharp ague, and in frenzy, in the day of changing by moving of kind, and
then it is wont to be good, and not good when it comes before the day of
changing: Before ye change or nevvbloone.
for it is good when it comes before the chaungable day through great boylyng
and fervor of ye blood within: which with his sharpness, makes running and
bleeding. In this manner and many other, comes flux and bleeding, whether
the bleeding be of changing or following the evil, the bleeding shall not be
stinted in the beginning, least it let the changing of the evil: or least the
blood draw to some other parts, and make worse tokens following ye evil, as
stiffeling and such other. And if the bleeding increase too hastelye, and the
patient is strong in ye place there the sore is, he shall be let blood: and also
the utter parts shall be bound and strongly constrained, and restraining
medicines shall be put to the Temples and to the forhead: and water with
vinegar shall be thrown in the face. If the bleeding comes of the liver, a
copping cup shall be set upon the place of the liver: and if it comes of the
milte, set it on ye milt: and if it comes of the mother, set it on the
mother, or upon the pappes.

Addition
Riues in Greek, Nares in latin, the nostrells, which be the organes of the
brain, by which the brain does attract and expulse the air, without the
which no man can live, and without the nosthrills no man can smell: and the
nosthrill; be the emunctory places of the brain, by the which reume is
expulsed and expelled. The cause of this impediment comes. 3. manner of
ways, through abundance of humor. Also by apostumation, lieng betwixt the
brain, and the organs of the nostrels. The third comes by apostumation
growing in the nosthrills. The remedy, sternutations, gargarises: beware of
too much drinking of wine, and of the fat of eeles and Samon.

Of stinking of the mouth. Ca. 24.
Fetor narium or Fetor aisellaru, stench of the mouth.
STinking of ye mouth comes sometime of corruption of the teeth, and of the
gums, and sometime of whelkes and of pimples of the mouth, and of the roof:
sometime of evil disposition and doing of the breast, and of the spiritual
members: sometime of rotted humors of the stomach: and sometime of universal
and whole infection of the body as it fares in Lepers, The breath of the
lepers does infect
the breath of them stinketh and infecteteth other: sometime of eating of
stinking things, as it fares in them that always eat garlike, onions, and
leekes: and sometime of the corruption of the spiritual members, and of the
universal corruption of those humors, which be infect: this stinking may be
hid and not cured, for such stink is continual, and comes by seasons. The
stink that comes of ye vice of the stomach is cold, and comes and goes
in a manner, for it is great before meat and little after meat by noone:
Fasting breath is stronger* but after meat almost (...) away for the time.
and this may well be cured with cleansing and sweet smelling, and
comfortatiue medicines. The^ first the matter that is in the stomach and is
cause of the stink, shall be defied, departed, and put out: often after eating,
spuing shall be excited, that the chambers of the stomach, may be cleansed and
purged of rotted meats, and the patient shall beware and spare meats, yt be
disposed to rotting: and he shall use sweet smelling wine to comfort him. If
it come of other cause, as of rotted teeth or of gums, the teeth shall be
drawn out that be the cause thereof: or the gums shall be froted and cleansed
with seething of roses in wine: or they shall be washed with vinegar luke
warm: the gums and the roots of the teeth shall be froted and cleansed with
powder of Thus and Masticke and with honey.

To chew cloves is a good help to mitigate the loathsome air for the inner
parts, Addition
but the rankenesse that comes from the arm holes, must be cured by letting
blood, or some good purgation, and commonly such children as be begotten in
such heat of blood: are choked in the matrixe, and so be dead borne, or if,
they live, they are very scuruie and scabbed, and of a gross complexion.

Of tooth ache. Cap. 25.
TOoth ache comes sometime of the vice of the stomach: Sometime of vice of
the brain, when cold humors or hot rumaticke infecteth the sinews of the
teeth: and breeds ache: of vice of the stomach, when it comes of hot
humors that be in the stomach, from the which sumositie being resolved and
dealed, comes upward, and biteth, and pricketh, and grieueth the sinews and
roots of the teeth, and breeds therein ache and stench also. If it come of
sharp biting humors, the ache is sharp and pricking, with redness of the
face, with roughness and dryness of the throat, with thirst and bitterness of
the mouth. If it come of cold humors, the ach is less with grief of head,
with swellyng and palenesse of face, with sower bolking and vnsauerines of
mouth, tooth ache, that comes of ye brain, dureth long, without coming and
going: for sometime it dureth ten hours, and more. The ache that comes of ye
stomach, dureth some hours or three, and rests afterward. The causes of
Tooth ache (as Constable. says) are rottenness and stench, breaking and thirlyng,
wagging and failing, and hear, and filth. The teeth be thirled, Riuen or
cracked.
and sometime broke, and sometime changed and turned in color, they be
sometime citrine, green, or black: and all this comes of rotted moisture,
that comes out of the stomach, to the sinews and strings of the teeth: and
thereof comes locking, wagging, and moving, and sailing of teeth: for sharp
humors in the roots of the teeth, thirle the teeth, and wastes them, and
makes them wagge: and so they be cause why teeth fall, when the roots fail
and rot. Worms breed in the cheek teeth of rotted humors that be in the
holownesse thereof: and this is known, by itching, and tickelyng, and
continual digging and thirling, and by stenche that comes thereof, and in
many other wise. Look before, in libro quinto in the tretise of teeth. These
sorrowful passions of teeth if they come of vile humors that be in the brain,
or in the stomach, the teeth shall be often purged and cleansed, and made
clean with couenable purgations and cleansing. Of all those Constant. speaks
at the full. Worms of ye teeth be slain with Mirre and Op^um: teeth that
wagge, be fastened with Ensence, and Masticke, and the same does Gargarismus
made of gallis and of the skin of a Pomegranade, and of Balausha with vinegar.

Of the pain of the teeth in young folk, Addition
it comes of distemperaunce of bodily heat, as in pastimes, when the body is
over hot, they take a sudden cold, which increases rume, congealeth blood,
and breeds wind, which passing through the nerves and orgaines do hasten
pricking in the stomach, gnawing in the bowels, and aching in the teeth.

Of the tongue and lack of speech. Cap. 26.
ALso the tongue is grieved in many manner wise, Glossa. Glotta Lingua, ye
tongue
sometime with palsy, and then it leeseth wilful moving and use of speaking,
as says Constantine. The cause thereof is default of the virtue of moving,
that is excited by the spirit that comes from the brain, or it comes of
the sinewe that bears the virtue of feeling, if it be stopped with humors,
or with a postume: either it comes of the vice of the tongue his own
substance, as of evil complexion of the tongue, and distemperance that
cools, or else of cold, or of heat and drines, or else of some humor. Also
sometime the tongue has a postume, and then it swells: and sometime of a
fleeting humor that slaketh ye tongue and lets the speech, and the sinewe
of the tongue is softened and made too moist and too soft, and then due speech
may not be shaped by the tongue, that is so lightly softened and slaked:
sometime by too hot humors and dry, ye tongue is shronke and riueled, and then
the speech is all lost: sometime the tongue is grieved with sore pimples and
whelkes, and then he is let in tasting and in speking. Then if the substance
be whole and sound without any wem, and the speech is lost, that vice comes
of the brain, Extemity
or of a certain sinewe that is stopped. Sometime the leesing of speech comes
of the leesing of wit, as it fares in frenzy, there a man uses not
imagination in mind and reason, and therefore it is no wonder, though ye
speech be lost, that is the instrument of reason. Look before in li. 5. de
lingua sane and infirma.

Addition
By the tongue is not only the benefit of taste, but also the expressing of
man's mind: the tongue may have diverse casual impediments, but let all men
take heed of voluntary evil, lyeng and slaundering: the swelling of the
tongue comes of superabundant reume, or surfeit.

Of hoarcenesse. Cap. 27.
Raucedo Brauchos hoarienes
HOarcenesse comes of many causes: for it comes of dryness or of moisture;
or default of spirits of virtue. Of dryness in two manners: for dryness
makes the way of ye voice rough or straight: and of that roughnes comes
hoarcenesse and letting of the voice. Also of dryness comes strayghtnes of
pipes, and pressing of the lunges, and so follows roughness, and hoarcenes,
and letting of the voice. Also of moisture in two manners, either of moisture
contained in the veins, and namely in the blood, or else of steame dropping
from the over parts: for much blood stretches ye veins, and makes ye ways
straight, and so the voice is let. And also steame dropping into the wosen and
pipes of the lunges works the same lets: and so for default of spirit and
virtue, the voice is let: as it is known by that, that the strength of the
voice, comes of the spirit and virtue. Then if hoarcenesse comes of
dryness, it is known by dry cough, that grieueth and lets the spirit in
ye wosen of ye voice, or sometime it comes upon another sickness, and by
compassion: and so there follows another evil, when it comes of dryness,
that makes the pipes of the lunges straight and dry, and grieueth and noyeth
the spirit. Then breeds the cough of moisture, that droppeth out of ye
brain In this manner breeds cough, that lets the voice. Or else hoarcenes
is known by pinching and pricking, as it were of thorns in the spiritual
members, and as it were in the smalnesse of the neck, and leanness of all the
body. And it is known that blood is ye cause, by a cough that is some deal
moist, and by redness of the face, by swellyng of the veins, and sweetness
of ye mouth. We know that fleame is the cause by cough that is some deal
moist, and by vnsauerinesse of the mouth, and by plenty of spittle. We know
that default of spirit is the cause by feebleness and leanness of all the
body, and by seauers that goes before, or fasting, fl^xe, and all that makes
the body lean. Then if this hoarcenesse comes of hot cause and dry, the
patient shall abstain and spare salt meats, cold, dry, seyed and roasted,
and he shall use temperately cold and moist, and meanly hot. If this evil
comes of blood, he shall bleed: and if it come of fleame, men shall give him
purgatious, and other medicines, shall be needful in a cold cause. And if it
come of default of spirits, it shall be help with resumptiues, and with
confortatiues. The same is the cure of hoarcenes and of cough Thereof look in
Plato and in Constantine:

Hoarcenesse comes of a great heat, Addition
and a sudden cold taken upon the heat, or by over straining the voice, by
late drinking, and sitting up; also of infection from the inner parts, and that
is a sign of leprosy. The remedy is water of scab^ous, and of fe^^ll, of
hecris and buglosle, of each a quantity mixed, and thereto sugar can: drink
six spoonefulls morning and evening.

Of squinancie or strangling of the throat. Cap. 28.
SQuinancie is strangling of the throat, and comes of a Postume that is in
the throat: and there are three manner of Squinancies. A dangerous (...) that
must have help ^pedely.
In the first, all the matter is gathered within in a small lease betwixt the
wosen of voice, and the pipe that takes meat and drink: and is known by a
strong ache and sore without any swellyng seen without: and if the mouth be
opened, there is no swellyng seen within.

And is also known by sharp seauers, and by letting of the voice, and also by
the patients own dome, His own gu^^.
for he may nothing swallow: and this manner Squinanci is incurable, for often
it slays a man the first day. The second manner Squinanci is when the
matter is gathered in less quantity within, and in more quantity without:
and this Squinanci has all the signs that the first has, but it is not so
strong, and some swellyng is seen without, and this manner Squinanci is uneath
cured. The third manner is, when all the matter is gathered without, and is
called Sinancia. The tokens thereof be strong swellyng without, soft fevers,
and little ache, without difficulty of breathing, and this manner of Sinancie
slays not, but if the swellyng draws inward. This evil comes
principally of blood, and secondarily of fleame and Melancholia, and never of
Cholera: these causes are known by their own tokens and signs. The first
ruring of this evil, is letting of blood under the tongue in much quantity,
and garsing and copying or horning in the neck, Imboxing
and in the shoulders: then shall be laid to medicines, that case, ripe and
cleanse. Look before in li. 5. of the throat.

Addition
Augina, termed Sinachi or Chinanchi, among the Grecians, the barbarous word is
Squinancia, the Squinci: whereof are supposed four kinds. The first appears
not outward, and that is death, except a very speedy preventing the cause. The
second does somewhat appear more inward then outward, and that is not so
dangerous as the first. The third does appear inward and outward, and that is
not so perilous as the second: howbeit it continues longer than the other.
The fourth does only appear outward, and that is not perilous. The cause is
of reume, that descends from the head to the throat: it may come of vaporous
humors, ascending from the stomach to the throat. The remedy: first, letting
of blood in a vein named Cephalica. The second, purge the head with pills of
Cothie. The third, use gargaries and clysters, let the patient abstain from
meat that is costiue or binding, and if a bibit serve, have the present
company of no covetous Physician: least while he look for reward, the sick
gape for wind.

Of the difficulty of breathing. Cap. 29.
Difficulty and hardness of brething, Asthma Anlichte^ shortnese of ^^de.
is called Asma, and comes of double cause. Of dryness that straineth the
lungs: for when ye lunges cannot freely open and close, there follows Asma:
or when the lunges to let by some humor that is gathered in the uttermost
parts of the lunges, they are pressed and wrong therewith, that they may not
freely open and close, and then is a manner Asma, that is called
Sanguissugiu^^, and has that name of Sanguisluga, of a bloder, or of a leach:
for with vyolence it draws air to cool the heart. Sometime is much humor
within the pipes of the lunges, which lets and stops the lunges, that
they may not freely be closed, and then it is called Anhelitus: for in this
manner, trauayleth the patient in out putting of breath. Sometime is much
humor within and without, wherefore the lungs may not freely close and open:
and then is that same manner of Asma, Onhopnoisis. ^ects spiratio
ralled Ortonia, evenness of breathing, for the pacient trauayleth like much
in drawing in and putting out of breath. Sl^o^te bret^^hm happens to those that
may not lie dowar in their been
And so are there thee manner of Asini^s, difficulty of breathing, as humors
let the lunges in three manners. If it comes of dryness and heat, it must
be help with Oyntmentes, Electuaries and Syrops. cold and moist, and again
ward. Look in Plato.

This infirmity comes by tough fleame being in the pipes, Addition
or else that there is some fault in the lunges, that may be putrified, the
sirop of Isop is good: but beware of cheese, nuts, and new bread crusts.

Of corrupt spettle and bloody. Cap. 30.
Sputum. Ptisina. Speule.
ALso about the spettle comes passions, as it fares in Empticis, in whom the
spettle is quitterie and venomous, and also in Emptoicis, in whom the spettle
is bloody. Emptisna is a passion when men spit quitter, and this passion is in
reumatike causes, and in them that have postumes upon the ribs inward, and in
the lunges, and in other postumes of the stomach, and of the breast, and of
the lunges. This evil comes in this manner wise: while some humor droppeth
from the over parts into the lungs. the lunges be smit and beat, and of the
beating the lunges are defiled, and of the defiling breeds quitter, or
whelkes, and botches breed in the lunges, or humor comes to some place and
breeds a postume, and is there gathered and turned in quitter, and is
afterward put out and boyded by strength of kind, or by coughing and spitting
of quitter. But every man that spitteth quitter, shall not be called Empticus:
for Pleuretici, yt have a postume upon the ribs inward, and many other that
spit quitter, be not Emtici: but they are Emtici that be corrupt with infection
of the lungs, and with quittery disposition thereof. The tokens thereof be
these: quitter spettle, lean bodies, small necks, cough, difficulty of
breathing, bolning of the face, and the roundnesse of the eyes swells and
aketh, Emoptoici be they that spet quitter: and that comes of the opening of
some vein, or of superfluity of humors, and of fumositie thereof: by biting
and gnawing of some vein, and by passing heat: for heat opens the poores,
and blood woseth and comes out. And men say that it comes out by Diabrosim,
that is by sweating: and then the blood that comes out is clear, and little,
and pure, and without ache, and the breath seems hot: often the blood comes
from other members, and turns to the mouth, as from the brain, and then it
is with redness of face and of veins of the eyes: and many times it comes
from the lunges, and then the blood fometh with cough and travail, and ache in
the right teate. And so of other members, Right breast.
in the which Cholaricke blood is put out and purged, now at the nose, now at
the mouth, by virtue of kind in diverse accidents. And so the first passion,
that is quitterie spettle, shall be helped with medicines, that dissolve,
mundifie, and cleanse, but beware that it turn not into Tisike: for long
Emptima after Fluresim, a postume upon the ribs within, furneth into Tisike
within forty days, as Ipocras says. And the second passion of Emoptoicis,
shall be help with medicines, that cleanse and constrain.

By a man's spettle, Addition
are discerned the sundry infirmities of man's body: as if the spettle be white
Viscus, the sickness comes of fleame: if black like the color of lead and
clammie, the sickness comes of melancholy: if the spettle be citrine,
yeolowish, or glassie, then the sickness comes of cholar: if tawney or a
reddish matterye color, the infirmity comes of blood. The whitte spettle
not knottie, signifies health. The foamie or froathie spettle, a raw
stomach.

The gleerie spettle like clear horn, slack, raw and slow of digestion.
Vide in Viatico, and in Plato.

Of the Tisike. Cap. 31.
TIsike is consumption and wasting of kind humor of the body, Pertisi.
and comes of whelkes and of botches of the lunges: and sometime of a reume
dropping from the head into the lunges, and smites the lunges often, and
thirleth them and makes holes therein, and whelkes and botches, as dropping of
rain perceth a stone. And it comes sometime of too great dryness of the
lunges, that is soon rent when it is dried like as a vine leaf in the end of
harvest is blown away with a light wind. And sometime it comes of blood,
when some vein is broke in the lunges. Such blood sometime turns into
quitter, and infecteth the lunges, and breeds therein whelkes and botches.
Therefore Ipocras says, that of blood and of spettle, comes Tisike and
Flux.

By botching of the lunges, all the body is wasted in this manner: First, the
lunges by opening thereof, draws in arce from without, and serves the heart
thereof to swage the kind heat of the heart, and when the lunges be grieved
with whelkes and botches, and feels the grieuing, they withdraw their moving,
nor they spread nor open not duly, and so they serve the heart insufficiently
of air. Therefore heat increseth little and little, and the body is little
and little wasted: for a fever Clike comes with Tisike, which wastes ye
substantial moisture of ye body, for every one yt have the Tisike, has the
Etike: but not again ward. Such a passion is not rasely curable, for it wereth
stronger and stronger. And Constantine tells the cause and says, That every
wound is hard to heal, but if it be cleansed: and the botche of the lunges
may not be cleansed but with cough, and the cough suffers not the wound to
be closed and sowlded: for it spreads and opens. Therefore more quitter is
gathered there in: while some deal it gathers, and some deal it purges: and
so the Postume is incurable, while it is so unsteadfast. Then he that will heal
the Tisike, shall first heal the wound of the lungs, or it putrify. Of Tisike
that is conformed, these be the tokens and signs, continual heat, soft in
the palms of the hands, and sharper in the soles of the feet, redness in
the cheeks, straightness of breath, thirst, with roughness of the tongue,
smalnesse of neck, wasting of all the body, shrinking and riuelyng of nails
and of utter parts, lowness of the roundnesse of the eyes, ache in the left
arm up to the shoulder, falling of hair: and that is a token of death yt
comes soon, as stinking spettle, and quitter, and more stinking than it was
wont, betokens full corruption of the substance of the lungs. Such a one
shall be fed with diet, that cools, sowdeth, and restores, with meanly
cold medicines, that swage the heat of Feauers, and laxeth meanlye the womb.
But over all things beware that he be not too soon laxed: For of great Flure
comes death in, and life goes his ware, as Egidius says. Medicines that
moist and dos wast humors help them.

Pertisi I take to be Disma, Addition
or Othomia whesing, that comes of viscous fleame, letting the Organes, for
that the patient is more pained to draw in his breath, thou to put forth.
Drink Ptisane well sodde of barley, and running water, with a little licoras,
and Cardamum, which is a kind of grains.

Of heart quaking, and the disease Cardiacle. Cap. 32
HEart quaking or Cardicle is an evil the it is so called, Tromos in grecke.
Tremore or lectigaris, or Morbus officialis Cardiaca passio.
because it comes often of default of the heart: And there is a double manner
of Cardiacle: one is called Deaforetica, that is, opening hoales and poores,
for it follows opening of poores: the other is called Tremens quaking: for it
is selt with a manner quaking and moving of the heart. The first, Diaforetica,
comes of a hot cause, and of distemperaunce of heat about the spiritual
members. And so the poores are opened, and humors and fumositie be resolved
and shed, the which fumositie comes out at the poores, and is made thick, and
turns into sweat, and of such sweting often comes Dropsy or Etike: and often
such swowne for default of virtue and of strength. The Cardiacle that is called
Tremens, quaking, comes of a cold cause, sometime of melancholic, and
sometime of fleamatike: for superfluity of such humor in the lunges, press
and wring often either chamber of the heart, and the substance thereof: And so
the moving of the heart is let, and such be sodeinlye stiffeled. And
therefore such an evil is called Tremens, quaking: For if thou hold thine
hand upon thy heart, thou shall not feel the heart open nor move in due
manner, but with a manner quaking and simple moving. Sometime the cause is with
a light Fever, and sometime with a strong Fever: and then is more peril.

And sometime it is without a fever: and sometime melancholy is the cause, and
such fall into the evil that hight Incubus, or Phraltes, Sometime it comes
of default of the liver, that sends not sufficient feeding to the heart, and
therefore the heart fails and is feeble, as Constant. says. Sometime it
comes of evil disposition of other members, and the heart is grieved by
company thereof. As when running, fleeting, smoke, or other humor (that is
grievous) comes from the brain, or from the stomach: and so the substance of
the heart is hurt and grieved, and fails: and therefore such heart quaking
comes of sharpness of smoke, or of matter that pitcheth and pricketh and
bitcth the substance of the heart, and so breeds quaking therein. Also there
comes thirst, through pressing and wringing of the heart, and for strength of
heat: and so comes dryness, and thirst, and seething, and loud breathing,
for the air, for it may not open it self. Also quaking comes of
melancholic smoke, of dryness distourbing the spirit. Also sloth comes: for
kind heat fails, and thereof breeds sluggishnesse and sloth. Also of
default of the heart, and of feebleness of spirits comes swoning that is
called Spasmation, and that comes sometime of accidents of the soul, as of
dread that closes the heart lightly. Some of too great joy, or of wrath, that
opens the heart to soon and so spirits pass out by Euaporations, Solutions,
and shedding. Sometime it comes of accidents of the body, as of evil
complexion, of great repletion of meat and drink, or of great abstinence, of
stopping of the veins, and of pressing and wringing of spirits: and sometime
of too great sweating. And of this swoning, some that swowne dye suddenly, if
the hallow vein be stopped, by yt which vein the blood and the spirit of
life comes to the heart: or if the way be stopped, by the which the lunges
receive cold air, and put from them superfluity of fumosifies. And sometime
it comes of great pressing of the full stomach, or of great pressing of the
mother.

In all these perils if humor be the cause, that humor shall be purged in
due manner, that is in default. Men shall give the patient medicines
confortatiue and reparatiue, that restore the spirits, and brings them
again. If it come of great sleeting and running, or of great sweating, the
running shall be stinted, and the sweating let. If it comes of great
repletion the stomach shall be voyded and discharged. Against heart quaking,
men shall give confortatiues, as Diamargaricon, electuaries and medicines, in
the which with other confortatiues, is put Must, gold, or Margarite, or
Pearls, and bones of the heart of an Heart, Ambre, Lignum Aloes, and Spodium:
for all these help against the Cardiacle swoning and other such evils of the
heart. namely, when they come without Feauers, for in the Fevers we shall give
no hot medicines.

Another declaration concerning the trembling of the heart. Addition
The cause of this infirmity comes of evil humors, which be in the cells
about the heart, it may come also of much sweating, or weakness of body, of
grosenesse of blood, and of melancholy, the humors stopping the celles next
the heart breeds tremblyng, of whence proceeds thirst, and deep fetching
of wind, as also dullness, fear, and sorrow. To cure the same use Maces in
your meats, and mirth with godly company, and beware of pensiveness.

Of the fever. Cap. 33.
THe fever comes of dissemperance of the heart: For as Constant^ne says, A
Fever is an unkind heat, that comes out of the heart, and passes into all
the members of the body, and grieueth the working of the body. Also in Epid.
Ipocras says, That a Fever is a heat, that passes out of course of kind,
and grieueth the works of kind. And Auicen says in this manner: A Fever is
strange heat kindeled in the heart, and comes out thereof, by mean of
spirits and of blood, by veins and wosen into all the body, and burns
therein, and that burning grieueth the works of kind. Also Ipocras says, a
Fever is a flame that comes from the breast, and passes into all the body.
As man's body is made of three things, so be there three diverse fevers. Man's
body is of spirit humor, and members.
Man's body is made of 3. things: of subtle things, as of spirits: and
fleeting things, as of humors: and of more bodily things, as of the members.
Then the first manner fever is, when the spirits be distempered in heat, and
is called Effimera, one days fever. The second is in humors, and is called
Febris putrida, rotted. The third that falls in the sad members is called
Ethica. And Constantine says, that Galen lykeneth those fevers to good
lykenesses. Effimera that fever (says he) seems like to hot wine, of which
wine if a bottle be full, needs the bottle wereth hot of the heat thereof:
And the same working comes of an hot spirit about the heart and all the body.
And Febris putrida, rotted, is like to hot water: For when hot water fills a
cold vessel, it heateth the vessel by heat thereof, and so hot humors
heat all the body and the members. And a fever Etike is lykened to an hot
vessel full of cold water: for cold water takes heat of a hot vessel. So a
fever Etike, when it is rotted in the members heateth the heart, and
distempereth and changes the other humors of the body.

Of the Fever Effimera. Cap. 34.
GAlen says, that Effimera, one days fever, has that name of Effimeron, that
is to understand, simple: for it comes of distemperance, that is in a subtle
substance, as in a spirit, or as Isaac says in li. febrium, that this fever
has this name Effimera of Effimeron, a fish of the Sea, that dies the same
day that he has first life. Or else as Masters tell, that fever is as it were
the heat of one day: for in Greek, Meron is a day, and his heat passes
seldom yt space of a day, for always it fails soon after a day, or turns
into fever Putrida or Etike, as Constable. says, and Isaac also. And this fever
comes of an inward cause, and also of an outward cause: and it comes of an
outward cause in two manners, of cold or of heat: of cold, as of sudden
coldness of the air, when the poores be suddenly closed without, hot
fumositie is stopped and closed within, and of the beating, moving, and
stirring of this sumositie heat is increased and strengthened, and thereof
comes distemperaunce of the heart. Sometime it comes of distemperance and
heat of the air, or of the sun, when ye spirit of feeling is distempered by
smiting of the sun beams: and for company and joining of spirits and of
humors, all the man is distempered. Sometime of inward cause: for by heat of
spirits and of humors, in some case man's complexion is soon changed, as by
too great travail, and by too great use of hot meat, and of hot drink, as of
white wine and such other: by too great use thereof, often the heat kindles
and wereth strong, and breeds the fever Effimera. Among other feauers, men
fall sooner and lightlier into this manner of fever, and is hard to heal, and
is perilous and grievous, if it turns into the fever Putrida or Ethica. And
this fever comes specially of some postume that breeds in the clift
between ye buttocks, and under the arm pits: the which Postumes Physicians
call Bubones: and therefore not without a cause it is said in Apho. All evil
fevers be in Bubonibus, except Effimera. Signs and tokens thereof is ye urine
not far from whole urine, some deal high of color, and some deal clean and
subtle, the pulse is hard and swift, and often smiting, not much passing out of
temperatenesse. The other virtues, as appetite and wilful moving, be little
changed. This fever is soon help, if the patient use couenable diet, and is
well ware of that thing that grieueth.

Of the fever Etike. Cap. 35.
THe fever Etike hurts and grieueth the sad members, and has that name
Ethica of Ethis, that is Habitudo having and during, as it were a fever
turned into during disposition. Sometime the fever Etike is an evil by it
self, and sometime it comes by reason of another disease: and comes
sometime of too hot meat and drink, and sometime of great travail and
business, as of great studieng or of waking, and of other such that heateth
the spirit of feelyng: and so the spirit of life, and also kind moisture is
made hot and less, and so the Etike is bred. Also sometime it comes of
another evil, as of Effimera, or of the fever Putrida, that comes and goes,
or of a sharp, and of an hot postume. For often it happens, that Effimera
passes the third day in one qualytie, and appears in the skin of the
patient a manner darkness, wanness, yeolownesse, and wasting, and then that
Effimera changes into Etike. Etike comes most of Effimera, yt comes most
of anguish, wrath, sorrow, hate, studieng, great waking, and by such like
business of the soul. And it comes of a fever that comes and goes on
this manner: For unkind heat heateth and dries the members, and also of an
ague, for it heateth ye blood, or has masterie and wastes the substantial
moisture, When blood is made thin, it is not due feeding of the members, and so
follows consumption and wasting: as it fares in a tree that is dried in
Summer by heat and dryness of the air that wastes the moisture: or of
scarcity of feeding, as it fares in winter, when the leaves fall: or of
corruption of feeding, and of meddling and changing to evil medlyng and
qualyties, as to glassinesse, and brimstoninesse, and other such: as it fares
in men's bodies, and sometime removing of food is caused through default of
might in digesting of meat and drink, and restoring of that which is wasted
and spent, as it fares in old men. And sometime strong heat has the
masterie in the body, and dries and wastes substantial humor and moisture of
members: and that falls often and comes often in Etike of an ague, or of
accidents of ye soul, when the blood within changes the radical members out
of their savor: as it fares in postumes of long time during, that heat the
body and wast it: and be sometime cause of the fever Etike, or of disposition.
Generally these be signs and tokens of such a fever, noyfull heat even and
like in all the parts of the body. The second token is, that the heat is
light and not pricking, so that the patient feels uneath that he has the
feauers. The third sign is, that the color of the patient is wan^ as lead,
or else yeolow. The fourth token is, that ye body is rough, the eyes hollow,
with dry blearinesse, for the moist feeding of the eyes is withdrawn.
Particular signs be diverse, as such a fever is diverse. This fever is diverse,
as the humidities are diverse: for Auicen says, that there be four moystures.
The first is in the uttermost parts of small veins, that enters into the
Essencia of members and of parts like: and when this moisture ouerwereth, then
comes a fever that is called Putrida, and no Ethica, but thereof lightly
comes Ethica. The second moisture is in the poores of the members of parts
that be like, as a deawe, and is called a draw of Authors: and when that deaw
is ^uer chafed, then comes the first manner of Ethike. The third moisture is
changed and turned by working of members of parts that be like, in part of
kind and complexion of the manner of members, and stands in steed of things
that be lost and wasted: and therefore Authors call it Cambium, Cambiu^.
change: as when it is over chased, then comes the second manner of Ethike.
The fourth moisture binds and continues all the members together, and
comes of moisture Sparmatike, and this is called Glutinum, Glutinu^.
glewing of parts, and when it is wasted, it may not be restored: and
hereof comes the third manner of Etike, that is incurable. For if this
moisture might be restored, there might be again tourning from age to youth,
as Auicen says. And so as Isaac says in lib. De Febribus, the first manner
Ethike is lightly curable, and hard to be known, but if heat increases and
dries: the moisture that is nigh, is dried.

And then comes the second manner Etike, and this is light to know, and hard
to be healed and cured. And when heat increases so much, that it dries the
moisture, that binds the members togethers, then comes the third manner
Etike, that is easy to know, and impossible to be cured. In the first manner
of Etike, with general signs which be rehearsed before, heat increases before
meat. In the second, heat is felt more after meat, and in the third, most.
In libro Febrium, Isaac tells the cause thereof, and says, that moisture of
meat and drink is contrary to the kind heat.

And therefore sometime it stiffeleth All unkind heat, as in the first manner
Etike, that feebleth, and therefore before meat is great heat: and if heat
that is feebled within, suffices not to stiffle unkind heat, it is excited by
his contrary, and flies his contrary, and comes to utter members: as when
cold water is thrown on a lyme stone, yt is burnt, and not quenched, as Isaac
says. The third manner Etike is openly known, for the face turns into a
pale color and hiewe: for the subtle moisture is fordryed, and for default
or virtue, the nosethrills be thin and sharp, the eyes be hollow, the temples
be rough and not plain. For when the humors be wasted, the roughness and
joints of the boanes be seen, the moving of the lyds and of the brows are
heavy, for dryness of the eyes, and therefore the eyes cloase wilfullye, as
they were heavy of sleep: and for default of virtue and strength they be felt
cold and dry but by abiding, always comes up more cold and more. If they be
uncovered and naked, it seems that they have no guts, and the groping of them
is as the groping of a bourd. If the skin be areared, it comes not
downward for default of moisture. The pulse is feeble, thick, and hard: the
urine is like oil in lycour, and if it be shed on a stone, it seems as
oil.

The first manner of this evil must be soon help, that it fall not into the
second manner Etike, that is hard to help. And it is help by mean diet and
temperate, and by medicines that bear down heat: and that comfort and
restores that which is lost. And heereto helps namely an Electuary, that is
called Electuarium patris, and he must use to be bathed with roses, violets,
hockes, and other h^arbes that comfort and moist. And the bath shall not be too
hot, but as it were luke hot, least the humors be to soon wasted: and men
shall not long abide in the bath. He shall be anointed with an ointment, that
restores, and cools, and maysteth, as with oil of violet, with white home,
with milk of a woman that feeds a male child. And specially Platenar..
says, yt Goats milk, in the which stones of rivers are quenched, helps them
that have the Etike and Tisike, if they take it fasting, while the stomack^^ is
void.

This fever Etike, or Hectica passio, Addition
is taken for one of the kinds of a consumption, because it consumes the
natural humiditie in man: that is to say, it does, consume blood, and so
consequently nature. The causes of this fever, it is by too much meddling with
women, as also long continuance of sickness. It may come of extr^me labor,
which few hurt themselves with or by debilitie of some principal member. There
be three kinds of this fever: the first as a vehement heat, which is in the
blood, distempering the heart: the second, an ardent heat inflaming the
principal members, through the calidetie of blood: the third, does arifie and
dry up the natural humiditie in (...) man. Quality the heat of the blood,
wi^h cold herbs, barley water, and (...)perate meats.

Of the Fever putrida. Cap. 36.
FEbris putrida, and rotted fever has that name of rotted humors, of the
which it is bred. And Isaac says, yt this rottennes comes in this manner: of
evil humors and of superfluity thereof gathered in some part, by strange heat
and unkind, yt comes by some chance, there is a manner distroubling and moving
of these humors, and by that strange heat, the humors boil and be not
defied, neither departing is made between the evil parts and the good. And so
the good parts be not cleansed, but meddled with ye evil parts by such
boiling. And therefore needs the parts be corrupt and ros^^ed. Then when
thick matter and grease and gleamye, so joined in the body, moves by heat,
it needs that it be resolved and shed into vapor, the which vapoure
enters into the thing that is moist and thick, and bideth there, and moves
and biteth it self, and may not freelye pass out for greatness and thicknes
of matter that lets it: And so it is corrupt and rotten. And to this manner
rotting, the complexion of young folk is disposed, namely their complexion
is hot and moist, and be not disposed thereto, when the heat and moisture
passes. And cold complexion and dry is not so disposed to rottenness. And
therefore selde old men have rotted feauers, for dryness of complexion
dries and joins humource, and lets and withstandeth the departing and
shedding of matter that is and be meame disposition to rottenness. For
coldness fresheth, and lets the heart that makes boiling and seething. Then
it is openly known, that the cause that makes rottenness is moisture, that
disposes, and heat that mooneth humors, and makes them boil: And the
dregs thereof be not departed nor cleansed, but always meddled together, as
Isaac says. Therefore needs they be disposed to rottenness, and namely
straightnes and closing of pores in the body, helps to this rottenness. For
when the poores be straight and stopped, the superfluity may not be resolved
nor departed, nor pass out. And therefore it needs that the more moving of
humors be made by heat, and more moving and corruption: namelye, when such
heat is unkind, and rules not kind but corumpeth it. Also these causes of
rotting have other causes without* yt help them in working, as vnmoderate diet
and travail and also inordinate medicines, and other such, that work and
bring to corruption and (...) wards, when they be take (...) ward to the body
in v^^ue manner and vnceuenable time. Then of moisture, so corrupt in some part
of the body is resolved a hot, and a corrupt smoke that goes to the heart,
and distempereth and grieueth the heart, and then this smoke theddeth it self
into the veyns, and breeds in the body and pipes a retted fever, as Isaac
says and Constantine also. Then such rotted matter that is cause of a rotted
fever, is either contained in some hollownesse of the body, as in the
stomach or in the liver, or some where cise, and then it is cause of a fever
that is called Interpolata, ye comes and goes: or it is contained in ye
veins or pipes, and then it is cause of a fever continual. The cause of the
continuance of a rotted fever is corruption of a humor, and constraining of a
vapor, that inflameth and burns in pipes and veins. And so the cause and
the solution of al rotted fevers is known in general, whither they be
continual or discontinuall.

The tokens of the Fever Putrida, chap. 37.
OF these rotted Fevers proceed some general signs and tokens. Febris
putrida, or Humoralis, the putrified humors.
The first is, for the matter of such a fever abides long in the body: And
when a strange cause comes thereto, it heateth and rotteth in deed The
second signification is, that before such a fever comes grilling and cold,
namelye if the matter be within the veins and nigh to the members of feeling.
For of cold matter comes some smokes yt grieueth the sinews of feeling, and
thereof comes grillings, shiueriug and cold. The third signification is, yt
such a fever comes and goes by seasons, and cease openly, as it sureth
sometime in continual feauers. The fourth is, for such a fever breeds most
anguish, for plentre and thickness of smoke that is bred of rotted matter:
And therefore heat and virtue be ordained, that kind may deliver it self of
that same smoke. And this time is diverse by diversity of matter in subtlety
and in thickness. For if the matter be subtle, and the virtue strong, it is
lightly dissolved and shed into the body: And the virtue comes again to ye
members as before hand: And if the matter be thick and the virtue feeble, it is
ye contrary. The fifth token is in the state of ye Fevers, for then come
accidents yt betoken the complexion of rotting, as of head ach, evil breath,
thirst, and such other. The sixth is when bodies be not full cleansed in the
resting of the Fever: but yet evil qualities abide in the body: for which
qualyties feebleness abides in the body, and the fever and the axes come
again. The seventh is, that it abides not in one manner estate, as other
Feauers dot in the solution, but it rests all in seasons, and passes as in
continual Feauers between axes. Many other signs there are, that be showed
in particular Feauers.

Addition
This Fever may come diverse ways, by alteration of air, by inordinate
labor, overmuch riding and travailing, by surfeit: use good diet.

Of the Fever Cotidian. Chap. 38.
Cha^gable
OF Feauers that come and go, some come of simple humor rotted without the
veins and pipes, as of kind fleame, comes a very Cotidian: of red Cholera,
a Tercian: of black Cholera, a Du^^tane. And some comes of an humor
compounded, as a Cotidiane: some comes of a sour fleme, and some of glassie
fleme^ and some of sweet fleme, and some of salt fleme. And these diversities
of Feauers be known by their own signs and tokens. And commonly in this
Fever comes head ache, wearishnesse of mouth, heuinesse of body, first the
cold, and thereafter ye heat, and every day axes: and yet worse, for some
day comes double axes. Ague courses.
The matter of these Feauers shall be defied, departed, and put out with
couenable medicines, and ruled with couenable diet. But beware the Physician,
that it turn not in Nuartane, or in Etike.

This Cotidian vexes daily, Addition
his beginning is commonly after salt fleame, there follows dryness and
thirll, if the sleme be sweet, then follows sleepiness, and dulnes, if the
sleme be ^owre, follows pain in the stomach, and vomiting.

Of the Fever Tertian and his signs and cure. ca. 39.
A Fever Tercian comes of Cholera rotted without the veins and pipes,
Febris terciana.
and is not gathered to a postume. Some Tercian comes of kind Cholera, and
some of unkind Cholera, as of ritrine and yelow Cholera. If a Tercian comes
of kind Cholera, these be the signs and the tokens. It grieueth from the
middaye unto the third, and namely about the third hour: First with shiuering
and cold, and then with heat and with ach of the forehead, with bitterness of
mouth, with thirst, with ringing of the ear, and with much waking, the urine
is red, subtle, and thin, and may have in grieuing and travail 24. hours at
the most, and 24. hours in rest. And as the matter is diverslye set, and in
diverse places, so signs and tokens be diverse. For if the matter be in the
mouth of the stomach, the ach of the forehead is the more. And also thirst
with roughness and dryness of the throat, and of the mouth, and desire and
will ofspuing, the urine is high of color. And if the matter be in the guts,
the foresaid signs be not so strong and high, but the ach is about the navel,
and the urine is more high of color. And if the matter be in the liver, or in
the case of the gall, the urine is more colored with yeolow foam above and
about. If the Fever comes of citrine or yeolow Cholera, the signs and
tokens be some den^e diverse. For it grieueth first with shiuering, and then
with heat, and moves between the hour of Cholera and the hour of fleame,
and the urine is yeolow meanly and thin, but drawing more toward thinness, and
moves in uncertain hours: for it comes sometime sooner, and sometime
later, and has the foresaid signs, that is to wit, ach of the forhead, etc.
But they be more slack then the first.

The fever is sometime simple, and sometime double, as the Cotidiane or
Continual. That fever is simple that comes of one matier, rotted only in
one place, and that fever is double, that comes of diverse Cholera rotted in
diverse places: As a fever continual is double, that comes of diverse fleme,
rotted in diverse places. The sign and token of such a Tercian is, that it
grieueth every day. First with shiuering, and then with heat, and is most
grievous from the third day to the third day, and in diverse hours. The
vrme is mean in substance, and some deal read, and somewhat beshaddowed
above. And so when the cause of a simple fever Tercian is known, then first
diet shall be ordained, as age, time, and quality of kind as keth. Then shall
follow couenable medicines. First ye matter shall be defied with a sour s^rop,
Then when the matter is defied, it shall be purged with laxatiue Drimell, and
with other couenable medicine. If the matter be in the mouth of the stomach,
spuing shall be excited: but the matter must be first defied. For it needs
to do medicine to remove the matter that is defied, and not to move raw
matter, as it is said in Aphor. And the matter digested is known by the
timelye and sooner coming of access, and by slacknesse of shieuering and of
cold. And by increasing of heat, and by long during affliction, and by
thickness of urine. Then when such signs be seen of digestion, the matter
of the Fever shall be purged, whether it be double or simple, but always with
consideration and cautile: So that if the matter be simple, the medicine shall
be simple, and if the matter be double, the medicine shall be double.

Addition
This Fever vexes every second day, and there may be a double Tercian. This
comes of Cholar, and vexes in the veins, the Fever Causon vexes to the
lungs.

Of the Fever quartane, his signs and remedies. Chap. 40.
THE Fever quartane comes of Melancholia rotted without the veins and
pipes, Febris quartana.
and not gathered to a postume. And this fever comes sometime of kind
Melancholia, and sometime of Melancholia that is unkind. Of a fever quartane
that comes of kind Melancholia, these be the signs and the tokens: It
grieueth from the fourth day, to the fourth day, with grilling and rising of
the hair in the powers first: And then with light heat, and has four and
twenty hours in the geatest travail, and 48. in rest: And trauaileth and
grieueth in the hours of Melancholia, that is before the ninth hour, and
keeps certain tunes of arcs. After the axes, the urine is somewhat yeolowe,
and is in the days of rest, as it were raw and pale, or somewhat white and
thin. If the matter be in the stomach, the mouth is sour, with mistering
of the eien, and turgidinesse, and with other evil signs and inordinate, with
elengenes, and sorrow, with dread anguish, and woe, and other hard passions
of the soul. In the body is heaviness and stownesse, and indigestion, and
swelling of Ades, heaviness of the thighs, legs, and joints, unrest of
waking, dread in sleeping, wanness in nails and lips, and namely in the
time of axes, ach in lyndes and loins, and of the left flank and small
ribs, with swelling of ye spleen, with strength of appetite. For heavy
melancholik humor puts down meat and drink, to the bottom of the
stomach. And therefore the mouth of the stomach is void, and appetite is
excited. There be other manner Fever quartanes, that come with meddling of some
other humor, and are called Nothe. And in such fever ^uartanes signs be
diverse, which be meddled with melancholic humor: But our purpose now is to
declare the difference of those feauers. Then when the cause of the ^^nartane
is known in his own diversity, strong medicines that defy, shall be given
at the beginning: for the matter is sad and thick. And therefore men shall give
medicines, which defy the matter and cleanse, as Oximell simple and
Squiliticum, and other such: when the matter is defied, it shall be cleansed
and purged with medicine, that is appropried thereto. He shall be bathed and
slewed with hot herbs, which open and close, but let him beware of
melancholic meats and grievous. He shall use Electuaries and hot powders,
that comfort and wast, and change the melancholic humor: And he shall use
medicines yt glad, as Drascene, Diaborage, Leticia, Calingale, and other such,
and he shall be anointed with hot ointments that comfort.

Addition
Every third day, that is to say, two days whole, and one sick, and there may
be a double Quarten. This comes of melancholy, or of cholora adusted, who
that has this disease with the black launders, shall hardly be cured: use to
purge as aforesaid.

The Fever continual.cap.41.
Febris acuta. The sharp Cotidian
Continual Fever comes of humor rotted within the veins, of the which
humor smoke comes to the heart, and grieueth the heart, and breeds in the
body and Fever that is called Continual. Sometime this humor is simple, and
sometime double ^ Simple when blood rotteth in the veins and breeds
continual Fever, that is called Sinochus. And when it rotteth not, it creaseth
in quantity and is over set: and the fumosities that be moved and braten, be
made hot and distemporate and distempereth the spirit of life. And there
comes the Fever that is called Sinocha in flatiua swetting. And sometime
Cholera rotteth in the most subtle veins of the mouth, of the stomach, of ye
heart, of the liver, and of the lungs, that is called Causen: for it burns
and kindles the spiritual members. And sometime it rotteth in other veins,
and is called Terciana, and continual: and sometime Cholera, and blood rot
togethers in the veins and pipes, and if the more part of blood rot, then it
is called. Sinocides. And if the more part of Cholera rotteth, the Fever is
called Causonides. Then for diverse causes be diverse signs of the fever that
be called Sinochides, these be the signs and tokens thereof: The Fever is
continual, and there is sharp ach of the forehead and temples, strong thirst,
(...)reetnesse of mouth, read urine and thick, and some deal wanne The same
signs almost be in the Fever that is called Sinocha Inflatiua, except
wanness of urine. Also the eien appear bolning outward, with fullness of
veins, and redness of face, and heaviness of all the body. And in Causon,
and in the other, the urine appears read, and subtle within, shaddowed with
a manner of blackness with so great ach of the forehead and temples that the
eien and the temples seem as they were pierced with nails, with color in
the body meddled with yeolownesse. Thust cease not, with steadfast waking,
and toughness and burning of the tongue, with hard womb: of Cholera if it
have a default in quality or in quantity, then comes the ^^re of the womb,
and cholarike spuings and the same signs and tokens appear in Causonide and
Sinochide, and the diversity thereof is known most by urine. In these
continual Fevers, that teme of blood, and men shall be let blood in both
arms, if strength and age will suffer. The diet of such shall be scarce and
^elde, as crummes of bread washed in water, prunes sod; and such medicines as
shall abate and change the blood, as a sour siroppe of violet and other such
Against accidents of these evils, as against (...) aching and ach of the
forehead. and other such, it needs most to take heed: Sometime this evil
ends with sweat healthfullye, and sometime with bleeding at the nose, or
else where.

He that has this Ague, a smokye house, a lousy bed, and a cursed queen,
Addition
shall not need the Physician, nevertheless keep good diet.

Addition:
FEbris Ephemera, or Febris Diaria, Addition
this fever is the original other of all Feauers, this name Ephimer is said
signify a beast about the river Hyppanis, that dies the same day it
receives life, called Ephimeron, Aristotle. So commonly this Fever in one
day is vexing and void.

This comes of inflammation of the vitalles, sometime of fretting, anger,
thought, sorrow, or of great hunger and thirst, as also by breaking of diet:
The chiefest remedy is tempo^aunce.

Febris Sinochos, a Fever without rest, continually vexing.

Febris Sinocha, this both differ from Sinochos, because the vexed feels some
rest.

Febris Homothena, is known by the urine, that is dim and swart in color.

Febris Augmastica, The Urine is bliewishe and watrye in a diseased.

Febris Epamastica, The urine is red and bright, these three vrines do often
visit those that be sick in their finger and great toe, and sometimes they
cannot tell where. Nevertheless, (Conceit) which is the mother of (Follye)
through too much niceness increases to disease in deed: W^ise Physicians
can tell how to cure such Patients, unto whom is ministered golden Angels,
for daintye simples. The cause of these Feauers do come of the abundance of
wealth.

Febris Ardens, This is a violent Fever, hot and firye, one of the worst,
very dangerous, this comes of Cholar, differing but little from the Fever
Tercian. For the matter is in the hollownesse of the lunges and liver, and is
cause of great dryness in the mouth. Use Cassio Fistula, and the stroppe of
Uiolettes.

Febris Emphisodes, this comes of great heat, and after two or three fittes
the Patient breaks out into whelkes and scabbes about the mouth and nose.
Squamule
This comes of the inflammation of the Liver, to cure this Fever, and also to
prevent all other Feauers whatsoever, so preserve in men their natural
strength, and in women their beauty and youth. You must use of Lycoras one
Dunce, of Carawaye seed half an Dunce, of Cardamum half an Dunce, of Sage,
Hisoppe, and Cardus Benedictus, of each half and handful. Of Galingale minor,
a quarter of an Dunce: then bruise your drugges, and bind together your
herbs, and feeth all in a Gallon of pure running water, until half a pint
be diminished, and in see^^ thing let it be very close covered, and so let
it stand or ever you strain the same six hours. Then let your sodden
Licoras and Cardamum, remain in your strayned drink, and so use thereof
Morning and Evening at your discreation, for fourteen days, etc. Which
obscrued, I doubt nothing more, then that this medicine will be too good for:
some, that may chance to be unthankful.

Febris Hemitricea, This Fever comes of a Cholarike humor mixed with fleame.

Febris Epialtes, This proceeds of gross fleame, and makes the interior
parts to bourne, and the exteriall parts of the body cold, there must be
medicines to dissolve the Fleame, the patient is thirstye, and the tongue
furred and rough.

Febris Liparios, This is the Leprous Fever or scurnye, and comes of hot
Cholarike humor mixte with corrupt fleame, causing the inward parts of the
body to be cold, and the outward parts to be hot, first purge Flegma
and Cholar: sweat three or four hours, and refrain the open air. Drink
scuruie Grass in white Wine, warm the juice, two days, two hours before
meat.

Febris Tetrahea, This is a fever vexing every part in the body, this
comes of rotten matter, and likewise of superfluous dregs indigested, and
this Fever ingendereth the black saunders, he that has this Fever is often
yaning, provide to be purged, but not rashty.

Febris Erretica or Commixta, the commi^t Fever, this comes of two causes,
thickness of blood, the second of of Cholar and fleame not natural, let the
pa^ient blood in C^phalica, if of blood: if of Cholar in Mediana: if of fleme
in Sophena and Cardiaca, taking heed: both to ye age, strength and youth of the
patient.

Febris Pestilencia, or Epidimea, the pestilent agu^ or Fever, this comes of
infection of air, and many other ways, Mitridate in Barlye water is good to
drink.

Thus have I gathered the Feauers togethers, forth of sundry Authors, to the
end that they may be the better known, and for the same remedy of the
diseased.

Of fleame. chap. 42.
SOmetime fleame rotteth in the veins and pipes, and breeds a Feauers
Cotidiane continual. The signs and tokens thereof is continual heat, and
most by night, without warning of coming, heaviness of head, and wearishnesse
of mouth. Urine with light color, it is thick, and has eighteen hours in
most travail; and six in false rest. And sometime Melancholy rotteth in the
veins and pipes, and breeds a Quartane continual. The tokens thereof is
continual heat, but most always from the first day to the fourth day, and
comes without warning, with shiuering or grilling, heaviness of head, soft
heat, not ^ull strong And the difference of this last Fever is not lightly
known by urine. Also sometime fleme rotteth without, and Cholera within, and
then comes a Fever that is called the less Enutritheus. The signs thereof
be the same that be of a continual Cotidiane, and then with the same signs
late comes cold, but namely the utter parts wexe cold, the head is heavy,
and the eye lids be ^uer set with false sleep. And this Fever has eighteen
hours in most travail, and six in the mean, but that mean in the Cotidian
continual. Sometime fleame rotteth within, and Cholera without, and breeds a
Fever, which is called the middle Enutritheus. The tokens thereof are
continual heat, but it is strongest from the third day to the third, and
comes with grilling and with shiuering, with head ach, and with thirst, and
has.36. hours in most travail, and.12. in false rest. The urine is red, and
some deal wan, and meanly thick and thin Sometime Melancholia rotteth
without, and Cholera within, and breeds the great Enutritheus, that has
more heate^ and all accidents worse then the first. Sometime the urine is green
sometime black, sometime wan and discouloured: And all these be tokens of death:
and has 40. hours in ye most travel, and.12. in ye less travel. An vntunning
Physician may uneath know and ^eeme the kind, and the diversity of these
double Fevers: For as Hippocrates says in Aphor. There be not always certain
tokens of evils that be sharp, nor of health, nor of death, as Galen says:
for in such evils sometime a perfect Physician erreth for swiftness of
moving of the matter and the evil, and also for default or virtue of the
patient, the which the Physician knows not. And therefore to speak of these
feauers, we shall make an end. And that which we have spoken of before is
known by the doctrine of Isaac, Constantine, Auicen, Alexander, and also
Galen. And it is not unknown, that the lesie Enutritheus is cured with
difficulty, and the middle uneath, but sometime it is curable, and the great
never: but by Gods own hand, as Galen says.

Of rising or standing of hair. Chap. 43.
RIsing or standing of hair is a certain shrewde disposition, Ho^ilpila tio.
that comes in the body of feauerish matter, The standing up of a man's hair.
and comes before the ares, and shows of the coming thereof. And it
comes of cold smoke, that is resolved, and shed of cold flumatike matter
or melancholik. And this smok al to sheddeth it self sodeinlye into the
members of the body, and touches the sinews and the brawns, and makes with
his coldness, that the skin shrinketh together. and so straining the mores and
the roots of the hairs, closes and stops the pores. And this cold smoke
causes the hair to arise and stand up rough and straight. Therefore Isidore
says, That the rising and standing of the hair with gastlye affraye, is
called Horripilatio. And comes when the hair of the head arises and
stands up for some fear and gastfulnesse. For sodein dread gathers heat to
the inner parts. And therefore the utter parts being without heat runs
and reueleth togethers. And so in the utter parts of the skin vnwilfullye
the hair rises and stands. The same cause and reason is in rising and
standing of hair and quaking and cold grilling and shiuering in them that have
the Feauers, as Constantine says.

Of loathing. chap. 44.
IN the members of feeding fall diverse passions and evils, as in the stomach
Fastidium, wambling and abomination, changing of appetite, perbraking, and
such other, as Constantine says: and Fastidium is vnwilfull abomination and
wambling of meat and drink, and most greeueth the virtue of feeding and of
nourishing. For as Isid. says, Fastidium is said as it were making noise and
disease. For a man that has abomination, Disliking.
has noise and disease in things that another has solace and liking. This
evil abomination comes in three manner wise. In default of spirits or of
stopping of the sinews of feeling, or of to great repletion of humors hot
or cold. The first is known, for while spirits be instruments of virtues,
to excite them to their doing and working, by defaulte of spirits, the working
of the virtue of kind appetite is lost. Also the second is known, for the
appetite of the stomach is called desire, and comes of double virtue of the
virtue of kind appetite, and of influence, and helps the virtue of feeling.
Then when the sinews of feeling be stopped, ye spirit of feeling may not come
down to the mouth of the stomach to make appetite, and not causeless when
the principal cause sayleth the appetite fails. The third is known, for
since that appetite comes because of lerenesse and voidnesse. Emptines.
Then when repletion comes of humors, the appetite is let. These be the
tokens when the appetite fails, for default of spirits, Leanesse of all the
body, that comes of fevers, of too great fasting, of waking and of flixe of
the womb. We know stepping of sinews, by that the patient has no liking in
things that he takes, and then the stomach has great indignation and
wambling: for it is cooled for default of spirits. Also for the same cause, the
meat seems cold in his passing. We know superfluity of hot humors by
bitterness of the mouth, of dryness of the tongue with thirst, by hot
fumositie and smoke, that hildeth and strippeth the rouse of the mouth. Also
there is sometime yeolow spuing. We know when hot humors be the cause, by
some unsavory or stinking bolkings, by indignation, and by wambling and
heaviness of the stomach. Then if default of spirits be the cause, men must
work against those things, which make default of spirits. For if default
comes of a fever, men must work against the fever: and if it comes of
fasting and of wast of the body, men shall restore that which is wasted with
meat, and electuaryes, which comfort, and so of other aromatike things, men
shall make sauce that restores the spirits, and that comfort the mouth of the
stomach, as of Uineger and of Mintes, and other such well smelling things,
shall be held to the patients nose.

If stopping be the cause: If nothing else lets, it is good that the
patient be let blood in the middle vein of the right arm, and men shall give
him hot medicines that depart, and also hot things that comfort, as
Dyacyminum, and other such: except too great heat be the cause, then men shall
use a sour s^roppe, and then the matter shall be avoided and purged with
couenable medicine. And if cold humors be the cause, then the stomach shall
be purged with Benedicta, or with other couenable medicine, and with hot things
it shall be comforted, diverse meats shall be pro^ered to ye patient, though it
be some deal grievous, if he desires them, so yt the appetite may be excited,
as Hippocrates says, liking meat shall be set before the patient, and liking
drink, though they be somewhat worse then the best meat and drink.

Addition.
This impediment comes of a cold fume, mixed with melancholy and fleame. Also
of foolish fear of a fa^e heart, and of a foolish conceit.

Of Bolismus vnmoderate appetite. chap. 45.
BOlismus is vnmoderate and unmeasurable, Bulimos.
and is as it were an hounds appetite, Hunger.
and comes of coldness of the mouth of the stomach, and has mastry with
some humor. For strong cold by strength of thrusting and of pressing,
thrusts and bears down the meat and drink that is taken downward to the
nether parts, and so the stomach emptieth, by reason of voidnes and lerenesse,
desires and has appetite. The stomach is cooled by many causes, as by too
cold diet, and other such. And Galen says that Bolismus comes of too great
heat of the nether members, whose veins draw from the liver, and the liver
draws from the stomach by certain veins yt be called Miseralce. And thereof
comes sodeine empting of the stomach, and so comes strong appetite, as it
were of an hound, and vnmoderate. And is known by deep urine, for it comes
soon, and the virtue fails not thereby. And cold medicines and gross diet
helps them that have this evil. These be tokens of this evil: A man has
undue appetite, and eats more then the common doing is: and yet of his great
eating the body is not amended, but is rather made lean and wasted: With this
evil often comes the flixe of the womb. Also sometime the appetite changes
and desires no^full things, as coals, earth, salt, and other such. And it
comes of melancholic humor, or cholarike, yt infecteth the mouth of ye
stomach, and makes it as it were hairy: and so ye stomach infected by reason
of likeness, desires such things, as it fares in women that go with child,
and in them that withhold menstruall blood. In the^ smoke is resolved and
departed, and comes out of unclean blood, and infecteth the sinews of
feeling in the stomach, and changes appetite and desire. Then against this
evil Bolismus hot things shall be taken, yt comfort the stomach, and also
unctuous meats, that be araied in great fatness, so that the fatness fleet
in the mouth of the stomach, and breed wamblings and abomination And if a
cold humor and fleamatike be the cause, as it happens often: then the stomach
shall be cleansed within, with hot electuaries, and without comforted with hot
ointments. In such a manner an inordinate appetite shall be cured.

This greedy appetite is soon quenched, Addition
the cause comes of a cold stomach, good savors and wholesome smells, be
good to reuocat this impediment.

Of yoxing. Chap. 46.
YOxing is a sown of a violent moving of the stomach, Singultus Alexos,
Ligmos In Arabia Alsoach, Hicket.
and comes of a crampy disposition of ye stomach: and it comes of two
causes. Principally of too great repletion or of abstinence and wasting, and
sometime of cold: by these manner causes ye sinews of ye stomach shrink and
riuell, ye which being shronk, yt bottom of ye stomach is araied upward, and
the virtue of ruling and governance laboreth to settle ye botto^e and bring it
into his own kind place: and so of such moving upward and downward comes a
noise yt is called yoxing, as some men tell: or else as it seems to me when ye
bottom of the stomak is arered, ye air yt is in ye middle passes out, and
voideth by strength of putting of ye lungs: and meets with other air, and
passes by straight passages, and makes a noise, which is called yoxing. When
it comes of repletion, it comes with spuing of humors, or of meat: and
then comes volkinges of diverse savors, as the superfluity of humors is
diverse. The disposition of body is ple^terike, and also too great diet
comes before hand. If it comes of abstinence and fasting, it is known by a
fever or by a flixe of the womb, or by bleeding, and by other tokens that
make the body lean and megre. But and it come of cold, it is known by
coldness of air, or else by cold diet used before, and by such other.
Against yoxing that comes of repletion, men shall use spewings and other
doings, that voydeth and heateth, and dries. Against yoxing that comes of
abstinence and fasting, if it be without a Fever, men shall use things that
restore and moist. And if it comes with a Fever, it is the more perilous.
Against yoxing that comes of cold, men shall use things that be hot in
themselves, and in working. Also sneesing helps, and it be excited: and
dread is good if it come sodeinlye, Sodeine disquiet.
or if some shameful doing be put against the patient. For heat gathered
inward by shame or by dread, dissolueth and departs the fumositie and smoke,
that is the matter of yoxing.

This Alsoach comes of a cold stomach, or of some evil about the heart, it
comes of overmuch drinkking. Aqua Composita and Licoras, is very good, and
ginger bruised gross, and mixed in clarified honnie, and so swallowed down.

Of Spuing. Chap. 47.
Vomitis. Emitos. Vomiting
SPuing is a violent casting of meat, and of drink, and of humors, out of the
stomach, and comes in this wise: either by strength of kind, or by some
accident of likeness: and sometime superfluity of hot humors abound in the
stomach, and sometime of cold humors: And sometime heat makes seething in
the stomach, and dissolueth and departs humors, and puts them out, and
that out putting is spuing.

As a strong cold in the mouth of the stomach, by strength of pressing,
puts downward meat and drink, and is cause of out putting beneth forth,
so heat that has the masterye, moves meat and drink and humors upward,
and is sometime cause of out putting above forth. And sometime is caused
superfluity of meat and of drink, the which when kind may not rule it and
defy it, she puts it away, and delyuereth her self thereof, as of things
which grieve and noy her. And sometime it comes of quality of meat or of
drink, and of sharpness and biting thereof, that prick and bite the sinews
of the stomach, and excite spiewing. And sometime it comes of feebleness of
virtue of withholding, and strength of the virtue of out putting: So that the
stomach may not hold for straightness, food that is received: and therefore
it casts it out. And sometime it comes of strength and biting of medicine:
and sometime spuing comes when the nether parts of the womb be stronger,
and puts the superfluities thereof upward to the over parts. And kind may
not hold them, but has abomination and abhors them, and puts them out
by spuing. Also sometime it happens by pressing and rearing of the stomach
by noyfull company of other members, when they be by casualtie greened, as of
the mother. And so often spuing is a token and a sign, that a woman goes with
child, as Galen says. Spuing is good when it comes of the virtue and
working of kind, or when it comes as it should, and when it must be done
by help of medicine: and when it comes in the day of changing, and the
patient is relieved thereby. Good spuing cleanses the stomach, and helps
and serves the virtue of digestion: and discharges all kind, and releeueth
all the body of man of full many sicknesses and evils. And does the contrary
if it be not good. And kindly before all spuing, generallye comes moving and
quaking of lips, and forcing and anguishe of the spiritual members, wambling
and abomination, opening of the mouth, stretching of the tongue, stretching of
veins, of pipes, and of sinews, tears in the eyes, running out of sweat,
changing of the throat, and bitterness and infection of the tongue, of the
palate, and of the mouth. Then if spuing be needful, be it excited: and if it
be to much and noyfull, be it restrained and let. Against spuing that comes
of cold cause helps hot medicines and conformatiue, both electuaries and
ointments, as Diacetontem calidum, Dyaciminum, and other such. And against an
hot cause helps cold medicines and dry, withholding and constraining
medicines, as Zuchara, Rosacea, Diaradon, T^^osandall, and other such.

Addition
Inuoluntarie coming of this disease, is by malice of the stomach.

Of ach of the belly, and of the stomach. Chap. 48.
Dolor. fretting in ye body
Womb ach comes of many causes, as of heat that dissolueth and departs: Of
cold that constrains and wringeth: of wind that stretches and reaueth, of
a Postume that ouersetteth and thirsts, of hot humor or cold, that makes
the chambers and the dens among the foldings of the stomach gleamie. Whereas
heat is the cause, the ach pitcheth and pricketh, the bolking is some deal
hot, the Urine is thick, meat is well defied, the spittle burns with
bitterness of mouth, cholarike dirt, and yeolowe urine. And if cold with the
humor be the cause, the ach is grievous, great meat is evil defied, and
light and subtle better. Often comes spuing that is flumatike, and raw,
hardness of the womb, and sour bolking. If ventositie be the cause, it is
known by routing and rolling, and hurling, and noise, and unsavory bolkings,
by the which bolkings the patient raueth. If a Postume be in the stomach it is
known by a fever that comes therewith, and by pitching and pricking and by
burning and indigestion, and by haling and stretching of the mouth of the
stomach.

Then if heat with humor be the cause, the humor shall be purged with his
own medicines, yea, and the stomach shall be comforted with cold
electuaries, and baumed without with cold oyntmentes. And if cold with humor
be the cause, it is curable in the contrary manner. And, if ventositie be
the cause, it is curable with medicines that wast ventositie, as with
Diamaratrum, Diaciminum, and other such.

Great ventositie in the body, and namely in the womb, breeds ach and
gnawing, when ventositie puts himself among humors, as says Constantine.
And therefore it needs to succor with medicines that dissolueth and wastes
ventosities of the womb. And therefore Constantine says, That a cupping cup
without garsing shall be done about the Navel, to draw the ventositie
outward from the inner parts. For as he says, ventositie greeueth more in
many causes then humors, as it fares in them that have the dropsy: Of them
he sets an ensample in the same Chapter. Then who so will keep continual
health of body: shall keep the stomach, that it take not too much meat, for
perfect and chief medicine is abstinence, as Constanst. says in 3. chap. De
Fastidio.

Fretting of the guts comes of emptiness of the body, Addition
to poor men for ^^ck of meat, unto the rest by disorder, many ways.

Detertura torment. Chap. 49.
AS Constantine says, Tormiuium. Gnawing in ye belly.
often in the womb is ache and torment, that comes of humors engleymed in
the guts and bowelles: As the ach that is called I^acus and Colicus, Iliaca
passio, and Colica passio, and other such. Sometime these passions and euilles
come of wind and fumosityes, that stretch and hale the bowelles that be fold
and crumpled: Sometime of superfluities of humors, which grieve the
substance of the bowels and guts: and sometime of some Postume, that hurts
and grieueth the substance of the bowels. Sometime of the great multitude of
Worms that gnawe the bowelles and guts within: Sometime of company of other
members, that breed ach in the bowels: Sometime of sharpness of humors,
that fret and bite the substance of the bowels, and breed therein whelkes and
botches. And these evils and passions have their own proper causes and
signs. Then raw ventositie and thick resolved and departed from humors, when
it is closed with dirt in the bowelles, it breeds much gnawing and torment.
And if the fumositie or wind be resolved and departed from bloody matter, the
ach shall be stinking as the Commentour says. And if it be resolved of
Cholarike matter, it is pitching and pricking. And if it be resolved of
Flumatike matter, it is called Extensiuus, stretching and running. And if it
be resolved of melancholik matter, it is called Grauatiuus, fore and grievous.
And if it be resolved of glassie fleame, it is called Congelatiuus, freesing.
And if it be resolved of ventositie alone, then it is called Dolor
deambulatiuus, wandering and walking, so says the Co^mentator word for word
Super Io. and masters and authors use these words. This passion and evil
shall be cured with medicines, that cleanse and void, and destroy and wast
wind and ventosities. For when great superfluities and gleamie fill the
bowels, they breed therein right grievous passions and evils. For the
bowelles be bound and glewed with gleamye superfluitye, and therefore kinds
may not deliver it self of superfluities: Therefore needs follows ftretting
and gnawing of the inner part, pressing and wringing of the nether parts,
and full great disturbaunce of the over parts by smiting of fumosities, and of
smoke. And sometime death comes and destruction of the body, as it fares in
Iliaca and Colica passione. Often in such a case men lay to first, things that
nesh and moist the hard matter: and then some deal biting medicines, and at
the last needeful medicines that cleanse and purge. And so when the inner parts
be discharged and purged, all the kind shall be brought into due state and
being. When a Postume occupyeth the stomach or the bowels, of the matter and
stretching of the Postume is great ach and heaviness in the stomach, and also
in the guts and bowels, and by the quality of the matter, and of ye postume,
the anguish and ach is seebler and stronger. For in the more subtle and
smaller guts the postume is kept, the more grievous and perilous is always the
ach, for the place and way of the passing of dirt and of wind is more straight.
But heereto within and without succoureth and helps medicine, that mea^ely
cools and swageth, because of the Fever, and by reason of the matter riping
and cleansings because of heat and of healing, and sowning, because of the
Postume, and of the Botch that comes after, least the place abide botchy not
well healed. All these and many other be known in Viatico, and in Plateario:
but it were too much to set them all here. When Lumbrici, worms of ye womb be
cause, then is most ach. Lumbrici be long worms and round, and sharp at the
ends, bredde in the inner parts of the bowels, of gleamie and raw humors.
And when they be in the smallest and longest bowels bred, they be called
Lu^brici, for they be long as Constan. says. And if they be nourished and fed
in the nether great bowels, than they be called Ascarides and Cucurbini. And
of these worms be diverse manner of kinds and shapes, as they be bred of
diverse matters, for of salt fleame comes long Worms, small, and sharp. For
the heat of that fleame, that moves from the middle toward the utter part,
draws a long the matter and kind of the worm. And dryness moves toward
the middle, and may not spread the matter abroad, but draws it togethers,
and rolleth it, and makes it round. And therefore Worms that be so bred be
long and round. And worms that be bred of sweet fleame be long and broad:
they be long because of heat, for heat draws a thing along. And they be
broad, for humor sheddeth and spreads abroad. And worms that be bread of
sour fleame that is cold and dry, be short and round. For either qualitye
moves toward the middle, and is contrary to length and breadth. And worms
that be bread of kind fleame, that is cold and moist, be short and broad:
short for the coldness, and broad for the moisture. And these Worms be
called Ascarides and Cucurbins. For they be like to the seeds of Gourdes.
Glassie fleame, for too great cold breeds nothing that has lyse. These
worms breed hard ach and torments, and gnawing. Therewith comes feauers,
itching of nose, gris ^ating of teeth, abomination of meat, stoning and
raning, and leesing of wit, crieng in sleep, quaking of body, putting out and
gnawing of the tongue, when they have naught else between their teeth. And
this comes for company that the guts have with instruments of wits and
feeling, and with the cheeks. Then as Constantine says, it needs that these
Worms be soon put out, least they destroy and wast the body, and make the
members soft. They be not put out, but if they be dead. For while they be
alive, they cleave to the guts, and uneath go out. But when they be dead,
they be horrible to kinpe and abominable, and so kind casts them out. But
sometime they pass out, but they be as it were dead and dye anon. Also they
be slain with bitter things, as with Wormewoode, and such other, as
Constantine rehearses in the same Chapter. And all such bitter things should
be given with honnie, or with milk, or with some sweet things. For worms
love sweet things: and when they take to them so sweet things, they take
bitterness therewith, and slay themselves. For there is the hook hid under
meat. When the mother or the bladder is grieved, the bowelles be grieved for
company. For when the neck of the bladder is stopped, the bladder stretches
through the urine that is withheld. And when the bladder is stretched, ye gut
that lies thereto, is pressed and wrong, and let of putting out of dirt: and
so of ventositie and wind closed within comes Coliea passio. Constantine
says, That this passion is bread in a gutte, which is called Colon, that is to
say, hollow: that gut is the bum, and is in the right side of the nether
womb, be clipped as a girdle even to the left side. And this passion has
seven manner causes, as Constantine says. The first is firye heat and
cholarike, meddeled with feauers, and drieng and dardning the moisture of
durte, and lets outpassing and deliverance of dirt. The second cause is
thickness and greatness of dry and stopping meats, that let delyu^raunce and
out passing of dirt. The third is gleaming flume, letting and stopping the
ways of the nether deliverance. The fourth is thick and great ventositie
and Wind, meddeled with gleamie humors, stretching and haling the gutte. The
fifth is a Postume bread in the gutte, letting free out passing of durte. The
sixth is multitude of short and broad worms, and of long and round Worms,
that be dead, and cleave togethers in this gut, and may not have passage to
void out thereof. The seventh is vnfeelingnesse of the got, that feels not
the grief of durte, neither puts it out. This passion, of what cause so
ever it come, grieueth and tormenteth the body grievously, and has general
and proper accidents: For generally therewith comes spuing, abomination and
wambling, fretting, and gnawing, passing ach and sore in that side of the
womb, and hardness of the womb. And if it comes of hot cause, it seems
that the womb is sticked and pricked with needles. And so the patient dies,
but if he have some remedy. And if it come of a cold cause: then is felt
great greenaunce, but the ach is not passing but in one place. And if it come
of wind and ventositie, the ach stretches and spreads, and changes place
with grinding and swelling. If it comes of a Postume, there is heat with
ach, and Feauers with thirst and with roughness of tongue: If it comes of
Worms, there is torment and ach and abomination. And sometime he casts out
worms at the mouth. And shortly to speak, the evil is pestilent and
^^rreyne, slaieng anon, but if there be hastily succont and remedy. Then
first the causes of the evil shall be swaged, dissolved, shed and destroyed
with bathings and beatings, which dissolve, depart, and melte the matter, and
with ointments, as Anacison, Irilion, and such other. If it cease not by
medicines that swage, then men shall take strong medicines, that dissolve,
cleanse, and pourge: as it is contained in Viatico.

This passion has a cousin, that is called Ili^ca passio, and has that name
of a gut that is called Ilion, and is a small gut and long, beclypping other
guts about, and he is uncovered and bare of flesh. Therefore therein is great
feeling, and so this passion is called one of the evils, that is named
Peracute, very sharp. For as Galen says, it slays in one day, or in
twain. And therefore it is more perilous than Passio colica.

But it is cured in such a manner as Passio colica, for it is bred welnigh of
such causes, but most of a postume, as Constantine says.

Addition
Lumbrici, or Elmitha are long white; worms in the mawe, stomach, and guts.
The remedy is to take garlike; and use it with meat.

Addition.
Addition
OF diverse kinds of worms in the body, as Vermes, which ye Grecians ^all
Scolices, Lumbrici, Ascarides, and Cucurbiti. Lumbrici be long white worms in
the body. Ascarides be small little worms as big as an hair, and half an
inch of length, and they be in a gut called the longation, and these worms lie
^ickeling in the ^undament, or fa^t hale. Cucurbiti, be square worms in the
body: some of the fashion like unto maggets, of a swarte darkie color.

Also there are oftentimes in young children, worms like unto Bombax, of half
an inche long, having six feet, of a pale color, and some brown. There is
also Sirones, which frette the hands, and in the feet termed Degges, Then is
there also the King-worme, named Impetigo. There are Tettar worms, care
worms, and worms in the teeth: Oil of bitter Almonds dropped in the ears,
and the juice of Rewe, and Oil of Wormewoode, kills the worms in the ears.
To cure the bexing of Astarides, Garlic in meats, because they breed of
cholar and flegmatike humors. For the dispatche of Lumbrici, take worm seed
bruised in Ale, or sweet wines fasting. Cucurbiti, these worms lyeng in the
mawe, come of abundaunce of fleame. Aloes cicotrine is good to kill these
worms, and Garlike with the meats for nine days.

Impetigo, Zerua or Zarua, called of the Greeks Lichen, of some Lichena. There
are two kinds, the visurous scab and watrie is called a King worm, the other
is a dry Tettarithis is infectious, and is soon taken by lyeng in an unclean
bed. The dry scabbe comes of melancholy, the wet comes of putrified
fleame and corrupt blood. Sometimes there grows worms in the body of
unaccustomed forms, after the superfluousnesse of the humor, by yt which they
are ingendered, some two, three, four, five, six, or seven yeardes long,
some round, and some flat, and of the color of ashes, and of Crickets without
feet. There are that have feet very short, as the Caterpiller: whereof some
be two inches long, and some more.

Forth of the secrets in nature proceed many deformed and rare worms, which
sometimes amaze the beholders. To keep the bodies from such worms, keep
temperate diet, and when there is fealte within the body any unwonted fretting
or gnawing, drinks the filyng of the Elephants soothe, made into a kind of
duste, with the powder of the Leaves of Tamariske, or else of the Pomegranate,
in a temperate Aqua vitae, and it shall speedely destroy all such impediments.

Of Dissenteri^. Cap. 50.
Dissinteri a al^o called ^xulceratio in restinoru A slixe.
ALso the womb is grieved with slyding and slippernesse, and with sharp biting
of meat and of drink, and of humors: as it fares in three manner flixes of
the womb, which are named, Dissenteria, Lienteria, and Diarna.

These be three diverse flixes: for as Constantine says, and Plato also,
Dissenteria is a flixe of the womb with flieng and shauing of the guts, and
with bloody dirt, and has that name of Discendendo, to cut and divide: for in
that evil the guts be cut, and divided. And comes of kind Cholera, or
unkind: and fretteth and gnaweth, and flies and shaueth the guts. And
sometime of salt fleame: and sometime of Melancholia adusta: sometime of evil
disposition of the liver, and is called Epatica. For the liver is called in
latin Eparepat^s: Sometime of feebleness of the virtue of withholding, that
m^ye not withold the blood: sometime of too great plenty of blood, and
namely of them that have some member, or some lim cut of. For when blood, that
is used to feed and to nourish ye member that is cut off, finds not that
member to feed, breeds superfluity in the liver, and is cast ^rit for
default of place to keep it: and is called properlye Dissenteria. And comes
o^te of evil disposition of the guts: and then breeds three manners thereof.
In the first, the fatness of the guts is resolved and shed, and the dirt
seems as it were washing of flesh. In the second, the celles among the
foldings of the stomach be shaven, and is like to shauing of parchment. In the
third the guts come out as small pieces, and then be seen resolutions and
departings, that be fleshly, sinewie, with pipes and wosen. The first manner
may well be cured, the second uneath, and the third never. Also Epatica may
uneath be cured. Then of this flixe that is called Dissenteria, the signs be
bloody dirt, fretting and gnawing of the womb, pinching and pricking ache:
and sometime the ouermost guts be shaven, and sometime the middle, and sometime
the neathermost.

And by this diversity the ache is diverse now in the ouer-most womb, now
about the navel, and now about the neathermost: and by diversity of the
causes, the medicine is ofle diverse. Then first men use to cleanse the humor,
where the default is in, and then to stint the flixe, and that with sirops and
Electuaries, with plasters and oyntmentes which stop and constrain: and
inward medicines help best, when the matter is in the ouermost guts: the utter
medicine helps best, when the matter is in the nether guts. Then stopping
medicines and constraining, shall be both medicine and diet.

This infirmity comes of unnatural cholar or of salt fleame, Addition
of Melancholy, as also by some impostumation from the liver, and by vlceration
in the bowels, and it may come by great straining.

Of Lientaria. Cap. 51.
LIenteria is a flix of the womb, Lienveria Imperfect digestion Leuor.
with out passing of meat and drink, without digestion, and without any
changing made in meat or in drink: but right as it is taken, so it passes
out at ye nether end. And comes sometime of shauing of the dens and
foldings in the stomach: and therefore the stomach may not withold meat and
drink.

And sometime it comes of gleymie and fleamatike humors, that cleave to the
foldings of the guts and stomach. And sometime of a postume, for then the
stomach is grieved with meat and drink: and therefore by doing of kind, the
stomach is moved to put out meat and drink, ere it be deffed. This evil
shall be cured as the foresaid evil that is called Dissenteria. Diarria is a
simple flixe of the womb, with but passing of defied meat and drink, without
bloody dirte: and comes sometime of multitude of meat and drink, and of
fleeting and sharpness thereof: and sometime of Cholera, which has default in
quantity more than in qualytie: for if the default were in quality, then the
flixe should be called rather Dissenteria, than Diarria. And sometime it comes
of humors, which run and fleet from the head to the guts, and either biteth
them or makes them slipper: and then the patient shiteth foame with blown
belles, as Hyppocrates says, They that have seamie dirte in the flixe that is
called Diarria, have fleame running from the head. This flixe is cured by
scarce diet, for multitude of meat and drink is the cause. If it comes of
sharpness of humors, men shall give medicines that cool and moist.

And if it comes of humors that fleet from the head, men shall give such as
destroys Fleame, and makes it stint.

Addition
This infirmity does come of sudden sliding of the meat out of the stomach,
the mawe and the guts, without perfect decoction and digestion.

Of the Dropsy. Cap. 52.
Anasarca Iposatea, a kind of Dropsy. yposarca, Sarcites.
THe Dropsy is an error of the virtue of digestion in the liver, and breeds
swellyng of members as Constantine says. For while the virtue of digestion is
feebled in the liver, much superfluity is bred in the body, the which
superfluity is put out by strength of out putting, and breeds blowing and
swellyng of members. And the Dropsy comes of three causes generally: Of
unkind withholding of superfluity, and of unkind running of moisture, of
principal distemperance of qualyties of the liver. For while superfluities be
with-helde against kind, as menstruate blood and corrupt, and other such, the
withholding thereof ouersetteth virtues and breeds superfluities: of the
which comes bol^ing and swelling of members. Of unkind running of moisture,
comes dissolution and departing of spirits, and feebleness of virtues. And
superfluities that come of indigestion, breed swellyng of members by
distemperance of qualities.

The virtue of digestion in the liver, erreth in four manners, as qualities be
joined in four: and so comes four manners of Dropsies, by passing and
excess of four qualyties.

The first Dropsy is called Le^toflumo: and comes of distemperance of
coldness and moisture, and has that name of white steame: for Lentes, is
white. The second is called Hippo^^rca or A^^surca, and comes of
distemperaunce of cold and dryness. The third is called Aschides, and comes
of distemperaunce of heat and of moisture. The fourth is called Tympanites,
and comes of distemperaunce of heat and dryness.

These Dropsies come in this manner. While moisture and dryness be distempered
in the liver, the virtue of digestion is feebled, and therefore when that is
feebled, many superfluities are bred, and the virtue of out putting puts
them to the utter parts: and so thereof comes great bol^^^g and swelling. When
coldness and dryness be distempered in the liver, then likewise ye virtue of
digestion is distempered and feebled, and also the virtue of out putting is
somewhat feebled. And therefore he puts not out superfluities to the
uttermost parts of the skin, but the superfluities be held in under the
flesh. And therefore this manner Dropsy is called Bypposarca, that is to
understand, under the flesh, or fast by the flesh.

Of distemperaunce of heat and of moisture, by dissolution and shedding of
spirits, comes feebleness of either virtue of digestion and of out putting:
and therefore superfluities be not put out of all the body, but they are
with-helde within between the womb and Siphac. As^ites. kinds of h^ds^p^ in
the belly.
And this Dropsy is called Aschites, for if the wombes of them be smitten,
they sownoe as a Flacket or a Bottle, for Arch is called a Bottle. By
distemperaunce of heat, and of dryness, spirits are dissolved and shed:
and so either virtue is feebled. And then the superfluityes that come of
indigestion, which comes of heat, and of dryness, tourneth into great and
thick smoke, and are not put out of all the body, but withheld about the
womb.

Timpanitis, that which causes ye bellye to swell, and is cause of shorre
breath.
And this manner dropsy is called Timpanitis, for if the womb be smitten, it
sowneth as a Taber or a Timbroll. Then in the first manner Dropsy, is boiling
and swellyng in all the body: the utter part is white and nesh, and if ones
finger be thrust into the flesh, it makes as it were an hole or a pit, and
that pit arises afterward as high as the other flesh: the urine is
discouloured white and thick. In the second manner Dropsy, is not so great
swellyng, but their flesh stinketh, the urine is discolored and thin. In the
third, the womb is blown and swollen, and sowneth if it be smitten as a
flacket, and the urine, is red and thick. In the fourth manner Dropsy, the
womb is straight and strongly haled, and sowneth as a taber or a timbrell, the
urine is colored and thin, the neck and other parts be made small, and the
nosethrilles sharp, the eyes hollow and round: the first two manner Dropsies
be curable, ere they be confirmed and rotted: the second two, ere they be
rotted and confirmed, be uneath curable, and after never. Then he that has the
Dropsy is swollen in the body, soft, grievous and heavy, and is thirsty,
and the more he drinks, the more he thirsts, and the more he drinks, the
more he fails little and little, and swells also. To the^ which have such
diverse Dropsies, men must give diverse medicines: But such medicines help them,
the which destroy and wast ventosities, and wind, and humors between the
shinne and the flesh, and comfort the virtue, which destroys superfluities in
the liver. Of all these Constantine speaks himself only.

Addition
Abundance of salt fleame and waterish and over feeding of raw and moist
meats breeds the Dropsy.

Of the Iaundise. Cap. 53.
Hictericia or Ictericia, the Iavvnes.
THE Iawndes is a defiling of the skin without vneuennes thereof. And there be
three manner of Iawndes, as it is said in Plateario: yeolow, which comes of
kind Cholera, green, and black. The first is called Aurigo, for it makes a
man yeolow as gold. The second is called Pegenitis, which is to understand,
green: For it is grie^ed with green Cholera. The third is called Melanchyton,
that is to say, black: for it comes of black Cholera burnt. It comes of
strong heat and seething of blood, passing and changing into Cholera, and of
passing heat that infecteth the blood: and therefore this Cholera is borne
with blood to the utter part of the skin, and changes and infecteth the
skin. Sometime it comes of stopping of the oner or the nether hole of the
case of the gall: and so Cholera reboundeth to the liver, and infecteth the
blood: sometime it comes of a postume, or of a continual fever, which
changes and burns the blood. Sometime of corruption of air, or of meat and
drink corrupt: or of biting and stinging of a venomous worm which creeps. In
this manner the blood is infected, and is sent to feeding of members, and as
the blood is infected, so it infecteth and corrupts the members. With most
hot Iawndes comes infection of all the body, heating of the right side, ^^i
st, bitterness of mouth, ache of the forhead, ringing in the ears, urine
colored, and the foame thereof yeolow, or green, or black, and all that
comes out of the body, which is infected with the same color. If it comes
of stopping of the over hole, it changes and dies all the nether parts, so
that they be all strongly dyed. And contrariwise, if it comes of the nether
stopping: all the over parts be more dyed, and the nether less. And if it
comes of a fever, by virtue and strength of kind, and after the seventh
day, in some day of changing, with slaking of the fever, and with releeuing
of the patient, and with withdrawing of the accident, it is a good token: such
coloring betokens that the matter of the Fever is than purged. And if it
comes by strength of accident, as it fares often before the seventh day, it
betokens peril. For it is a sign and a token that the matter comes
upward, for likeness, or for fumositie, or for sharpness and biting, as
Galen says openly upon Aphor. And often such a passion and evil is cured by
blood letting, and by medicines, which cool and change, laid to: and namely
upon the region of the liver, for there the blood is most infected, as in his
own well. Also men give them inward in diet, and in medicine those things,
which swage and cleanse blood, and change evil disposition of blood. And if
it comes of stopping, men give medicines which shed and open: but not too
hot, as it is said in Viatico.

Addition
These three kinds of Iawnes. Agriaca yeolow, of some Penateleon the green
sickness: Melankyron, the black Iawnes. The yeolow Iaundes, comes after
long sickness or thought. The green Iawndes comes of yeolow cholar, mixed with
putrified fleme. The black Iawndes comes of color adust, or melancholy and
putrified blood.

Of Emoroides 1. Cap. 54.
Haemerrhoides. Emerodes and piles
EMoroides be five veins, which stretch out at the arse, of the which veins
come diverse passions and evils, as bolning and swellyng, withholding, and
flixe. And sometime by virtue and strength of kind, superfluities be sent and
drawn to the said parts, and the said veins being broken, the superfluities
be thrust out, and the body is delivered of many sicknesses and evils. But if
the flixe and running passes measure, then come many evils. And when they be
held by custom, then follow full great sickness and euilles, as Dropsy,
Tisike, Madness, Melancholy. These veins swell in this manner. The foresaid
superfluities and dyrte comes down to the mouths of the veins, and stop
and make the said mouths thick: and thereof comes swellyng. Sometime the
mouth of the veins, be riuen togethers, and made voystous and thick, with
strong dryness. And sometime they be burnt of Chirurgions for too great
running, and scarres of the burning are seen, and then they are uneath opened
or never.

Sometime the heads of the veins be stopped by thickness of blood: and
sometime opened over measure by sharpness and fleeting of blood. With too great
holding comes these signs heaviness of head, palenesse of face, and
wanness, heaviness of loins and of joints, disposition to Dropsy and to
Tisike.

With great fleeting and running, comes feebleness and leanness of body,
changing of color and of hiewe, ache and gnawing in the nether part of the
body. And if it be continual and passing measure, it breeds full great
passiens and evils. And if the mouths of the veins run too swiftlye, they
shall be stinted with medicines that stint by little and little. But namely if
the Evil be old, least the blood, be sodainlye smit to some member, and then
a worse evil is bred thereof. Therefore Hippocrates says, To them which heal
old Emoroides, but if they leave one unhealed, it is peril. And if they be
too lyghtlye cloased, they shall be opened with medicines that soften and open.

Emerodes or pyles, Addition
be veins in the extreme parts of the longation, to whom does happen diverse
times two sundry passions, the first is like teates, and they will bleed, they
be very Emerodes, the other be like wartes, and they will itche, and water and
smart, and they be named the Pyles: and in the same place does breed other
infirmities, as the falling out of the fundament, fistels, festures, and Puxe.

These impediments comes of malicious humors of the mawe, and in the guts.

The powder of ginger, and of a gall, wherewith ink is made, mixed with linseed
oil, and put to the place, is very good.

Of ache of the reins. Cap. 55.
AChe of the reins in Greek is called Refrenesis, Nephroi, Rines, the reins,
of a man's back
the which ache has affinity with the evil is yt called Colica passio. But
they be diverse: for Colica passio changes and is unstable, for it changes
every day from that one side to that other. The ache of the reins is stable
and steadfast.

The loins and reins have ache and passion, that come sometime of swelling,
Sometime of repletion of humors, sometime of wind and ventositie, and
sometime of the stone. All these breed full great ache and grief, and namely
if heat be the cause: and the sign thereof is the high color of urine,
sharp ache and pricking. If cold be the cause, the urine is raw, and the
ache slow. The stone and gravel, and other diners superfluities breed osle in
the reins: and that comes namely of drink of slimie water, and of gross
diet. For thereof comes stoppings in the reins or in the bladder, and
sometime changes into substance of stones or gravel, by working of strong
heat. They yt have the stone, have many disaduauntages, that is to wit,
difficulty of pissing, with Colica passio, and other such: for by stopping of
the stone, the ways of pissing be stopped, and then comes Stranguria, when a
man passes with difficulty dropping meal. Sometime the ways be all stopped,
and pissing is all forbode, and that evil is called, Dissuria: for of gleymie
humors in the reins and in the bladder comes the stone, in young men,
namely in the reins, and in children in the bladder, for the neck of their
bladder is straight, and lets the passage of the matter, and so the stone is
bred, as Costantine says. Also in children the urine is thick, because of
gleimie diet, and gleymie things is more able to be rouled and to cleave
togethers: and therefore often the stone breeds in small children. And if the
stone or the matter be in the reins, it is known by sleeping of the foot and
leg on the left side. And if it be in the bladder, the ache is about the share
and twiste, between the genitours, and the hole at the ridge bones end. Also
the gravel that comes of the reins be read, and if they come of the
bladder they be white: and a stone that is bred of gleymie humor, is easily
dissolved and brought out: and if it be bred of gravel, it is hard to dissolve
and to be broken. And in women the stone breeds more seldom than in men, for
the ways be more large, and heat and dryness more feeble, to make the
humors rotlewe: and also often purgations, Copy or quauie.
for they be purged of many superfluities by me^strual blood. He yt has this
evil, shall be purged in this manner: They shall be often bathed in hot
baths, that dissolve, and open: and they shall be fed with meat and drink that
is easy for to desie, and comforted with medicines, that dissolve, and open,
and cleanse: and they shall be occupied with some business: and sometime they
shall be taken to surgerie, and namely children, and then young folk, for in
age cutting is perilous, for after forty year this Evil is incurable, as it
is said in Aphor. After forty year, be that has the stone is not saved.
Sometime comes unwilling pissing, and that evil is called Diampnes, or
Diabethica passio. Diampnes a passion in the bladder: this discale must be
cured with skillful medicines, and not vrish hasly corrections.
And Constantine says, that it comes of default of virtue of withholding:
for there is great strong drawing of humors to the reins, and great
superfluity comes to the bladder, the which the bladder not being able to
sustain, puts out with pissing. Also sometime it comes of softening of
sinews, and of slaking of brawnes in the neck of the bladder. Sometime of
heaviness of sleep, and of multitude of humors, as it fares in children
that vnknowenlye piss in their beds, and in dronken people: and it is the
property of them that have this Evil, to be a thrist always, and may uneath
have water enough, Diabetica passio, immoderate pissing.
as Constantine says: and therefore as they drink the water, so they piss
it. Sometime it chances of a humor that stops suddenly yt ways of the
piss and wringeth out by strength of pressing the moisture that is therein
contained. To them that have this foul evil, things that slake heat be
needful, and sharp sauouring things, that comfort and quench the heat of the
reins, and brings the sinews that be softened to their own due state, and
this is done by drenches, electuaries, plasters, and ointments. But a wise
leach and a ready, shall always beware, that he lay not in this case, medicines
that be too moist, for they making it more soft should grieve: Nor too dry
things, for such should sharp the heat, but they shall lay too, now these,
now them, that the sore place be moisted and cooled by cold things, and that
the moisture be constrained by dry things, and the sore member comforted. Over
all things the diet shall be temperate: for too hot things grieve the reins
and loins. Also too cold things let the virtue of digestion, in substance
and hollownesse of the liver. It is good to give to such men temperate and
compouned medicines: for often the matter is such and the cause also.

Addition
Diverse impediments are in the back, the cricke, aching, straining of powers,
abundaunce of reume is the cause of pain.

Of Hemia, Cap. 56.
Kyli. Names.
HErnia is a skin in the womb, and is called Siphac, and breaks sometime.
Siphae is a skin that departs the bowels from the gendring members: as
Diafragma is a skin, that departteth and is set between the bowelles and the
spiritual members: and so Hernia is as it were the nether midriffe, and
Diafragma the over midriffe. And for Hernia the nether midriffe holds up the
bowels, if it hap that this Hernia be broke, a great deal of the bowels fall
down into the codde of the genitours. Then if it happen that this skin, that
is called Hernia be broke, by stretching and reaching, or working of heat
constrained, or ^laked and softened by moisture: then it falls that the
bowelles slide downward into the codde of the genitors, and that not without
great soreness. This skin is dealed or slaked, sometime by an outward cause,
as by too great travail of body, or by great strogling and wrestling.
Sometime by smiting or by falling, or by such other. And sometime by too great
wayght and weying downewarde of the other members, and by forcing; as by too
great singing and crieng.

Sometime by an outward cause, and by great strength of heat and sharpnes of
hot humors cutting and slitting the skin. Sometime by too great moisture,
slaking and stretching the sinews and brawnes, and in what manner it befall, it
is more resely curable in the beginning, and namely in a young men. And if that
breach be great and old, and with breaking of the sinew, it is soudred uneath
or never. For it is healed with great difficulty, as Constantine says. But
often it is saved by diet and medicine: and sometime by cutting and surgerie.
Then Authors tell, that slopping things help such men, and medicines that
soudreth, both in meat and in medicine, as Electuaries taken within, and
baulmings, and bathings, and Oyntmentes without. Over all things it is said,
that scarce diet is best, and continence, namely of the service of Venus, and
of all moving. And such men should over all things beware of things that breed
ventositie, and wind, and swelling. For as the Commentour says, Ventositie
and wind, grieve most Hernious men that be so broke.

There are three special kinds, Addition
Hernia aquosa, Hernia ventosa, Hernia carnosa, waterish, windy, and fleshy.
These impediments be engendered in the coddes. Also there is Euterocela,
Epiplocela, and Hidrocela. The first of these is, when the guts fall out of the
body into the codde: ihe second is when the Pellicle or small rhyme falls
down with the guts into the codde, the third anoyeth the stones. There is also
Parocela, Sarcocela, Circocela, Flesh grows in the codde about the stones,
the swelling in the veins, and the stayeng of the rupture.

Of Arthetica Passio. Cap. 57.
ARthetica is an ache and evil in the fingers and toes, Morthus a^t^culuis the
gout in the ^oynis.
with swelling and fore ache. And when it is in the fingers, it is called
Ciragra, and in the toes it is named Podagra. If it be in the whitlebones and
joints, it is called Sciatua passio, comes of cholaricke blood, and
fleamaticke humor, and comes most of reumaticke cause.

If blood be the cause, it is known by redness of the place, and by heat and
swellyng of the beynes of the sore place, and of all the body, by hot diet had
before: and most by age, and by a region like, for it moves most in spring
time. If cholaricke humor be the cause, it is known by full strong ache, and
soreness, and by stretching and halyng, and dryness of sinnewes, by heat of
his own place, by color read, meddeled with yeolow, and by swellyng. And
moves most in Summer, and most by hot diet and dry, and in such a country,
and often many cholaricke superfluities are cast out by spewing and shiting. Hot
things grieve, and cold things help and comfort. And if steame be the cause,
it is known by disposition of steame, contrary diet, by like ache, by swellyng
of the place, by sore ache and strong, by little redness or none. If it
comes of rumatike cause, it is known by heaviness of the head, by moving of
humors, tinglyng and fleeting in the ridge bean, and about the shoulders.

This evil is worst, for it draws togethers and makes the sinews of the
fingers, toes, and the feet to shrink together, and draws out and wastes
substantial humors in the hands, and makes them dry, and clighted, and
closed, and vnmightie to be opened: also it makes the joints of the fingers
unseemly with knottie bunches. But this sickness may soon be healed, and
when it is old, uneath it is curable, namely, when it is turned into knottie
hardenesse: and so the matter that is in default, shall be pourged with
couenable medicine, and the patient shall be let blood. If blood be the
cause, the heat shall be smit again with cold medicines. Sometime cold humor
is the cause, and then it shall be daulmed and comforted with hot Playsters
and Oyntmentes. And the patient shall abstain from great meats, and namely
from such as breed wind, and swellyng, for often bentositie and wind makes
this evil more grievous.

Addition
Claragra, Podagra, Sciatica, is the gout in the hands, feet, and hippes.
The cause of this infirmity, comes of corrupt blood, as also of fleumatike
humor, or else of a choloricke humor. If it come of blood or rumatike flume,
the place will swell and be read, and the veins full. If of cholar, the place
swells not, but is dry, smooth, and lean, with pricking and burning. If
this disease have continued, after fortye years it will be hardly cured. The
remedy is to avoid contagious meats and drinks, as wines^that be pearcing,
new beer, and ale, hot bread and cakes, all shell fish, and water foul,
Pigeons and Eeles. Use Bathes, such as the learned Physicians shall appoint,
Oil of swallows, Oil of Frogs, Oil of leate, and to conclude, Oil of
Patience.

Of Gutta Sciatica. Cap. 58.
GVtta Sciatica is an evil that comes of humors, which fall down into the
great sinnewe, that is between the great brawnes of the haunche as
Constantine says. And comes of gleymie humors gathered together in the
hollownesse of the joints, and of the haunche. Sometime of bloody humors
meddled with cholar. And all these are cause of ache, the which ache stretches
into the legs, and anon to the heel, and also anon to the little toe.

The cause thereof is, as the Commentatour says, that from the whirlebone in
the middle of the haunche, and of the leg, passes a sinewe to the utter
anele bone of the foot, and scam those to the little toe: and this is cause,
why in this evil, ache stretches to that little toe. And therefore it is, that
they that have the stone in the reins, feel in that place tinglyng and
sleeping for stopping of the sinnewe, wherefore the spirits may not come to
that place in due manner. And the ache is sometime in one side, and sometime in
either: but it is worse in the left side, than in the right side.

And the cause thereof is, for in the right side is more heat than in the
left side, and therefore it dissolueth and defieth the matter there gathered
more easelye: and in the left side is less heat, and the matter is more sad
and thick, and worse to defy and destroy. In this Evil is little ache,
quaking, pricking and burning, namely in young men of hot complexion, and
namely if hear be the cause: and in that cause it helps and profits to be
let blood in the vein which is called Sophena, and that vein is under the
ancle bone. Also the Patient shall be purged and healed, as in the evil, which
is called Passio Arthetica. Also every one which has this passion Sciatica, as
he that has Pasio Arthetica, shall beware of too great repletion of meat and
of drink, and namely of the works of Venus: for it sharpeth most rume, and
lets digestion, for loss of spirits and of pure blood and clean, as
Constantine says. Also the body shall be first purged and cleansed within, and
then men shall lay too playsters without, as the place of keth. For medicine
helps and profits little without, but if the matter, which is ye cause of
ye evil, be withdrawn within, as Con. says. Also he says yt Dioscorides
says, that it helps them much, yt have this evil that is called Sciatica
passio, if the sore place be comforted with hot dirte of a Cow. For it dries
mightily, namely if it be tempered with Galbanum, and frankencense, and with
vinegar.

Of Podagta. Cap. 59.
COnstantine says, that Podagra is a sore evil in the feet, and namelye in
the wrestes and soles, with stretching of the sinewe and quaking, and comes
of evil humors, which fall down to the wrest of the feet. And if the
humors be cold and thick, then is great stretching and swellyng, but the ache
is not full pitching, nor great swellyng may not be, for the feet have but
little flesh, and therefore they may not stronglye swell, for swellyng
breeds in fleshly members.

This evil breeds in them, which live casely and soft, and travail but
little: and cleanse not the body of superfluities of humors, namely if they
eat much and drink. For of such things, come superfluities of humors,
which breed reumes, that drop down to the feet, and namely when they be
feeble, and may not put off the kind of superfluity. And that comes most of
the service of Venus: for that service month and shakes all the cheyning and
joining of the body, as Constantine says. Also it heateth, and therefore it
moves humors, and flaketh and breaks sinews. And therefore it happens,
that gelded men have not Podagra, for they serve not Venus: nor likewise
children nor women but seld, and that is because they be purged with menstruall
blood. Therefore Ipocras says, that women have not Podagra, except in case that
menstruall blood fail. If this evil comes to young men in Spring time, it is
curable: but if it comes in Harvest, and indureth to Winter it is hard to
heal, as it said in Aphor. And the Commentour tells the cause thereof, by
dome of Astronomy in this manner. The age of the Moon.
The first age of the Moon he says, is hot and moist: The second, is hot and
dry: The third, is cold and dry: The fourth, is cold and moy^, (...) the
first age, by heat, the matter is departed, and by moisture, shed: In the
second age and the fourth, the matter is kept, and is perfectly defied. In the
first age of the next Moon thereafter it is perfectly defied. And so in the
second age of the hot Moon and dry, the matter is all wasted: and within
six weeks, which contains xl. days, the evil is full cured, and namely in
Summer, for in Harvest and in Winter the matter is thikckened and sadded, and
is not obedient to digestion. Then first, the matter of this evil shall be
purged, and after in the beginning it shall be smit again with cold medicines
laid too with out: hot medicines which dissolve and shed, shall not be laid too
in the beginning while the cause is renmatike. And if the matter be cold, the
renme must be the more excited and stirred.

And therefore in the beginning, men shall use strong Repercassiues in a hot
cause, and less strong in a cold cause, lease the matter were hard. Then he
shall have stewings and balming, and oyntmentes hot or cold as the matter
requires. The patient shall use light and temperate diet, and he must beware
over all things, of the service of Venus, and he shall use light and also
meanly travail.

Of a Postume, Cap. 60.
Apostema. Postume.
A Postume is gathered of superfluity of humors in some member, and makes
rotting and swellyng as Constantine says. It falls sometime, that a member
impossumeth through an outward cause, as Constantine says: as of smiting, of a
wound, of falling, of breaking, and brusing, and boyshing, and hurteling: for
of all such things, humors move often and come to the sore place, and puts
and hurleth every each with other, and wereth hot and rotteth. Sometime a
postume comes of an inward cause, as of superfluity of corrupt humors, that
often runs and comes togethers to a certain place, and that in two manners:
for sometime by gathering of matter in their own member: and sometime by
running of matter out of one member into another: and such running has many
causes, as Constantine says. The first is strength of the member, that puts
off noyfull things: for some principal and noble members discharge themselves
of superfluities, as the brain discharges himself of fleumaticke humor, and
of sumositie. The second cause, is feebleness of the member that receives:
for feeble members receive superfluities, which come down from the over and
stronger members, as the skin and the flesh. The third cause, is multitude of
humors, the which, when great superfluity of them is in the more veins, they
be shed into ye less veins, and enter into the substance of members, which be
of parts like: and that which is more than is needful to yt food, tunneth to
the member, and the way is closed, and makes a postume. The fourth is
largeness of the veins, by whom those humors run easily from member to
member. The fifth cause, is moisture of humors and subtilnesse, the which of
easy moving be casely shed: and when they be shed, they are gathered in some
member, and there they be held and thrust by straightnes of the member, and
huried, and defiled, and disposed to rotting. The sixth cause, is the
disposition of the members: for kindly the nether members receive supersluitie
of the ever members, as the members of the head put down their superfluities,
sometime to yt brawnes and veins of the throat, and so comes Squinancie.
Sometime to the members of the breast, and so comes hotches and postumes in
the lungs. A postume comes in this manner: While humors have default in
quantity, and may not be wasted by heat, nor put out by strength of virtue,
they be received in the hollownes of members, and there boil and putrify, and
as peast set in an over, and dried by fire, receives a manner crusting in the
utter side, under the which crust the paast is soft: so the humor gathered,
by heats boyleth and makes a manner crust above, under the which crust rotted
humor is bid, and swells: and such a swellyng is called Apostema. And
sometime it comes of ventositie and of mind, and is called Bubo. Sometime of
a simple humor, as of blood, and is called Fleugmon. The tokens thereof, be
redness which comes of the color of blood: hardness comes of multitude
of matter, and of heat, which wastes and consumes watery matter: quapping and
leaping, by reason of ventositie and of sumositie: shifting and putting, sore
ache, by reason of stretching: heat, by reason of hot matter: and swellyng, by
reason of multitude of matter. In this manner is made a Postunis of simple
Cholera and red, and is called, Herisipila, that is, holy fire, Per Antifrasin,
that is to say, by contrary manner of speaking.

And another manner postume comes of pure Cholera, and gnaweth and fretteth ye
member yt it is in, and is called among Physicians. Herpes Essimoncus, as it
were gnawing and fretting it self. In the same manner wise a postume comes
of fleame, and is called Zuma, or Palus. For right as in moors and in maraise,
is much superfluity of slyme and of wose, so in this postume is much
superfluity. And if thou thrustest thy finger thereupon, it denteth in: for
the running matter withdraws, and lets not the finger to enter, and then
in the middle is a pit, as it were the bore of an hole, and when the finger is
away, the matter comes again, and fills all the place. The tokens of
these Postumes be whiteness, for the matter is white: softness, for the
matter is fleeting: and soft ach, for the matter with his coldness swageth the
feelyng. In a postume that comes of red Cholera, the signs be as it were
coutrarye: for the heat is strong, because that ye matter is full hot: it is
red with yeolownesse, for the Cholera is not red, but yeolow: great ache and
pricking, for the matter is sharp. Of Melancholia comes a postume, and if
the matter be all without, the postume is called Schrosis. And if the matter be
some within, and some without: then comes a postume which is called Cancer, a
Canker, to the likeness of a Crab. For in likewise as a Crabbe is broad by the
ridge, and the arms stretche by the sides: so in this postume is a manner
swellyng in steed of the ridge, and the branches of humors stretch hither and
thither in steed of arms. Also it croepeth little and little, gnawing and
fretting the flesh and sinews slowly to the sight as it were a Crab. The
signs thereof be, great hardness, for when the matter is earthly and
melancholic, it is full thick and sad: the color is wanne, for the matter
is not all black: the ach is scarce or none for vnfeelingnesse thereof, for
the matter has two slayeng qualities, coldenesse, and dryness: and it gnaweth
and fretreth always, and costumpeth the flesh anon to the roots of the
sinews, and infecteth the bones that reach thereto: and therefore this evil
is as it were pestilence evil. Among these gnawing and fretting postumes is
such an order. For Noli me tangere is a cankrie postume in the sace, and
fretteth little and little, and less then other: and the Canhertretheth more
than the postume, which is called Lupus. And Herisipila the holy fire, fretteth
most. And Fistula the fester fretteth not, but rotteth within, and makes the
flesh rotlewe, and the sinews shrink, th^^ we or ^^^^ ^alu^e.
and draws them to quitter, and corrumpeth sinews sometime, and makes the
bones to fall. And it comes often and many times of a wound, which is evil
kept, when the bone, which is there under is infected with quitter, and so the
feeding that comes thereto, tourneth into this manner, for because the utter
part breaks and the wound runs, sometime the wound is closed, and sometime
it, breaks again, and if the Fester be full cold, uneath it is curable.
Often about the wound, be many open holes: For a fester has a deep wound
within, and a straight and a narrow without: and the Ca^ker in contrariwise
has a wide wound without, and straight within: and therefore it is more
harder to help. Sometime as fester comes, of a reume, or of an old wound,
and sometime of a postume evil healed, and namely if the postume and the
wound be made too moist, and has many holes, out of the which holes issues
water of diverse colors, now white, now yeolow. And often these holes be cloased
in one place, and break out in another. Other postumes there be, which come of
contrary matter, as it fares in a postume, which is called Antrax, which
Constantine calls Carbunculus, for it burns as a coal: and it comes of
full wood matter and venomous, and of matter that is compowned, and it is
known by those lines, which be therein of diverse colors: and is shaped like
unto a rod, and therein be some lines red and bloody, and some yeolow and
cholaricke: some be somewhat white and fleumatike, and some wanne and
melancholicke: Some clear, and come of salt fleame, and so of other unkind
humors. The tokens of that Postume Antrax, be passing ache, burning and
pitching, and pricking in the ground.

In the head of the postume breeds a whelke or a blaine, which betokens and
signifies, that heat follows the humor that has masterie, and has in a
gathering a shape like unto a rod, distinguished with lines of diverse
colors, and it seems that it is drawn to the ground thereof with a manner
thread fastened to the utter part of the bladder in the middle.

To heal and to save postumes, men use in the beginning, Repercussiues, but if
the matter be wood and venomous, as it fares in Herisipila, holy fire, and
in the postume which is called Antrax: for in such, men shall not lay
Repercussiues to ye sore, but rather those things that swage and ease, least
the venomous matter be smitten inward to the inner members, and so cause more
grief and disease. Then when the Postume is in state, men shall use tempering
things and shedding, and softning, and cupping. And when the postume is opened,
or else broken, and the matter brought out, then men shall use medicines that
close and souder, and that breed good flesh. To other postumes, which hane
worse accidents and stronger, men shall use such medicines, as men do use
against the Canker and Festure, and other such, for there as kind fails, the
patient shall be first cleansed within. And men shall ordain therefore remedy
as the place as keth. Against the Canker, men shall minister medicines, which
burn and fret the dead flesh. Against a Fester men shall use medicines, which
diye, and wast, and cleanse, and washes of the quitter. And if these profit
not: then he shall be put to Surgerie. For it is more safety, that one corrupt
part of an whole body be burned or cut away, then all that other deal be
spilte and corrupt and utterly destroyed. Furthermore afterward against
venomous postumes, as against postumes, which be called Antrax, Antrax is a
felon or whisslavv
men shall ordain a remedy wately and soon: for he slays soon, but if
succor come redely and soon. Then it is good counsel, but some other things
let, to let blood in the beginning, in the same side, in ye next place to the
gathering of the postume.

For it is not sure in such a case to let blood in the contrary side, least
the matter be drawn into the body, and to noble members, while the matter is
venomous, and than it is needful and good to drink Triacle with hot wine, and
to annoint therewith the sore place. For if the triacle be proved, Triacle in a
plaster.
and it be a very Antrax, the Triacle shall draw out the matter that is dry
and venomous, and he shall dry it so, that thou might make powder thereof,
as it were ashes: and then Triacle shall be laid too fresh oftentimes, till
the postume break, and when it is broke, it is no dread of peril. The yolke
of an egg baked with salt, works the same, if it be often laid to the
postume, for it swageth and eases the same, and breaks the postume, as the
Commentour says.

Apostumes be of diverse causes, and breed in sundry places: the inward
Apostumes be most dangerous, which are in the head, stomach, lunges, spleen,
and bowels. Flegmon, comes of blood. Zimie of fleame, or Zunia.

Herisipila comes of cholar, Cancri or Sclitos, of melancholy, or cholar
adusted. Byles, botches, blaynes, and such like, be less dangerous, so that
in the coming forth, for want of skill, they be not sunk in again: for
where there is not sufficicieut heat of body to force them forth, they stop
the powers, and suffocate to death.

Of Blaynes. Cap. 61.
VLcera he called some blaynes, Vlcera, Water blaines and flock to.
that spring all about in the body, and comes often of the humor that is
between the skin and the flesh: and are called Vlcera, as Constantine says
In fine Viatici: For in the utter part of the skin, by sharpness of humor,
they make departing of continuance.

The matter of them is subtle moisture of blood, or of cholar, that comes
from the inner parts to the utter, and anon to the utter skin of the body by
virtue and strength of kind, or of accident of evils. Suth blaines defyle the
skin, and they make it unseemly and loathfome: And breeds tickeling,
itching, and biting in the flesh, and reaueth the skin from the flesh. And
sometime if they be continual, they be messengers and pronostifie the peril
of Leprehoode. Who that desires to be free and to be delivered of them, shall
not lean to be purged within of hot superfluities of humors, which infect and
corrupt the body. Then he shall use dry bathes, which consume and waste
meanelye the humors, that make these blaines in the flesh, and in the skin:
as quantity and qualitye asks. And he shall spare dronkenshippe, and too
laxatiue diet. And he shall withdraw him from travail and business.

Of Pustules. Chap. 62.
Pustule. Wheles or pushes
PUstules be called gatherings of Postumes and superfluity in the utter part
of the body: and be bred little and little, and in sundry wise. For kind
puts off noyfull superfluityes to the utter parts of the body: the which
blaynes come often and spring of superfluity of meat and drink: and
nourishing of the body. And therefore skilfully wise and discreet men call
them Pustulas, and Pabulas also, as Remigius says. And therefore they hight
and be called Pustule. For they be small and little blaines of venimons and
burning quitter, and of rottenness, which is contained within them, as Isidore
says. And Constantine says, that those foresaid blaines be called Variole;
the pox in children: and also sometime in men of age. In small children such
blaines be healthful: and is a good token of health, that comes afterward,
as the Commentour says.

There the Pox breed of corruption of rotted blood. For in children and in
young men, if the pox break not out, it is dread that Leaperhood comes
afterward. For it comes in children of menstrual blood, which they were fed
with in the mothers womb. The which blood is put out to the utter parts, by
virtue and strength of kind. And the children be delivered of peril, yt
should have sallen afterward. Also it happens in men of full age, and in
old men in Feauers about the time of changing, that such blaines break out
by virtue and strength of kind putting out of the kind of the Fever to the
utter parts. And therefore neither in these, neither in the other, shall be
Repercussiues laid too, least the matter be borne inward: for it is somewhat
wood. Of a pestilent force.
Nevertheless about the eien in this raze men shall lays some light
repercussiues, least the quittet of blaines hurt some curtill of the eye, or
the black of the eye.

In all other places a ready Physician draws such kind to the utter parts,
as far forth as he may, except the place about the eyes. For there the matter
shall be smit again, and brought into other places, least the matter that is
wood and violent, griue and hurt the tender substance of the eyes. Also a
ready nurse, and a ready Physician both in a child, and in a man of age shall
be ware, that such blaines be not broke nor opened before, namely about the
face: neither for itching nor for any other cause, least unseemly and foul
pittes abide in the face always. Of many other causes such blaines and Pox
breed in the body: Now of flumatike matter comes white and soft and
running: now of cholarik matter comes sharp pitching and hard. For cholarike
humor shed between the skin and the flesh, opens and biteth the skin
by heat and sharpness, and breeds many blaines, in the utter parts of the
skin, but they be very small and little, as it were the seeds of Milij. And
therefore among authors this evil is called Herpes, or Milij, or Granulosus,
an evil full of greynes. Of what matter so ever it be that such bleines come,
if they come often and continually, it is good, that the matter which the
defaulte is in, be pourged with due medicine. And then if the body be full
repleate, he shall be let blood, or be cupped or horned. And the patient shall
be help with due bathes, which dry and wast huomurs, and also with couenable
ointments.

Addition
If the pushes or pox be white, of fleame, if red, of ill blood, if dry and
hard, of Cholar, is black, then of melancholye, which is a token of death.

Of Scabbes. chap. 63.
Psora. Scabies. Scabbes.
A Scabbe is corruption of the skin, and comes of corrupt humors, which
be between the skin and the flesh and hurts and noieth, and greeueth and
desoyleth the body. For as Constantine says and affirms, Kind puts out
evil humors, and voideth them to the utter parts of the body, to cleanse
and purge the inner parts. And if those foresaid humors be subtle and
small, then they be easily and lightly dissolved and wasted by fumosities and
sweat. And if they be great and thick, they be under the skin, and breed
scabs in the body. And humor so closed between the skin and the flesh, if
it be cholarike, and some deal with held, it breeds a dry scabbe and not
quitiery, with chinnes and cliffes, with itching and pitching. And if the
humor be fleamatike: often it makes great scabs and white, with scales, and
without great itching: for wet scabs with quitter and scales, with like
itching, shows and betokens, that the blood is meddled with Cholera: And
comes often of great repletion of the body, and also often of sickness tant
came before: by the which sickness the virtues be oppressed and ouerset, and
superfluities increase. Also in some men is an old scabbe, that comes of
default of the spleen. And such a scabbe though is pass, it comes lightlye
again. Scabbes be curable with medicines that dry and consume, and wast and
cleanse within and without.

Addition
Scabi be diverse, as Scabies fursurea, and Scabies sabina, some scabbes are
like Hoppes, some like branne.

Of a dry scabbe and itch. Chap. 64.
A Dry scab is corruption of humor between the skin and the flesh,
Impetigo A kind of Ringworme
that changes and grieueth the body, and makes it itch. For some Cholarike
superfluity, that is smoaky, is put and thrown from the inner parts to the
utter part of the skin, and infecteth the skin, and makes it full of small
pimples and scabs, as though it were sprinkeled with Branne. And than the
skinue is infected with small chins and itching. And sometime this infection
comes of too strong Cholarike matter: or of melancholic, as Constantine
says. And this evil is called Impetigo. For it lets and grieueth the skin
and the flesh, namely with tickeling and itching. Also this evil is called
Serpigo, as it were a creeping evil. For it creeps into all the skin, as
it were a Serpent or an Adder, and infecteth the skin, and desoyleth it with
small scabbes after scratching and clawing. Sometime this Evil beclippeth the
skin of some lim all about, as it were a girdell, and such a scab is called
Herpes Cingulus among physicians. But Impetigo is an other evil then Serpigo.
For Impetigo comes of more rising, and of more fiery matter: for it comes
of Cholar. And therefore it makes euenlong holes, straight, and full small, and
move always upward as fire: But the other manner seab that is called Serpigo,
comes of matter that is less fiery: And therefore it moves not upward, but
it beclippeth the members all about. Therefore it is said as it were creeping
all about. This evil shall be cured with stews and baths, yt open, consume,
and wast, cleanse and wipe, and also with ointments. He shall be anointed with
ye juice of Ebuli, Sambuci, Iappatij, Fumiteriae, and other such. Afterward he
shall use baths of sweet water, as Constantine says. And men say, that the
spittle of a fasting man helps against this evil. Always this evil has
fellowship of passing biting and itching, and of desiring of frosing, rubting,
scratching and clawing. Thereof comes a manner false liking and quality, yt
is resolved of hot smoke and sharp, yt biteth and fretteth the skin, and
that smoke is resolved of hot matter. And such a liking is false and grievous.
For it makes the skin disco^tinued and full of blains, and aketh and smarteth
full sore at the last end.

Of Lepra Meseltie. cap. 65.
Lepra.
LEpra, meselrye, is an universal corruption of members and of humors, and
has beginning of the veins, and full increasing without the veins: for when
the humors be corrupt, the members yt be nourished and fed with humors be
sone corrupt. Constantine says that every each Elephancia or leperhood has
beginning principallye of corruption of Melancholia. Therefore Constan. says,
that Lepra is an evil cold and dry, and comes of black Cholera and strong,
rotted, and is seen in the utter part of the body. And it comes of four
rotted humors, that were strong and be corrupt and changed into black
Cholora, as he says ibidem. Humonrs with she which Melancholia is meddled, may
not rot at the full in the veins, and for that melancholy is cold and dry
and so contrary to rotting: And so the humors meddeled therewith may not rot
full, ere the melancholy be incorporate. And have abiding in the members, in
the which is full rotting. And of that rotting comes Lepra meselry. For the
humor melancholy by reason that it is hard, sad, and fast: it may not rot but
in the abiding of time. And if it h^^p in any wise, that it rotte in the
veins, it should rather breed a fever then Lepra. In four manner wise Lepra
is diverse, as the four humors be passingly and diversely meddled One manner
Lepra comes of pure Melancholia, and is called properly Elephancia: Elepha^cia
and has that name of the Elephant, that is a full great beast and large. For
this evil grieueth and noieth the patient passing strongly and sore. Therefore
this evil is more hard and fast, and worse to heal then other. The second
comes of melancholy and of fleme, and is called Tiria, Tiria.
or Serpentina and has ye name of an adder that is called Tirus. For as an
Adder leaves lightlye his skin and his scale: so he that has this manner
Lepra is often stripped and pilled and full of scales. The third manner Lepra
comes of melancholy, infecting of blood, and is called Alopicia, Alopecia
and Vulpina: For Alopes in Greek, is Vulpes in Latin, a Fore in English. The
Fore has a property, that his hair salleth in Summer for heat of blood in
the liver: So often his hair that has this evil, falls from the brows, and
from other places. The fourth manner leperhood comes of red Cholera, corrupt
in the members with melancholy, and is called Leonina, Leonina.
and has name of the Lion, that is most hottest beast, fierce and cruel. And
this manner Lepra comes most of fervent humor and passing malicious: And
therefore it fretteth as a Lion, and destroys all the members. Then
principally of corrupt Melancholia comes Lepra that is called Elephancia. Of
corrupt fleme comes Tiria, that is called Serpentina: And of corrupt blood
comes Alopecia, that is called Vulpina also. Of red Cholera comes the worst
of al, that is called Leonina. These four manners of Lepra have some common
signs and tokens, and some special signs: by the which their special
diuersitye is busily known. Universally this evil has much tokens and signs:
In them the flesh is notably corrupt, the shape is changed, the eyes become
round: The eye liddes be riueled, the sight sparkleth, and namely in Leoninn:
the nosethrills be straighted and riueled, and shronke: The voice is horse,
namely in Elephancia: Swelling grows in the body, and many small botches and
whelkes, hard and round in the legs, and in the utter parts: Feeling is
some deal taken away: The nails be boystous and bounchye, as they were
scabbed: The fingers shrinked, and crooked: and the hands be as they were
dry: The breath is corrupt, and often whole men be infected with the stench
thereof: The flesh and skin is fattie, insomuch that they may throw water
thereon, and it is not the more wet, but the water slideth off, as it were of a
wet hide: There is also itching, sometime with scabs, and sometime without
scabs, also in the body be diverse speckes, now red, now black, now wan, now
pale. In the legs be many specks and whelks, and be now seen and anon
vanished: and now broken out, and now shrinken in again. And among the
whelkes of the legs, if thou find one that is more and fowler then the
other, it is a token that the lepra is fastened and confirmed, The tokens of
Lepra be most seen in the utter parts, as in the feet, legs, and face:
and namelye in wasting and minishing of the brawnes of the body. Above all
these conditions of Lepra every each manner Lepra has his own proper and
special tokens, by the which he is known. For they that have that Lepra that
is called Leonina, their couloure is more yeolowe and citrine then other: And
also their eien be more sparkling, and more strouting out, and moving, and the
skin more rough, with more chinnes and cliftes often times: And they have more
fretting and itching then other, and be more fret and gnawen in all the
members at the last. In them that have the Lepra that is called Allopicia, all
the hair of the eye liddes, and of the brows fall: and the eyes swell
greatly, and be full read: In the face be read pimples and whelks, out of
whom often runs blood and matter: In such the noses swell and be great, the
virtue of smelling sayleth, and the breath stinketh right foul: and in the
gums is full great infection and corruption. In them yt have the Lepra that is
called Tiria, be soft swelling pimples and whelks: The skin is somewhat whitish
and swollen, and somewhat shining with many lice and worms. In them be these
conditions and many other full evil that come of corrupt fleame and unclean
spittle, gleamy and quittery: The nosethrills be stopped, and other such
diseases there be. The eyes weep and run, for resolution and shedding of
superfluity of moisture, the lips and gums rot, the wosen of the voice is
rough, and the voice is hoarse. If they be let blood, the blood turns into
fleeting substance, and the part thereof that is sad, is white or whitish.
And if it be washed, it renleth anon, as milk does, with running, and that in
great quantity. In them that have the Lepra that is called Elephancia, the
color and hiew is emulous following and sewing: the face is leadish, the hair
of the brows falls, the eyes be round and the nosethrilles straight: The
brawnes be wasted: and that is commonly in all dry Lepra, more then in moist.
Feeling fails, namelye in the biggest fingers, it increases slowly: but when
it is increased, it makes chappes, chinnes, and cliftes: If they be let
blood, the blood is wanne, or brown, and the more it is frotted, the blacker
it is, and the harder. In the middle of that blood be as it were white veins,
and branches and bows of sinews, and that is common in all Lepra. Lepra
comes of diverse causes besides the foresaid humors, as of dwelling and
inhabiting and keeping-companye, and often talking with leprous men. For the
evil is contagious, and infecteth other men. Leprosy infecteth
Also it comes of fleshlye lyking, by a woman soon after that a leprous man
has lay by her. Also it comes of Father and mother: and so this contagion
passes into the child as it were by law of heritage. And sometime it falls
when a child is conceived in menstruall time: And also when a child is fed
with corrupt milk of a leprous Nurse: and sometime it comes of an outward
cause, of insect and corrupt air. Sometime of evil diet, as of melancholyke
meat, too cold and dry, as of flesh at Kotheren, of Asses, and of Bears,
and of such other. Ba^ren kine often bulled. Asses and Bears flesh.
And sometime it comes of too hot meats, as of long use of strong pepper,
and of garlike, and of such other: And sometime of corrupt meats, and of meats
that he soon corrupt, as of meselyd Hogs, of flesh that have pieces therein,
Mesesid Porke
and is infected with such poison and grains.

And of unclean wine and corrupt: sometime of biting of a venomous worm, that
infecteth and corrupts the substance of humors and of members. In these
manners and in many other the evil of Lepra breeds in ma^s body: but
howsoever it be gendered, uneath it is curable, but by the help of God, if it
be confirmed: But it may be somewhat hid and let that it destroy not so soon.
The patient shall beware of hurtful meats, and specially of those that
breed melancholy, and also of meats that over heateth the blood. Then he
shall use small and couenable diet, and meats that be not corrupt, neither able
to be corrupt soon: And if blood be the cause, as in Allopecia: then he shall
first be let blood: and then be purged with due medicines. In other manners of
Lepra it behooves first to take medicines, and then to be lot blood, if it
needs, and else not. For it should grieve, if it needed not, as Constantine
says. Then he shall use due medicines within, and couenable plasters and
ointments without, to withstand the accidents. To heal or to hide Lepra as
Plato says, best is a red A^er with a white womb, if the venim be away and
the tail and the head smi^^en off: and the body sod with leekes, Soakes ^^^sh.
if it be often take and eaten. In the same wise ^ wine, in ye which it rotteth,
if the patient drinks often thereof. And this medicine helps in many evils:
as appears by the blind man to whom (he says) his wife ga^ue an Adder with
garlike in steed of an Ele, A Soake.
that it might slay him, and he eat it: And after that by much sweat he
recovered his sight again.

De Morbo Gallico. Of the French Pox Chap. 66.
Morbus Galicus.
IN times past they were called the Spanish Pox, about the year of our Lord
God. 1493. This pestiferous evil crept among the people, it first appeared at
Naples, This chapter is added.
in ye fre^nch men's host, (whereof it took the name) afterward the French men
loathing the name of French Pox, termed it the Evil of Naples, Sithence
which time, it is become the evil to change Countries. Notwithstanding it was
diverslye called, as Jobs scabbes, ^^^gers Evil, Fiacres sickness. The wiser
sort of people did interpreate this disease to be the wrath of God, a disease
of much filthiness, it is to be taken by drinking with those that have this
Evil, with using to their stools of ease, and Priuies, and soonest with lyeng
in their beds, of the cause of this disease. Into what disease the French
Pox are turned, hew men sought to prevent the same, and of the description
of Guaiacum, Read the book Tituled Morbus Galicus, set forth by Nicholas
Massae, Doctor of Physic, a Venetian, Anno. 1532. and translated by Thomas
Poynell of Marten Abbeye Chanon. Anno. 1533. It may easily be perceived that
Bartholomeus never knew of this evil, nor a multitude of other woods, trees,
plants, herbs, stones, worms, fishes, birds, seeds and peoples, which in
this work thou shall find, as the place requisite shall declare. Also of this
Morbus Galicus, or Variole Maiores, of some named Mentagra, the French Pox,
there be diverse, some be moist, some be weasing watrishe, some be dry,
some be like Kingwormes, some be fistuled, some be festered, some cancarous,
some be like Wennes, some be like Biles, some be knobbed and knurred, and
some be vlterous, having a dry scabbe in the middle, some have ache in the
joints, and no outward sign of the Pox, and there is small Pox. The
abhominablest and filthiest taking of this disease, is by carnal copulation
with those yt have it. The diet made with Guiacum is the approved remedy. Use
counsel of the physician.

Of the Morphew. cap. 67.
MOrphea is speckes in ye skin, and comes of corruption of meat and drink:
And yt which is leper in ye flesh, is Morphea in the skin. Morphea
Also some Morphea is white, and comes of fleme, and some is black, and
comes of Melancholia, and some is red and comes of Cholera or of blood. The
Morphea yt comes of Melancholia and of steme, is hard to heal: And ye
Morphea yt comes of blood is more easy to heal. Morphea is incurable, if the
skin of the fire liepight and pricked with and needell and bleedeth not, and if
it bleedeth then it is curable. A sauce flume face, is a priuye sign of
leprosy.
And Morphea is all in the skin, and Lepra is both in the flesh and in the
skin. This infection differs but little from the infection that is called
Gutta rosca, that infecteth the face with small and soft pimples, and comes
of gleamie, bloudye, and cholarike humors that be between the skin and the
flesh. In this passion, first the patient shall be let blood, and the inner
humors shall be purged, and be help with stews and baths: And so the face
shall be comforted, and the pores shall be opened, and the matter shall pass
out: then the sore place shall be washed with medicines that cleanse and dry,
and anointed with couenable ointmentes. Also Constantine says, that
anointing with the warm blood of an Hare is good against this infection.
Blood of a Hare.
For it departs and smites again, and wastes the blood that is between
the skin and the flesh. Above all things against such an Evil which comes
of humor, that is between the skin and the flesh, Fimus terrae is best in
bathes and in stews, in diverse seethings of stroppes and ointmentes.

In drink it purges and cleanses pimples, whelkes, scabbes, and itching, and
dries superfluity of humors between the skin and the flesh, and helps
and succoureth them that be disposed to Lepra.

Of venomous Worms. Chap. 68.
Over and beside the foresaid evils and passions, which be rehearsed and
described before, most perilous death and evils happen and come to mankind by
wicked venim. And for that all kind of venim is contrary to the complexion of
mankind, it slays sodeinly, but men have the sooner help and remedy. Some
venim comes of corruption of meat and drink: And some of biting, of
creeping worms and of adders, and of serpents, and of other beasts, of whom
their humors and teeth be venomous to man's body Also some venim is hot and
dry, as the venim of an Adder, which is called Tirus, Look in ye 18. book
Tirus.
and of an Adder that is called Vipera, and other such. And some venim is cold
and dry, as the venim of scorpions: and some venim is cold and moist, as the
venim of Spiders. Of the poison of Spiders and of Scorpio^s.
The venim of Serpents and Adders is diverse in malice, as Auicen says in
Ca^de venonosis. For the venim of males is more sharp and strong then the venim
of females. And yet the female Serpents have more teeth then males, and
therefore they be taken for ye worse, as Auicen says there: Also the venim of
the old Serpents is worse then the venim of the young: And of great and long,
worse then of ye short of the same kind. Also the venim of them that abide in
hills and woods is worse, then of them which be nigh cliffes and banks of
waters. Also ye venim is worse that comes of one that is fasting, then the
venim that comes of one that is full. Also venim is sharper in Summer then in
winter: And adders and Serpents sting sooner at the mids of the day, then in
the morning: And sooner by day then by night. For by heat the venim is shed
into the utter parts, and is in time of coldness. as it were frosen in one
place. The venim of the Adder that is called Tirus, and of the Adder that is
called Vipera, and of all other Adders though it be hot, yet it happens, that
of their biting comes heuinesse and coldness, by reason of slaieng and
quenching of kind heat, by contrarynesse of venim. For kind heat by shedding
and sprinckling thereof heateth the body, when it is ouerset: And as it were
queint by strength of venimme, it heateth the utter parts. Hot venimme
gathers not togethers the hot blood of the heart: but it departs and
sheddeth kind heat, and slays it.

Uenim of a Cockatrice is so violent that it burns all thing which is nigh
it: This is of no assured testimonye, but by co^icture.
And so about his den and his hole nothing waxes green. It slays sodeinly
birds and fowls that fly before his den. All beasts that come nigh be
astonished and move not, but fall down, and so die, only by his venomous sight,
or breathing or whisteling^ And he that is bitten of him, melts and swells,
and casts venim, and dies sodeinlye. Uenimme of the Cockatrice is so violent
and strong; that if it be touched with a Spears the touches shall feel the
violence of the venimme, (...) Auicen tells of and that touthed such a worm
with his spear in India, and sees with fall down dead, and his horse also.
He that is hurt of a Cockatrice, has such a token, the body changes
sodeinly into green color and hiew, and sodeine death follows. And there
within the place where ye Cockatrice dwells the venim of an adder that is
called Aspi^ is worst, for it slays within two hoares or three. The tokens of
his biting be those: Sodeine changing color of the skin, great poring,
sodeine coldness of members; sleeping, and deep closing of the eieliddes,
great and strong thirst ^ so that the patient thinks that he dies only for
thirst. The venim of another manner adder, that is called Aspis, and is called
also Spuens, spitting, by reason that he slays with his spitle, his spitle is
so violent, that it slays al thing that has life, if it touches that
spittle. It slays and it be felt. But he that is venimmed feels of the
first sore and great ach about his bowels and guts, and has darkness of eyes
and closing, and strong sleep, with the crampe and ^^resting of the neck and
pulse inordinate. And against that venimme helps no medicine, but only
cutting off, or burning of the member, in the which the venim is cast. For
burning fordrieth and closes and stops the ways that the venim may not
pass unto the heart. Also the venim of a Dragon is full malicious, and his
venim is most in the tail, and in the Gall. With that venim comes most
heaviness of body, swelling of lippps, and giddiness, dunnesse and darkness
of the eyes, destroieng of reason, inordinate moving and feebleness of virtue.
Uenim of a Scorpion slaieth, but if men have remedy the sooner: Thereof comes
burning and pricking about the member that is stung. And when it comes to the
heart, the patient swoneth, and breaks out, and sweateth: And it closes the
heart, of the last, and freeseth the body with his coldness, and thereof
comes death and destroieng of life. Seek afterward of the property of the
Scorpion in the last book.

Among all the venomous beats, Addition
aber is most pernicious, for he is as a can^^^ to himself, a poison to his
neighbor, and the devil before God.

Of the biting of a mad dog. Chap. 69.
ALso the biting of a wood hound is deadly and venomous. For as Constantine
says, an hound is cold and dry, and in men black Cholera has the mastrie,
And when that Cholera is altered and rotted, it has masterie in the body, and
makes the hound wood. For the fumositie that comes of black Cholera is
strong, and infecteth the brain: And so when it comes about into diverse
parts, it infecteth the said parts, and then makes them venomous. Therefore
when he biteth any man, and the venomous spittle comes into the wound, the
humors and spirits be infected: and the venim that is therein is drawn to
the place, that is like to the place, in the which the venimme was bread, that
is the brain, and then the man is wood. And if he bite another, he infecteth
him, and makes him wood also. And such venimme is perilous. For it is long
hid and unknown, and increases and multiplieth it self, and is sometime
unknown to the years end, and then the same day and hour of the biting, it
comes to the head, and breeds frenzy. By feeling of kind other hounds
know and feel a wood hounde: and bark at him, to make him a feared, as says
Constantine. For they feel and know, that he is contrary and noyfull. This
venomous woodnesse falls most in Harvest. For then, because of likeness,
Cholera increases, and also in springing time. For then heat is shed, and
not wasted. And so by moving, it waxes strong: and comes out by kind. For
a wood hounds tongue is so venomous, that it makes the hound to reyle and
stagger, as he were dronken, and to go about yaning and driueling, with the
tongue hanging out and if his driuelling fall into the water, it infecteth the
water, and who that drinks of that water, shall be Idropicus and wood; Look
other properties of a wood hounde afterward in the Chapter of a dog. They
that be bitten of a wood hounde; have in their sleeps dreadful sightes, and
be fearful astonished, and wroth without cause: And they dread to be seen of
other men: and bark as hounds: And they dread water most of all thing, and
be afeard thereof full sore, and scoymous also: And then is this evil uneath
curable. Huc vsque Constantinus. Also there be many other venomous things,
and perils of venim: but of such as holy writ makes special mind, we treat
on Therefore touching this work, the other shall pass at this time. But only I
think and hope, that men shall take heed and know that venim works in the
body full many diseases without number. For all the kind of venim is contrary
to the kind and complexion of mankind. When it has mastery in the body, it
distempereth all the kind, and corrumpeth and changes the spirits and
humors with his malice and sharpness. And first venim assaileth the noblest
part of the body, that in the place next about the heart: and smites with
sharpness the spirits of feeling in the brain, and distroubleth the limbs
of the wits, and of feeling: and feebleth sodeinly their working and their
doing: and finiseth and wounds the sinews, and infecteth the veins and the
wosen: and makes them rough and riueled: and breeds in the inner parts sore
forment, burning, gnawing, and biting. And now if burns, now it freeseth, now
sheddeth, departs, and resolves: Now it wastes at full; and fordrieth the
substantial moisture of the heart: while it burns the inner parts, it cools
the utter parts, and againewarde, it makes the utter part of the body full
hot: And yet with his coldness it staieth, and constrains the blood in the
veins of the heart. By breeding of venim in the members, his body swells,
and wexeth now pale, now glisning; now suddenly green, now black and by
diverse speckes, which defouleth she body without: his malice is known within,
and it breeds in the stomach abomination, and noifull and horrible
wambling* And with his sharpness it perceth, thirleth, and gnaweth the members
of life: Therefore to suffer and withstand his r^ise, kind is vnmightie, and
fails and is overcome at the last, and the venim has masterie in the body,
and turns the humors to his own, likeness, and makes them venomous and
noyful and grievous. And therefore it is perilous to touch such bodies as be
infected with venim. For by euaporation and out springing, often such bodies
infect and corrupt all things near them. Also though venimme be horrible and
enimye to kind; often it happens that d(...) is desired of kind; not for
himself, but for some sweet thing meddled therewith, which is friend to kind:
For often the strength of venimme is hid under sweet things and sauourie.
Therefore Constantine teaches; that a man that dreadeth uenim, should not only
beware of stinking and bitter things, but also of sweet things sauoury, and
salt, and sour, and of other such. For often the malice of venimme is hid
under such things as kind desires. Also Constantine teaches for to know by
effect and doing, when venim is taken in meat or in drink: and says, That if
a man feels burning in meat or in drink, and the Crampe follows thereupon
anon or swelling in the fingers or in the nails, it is venomous and mortal.
And thereof comes tokens in the fingers and in the nails, which he made and
brend of fumositie of the heart: in token that venimme has mastery about the
innner parts, and sheddeth it self thence to the utter parts. And farther it
follows there: also if he gepeth and driueleth, and the lips smart and
tingle, and if he feels heat in the tongue, and sweateth, and is vexed
straight about the heart, and the eyes dim and dark: it needs him to host
with medicines, or else he dies hastily. Then against venim taken into the
body, it is a general medicine to excite spuing, to void and put out the
venomous matter above the spuing, either beneth with a clistery: Then with
Wine, that Sowthistle is sodde in, he shall take Triacle that overcomes
venim: then he shall be purged and bathed, as it needs against the venim,
and shall bleed at last: His diet shall be ordained, that he be fed with fat
meats, and meat that stops the veins, that leads to the heart: that the
venomous vapor and fumositio come not to the heart. In this cause great nuts
and Auellanes, and dry Figs help. For they draw and consume, and wast
venim. And therefore they be good before meat and after. Also Constantine
says, that Balsamus with woman's milk helps right soon against the burning
and sore ache, which comes of venomous things. Also there it is said, That
no cause was of making of Triacle, but only to destroy venomous things: and
that it does in three manner of wise: for it foredryeth and wastes venimme:
for therein be many things that have virtue of drieng. Also by his virtue it
puts out venim. For therein be many things that be priuye propertyes
contrary to venimme. Also it comfort the members: and therefore against
venim it gives the members might and strength to withstand. For therein be many
things that comfort, and if it be peril to abide and Triacle may not be
sound: Then as Galen says, Garlike shall be bruised and sodde anon to
dissolution, with a fat hen, and then men shall give the patient the juice to
drink. For it is contrary to venim, and swageth inward burning in a wonderful
manner. Therefore Garlike is called Tiriaca rosticorum, Triacle of vplandish
men. Also as Constantine says, without Garlike the juice of a hen helps.
Also liber de simplici medicina, it is said, that some things be contrary to
venim, and draw it out from the inner parts by heat and subtlety of their
own substance: as a Cock and an hen slitte, and laid to the venomous biting.
Also some things be contrary to venimme by likeness and subtlety of their
own substance, and strive against the substance of venimme: and therefore by
their own lyknesse they draw venim to themselves of a privy property, as ye
flesh of an Adder that is called Tirus, is contrary to venim. And some by
double or simple working and virtue strieue against venimme, as Calamunte,
luyre of Caul, Orobi Grana, Citra Ipericon, Nasturcium, Rue, Salt, Leek,
Aristologia, nuttes eaten with Rue, the root of Aspiragi, and the seed thereof
also, Balsamum, vinegar, blood of an Hare, the milk of an Ass, childrens
piss, an Irchins stones, gendering stones of an Heart, and of an Ass, dried
and broken, Castorem, Garlike, Gencian, mint, Diptanum, and many other without
number. For because the perils of venim be many, therefore the goodness of
God ordained passing many Triacles and remedies: but for cause of ensample,
these shall suffice now at this time.

Venemum is called Ios, a subtle matter that nature abhors. Addition
In times past at Rome they would poison souls with Idolatry, and men's stirops
and saddles with a venimons villainy.

The remedy against the biting of a mad Dog. Cap. 70.
AGainst the biting of a mad hound, Digma. Morsus. Biting.
and of other venomous beasts, wise men and ready use to make the wounds
bleed with fire or with iron, that the venimme may come out with blood that
comes out of the wounds. Men use to do thereto worms that are called
Leaches, Horseleaches.
and blood suckers, and also Cups and horns, to draw the venimme from the
inner parts. Men use to gine inward things, that be contrary to venimme,
whether it be simple or double. Triacle and other such things, be made in a
plaster, and laid to the wounds without, as Nuttes stamped together with
Garlyke, Rewe, and Salt And also Nuttes chewed, and laid upon the bitten
place.

And with these foresaid things, Dioscorides says, That crabs of rivers have
a privy virtue against this venim. And therefore Constantine teaches to give
to such men Triacle with water of a crab. Also ashes of crabs with Gencia^, is
a particular remedy against such biting of a wood hound. And against this
biting helps specially the juice of Capritoli, Onions, Rue, Nuts, Garlike,
Salt, the twigs of a fig tree, Mint, Orobum. All these, or some of them with
vinegar and honny, be wholefully laid to such bitings For as Constantine
says, all these draw to themselves venim, and with their heat and dryness
they dissolve, destroy, and consume it Against biting and stinging of a
Scorpion the chief remedy is oil, in the which a Scorpion is drowned or sod,
and laid to the place that is strong. Also if the same Scorpion or another be
bruised and laid to the wound, it is the wholesomest remedy, for the venimme
of stinging turns again into the body that it came out of. Also Constant.
says, That Butter of the milk of a cow, helps much against the venim of a
Scorpion. Butter by his fatness stops and dissolueth, and wastes by heat,
and cleanses, and wipeth by cleanness and moisture. Then Butter eaten
ascends to ye heart and stops the ways, that the smoke of venim may not
come to the heart. Also crabbes of rivers help, if the ashes of them be either
by themselves sod or roasted and burn unto ashes, and mingled with milk of an
Ass, as says Constantine. Also as he says, Casterium and Brimstone helps,
for either is hot and dry in the fourth degree. And therefore they help
against venim. For they dissolve by heat and wast by dryness. Against bitings
of adders and serpents, and against the biting of an Adder the which is called
Vipera. First the venimme shall be drawn cut with cups, or with horns, or in
some other wise sodeinly: And he shall take Triacle with water of the seething
of Gencian, of Rue, or of Mint. And the Triacle shall be laid about the place,
and upon the wound: or garlike broken with salt and rue, if the Triacle
fails. In the beginning the member that is bitten or stung, shall be
straightly bound, that the smoke of the venim, may not freely break into the
inner parts, and men shall help within with things that be contrary to venim.
Also Constantine says, that against such venim the brain of an hen and lambs
dung, and the juice of ye twigs of Pomgranates helps well. For as the
Co^mentour says, these dissolve venim and makes it ready to be wasted.

Lay upon the place where the Hornet, Addition
Waspe, or Be stingeth, a gadde of cold steel.

Of medicine. Chap. 71.
TO give couenable and true medicine against diverse sickness and perils,
Pharmaria, or Acesis, Medicina Medicine Schatophagos.
a good Physician needs to look well about, and be full ware and full well
advised: For nothing lets more health of sick men, then uncunning and
negligence of Physicians. On the Physicians side, it needs, that he forget
nothing yt belongs to the evil. Also that he be diligent and busy in things
that belong to the craft of medicine: and he must be ware and advised in all
things. Also to heal and save effectually: him needs to know and understand
the complections of men, compositions, mixtions, and medlings, both of the
humors and of the members, and to understand and know the dispositions of
times, the conditions of male and female, and age. For one manner medicine
needs in winter, and another in Summer: And one manner in the beginning of
the evil, and another in the full, and another in the passing thereof: One in
childhood, and in youth, another in full age, another in old age: one in the
males, another in females. And him needs to know causes and occasions of
evils, and tokens, signs, and accidents of all manner evils. For medicine may
never be sikerly taken, Truly.
if the cause of the evil is unknown. Also him needs to know complections,
virtue and working of medicinable things: For but he knew what medicine is
simple, what compowned, what cold, and what hot, what works and amendeth the
body, what keeps heal, and heals sicknesses: What hardneth and
constrains, and softneth and laxeth: He may never safely pass forth and
work in medicine. Also therefore it needs to know the qualities of herbs,
and of other medicinable things, and diversity of degrees, what is hot and
dry, what is cold and moist, in what degree, if he will not err in his
office. And therefore him needs to know the during contrarinesse,
simpleness, quantytie and quality of ye patient, and his virtue and strength,
and feebleness. For a changing evil, that is long enduring, needs stronger
medicine, then an evil that is new, and has not long ^indured. Also a simple
evil shall be healed with a simple medicine, and an evil that is compowned of
contraryes, shall be healed with compowned medicines. For selde a simple
medicine heleth a sickness that is compouned. Also against an hot cause needs
a cold medicine: and against a cold needs an hot medicine: and against a
meddled cause needs a meddled medicine. And therefore a Leach and Physician
that is wise and ware, and knows the evil, tempereth the quality, as the
quantity and quality of the evil asks. Also when he sees that the evil
comes of repletion, he helps it by voiding of the matter, and by scarce
diet. And if it comes of abstinence, he heals it with repletion. Also the
office of a good Physician stands in inquisition and searching of the causes
and circumstaunces of the evil. For he searches and seeks the cause, by
light, by handeling, and groping, by urine, and by the pulse: When the cause is
known, if the matter be hid deep within, the^ he uses drawing medicines.
And if the matter be in the fore parts, and without, he labors to draw the
matter to the stomach, that he may the ^asilyer bring it thence. And if the
matter be hard and sad, he gives medicines that deals and distributeth, and
all to kitteth, that the matter may be soft, and made ready and easy to
voydaunce. Also when the matter is defied and drawn, he uses the third time
laxatiue medycines, that the matter that is defied and drawn; may be lead out
by a couenable region, by spuing, or by shiting, or by sweating. And when the
matter is couenably voided, he uses the fourth time certain medicines to
comfort kind that is weary and feeble by violence and strength of medicine. And
when kind is comforted, he uses certain medicines resumptiue and restoratiue
to that, that is lost by strength of the evil, or of medicines. And the
restoring shall be made and given little and little, and not sodeinlye, by
couenable and temporate diet. For in them, which are so purged and cleansed,
often kind desires much, and so many times the patient takes more the^ he
can digest, without he be restrained, in governance of diet by a physician,
ware and wise. At the last when kind is restored and brought into the former
state, he teaches to use certain medicines, preservatives, least he that is
healed and recovered, fall into a worse sickness. For such things be
couenable, bathes, bloudlettings, electuaryes and moderate travel. For such
things awaketh kind heat, and discharge kind of superfluitye of humors,
and help and comfort digestion. And if the matter be fleeting or soft, or
thin, then he uses constraining and dryeng medicines, and repercussiues.
And when the matter is restrained and with-helde, a wise Physician uses to
give couenable laxatiue medycines, to bring out humors that be dissolved
before, and now constrained: least they abiding still there, either fleeting to
some other part, do putrify, and so breed a Fever, or else engender another
disease: and restraining is wont to be made little and little, least the matter
be smitten sodeinlye and fall to some noble member, and breed a more grievous
sickness: also purgation is wont to be made then: and then, that it be not
sodeinlye done. Then medicine is wont to be made in three manner wise, either
dissoluing and unbinding, constrayning and binding, or restoring. For other
bodies which be full, be dissolved, or those that be unbound, be
constrained, or that which is lost in the body is restored: With laxatiue
medicines we ^at^ and unbind, as with Scamonie: With binding medicines we
bind, as with Achacia: and with medicine which stops, we restore, as with
meat and drink that nourishes and feeds, and with Electuaryes arrayed
therefore. Prepared.


Then consider thou shortly heereoff, that a Physician visits often the houses
and countreies of sick men: And seeks and searches the causes and
circumstaunces of the sickness: and arraieth and brings with him diverse and
contrary medicines: And he refuses not to grope and handle, and to wipe and
cleanse privy members and wounds of sick men. And he behoteth to all men
hope and trust of recovering of heal: And says that he will softly burn that
which shall be burnt, and kitte that which shall be kitte: And least the
whole part should be corrupt, Few Physicians and Chirurgions use in these
days such diligence.
he spares not to burn and to kit of the part that is rotted: and if a part
in the right side aketh, he spares not to smite in the left side.. A good
Leach leaves not kitting or burning for weeping of the patient. And he hides
and covers the bitterness of the medicine with four manner of sweetness.

He drinks and taasteth of the medicine, ^^though it be bitter: that if be
not against the sick man's heart: and refraineth the sick man of meat and of
drink: And lets him have his own will, of whose health is neither hope nor
trust of recovering. He does away rotted and dead flesh, that is disposed to
corruption, and with bitter and fretting medicines, and cleanses running scabs
with drieng medicines. And after medicines that slay and burn, he swageth the
ach of wounds with comfortable and liking medicines: and when a wound is
cleansed he heateth the place thereof. And for inward evils grieve more then
outward, a wise Leach takes heed to cure and expel first inward aching, and
cures the matter that is hard and corrupt within, with medicines of
digestion, as with Oximell, and with sour strop: And first he deals it, and
kitteth it, and makes good to digest, and makes it ready to the outpassing
and voidaunce. For as it is said in principie Aphor. It needs by medicine to
put off that thing that is defied, and not that thing that is raw. For when
the matter is digested and defied, and made able to voidance, drawing medicine
draws the matter so defied, out of the inner and further parts to the utter
parts. And heereto helps some bitter things, as Irapigra, and Ieralogodion,
and other that smacketh of Aloe. For such bitter things pearce and come more
sooner to the further parts, and cleanse more the utter parts then other
medicines. The third time couenable medicine voydeth and puts out matter
that is so voided and thrown, but that is done warily, least there be too
great auoidance: for it grieueth the body, that it is feebled therewith. And
sometime is more voided of good humors then of evil, according to that
Hippocrates says: it is enimye to kind and deceiuable, to void and to put
out much sodeinlye, or to heat or to cool. A good Physician takes heed to
the matter of the evil, and of the place of the matter: and also of the might
and of the strength of the patient: and thereby he varieth his medicine: for
if the master or humor that is in default be voided, it helps much the sick
man: and if it help not, the sick man is more grieved, as Ipocrates says.

Medicines does consist of two things, Addition
in Theorike which is speculation, and in practice, how to frame the medicine
to cure and has^en health, and to turn the complections into their kindly
order and operation, the science is honorable so the Physician be honest, and
such a one as will not disdayue the poor in their necessity.

Of drawing medicine. Chap. 72.
DRawing medicine works by subtlety and heat of substance. By his
subtiltye it thirleth easilye, So^eth in to ye inner parts.
and by heat it draws iron and many other things that sticks within, and
humors that be far within.



Also medicines of digestion be needful when the matter is full hard and
sad: for it cutteth and deals the matter, and so makes it able to be put
out, and therefore it works by cutting and departing, and makes it thin.
And by the subtlety of his substance, and by help of heat, it departs one
part of ye matter from that other, as it fares in medicines, Sosien
which nesh the matter. Also sometime laxatiue medicine purges matter which is
defied, and dissolueth and draws, as Scamonie, taken in the stomach sends
from it self subtle smoke, which thirleth easily and dissolueth humors, and
makes them abominable to kind, and draws them by help of the virtue of
out putting: and when they be drawn, she casts and puts them out of the
body, and some laxe with their gleyminesse and make slipper, as Mercury and
Hockes, and other such: and some perce humors with their sharpness, as
Euforbium: and some with their fatness and glewing, thrusting and pressing, as
Mirabolianis: and some with their saltness biting the guts, as ye seed of
Attriplex: some with their sweetness and moisture by shedding ye guts, as
Cassia fistula. Also binding medicine works by cold and heystous things in
substance: for the cold parts be gathered togethers, and be let to pearce by
the greatness of the parts. Sometime they breed great humors; and therefore
they constrain and stop, and comfort the virtue of with holding, as Es^ula:
some constrain and stint blood, as Corallus, Bolus, Emachites, Plantago, and
other such. Some bind the womb, as Ciconia, Mora, Kos^, and other such
manner. Also hardening medicines renleth ye matter and makes it thick,
Co^ieleth
and that they do, by things that be full cold and dry, either moist, as by
Sillium, Semper viua, Portulaca, Solatrum, and other such. Also softning
medicines work by things which be meanly hot, and much moist, and so does
ripping medicines also. Also opening medicines have virtue of burning and of
making thin: for they open the ways which be stopped, and make thin humors
that be gleimie and thick, and does that by hot things and dry. Also a
cleansing medicine works either by unbinding, as Calamentum, or by softening,
as Cassia sistula and Fallowes: or by clensing, as wiping away filth and hoare,
by his eat thinesse and dryness. Also there be many other diverse medicines,
as slaieng, fretting, gnawing, and burning, Diaforetica, repercussiues,
mitigatiues, swaging, and other such: Of whom it is treated in lib. De Simphei
medicina. But here we shall make an end of the seventh Book of this present
Uolume, which shows the infirmities, evils, and diseases of man's body, and
of the other part, of medicines and things needful for those infirmities.

FINIS LIBRI SEPTIMI.
INCIPIT LIBER OCTAVVS. DE COELO ET MVNDO.
SEeing that we have by the holy of God, full ended the treatise of man's body,
of God and of the properties of Angels and of men, and of accidents, and
conditons of men: now we shall speak of the properties of the world that we
see and feet, by the help of God, which is sent to us from above: that we may
draw occasion to the praising of God, for the properties of working of the
maker and conditor of all things: for unseen things of God, be seen and
known by things that be made and vnsderstood, as the Apostle says. Romans 8.
Romans 8.
We look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not
seen. And therefore we shall shortly put to this work, some properties of
this world and things that be therein, 2. Cor. 4.
that we may by likeness of bodily properties the more easily understand
mystike and spiritual mening in holy Writ. And we shall begin at the
properties of the world.

What is the world. Cap. 1.
The world bering the platform of all. The Celestial world. The Elementall
world. The lesser world.
AS Marcianus says, the world is said in three manner wise. For Divine
understanding is called the world, that is to wit Mundus Archetipus, and is
bodilesse, unseen, and everlasting. And to the ensample thereof, the world
that we see and feel, is made and wrought, as Boethius says: Thou bring
forth all things of high ensample, thou fairest, bear in thy mind, the
fairest world, and make and workest by a like Image, etc.

In the second manner, the world is called all things that is contained in the
roundnesse of heaven. As heaven, in the which the stars shine: and fire in
which all things heat: air, by the which all things that has life breeds
and proves: and water that beclippeth the sides of the earth: earth, that
sustaineth and holds up, and feeds all these low things of this world. Of
which it is said, The world is made by him. Ioh. 1. John. 1.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God was the
word. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by it, and
without it was made nothing that was made, etc.

In the third manner, man is called, the less world, for he shows in
himself likeness of all the world. And so the first world is everlasting and
during in thought and mind of God. The second world is everlasting by the will
of God, and takes everlasting being and springing of him. The third world is
somewhat everlasting, and some deal passing, bearing in it self likeness of
all things. Before it is treated of the first world, and of the second: Now
of the world that we feel and see somewhat shall be spoken. Then Marcianus
says, the world is an universal gathering together of things, which be made,
and is all round, as it were a sphere or a ball: for the utter part of the
world has shape and likeness of a sphere, and of a circle. And as Marcianus
says, there was no shape neither likeness so couenable to the world, as a
round likeness and shape, and that for perfection of all things: and for the
likeness that the world has in everlasting being with his worker, that is
without end and without beginning. And Philosophers divide all the world in two
parts: of ye which twain, the more noble and simple is the over part, that
works and stretches from the circle of the Moon to the region of planets.
The other part is the lower, and suffers and stretches from the circle of the
Moon downwarde to the middle point of the earth. Marcianus describes ye lower
part of the world in this manner wise: The world he says is a circle of four
Elements, which be found all round, in the manner and form of a sphere: and
the earth is placed in the middle: and the other deal is ravished about the
moving of heaven, to the making and forming of this world. The virtue of God
made and ordained Primordial matter, in ye which as it were in a massy thing,
the four Elements were potentially, and not distinguished in tale and number,
as they are now: but they were meddeled. And that Mussa and lump Plato calls
Isle in Thimeo. And thereof the wisdom of God made and brought forth all the
Elements, and all that is made of Elements, and ordained them in their own
qualyties and place. For that which was hot and dry, in that manner passed
into kind of fire, and because of lyghtnes thereof, the wisdom of God set it
above other. And such as was most cold and dry, passed into kind of earth
and for heaviness and sadness thereof, he set it beneth that was hot. And
moist he put into kind of a^^e, and such as was cold and moist, passed into
kind of water. And as these two Elements be more light, clear and subtle,
he set them between fire and earth. In Timeo, Plato as he might, described
this first matter, in this manner. Isle the first matter he says, was without
quality and quantity, without color, and shape, and likeness, without plate
and tune, between some substance, and no substance, etc. These words be full
hard to understand, but they be in this manner expounded: for it is said, that
that matter was with out quantity: not for that they were clean without all
quantity, but for it had no certain quantity known to us: as men say, that
a Giaunt is endless much, for he passes ye quantity of men. Also that matter
is said without qualytie: for it had no name specially of any quality, for it
could not be said, more hot than cold, nor againward: and so of other
qualities. And he says, without color: for it had no color of kind of any
Element. It was without time, for as yet was no time, nor passing of time, when
this matter was made. It was without place: for it had no certain place, more
upward than downward, nor more breadth than length. It was by substance, and
no substance was before this matter, but some substance, was thereafter. Then
the material beginning of the nether world, was that unseen matter, that is
the first matter that is common and able to receive all likeness of shapes and
qualytie.

And is also kept and saved, under diverse kinds and shapes: for this matter
abides not corruption, touching the substance thereof, though it be
continually changed, touching the qualyties that changes. For this matter
that is now raren^ed and made thin, abides under the form and shape of fire,
and under fire, shall by and by, by thickning do on kind and matter of air,
that was before under the shape, and form, and matter of fire. Hereof it
follows, that the first matter, of the which the world is kindly made, is
ingenerable and incorruptible. And of that matter all material things begin,
and turn again to that matter, as into the Mother. And so the world is made of
many composed things and contrarious, and yet in it self it is one world: for
the world is one in tale and number, and not many worlds, and that is for the
unity of matter, as it is said in li. de coelo and mundo. The world occupies
all his matter, as it said there in (...) mundi eternitate. Then the world, of
the which we speak at this time is not diverse in it self: neither departed in
substance, though contrariousnesse be found in parts thereof touching
contrarinesse of the qualities: for the world has most needful accord in all
it self, and as it were aecorde of music, though it seem that it has
unlikeness in sour of his parts for contrary qualities, as Austen says openly,
super ^eo. This world (he says) shall pass touching this passibilitie and
kind and shape that it has now, but it shall abide evermore touching the
substance and kind, as it is said there. And the Gloss says there: Hence
and earth shall pass, etc. Mat. 5. Hereof it follows, that the world is
wonderful because of changing thereof. But nevertheless, for the nobility of
his matter, virtue and working of his shape, and so for easy might of
breeding, and of generation of things: the world is not to be praised so much,
as God the maker of the world, is to be praised over all things. Nothing in the
whole frame of the world is so vile, nor so low, nor pertykell, in ye which
shines not praising of God in matter and in virtue, and in shape: and the
matter and shape of the world is some difference, but that is with accord and
most peace: for yt part of the world that is most pure and clean, and simple
and noble, has ye more uniform inclination and appetite to receive ye more
noble form and shape: and the more spiritual the matter is, ye more
inclination and appetite it has to spiritual form and shape, and so the
matter of heaven, requires and needs the more simple and noble form and
shape, then ye matter of ye Elements. Also ye matter of heaven is more noble and
simple in ye more noble body, as in ye Sun, tha^ in ye moon, or in Mercury, or
Mars, and the matter of elements, is more noble in fire, tha^ in ye air, or in
other elements. And so the matter is more great and boystous in earth, than in
other Elements, for therein be more parts of matter gathered, as Aristotle
says. Therefore (he says) that of an handful of earth is made ten of water.
Multiplication.
Also the matter of one Element is more clean and pure in one part, than in
another, as it is said in pri. Mecho. For the over parts of fire, be more
noble and simple than the nether: and the middle parts of the earth be more
great and sad, and less clean and pure. And for that the meddled bodies be
made of the Elements, all the parts of the Elements be more pure and noble:
the meddled bodies be more simple pure and noble: and as it is againwarde in
Elements, so it is againward in meddled bodies. Also more noble matter of the
world, needs more noble form and shape, and therefore the matter is
disposed, as the form and shape as keth. For if fire shall be made of earth,
it needs that the greatness of matter of earth be made subtle and pure,
and more spiritual and simple: that it may be clothed in a more simple form,
that is form and shape of fire: and shortly to speak, it needs that the
matter be arrayed and disposed, after the property of form and shape. Also men
take heed of the nobility of the world, by the more noble and worthy parts
thereof: and also by the more noble workings and doings. And therefore the over
part of the world, is counted more noble and worthy. For the matter there is
more clear and pure, and the shape is fairer, and the virtue is more in the
over parts than in the nether. For the world at all is the more fair and
seemly, by as much as the nether foul part of the world, is arrayed with the
more fairness and bliss of the over part, as Austen says. Some perfection
of virtue and of charity, that passes in the over parts sheddeth it self
continually toward the fairness and perfection of the nether parts. Also
things that seem and show, that the nether part of the world, has lost in
fairness and in light, that that part recouereth in grace and virtue of
plenteousnes. For no less wonder is of virtuous plenteousnesse of the earth,
in bering and bringing forth of herbs, trees, and of fruit, and in diverse
gendring of beasts, and of creeping worms, in diverse breeding and gendring of
metal, and of pearls and of stones: then it is to wondering of the cleernes
of heaven with diversity of circles, and roundnesse and stars thereof. And
though the world be arrayed with so many noble and worthy differences of things
by might of the virtue of God: yet touching the nether part thereof it is
subject all about to many defaultes and wretched conditions. For though the
world seem father and forth bringer and feeder of bodies, yet it is prison of
spirits, and most cruel criling of souls, and is place and stende of full
many wretchedness and pains: for the world is place of trespass and of
guilt, the habitation of pilgrimage, and of woe, of weeping and of tears, of
travel and of faintnes, of fearfulness and of shame, of moving and of
changing, of flowing and of ouerturning, of passing and of corruption, of
insolence and perturbation, of violence and oppression, of deceit and of
guyle. In the world is naught else found but vanity, wickedness,
covetousness, anguish, soyling and age. The world draws to him, and loves
those that be knows: and puts away and bespiseth them that he knows not.
The world is noyfull to many men, and profitable to sewe at the last. The
lovers thereof the world deceives and beguyleth: For the world promises
many things, but at the last it pays few or none, and reseth not to sewe and
to take them that despise it, and that in the manner of a shadow: and is brifie
and intends to dye his sutours that follow him. And therefore oste times
those that it most bears up with riches and worship, it makes most poor,
and brareth them down at the last. And to use Gregory's word, We shall fly
the world, though it please us with wealth: for he that knocks with so much
woe and sorrow, what else cries he, but that he should be forsaken? And this
of the properties of the world in general, shall suffice at this time.

Of the distinction of heaven, Cap. 2.
NOw put we our hands by help of Christ, in describe some properties of
heaven, and of the parts thereof* for heaven is the place and dwelling of
Angels, and of good men (...) says* and as holy men tell, one heaven is seen,
and another heaven is unseene. The heaven that is seen, is many manner wise as
the Gloss says, super Deuteronomy. ^0.ibi., Loo heaven is the Lords thy Gods, and
heaven of heavens. Heavens be seven, named in this manner; Aereum, Ethereu^,
Olimpeum, Igneum, Firmamentum. Aqueum, Emperium celum, heaven of Angels. The
heaven that is called Aereum, is the middle place of the roundnesse of the air,
that is not full of great and boystous vapors of water and of earth, and so
that part of the air; that is more pure and clean, and less meddled with the
nether qualities: for the pureness and cleanness thereof, and cleernesse of
kind, it is called heaven, as it is said Mat. 13. The fowls of heaven eat
it, etc. Celum ethereum, as some men say, it is yt is called, the ouermost part
of the air, yt is nigh joined to the fiery roundnesse, and is called
Ethereum: for it is bright and shining. For that part between the fire and the
air is nigh the fire, and receives of the fire light and shining, for
Ethereus in Greek, is named brightness, either shining as Isidore says.

And Coelu^ igneum, fiery heaven, as some men mean, is the middle of the
roundnesse of the sphere of fire: and that is for the pureness, subtilnesse,
highness, and working, that the fire has passing other elements, and for
other properties, that the fire has for nighnesse to the roundnesse of the
Planets. And Gregory says upon that place of Job. Behold and see Etherea, etc.
By that name Etherea is understood all the space yt is from ye Moon, even to
the stars yt be night, in ye which space us roundnesses and circles of ye
seven Planets. Seek within De Ethere, what Marcianus means thereupon.
Alexander ordeineth the seven heavens, and says in the manner: The first heaven
gives light in one manner wise, and is not moved, and as called Celum (...):
the second also (...) says gives in one manner wise light, and is called
Celum: Aqueum (...) as it were of kind of water or of crystal stone. The
third heaven gives light, not like bright in every part, and is moved as the
heaven of stars. The fourth heaven receives light without heat, and is
called: Olimpicum. The fifth receives light in heat, and is called C^lum
igneum as ye fourth heaven. The sixth receives light, and is joined with the
other part, and is called Celum Ethereum, bright shining heaven. The seventh
receives light, and is joined with the nether part, and is named Celum Aereum,
of the kind of air: and so it seems, that they call Olympium the space of
the roundnesse of the Planets: for that space is always light and shining. And
the firmament they call the first heaven and the last, as philosophers mean: in
the ouermost part whereof be the bodies of stars. For Philosophers set but
only one heaven. But as Basilius says in Pxomeron, the Philosophers would
rather gnaw and fret their own tongues, then they would assent, yt there be
many heavens. Aristotle in libro de causis elementorum, describes that heaven
that is called Firmamentum, in this manner. Heaven (he says) is the fifth
Element, severed from the nether Elements, and distinguished by property of
kind: for it is not heavy, for thea it might come downward: nor light, for
then it should stye and move upward. For if it were one of yt four elements,
or compowned of the four, then corruption might come therein in all, or in some
part thereof. And as it is said there: The creator set it to be well and cause
of generation and coruption. And therefore that heaven is kindly mouable
without rest: and the moving thereof is round about the middle, upon a line
that is named Axis, that stands thee pight immovable between two stars,
that be called Polys, that be the most South star, and the most North star:
the which North star we call the shipinans star.

And that heaven has end touching length and breadth, and stretching of place:
But it is endless touching moving, for it moves by a ^^suer of endless
might: that is by God himself, that is most high and glorious without end.
Hitherto speaks Aristotle lib. de causis Elementorum And also be calls
these Poles, two stars, in the highest ends of heaven, set in the middle
thereof, one above, and another beneth: the one there of, is set above in
middle of ye Heaven. Northwarde, and is called Polus Artieus: and that other is
set against him South ward, and is called Polus Antarticus, as it were set
before the star, that is called Polus Articus. Between these two Poles, as it
were between his two ends, heaven moves: so that the greatest Circle of
heaven comes not even round over our heads: For they two Poles be not like
high to us, and heaven moves from the East to the West, and from the West
again till be come to the East, and all that way like swifte, like as a
wheel moves about the axeltree. And therefore Aristotle understands a
certain line that stretches from that one Pole to that other Pole in straight
length, and about that line, all the roundnesse of heaven moves like swifte:
and that line be calls Axis, as the Commentator says there. Of the kind of
this heaven, it is treated In libro de coelo and mundo, secundum nouam
translationem. Heaven (he says) is one thing compowned of marter, for it
contains the kind, of the which heaven is named, which is the last passing
of all. And it follows in the same book: There be not many heavens, nor were,
neither shall be, for heaven is one perfect and complete at full, and nothing
is like thereto: and without heaven is neither place nor body, nor widenes, nor
fullness, nor time, that is number and mesure of moving. Therefore there is
steadfast life, that is to wit beyond the last, and that life is endless: For
that life neither saileth, nor ends, and that is very life. Also he says
there, that heaven is not made nor gendred, but it is simple, and the moving
thereof is even, and there in is no diversity: and the moving thereof, is
singular, and round about: and the moouer thereof is a spirit, that moves it
by his own will: and the beam of heaven is continu^^ with the beam of fire,
and joined there with to profit of life of the men which abides. Also the
firmament is called heaven, for it is sad and steadfast, and has a mark, that
it may not pass: and so for full great abiding of his steadfastness, it is
incorruptible and unchangeable both in substance and in shape. And the shape
thereof is round about, and hollow within to be ward: and round about toward
them which be above heaven, but the roundnes bends from them ward. The moving
thereof is kindly round about, and a flonte, Bias or ouerthwan
and round about from the East to the west, and rolleth about, and draws with
him by simple moving, and like swifte in the space of a night and a day, all
that is there under, even to the place of the fire: and so he rauisheth and
leads about with himself, the roundnes of the seven Planets. And Rabonus
says, all that is there under, is obedient in one manner order, and not
distourbed to the virtue of moving thereof. Also he says In expositione super
Genis. The virtue of moving thereof stretches even to these nether Elements.
And so men suppose, that it draws about with himself the ouermost fire, and
also the working of ye virtue of moving thereof, comes even to the air, and
also even to the waters: in the which waters touching ebbing and flowing, it
makes in the most part increasing and decresing, and these three Elements,
Fire, Air, and Water be obedient to some manner moving of heaven: but they
follow it not in one manner wise, nor in one order, but some less, and some
more, as it is said before. That which is more light and pore, is more
obedient, and that which is less light and pure, follows more slowly, and is
less obedient. The earth is not obedient to the moving of the virtue of henen,
to take thereby changing of place, though it be obedient, and receives diverse
impressions, to bring forth of it self, diverse manner of kinds. Then as
Rabanus says, there the firmament has touching, moving, like swifte passing,
ordinate, and not distourbed, and is swiftest of all mouings. Therefore lest
the shape of the world should fall, by the swiftenesse of the moving thereof,
it is tarried by ordinate moving of the Planets: and so the strong swiftness
of his moving, is made moderate by contrary moving. Also it moves without
travail: for the parts changes place and stead, the whole heaven changes
no stead nor place: and though these nether things be distourbed, and happily
unsteadfast, heaven with his roundnesse and circles forsakes not, nor leaves
not the sad tenor of his order, namely in a point. Therefore the moving of
heaven, is the first subjection of all time, and manner and rule of all other
mouings. Also the firmament by his moving is principle working and doing of
generation and corruption in the lower world And as Rabanus says, the cause
thereof is, for the firmament sends the virtue of his light, that is
effectiue cause of generation to the earth, as to his own middle, and
gathers his own beams, and joins them in the utter part of the earth.
For as it is showed in Scientia Perspectiua, every each round body and hollow,
and bright in every each point thereof, sends a beamie line into the middle
of that bright body: that is to understand the utter part of that middle: and
the nearer every beamie line is to other lines, which go out to the middle,
the more stronger he is to print in effect thereof and doing. And their
strength comes of nighnesse of one line to an other: and thereof it
follows, that for the body of heaven is round, hollow, and also bright. And
this earth in comparison to the greatness of heaven, is accounted but as it
were a point: for the earth is the middle point, that therein is full great
gathering of heavenly beams: and of the virtue and touching of those said
beams, comes full great generation and forth bringing of things that are
bred in earth, which is the middle of the firmament.

And though heaven be Principium, and Well of generation: yet in it self it
receives no generation, nor corruption, nor decreasing nor increasing: for
heaven in his substance has much simpleness and likeness, cleanness and
pureness: and has no departing nor contrarinesse in the parts, of the which
it is compowned, and therefore of it self it has no might to corruption. And
Aristotle argues, in li. de coelo and mundo thus. All corruption (he says)
comes of contraries, and nothing is sound contrary to heaven: wherefore
heaven is not corrupt.

Also though heaven in it self be like in parts: yet needs it to have many
diverse roundnesses and circles in shape and greatness, that differ in length
and breadth, and that of diverse habitations, which be needful to things that
shall dye, as Aristotle says in li. de causis Elementorum. For if the nether
world should receive influence of beams in one manner disposition and measure,
feeding of them that should dye, and generation of all the nether things
should fail: and therefore it is needful that heaven move a slont, that by
arising and going down of Circles, now cold, now heat, Bias
may be bred in the middle. For if heaven moved straight toward us, all things
that be there we dwell, should be consumed and wasted with heat or with cold,
as Aristotle says. Also men take not only heed in heaven of pureness and
incorruptiblenesse of matter, but also of fairness and cleerenesse of shape.
For as Aristotle says in li. de sensu and sonsato, Heaven in his own kind is
bright, but in the parts thereof is diversity.

For in stars is more gathering of light, than in other parts of heaven.
Wherefore in shape heaven has roundnes, hollownes and utter roundnesse, with
cleernesse and brightness, and evenness in the hollow heaven, and diversity in
parts. Wise men tell, that of meeting of roundnesses, and of contrary moving of
Planets comes a sweet harmony: where of speaks Macr^bius in lib. Ciceronis,
expounding the dream of Scipio: In putting and moving of these round worlds
comes the sweet sound and accord, etc. Also it is said in libro de coelo and
mundo, in fine: that heaven with continuance of his moving sets a light
flame on that thing which it moves upon. Therefore the air is set a fire,
with moving of heaven. For moving is cause of heat. Therefore there it is said,
that it is perceived, that of moving comes heat kindly, and of rest comes
coldness. And therefore heat softneth matter and departs it, and coldness
gathers and binds it. Therefore the parts of the Elements, which be nigh
to the moving of heaven, be more hot then the other parts of the nether world,
as it fares in fire and air. And in ye third Element, yt is the water, moving
is feebled. And therefore therein is coldness, but not in the uttermost. In the
fourth element, that is earth, because it is far from the heavenly moving, is
constraining to the uttermost, through absence of heat and mastry of
coldness. And therefore the earth abides resting, and everlasting, that it
moves not, as Arist. says there. Also men take heed of the nobility of heaven
in simplicity of his substance, in pureness and euerlastingnesse, in
brightness and cleerenesse of shape, in rou^dnesse, in evenness of moving,
and swiftness, and virtues in highness of place. For touching the place
thereof it is most far from the middle of the earth in stretching of quantity:
For the greatness thereof passes imagination and measure of reason. In might,
for it rules and governs and ordeineth and measures all that is there
under: And that is more wonderful, heaven ordeineth and measures, and
amendeth and changes all the nether things, that takes never changing of
thing which is lower then it self, nor that thing which is unlike thereto in
kind, confirms it self in any virtue to the heavenly body.

Of the Christalline or watery heaven. Chap. 3.
THe sixth heaven is watery or cristallin. And is made by the might of God of
waters, which be set above in the firmament. For authority of holy writ tells
us, ye waters be set above heavens: which be so light and subtle, yt there ^e
turn, ^^ heavenly kind. setteled.
And therefore they be pigut there. But Beda says, yt those heavenly ^ waters
be hanged above the firmament, not by the thinness of waters, but by ye clear
and subtle virtue of God: and that to temper ye swiftness of the firmament,
or to swage the heat yt comes of ye swift moving of the Firmament. For Bedas
opinion was, ye heaven is strie kind, as Plato and his followers say.
Therefore Beda says, that heaven is of subtle and fiery kind, round, and set
like far from the middle point of the earth. And therefore it seemed to Beda,
yt therefore it was need, yt there were waters to bring that heavenly heat to
temperatnesse: and that the nether world should not take damage of the burning
of heaven. Some say that Saturnus, that star is cold, and that he has of
cold kind of those waters, which be set above the tap of heaven: and that
because yt the plece thereof is nigh to the firmament. Also they say, that the
firmament by virtue of those waters is cold and cools the roundnesse which
Saturnus is in: for it is next thereto. But how this might be reasonably done,
it is not clearly known to them that use reason. For seeing that watery
substance, by reason of both his qualytice, moisture and coldness is contrary
at all to fiery substance: It is not clear enough to Philosophers, how
between bodies that be so diverse and contrary, might unity and accord be
found in any wise. And nevertheless it is written. Job. 38. He that makes
accord in his high things. Job. 38. ver. 19. Where is the way where light
dwells, and where is the place of darkness. Verse. 24. By what way is the
light parted, which scatters the East wind upon the earth.

Verse. 33. Know thou the course of heaven, or can thou set the rule
thereof in earth. Verse. 36. Who has put wisdom in thy reins, or who has
given thy heart understanding.

Therefore Philosophers that search and inquire, as I think the inner point of
Philosophy more clergealy, Divinely.
and inner to the ground, have another opinion, and mean otherwise. For
Alexander says, that those waters, which are above heaven, be not set there as
cold fleeting, and moist, nor as s^^, frore; and heavy: for these be
properties, and have contrarinesse among themselves, and be contrary either to
other. But more berely by the ordinaurie of the wisdom of God, those waters
that be upon or above the firmament, be in the most noble condition of their
own kinds se in that place by Gods own doing: inasmuch as they be next to
heavenly kind. And this property of kind of cleerenesse and brightness is
properly and kindly found in kind of water. And by cause thereof it has
likeness, and accords with Celum imperium, God^ seat
and also with the firmament: therefore our Lord has set water beneath, under
the reason of cold and moist, with other needful conditions to generation
and corruption: but he set waters above by reason of cleernesse, as it was
needful to the conservation of the world. And therefore he says, that heaven
is called watrie and christalline, because of ableness to moving, and of
cleerenesse: for it is clear as crystal, and receives light and fullness of
light of the over heaven, which is called Celum imperium, and sends that
light, which it receives, to the nether heaven: and it is called heaven, for
it is unknown and buseene of us: and it is called Cristallinu^, for it is hard
as Crystal, and not only therefore, but because it is euenly bright and
clear: and it is called Aqueum, watrie: for it has moving as it were water of
his subtlety and moueablenesse: and it is moved, and moves the next heaven
thereto, and the said heaven moves forth the heaven that is next thereto. And
therefore that heaven that moves the nether mouable things saves principally
the nether mouable things, as Alexander says.

Addition.
Addition
THe variety of opinions concerning the Heavens, do manifest the incertaintie
of humane skill: nevertheless wise men epsy, that where there is cause of
learning, so long laborious studies are not spent in vain, as appears by
these three seueralls, p. C. Carlisle.

The number of spheres, as the truth is, and as Plato and Aristotle describes
them.

Nouus iste orbis, qui and Firniamentum dicitur, Aristot^le vocatur primum
mobile^, seu supremuscibis.

The first (for lack of the figures) is the seat of the holy and blessed
Trinity, God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost the third
person, the Archangells, Powers, Potentates, and Angels, the souls of the
Elect, which are departed in the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The second: the twelve Signs. The third, the seven Planettes: these
contatrie seven heavens. Then follows the four Elements: whereof the earth
is lowest. The twelve Circui^es are under, and enclosed of coelum Emperium.

Some of the Mathematicians, omit the burning heaven, and add the tenth, which
they call Primum mobile, and the ninth, which they call, Secundum mobile, as
thus: Primum mobile, secundum mobile, Firmame^tum, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol,
Venus, Mercury, Luna, Ignis, Air, Aqua, Terra.

The School men omit the seat of God, and in the place of it, they put three
more, as appears in this resitall. The ninth Coelum Aqueum, or Christallinum,
or Adamantium, the waterish, or ycie, or hard heaven, as hard as an Adamant
stone. The tenth Primum mobile. The eleventh, Coelum Emperium, the burning
Heaven: Coelum Emperium, Primum mobile, Coelum Aqueum Christallinum
Adaniantiom, Firmamentum, saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, Luna,
Ignis, Air, Aqua, Terra.

Of heaven Emperio, Cap. 4.
COelum Empereum is the first and highest heaven, the place of Angels, the
Country and habitation of blessed men. And has that name Empireum, of Pir,
that is fire. For it is fullye called fire, not for burning, but for light and
shining, as Isidore says. For this heaven is most bright and shining, and
gives light and shining unto the heaven Christalline, that is next thereto.
And this heaven of his own kind is in parts like without stars, and shapen
all round, as Damascenus says. And it is round, for to contain spiritual
and bodily things and it is kindly quiet, immeucable and unmoved. And so that
heaven is not needful for continuance of generation of lower things: but, as
Alexander says, For complexion and full perfection of the world, and of
bodies, as certain ends ask, which are ordained according to the middle: The
one end is most dark, as the Earth. The other most light as Coelum imperium.
Either body, uttermost, and highest, and lowest, is for it self immovable and
quiet.

Rabunus describes the properties of this heaven, and takes the words of
Basilius in Exameron, and says in this manner: Coelum Emperium, is the first
body, most simple in kind, and has least of torpolentnesse: for it is most
subtle in the first firmament, and foundation of the world, most in
quantity; bright in qualytie, round in shape, highest in place: For it is
farthest from the middle point of the world, and contains spirits and
bodies, seen, and unseen: and is the highest dwelling place of God. For
though God be in every place, yet it is said specially, that he is in heaven:
For the working of his virtue shines most there. And therefore heaven is
specially called, Gods own seat: For in the body of the world, the kind
of heaven is fairest, as Damascene says, and in heaven the virtue of God
works most openly.

Of Ethere shining. Chap. 5.
EThere in Greek is shining, and Isidore says. The over parts of fire, and of
air are called Either, where is everlasting shining of light and of
brightness. And Anaxagoras says, that that name Either, is the name of fire.
And as Aristotle says, he troweth that, for the burning, which comes of the
swiftenesse of the moving thereof: and so Anaxagoras means, that all thing
which burns is called by that name Either. And Alarcianu^ says, that Either is
the place, which is departed from the nether world, and is unseen in
comparison to yt nether, which suffers many manner diversity and changing.
For in Ethere, in that place is day everlasting, no night comes after day
light, and no wonder: for the shadow of the earth, which is cause of the
night, comes not in so high a place, as is that place, which is called Either,
as in li. Metheororum Arist says, that Either is naught else in kind, but one
element, and is none of the four Elements: For all thing which is above ye
roundnes of ye Moon, is of kind departed from the kind of the nether
elements. Therefore Either is neither heavy nor light, nor thin nor thick: nor
may be departed by thirling and holing of another body. For no corruption nor
alteration may come and enter into the kind which is called Either, neither into
all nor into part thereof: and if it came, as had composition of the Elements,
then corruption should come therein. But yet Anaxagoras says, that Either is
the air, which is set a fire. And he says, that sometime it comes downward,
and is hid within the earth: and for the subtlety thereof, it is ruled now
upward, now downward: and therefore comes earth shaking, of the virtue of
Either closed in the inner parts of the earth. But Aristotle says, that this
saying is erroneous: For a subtle thing moves not downward: and also though
it moved downwarde, yet it should not make such working. And as Macrobius
says, The shining of Either under the roundnesse of heaven, blaseth and shines
into all the roundnesse of the world: and contains in it self the
roundnesse of the seven Planets, which move against the mooing of the
Firmament. And the nether part of the air with swiftness of his moving,
sets on fire the over part of matters Elementall: and of that setting on
fire, the roundnesse of fire is gendred and bred, as it is said, in libro de
coelo and mundo in sine. And Either is not set on fire, by the matter that is so
set on fire. For it takes no changing of the nether things, though those
nether things take changing thereof.

Of the sphere of heaven. Cap. 6.
Sphaera.
THe sphere of heaven as Isido. says, is a certain kind shapen all round, and
moves all round about the middle thereof in even space of times, from one
point to the same. Philosophers tell, that this sphere has neither end nor
beginning: and therefore because of the moving about thereof, it is not soon
known, where it begins, and where it ends, and no shape is so according
to heaven, as the shape of a sphere, both for the simplicity thereof, and for
containing and receiving, and also for likeness and accord, as Isido says. Also
Alphrag^^as says, that the sphere is the round uttermost part of the heavenly
body, in the which the fired stars be contained. And this sphere goes about
upon two Poles, the one thereof is by North, and goes never down to us, and
is called Polus Articus, the North pole: the other is Polus Antarticus, that
is, the South pole, and is never seen of us: and that is, because it is far
from us, or else because the earth is between us and it. Between these two
Poles, as it were between two ends of ye world, the sphere of heaven moves
and turns round about, and with the moving there of, the stars that be pight
therein, are borne and ravished about, Drawn.
out of the East into the West, and again out of the West into the East, in
moving of a day and a night, in the space of sour and twenty hours And the
sphere of heaven moves about with so great swiftnes, that but if the Planets
met, and let the swifte moving thereof, and made it moderate: the shape of
the world should fall. And therefore as Alphraganus says, the seven
roundnesse of Planets, be under the sphere, every one meeting and crossing
other. By the which roundnesse, the Planets pass with couenable meeting, and
meet and come against the ramishing of the stemament, and withstandeth and
tarieth the swistnes thereof. And all the body of the sphere, moves a slont
about the middle, that is about the line that is named Axis, and Axis is a
certain line understood, that stretches straight by the middle of a bal, or
of an other thing from one Pole to another: by such a line understood in heaven,
the roundnes of heaven moves as a wheel moves about the axi^tree. The ends
of this line that is named Axis, be called Cardinales coeli, and be pight in
the foresaid poles, and are called Cardinales, because they move about ye
hollownesse of the Poles, as the sharp corner of a door moves in the herre.
And those Cardinales be hollow and crooked inward, as Isid. says. And half
ye sphere is called Emisperium, that is, the part which is all seen of us,
and for desaulte of our sight. It seems that it touches the earth: and the
Circle, to the which the sight stretches and ends, is called Orizon, as it
were the end of the sight, as says Isid. Then know thou hereof shortly, that
the sphere of heaven is a bright substance, and shines even to the middle
thereof, that is to the earth, and the roundnesse thereof is most far from
the middle point of the earth: and therefore the substance of these things which
be full great in heaven, seem full little to our sight: and that is for they
be far off. And this sphere contains all the nether things, and ordains and
informs them all, and is cause effectiue of generation and of living, and
rauisheth and draws to it self contrary things: for by violence of his
moving, it draws after him the Planets, which met with him, and passes
forth with harmony and accord. For Ari. says in li. de proprietacibus
Elementoru^, of ordinate moving of the sphere, and of the contrary meeting of
Planets, in the world comes harmony and accord.

And so Macrobius says: in putting and moving of the roundnesse of heaven, is
that noise made, and tempereth sharp noise with low noise, and makes diverse
accordes and melody: but for the default of our hearing, and also for passing
measure of that noise and melody, this harmony and accord is not heard of us.
In likewise as we may not perceive and see the Sun move though he move, for
the cleerenesse of beams overcomes the sharpness of our sight.

Of the circles of heaven. Cap. 7.
CIrcles of heaven be many: of ye which twain be seen, the which twain be
called Galaxias and Zodiacus. Addition


Zodiacus, an overthwart circle devised to be in heaven by the Astronomers, to
declare the course of the Sun always, between the Tropikes of Cancer and
Capricorno. To which points when it comes either in the deepest of winter,
or in the highest of Summer, it declyneth by little and little back again
toward the Equinoctial. This Circle has the name of the figures of beasts,
that are imagined to be in it, to express the natures of the twelve Signs,
which are within the compass of the same.

The other are unseen, as the Circle that is named Equinoctialis, that
departs heaven in two parts even like: the which two parts be called
Emisperia. And that Circle Equinoctialis, touches the Circle that is called
Zodiacus, in two Signs, that one is named Aries, and that other Libra, the
weigher and the Ballaunce. The other Circle is called solsticialis estiualis,
that is, The stinting of the Sun in Summer: for when the Sun is therein,
the Sun is stinted in the Summer, and the days begin to were shorter. This
Circle touches Zodiacus, in the sign that is called Cancer, the Crabbe: and
is as it were the joining of our dwelling country.

And another is called Parallelus, or the Circle Septemtrionalis, and is named
Articus also, and is as it were the departing of our dwelling place. And the
Circle that is toward the Circle, which is called Torrida zona, which is as it
were the joining of Torrida and of our habitation, touches the Circle which is
named Zodiacus, in the Sign which is called Capricornus: And this Circle is
named Solsticialis Hyemalis, of stinting of the Sun in Winter. For when the
Sun is in that Circle, the Sun stinteth in Winter, and the days begin to
were long. Another Circle there is, that is called Parallelus.

( Addition
Paralleli, lines in the sphere of the world, equally distaunt, whereby the
Sun passing, causes variation in the hours of the day) and is called
Antarticus also, and is in the South, before the North Circle, which is called
Parallelus Articus. And these five Circles are called Paralleli, as it were
Circles like far a sunder. Beside these be two Circles, either called
Colurus: ye one is named Colurus septentrionalis, the North Colurus, and
begins from the North Pole, and passes round by the Signs that are called
Cancer and Capricornus, and tourneth again to his own beginning. That other
is called the South Colurus, ( Addition
Coluri, are two great Circles in the Sphere, which do declare the time called
Aequinoctia and Solstitia, that is to say, when the day and night be equal
in length: also when the day is longest, and the night at most length) and
passes by the Sign Libra, into the Sign that is called Aries, and turns
also again to his own point. And coluri are said as it were colla Tauri, and
have that name of the tail of a wild Ox, that arreareth his tail, and
makes an imperfect Circle: And Collurus is said as it were an imperfect Circle.

The tenth Circle is called Orizon, that is, making end of the sight: In that
Circle it seems, that heaven and earth be coupled togethers.

And there is a South circle that betokens and marketh that part of the
circle, and is called Zodiacus, in the which part it seems that the Sun, is
like far from the East and from the West. And these two last circles be not in
the sphere, but vary and be diverse, as diverse aspects asks. Huc vsque
Isidorus. li. 3.

Addition
Orizon is the furthest part of the firmament that man's eye can discern, or
determine.

Of the circle Galaxia. Chap. 8.
GAlaxias is a circle of heaven, and is more fair and bright then other
circles of heaven, and passes by the middle of heaven, and begins from ye
East and passes to the North by these signs, which are called Cancer and
Capricornus, and turns again to his own point. And this circle is called
the milky circle: For among all circles of heaven, that circle is most bright
and clear, and most notable. And therefore by night ir rules and leads
ship-men, and waye-faring men. And the more clear the weather is by night and
cold, the better is the perceiving of this circle. By the opinion of the common
people, the circle Galaxias is ye vore of the passing of the Sun, that the Sun
leaves after him when he passes in that circle. But Aristotle says yt this
is false. For if Galaxias were of the imprinting of the passage of the Sun,
then must this printing be in the signs, in the which the Sun passes with
other moveable stars. And we see that this is false. For it passes the
bounds of the circles, which are called Zodiacus, where the Sun comes not
nigh: as it is said in Libro Meth. Therefore Anaxagoras and Democritus said,
that Galaxias is of reflection and rebounding of light toward the air, as it
were in a mirror. But this is false, as Aristotle says. Therefore if it were
so, Galaxias should change place, as the light changes, and this is false.
For we see, that Galaxias is always in one place, and passes not thence
Therefore Aristotle says in this manner.

Fire, which is nigh to the roundnesse of heaven, is shining and bright. And in
the place where Galaxias is seen, be many small stars and bright, and in
those stars shines that brightness. And therefore that place seems most
bright with beams of light, and passes not out of one place of the roundnesse
of heaven. Huc vsque Aristoteles liber. pr. Methreorum. cap. 2.

Of the Zodiake. cap. 9.
ZOdiacus is a circle that passes aslont, and is departed even in twelve
parts, the which twelve parts Philosophers call signs. And these signs
show to us in what part of heaven the Sun and the Planettes are in. Then
the twelve signs be twelve spaces distinguished in like much, known of
Astronomers by notable stars, and every each sign is departed in thirtye
degrees, and every each degree is sixtye minutes, and every minute is sixtye
scruples. So that sixtye scruples make one minute, and sixty minutes make one
degree, and thirty degrees make one sign. And these signs be called by
their own proper names: As Aries, the Weather: Taurus, the Bull, and so of
other. They be called beasts, not for that beasts be set in heaven: but for
in effects and doing they present some property of such beasts: as it shall
be said here following.

Among these twelve signs, four be Cardynall signs, as Isidore says: as
Cancer, highest, and Capricornus, lowest, Aries and Libra in the middle. The
first twain be called Signa Solsticiaria, The Sun is in the highest.
those be the signs in the which the Sun stinteth. For in Cancer the Sun
stinteth, and comes no nearer to us ward: And in Capricornus he passes no
further upward. The Sun is lowest.
In the first he makes most long days and short nights: And the second
againewarde: and in the other two signs the day and night be like.

And in Libra is evenness of day and night in Harvest: and then in either
time days and nights be like long: also in these signs there be three
fyrye, Fire.
that be Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius: and there be three earthye, that be
Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus. Earth.
And there be three ayrye, Air.
that be Gemini, Libra, Aquarius. And there be three watrie, Water.
that be Scorpio, Cancer, Pisces. Among these signs, they that be firye and
ayrie, be hot and male, and day signs. And they that be watrie and
earthie, be cold and female, and nightish signs. Also among these, four be
mooueable, that be the four cardinal signs, that be Aries, Cancer, Libra,
and Capricornus: for in these signs time changes. And four be pight, in
the which time is pight: that be Taurus, Leo, Scorpius, and Aquarius. And
four be common, in the which they be meddeled: that be Gemini, Virgo,
Sagittarius, and Pisces. And these signs be called houses: for they be the
home and dwelling places of Planettes. And of these houses, some be called the
houses of Triplicitie, and some of exaltation. For those signs that accord in
one kind, make a Triplicitie, and have one name, and so they be ordained in
four parts of heaven. For in the east part be the fiery signs, East.
Aries, Leo, and Sagitarius: The earthy signs be Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricornus in the South. South.
The airie be Libra, Gemini, Aquarius, in the West. West.
Watrie be Cancer, Pisces, scorpio in the North. North.
And among Triplicities of houses, those that be in the East be stronger in
their working and doing than the Weasten, the Northern, or the Southern: For
more noble planets have mastrie therein. For the Eastern Triplicitie, that is
the first, has the Sun by day and the Moon by night, and Saturnus is
partenee with them by day and by night. And West in Triplicitie has Saturnus,
Mercurius, and Jupiter. And the Northen Triplicitie has Venus, Luna, and Mars.
And the Southern Triplicitie has Saturnus, Mercurius, and Jupiter. Also
signs be called houses of exaltation and rising. For as Planettes be more or
less enhaunced in degrees of signs, the more vertuouslye and perfectly they
work. For the Sun has his virtue and exaltation in ye eighteen degree of
Aries: and his falling in the degree of Libra, Venus has her bliss in
Piscibus, in the eight and twenty degree, and her falling and her discomfort
in such a falling of the sign, that is there before, that is Virgo. Mercurius
arises in Virgo, fifteen degrees, and falls in Piscibus in as many degrees.
The Moon arises in Cancer in the third degree, and falls in Scorpion in as
many degrees, Saturnus arises in Tauro in one and twenty degrees, and
falls in Aries in as many degrees. Mars arises in Capricornus, in seven and
twenty degrees: and falls in Cancer in as many degrees. Jupiter arises and
Caput draconis in Geminis in three degrees, and falls in Sagittario, in as
many degrees. Cauda the tail of a Dragon arises in Sagittario, in three
degrees, and falls in Geminis. Beside these every each sign is departed in
three parts, the which parts be called Facies. The beginning of which is
from the first degree of Aries, and dureth to the tenth degree: the second
dureth to the. xx. the third dureth to the thirtye. The first part that is
called Facies is given to Mars, the second to the Sun, the third to Venus.

The first Facies of Taurus, and is given to Mercurius: the second to ye Moon,
the third to Saturnus. The first Facies, of Geminis is given to Jupiter: The
second to Mars: the third to the Sun. The first of Cancer to Venus: the
secoude to Mercurius: the third to the Moon The first Facies Leonis is given
to Saturnus: the second to Jupiter: the third to Mars. The first Facies of ye
sign that is called Virgo, is given to the Sun: the second to Venus, the
third to Mercurius The first Facies of Libra, is given to the Moon: the second
to Saturnus, and the third to Jupiter. The first Facies of Scorpio is given to
Mars, the second to the Sun, and the third to Venus. The first Facies of
Sagittarius is given to Mercurius, the second to the Moon: ye third to
Saturnes The first Facies of Capricornus, is given to Jupiter, the second to
Mars, the third to the Sun. The first Facies of Aquarius is given to Venus, the
second so Mercurius, the third to ye Moon. The first Facies of Pisces is given
to Saturnus, the second to Jupiter, the third to Mars.

Then a Planet that is in his house, has five stars: in degree of exaltation
and arising, he has four: in the house of the Triplicitie, he has three: in
ye part that is called Facies, he has one or two. And among the Planettes he
that is most abundaunt in number, passes most in strength. And every each
Planette is more strong in his own house, than in another house. And so by
strength of the sign that a Planet is in the Planet is strengthened ^ and is
feebled of feebleness of the sign that he is in.

As a strong man is more strong on a strong horse than a feeble. And therefore
as Misael says: Astronomers in thoy^ domes and in their judgments take heed
of the houses ascendents. The whole art rests on deeming and aming
That is to understand of arising of signs, and dignity of Planets, that they
may deem and guess what shall befall by principate and masterie in houses, in
Angles, or ascendents anglye either falling from angles.

And also some signs be called Domus angules, as the Cardinal signs, of the
which we have spoken before, that be Cancer, Libra, Capricornus, and Aries:
And some signs be called Domus succedentes, following Angulis, as Taurus,
that follows the sign that is called Aries: and Leo, that follows the
sign which is called Cancer: and Scorpio that follows the sign which is
called Libra, and Aquarius, that follows the sign, which is called
Capricornus. And some be called Domus cadentes^ de Angulus, falling from
Angelis, as Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces: as it is seen in Misael his
figure. And by rising and going down, Oppositions and Conjunctions, and
aspects of these signs diverse and contrary things fall in this world. For as
the same Author says, they be in strength of kind, and both gendered under
a strong sign, male, ascendent, and arising: and under a strong Planet, with
good aspect therein, be of strong and good dispsition in their kind: and
againeward.

Also houses that be called Domus Anguli, the first house is Eastern, that is
the sign which is called Aries: and the Northern house is Cancer: and the
West Angule is Libran and the Angule of the earth is Capricornus. These four
Anguler signs be of most virtue: and the Eastern more than the Western: and
the Northen more than the Southern. And the angle of the earth is less strong
than the other angles, as the same Author says. The signs that be called
Domus succedentes, be of mean effect and virtue: and the second sign, that is
to wit, the second sign from Aries yt is Taurus, and the fourth sign, the
fifth, the eight, the eleauenth: and among these signs or houses, the eight is
worst working and betokening: and therefore Astronomers call it Domus moris, the
houss of death: and the other signs be called Domus cadentes, fa^ing houses,
that be the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, the ninth, and the twelfth, and be
of feeble effect, and of worst betokening, and namelye the sixth and the
twelfth: and the cause thereof in, as the author says, for in the sign that
is called the sixte house, Mars is word and Master: and therefore it is called
the house of sickness and of feebleness of all things: and in that sign is
the joy of Mars, and in the twelfth is the joy of Saturnus: and therefore it
is called the house of enmity, of forrow, and travail: also signs that be
called Domus, behold every other, and have aspect every each to other: so it
is said, that there be three principal aspectes, that be called Sextilus,
Timus, and Quartus. Aspectes is called Sextilis, when a Planet in any sign
ascendant arising, has aspect to the third before him, and to the third
after him: and that from the third to the leauenth Ensample. If any Planet be
in ye beginning of Aries, has aspect to the Planet, that is in the head of
Gemini before him: and to him, that is in the beginning of Aquarius, after him
that is in the leauenth sign: and this aspect is called Sextilis: for it
holdoth the sixth part of heaven, that is sixty degrees, and such aspect is
laudable, fortunate, good, and gracious.

It is the sign of mean love as Astronomers tell, as the foresaid Author
means. The third aspect is from ye fifth sign to the ninth. Ensample. A
Planet that is in the beginning of Aries^, has aspect to him that is in Leone
before him and to him that is in Sagittario^, after him, that is the night
sign. And this aspect is called Tercios, and Trinus also: for it contains
the third part of heaven, that is fire score degrees, and this aspect is best.
For it is in the sign of perfect friendship and love, as the Author says.

Notes requisite.
The fourth aspect is from the fourth sign and the ninth. Ensample. A Planet
that is the beginning of Aries, has aspect to him that is in the head of
Cancer before him, and to the Planet that is in the head of Capricornus after
him, or behind that is the tenth sign. And this is called Qitartus, the
fourth: For it contains the fourt^ part of heaven, that is four score
degrees and tennt. And this aspect is evil: for it is the sign of wrath and
enuyd, and enmity, and in perfection, as the foresaid Author says. And
conjunction and appos^tion be not aspects: but sometime they be called aspects
by misersing and changing of that name aspect. Then when the first sign has
aspect to the leauenth; as Aries to Libra, it is called Aspectus oppositus, and
is worst: for it is the sign of perfect enmity, and signifies and betokens
worst haps, and namely if Mars have such aspect to Saturnus, or to the Sun:
And when a Planet comes with a Planet in ye same sign ascendent, or in the
next sign there before, or behind: then it is called Conjunction. And this
Conjunction may be good, if that the Planets be good. And againeward evil,
Sapiens dominabitur austris
if the Planets be evil, as the Author says. And all this is said in figure,
that the Author makes and sets.

Of Aries. chap. 10.
GAther we kind of all signs arowe, and by order, taking beginning of the
sign that is called Aries. Then Aries is an Casterne sign, as it is said. For
as a Wether in lieng upon one side, turns and changes by equal times, so
the Sun being in that part of the circles Zodiacus, that is called Aries,
makes evenness of day and night, and makes the artificial days and nights
like long. And Misael says, that Aries is a fiery sign, male, and a days
sign and unstable, and the house of Mars. The Sun is Lord thereof by day,
and Jupiter by night, And Saturnus is partener with thom. And this sign Aries
is of the first Ersplicitie. The first Facies is given to Mars the second to
the Sun, the third to Venus. Shape in Aries.
And of man's body Aries has mastrie in the head and face, and makes much
hair in ye body, and makes ye body and face crossed and heavy eyes, short
ears, and long neck, and is the house of life, and of the birth of man: For
as that sign goes upward from ^he nether part of the earth toward the over
parts of heaven; and turns again from darkness so light: to both a child
that is borne pass out of darkness. And by virtue of that sign the thing
that is hid comes into light, and privy things be known to wise men. And is
Albomasat tells in libro de motibas astroru^. In going down (he says) of
the third or of the fourth degree of Aries, the sign arises that is called
Libra, and moves the air. In the tenth degree ^seth the star that is
called Almareth and Alphet^, and makes the air clear and bright. In the 25.
degree Pliades the leaven stars go down, Pleiedes, the seven stars.
when the Sun, or the Moon, or any of the Planets comes into the first,
second, or third degree of Aries, then shall be clowdie weather, ^ wind of the
South cold and tempest. In the second degree of Aries, or in the ninth shall
be great heat.

Of the sign Taurus. cap. 11.
TAurus, Al herbs, stones, fruits, serpents, and seeds, of; operation, in the
4. degree of this conjunction.
as Misael says, is an earthly sign, cold, pight, and a nightye sign, the
house of Venus, the second, exaltation of the Moon in the fourth degree: Venus
is Lord thereof by day, and the Moon by night. And Mars is partener with
them: and of the Triplicitie he is the second. Taurus are incurable poisons
swer or fresh in taste, these haste^ sodein death.
The first Facies is given to Mercurius, the second to the Moon, the third to
Saturnus, and has mastrie of man's body in the neck and in the throat, and
gives large face and crooked, heavy nose and long, large nosethrills, heavy
eyes, hair standing, and black and a great neck, and makes a man
thamefast, and to walk honestly, and nevertheless in vain and in idleness.
Shape in Taurus.
And he is the house of substance, and of riches, and possession, of receiving
and giving, and is called Taurus, a Bull, for a Bull earing makes the land
plenteous and rich. Also when the Sun is in Tauro, land may be eared, and is
couenable to be tilled, and to bear fruit, as says Albumasar. In the first
degree Taurus, arises the star that is called Paluit. In the sixth degree ye
constellation that is called Orion, goes down, and the air changes. In the
eight degree Phades, the seven stars arise and distrouble the air. In the
16. degree, the stars that be called Hiades arise, and distrouble the air.

Of the sign Gemini. cap. 12.
AS Misael says. The sign that is called Gemini is airie, male, mean, and a
day sign. The house of Mercurij, exaltation of Cauda Draconis, the star that
is called the Dragons tail, is in the third degree thereof. Saturnus is Lord
by day, and Mercurius by night. And Jupiter is partener with them, and of the
third Triplicitie. The first Facies is given to Jupiter, Shape in Gemini.
the second to Mars, the third to the Sun, and has mastry in man's body, of the
shoulders, arms, and hands, and makes a man fair, couenable, and of mean
stature. And if Mercurius be coniunct thereto, and be fortunate: he disposes a
man, and makes him able to lecture and to writing. And is the house of kindred,
and nigh sibnesse of counsel, of religion, and of truth. Of good meat and of
sleep, as Albumasar says, when the first degree of this Gemini goes down,
the stars arise yt be called Hiades, and change the air, and thereafter
Archites and Echites, that be called Aquila, the Eagle in eighteen degrees,
and Delphini in ye six and twenty degree. This sign is called Gemini, that
is to mean twins, as Isi. says. Fables of Poets mean, that these twins were
Castor and Pellux, two brethren borne at one burden, and wereful strong men.
And because of them it is said, yt the Sun is then in Gemini. For when the Sun
is in ye part of heaven, ye virtue is doubled to make the nether world
plenteous. And then sometime be many wars and strifes between kinsmen and
cousins. Also Isid. tells another tale, and says, yt when Castor is over and
rules the nether things, then Pollux is over and rules the over things, and
againeward. And Marcianus says, that that is feined. For sometime in Summer,
when nights be most short, one part of the constellation goes down, and the
other part, that is ye forth, arises and goes up. And therefore it is said,
that the one brother owes heaven, and the other hell.

( Addition
Castor and Pollux, as Poets have feined were two twins, begotten on Leda, ye
wife of Tindarus king of Laconia, (with who^ as it is feined) Jupiter in the
likeness of a Swan, did accompany, for in those days incha^tment and witchery,
help to further much iniquity, and the children so begotten, felt Gods
vengeance secretly, she is said to hatch two eggs, of ye one came Pollux and
Helena, which was ravished by Paris, for yt which came Troi^s destruction, and
of ye other came Castor, and Clite^nestra, ye wife of Agame^non, king of Micene
in Greece, now called Peleponuesius: the tide eggs are ye two princes, ye
husband and ye adulterer: those two Castor and Pollux, delivered ye seas from
pirates and rouers, and therefore being counted Gods of ye sea, were called on by
mariners in time of danger, and tempest Occasion of this was taken of the star
called Gemini, into the which it is feined those two brethren were turned: there
are two lights which do often settle on ships called Castor and Pollux, which
if they ascend is a token of fair weather, if they falen ye seas a show of
tempest, this is common.

Of the sign Cancer. chap. 13.
THe sign yt is called Cancer is watery female, unstable, a night sign, the
house of the Moon, eraltation of Jupiter in the fifteenth degree thereof.
Venus is Lord thereof by day, and Mars by night: and the Moon is partner with
them. And he is of the fourth Triplicitie. His first face is joined to Venus,
the second to Mars, the third to the Moon: Shape in Cancer.
and has mastery in the body over the breast, ribs, and lunges: and makes
greatness in the body. For from the middle he makes a man great and evil
shape, and boistous, and upward subtle, and makes short teeth and crooked:
and is called the house of the father and of vines, and of all things that grow
upon earth: of castles, of towers, of towns, and of Cities, of treasure hid,
and of heritage. Hereof speaks Albumasar. And when the fifth degree of this
sign Cancer goes down, the sign that is called Capricornus arises, and
changes the air. In the leauenth degree Orizon arises and changes the
air in heat. In the 29. degree arises the sharp star, that is called
Canicula, At which time begins and dog days which is said the time of
infection
and seems a full hound. And then is great disturbaunce in the air, and as
Isidore says, This sign is called Cancer, the Crabbe. For the crab is a
shelling beast, and goes backward: So the Sun, when he goes in that part of
the circle Zodiacus, that is called Cancer, Dies cani culares.
he goes backwarde in the eight degree of this sign Cancer. Also then the
Sun is high toward the roundnesse of the sphere, toward our dwelling place:
and is set in earth that he may not pass higher: and then he turns again,
passing by the nether signs even to Capricornus.

Addition
Canis is a star in the Firmament, rising the. 17. Kalends of August, and
goes down within. 40. days after: in which time being called the dog days,
this star joining with the sun in the midst of the firmament doubleth the
heat, etc.

Of the sign Leo. chap. 14.
AND Misael says, The sign that is called Leo, is fiery, male, pight, and a
day sign, the house of the Sun, and his exaltation, the Sun is his Lord
by day, and Jupiter by night, and Saturnus is partener with them. And he is of
the first Triplicitie. His first face is given to Saturnus, ye second to
Iupter, Shape in Leo.
the third to Mars, and helpth in a man the stomach, brawnes, heart, and
ridge, and makes a man great upward and small beneath, of great heart and
fierce, with small legs, and be called, the house of children, and of new
clothes, of free men, and of goods, and this says Albumasar. In the fourth
degree of Leo, Aquarius, and Clion arises, Clion. a star.
and the air is changed. In the nineteenth degree Cancer arises and
Capricornus goes down. And that sign is called Leo, for the Lion is
strongest of beasts, namely of heat, and specially in the fore part: so the
Sun entering into that part of this sign, printeth in his beams more sharply,
then he does in the end when he passes out of the sign, as Isidore says.

Of the sign Virgo. chap. 15.
THE sign that is called Vrgo is earthie, cold, meanly, and a night sign:
the first house of Mercurius, and the exaltation of Mercury is in the fifth
degree thereof. Venus is his Lord by day, and the Moon by night, and Mars is
partner with them, and is of Triplicitie the second. His first face is given to
the Sun, the second to Venus, the third to Mercurius. Of the parts of man he
has in cure the womb and guts, Shape in Virgo.
and makes a fair person, fair eien, fair face, and seemly, and he swageth
the will: and is the house of sickness, of servant, men and women, and of
beasts, and betokens right wisenesse and changing from place to place. And
this sign is called Virgo, a maid: For a maid is barren, and without fruit:
so the Sun entering the part of Zodiacus, that is called Virgo, The Zodiake
declining
wastes with his heat, humor and moisture: and so makes the earth barren of
fruit.

Of the sign Libra. cap. 16.
MIsael says, that the sign that is called Libra is watrie, male, unstable, a
day sign, the house of Venus, the first exaltatio^ of Saturn^, in 21. degrees
thereof. Venus is his Lord by day, and Saturnus by night, Mercurius and Jupiter
be both partners with them, of Triplicitie in ye third: His first face is given
to the Moon, the second to Saturnus, Shape in Libra.
the third to Jupiter. In man's body he rules ye nether parts, the womb, the
guts, and the navel. And he is the house of wives, sponsalles, and marriages,
of strife, theft, and robberye, and this says Albumasar. In the fifth degree
of the sign of Libra, the star that is called Leo, arises and changes and
heateth the air. In the. 2^. degree arises Corona, and makes much troubling
of the air.

Addition
Corona, the sign of Ariadne (the wife of Theseus king of Athens, who was much
defaced by breaking his fayth^ which he had promised to the daughter of Minos,
king of Cret^, leaving her in the I Will Naxas, notwithstanding she saved his
life) which has nine stars in form of a crown.

And in the.23. degree arises the stars that be called Hyades and
Vespertio^, and then is more perturbation of ye air. And thereafter arises
Virgo. And this sign has his name of Libra, of a balance that is ye
instrument of weieng. For the Sun being in that part^ of heaven yt is called
Libra, makes days and nights even like and long, as Isidore says.

Of the sign Scorpio. chap. 17.
MIsael says, the sign that is called Scorpio, is watrie, cold, pight, and a
night sign, the first house of Mars, the exaltation of no Planet. Venus is his
Lord by day, and Mars by night: and the Moon is partner with them, of
Triplicitie is the fourth. His first face is given to Mars, the second to the
Sun, the third to Venus. Of the part of man, it serves the members of
generation, the bladder and the reins: and gives a ruddy face and little, much
hair, small eien, long legs, and great feet. And he makes a man light and
unstable, wrathful, and a liar. And is called the house of death, and of
travail, of harm, and of damage, of strife, of battle, of guilefulnesse,
and feluesse, and of wit. Hereof speaks Albumasar. Shape in Scorpio.
In the second degree of Scorpio the stars Hiades arise, and causes great
disturbaunce and distemperaunce in the air.

( Addition
Hiades are seven stars, whose names are Ambrosia, Eudora, Palitlioe, Coronis,
Plexauro, Pytho, and Tithe, they be troublous, and raise storms and winds.
They go down the.14. Kalends of May: Poets have named them the daughters of
Atlas and Aetheria, wherefore they be also called Atlantides: Atlas of
Mauritania, as the Greeks supposed, did first find out the course of the stars,
by an excellent imagination: it is supposed he was about the years. 1599.
before the incarnation: of so great antiquity is the science of Astronomy.

And thereafter arises Taurus. In ye 22. degree thereof Pliades go down: and
the^ the wether and the air is clear. And that sign is called Scorpio. For a
scorpion is a beast that stingeth gladly with ye tail. Also the Sun being in
that part of Zodiacus, that is called Scorpio is cause of hurting, and of
punching of man's body. For then he withdraws and gives less heat to the
air, whereby the air being distempered in cold, greeueth and puncheth the
body soon, as Isidore says.

Of the sign Sagittarius. Chap. 18.
MIsael says, that Sagittarius is a watrie sign, male, mean, and a day
sign, in exaltation of Cauda draconis, the Star, in the third degree
thereof, the Sun is his Lord by day, Jupiter by night, Saturnus is partener
with them of Triplicitye. The first face is given to Mercury, the second to
the Moon, the third to Saturnus. Of man's parts he disposes the eyes,
Humane feature.
and makes long haunches and legs, and even long face and small chinne, and
makes a man fayrer behind then before, and makes small hair, and a great
womb, and he makes a man have liking in moving.

And therefore he is called the house of travailing men, of truth, of
wisdom, of mastrye, of worship, of wit, and of cunning and knowing of
Stars, and divination of dreams. And hereof speaks Albumasar. In the
second degree of Sagittarius, Plyades arise, and go soon down. And the head
of Scorpio aryseth, and then is strong turbation of the air. In the seventh
degree the stars Hyades go down, and the air is changed. That sign is
called Sagittarius, Sagittarius arrows are rain, hail, and now.
ye archer: For as an Archer sends his Arrows: so the Sun when he is in
that part of Zodiacus, sends to us Rain, hail, and Snow.

Of the sign Capricornus. Chap. 19.
MIsael says, That the sign that is called Capricornus, is earthie, cold,
unstable, a night sign, Saturnus first house. The exaltation of Mars is in ye
28. degree thereof. Venus is his Lord by day, and the Moon by night, and Mars
is partener with them of Triplicitie, and is the second. The first fate is
given to Jupiter, the second to Mars, the third to the Sun. In man's body he
beholds the knees, and gives small leggers and dry bodies, Shape in
Capricor.
rough face and hairie, guilefull and wrathful. He is called the house of
Lordship, of worship, of king and of kingdom, of bl^i^e, and of imperie, of
riches stolen and hid Hereof speaks Albumasar. In the fourth degree of
Capricornus, Cancer arises in 38. degrees, the head of Cancer goes down, and
ye head of Capricornus arises. And is called Capricornus. For as a Goat buck
is a beast with horns standing upward: so the Sun, when he is in that part
of Zodiacus, makes the stinting of the Sun in the winter, and then he
begins to stie upward by signs toward Aries and toward Cancer.

Of the sign Aquarius. chap. 20.
MIsael says, That the sign that is called Aquarius, is male, pight, a day
sign, the house of Saturnus: but is exaltation of no place. Saturnus is his
Lord by day, and Mercurius by night. Jupiter is partener with them of
Triplicitie, as in the third. His first face is given to Venus, the second to
Mercurius, the third to the Moon. Shape in Aquarius
And it is said he has Lordshippe of man's legs until the anckle b^a^e, and
makes a man glad and joyful, and a great waster^. And makes a fair face,
and well colored. And of some he makes one leg longer then another, and he
is called the house of friendship, and of Merchandise, and fair, of fortune,
of rent, of tribute, and substance, of riches, of king, of knight, and of foot
men. Hereof speaks Albumasar. In the fourth degree of Aquarius, the sign
arises that is called Leo: In the leauenth degree, the star that is called
Stella regia, and the star that is called Lampades, go down and change the
air, and thereafter Capricornus, and the head of Aquarius arises. Fables
mean, that that sign Aquarius is ye butler of Gods, and gives them water,
and therefore he holds a pot. And therefore then it is said, that Sol is
in Aquario: for that time the air is made thick, and has much water b^ead:
and then is more rain then in other times, as Isidore says.

Of the sign Pisces. chap. 21.
MIsael says, That the sign that is called Pisces, is watrie, cold, mean,
and a night sign: the house of Jupiter, but exaltation of Venus in the 27.
degree. Thereof Venus is Lord by day, Mars by night: and the Moon is partner
with them, of the Triplicitie in the fourth. His first face is given to
Saturnus, the second is Jupiter, the third to Mars. Of man's body he rules
the feet, and gives large breast, little head, Shape in man.
a flowrishing beard and fair. And makes a man white, of great heart, with
round eyes: And that sign is called the house of enmity, of Ass, of horse,
and of every wast that is rid upon. And betokens travail, woe, and
sorrow, backbiting, deceit, and guile, evil will, and prison: Hereof
speaks Albumasar^ In the tenth degree of the sign yt is called Pisces, Virgo
arises in the 12. degree, Thele, yt is the sign yt is called Libra, arises:
in the.19. degree, the sign that is called Cancer arises: in the.24. degree,
Orision, and the sign that is called Aquarius arise. And this sign is called
Pisces, the fish, for that time is generation and froting of fish. For when the
heat of the Sun arises, humors be dissolved and parted, and then^ fish
use to shed their seed, as Isidore says. And so Astronomers mean that these
be the privy properties and virtues of the.12. signs of heaven. And I have
put these properties of these.12. signs to this work, suppossing that it is
profitable to them that read ye names of them in holy writ, to find and know
shortly, what old men meaned and understood of them in old time. And why
and wherefore Astronomers, that take heed of the course of the Stars, set
such names to these twelve signs. For by rising and down going, and conspect
and sight these 12. signs, that be called also Domus, houses: diverse and
wonderful chaunges fall in these nether parts of the world, as it is said.
For the over bodies of heaven alter and change these nether things, and make
in them diverse impressions and printes. And by these twelve signs, move the
Planets that be called Sidera errancia, not for they err, for they have most
certain moving and discreet: But they be called Errancia, for it is known
that they hold their course against the course of the firmament. And therefore
of the moving of Planets, and of their place and effect, somewhat shall be
shortly said, both in general and in special.

Of double moving of the Planets. chap. 22.
ALL the Planettes move by double moving, by their own kind, moving out of
the West into the East, against the moving of the firmament: And by other
moving out of the East into the West. Contrary moving.
And that by rauishing of the Firmament. By violence of the firmament they be
ravished every day out of the East into the West. And by their kind moving,
by the which they labor to move against the Firmament, some of them fulfilleth
their course in shorter time, and some in longer time.

And that is for their course be some more and some less. For Saturnus
abides in every sign thirty months, and full ends his course in thirty
year. Jupiter dwells in every sign one year, and full ends his course
in.12. year. Mars abides in every sign.45. days, and full ends his course
in two years. The Sun abides in every each sign 30. days and.10. hours
and Semis, and full ends his course in.CCClxv. days, and six hours.
Mercurius abides in every sign. 28. days and six hours, and full ends
his course in.CCCxxxviii. days. Venus abides in every sign ^^. days, and
full ends his course in CCCxlviii^ days. The Moon abides in every sign
two days and an half, and six hours, and one bisse less: and full ends
his course from point to point, in 27. days and eight hours. And by entering
and out passing of these.7. stars, into the.12 signs, and out thereof, all
thing that is bread and corrupt in this nether world is varyed and disposed:
and therefore in the Philosophers book, Misalath. chap. 1. it is read in this
manner. The highest made the world to the likeness of a sphere, and made the
highest circle above it moveable in the earth, pight and steadfast in the middle
thereof: not withdrawing toward the left side, nor toward the right side, and
set the other Elements moveable, and made them move by the moving of seven
Planets, and all other stars help the Planettes in their working and kind.
And therefore the working of the Planettes is like to the stone Magnas, an
Adamant, and to Iron. For as Iron is drawn to that stone, so every creature
upon earth, has a manner inclination by the moving of the Planets. Couenable
sitting, and destruction comes by moving and working of Planettes: the
working of them varieth and is diverse by diversity of Climas and Countries.
For they work one manner thing about the land of bliew men, and another about
the land and country of Slauens: and therefore as he says Caput. quarto. Take
heed of conjunction of Planets in these signs. For if many Planettes be
coniunct in watery signs, in the space of the years, it betokens much rain:
And if they be coniunct in fiery signs, it betokens dryness and hunger,
that comes of passing heat and dryness: and if such a conjunction be in
signs that be ayrie, it betokens much wind: And in the signs that be
cold, it betokens heaviness of cold, and of temporatenesse of heat. And
yet in the same book. ca. 8. it is said, that gifts of signs increase in
their working by conjunctions of the Planets in good or in evil. For if the
planettes be good, they betoken good, and if they be evil, they betoken
evil. For as be says, Some Planets be male, evil day signs, heavy, cold
and dry: as Saturnus. And some be good, male, a day Planet, temporate, hot,
and moist: as Jupiter. Mars is male, a night Planet, and breeds heat and
dryness. Venus is female, a night Planette, mean, between hot and cold, and
moisture. And Mercurius is of temporate kind, a day Planet, now male, now
female. Therefore he tourneth himself soon to the kind of the Planet, that
be is coniunct with. And so with good Planettes he is good, and with evil he
is evil, and with mean he is meone. Also the Moon is a female Planet, and a
night Planet, cold, and passing moist. Therefore Astronomers mean, that some
Planets in their doing and effects be good, as Jupiter and Venus: for they
grieve nothing, but help and save both their own, and the things that be not
their own, as far forth as they may. Other Planettes be evil, as Mars and
Saturnus, not for that they grieve always their own, but they help only
their own. And some move as the Sun, the Moon, and Mercuryus. For they
help their own, and be now good and now evil to other: and namely, as they
be conjoined in diverse houses of signs, with Planets good or evil. For with
good they be good, and with evil they be evil. As these seven Planettes
often work, they have might and power in often generation of men, and of other
heastes. For as Astronomers mean, C: generation causes supernatural, naturail.
and Galen, and other wise Physicians, Saturnus with his coldness and
dryness, congeleth the matter that is conceived in the mother, and makes it
thick: And in the second month Jupiter gives spirits and members: In the
third month Mars makes the blood thin, and humors thick, This is a
fallax, of ^erfortie days, the feature in perfect. except he means the
power of every se^ce
and ordeineth and compowneth. In the fourth month the Sun gives spiritual
life to the liver and to the heart. In the fifth month Venus makes perfect
and disposes the members and limbs of feeling, and of office, as the ears,
nose, and other such. In the sixth month Mercurius compowneth all the holes and
holow members, and tongue, and nosethrilles. In the seventh month the Moon
departs and distempereth members in their own place and steed, and therefore
then a child is borne profitable and healthful, and if the child put off the
birth, even to the eight month, then the child dies. For then the might and
virtue of Saturnus comes yet again, for with his either quality, cold and
dry, he binds and slays the child. And in the ninth month Jupiters virtue
comes again: for he nourishes and keeps the child with his temporate
heat, therefore a child that is borne that time, shall live, and also the child
that is borne in the beginning of the tenth month, may have help and life,
for then again Mars reigns, and by his heat and dryness, the childs
members be strengthened, and therefore the child by benefit of heat and of
dryness, comes out: mighty and strong Planettes have those workings, and
many other general and special in the nether bodies, and namelye when they
have Lordship and mastery in their own home and house, for every Planet has
his own house as Albumasar says.

For Saturnus his own first house is Capricornus, and also Aquarius: Jupiters
house is Pisces and Sagittarius: Mars house is Aries, Libra, and Taurus,
Mercurius house is Virgo, Libra, and Gemini, the Suns house is Leo, the Moons
house is Cancer. In these.12. houses and signs, the 7. Planets be Lords and
Masters, and pass and move therein by diverse moouings: and now be in
exaltation and arering, and now falling and abating. And in these signs the
Planettes move and abate with double moving, and move by accidental moving
and rauishing of the Firmament, out of the East into the West: and by kind
moving, the which kind moving is double, the first and the second. The first
moving is the round moving, that a Planet makes in his own circle, and
passes never the marks and bounds of the circle. The second moving is that
he makes under the Zodiacus, having aspect to the same circle, and passes
always like great space in a like space of time. And the first moving of a
Planet is made in his own circle that is called Ecentricus, and is called so,
for the earth is not the middle thereof, as it is the middle of the circle that
is called Zodiacus, and therefore the circle of a Planet is called Ecentricus,
if the utter roundnesse thereof passes about ye middle point of the earth, and
departs the earth even a twain, and his middle point of the earth: but his
middle point is without the middle point of the earth. And this circle
Ecentricus is double, that is to wit, difference and equance. For to the
Planets are assigned three circles, as says Ptho. That is to wit, equance,
difference, and Epiciclus. The circle that is called Difference, is the circle
of a Planet, in whose roundnesse always moves Epiciclus of the same Planet,
and is called therefore difference, because it bears ye circle Epiciclus.
Circulus equans is called that circle, about whose middle point moves the
point of Epiciclus, that Planet moves even about, and is called Equans,
evening, for therein the Planet holds even by his course: Epiciclus is a
little circle that a Planet describes and goes about therein by the moving
of his body, and the body of the Planet goes about the roundnesse thereof:
and so in the over side of that circle that is called Epiciclus, a Planet
moves from the West, Eastwarde. And in the nether part thereof he moves from
the East, Westward. And therefore it shows that the Sun and other Planets move
in their own circles: and first like swift, though they move diversely in
diverse circles. Also in these circles three manner moving of Planets is full
wisery found of Astronomers, that be called Motus directus, Stacionarius, and
Retrogradus. Motus directus is with right moving, when a Planet moves
straight from the beginning of a sign, toward the end thereof, and Motus
Retrogradus, againeward, that is moving backwarde, when a Planet moves
backwarde frontwarde the end of a sign, toward the beginning. Stacionarius is
when it seems that a Planet stands and abides as it were in the middle: So
that it seems that it moves not upward nor downewarde, toward the
beginning, neither toward the end of the sign, and always Directo, forth
right moving is in the over part of the circle that is called Epicicli:. And
always Retrogradation, moving backward, is in the nether part: And Stacio,
stinting and abiding or hoouing, is in the middle. The diversity whereof
Philosophers assign in many manner wise. But this Retrogradation, backwarde
moving, has place only in five Planets, and not in the Sun nor in the Moon,
for the Sun and the Moon have no backward moving, though they move in the
circles Epicicl^ and that is as some men mean, the Sun beams: for the
virtue of the Sun beams because of backward moving. For the virtue of the Sun
beams do otherwhile put off Planets, and make them move backwarde, and
sometime draws them, and makes them as it were standing and abiding, as
Alphtagoranus says. Other causes yt co^mentor assigns: but these suffice at
this time. Then consider thou hereof, ye planets be stars Erratice, moving
diversely, and distinguished by.7. circles and roundnes, as in place and virtue,
so in effect they be diverse and sundry, as Beda says in li. de naturis reru^.
These stars work and change the elements, and breed all that is bred, and
corrupseth all that is corrupt, and also with their contrary moving they tarry
the swift moving of the body of heaven, and be cause of tempest, and of clear
wether, and of plenteousnesse and of barre^^e^^e, and flowing and of ebbing of
tho sea, and parseth every each with other of quality and of virtue. For as
Beda says: when any of the planets comes into others ^^^cle, he departs
with him of quality and of virtue: and also by aspect that every each has to
other, and by Conjunction, they change their qualities and effects For the
goodness of a goodly star, changes and abateth the presence of an evil
star; and againward, the malice of a malicious star is tempered and abated by
the partened of a goodly star, as Albumat^^ says, and Ptholomeus. Also by
ordinate eleuations, and rising and abating of them in their circles and
roundnesse, and by meeting of their circles, they be arose of there king, of
noise, and harmony, as it is said in ^i ^ro do quimque substantsis. And as
Macrobius says, between the sphere of Saturnus and of the Moon, all the
consonancie and accord of music i^ sound. And they shining with the Sun, hide
his light, and receive perfection of the virtue of the Sun. And the higher
circles they have, in longer time they fulfill their course.

Of Saturn. chap. 23.
IN ( Addition
the beginning of the Planets, shall be set forth what manner of person these
were, of life and conversation that the stars were named by for the better
understanding of this science. Saturnus the son of Coelum and Vesta, who
married Ops his own sister, his eldest brother named Titan perceiving his
Mother and sisters, more bent to have Saturn his younger brother to succeed in
the kingdom, yielded his right therein to him for his own life time, on this
condition, that he should not bring up any ^^ue male, but the heritage should
come again to his children, wherefore Saturn upon this covenant made with his
brother, used to kill and devour all ye male children, and brought up only ye
daughters, Ops therefore his wife, having brought forth on a time Jupiter and
Juno, showed Juno to her husband, but Jupiter she conveyed privily, to the
Coribants (ye Priests of the Idol Cybele, inhabiting ye mount Ido in Phrigia;
and from thence to Ido in ye I Will of Greta) to be kept and brought up. Likewise
afterward being deliuere^ of Neptune, she conveyed him also secretly to be kept
and nourished, and lastly saved by like means her third son Pluto. But when
this was known by Tita^ yt his brother had kept up his men children, and thereby
the kingdom should go from his line, his sons and he jointly made war upon
Saturn, in the end whereof Saturn and Ops his wife were taken and kept in
prison, until such time as Jupiter coming to age, overcame the T itans, and
delivered his father and mother. But forasmuch as Saturn understood by orade
that he should be driven out of his kingdom by his sons, he laid wait to
destroy Jupiter, wherefore Jupiter made war on his Father, and chased him out of
his kingdom of Creta, into Icoly where he hid himself a long time in that
country after called Latinum.

Saturnus has that name of Saturando, making fullness and plentye, his wife is
called Opis of Opolentia, fullness and plenty, that shows to man and to
beast, as Isidore says, and Marcianus also. Fiables speak of him and say,
that he is painted as a most sort ^^fall man: for his own son gelded him,
and his genitours were thrown into the Sea: and thereof comes Venus. Misael
says, that Saturnus is an evil willed Planet, cold and dry, a night Planet
and heauir. And therefore by fables he is painted as an old man, his circle is
most far from the earth, and nevertheless it is most noifull to the earth:
And for that he is far from ye earth, he full ends not his course before.30.
years. And greeueth more, when he goes backwarde, then when he goes forth
right. And therefore by Fables it is feined, that he has a crooked hook, and
is pale in color or wanne as Lead, and has two deadlye qualityes, coldness,
and dryness. And therefore a child and other broodes, that be conceived and
come forth under his Lordship, dye, or have full evil qualyties.

For as Ptholomeus says, in libro de iudicijs Astrorum, he malteth a man
brown and foul, misdoing slow, and heavy, eleinge and forie, seldom glad
and merrye, or laughing, and therefore Ptholomeus says, they that be subject
to Saturnus, have often evil dry chinnes in the hinder part of the foot,
Disposition.
and be yeolow of color, and brown of hair, and sharp in all the body and
unseemly, and be not skoymous of soul and stinking clothing, and he loves
stinking beasts and unclean, sower things and sharp: for of their
complexion melancholic humor has masterie. Ptholomeus speaks of this
Saturnus, and says, that under Lordship of Saturnus is Capricornus and
Aquarius. His Lordship is in libra, but in Aries he draws out his kingdom.
Under him is contained life, building, doctrine, and cold place and dry. In
dome and judgment he betokens sorrow, we, and cleingnesse. His color is
black and leadye, and he is false: and when Saturnus comes into Jupiters
circle his malice abateth, and color changes by reason he is near to
Jupiter: for though he be kindly leady, yet by cleerenesse of Jupiter, when he
is coniunct with him, he is made white and bright as Ptholomeus, says.

Of Jupiter. Cap. 24.
IVpiter ( Addition
succeeding Saturn in his kingdom of Creta, fell in love with, Danae the
daughter of Acrises, king of Argiues, unto whom (being enclosed in a strong
Tower) Jupiter came in the form of a golden Rain, in at the house ^toppe, and
gat on her Persrus, who was afterward, a valiant Knight, he gave the name
first to the country and people of Persia. By this: Fable is signified, that
Jupiter seen treasure prinely unto Danae, and also to them that had the keeping
of her, wherewith they being corrupted, suffered Jupiter to enter into the
tower, and accomplished his pleasure. This declares the force of money and
gifts in assaulting of chastity: notwithstanding he was valiant and wise, yet
was he given to lechery, destowring maids, and de^ilyng wives, and after his
death was extolled for a God: he had to wife his sister Juno, called also Hera.)

Error of Nations, and faining of Poets mean, that Jupiter was highest father
of Gods. Jupiter is a goodly planet, hot and moist, male, and a day planet,
temperate in his qualyties: In color siluerte, white, bright and pleasing: and
therefore often Philosophers set the cause of wealth in Jupiters Circle, as
Marcianus says. This Jupiters Circle is next coniunct to Satarnus circle: and
therefore for highness of his circle, in twelve years he full ends his
course. This Jupiter by his goodness abateth the malice of Saturnus, when he
is in the over part of his circle, that is coniunct to the circle of Saturnus:
and therefore Poets feign, that he put his father out of his kingdom, as
Marcianus says, and Isidore also: for by his presence he abateth the kind
malice of Saturnus. This Jupiter coniunct with good Planets, makes good and
profitable impressionsm these nether Elements, and therefore Astronomers tell,
that in man's body he helps to fairness and honesty: for he gives white
color and fair, meddled with redness: and gives fair eyes and teeth, and
fair hair, fair beard and round. As Ptholomeus says, he has masterie and
rule of the air, of blood, and of sanguine complexion. Hereof speaks
Ptholomeus, Under Jupiter be the signs, that are called Aquarius and Pisces,
and be his house, and raigueth in Cancer, and in Capricornus his kingdom
passes Under Jupiter is contained honor, riches, and best clothing. In
judgment and dome of Astronomers, he betokens wit and wisdom, and reason,
and is trusty and true. And therefore as Astronomers tell, when he is seen in
his circle that is called Ascendens, he betokens reverence and honesty, and
faith, and learning, and he shall be end to salvation, and so he comfort
the goodness of all the signs, and he betokens in them good, when he is found
in them, except in the twelfe: there he says, that Jupiter betokens,
thraldom, poverty, sorrow, and eleingnesse, and discomforte in four footed
beasts, and in meynie and servant, as Misael says, and Ptholomeus also in
like wise.

Of Mars. Cap. 25.
MArs ( Addition
termed God of Battle, and only Iunoes son, without company of her
husband. The Poets fained that Mars never had father, because he hated peace:
for the nature of bastards, is commonly to be either very fearful, or very
venturous, and most commonly delighting in those exercises, that be aunswerable
to heady, traiterous, and unseemly practices. Juno found in the fields of
Olenius a flower, with ye which as soon as she had tasted, conceived and
broughtforth Mars.)

Mars was taken and held for God of battle among Nations and People: for he
is an hot Planet and dry, male and a night Planet, and so has mastry over
cholar, fire, and cholaricke complexion, and disposes to boldness and
hardiness; and to desire of wreake. Therefore he is called God of battle and
of war, and comes next after Jupiter, and goes before Venus, and therefore
by nighnesse of either star, his noyfulnesse is tempered. In color he is
bright, and shining, and fiery, as Marcianus says: and therefore he has more
virtue and strength in heating, than other Planettes as the same Author says.
Ptholomeus says, That this Plannet disposes man's body to length and to
smalnesse: and that is because of his heat and dryness, but this is in youth:
For in age, by heat that wastes, and dryness that makes to shrink, he
disposes to stooping and crookednes. And he disposes the soul to vnstredfast
wit and lightness, to wrath, and to boldness, and to other cholarick passions.
And also he disposes and makes able to fiery works and crafts, as Smithes
and Bakers, as Saturnus disposes men to be earth tillers, and bearers of heavy
burdens: and Jupiter the contrary disposes to light crafts, for he makes men
able to be pleaders, changers, handlers of silver, writers, and other such, as
Misael says ca. 12. Also (as Ptholomeus says) under Mars be these Signs
Scorpio and Aries, and be his houses, and he reigns in Capricorno: but in
Cancer is the passing of his kingdom. Under him is contained war, battle,
prison, and enmity: and he betokens wrath, swiftness, and wounds, and is
read, and untrue, and guylefull: and Mars abides in every sign forty days
and sixteen hours, and fulfilleth his course in two years.

Of Venus. Cap. 26.
VEnus ( Addition
the Goddess of lasciuiousnes and wanton lust: by the which is signified,
uncleanly copulation, she came of the kindred from Saturn. Lo, of what
antiquity is whoredom among the Pagan Gentiles, and still maintained, of
those, that should be Christians, specially forbidden by God in the 20. of
Exodus.)

Venus, that is called Lucifer also, as Misael says, is a goodly Plannet,
female, and a night Planet in his qualyties, in heat and moisture temperate.
This Planet only passes the Circle, that is called Zodiacus, in two parts, as
Beda says, and is named Venus, for men say, by his qualytie hot and moist, he
exciteth to love of lechery, as Isid. says. Always he is nigh the Sun, and
goes before him, and then he is called Lucifer, a day star: another time he
follows the Sun, and then he is called Vosper, an Evening star, as Beda
says, he has color white and shining, as Electrom, that is metal, that is
most white and bright, as Marcianus says: for among all stars, Venus shines
most comfortably and whitely.

And therefore he is called cleerenesse: for he sends from himself clear
beams of light: and therefore he makes shadow when the weather is fair and
clear.

He goes before the day and Sun, and warns that the day comes anon,
and the Sun rising. When he is in the same sign with the Sun, he is hid
with the cleerenesse of the Sun, and then he is not seen, When Venus is
higher than Mercurius, then he is slow in moving, and againward, when he is
lower than Mercurius, he is slower, as Marcianus says. In three Semitoni,
Venus runs to the sun, and abateth his malice, as Ptholomeus says.

In man's body he disposes to fairness, volupt and lyking, in touch and
feeling, in smell and taast, and in song: and therefore he makes singers,
lovers of music, and makers of confections of spicerie and spicers,
goldsmithes, and taylours to shape women's clothing, as Misael says. And
Ptholomeus says, that under Venus be these signs, libra and Taurus, and be
his houses, and he reigns in Piscibus, and in Virgin his kingdom fails
and passes. Under him is contained love, friendship, and pilgrimages: and
betokens winning, joy, and bliss, and he is true, and he abides in every
sign nine and twenty days, and full ends his course, in CCC.xlviii. days.

Of Mercurius. Cap. 27.
MEcurius ( Addition
the son of Jupiter by Maia, whom Poets feign to have wings on his head and
feet, to signify, that talk (which is represented by the person of Mercury)
does quicklye pass through the air. He is feigned to be messenger of the
Gods, because that by speech and words, all things are declared. He was
counted God of eloquence, Merchandise, feats of actiuitie, and theft also. He
first invented the Harp, and on his sister Venus begats Hermaphroditus, that
was both man and woman.)

Misael says, that Mercurius, is a Planet temperate, and a night Planet, now
male, now female: for he tourneth himself soon to the Planet that he is
joined with: and he is made good with good, evil with evil, and mean with
mean, and evil willed with evil willed: and therefore in the over part of
his place^ he medleth his qualyties with the qualyties of Venus. And therefore
Poets feign, yt he did fornication with Venus, as Isidore says: and he is
called Mercurius, quasi medius currens, as running in the middle between Venus
and the Moon, as Beda says. And therefore he is joined with Venus, in the
over part of Venus circle: and with the sun, in the nether part of the
Circle of the sun. And also his circle comes into the circle of Venus, in
the over part of that circle: and into the circle of the sun, in the nether
part thereof: and when he is in the over part of his circle, he is better
seen, and less hid with the sun. And sometime he shines before the sun,
and sometime he shines after the sun going down, and therefore of simple
men he is called Vesperus. It is said, that he is Lord of waters, therefore
Lucanus speaks of Mercurius and says: The Lord of waters much smitten.

Also Poets call him, God of fair speaking and of wisdom. Therefore
Ptholomeus says, that he makes men studieng in science of numbers and lovers
thereof: for he disposes and makes men able to science and use of calkling
and of accounts: and therefore he is called God of Merchants, for accounts is
most needful to Merchants. Also he is called God of wrestling, as Isidore
says: for he wrastleth with the sun, as he would overcome him: for always he
passes nigh the sun, never passing xxx. degrees from the sun. Therefore he is
selde seen, for he is hid under the Sun, and for heat of the sun he is
painted wanne and brown, and for his swiftenesse, he is called in Fables the
over runner of Gods: for now he passes with ye sun, now before the sun, and
now after the futi. When he comes before the Sun, it seems that he stands
next the sun beams, and is called Stacionarius: and when he comes after the
sun, he seems Retrogradus, going backward, as Macrobius says: under Mercurius
be these signs, Gemini and Virgo, and he reigns in Virgin, but in Piscibus
his raining passes. He abides always within in the Sun one Sign before, or
one behind. Under Mercurius is contained, fortune, buying and selling, and
gift: and he betokens wisdom and wit, and with good Planets he is good, and
evil with evil. He abides in every sign eight and twenty days and six
hours, and full ends his course in CCCxxxvii. days. Huc vsque Ptholomeus.

Of the Sun. Cap. 28.
THe ( Addition
Sun, is named Sol, Phoebus, and Titan, which was the elder brother of
Saturn, not that the Sun had his beginning of Saelum, but Coelum, a celando,
made and set by God almighty and called it the great light to rule the day,
which Sun is placed among the seven great Stars, called the seven
Planets: so named by the first inuenters of Astronomy, to ye end they might he
severally discerned and known. The Sun is the fourth in place, as it were a
King in the midst of his throne: for under him is Luna, Mercurius and Venus:
and above him in position and place, he has as many, that is to wit, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, by the which placing is expressed the most mighty ordinance
of God, to the benefit of Nature.)

Isidore says, that the Sun is said, as it were Solus lucens, alone shining:
for that he is the well of all light. And by his beams, the over bodies and
the nether be lightened. And Misalath says, that the Sun is a gracious
Planet of himself: but sometime by conjunction, he is made evil, and is male
and a day Planet, hot and dry: for the Sun quickneth all thing, and gives
all thing life, form, and shape. For as he says, The Sun is more in
quantity, in working, and in cleerenesse, than all the stars in heaven: for
he has more plenty and sadness of light, and he is also more in might and in
multitude of effects and doings. Also he is more in evenness of moving: for
he moves always forth right, and in his own circle: and holds him always in
the middle, under the circle that is called Zodiacus, for his circle passes
straight by ye middle line of Zodiacus, and passes never the bounds and the
marks of the Circle Zodiacus. And therefore his moving in his own Circle is
even and like swifte, though it seem sometime that he move unevenly swifter
either flower, in comparison to other things. Also as the Circle that is called
Zodiacus, is distinguished in twelve spaces, that are called twelve signs: so
the Circle of ye Sun is distinguished in twelve spaces, that be called signs;
and every of these signs, contain xxx. degrees: and every degree, lx.
minutes: and every minute, lx. seconds. And when the Sun passes from one
point of his circle, and comes again to the same point: he passes by these
twelve Signs, and this passing is called the circle of the air: and he
passes not fully a degree in a kindly day, that is a day and a night, as
Albumasar accounts it, but he passes lix. minutes, and viii. seconds, or
lviii. so that of the last minute remain two seconds, or lii. that be not
passed: and so much lacks, that the Sun passes not a full degree in one
natural day. Then by his moving ordinate, and by his course not distourbed,
he ordayneth and disposes, and perfecteth all thing in this world. Heerof
speaks Ambrosius in Exameron, and describes the virtue of the Sun, and
says in this manner: The Sun is the eye of the world, and mirth of the
day, fairness of heaven, measure of times, virtue and strength of all that
is gendered, Lord of Planets, fairness and perfection of all the stars. Also
Marcianus says the same in this manner: The Sun is the Well of inwit, and
mind, and of reason: head and well of light, king of kind, inwit of the
world, shiner of heaven, moderatour of the firmament: for therefore he moves
against the firmament, for to make his moving moderate and temperate, and
therefore he is called the brightness of heaven.

For as Macrobius says in libro Ciceronis. The definition of Plato was, that
the light of all the roundnesse of Circles, comes of the Sun. And Plato in
Thimeo says in this manner: God the master of things, makes warely and wisely
the most dear light, that that we call the Sun, by whose brightenesse and
shining, heaven and all the nether things be lightened, and and he is measure of
that that has life. And in libro de Elementis Aristotle says, That the Sun
has his own light, and the stars and the Moon receive light of the Sun, as a
glass set before a candle receives light of a candle. And therefore:
Marcianus says; that the Sun passing at the middle of the circle that is
departed in signs, sends from himself twelve beams, by the which the over
bodies, and the nether are lightened. Of these virtues and properties of the
Sun speaks Dionisius in libro de Diuinis nominibus cap. 5. and says in this
manner: The Sun that has his own being, and is one manner shining light,
inlighteneth many Essencias and qualities of things, that be seen and felt,
and be diverse in being: and that light the Sun renueth and feeds, and makes
plenteous, increases, changes and sets in place, and planteth, renueth
ministereth all thing: and so of these words the property of the Sun is
known in his own kind, and in his own effect. For in his own substance he
has most simplicity: for he has no substanciall composition of parts unlike,
nor of contrary parts, as the four elements have, and things that be made of
Elements: but he has all manner simplicity in his own manner, kind,
likeness, and accord.

And therefore he has everlasting being and during in his substance, without
corruption: for the compowning of contrary things is the well of corruption; as
Aristotle says. And of this simplycitie the Sun has lyghtnesse in
substance: for thickness and boystousnes of natural parts, is cause and
well of heaviness: and of the lyghtnesse the body of the Sun has ableness
to moving, for light bodies do move easily, and the Sun is most swifte of
subtlety of his substance and of ableness to moving: for he has most
actualti^ and virtue of working. For the more simple that a thing is kindly,
the more might it has to diverse workings and doings. And therefore couenably
Dionisius says, that the Sun is a light, even and like shining: for in his
light he sayleth never; though it seem sometime, that his light is taken away
from us, when the earth or Moon is set between him and us. Also he has
virtue of renewing: for he opens poores and holes of ye earth, and brings
forth that is hid in mores and roots, and cloatheth and renews the ouerpart
of the earth, with herbs, twigges, and flowers, for by entering of the virtue
of the Sun, that pearreth to the inner parts of the earth, that is in winter
time like an old thing, that is fordryed and withered: the earth is every year
renewed with green things and fair. Also he has virtue of nourishing: for
the Sun beam comes into the inner parts of mores, roots, and seeds: and
dissolueth and departs the moisture of the earth with his own heat, and is
like in his virtue of drawing, to the virtue of the seeds, mores and roots:
and therefore he draws to him of that moisture, and tourneth it into feeding
and norishing of things that spring of ye earth. Also he has virtue to keep
and to save things of the nether world: for elements that be contrary rach to
other, because that they be so contrary, they should destroy themselves, except
they were reconciled and saved, by influence of the virtue of ^eauen, and so
kept in due being, as Alexander says. Also he has virtue to make perfect
things: for elemental heat begins to work in generation of bodies, and heat
of the sun perfecteth, and brings forth to due and full end, as Alexander
says. Also he has virtue of distination, and of making of knowing: for
colors of things, kinds, and of shapes of things, which be unknown in
darkness and vndistinguished, by the presence of the light, and brightness of
the Sun, they are known and distinguished a sunner. Also he has virtue of
unity and accord, and that of himself: and also by accident, is of himself,
for he joins, reconcileth and accords the Planets, in their own effects
and doings.

Also he accords togethers, elements that be contrary, wherefore as Marcianus
says, and Macrobius also: the Sun is the middle among the Planets: for to make
harmony and accord of heaven the Sun in his own circle, makes that thing,
that the middle string makes in an instrument of music. Also by accident
heat, he joins things that are of one kind, as he dissolueth and departs
things that be of diverse kinds: for as the matter asks, in which he
workketh, now he gathers, and now he departs. Also he has virtue of
plentiful vertuousnes, for he gives virtue of generation to these nether
things, to bring forth things of diverse kinds. For (as Ari. says) A man and
the Sun gendereth man, for nothing brings forth srulte, nor grows, but
the Sun beam reaches thereto.

Also he has virtue of comforting: for as the Sun arises about the circle y^
is called our Orizont, virtues of beasts be made stronger, and even till y^
Sun come to the middle of ye heaven, they increase: and in his passing West
ward and downward: for his farnesse, bodies be feebled in their virtues, and
fall as it were asleep: as it fares in flowers, that open in the Sun
rising, and close in the Sun going down as Alexander says. Also he has
virtue of changing, of orday^ning, and of distincting of times: for passing
downwarde by the South signs, he makes the days more short, and rising up
by the North signs, the day is more long. Also he changes y^ days, for ye
Sun shining upon earth, makes the day, and as the disposition of ye Sun is
diverse, The. 4. horses of Phoebus. Red, white, yeolovv, black, Gules, Arg^nt,
Or, Sabella, Pyrois, Fuous, Ae^hon, Philegon. their names.
ye day is diverse. For first ye Sun is red in the dawning, then he shines in
the morrow tide, and then at noone he is hot, and pale at even. And therefore
it is feigned, yt he had four horses: of whom the first was read, the second
bright, the third burning, the fourth loving the Earth, as Beda says. Also
(as Beda says) if the Sun be speekled, or hid under a cloud, betokens a
rainy day: if he be read and pale, betokens a day of tempest: and if he
seems hoarish in the middle, so that he shine in ye middle, and send out
beams toward the South, betokens tempest, moist, and windy: if he be pale,
and falls among black clouds, betokens Northern wind, as Beda says.
Also he has virtue to comfort the nether things, as Isidore says, that by
farnesse and nighnesse of the Sun, men's faces and beasts bodies be disposed
in strength and heat. Therefore Marcianus says, that by constellation of the
Sun, men be fair and nimble ^^^id ^wift^. And therefore in Fa^^es, he is
painted with feathers, and with chiteish face: and therefore he is called
Phoebus, that is far.

Also Peholomous says, that the Sun makes a man corpulent, great of body,
fair of face, and welt colored, with great eyes, and makes a man able to all
works of gold; if he be in his own exhaltation: and to all works of brass he
disposes, if he be in his abating. Also he has virtue of cleansing and of
purging, for by spreding of his beams, he cleanses and cleereth the ^ayre, and
disperkleth and sheddeth, and dries away pestilent air.

Also though he be not hot of himself, yet he has virtue of beating, of
^eeming, and of burning. And that comes of contraction, and of rebounding and
meeting of his beams, and moving of the over part of the body, and namely if
the body which the beams come upon, be a shewer, and clean and bright, as it
is said in the science of Perspectiue. Also he has virtue of drawing too, ^for
by his heat, he draws out of the Sea fumositie and vapors, and makes them
thick and turns them into clouds: and when they be so made thick and
clowdie, he dissolueth and sheddeth them in hayle, now in rain, and now in
snow, Therefore Marcianus says, that it is said in fables, that the Sun was
fast by the Occean, and that the vapors that were drawn up, ^urned into
nourishing and feeding thereof. And therefore some men tell, that strong heat
comes before strong rain: and that is for great drawing of vapors, by
strong impression of beams of heat, in the womb, and hollownesse of a
cloud, as Aristotle says.

Also he has virtue of giving life, that is seen and known by that that
nothing may live, but there as the Sun beam may reach. And therefore Ptholemeus
says in the same cook: Under the Sun is the Sign that is called Leo, and
is his house: and he raineth in Ariete, and his reign passes in Libra, and
under him is contained spicerye, winning, faires, and fortune: and he
betokens spirit and soul: and his color is white and red, and is trustic
and true, and full ends his course in three hundred days. lxvi. and six
hours. Also among all Planettes, he disposes most beasts to boldness and to
liveliness. And though he be most in quantity, and most swift in moving, his
greatness and swiftness of moving is unseen: for though he be eight times so
great as all ye earth, The Sun 8. times as big as the earth.
as Macrobius says: for highness of his place, uneath he seems two foot in
quantity. And that he is without comparison more than he seems, it is known
by that, that he seems more in his arising and down going, when he is most
far from us, than he seems in ye point of the South, when he is most nigh
to us. And so it is known that in beholding of him our sight is beguyled.

And that is openly declared in his moving. For he moves swifter than an
arrowe, and nevertheless it seems not that he moves. for great cleerenes
and passing of his quantity, so the swiftness of his moving escapes our
sight. And this that is said suffices at this time.

Of the Moon. Cap. 29.
THe Moon is called Luna, Luna. Decor noctis. Bona dea Berecynthya. Duana.
as it were one of ye lights, that is to understand principal and most, for he
is most like to the sun in greatness and fairness, as Isid. says. For as
it said in Exameron: the Moon is the fairness of the night, and mother of all
humors, minister and Lady of the sea, measure of times, follower of the sun,
changer of the air, and has no light of her self, but borrows and takes
of the plenty of the Sun, and takes form, shape, and figure of the Sun, as
he is far or near to the Sun: Also the Moon lacking lightness of her
self, takes light of the well of (...) of the Sun And therefore it is said
(...) Elementor^m in Aristo. That the Moon is always half shired of the Sun
and receives light, and reboundeth it toward the earth: for he has kind
like to a shewer, that has no proper color, but takes light of another: and
the nearer he is to the Sun, the more he loses of his light to the
earth-ward, but the cleerenesse, that he ^ee^eth in the nether side, toward
heaven therefore he is the more shining upward in the ever side. And therefore
when he is coniunct with the Sun, he sends no light to the earth, but is in
the side of heaven and upward fully shining. And against and, when he is before
the Sun is all shining toward the earth, and nothing toward the heaven, as
Beda says, and Macrobius also. Also the Moon chaingeth figure and shape: for
he shows toward the earth a diverse face of his light: for now the shows
her self shaped bow wise, and now as a circle and round to the sight of men,
now Moynoydus, now Dictotomos, now Amphitricos, now Pancilenos. And he is
Moynoydos, when he is new and seems horned: and is Dictotomos, when he is as
it were half full, and is eight days old: and he is Amphitricos, when it is
doubt of his full roundnesse when he is eleven or twelve days old: and he is
Pansilenos, when he shines at full, when he is fourteen days old. Also the
Moon shows her self in three states: for he is with the Sun in
conjunction, when he is next to the Sun or aside, when he passes fro-ward
the Sun, or when he is all before the Sun. When he goes first fro-ward the Sun,
he seems with horns as a bow, and then always the horns be turned
Eastward: and when he comes again to the conjunction, he receives the same
figure and shape and then the horns be always turned west ward: and in that
side that is turned from ward the Sun, he seems always void, and in the side
that is toward the Sun, full of light.

The Moon increases all humors: for by priuye passings of kind, floude and
ebb is increased and multiplied. In her waning the marrow of ye bones, the
brain of the head, and humors of the body be made less: and in wexing and
increasing of her, they are increased, and therefore all thing has compassion
of the default of the Moon. Also she draws to her waters of the sea, for as
the stone Adamas draws after him iron, so the Moon moves and draws after
her the Occean sea. Therefore in the rising of the Moon, the sea swells and
increases, and flows by East, and ebbeth and decreaseth by West: and
againward when the Moon goes down, the sea flows by West, and ebbeth by
East. And as the Moon has more light or less: so the sea stretches or
withdraws in his flowing and ebbing, as Marcobius says in lib. Ciceronis.
The sea of Occean, in the increasing of the Moon holds this manner: for the
first day of the Moon he is more full then he is wont, and is at highest: and
decreaseth and waneth the second day, and so he withdraws before the seventh
day. Then again he increases and springs seven days, so yt the fourteenth
day the spring is at the highest: and so always in the new Moon, the spring of
the sea is highest, and also in the full of the Moon. Also the Moon gathers
deawe in the air, for she printeth the virtue of her moisture in the air, and
changes the air in a manner that is unseen, and breeds and gendereth deaw
in the utter part thereof: for we see that ye more clear that the Moon is in
the Summer time, the more plenty of deaw is seen upon the grass and herbs.
Also among planets, the Moon full ends her course, in most short time: for
her circle is more short: and therefore in the space of seven and twenty
days and eight hours, he passes by all the signs of the Circle that is
called Zodiacus, as Ptholomeus says. And therefore Ptholomeus speaks in this
manner of the Moon, and says, that under the Moon is Cancer, and is her
house, and she raigueth in Cancer, and the passing of her reign is in Libra,
and is a cold Planet, and passing moist, female, and a night Planet, and
abides in every sign two days, six hours and a half: and full ends his
course, in seven and twenty days and viii. hours. Among all the stars that
he called Erratice, the Moon passes in most uncertain and unsteadfast moving:
For because of shortness of his course, he passes and walks now under the
Sun, now behind and after the sun. And when the sun passes by the South
and lowest Circles, then the Moon passes by the North and lower circles: and
then the Moon is upright as a boat, and has horns upward: but when he is
under the Sun, he has horns boowing toward the earth, and when he wayneth, he
is areared, as Beda says. Also when the Moon is between us and the sun,
then often is Eclypse, that is default of ye sun: and this default may never
fall by kind but in conjunction of the sun and moon, when the Moon
changes. And this conjunction is in the line, that is called, Linea
eclyptica, and is the middle line of the circle that is called Zodiacus, and
the Eclipse falls always when ye sun is in the head of the Dragon, and the
Moon in the tail againward. Hereof speaks Albumasar in libro de motibus
planetarum, and says: If the Moon meets with the Sun, and passes even
between us and the sun, he makes us have default of the sun beams: and
that is in Capite or in Cauda Draconis, in the head or in the tail of the
Dragon: what is Caput and Cauda draconis, it shall be said hereafter. Also when
the earth is between the Sun and the Moon, the Moon lacks his light, and
is Eclipsed. Hereof speaks Marcianus in lib. de Astro. and says in this
manner. The Moon going upward or downward, falls into the Sun line if her be
xxx. days old. When he is all under the sun, he darkneth and takes away
the light of the sun, and makes darkness in earth: and makes not this
default in every month, for he is not always in the same line, that is even and
straight line between the sun and the earth. And the same default falls on
the Moon, when the Moon is all before the sun, and is fifteen days old.

For if the Sun be then under the earth, and makes shadow of the greatness
of the earth, that stretches to the line that is straight before the Sun, and
if the Moon comes into that line, her light is taken away: for the shadow of
the earth is even set between the Sun and the Moon. Then the Moon is not
so clipsed every month: for he is not full in the line that the clipse is in,
and that shadow is not even between him and the Sun: and therefore his light
is not every month taken away. Also sometime the Moon contains in it self, a
manner darkness and dimnes, and that comes of qualytie of his own body,
that is kindly dark: for he has no light of himself, but of the Sun: or as
some men mean, that darkness comes of the shadow of the earth, of the which
is rebounded a manner dim spleke in the body of the Moon, that dimmeth some
deal his light: and that is most, when he is nigh to the earth, the Moon
takes some manner hoare and filth as Marcianus says, and when he passes up
to the higher circles, he is bright and clean, and then he seems not wemmed,
with no speckles, and smotching, as Marcianus says. Also the Moon signifies
and betokens changing of times and of weathers: for (as Beda says) if the
Moon be red as gold in the beginning, then he betokens winds: and if
there be black specks in the over corner and luemmes, he betokens rain in the
beginning of the month: and if he be red in the middle, it betokens fair
wether and clear in the full of the Moon: and in night rowing, if the Moon
light spranckleth on the cares, then tempest shall come in short time, as Beda
says. Also in ye harmony of heaven, the Moon makes the heauiest sown, The
deepest bace.
as Marcianos says: for in the circle of the Moon is an heavy sown, as a
sharp sown is in the sphere of heaven yt comes of ordinate sown, and of
sherking of the moving of the circles, and of the roundnesse of heaven.

And as he says, thereof comes most sweet melody and accord. Also the Moon
gives plenteousnesse to the seeds of the earth: For in ra^yng she over
seedeth, that profits by deaw, that falls of the body of the Moon as he
says: and therefore in Fables she is called Proserpina: Procerpipina, the wife
of Pluto, daughter to Jupiter she is taken sometim^ for the Moon.
For Nations call the Moon Goddess of seeds that be thrown in the earth.
Also she is called Diana, Goddess of woods and groves: for the gives light to
wild beasts, that gather their meat by night in woods and groves. And
therefore nations call the Moon Goddess of hunters, for hunting is ofre in
woods and groves: Diana, and daughter of Jupiter flieng the company of men, for
her cha^i life: she is also taken for and moon.
and therefore they painted a Goddess, with a bow in her hand, for hunters
use bows. Also though the Moon be cold and moist, yet he takes heat of
nighnesse of the circle of the Sun, for by heat and dryness of the Sun,
his passing coldness and moisture is tempered, for that he should not in
coming down toward the earth, make winter every month, as Macrobius says.
Also as Albumasar says, the Moon cleanses the air, for by his continual
moving, he makes the air clear and thin: and so if moving of the sphere of
the Moon were not, the air should be corrupt with thickness and infection
that should come of outdrawing by night of vapors and moisture, that great
corruption should so^^e thereof. Also Astronomers tell, that among all
Planets, the Moon in ^ulyng has most power, over disposition of man's body:
For as Ptholemeus says, in libro de iudicijs astrorum. Under the Moon is
contained sickness, loss, fear and dread, and bomage. Therefore about the
changing of man's body, the virtue of the Moon works principally: and that
falls through the swiftness of his moving, and for that he is nigh to us,
and also for the privy power and might that is kindly in the Moon: and
therefore a Physician knows not perfectly the changing of sickness, but if
he know the effects and workings of the Moon, in man's body. Therefore
Hippocrates in principio Pronosticoruin, speaks of the Moon, and says in
this manner: A certain star is of heaven, in the which a Physician must take
heed and understand it, the purueyaunce thereof is wonderful and dreadful.
And Galen in commento de diebus creticis. says: A Physician must take heed
and advise him of a certain thing, that fails not, nor deceives, the which
thing, Astronomers of Egypt taught, that by conjunction of the body of the
Moon with stars fortunate, comes dreadful sickness to good end: and with
contrary Planets, falls the contrary, yt is to evil end. And therefore a
Physician, that is perfectly wise and ware, by Hippocrates learning, shall
behold first the Moon, and when he is full of light: for then humors increase
in men, and marowe also, and increasing in the Sea, and in all worldly things.
Then when the sick man falls in his bed, it needs to see and know, if
the Moon passes then out of conjunction: for then the sickness increases,
till the Moon come to the degree of opposition, that is before the Sun in the
full of the Moon, and if he be then with an evil Planet, or in an evil
sign, and hard aspect to yt hoose of Mars, that is the viii, sign, that is to
meaning: If the Moon have aspect to Mars, that is called the Lord of yt sign,
named Scorpio, then of death is dread, and if the Moon be with a good Planet,
and in a good house and sign, and has aspects to the Lord of the house of
life, that is Mars, That is Lord of Aries, that is the first sign: then is
hope of life's and so men shall see and doeme of other, as it is said in the
book that Hippocrates made, and has the name, De Iudicajs infirmitacis
secundum Luuam.

Of certain properties of the Moon. Cap. 30.
ALso the Moon has some properties, which he not full good, as well in
substance as in effect: for that he has substanciall darkness, because yt he
has no light of himself, as other Planets have: and he is most unstable, for
no star passes so about by all the parts of Zodiacus, as the Moon does.
And also of evil willed stars and grievous, he takes evil qualyties and
griefs: for as Ptholomeus says, the Moon with evil Planets is evil.

Also the Moon by his sitting between us and the Sun, takes from us the
clear light of the Sun: and when the Moon comes into the shadow of the
earth, he leeseth his light and fairness, and perfection. Also for he is nigh
to fat air and to the earth, he takes a foul s^leke and unseemly, of
shaddowe, To armed the man in the Moon.
of the air, and of infect air, as Marcianus says. Also the farther the
Moon goes fro-warde to the Sun, the more light he takes and cleerenesse,
in the side that is toward the earth: and the more he fails and abateth in
light in the side that is toward heaven. Also he has many evil effects and
doing, for as Ptholomeus says, The Moon makes a man unstable, changeable,
Not in will but in working.
and removing about from place to place.

And be makes a man evil disposed and disordered in the eyes, and he makes
in a man the one eye more then that other, or he makes him look a squint, and
some we^ or a Pearl in the one eye, and he says more heereto, that a man in
whose complexion the constellation of yt Moon has masterie, shall not be
without default or a wem in his eye, and that happens by reason of yt passing
moisture of ye Moon, that is nigh to the eyes, and disposes the humors of the
eyes to so evil and shrewde quality. Also it is said in lib. Milala^^^ cap. 5.
that the Eclipse of the Moon, if it be in Winter, in cold signs, betokens
passing coldness and great binding in earth and in air, and in waters, and if
it be in watery signs, it betokens full great plenty of rain and of water:
and if it be in nirie signs, it betokens perit of tempest and of winds.
Ptholomeus and Albumasar say, that the Moon when he is in yt second sign
after yt ascendent, Observation begat expencce whereof preecedeth custo^e, but
beware of destenie.
betokens discomfort, woe, sorrow, and loss of cattle by thieves and robbers.
Also in the fourth sign, and in the art, and in the right, he betokens
wrath, anguish, with drawing, and chaungeablenesse of ye people, and betokens
the tenth sign, yt who yt then begin to rebel shall be soon set down and
in ye twelfth, he betokens let, strife, hardness, and prison of friends. And
in all other houses and signs he has good effect, and betokens good,
namelye if he be in company with good Planettes. By diverse age of the Moon,
menstruall humors in women move, and brain in heasts, and diverse passions be
excited in bodies by virtue of the Moon, as it fateth in them that have the
falling evil. This that is said of the properties of the Moon, and of other
Planettes is sufficient for this time.

Of the head and tail of the Dragon. Ca. 31.
TWo stars there be, that be no planets, but it seems, that they have kind
and effect of Planets: and they be called Caput Draconis, and Cauda, the head
of the Dragon and the tail. And they move with the firmament, and follow his
course: and so they pass from the sign that is called Leo, into the sign
that is called Cancer: and from that sign that is called Cancer, into the
sign that is called Gemini, and so forth. And the Dragons head abides in
every sign, 18 months, that is a year and an half, and the tail also: and
full ends his course in. 18. years, and if the head he in any sign, always
the tail is in the sign that is even before him, and the womb in the fourth
sign, and if the head be in Cancer, the womb is in Aries, and the tail is in
Capricornus. And if the head be in Leone, the womb is in Cancer, and the tail
in Aquario: and so of other signs. And therefore because of contrary aspect,
the tail is always benimous. And the head has his exaltation in three degrees
of Gemini, and his abating in three degrees of Sagittarius. And againward: the
tail has his exaltation in the third degrees of Sagittarij, and falls in
the third degree of Gemini. And here we must take heed, that when the Moon
is coniunct to the head of the Sun, or to the tail, being nigh the degrees of
conjunction, by. 12. degrees thence or within, always the Eclipse shall be more
or less, as the head or tail comes nere of father to the degree of
conjunction. And this has a special place in the Eclipse of the Sun. In the
same wise it shall be held in the Eclipse of the Moon.

For if the Moon comes in any sign with the tail, and the Sun is with the
head in the sign that is even before: then shall be the Eclipse of the Moon.
And againewerd: if the Sun be with the tail in any sign, and the Moon with
the head in the sign that is even before him: then again shall be ye Eclipse of
ye Moon. And if he comes in the same degree: then the Eclipse shall be
gneral: and so he must come in ye head or in the tail in yt same degree, or
nigh.12. degrees thence. or within, if the Eclipse shall fall. And so in the
conjunction, the Sun and the Moon must be in the same sign, or in the same
degree, and in the same minute, and in the same degree.

Hereof it follows, that though the Moon be joined with the Sun, and
changes every month, he makes not Eclispe always: for they come not alwaie
togethers under the line of Eclipse. For yt Moon changes not, neither has
conjunction always in yt same degree, neither the head and tail meet always in
yt conjunction, nor oppsition of the Sun and the Moon.

^Of the star Cometa, chap. 32.
COmeta is a Star beclipped with burning gleames, as Beda does say, and is
sodeinly bred, and betokens changing of kings, and is a token of Pestilence,
or of war, or of winds, or of great heat. Sometime it seems, yt such stars
so beset with blasing beams, move with the moving of Planets: And sometime it
seems that they be pight and not moveable. And always (as Beda says) they be
seen in a certain place of heaven: And they pass not by diverse parts of yt
Zodiac, as Planets do, but if seems yt they be in yt circle that is called
Laclens, or Galaxia, and they spread their beams toward the North, and never
toward the West. And therefore they be not seen in the West side. And they be
seen but in short space of time, that is seven days: but sometime it is
seen the space of. 8. days, as Beda tells. Whereof it is yt this star that
is called Cometa comes and is gendered, whether it be of Planettes, or of
stars that be pight: always he is seen in the firmament in the North side as
he says. Hereof it follows, that the star that was seen in the birth of
Christ was not Cometa, for he passed and moved out of the East by South toward
the West: and so move not the stars that be called Stella Comete, as
Chrisostomus says.

Of fixed stars. Cap. 33.
STellae be called stars, and have that name of Stando, standing: for though
they move always, yet always it seems that they stand, as Isido. says. And
they be called Sidera, and have that name of Considerando, taking heed: for of
them Astonomers take heed, and by them give judgments and dontes, and know
what shall befall. Also they he called Astra, and have that name of Austros,
or of Anastros: for by opposition, bodies of some stars, be pight in the
where of the firmament, as nails in the roundnesse of a wheel: and that is
troth of some, and namely of the more great, as Isido, says. And Alphraganus
says, that a star is light gathred in his rou^dnesse and sphere. Therefore the
more gathering of light is in the substance of the body of a star, the more
he is in quantity, in fairness, cleerenesse, and also the more in might and
virtue. Also he calls stars of light: for that they be bright bodies, and
give to men and beasts, by night when it is dark, the comfort of light, and
ornate and hight the over part of this world, and as far forth as they
may, they be in steed of the Sun, of whom they receive light, and by
continual sending out of beams, they cleanse and pourge the air: by virtue
of them, corruption of pestilence is taken away from the nether world. Also
by virtue of stars. Elements that be contrary each to other, be conciled and
accorded, and lightened with everlasting shining of stars. By heat of them
all things the nourished and saved: for after Plato (as Beda says) the
stars be of fiery kind, for many men in old time said, that heaven with
light and ornaments thereof is of fiery kind. And Aristotle and other
Philosophers mean and understand, that heaven is the fifth Element,
distinguished from the four Elements in kind and in property, and they say,
that the stars he not cold nor hot in substance, no more than the heaven
is: they be but hot only in working, effect, and doing. For heaven by
continual and everlasting m^uing, heateth that thing, upon the which he
moves, and so heaven and the stars heat and cool these nether things: for
by moving and rebounding of beams, they heat and breed virtue of heat in
the utter part of a bodies that is before them. But whereof the stars be made,
certain it is, that they be of most pure and simple kind, and not corrupt.
Lenthing their shape they be most bright, and also they be round in figure, and
be sad, and sound, not hollow, nor hoaly in the utter part: they be plain and
not rough nor corued: in place they be highest, in moving they be most swifte,
in quantity they be most great and huge, though they same little, for farnesse
of place, in number and tale: only he knows how many they be, that numbreth
and tells the stars In might and working, the stars be most vertueus among
bodies: for the stars grauer, and change and save the nether things.

The stars by out sending of their beams, lyghten the darkness of the
night, and full end their course in spheres and circles, and move in one
swifenesse no tune more swiftlye than other: and they hide their light in
presence of the Sun, of whom they receive light. In their coming and rising,
they change the air in many manner wise: for they make now tempest and now
fair weather and clear: as Beda says. Also by changing of color, and
sprincklyng of beams, they betoken, now good happes, and now evil, as
Astronomers tell.

Also they be gracious to shipmen, and show their way in the middle of the
Sea. Where stars be coniunct nigh togethes, they give the more light, and be
more fair and bright.

As it fares in the seven stars, and in the stare of the circle the which is
called Galaxia, that is Watlingstrete. And though they show so great
fairness because of company and gathering, togethers, and also be more bright
and clear, being coniunct then else, yet for to take heed of each by
himself, they seem not fair. And the cause thereof is (as Marcianus says)
for passing brightness of ones shining, takes away the default of another,
and so when one lacks and fails, another that is more clear amendeth and
fulfilloth. Also for fairness of place, stars seen to men unlike great:
for some seem more and some less. For Albumasar says: The more even the
stars be straight over our heads, the less they soeme in quantity, and more
little to our sight. Againeward: The farther they be from the place that we be
in, in their arising and down going, the more great they seem generally to
our sight. And also they seem more great in quantity in the down going, then
in the rising, as Beda says, A point is called Ceneta capitis nostri, and is
the point that is above heaven over our heads. And so it is said, that a thing
is in the Ceneth of our head, when he is above straight over our heads: for
Ceneth is called a straight setting ou^er our heads, and the reason thereof is
for this cause, as he says, for vapors that come up from the earth, suffer
not the beams to come straight and even to our eien: and therefore the eye is
deceived in such a sight. For the eye weeneth that it takes in himself what
is beset in the air, and lightened with the Sun beam. But Algazel says, such
a fight is deceived: as the sight of a Candle is seen without let of an eye
that is whole, but of a bleare eye it is not seen without likeness and shape
of a manner of a rainebowe. And an eye that is deceived, weeneth always to see
in another thing, as in light that it sees, and weeneth that is in another
thing that is not, but rather in the same eye, as Auicen says, Capitulo de
obscuriefare ^isus. Seek before of the sight. Also Marcianus says. That
stars pass in there circles with harmony: for all tunes and accord of music
be found among stars, nor the wright of the nether bodies make not discord
in the melodye of the over bodies: neither in melody of the middle bodies. Nor
againewarde, the sharpness of sown of our bodies, destroy not the sown of
the nether heavy bodies, as Marcianus says Aristotle says in libro de coelo
and mundo, that stars be of the matter of the body of heaven, in the which
they be pight. And therefore they be kindlye clear and bright, as the heaven
is, in the which they go about. All the stars have light of their own out
of the Moon. But though Stars have light of their own: yet to perfection of
their light, they receive supplyment and help of the Sun. Stars
communicate and part each with other their light: For one makes another more
clear, and the goodness of the one stretches the goodness of another, as it
is said In libro ^le coniunctionibus Planetarum. Also stars be contained in
their own proper circles and place: and therefore though the circle of one
meet sometime with the circle of another, and enters therein, they forsake
not therefore their own circles and place, nor let them that they meet, nor
do wrong none of them to other, Also (as Marcianus says, Some stars arise
sooner, and go sooner down: and some starreo arise later, and go later down:
and some arise together, and go not down ot once. And this diversity of
rising and going down, salleth and comes of unevenness of circles, in the
which they be seen going down or arising. For by highness or lowness of
the body of heaven, the stars arise and go down in diverse times: also
Stars change and distinguish times, years, months and days. For (as
Aristotle says, in libro de proprietatibus Elemento^^m) changing of tune is
not but by changing of stars, in diverse signs, and above the seven
Climates and countries, as by change of the Moon in every xxviii. days, or
by changing of Mercurius and of Venus, in every tenth month, or in less
time: or by changing of the Sun in every year, or by changing of Mars in
two Year, or of Jupiter in. 12. year, or of Saturnus in. 30 year, or by
conjunction and termutation of Triplicitye in.CCC.^. years. Or else for
changing of roundnesse and circles of Stars, that be pight: for they
change in one degree in a C. year, the changing of them falls in every.
xxxvi. C. year. And this is the great year, that is the last of all things.
Huc vsque arislot, in codem libro. In libro Ciceronis Macrobius says, That the
end of this great year is when all the stars and Planets, that be in
heaven, pass from a certeins place, and go about, and come again to the same
place, as Philosophers say, after. 15. M. year. But whatsoever Philosophers
tell hereof, we shall hold certainly: that that belongs not to us to deem,
what time the last end shall come. And when it shall be, he only knows,
that is maker of times, and contains in his might and power, moments and
times.

Of Polus. Chap. 34.
AS Beda says, Polus is a right little star, of the which all the over part
of heaven is so called. And two Polis there be, that one is called Articus or
Bovealis, that always shines to us, and never goes down to our sight. For
always he is above us: And be has that name Polus, of Pollendo, shining: for
he shines always to the world. The other Polus is called Antarticus, that is
to wit, the South or the rain star, and is before the North star that is
called Polus articus, which is always unseen to us. Between these two Polis,
as it were between the ends of the world, the firmament moves always. These
two Polus move never out of their own place, but yet they be borne round
about in the circle of the sphere. A line that is called Axis, stretches by
the middle point of the earth from pole to pole. About the which Axis all the
swiftness of the firmament is ravished and moves. And this line yt is called
Axis is not material: but rather a certain intellectual line, and stretches
from pole to pole, even straight as a line in drawn even and straight from one
point to another. About this ^^ne that is called Axis, as it were about the
middle of the world, the firmament passes about with endless rauishing. Then
the Pole is a star higest in place, most swift in moving, and least in
quantity to our sight: though he be full great and huge in himself: and he
is most profitable in effect. For by the place of this star, place and
stroedes and bounds of the other stars and of circles of heaven be known.
Therefore Astronomers behold most this star. Then this star is described
of most short circle: for he is far from the place that we be in, he
hides the hugeness of his quantitye for vnmoueablenesse of his place: and he
does certify men most certainly, yt behold and take heed thereof. And
therefore he is called stella maris, the star of the sea. For he leads in
the Sea men that sail, and have ship men's craft.

And because of his place, tho middle of all heaven is known, and by the going
about of certain Stars, that he called Arcthurus, the star which is
called Pelus, is distinguished from other stars. Arcthurus is like thereto, and
is commonly called Charlemaynes Waine. And this star has that name Polus
articus of Arcthurus: for it is nigh thereto, as Beda says.

Of Arcthurus. Chap. 35.
ARcthurus is a sign made of seven stars, set in the line that is called
Axis, and goes about in himself, as Isidore says. The circle of these seven
stars, for it goes about as a waine, is called among Latins, Septentrio,
and Septentriones also. And is commonly called in English Charlemaines waine,
Septentriones. The seue stars, which are seen, Charles waine, or Vrsa mayor.
and he goes not down: for that these seven stars be full night to the pole,
that is the highest star. And the same circle is called Artophilax: for that
it follows a sign that is called Visa: Old men called the same circle
sometime Boetem: for that it is nigh the sign that is named the waine, and is
sign that many men behold, and is arated with many stars: among yt which is
the sign Arcthurus, yt is properlye a Star set behind the tail of the
sign that is called Visa mayor, the more Bear. And therefore all that
constellation Arcthurus, has that name of that star, as Isidore says, and
has worthily that name Arcthurus of Artando, binding and knitting. For of the
first part thereof cold arises, by reason it is far from the heat of the
Sun, and by cold the holes and pores of the earth be constrained, bound, and
stopped. And the seven stars appear with beams of light, and or bright
form and shape. Of which four, the first be ordained, as it were a
quadrangle, with four sides, each against other. And the three that follow
be disposed as it were half a circle, and they be set under the pole, about
the line that is called Axis. And therefore always they wind round about the
pole, as it were about the middle point, as Gregory says. Always these
stars wind and turn round about that line that is called Axis, as a Bear
does about a stake. And therefore that circle is called the more Bear, as
Macrobius says. Always this circle windeth round about, and goes never down
out of sight, as Gregorye says. When three stars go upward, four go
downewarde. And againeward. When four go upward, three go downewarde, as
Gregory says. Among all the high circles, the circle of Arcthurus is highest.
For it is next to the Pole, and shows him most to mennee sight, and is seen
every time of the night, but if it happen, that it be let by mistres, or
clouds set between him and the sight. Among the middle stars of Arcthos,
falls down as it were a Dragon, or a flying star in lyknesse of lightning:
and ^^^^d Draco, as Marcianus says. a^^^ ^^^teth in his coming with
sprancling b^^ur^^s, namelye in Winter, and betokens and signifies strong
frost on water, and on earth, as Marcianus says.

Of Orion, Chap. 36.
ORion is a sign which arises in Winter; Orio^, this star in named of Orion,
and son of Neptune.
and exciteth Waters and tempests. And Orion is dim, and breeds and
brings forth winds and tempests, and Orion has the name of rising and
hugeness of waters, as Isidore says. In his rising he gendereth and dreedeth
tempests, and changes the air, and is disposed and shapen as an armed man,
stretching out his feet and arms. And his length and longitude stretches
nigh to the breadth and latitude of three signs, as Marcianus says. And he
shines most in the sign that is called Taurus as he says: And Orion is a
constellation most notable, because of hugnesse, and also of fairness: and
also because of dispesition and virtue. For it stretches out of the sign,
that is called Aries, to the sign yt is called Gemini, as Marcianus says. And
also he makes with his brightness, those three signs the more fair and
clear, as he says: and he is shapen in the order of stars, as it were a
knight giroe with a Swoorde. Of him speaks Marcianus, and says in this
manner: Am^tus etjam fragrans splendebat in arms, that is to mean, he armed
also burning brighte shone in weapon and arms. But as he says, brightness of
Orion betokens fair weather and clear: and again ward: His darkness strong
weather and tempest. When the Sun is in the signs of Orion, which be Taurus
and Gemini, then bourgene and spring al things that receive feeding and
nourishment of water, of air, and of earth, as he says. After this
constellation Orion comes and follows a star that is called Conicul^, and
is evil willed and noyfull, as Astronomers tell: and fables mean, that that
star was Jupiters hound, as he tells. But this Cannicula is not that noifull
star, that is called Canis, and arises in the sign yt is called Leo. Of the
which star certain days have their names, and be called Dies caniculare
among Philosophers, as Gregory says. Then Orion in his first rising
betokens tempest and weather, and afterward fair weather: and works with
the Sun, to make the earth plenteous: and when the Sun is in the sign,
that is called Taurus, Orion withdraws him as though he hide himself under
the Sun beams, nor then he shows not his cleerenesse to the nether
things. And he arises again in July, when the Sun ascends in Gemini, to
the higher circles when the earth has most distemperance of air in hot
quality.

Of Hyades. Chap. 37.
Of these stars there is mention before.
HYades called Situle also, be rainye stars. For in the arising of them falls
much rain, as Isidore says in libro tercio. For that time by violence of the
heat of the Sun, They be also called Atlantides.
vapors be drawn upward, of the sea and of the land, more strongly then in
other time. And he resolved and shed, and turned into rain by moving of those
stars that be called Hyades. And therefore the stars be called Hiades, and
Situle, as it were suckers. For it is said in fables, that they draw the
humors to themselves, and do resolve them and temper them, as Iginius says.
And these stars have their place and steed in the front of the sign that is
called Taurus, as Marcianus says. And when the day lengthneth, and the Sun
goes upward, and is more seruent: then commonly Hiades be first seen, as
Gregory says, super Job, 20. When Saturnus pusheth them: then they breed
diverse tempests and wethers, as Beda says. In the rising of those stars,
that be called Hyades, fruits and corns grow plenteously. For then they be
well sprung with rain. This constellation Hyades has many full clear stars
set about him, and arises in the sixteenth degree of the sign that is called
Cancer, and they distronble the air in their arising, as Albumasar says.

Addition
The Romans call these stars Sunculae.

Of Pliades. cap. 38.
PLiades be seven Stars, and have that name of Plurality. For they be
many, and be set nigh togethers: but yet distinguished a sunder, as Gregorye
says. And Pliades arise in Winter. And the more cleerer and colder the air
is, the better they be known and distinguished from each other. One is seen
shine among those seven, which shows not it self at the full, neither
fullye hides it self. Their place is between the knees of the sign which is
called Taurus, as the Author Isidore says, and Gregory also. In the month of
June the Sun takes his course and his way by those.7. stars pliades. And
then the heat of the air is tempered by rain of springing time. And at this
time the earth is arraied with fairness of flowers, as Marcianus says. The
chief of the 7. stars is called Maia^ of ye name of Maia the mother of Mercurius
And for this cause it is said, that Juno loved ye Cordesse Maia. And it is
seined, that she was one of the.7. stars pliades. And she was Mercurius
mother. Thus means sayning of Poets, as Marcianus says. And Albumasar says,
that plyades the seven stars, do arise in the.16. degree of the sign that
is called Taurus, with other stars that be called Hyades, and they distrouble
the air with their moving.

Pliades the seven stars which mariners use in trieng of coasts: Poettes
seigne them to be the seven daughters of Licurgus or Atlas.

Of Canicula. Chap. 39.
CAnicula is a full seruent star, and arises in the.29. degree of the sign
that is called Taurus, as Albumasar says. In the arising thereof is a great
disturbaunce of the air and weather. And of this star the days, that be
called Dies caniculares, have that name: in which days it is sull perilous to
be let blood, or to take laxatiue medicines: that is for passing distemperaunce
of the air in heat. And therefore in Aphorism. Hippocrates says, That before
that star Canis, and after that Star, and under that star Canis, laxatiue
medicines noieth and grows. Forbeate to take purgatio^s


There it is said in Commento, that before the rising of that Star, and in
the rising, and anono after the rising thereof, it is perilous to give
laxatiue drinks. For then the air is hot and dry. And that comes of an
hot sign, and of the hot star, and of the Sun, that is then with that
star Canicula, in the sign that is called Leo: for with little medicine the
body should be made too hot and to dry, and thereupon happily should come to a
fever. And also the medicine should wose and pass out, and work the less. For
then holes and pores be open and wide, by reason of the heat of the air. And
there Galen says, That strong heat without forth, draws out the strength
and virtue of the medicine. And therefore hot water is contrary to laxation,
if the heat of the air be strong at that time. Also the inner virtue is then
feeble, and is made more feeble by drinking, or by letting of blood. And the
Canicular days begin in the fifteenth Balends of August: and they end in ye
Nonis of Septembris. And so they be even fifty, as it is said there.

Of light. Chap. 40.
Lumen.
AS Basilius says, Light is a kind in all his parts like. Authors speak
diversely of light, what it should be in deed, whether it be in substance
or accident. Aristotle says, That light is no body, nor streaming out of a
body. And Damascenus says, That light has no substance of his own. And
Austen says super Genesim. ad litteram, That the light is a bodylye
substance, most simple in kind of bodies, and most multiplied and increased
in diverse matter of workings, most moveable, and passinglye thirling and
pearcing, and least letting, and most breeding, and most highlye accords and
reconcileth things the which be diverse and contrary, and is most
conuertible, and is ground and beginning of highest natural motion, and most
perfectible, most glad and most communicatiue: therefore in bodies nothing is
more profitable then light: and nothing more convenient and conenable, nothing
more sayre, nothing more swifte, nothing more subtle. nothing more inpassible
or wemlesse, nothing more virtuous found then light. Also Lux and Lumen is
light in English, but in Latin is difference between those two Nounes. For
Lumen is a flowing and a streaming that flows out of the substance of light:
but Lux is the sustantiall well, upon the which Lumen is grounded. For if light
in it self were accident, needs by it self it were accident to some thing: and
accident by it self has cause of being of very form of his object. And so
if light in the air wers accident, it should have cause of being of the very
form of the air: and that may not be. Also light changes his subject, as
it is known. For light is first in the East, and afterward in the West. And
the East light gendereth light that is next thereto: and so forth even to the
West: And accident changes not his subject, nor works not without his
subject, but there in. And hereby it seems that light is not accident. Also
if light were accident of the air, the air should sodeinly move with ye wind
out of the East into the West, as the moving of light is sodein. And so the
air moves not sodeinly, nor any other element. Also nothing is more worthy
and noble then light: and accident is less worthy then the substance: And so
it seems yt light is not accident. For air is much less worthy, and less
noble then light. But if light be a body, it is hard to know and understand,
how and in what manner light is in the air, or in any clear body, as in
Crystal. For two bodies may not be at once in the same place. Nevertheless
it is not inconvenient nor impossible to set, that light is a bodylye
substance, and that it is at ones with another body: for we see water and
ashes joined and meddeled togethers, saving body and place of both. And the
containing of either distinguished from other, and the parts of either
contained within his own utter part. In what manner wise so ever they be
meddeled togethers ashes and water, the water abides in his corporalnesse, by
joining and continuing togethers of his parts: and ashes in his body also. But
for this meddeling and joining togethers, they be not two bodies in the same
place: But the water has his own place, and the ashes his own place. So
light may be in the air, or in every each other body, saving the
corporalitie of either, and contuniaunce of their substantial parts. And so
light entering into the inner parts of the air, or of Christalline, has his
own place, beclipping about his utter parts. And that place distinguishes
light from the substance of the body, to whom it is joined, though it may
not for simplicity of his substance be felt nor seen. But yet it is more
wonder, that many lyghtes, which be brought in one place, and the lyghtes
meddeled together, and though they be joined and united, yet nevertheless the
substantial form of each light is saved, by the which form every of them is
diverse from other, though none of them be material cause, or formal to
other, as Dionisius teaches openly, in li. de diuinis nominibas, and says in
this manner: When lights (says he) of lamps be in an house, and be one
whole light gathered togethers, and be common to all, yet they have a prime
distinction between themselves, and be distinguished a sunder, by one
distinction, and by distinguished unity. For we see when many lamps be
light, for one light, one claerenesse comes of all their lights, and shines
without knowing distinction. And no man (as I think) can sequester the light
of one of them from the light of another: nor out of the air that they be in,
while they be all together: nor (...) by sight one from another, while they
be altogether shining, all the light seems one without distinction. And if
one lamp be withdrawn, it takes not away any thing of the others light,
nor leaves there of his own light. For as it is said, there is a perfect
^rutie universally meddeled, and no confusion in any part. And the unity is
so much in this bodylye air and material light. L^ue vsque Diomsius. In these
words Denis seacheth openly, that lights be joined togethers, and the
substantial property of each is saved, and accident properties, and takes
with them both in coming and going.

Also Denis says, that light that is called Lux in Latin, is a substance
being in it self: and thereof comes beaming and a manner shining of other
bodies For always Lux, light, shines in it self. Nevertheless it shines not
always but only when it sindeth a body with matter disposed and able to be
lightened, as Austen says: for substance of heaven is very light, that has the
first place in bodies: and nevertheless heaven lightneth not in darkness nor by
night. Then always light shines inuisibly, and in darkness: but it shines not
always sightlye. And therefore every creature feels the virtue of light. For
virtue of light works vnseeingly, feeling and moving in beasts, as it is
said in libro Fontis vitae. Also in libro de ludicijs astrorum, Albumasar
says, that Hippocras taught, yt but if the life of stars, tempered the
thicknes of the air by night, all bodies with souls should be destroyed: and
nevertheless it is certain, ye of light of stars is not seen by night, for
impression of working of light is known in toe sea that ebbeth and flows by
respect of the Moon to some part thereof, whether the Moon lighten the air
or no. Also though the thinks, holes, and dens of the earth, be not lightened:
yet the virtue of light works in them, as it is seen in cares of metal,
and in other things that be gendred and bred deep within ye earth And shortly
to speak the presence of light is needful in every body yt is meddled; by the
which contraries in elements be joined. Also light sheddeth it self from the
highest heaven: yt is called Coelum imperium, even to ye middle of the world,
and is one in his substance, and simple in more and root, yet is it variable
after the diversity of bodies that receive it, whether it be the Sun, or the
over bodies, or nether, wherein is one substance, virtue, and working of
light, though there be no virtue of lightening therein. This is the first
gendering light that was made the first day, as Basilius says, that is above
the Sun, and other lights and stars that were made the fourth day. The light
^luneth is darkness John. 1.5.
Therefore the Sun, and other stars, be bearers of the first light: which
through taking of bodylesse light, they be suffisaunt to everlasting
lightening, without loss of their own substance. Therefore this light
stretches into every place, and persecteth and dispoleth all bodies, some more
and some less. Then it is moare, roo^e, and fundament of all shining, and is
one in substance: and of none of the lower bodies contained accidentallye: but
it contains all bodies, and is formal in comparison to them, though it be
material in it self, and is in place and steed: And therefore for light is
material, it may have diverse parts in diverse place. And for it is
forntall, it has indeed diverse parts in diverse place. For what the matter
may have in power, the form has the same in effect and deed. Hereof it
follows openly, that for light: in kind of bodies has least of matter, and
most of form, light is more near in kind to form then to matter: And
therefore because of matter, it is in the least steed, that is a point. And
because of form, it is in every place and steed. For every thing mooneth to
his own form as Aristotle says.

And therefore the nobler that it is, the more it extends hiss matter, as
Algazel says. Wherefore the form of light, because it is the most noble of
bodilye forms, it stretches and spreads most his matter: and therefore
onepoint of light or of shining, were suffisaunt of it self to lighten all the
world: For the nobleness of matter, and for most adualnesse and doing of
form, as Algazel says: and Then light is one simple and uniform, in his
essence, though bodies of light be diverse and distinguished and sonder.
Though they seem in one act gathered like, yet one lightening comes not in
the substance of another, though it seem to the sight that they be joined in
one lyghtening and light. Then it is not inconvenient to set two bodies
together in one place, if one of them be subtle and formal, and as it were
complement and perfection of the other: and that other ma^teri^i^^^^ imperfect.
And two bodye^ that be blessedfull (as bodies shall (...) the bli^^ of heaven)
may not be in (...) place and steed. For neither of their ^^ay be material
in no w^^e or that other^^ But a body that is v^^full, and another that is not
blissful, may be togethers in the same steebe and place, without
inconvenience, as says Austen openly. And Basilius says, That light is most
moveable. For it moves it self without ceasing, and gendereth light in lines,
forthright, and in roundnesse all about: And moves and sheddeth it self
into all parts about: and touching it self it month sodeinly: For light is
more able to work and pearceth, and comes into the innest part of every
thing, without let and tarrieng. And sight gendereth things that be diverse
and unlike, and joins and accords the contraryes, that be in Elements, and
in middle bodies. And also by outcasting and stretching, and onercasting,
breaking and rebounding of beams, light brings forth all thing, and keeps
and saves them in being, or disolueth and undoes their being, as Calcidius
says Super T^^meum. Also light gonerueth and rules life, and during of all
thing, and multiplyeth it self gendering: for light gendereth light, and light
that is gendered, gendereth light that comes after, and lyghteneth forth: and
so in an instaunt, one point that is product, fills all the world of light
and shining. Also light shows it self and other things of heaven by his
incomparison in the utter part of a moist body, and clear light works
diverse effects. And as Austen sorth, light puts of darkness, and undoes
cleyngnesse and discomfortes: and destroys false waiting and spicing. Of
light comes surette, it brings forth all glad, and merrye kind and
shape. And brings in form and fayrenesse to all things and for without
light all bodies tenidius hid and unknown. Do away light (says
Daiuascene) and all things be unknown and abide in darkness. Then (as Ambrose
says, and Masilius a^^d,) Light is the fayrenesse of every creature that is
seen: The grace whereof most in sight and beholding, that makes other members
and parts of the word, wortye to be pleased: And this same (as Basinus says)
is above heaven most peaceable ^wel ^ng place of ^^^^lld and of Sa^^tes. This
is by ensample the showing of the (...) trinity. This light without
diminishing of it self, shows and shoddeth light, which received in the over
part of a dark body, does not drown and deep it self therein touching ye
likeness of sight, but touching might and virtue. Isidore says, light has
many other propertyes worthy to be praised, in substance, virtue, and working:
nothing is sound more clear, and pure then the substance thereof. Therefore
though it pass by vileness and filth, it is not defiled: Nothing is more
actual in deed then the virtue thereof: Nothing is found more profitable in
bodies then the working thereof.

Of shining. chap. 41.
SHining is springing and streaming out of the substance of light. And comes
out of light without mingling of any other nature. And duteth as long as the
light, of the which in comes, as Austen says. As save as fire is, as soon,
is shining. Therefore if fire were everlasting, shining were everlasting: Also
shining comes of light without diminishing of light, and without dryling of
the cleanness of light, and without discontinuance thereof, Ezecli. 10.
with showing of it self and of other things, and with multiplieng of it
self, as Basilius says.

Of beshining. chap. 42.
BEshining and light he diverse as Species a genere. For every shining is
light, but not again ward and every light is shining: for every shining is a
certain out streaming of the substance of light, receuied in the air, or in
another clear body, and shed all about. And as the author of Perspectiue
says, in three manner shining is found. For some shining is called Lumen
reflexum some Fraetum and some Directornos Reflectum i^ beshining, as from a
mirror or a shewer, or from other glistering bodies that rebound again the
shining that they receive. And then that shining that reboundeth again is
called Lumen reflexum. The other shining that is called Lume^ fractum, is when
shining comes to a body, that is seen deal thick or hard, that it may not
receive and take light in it self, but for the matter and kind of that body
is not full obedient, that shining passes not forth light, but blencheth
aside from the right passa^e, and such shining and brightness is called
Fractio radi). The third manner of shining is called Lumen directum, that is
not put of nor finds matter in ebediri^t in no manner wife. And posseth
fraly, and does perfect working. And this shining makes the air perfect and
other clear bodies, and highteth forms and shape^, and shows shape^ and
figures, and comfort and gladdeth eyes, and exciteth and waketh men of
sleep, of sluggardye and sloth. And printeth likeness and shapes, and Ima^es
in the utter parts of mirrors and of bright glistering bodies. For shining
comes to the utter part of a glistering body, and reboundeth agains in
angles and corners, that be like murb. And printeth therein shapes and fourmes
of all bodies. And so it sets for the utter part of a mirror by Imog^^ad
shape, the thing that is wilbent by substance. Also st^mi^^ takes perfection
by the disposition of the matter, that it comes in. For his clerenesse
increases in clear matter and eleoue, and abat^^h in scule matter and dark.
For in dear matter as Christ^d ^^ and air, it finds no let. Therefore into
^^sith a matter, it puts, one his vene shining beams, and shows t^o^^^c^
Denis says, And the more perfect lie it is printed into a body the more
largelye it is rebounded thence, and stremeth to the or^^ in bodies. And when
it comes to gross matter and borthous, thread it has dim distribution of
working: as when it is shed into fatre mai^^, it is vnperfectlye taken so
that si^^n it is shed and and but, is seems dark. And so the saines of the
matter lets distribution and poining of the shining of the matter, that is
taken. Then in clear and pure substance shining as perfectly seen and
increased: in great and thick substance, it is diminished. And so it
follows, that pure matter and subtle, takes shining of light, perfectly.
And it is found, that dr^^me matter, boystous, and thick, puts off shining
of light, and brightness.

Of the light beam. cap. 43.
A Light beam is a bright stream of a body of light, by the which beam,
light and shining does his working, as Beda says. And some beam passes
straight forth, and comes of the body of light, moving by a straight line
without blenching, and comes to the middle point, and is called
Perpendicularis and Rectus: And some beam comes of a body of light, and
finds a clear body, and passes not forth right, but sidelyng and blenching,
and this blenching is called breaking of the beam. And such a light beam is
called breaking of the Beam. And such a light beam is called Radius
colleteralis, and Confractus. And the Sun beam passes straight forth from
the body of light, or blencheth aside, and meets with a body, that puts
and smites the light againwarde: and such a smiting and putting is called
bending of the beam: and such a Beam is called Radius reflexus, as the
Author of Perspectiue says. And so a Beam of light is moveable, and clear,
and bright, and round, and right of it self, and most contained if it be of a
straight Beam: and it happens sometime, that a light or bright beam is
broken and shuft aside, or againeward, by the disposition of matter that it
finds and touches. Such a beam is closed in a hollow cloud, and most
works and makes diverse forms, colors, shapes, and figures in the Cloud,
or in the air, as it fares in the colors of the Raine-bowe, that is not
else called, but entering of light beams into an hollow cloud and watyre, as
it is said libro Mecherorum: always sodeinlye by moving of beams that move
continuallye and sodeinlye, it happens that the air about is set a fire:
and namelye if the beams meet in the place of rebounding. For there the
beams be gathered, and beat each other: and so they are cause why the air
about is often set a fire, as it fares in Crystal, and in Berrall. For if such
a stone be set before the Sun, and put thereto, it shall set it on fire.

Of shadow. cap. 44.
Shadow is setting of a thick body and divine before light, or before a body
of light. And three manner kinds be of shadow by consideration of
Philosophy. It happens, that a body of light is round, and sometime more
then the body that is set before the light, and sometime even as much, and
sometime less: If it be even as much, it makes the shadow even as much
round, and such a shadow is called Chelindroydes, that is to understand,
Like round. If it be less then the Obstacle that lets light, it makes the
shadow stretch abroad, as it were a Pauier: and such a shadow is called
Cathaloydes. And if the body of light be more then the body, that lets
light, it makes the shadow stretch forth sheeld wise, and the point
forward: and such a shadow is called Conoydes. Hereof it follows, that the
Sun, for it is more then all the earth, makes the shadow Conoydes, that is,
shapen as a shield. Then happening, that the earth being even set before the
Sun in a certain manner assigned, it makes the shadow stretch so high,
that it stretches to the Moon, and infecting the Moon, makes Eclipse
thereof: But when the Sun passes besides the sphere of the earth, the point
of that shadow passes aside into some part that is there before: and then the
Moon is freely seen shining. And when the Moon is even straight between us
and the Sun: then the Moon makes the shadow shapen as a pauier: and
therefore the Moon beshaddoweth the earth, and makes a particular Eclipse.
For such a shadow is not suffisaunt to cover all the earth, for in some place,
the earth is lightened with the Sun beams. By such a shadow comes eclipse
in one Climate and country though another Climate be lightened, as Albumasar
says: and shadoweth and bears down the Sun, and hides the shining of the
Sun beams, and causes barrenness of the earth: and is friendly, and feeds
adders and serpents: and cools men and other things that be too hot: and
lets and tarryeth riping of fruit and of corn: and strikes men and beasts
with many manner feauers and dreades horrible. And though it be no body of
kind: yet it shows shape and likeness of body, and shapeth it self by
moving and rest of bodies. For when the body moves, the shape moves and
rests when the body rests: and follows them that go: and flies them
that pursue. Also the longer the day is, and the higher the Sun is in heaven,
ye shorter is the shadow of the body that it makes. And againward. And
therefore in the Sun rising, and also in the going down, the shadow is more
then at midday.

Of darkness. Chap. 45.
Darkness is absence of light, and is called Tenebre of Tenendo, holding. For
it binds and holds the eyes, that they may not see the Sun nor any other
light: and so darkness is naught else but privation. Also dark air is called
darkness: and so is the shadow of a dim body, as Basilius says, and is
contrary to light both in quality and in place Darkness brings in fear
and dread, and withdraws fairness of colors, and abateth shame, and
nourishes sleep and simnber.

Addition
I Have thought good to set before thee, forth of the book de Occulta
Philosophia of Hen Cornelius Agrippa, his Ladder, wherein is the wonderful
compact of the universal division of the number of. 12. beginning with the
twelve orders of blessed spirits, omitting the. 12. names of God.

Seraphin, Cherubin, Throni, Dominationes, Potestates, Virtutes, Principatus,
Archangeli, Angeli, Innocents, Martires, Confessores.

The.12. Angels presidents over the signs.
Malehidel, Asmodel, Ambriel, Muriel, Verchiel, Hamadiel, Zuriel, Barbiel,
Aduschiel, Hananell, Gabiel, Barchiel.

The.12. Tribes.
Dan, Ruben, Ihuda, Manasse, Asser, Simeon, Isachar, Benjamin, Neptalin, Gad,
Zabulon, Ephraim.

The.12. Prophets:
Malachias, Aggaeus, Zacharlas, Amos, Oseas, Micheas, Jonas, Abdias, Sephonias,
Naum, Abacuck, Joel.

The.12. Apostles.
Mathias, Thadaeus, Simon, Johannes, Petrus, Andreas, Bartholomeus, Philippus,
Iacobus, Thomas, Mathaeus, Iacobus minor.

The.12. signs in the Zodiac.
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius,
Capricornus, Aquaries, Pisces. These are in the celestial world.

The.12. Months.
March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November,
December, January, February. In the elementall world.

The.12. Plants.
Elelisphacos, Orthios.
Peristereon, Hyptios.
Peristereon, Symphytus, Cyclaminus, Calaminthus, Scorpiuros, Artemsia,
Anagallis, Lapathus, Dracontea, Aristolochia.

The.12. Stones.
Sardonis, Sardius, Topazius, Chalcedonius, Iaspis, Smaragdus, Berrillus,
Amethystus, Hyacinthus, Chrysopassus, Christallus, Saphirus.

The.12. principal members.
Caput, Collum, Brachia, Pectus, Cor, Venture, Renes, Genitalir, Anche, Genua,
Head, Neck, Arms, Breast, Heart, Belly, Reins, Members, Hippes, Knees, Ctura,
the shanke. Pedes, the feet.

The.12. points of the dampened Devils.
Pseudothie, False Prophets: Spiritus mendacij, Lieng spirits: Vasa
iniquitatis, Uessalls of iniquity: Vltores celerum, the last sharpness or
endless torment. Prestigiatores. Iuglers, Cosoners, and Scorners: Aerae
potestates, airie governors: Furae seminatrices maloru^, sowers of desperate
discord: Criminatores, sieve exploratores, False accusers, and outrageous
railers.

Tentatores, sieve insidiatores, Prouokers and inticers: Malefice, Witches,
Apostate, Reniers of the faith: Infideles, Unbeleeuing.

These.12. sorts of peoples, framed to the. 12. sorts of wicked Devils, are
made one in the proportion of endless dampnation, even so, in the government
of every. 12. is specified the most unsearchable will of God, how far man
has power of governing, and by what effects he is governed, the knowledge
whereof, is the gift of God, the benefit of men, and the alteration of all
other creatures.

Blackness, is darkness, a grisly hiew to tell,
a bright shining cleerenesse, does punish in the hell:
On earth it gives dought, in heaven eternal joy,
in hell, contrary turning the wicked to'anoy.
This is the might of God, for lasting souls to know
that bodies have possessed, perpetual joy or no.
His mercy, move us still, of mischief to beware,
his love, accept our will, to him our souls prepare.
A note also of the four seasons of the year.
The Spring time is hot and moist, and continues so long as the Sun is in
Aries, Taurus, and Gemini, March, April, May, which is from the.10. of March,
unto the.12. of June.

The Sun is hot and dry, conn^ed from the beginning of Cancer, unto the end
of Virgo, Iulye and August: September, that is from the.12. of June, unto
the.14. of September. Harnest is cold and dry, that is from the beginning of
Libra, unto the end of Sagittarius. October, November, December, counted from
the 14. of September, to the 12. of December.

Winter is cold and moist, continuing from the beginning of Capricornus, to
the end of Pisces, January, February, March, Capricornun, Aquarius, and
Pisces, that is from the.12. of December to the.10. of March.

A brief note how to understand the Ephimerides.
Understand there be seven Planets, the highest, Saturn, then Jupiter, Mars,
Sol. Venus Mercury., and the Moon

A conjunction is figured, and it is when an other Planette is joined with the
Sun, or Moon, or others among themselves within one degree.

The Sextile aspect or radiation is thus expressed, and it is within as
degrees, the one from the other.

The quadrant aspect thus, 90 degrees distant. That Trine thus, separated. 120.
degrees. The opposition thus, 180 degrees, the one distant from the other.

These follow by order. Aspects.
Conjunction, Sextile, Quadrat, Trine, Opposition.
Planets.
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Lunae.
Signs,
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scopio, sagittarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces:


FINIS LIBRI OCTAVI.
INCIPIT LIBER NONVS. DE TEMPORVM DIVISIONE.
AFter that we have spoken of yt properties of heaven, and of the parts
thereof, of the which holy writ makes meneth: now we will speak shortly and
compendiously of the effect and doing thereof. That is to understand, of the
properties of time, and of the parts thereof. Moving has cause first and
principally of trendling about of heaven: The moving thereof is first and
everlasting, as it is said m^li, de coelo and mundo: and this is not like to ye
corruptible and chageable moving of nether thinks, corporal and visible: but
it is the cause of ye nether moving. For ye moving of yt nether things yt be
gendered comes of the moving of ye round spheres and circles: that be above:
and that moving is incorruptible, and always in one state, as Aristotle says
there. And moving is passing from one end to another contrary end: as it is
said in the ends of the same book. For all that changes from the contrary,
is changed into contrary. And there be six manner moouings, that be called
Generation, vi. manner of mouings
Corruption, Alteration, Augmentation Diminution, and Changing, touching
place, as he says there. And some moving, that is changing touching place,
in trenling and round winded about: And some is straight and foorthright: and
some is compowned.

And a thing that trenleth round about changes not place, atouching All the
whole: but touching parts thereof. That that compasses round about, sometime
changes place: as it fares in moving of Planeties. And straight forthright
moving changes always place, as long as it moves indeed. For either it
moves from ward the middle toward the roundnesse, as Fire, Air, and other
such light bodies that move upward, or againeward, it moves downewarde
toward the middle, as water and earth, and other such heavy bodies. And there
be six manner moouings of straight and foorth-right moving. For straight and
foorth-right moving is rightsomes or leftsomes, forthwarde, or else
backewarde, upward or downewarde. And moving that is compowned is of two
contrary moouings, as the moving of a fire-brande. And this moving has this
propertye: for of strong in ^^ing withmeth heat, As at fares of the moving
of the first sphere and rodurnesse: by moving and ^roting thereof, the air is
always set a six, as Aristotle says.

And by moving Lead ^ome^oth, that is therein, as he says. Also moving may
not be meaten and measured but by measure of the space in the which moving
is. And all thing that moves either it makes by propertye as the stone
Adamos moves (by strong drawing) pron^ or by violence, The load stone.
as a Ship mooneth by strong shoouing of wind: either wilfullye and by his
own will, as the body moves, as the Soul will. And there is double moving
of mutation and changing: either the moving is of changing from place to
place, or of changing of disposition, moving into another disposition. Moving
from place to place is kindlye or by strength: as when a stone is let fall, the
more that it comes downwarde, the swister is his moving: and so that moving
wexeth stronger toward the end thereof: and when a thing moves by violence,
the strength is the beginning of of the moving: and the farther it is from the
beginning, the seebler is the moving: as it fares in an arrow, that comes
out of a bow, which flies so far, that at last it pearceth nothing nor
grieueth. Also moving is cause of generation, and of all changing of the
nether things, and of generation of heat and of burning and of setting a
six, and of subtiliation of water and of the air. Moving comfort kind
heat, and makes appetite and desire, and helps larat^^s medicine to cleanse
the body. Heerof speaks Hippocritos and says: If thou will hauethy body
clean, take Hellebore. Hellebor.


( Addition
Elleborum albus, in English Lingwort, the roof whereof is neesing powder,
there is also Elleboru^ niger, the herb named Bears foot, or Lertwort, or
Setwort. This herb must be discreetly taken.)

Also if the moving be outward from the middle toward the ra^^nesse, moving
shall spread and stretch abroad the matter ^ and if it be againward, from the
utter roundnesse toward the middle, it gathers the parts of the matter
togethers, and makes them: thick and vinding. Also temperate moving keeps
and saves kind of men and beasts, and intemperate moving destroys it.

Of Time. Cap. 2.
TIme is measure of changable things, as Arist. says De quinque substaneijs,
Time is number and tale, numbering and tellyng, in all things that are numbered
and fold. Or else as Rabanus says, Time is dimention of changeable things,
touching moving and abiding, and dureth in moveable things, as Austen says.
Nothing is more precious than time. Wherefore of each possession two may be had
togethers or more: but of time two moments may not be had togethers. And time
lost cannot be recovered, for loss of time is short, chaungable, unstable, and
vnreconerable, for it passes with moving and mouable body, and begins
therewith: and where moving sayleth, then time ends. And therefore time shall
not endure always: but it shall cease, when nothing shall be but Eternitas,
everlasting, as Austen says.

( Addition
The state of man's life, is comprehended in vii. triumphs. Love ouercomes Man,
Chastity ouercomes Love, Death ouercomes Chastity, Fame ouercomes Death, Time
ouercomes Fame, Eternity ouercomes Time.)

Nothing is more common than time: for it is egally common to all thing.
Nothing is more passing than time: for time rests never, but when it
begins it begins to decrease and lessen. And againswarde: for the time
that is present, is end of the time that is passed, and beginning of the time
that is coming. For all time varieth in three manner wise, that is to wit,
Time that is passed: present, that is now: and future, that shall be. And so
shortly to speak, in this manner every time was, is, or shall be, by rising
of time, of his diversity, succession of parts, that come each after other,
always is day and night, as: beda says: but in one place is day, and in
another is night: and some where is day, some where is night.

Nothing is more uncertain, than time, nothing is more vnperceptible, nor more
unknown of it self. For as Isidore says, Time is not known by it self,
but only by works and deeds of men. Nothing is more chaungeable that time:
and therefore no thing is more perilous in the body.

For as Hippocrates says, The changing of times gendereth most e^^tis. For
sudden changing of cold into heat, changes and appayreth bodies: and that
is, for that kind suffers not sudden chaungings, as he says.

Therefore often sudden changing of time, is cause of sickness. Also nothing
is more healthful to the body, then is time that is temperate in his
qualyties. Therefore it is said in Aphor. If times be in good temperature, as
the time asks, then be good states: and sickness come most to good end in
such times.

Also though time be so chaungeable, yet nothing is more continual than time:
for parts of time be contained. Therefore Marcianus says, That time that
wereth old in Winter, quickens again in springing time. And againward (that
is so renews.)

Gal. 6.
While we have time, let us do good unto all men, but specially to those that
are of the household of faith.

Of the year solate and Equinoctial Cap. 3.
AS Isidore says, and year is the full course, and passing, and winding about
of the Sun, when he comes again to his own place, in CCC lx v days, and
a quadrant, that is six hours. And a year is called Annus, and has that
name for it comes about, as months come about therein: and therefore a year
has that name Annus, of An, that is abouts, as it were a circle that comes
again into it self, and is renewed. Therefore among the Egyptians, before
that letters were found, the year was betokened by a Dragon painted, biting
his own tail, and coming again into it self. As Isidore says, there be
diue ^^ years: for the year of the Moon is less then the Sun by xi.
days: and the year of of the Sun has twel^^e months, and each planet has
his year, in the which he full ends his course: as Mars in two year, Jupiter
in twelve, and Saturnus in thirty. And there is a great year, that is called
Annus mondanus, and that year is (as Arist. says) when all the stars come
to their own first place and point that they were made in. And (as Arist.
says) This year comes about in xxxvi. M year, as it is said in libro de
proprietatibus elementoru^. And Plato and his suitors tell, that this year
comes about in fifteen thousand year, as Macrobius says, in li. Ciceronis.
And some year is called Usual, as is the year of the Sun, and contains
four times, Winter, Springing time, Summer, and Harvest: and are called times
in their qualyties, because they temper each other, as Isido. says. And they
be called Curricula, for they run and come each after other, and abide never
in no state, as Isid. says. In these four Times of the year, comes twice
Solstitia, stinting of the Sun in Winter and in Summer: and twice Equinoctia,
euennes of day and of night in Ver and in Harvest, Solsticium is the most
euenesse of day and night: and comes when the sun enters into the signs
that are called Cancer in Summer, and in Caprirorno in Winter: and is called
Solsticium, as it were stinting of the sun, and that for double cause, either
in Summer or in winter, for length of days and nights, it seems that the
Sun stinteth and abides in Summer, above our dwelling place: for in either
stinting, it seems that they stint and abide. For in Summer it seems that
the Sun may come no nearer us than he does: and in winter it seems he may
pass no farther from us then he does. Equinostium is most evenness of the
day and night artificial, and falls when the Sun comes into the sign
that is called Aries, or into the sign that is called Libra: the first is in
Springing time, and the second in Harvest.

I omit the rehearsal of fasting days, Addition
because they were supersticiously termed, Triaduan^.

Also the year of the Sun is the common year, and begins in January, and
ends in December, and in the space, in the which the Sun goes about in the
sign that is called Zodiacus, three hundred days, three score and five, and a
quadrant, and six hours: and is the fourth deal of a natural day. And
these six hours be accounted in common years, and gathered in the Bisexte.
And the Bisexte is gathering of eighteen hours, which comes in three
years, with six hours of the fourth year, to make a full day of four and
twenty hours. And the year Bisextilis, has that name of the gathering
thereof, as Beda says: and is called Bisextus, for every year, when it falls
in February, the sixth Kalendis is twice accounted. Or else it is called
Bisextus, for that day is gathered of Bisse momentis. For of thirty mome^ts in
the which the Sun abides in each sign passing thirty days, and of thirty
trienties be gathered six hours in a year: and so in three years be
gathered eighteen hours, and in four year six hours, and these hours put
together in the fourth year, makes a day, that is called Bisextilis, as Beda
says. But hereof look in the Compost.

Of the year Lunare. Cap. 4.
THe year of the Moon is sometime called the space, in the which the Moon
passes about from one point of Zodiacus, to the same point again. And that
space co^teineth (as some me^ mean) seven and twenty days and six hours.
And sometime the year of the Moon, is called the space or time, in which the
Moon moves round about, from conjunction to conjunction, that is, from
change to change. And this space passes the first, by two days and six
hours. And it is said, that the Moon is in the conjunction, when the Moon is
even straight under the Sun, when no part thereof that is toward us is
shining: and the Moon is all bright, when it is seen at full. Also after the
conjunction and change, the Moon passes from the Sun, and leaves him in
some certain point of Zodiacus, and finds him not there when he comes
again, for the Sun passes in his own course. Therefore the Moon must
spend two days and six hours, or he can take the Sun, and such a space of
time is called Lunacio, and is commonly called one Moon. Sometime a year of
the Moon, is the space that contains twelve Lunacions, twel^^e Moons: and
Compotiffes departs those twelve Moons, in six even and six odd, as the
months be even or odd: for an even month answers to an odd month, and an
odd month to an even month. Then a year of the Moon, that contains such
twelve months, contains three hundredth days and four, for it contains
six times thirty, and as often nine and twenty days, that make so great a
sum: and so it follows, that commonly the year solare, passes this year
of the Moon by eleven days. And this passing, makes the Prime of the Moon
change every year, and also the age thereof in the beginning of months: so yt
if Prime be this year in the fifth day of a month, the next year after the
Moon shall be twelve days old, in the fifth day of that month. And
sometime some year of the Moon is called Embolismalis.

Embolismus is incresing and excess, by the which the year of the Sun
passes the year of the Moon: and in certain years of such Embolismus,
gathered togethers, comes up xxx days, yt which xxx. days be accounted for
one Lunacion, one Moon: and the year in yt which such a Lunacion of xxx.
days falls, is called Annus Embolismalis, and therefore the third year is
Annus Embolismalis: for in that year comes up a Lunacion, a Moon of xxx.
days, and three days leaves over, for thrice xi. make three and thirty.
Also the sixth year is Embolismalis, for then comes up a Lunacion, a Moon of
thirty days, and then leaves other three days, six in all. Also the eight
year is Embolismalis in this manner: The six that leave over thirty in the
six year, are put and done to two and twenty days, that come of the
increasing of the seventh and of the eight year, that make eight and twenty
days. But for to have in the eight year a Lunacion Embolismalis, of thirty
days, we must borrowe two days of Embolisme, that is the increasing by
eleauen days of the next year thereafter. And so it is accounted forth,
even to the nineteenth year, when the Circle and the course of the Moon is
fullye ended. The which Circle and course, contains twelve common years, and
seven Embolismalis: In each of them be thirteen Lunations: for the third
year is Embolismalis, the sixth, the eight, the eleventh, the fourteenth,
seventeenth and the nineteenth, and the other be called common years. And
among the Hebrews men take most heed of obseruaunce of the year of the
Moon: and therefore it is called Annus legalis, the year of the law, for all
the feasts of the law, were held by the course and age of the Moon. And
therefore among them such a year begins from the Lunation of April, as
Beda says. And in Exodus 12. cap. it is said: This month shall be to you,
beginning and first of months of the year. Also over and all without the
year that is called usual, and common, and Legalis, is a year yt is called
Emergens: when for some notable cause that falls, the time that comes
after, is accounted from that notable cause, as the Greeks account times and
years, from the first Olympias, and Christian men from the Incarnation of our
Lord, and so of other.

( Addition
Legalis, was a time appointed for the giving up of judgments against captives
and malefactors, the one before the time of harvest, and the other after.)

Heerefore it happens often, that the middle of the year that is called
Legalis, is the beginning of the year that is called Emergens, and againward:
and heerby many countries in the Bible, he brought to accord. But of
diversity of years, this may justice at this time.

TREVISA.
( Addition
Emergens, was a time of the year, in the which the Ancients came forth to
determine of weighty matters for their Common wealth.)

When Troy was destroyed, ye Greek were joyful thereof, and ordained therefore
to have every fifth year once, a great solempnitie, and deeds done at the
foot of the hill, that then was called, Mons Olympus. And they called the
first five years the first Olympias: and the second five years, the second
Olympias, and so forth: and they reckoned their years by years of Olympias in
this manner. The first year they called, the first year of the first
Olympias, and the second year, the second year of the first Olympias, and so
forth of the first five years. And the first year of the second five years,
they called the first year of the second Olympias, and the second year, the
second, and so forth.

( Addition
Olympias is the space of 5. years, whereby the old Greeks did account as we
do now, by the years of our Lord: as the first Olympias, the second, the
third, etc. Glareanus writes, that Olimpias is the space of four years, and
that they which take and write otherwise, are deceived.)

Of Springing time. Ca. 5.
SPringing time is ye beginning of the year, that begins when the sun is
in the first part of the sign that is called Aries: and begins to pass
upward, toward the North by a right line, as Constantine says In Pantegni
libro quinto, capitulo tercio. And a right line is that that longs not to the
North, nor the South, but is like far from either Pole, and springing time
dureth until the end of the sign that is called Gemini, as long as the sun
passes three signs, of the which, each has his own month, that pertains
to springing time. The first month belongs to the sign that is called Aries,
and begins from the eight day of March, and dureth to the seventh day of
April. The second month pertains to the sign that is called Taurus, and
lasts and dureth from the seventh day of April, to the eighteenth day of
May. The third belongs to the sign that is called Gemini, and lasts from
the eighteenth day of May, to the seuenteeth day of June. And springing time
is between hot and cold, most temperate between Winter and Summer, mean in
qualytie: and partneth with either of them in quality, for then blood
begins to multiply in bodies of beasts: and humors that were bound and
made thick in Winter, begin to move and to be dissolved by heat of springing
time. Also springing time in qualyties is temperate, and most healthful, and
least grievous and sicklye, as Constantine says and Galen also. For in these
two qualities kind has liking. For heat is cause effectiue, working,
nourishing and increasing, and the me^^ture is cause material: and therefore
in springing time blood is most gendered, that is most needful to nourishing
of the body. If springing time pass his own kind, it breeds many
sicknesses and evils. Therefore it is said in Aphor. If the winter be dry,
and springing time and Harvest moist and rainge, then needs in Summer be
bredde feauers, blearinesse of eyes, and flixe: namely of them that be moist of
kind, as the Commentour says. In winter day humors, by coldness be
withheld and made sharp: and in springing time, that is distempered in
coldness and in moisture, many superfluities be bred and resolved, and shed by
heat. For in Summer, for heat is not mighty to wast such humors and
superfluities, it rotteth, and so breeds fevers, ague, and many other evils.
And if Winter be hot and moist, and springing time cold and dry, needs men
were sick in Summer, and women that go with child, bring forth and have
dead borne children: whereof Galen in Commento tells the cause, and says:
that when the bodies of women, that go with child, in winter be hot and moist,
than they be tender, wany, and not sad. Therefore cold air of springing time,
comes suddenly into the inner parts of a woman, and grieueth and hurts the
child. For by coldness and dryness that be flaieng qualities, the child is
slain, and the child so slain, greeueth the strings and breaks them, and so
needs the woman has a dead borne child. Also springing time opens the earth,
that has been long closed and bound with cold, and brings forth mores,
roots, and herbs, that were hid in the earth, and hyghteth the Earth, and
renews it with flowers and herbs, and exciteth birds and fowls to
^het^ering and to love (...) clotheth and hightesh all the over part of the
earth, with a wonderful (...). Therefore springing time is called Ver, and
has that (...) of Viror^ or ^s Vigore, yt is to understand of greatness, or
of virtue: for then herbs and trees begin to spring and to ^rere green,
with bin genings and twigges. Springing time is the time of gladness and of
love: for in springing time, all thing seems glad, for the earth wexeth
green, trees burgen and spread, meadows bring forth flowers, heaven shines,
the sea rests and is quiet, fowls sing and make their neasts, and all thing
that seemed dead in winter and wittered, be renewed in Springing time.
Therefore Marcianus calls ye cleerenes of ye air in springing time, Jupiters
lau^hing: and water in springing time is unwholesome to drink, for it is made
great and thick with vapors, that be resolved and shed, also it is infected
with frogs and other worms that then breed: and therefore if it be needful
to drink water that time, Constantine counsaileth to sees it first, that it
may be cleansed and purged by boiling.

Of Summer. ca. 6.
SUmmer is hot and dry, and begins when the Sun is in the first part of
the sign that is called Cancer: and then the Sun is most high above us, and
begins to pass down little and little, even to the end of the sign, that
is called Virgo, and Summer has three months right as springing time, as
Constantine says. The first month belongs to the sign that is called
Cancer, and lasts from the xvii, day of June, to the eighteenth day of July.
The second, when the Iunne is in Leone, and dureth from the xviii day of July,
to the xvii day of August. The third begins when the sun comes into the
sign that is called Virgo and dureth from the xvii day of August, to the
xviii. day of September, as Constantine says. Then Summer is hot and dry,
and breeds Cholerum. For in Summer the suns course is highest, and most
straight over our heads, and printethful strong workings in our bodies, like as
he does in the nether things. Therefore he dissolueth and wastes
superfluityes that he gathered in Winter. And if Summer pass his
temperatenesse in wether, then often he gendereth hot sickness and dry, as
Constantine says. Then the sun makes the days long, and the nights short,
and ripeth fruit and flowers. For then by his great heat, he makes digestion
of humors in fruit, and tourneth them with good digestion, and incorporeth
and joins them to the fruit, and fordrieth and wastes superfluities at
full, and so he makes caves and pits in the earth. For by his heat he wastes
and dries the moist parts, and by his dryness he wringeth and joins
togethers the carthie parts, and he opens and chinketh the earth: for when
the watrie parts, that be cause of joining togethers of parts, be wasted and
dried, then it needs, that onepart be departed from another, and so be made
clifts and chins in parts of the earth. And so Summer dries marreises and
moors, and wastes moisture, and makes them rough and hard, and clinkerie,
and full of pits and hoales. And the working of Summer by subtlety of heat,
comes into the hollow parts of beasts, and dries and wastes humors, that
be between the skin and the flesh, and all to sheddeth them, and makes
beasts swifte, and so he destroys and wastes superfluity. Also by opening
of pores, spirits pass out by exhalations, and substantial moisture, and by
vapors: and therefore virtues be feebled, and also made faint, of his either
qualities, and so comes exciting and beginning of Cholera. And therefore he
breeds hot feauers. Summer feeds Bees that gather honey, with his flowers.
Also by night be breeds deawe and moisture, and springs there with grass
and herbs, that he fordrye them not by heat of the day In Summer time
fowls sing and make most melody: and to breed birds, namelye wild fowls
be comforted. Shadow of things be short in the middle of the Summer.

Of Harvest. Cap. 7.
Harvest is called Autumnus, and has that name of Augendo, increasing: for
that time, namely, corn and fruit, be augmented and plenteously gathered in
barnes. For all the travail of ye year, is then most, and corn and fruits
be gathered and brought into barnes. And therefore is comparison between
Harvest, and them that be nourished in Iunos fable, because of plenteousnesse,
as Isidore says.

( Addition
Ceres of the kindred of Juno, the daughter of Saturn and Ops, called also
Isis, was wife of Osiris king of Egypt (who as the Greeks suppose) did first
invent the sowing of wheat and barley, which before did grow wild among
other herbs: also that she did first make laws, whereby Justice should be
equally ministered to all men: violence and wrong being by fear taken away.
Herodotus writes, that the Egyptians affirms Ceres and Bacchus to hear
chief rule in hell. Plenty and riot, with forgetfulness of diet, abuses the
benefit, surfetteth the body, and damneth the soul. Ceres betokens increase
of grain, because she is called Dea frugum^ of the frugalitie which comes of
earth and seed. Saturn is said to be a deuourer of children per Antethesis,
for that the earth as the yields increase, does receive all into her again.
Bacchus was the first that in Greece found the manner of planting Wines, and
the secret of pressing Wines, called Liber Pater, by an Adage, the father of
liberty, In Vino veritas, when men be dronk, they disclose all, and when the
wine is in, the wit is out, all superfluous bankets and riotous excess are
called Conuiuia Bacchanalia, dronken feasts,)

For Harvest makes men busely occupied about gathering of corn and of fruit,
and spoyleth the fields of corn, and spoyleth trees of fruits, and by
dryness and coldness he slays burgenings and leaves of trees, and makes them
fall, and the earth barren and bare, and with draws the virtue of budding and
of springing. Also harvest is cold and dry, and breeds humor. Melancholic,
that is cold and dry. Harvest begins, when the Sun enters and comes
into the first part of the sign that is called Libra, when the Sun is in the
right line that is called Linea Equinoctialis: for he is like far from the
North and from ye South. Harvest time has three months that serve it, as
Constant. says. The first begins, when the Sun is in Libra, and lasts
from the xvii. day of September, to the xviii. day of October: and then the
Sun begins to withdraw in the middaye. The second month is, in which the
Sun is in Scorpione, and lasts from the seventeenth day of October, to the
xviii. day of November. The third month is when the Sun is in Sagittario:
and lasts from the xvii. day of November, to the xviii. day of December, as
Constant. says. Harvest in his quality is contrary to springing time: and
therefore that time breeds many evil sicknesses.

Thereof speaks Hippocras in Apho. and says, In Harvest falls sharp
sickness and deadly. Upon that place Galen says, that Harvest is more
pestilenciall than other times, and more evil in many things. First for
changing of time: for now he is hot, and now cold: also for he comes after
Summer, and finds many hot humors, that be full hot, because of heat that
was in summer, and the cold of Harvest smites again such humors to the inner
parts: and suffer not them to pass out of the bodies. And so such humors rot,
and breed full evil sicknesses, and Quartanes, and fevers that uneath be
curable: and that is because Harvest is cold and dry and inordinat, therefore in
harvest too great drines does consume and wast substanciall moisture, and
makes bodies feeble and faint. And for diversity and changing of air, pores
and holes in bodies be now suddenly opened, and now suddenly shut: and so hot
fumosities are withheld, which for that virtue may not put them out, of
multitude and sharpness of matter comes deadly sickness and evils. Also
Harvest time is noyfull and grievous to them that have the Tisike: for with
coldness and drines thereof, he fordrieth and renteth ye lungs, as it were Pampin;
the flower of a vine: and therefore he grieueth them sore that have the Tisike.

Of winter. Cap. 8.
WInter is called Hierns, and has that name of Eundo going, either passing:
for in Winter time the sun goes about and passes after in a shorter circle
than in Summer time, and therefore he makes shorter days and longer nights as
Isidore says. And as Constantine says, Winter begins, when the sun is in
the sign that is called Capricornus: and is the end of the descention and the
lowing of the sun in the middaye, and then begins little and little to
pass upward against the North. Also Winter has three months yt serve him. The
first begins in Capricorno. and lasts from the eighteenth day of
December, unto the seventeenth day of January. The second is when ye sun is
in Aquario, and lasts from the seventeenth day of Januarie, to the xvi. day
of February. The third month is, when the sun is in the sign, that is
called Pisces, and lasts from the xvi. day of February, to the eighteenth
day of March. And Winter is cold and moist, and nourishes steame: but in
Winter coldness has more masterie than moisture, for then is great binding
and freesing of air and of water, for the great farnesse of the Sun: of the
which farnesse comes great coldness in Winter time. And so Winter is all
contrary to Summer. Therefore all thing that lives and springs by benefit of
summer, fades and dies by hard cruelnesse of winter: and the foores and the
signs of summer that is gone, is all destroyed and brought to naught in Winter
time. In winter time, snow and greatness of water is multiplied: in Winter
time paths and ways be made slipperie and fennie, but the pores of the earth
and chins be constrained and frore, and made hard with cold, frost and ice. In
winter al bodies have longer shadows than in sumer, and pores of the earth be
closed, and therefore in the utter parts bodies were cold, but within the hot
parts fly coldness that have mastrie, and be gathered and joined togethers.
And therefore waters of deep pits and of wells be felt more hot in Winter than
in Summer: for kind heat slyeth coldness that has mastrie, and be gathered
and joined togethers.

And therefore waters of deep pits and of wells, be felt more hot in winter
than in summer. For kind heat flies coldness, that is contrary thereto: and
draws into the inner parts of the earth, and closes it self in veins of
deep pittes and wells, and therefore by reason of the presence of the heat,
the water of them freeseth not. Also sharpnes of winter makes men sluggards
and slow in working: for coldness constrayneth the sinews, so that they
shrink some deal, wherefore members stretch not to work so easily as they do
in Summer. Also by coldness of Winter pores be cloased, and kind heat
draws inward, and comfort the virtues of feelyng, wherefore appetite is
awaked, and more meat and drink needs than in other times.

Therefore Hippocras says in Aphor. that in winter time by kind, bellyes be
more hot and of longer sleep than in other times. Therefore in these times of
Winter men shall take more meat, for heat is great and strong, and need the
more nourishing. Also when Winter passes his own qualities: diverse sicknesses
and evils breed in bodies: for by reason the poores be closed, many humors be
gathered in the hollownes of bodies, the which humors find no way to pass
out. And so they wexe hot and rot. And thereof needs comes diverse sicknesses
and evils.

Of the months. Cap. 9. January.
A Month is called Mensis, and Mensis is a Nowne of Greek, drawn of the name
of the Moon: for in the language of Greek, the Moon is called Mean. And
among the Hebrews lawful months have names of the moving of the Moon, and
not of the course of the Sun. And Egyptians first for ye swiftness of the
Moon, took the the name of a month of the course of the sun: for the course
and moving of the sun, is less swift than the moving of the Moon, and may be
more easily known, as Isidore says. and there be three manner of months,
manner of mo^ths
one is the month of the Sun, and dureth as long as the sun abides in one
sign, in his course, and is called Usual, and is the space of days that is
contained in our Martiloge and Kalendis. ( Addition.
Martiloge, was a book of all ye dedication of saints, and Englished by
Richard Whicford, Priest, and brother of Syon, by Richmond, a fond book.)
Another month is called the month of the Moon, and is that space, in the which
the Moon passes from one point in the firmament, and comes again to the
same: and contains xxvii. days, and vii. hours. For the Moon abides in
every sign two days, and two parts of an hour: and for he abides in every
sign two days, and the signs be xii. thereof comes xxiiii. days: and for
he abides in each sign six hours, therefore comes three days: then these
iii. days put to xxiiii. days, make xxvii. days, and vii. hours. Otherwise
a month of the Moon is taken for a full lunacion, which dureth from change to
change, as it is said before hand. Look before. Also a month contains 4.
Weeks, and a week seven natural days, and a day four quadrants, and a
quadrant centaineth six hours, and an hour four poynst, and a point x.
moments, and a moment twelve ounces, and an ounce seven and forty Attomos, and
Attomus is no farther departed for his shortness. And months usual be twelve,
of the which the first is called January, and has that name of a God fained,
that is called lanus: for to him that month was hallowed. And now that month is
called lanuarius, for he is bond and gate of ye year: and he is painted with
two frontes, to show and to teach the beginning and end of the year, as Isid.
says, and he is painted eating, and drinking, with a cup, for that time beasts
need great plenty of meat, for their appetite is strong, most because of
entering of heat to the inner parts. And this mo^th has long nights of xvi.
hours, and short days of 8. hours. ( Addition
Ianus, some suppose to be Saturn, some to be Iaphet, one of ye sons of No^.
Ianus was also a place in Rome, whether usurers resorted, as at Paul's church
in London, a place most irreverently used. Ianus was figured double faced,
signifieng constancy, and diligence.

He was King of Italy, so named of Icalus, from whom proceeded the name of the
Country now called Italy.

Of February. Cap. 10.
THe second month is called Februarius, and has that name of Februo which was
a fained God, and is called Pluto also, for in old time, the month was
sanctified and hallowed to him. For old error of nations sanctified and
hallowed January to the higher Gods, and February to the nether Gods: and
therefore Feuerill has this name Februarius, of that sained God that is called
Februus and Pluto also, and is called God of hell. And this month is full
rainye and and watrye, for rising of vapors and of moisture that turns into
rain: and therefore it is said, that the Sun is that time in Aquario, for
great plenty of rain. And February is painted as an old man sitting by the
fire, heating and warming his feet and hands: for that time is strong cold,
for the Sun is far, and has been so long time And among all months.
February is the least month, for he has but right and twenty days, when it
is not Bisexte, and in ye Bisexte he has nine and twenty days: and among the
Hebrews February is called Sabath, and among the Greeks, he is named
Xendicos. His might has fourteen hours, and his day ten.

( Addition
Februus, a name of Pluto, the son of Saturnus and Ops, and brother to Jupiter
and Neptune. Which coming to the division of their fathers kingdom: the West
part toward the lower sea, fell to Pluto, the youngest son: the East part to
Jupiter, and the Islands to Neptune. Hereof began the Poets Fable, that
Jupiter was King and God of heaven, Pluto of Hell, Neptune of ye Sea. Plutus is
called God of riches, whom Poets ^aine to be lame, when he comes to a man,
and to have wings when he departs: By that deui^e signifieng, that riches
are long in getting, but quickly vanish away, if they be not well guyded. He
is also imagined to be blind, as more often lighting on unworthy men, and
naughty persons, than on such, as for their virtue are most worthy to be
enriched.)

Of March. Cap. 11.
MArch is called Marcius, and has that name of Mars the Author of Romans Or
he has that name, because that the beasts and fowls be moved to serve Venus,
as Isidore says, and then females desire male: and for a male in latin is
called Mas, that month is named Marcius. And among the Hebrews the month of
March is called Adar, and among the Greeks, Distan: and he has one and
thirty days, and his night has twelve hours, and his day twelve, and in the
month of March is euenesse of day and night in springing time, when the Sun
holds the middle line between North and South. And therefore in the month
of March, the pores and holes of the earth be opened, and humors begin to
move upward in beasts, in trees, and herbs. Therefore March is painted as it
were a Gardeiner: for that time superfluities of vines, and of other trees be
shred and pored. And in March the time is full chaungeable and unsteadfast: and
therefore that time bodies of men change full soon and easily. And in March
water is not very wholesome to drink: for then water is namelye infected by
shedding of seed of fishes and of Frogs. For the Sun in the beginning of
March is in the middle of the Sign, that is called Pisces, fish.

( Addition
Mars signifies force: his Chariot. violence of the swiftnes of ye blustering
winds and hayle: ye names of his two horses, Terror and Fear, that comes to
Cattle, Birds, Fishes, and men, killyng the increase, with exchaunged
tempests.

Of April. Cap. 12.
THe fourth month is April, and is called Hiar among the Hebrews, Xandicos
among the Greeks: And has thirty days. His night has ten hours, and his
day xiiii. and is called Aprilis in Latin, as it were Aperilis: for that time
all things open, and then burgen flowers, and leaves spring and come out of the
earth and of trees, and therefore April is painted bering a flower. Some thing
is spoken of before in ye Planets.
For in that month the earth begins to be closed and arraied with flowers.
And this month is called Aprilis, as it were Asfrondilis of Affron, that is,
seed: for that time the pores of the earth being opened, the fields be apt to
be cared and tilled, and apt to receive seed, when the Sun about the middle
of March, comes into the sign, that is called Taurus, the Bull.

Of May. Cap. 13.
THe fifth month is Madius or Maius, May: and has that name May, of Maia the
mother of Mercurius. Or he has that name Maius of Maioribus, the more worthy
and gretest of Romans: or he has that name Madius of Madefactione, wetting
and moysting of cayne: for in that time the stars arise that be called
Pliades and Hiades, and other rainye stars: and by virtue of them comes
rain and deawe to wet and moist and bespring seeds that be sown. Among the
Hebrews, this month is called Starba^, and among the Greeks he is called
Antimoseos, and has xxx. days, and his night is eight hours, and his day
xvi. And May is a time of mirth, of love, of gladness, and of lyking: for
most in May birds sing and make joy, and then Kings go forth to war and to
make battles. In May woods wexe green, Meadows spring and flourish, and
well nigh all things, the which be alive, be moved to joy and to love, and
therefore it is said, that in the middle of May the sun comes into the
sign that is called Gemini: For then is temperatenesse of air and mirth, and
liking is doubled among men, for May is a time of solace and of lyking.
Therefore it is painted like a young man riding, and bearing a foul on his
hand.

Of June. Cap. 14.
THe sixth month is called Iunius, and has that name of Iunioribus, younger
men, for the people of Rome were divided in parts and tents, and companyes of
younger men, and of elder, as Isid. says. The month of June is end of
springing time, and beginning of Summer, and is called Thebatch among the
Hebrews, and Deseos among the Greeks, and has xxx. days, and his night has
six hours, and his day xviii. And is the month of stinting of the sun, for
in ye middle thereof, the sun comes into the sign, that is called Cancer,
and then the heat of the sun dries humors in mores and roots, and all thing
draws to ripenes: and therefore he is painted, as mowing hay, for that time
hay is ripe in meadows.

Of July. Cap. 15.
THe seventh month is called Julius, and has that name of Julius Caesar,
because he was borne in that month: or as it is said, in that month he was
made Emperor. And this month is called Canilis among the Hebrews, and
Panetnos among the Greeks, and has xxxi. days, and his day has xvi.
hours, and his night has viii. And this month is most fervent: for in the
middle of this month the sun begins to be in Leone, and the Canicular
days begin. And therefore is great passing heat in that time, because of the
hot sign, and also because of the most hot star. Also yt time all hot
passions and evils increase, and that time is most disconuenient and
vnaccording to medicine. That time by full great heat coming inward, and
wasting moisture and humor, the Corn ripeth. And therefore Julius is painted
with an hook, reaping Corn: for then is couenable reaping time. And this
month is changing and unstable, whose heat is strong in the beginning, and
slacker in the end.

Of August. Cap. 16.
THe eight month is called Augustus, and has that name of Augustus the
Emperor: and this month is called Ebal among the Hebrews, and Ior among the
Greeks, and has xxxi. days. His night has x. hours, and his day xiiii. In
this month corn is gathered into barned: and therefore he is painted with a
flayle threshing corn, and makes the earth bare, and spoileth it of corn and
fruit. And therefore it is said, yt the Sun in ye mids of August, comes
into the sign that is called Virgo, the maid: for a maid is barren and
without fruit, so the earth is barren and bare, when he is spoiled of corn
and fruit.

Of September. Cap. 17.
THe ninth month is called September, and has that name, because he is the
vii. month of temperate rain, that is to understand after March: for then often
is plenty of rain. And this month is called Tarsa among the Hebrews, and
Corios among the Greeks: and has xxx. days: his night has twelve hours,
and his day xii. In this month is evenness of day and night in harvest time:
for in the middle thereof the sun comes into the sign that is called
Libra. And this month is the end of summer, and beginning of Harvest. In this
month, Grapes be ripe: and therefore he is painted in a vineyard, as a
Gardener gathering grapes in a basket. And this month is chaungeable and
unsteadfast. In his beginning heat is strong, and withdraws and abateth in
his end: and has harvest coldness. Among the Hebrews this month was full
solemyne. For among them the seventh day, the seventh month, and the seventh
year, were in great worship.

Of October. Cap. 18.
There, month is October, and has that name, because he is the viii. after
rainy time, and is called Marizon among the Hebrews, and Hiperbeos, among the
Greeks: and has.30. days His night has.14. hours, and his day. 10. which
is yet hot in the beginning, but he greeueth bodies with cold at the cad: and
therefore it is said, that in his middle the Sun comes in the sign yt is
called Scorpio. Scorpio is a worm pleasing in face, and stingeth with the
tail. For this month is kindly cold and dry: be dries the earth, and
disposes it, and makes it able to be sown with seeds: Therefore in Winter
seeds be sown. And therefore this month is painted in the likeness of a
sower, that sows his seed.

Of November. cap. 19.
THE eleventh month is November, and has that name, because he is the ninth
after reinye time, and is called Caseu among the Hebrews, and Dyos among the
Greeks: And has thirtye days. His night has 16. hours, and his day eight.
This month for his coldness thirleth inward, and greeueth bodies right so^re.
And therefore it is said, that in the middle of this month the Sun comes
into the sign that is called Sagittarius, the Archer. This month with his
dryness and cold, constrains and binds and dries, and makes leaves of
trees fall. And closes and stops pores in beasts. And gathers humors
inward, and freeseth them, and greeueth and pricketh. Therefore at that time
beasts wax fat and tallowie, and namelye swine. And therefore this month is
painted as a churl beating Oaks, and feeding his Swine with mast and Akornes.

Of December. chap. 20.
THE twelfth month is December, so called because he is the tenth after the
reinie time. And December is a water month: and is called Thubeth among the
Ebrewes, and Epileos among the Greeks, and has.31. days: his night has 18.
hours, and his day has.6. And in this month is Solsticial: for in ye middle
thereof the Sun enters into the sign of Capricorno. And when it is so far
from our dwelling, yt it may no farther pass toward the South: then it
tourneth again little and little from the South circles, and styeth up by the
North circles, and the end of Harvest is the beginning of Winter: and
stretches unto the xvii. day of March, and then begins growing time. And
in that month for sharpness of cold, fowls and beasts that be fed in house
be quiet and of little moving, and therefore they wexe fat, and therefore that
time they be slain. And of these months, a year is made, as well of the
Sun, as of the Moon.

FOrasmuch as the learned by their observations, Addition
have written of diverse perilous days to happen in every month: and
considering how necessary it is that those days be expressed, for the
avoiding of many dangers, notwithstanding, the Ordinance of God, can alter
both the times and seasons.

January has eight such days, the 1. the 2. the 4. the 5. the 10. the 15.
the 17. the 19. Drink white wine this month, if thou be able: or else use
temperate diet.

February has three days, the 8. the 10. the 17. these not so evil. Be
circumspect of the 26. day, the 27. and the 28. Eat no broathes, wherein is
Mallows, etc.

March has three days, the 15. the 16. the 19. not so evil as the 28. day.
Sweet meals are good to eat this month, young Lamb, Meal, and Pullaine.

April has two days, the 16. the 21. The 7. day and the 8. the 10. the 20.
use hot and comfortable meats of light digestion.

May has three days, the 7. the 15. the 20. These not so evil, the third
the sixth, rise early, and break thy fast in a measure.

June has two, the 4. the 7. These not so evil, the 10. the 15. the 22. Sage
and Lettuce are good in Sallets: and sometime to drink cold water, is not
hartfull.

July has two days, the 15. the 20. Abstain thy body, beware of lust, and
lechery.

August two days, the 19. the 20. The 29. and 30. Mesraine strong drinks and
hot spices.

September has two days, the 6. the 7. The 3. the 4. the 21. and 22. eat
good fruits that nourish.

October one day, that is the 6. The 3. the 16. the 24. Drink good wine and
avoid discord.

November has two days, the 15. the 19. Beware ye bl^^de not the 5. day, the
6. the 28. the 29.

December has three days, the 6. the 7. the 9. Take heed of the 15. 17. 22.
Warm not thy feet too hot, nor let not thy self blood, except an extremity
urges: frequent the Temples for thy Religion, and obey thy Lord God, and make
much of the Physician.

Of the Week. Cap. 21.
A Week is called Ebdomada. and also Septimana, seven night: and have that
name of the number of seven days and nights. By often coming about thereof,
months, years, and times pass. And a week begins in the one day, and
ends in the same: The parts thereof be days artificial and natural. Days
be called Dies, and have that name of Dijs, Gods. Men in old time hallowed the
names of days, to certain stars. They gave the first day to the Sun,
that is Prince of Stars, and Lord of Plannets: and therefore the first day
is called Dies Dominica, the Lords day, and Sundaye.

Also that is priueledged in many wise, for in a Sunday the world was made,
and in a Sunday our Lord was borne, and in a Sundaye, our Lord arose from
death to life, and in a sundaye our Lord sent the Holy ghost to his disciples.
And they gave the second day to the Moon, that is next to ye sun in hugenes
and brightness. The third day has the name of Mars: and so of ye other. And
some day is called Dies Aegyptiacus, and some not so. Dies Aegyptiacus is ye
day, in the which God sent some wreake into Egypt. And for there be.xxiiii.
Aegiptians days, it follows that God sent mo^ wreakes upon the Aegiptians
then ten, that be most famous among other. The days Aegiptiac^ he set in the
Balender, and be called Dies mali, evil days: not for some thing should be
spared in those days, that should not be spared in other days, but for to
have in mind the miracles and wonders of God. Some day is artificial and
some natural. Artificial day is the space in the which the Sun passes
about in our sight from the East to the West: and is called Dies artificialis,
crafty: for he has diversity as it were by craft, by diverse place of
Climats and of countries. A natural day is the space in the which the Sun
passes about, out of the East by the West, into the East again. And such a
day contains.24. hours. And the day artificial of evenness of day and
night, conteyneth 12 hours, and in other times more or less, as the days
wax longer or shorter.

And some day has the name of Kalendes, and some Idibus, and some of Nonis.
And the first day of a month has the name of Kalendis: And is called Kalende,
of Calo, that is to call. For then men use to call merchaunts to Faires. And it
was a solemn feast that is called Festum Neomenie, the feast of the new
Moon. For then the Moon was seen to be new. None be said as it were
Nundine, faires: for then faires, begin. And Idus is to mean Diuisio,
departing, for then faires were departed.

Hereof we have three diversities of days, Kalendis ordained to hallowing,
Nonis ordained to chaffer, To buy or sell.
and Idus ordained to depart and pass home from Faires. And a day natural
has xxiiii. hours, in the which the Sun is borne about all the earth by
rauishing of the firmament. The parts of a natural day he Quadrantes, Hora,
Punctum, Momentum, Vncia, and Athomus, Quadran^ is the fourth part of a day
natural, and is the space of six hours: and an hour is the sixte part of a
quadrant: and an hour the.xxiiii. part of a day natural. And is called Hora
as it were the end and the less part of time: as the brim of a river or of
the sea is called Ora, as Isidore says: And a Puncte is the fourth part of an
hour, and is called Momentum, as it were Minimum, the least and most straight
time that has name of meeuing of stars, Vncia is the twelfth part of a
moment. Athomus is the.xlvii. part of Vncia, and is called Athomus, as it were
without dividing and parting: For dividing and parting of time, passes no
further then Athomus.

Also the day receives shining of the Sun, and receives light, and sends
it forth to other things. Therefore this name Dies comes of Dian Greek, and
Dian is to understand, cleernesse, as Isidore says: Also the day describes
and distinguishes months, years, and times, of all course: And passing of
time is accounted and reckoned by number and sum of days. Also as the Sun
passes near or farther, the days lengthen and shorten: Therefore because
that the Sun is far from us in Winter, days be shortest, and in Summer
longest. For in Summer the Sun is most high in us: also the day hides the
stars and the over bodies of heaven: for the more clear yt day is, the more
the stars be hid from our sight.

Also the day distinguishes colors and forms, and shapes of things, that
be seen: For figures, fourmes, and shapes that be hid by night, be seen
by day, as Beda says. Also the presence of the day comfort and gladdeth
birds and fowls. For in springing of the day, the birds be joyful and
sing: Also the day comfort wayfaring men, and makes them sure in in peace:
And is enimye to thieves, and makes them dread: for thieves dread by day. Also
the cleernesse of the day voideth and puts off darkness of the night, and
comes soon after, and the more tempest and disturbance that is in the night,
that passes, the more desirous is the presence of the day that follows. Also
the day changes his state: for he waxes longer or shorter: and the shorter
he is in Winter, the longer he is in Summer.

Also the day waketh and puts of heaviness, sleep, and slouthfulnes: for yt
day is ordained to travail of men. And the more the day draws to an end, the
more the wise workman busieth to make an end of his days work.

Of the dawning. chap. 22.
THE dawning is end of the night, that passes, and is beginning of the day,
that comes after: and is called Aurora, as Isi. says, as it were a golden
horn: for if sends shining color, as it were color of gold: And
therefore in the dawning, the Greeks call the Sun Crilodomus, that is to
understand, the house of gold. For his beams shining, do show golden
creastes. Or else he is called Aurora, as it were wether dewing. For in the
dawning dew is gendered: and by the moisture thereof the earth is watered and
sprung, and the heat of the air tempered: and the dawning has light of the
Sun, and is more clear then the night, and more dark then the day. The day
exciteth clean birds, and day fowls to dye and to sing, and drives and
fears away night souls. In the springing of the dawning, flowers that be
closed, open: and herbs and grass, that wither and fade in great heat, arise
and rear up their heads. In the dawning virtue and strength of wit and of
feeling be comforted. In the dawning sickness of beasts is lighted and abated
For in ye dawning, sanguine humor has principal mastry, as Constantine
says. The dawning follows the kind of springing time even to Undern, and
middaye follows the kind of Summer, and the euentide follows the kind of
Harvest time, and night is called and lykened to Winter. In the dawning, for
mastry of blo^d, sleep is sweet and wholesome. Also that time most specially
Cocks be excited to crow. And in the dawning Lucifer, the star arises, and
warns of the Sun rising, and of his soon coming. The dawning begins
from the end of darkness, and wareth perfect, and passes to the perfection of
light, and changes his color in the arising of the Sun. For the shows,
now yeolowe, now read, and now golden color. This diversity comes of
diverse quality of vapors or of clouds, in the which is printing of the
Sun beams, as Beda says. Dawning is Aurora: and Aurora and Diluculum, is
all one, and is called Diluculum, as the bright and light begins of the day.
For Diluculum, as Isidore says, is end of the night and beginning of full
light, releeuing and easing of sickness, speeding and deliverance from
enimyes. For in Diluculo, that is the dawning, enemies fly and thieves also, as
he says. Mane and Diluculum is all one. For Mane is full of light, and is
called Mane that is good, for nothing is better then light, as Isidore says.
Mane the early dawning, is beginning of travail, end of sleeping, time of
soberness, and perfect digestion and ended, and makes an end of yt night
little and little, and passes soon, and shows qualities, figures, and
shapes of things.

Of Midday. chap. 23.
MIddaye is called Meridies, as it were the middle of the day. For at middaye
the Sun is seen in the middle of heaven, and is in the middle point between
the East and the West: and is seen like far from other. Or else midday is
called Meridies, as it were clear: and the day is most clear and pure, when
ye Sun shines out of the middle of heaven, and lighteneth all the world with
even cleerenesse, as Isidore says. This hour is most hot and dry, and most
like in qualities to Summer: and that is for many manner causes. For then the
Sun is most straight over our heads, for the straight reflection and rebounding
and doubling of the Sun beams, and for streyghtnesse of the lines, under yt
which the beams be thrust togethers. Also that time for multiplication and
coming together of beams the air is full hot. And therefore then is most
heat gendered in these nether things. And in the hour of midday each body
makes most short shadow. And then the shadow stretches fromward the Sun
toward the North. And the more the Sun passes fromward the South circle, the
shadow of a body is the more long, as Beda says. In the midday flowers and
herbs fordrie: but fruit and corn do most ripe, then beasts draw to shadowy
places, for strong heat of the Sun: and some rest in their own dens and
hidels. In the middaye venomous beasts, as Serpents and Adders grieve most.
For then they cast soon and shed their venim. Also in the morrow tide, for
coldness of the night that is passed, they wax cold. And therefore in them
the strength of venim abateth: but it waxes hot in the midst of the day.
Therefore that time they be more fervent to sting, and shed, and cast venimme,
and so in the fervent middaye they go out of their holds and dens, and put
them forth for to have heat of the Sun, as Isidor says.

Of Euentide. Chap. 24.
EUentide is called Vespera, and has that name of a West star, that is
called Vesperus. For Vesperus is a star that follows the Sun, going down:
and comes with darkness that follows, as Isid. says. And euentide is
called Serum, late: and has that name of gates closed. For when euentide
comes, gates be closed and shut, for that all thing that is in house
should be more safe. Also the euentide is called Crepusculum, as it were
light that is in doubt, when it is not certeinlye known between light and
darkness, as Isidore says. Then at even the day ends, and the Sun
beams be withdrawn. For above the earth against even, shadows of bodies be
most long, And flowers that open against the Sun, close for absence of the
Sun. Also pores of bodies that be opened by heat of the day, close for
slacknesse of heat in the euentide, exhalation, vapors, and fumosities that
be of miste and of clouds, be resolved in the euentide. Men and beasts, and
also Fowls and Birds, because of resolution of fumositye in their bodies be
then disposed to rest and to sleep. Night Fowls, and Owls, and night Crows
come out of their holes to get their meat in the euentide. Herds gather
flocks of beasts out of Leeses into foldes, or into other places of couenable
rest. In the euentide uneath be Hounds known from Wolves. In the euentide
for rising of enimyes and of Thieves, Work men and Watches and Wardennes be
set and ordained in walls and Towers. Also in the euentide, laboring men
be rewarded and paid, and they go to rest.

Of the night. cap. 25.
NIght is called Nox, and has that name of Nocendo, noyeng. For Night noyeth
the eyes: for it takes away from the eien his perfection, that is the deed of
seeing: For night hides colors of things, in whom the eye has liking: And
the cause of night is shadow of the earth that is between us and the Sun, and
withdraws from us the Sun beams, and lets us to have sight of the
Sun, and takes from us the light thereof: The night is cold and moist, in
qualyties most like to Winter. Therefore night is couenable to rest of beasts,
and needful to working of kindly deeds and effects: and so night is time of
sleeping and of rest, that the virtues that be distracte sparkled and made
feeble by day waking, may be joined and rested by benefit of night: and so
joined and gathered, may be comforted. For night should not be all without
light, it is beshyned with brightness of stars: and so by moving of
Stars, the passing of the course of the night is known. And also thickness
of air of the night is tempered by moving and shining of stars. And
therefore men that pass by the way or sail in the sea, may soon go out of
the way, but if their way be ruled and led by moving, and place of stars.
Al sickness generally is stronger by night then by day: The end of night and
coming of day is known by crowing of Cocks. Also by watches and wards of
Knights, the night is departed in four, as Beda says. For the first waketh
in the first quarter of the night: the second in the second quarter: and the
third in the third: and the fourth in the fourth, that is at Cock crowing. For
they wake always in Castles: for always they have mind and find somewhat, that
they dread, as he says Super. Lucam. cap. 12.

And yet more, the night of it self brings in horriblenesse and fear, and
contains fantasies and deceits: for more fantasies be seen by night then by
day. And also men that sleep by night, see more fantasies, that men that wake
by day, as it is said there: Much have I suffered by night because of him.
Mat. 27 Also night brings in thickness and infection of air: for of
fumositie and moist vapors, and exhalations comes so great changing and
infection of air, that uneath men, beasts, and things, that have life should
live, if that the Moon and the stars with their moving did not withstand
and let such malice, as Alb. says. Also night shows things that be hid in
the cleernesse of day as it is known. For stars be hid by day, and shine and
be seen by night. Night feeds unclean beasts: For Boares and other wild
beasts hide themselves, and lurk in dens and ditches by day, and go about
by night in vineyardes and fields. And often night gives to evil doers
hardiness and surety, for by day thieves and robbers dread to be taken: and
be by night bold and hardy to all evil deeds: as Gregory says. The night
greeueth them most that be in peril of the sea, for when night comes upon
them, that be in peril of shipwreck, uneath they may escape any weather, as
Gregory says. The night wastes the half part of man's life slitye: for we
spend as much time sleeping, as we do waking by day: and so night
withdraws touching travail, the most part of our life, as Galen says.

Of the Sabbath: cap. 26.
SAbbatum is chief feast of the week, touching hallowing. Therefore the
seventh day was ordained of our Lord. For the seventh day our Lord rested
from all manner working. Genesis 2. Therefore among the Hebrews no work of
seruage, was suffered to be done on the Saturday: but servants, women and
beasts should rest in the Saterdaye. Also in the Jews houses no fire should be
kindled in the Saterdaye: and meat that was needful, was dressed and made
ready in the day before. In the saturday men were arrayed with their best
clothes, and the people used plenty, commonly of the best meat. And the
temple for love of prayer was more frequented the^ in other days. In the
Saturday the greatest sacrifice and offering were always brought and done upon
the Altars. Always in the Saturday Priests declared and expounded the law to the
people in their Sinagogues. And they sung solemn Psalms, and idle walking
about was fordidden: for the space of the way of Saterdaye, was called the
space only of a. M. paces. For it was holden unlawful to go more way in the
Saturday, as the Gloss says Super actu Apost. In the Saterdaye it was not
granted to wear armor but in defense of the law: as it is said Libro. 1.
Mac. 2. Then the feast of the Saturday was betokened the rest of the soul, and
it was ordained, that he that brake the Saturday should be stain without mercy.
As it fell of him that gathered wood in the Saturday, that the people stoned to
death, by the bidding of our Lord.

Of Neomenia. chap. 27.
AMong the Hebrews Neomenia, Neomenia The time of ye new Moon.
and a new Moon is all one, and was solempnly holden in Kalends of the
Months, in the worship of our Lord, that renueth all ordinances. And as
nations did in the beginning of months in worship of the feigned Goddess
Diana and Juno, the Hebrews did in worship of the Creator in Kalends of
months.

And therefore the beginning of months be called Kalende, as it were
worshipping, as Isidore says. Or he has that name of Calo in Greek, that is
to understand calling: for the coming of this this solempnitie should be
known by Trumpets and Clarions And by trumping the people were called to this
feast, that is called Neomenia. This Feast was right high and holy: and
therefore it was worshipped with spiritual hosts and offerings. And the people
were called specially to meat and to Feast with trumpes and clarions in the
Kalendes

( Addition
Also of the Prime the common rule is, that Sunday Prime is dry weather. Monday
prime wet. Teusday prime, cold and windy, Wednesdaye tempestuous, Thursday
fair and clear. Friday changeable, Saturday, rainie, the three days from the
change, is the prime day.

How many miles the Moon is from the earth, and every Planet from other.

As some have published, it is from the Moon. 15750. miles.

From the Moon to Mercury, is.12812. miles.

From Mercury to Venus as many miles.

From Venus to the Sun, is.23437 miles and a half.

From the Sun to Mars, is.15725. miles.

From Mars to Jupiter, is.78721. miles.

From Jupiter to Saturn, as many miles.

From Saturn to the Firmament, is 120485 miles.

The whole sum from the earth to the firmament, is.280734. miles and a half.

Of Septuasgesime. chap. 28.
SEeptuagesime is the space of.70. days: and stretches from the sunday, yt is
called Septuagesima, to ye saterdaye in Easter week: yt is called Sabbatu^ in
Albis. These.70. days betoken those.70 years, in yt which the children of
Israel wet bomde in seruage in Babylon, and wet continually al those.70. years
in wretchedness, and in sorrow: but they took leave of Ciro ye king, and came
again with joy and worship, when those.70. years were ended. And by these.70.
years of thraldom in Babylon, all ye time of our life is betokened: all the
while it is subject to sin or to pain. And therefore the sin of the first man
with pain that he had for it, is red in holy Scripture in the first Sunday,
when Septuagasima begins. And so in token of the wretchedness of this world,
songs of wealth and of joy be still: and wedd^ng and spowfalls be suspended,
Marriage forbidden
till it be after Easter. For by ye passion of Christ, shraldome of sin of
mankind, is released: but yet pain dureth and abides. As ye people of Israel
made great joy and mirth for their freely coming again into Jerusalem: but
nevertheless for hardness of the way they travailed full sore. So we passing
toward our country, make joy because of our redemption: but yet we make sorrow
and woe for our sins. When the Septuagesima of this life is full ended: The.70.
years.
then we shall shine in white in presence of the lamb: for when ye travel of
this life is ended: and that we come to the Sabbath of endless rest: then we
shall have joy and double stole, yt shall be restored to us that time. In token
of wretchedness of this life, and in the gospel be taught to travel in ye
vineyard of our Lords Sabbath.

Of Quinquegesima. cap. 29.
QVinquegesima is called as it were.5 times 10, and betokens forgiveness,
For the 50. year was called Annus iubileus and was most sole^pne and holy
among the Hebrews. For in yt year men yt were banished, should come home again.
and debts should be forgiven, and loss should be restored: And Quinquegesima
begins the third sunday after Septuagesima: and ends in the sunday of yt
resurrection For it betokens ye state of grace, to yt which we be restored by
ye benefit of penance: and therefore fasting of holy church begins in ye
middle of the week of septuagesima, and then often we rehearse yt.51. Psalm in
the service of yt day. For it is a Psalm of penance, and is said welnigh in all
yt hours, and ye Psalm is called Miserere m^i deus, the hallowing of the
fifty year, that is called Annusiubileus, and began, as Hebrews tell, before
the law, yt is to wit, before Abraham's time: yt delivered his nephew Loath, yt
was then.50. year old: and therefore after that time the fifty year was held
among Abraham's children: and that was afterward allowed in time of the law,
because of mistike meaning, Secret revealing.
as it is said in Numeris.

Of Lent. Chap. 30.
LEnt is called Quadragesima, and is the space of forty days, as Isidore
says: And begins from the first-sunday of lent, and stretches and lasts
to ye Cene of our Lord, Maunday thursdaye
that is shere thursday. In the which Cene and supper our Lord began the
Sacrifice of the new Testament, and fed us with Angels bread. Therein is
betokened, that he that does full penance of Lent, and full ends ghostly
this life, shall have joy and company finally of contemplation and sight of
God. Quadragesima, Lent, is the time of chiualrye of christen men: in the which
time we fight sharplye against vices and sins. For this number of days we
take to our chivalry, not only by ensample of Moses and of Elye, but also by
following of Jesus Christ, that fasted so many days as it is read. And well in
these number of days we fast. For this number ten doubled four times,
presents and betokens the ten commandments, and the four Gospells, by
the which Gospells arms and weapon now of our adversary is put off, and
land of life is there got by law of heritage, as the land of behest was
granted to the children of Israel after that battle and fighting of forty
year, in desert and wilderness. Also the fruit of our chiualrye is showed
under this number. For this number of fortye, if the parties that depart it be
gathered togethers, make the number of fifty. The which number betokens
forgiveness of death, and restitution of heritage that was lost. And heerby it
is showed that in fighting against vice and sins, we get mercy and forgiveness
of sins, and be made heirs of everlasting good and riches. And in this
number we hallowe to our Lord tithings and first fruits, for the tithing of
three hundred days and sixtye. we fast six and thirtye days; and for the
tithing of five days and six hours that be over of an whole year, we fast
one day that the sum be paid to GOD for tithinges of a year, seven and
thirtye fasting days: and the days of our four times be there offered for
first fruits. And this we do, that we that offer to God first fruits of our
time in faith of the Trinitye, and the first fruits in contempletion and
fulfilling of the term commandments by faith and good deeds, may come to
the worthiness of the first birth, and to the pennye of everlasting wealth.

manne^ of resisting temptation^
In the Tract be showed four manner of impugnations and of temptations. Of the
which the first is light and privy, that is night dread. The second is light
and openly known, that is an Arrowe flyeng by day: The third is heavy and
open; that is the meeting of the middaye feende. The fourth is privy and
heavy, that is the doing and walking in darkness. Against those so many
impugnations, we be warded and succored with spiritual armor, to the which
the Apostle in the Epistle teaches and calls us, where he says: Put we be
forth, as servants of God by armor of righteousness and of virtue of God.
And among all times of the year, the Lent time is most worthy and noble. For
Lent is time of quickening. For the earth that seemed as it were dead in Winter
time, quickens again and waxes green in Lent. Also Lent is time of
renewing: for the earth is arrayed and renewed with herbs and flowers, and
treees with branches and leaves.

Also Lent is time of conceiving. For then the virtue of generation is most
strong in beasles, trees, and herbs. Therefore all thing that springs on
the earth, grows and burgeneth that time. Also Lent is the time of making
nests, and of breeding. Therefore Turtles and Storks, and other fowls and
birds, that be unseen in Winter, come in Lent and be busy to make their
neastes. Also Lent is time of medicine and of purgation. For then in bodies be
humors moved most to pass out: and therefore it is couenable time of
medicine: also Lent is time of winning and of chaffer. For then the earth is
disposed to be cared, and the sea to sail in. And therefore in Lent and
springing time, for hope of winning, men use to go about, and use diverse
merchaundises. Also Lent is time of shredding and of paring, The time of
graffing, planting, and sorting seeds.
and to cut off superfluityes: and therefore in Lent Uines and other trees,
be cut and pared and shredde of superfluities. Also Lent is time of bourgening
of Uines, that be cut and pared. For superfluitye of humors, that is in the
root comes out by vapors, and droppeth and passes out when the Uine is
cut. Also that time the virtue of bourgening breatieth out in diverse parts,
and shows it self: in twigges. Also Lent is time of sowing, and of graffing.
For in Lent seeds be sown on the earth: and graftes be grafted on the trees.
Also, Lent is time: of dew and of rain, to spring and to moist; and to
nourishe the seedees that be: sown, as Albumasar says, and Leda also.

Addition.
Examples of fasting.
AS for fasting of that original proceeded further: for the use of flesh and
wine from Adam. till the time of Noah was unknown: And Moses forbear meat. 40
days, and Belias did likewise; our Savior Christ fasted the seek space, and
God pardonce the Niniu^tes of their crimes; because they fasted with repeutance.

The Jews also in their law, so often as they either asked any benefit of God,
or would pacify his wrath, or rendes thanks, for his benefits, or kept
any solemyes feasts, used commonly to fast. And ^^^es he keeps not the love
fast, which forbeareth flesh, or forgoeth his supper, but he that minisheth his
affections, abating his anger, swaging his pride, modifieth his desires,
mortifieth his lusts, kiffereth patiently all adversity that chances to
him, that man is the true faster. Albeit the other is a coadiutor to that
thing, and helps much that purpose. Therefore to the intent we might
reclaim such corruptions of our old Adam, the Apostles did ordeins the fast
of Lent, as Hiemme in an Capistle^td Marcella does plain deriate^. Wherefore
they that refer it to Thelesphorus be deceived, Thelesphorus did appoint it
before Easles.
for he did not institute it first, but appointed that it should be kept
before Easter, and added another week to it, that we call Qu^oquag^sima^^,
this week he commanded Mi^^^tes to fast more then the laitye, because they,
which ought to be holyer then the rest, should in this ordinarye fast, show
more abstinence then the other. The Apostles also institutes, that three weeks
after the nativity of the Lord named Christide, should be solemp^tye fasred,
which constitution ^^^ is a while kept universally, albeit and can ^^^her
sake it to be amitieson of old Roman feases, which thrice in the year had
sacrifices, for the prosperous soceesse of their corn. The one Venali, for the
wines, the other Robiga^^a for all their grain, least it should be mildewed.
The third Horalia; for all their fruits. These vain superstitione; old
Bishops of Rome turned to a godly use, and transposed then feasling, than
the ^ather at the contemplation of our prayers and fastings. Superstition
turned into religion.
God might prosper the increase of all fruits; to the sustentation of us his
creatures. Polidure Vurgil in his: ^ book, and 3. Chapter.

Ieiuniom is called in Hebrew Zon, a fast is a discipline and chastesing of the
body, taken willinglye for the time present, by the which we are made humble
before GOD: (...) thereby bereave the body of nourishment, that it may obey the
spirit: There are two necessities which make us fast, yt is a public
necessity and a private: Public necessity is, Joel. 2, Jonas. 3
when some calamity, either presses or nec^sa^^y to come upon the Church of
God: the example thereof ^^ appear in the Scriptures Private necessity is,
when any man does ^i^t, ^^eling himself to be vexed of his own lust or
concupis^^nce, from the which he takes away the amise, yt it may the less
instance and burn. The whole ^y^e^ of Christans must be a fast, as Christ
exhorts us saying: Couete ^^ graue^ ^^^iue^^a v^ stra crapula ve^ebriet ^^^;
Lake heed least your he^ddes be laden with surfettes or with dronkenesse.

I do evidently find has in the old Testament and in the new, yt fasting
was commanded. But on what days we ought to fast, or not to fast, I do find
commanded neither of God, nor of the Apostles.

So Austen says, Nahil prodest tota die longum duxisrie lejunium, si postea
sua vitate ciboium vel nimietate anima obruatur: that is, it does nothing
avail to fast all the day, if afterward the soul be overwhelmed with
delicate meats, etc.

Origin writes thus, Ieiunio sic adhibenda temperies, vt corpus vestrum, nec
situritas excitet, nec inedia immoderata debiliter: Fasting must so be
temperated, that neither fullness may excite and stir the body, neither
immoderate hunger may weaken the body.

I read an old verse in which is contained the use, and abuse of fasting:
this is the verse.

Abstinet aeger, egens, cupidus, gula, Simla, virtus.

The sick man fasteth because he has no appetite to eat, or by the reason of
some medicine received. The poor man lasts because he has not for to eat.
The covetous man fasteth to spare meat and drink. The gluttenous man fasteth,
that he may after eat the more greedely. The Ape, that is the hypocrite;
fasteth to seek the praise of man. The godly man fasteth to mortify his
flesh, and to mourn for his strives. Look for this, further discoursed in the
Miscellane of Dallen.

Of Easter. chap. 31.
EAster is called Pascha in Greek, that is to understand, passion, or
suffering: That comes of Patin, that is to suffer. And is called in Hebrew
Phase, that is passing or passage. For in the Paske of Hebrews, and Lamb, was
offered, roasted and eaten, and nothing thereof left till on the morrow. And
that which might not be eaten, was burnt in the fire with have, and it was
eaten with wild Letuse, and with the purest bread. It was forbid and
commanded, that men that were unclean and not circumcised, should not eat
thereof. The Hebrews were gird and shoddde, when they should eat thereof.
Each man that eat thereof should hold a staff in his hand. Posts of houses
were bawmed with blood of the lamb, and the virtue of the Angel that flewe
the first birthes, was withstoode thereby. For he had no power to green there,
as the posts of the house were baumed with blood of that lamb. In eating of
that offered Lamb, our Lord passing through Egypt, the people of the
Egyptians were smitten: and the people of the Hebrews were delivered out of
the cruel Lordship of the Egyptians. And so because the first birthes of
Egyptians were slain, the first births of Hebrews were hallowed, and
offered, and after eaten. After the eating of the Lamb, the people following a
pillar of fire, and of a cloud, were lead without hurt throughout the red sea,
and Pharao and his host that pursued them were drowned. And finally, for their
deliverance and drowning of their enemies, they sung lauds to God: as shows
Exo. 12. and.14. And therefore in mind of slaughter of the Egyptians, and of
deliverance of the Hebrews came up an usage in ye country of Jews, that at
Easter, of tiro, yt were dampened to death, one should be slain, and that other
should be delivered and pass free, as it is open: Mat. 26 And this Easter of
Jews was figured and prophesied of the Easter of christen men: in the which
Easter by the blood of the clean Lamb without wem, that took away the sins
of the world, all that be chosen, be quit and raunsomed out of the service
of feends. By the lamb they that be chosen make passage from flesh to
spirit, and from the old ^^an to the new, and out of the world to heaven, out
of shadow to light, out of figures to foothnesse, and out of seruage and
thraldom, to the freedom of the bliss, of Gods own children.

And therefore Easter day is time of gladness and of joy, time of honesty and
renewing, time of cleanness and of pureness and of joyful refection and
feeding: for children of the resurrection be solemply fed, not with sour
dough of malice, but with pure meat of sweetness and of soothnesse. Always we
hallow Easter day on the Sundaye in springing time, when the Moon is yet at
the full. And always we hallowe Easter day on the Sunday, for reverence and
worship of the resurrection of our Lorde^. And we hallow it not always in the
fifteenth day of the Moon, as the Jews do, least it should seem that we
hold the same law, following the meaning of the Jews. Also to speak largely
of Easter, our Easter stretches to many days: first to Palm Sunday, the
which is commonly called the Easter of flowers. For that day our Lord was
received with boughs and branches of trees. Also this day is privileged: for
the day the children of Israel under Joshua passed Jordane dry footed, and
entered and came into the ends and countries of the land of behest, andaeate:
of the fruit of the land of Canaan, and anon Manna was given, wherewith they
were fed in desert 40. Winters, as it is said Joshua. 2. Also the same day that
it fell, that time was Palm Sunday. And our Lord drove out of the temple
buiers and sellers, after that he was received worshipfully with boughs and
branches of Palm and of Olive. Also the day of Cene, that we call
sheerethursday, pertains to Easter.

Of Pentecost. chap. 32.
PEntecost was a solompne feast among the Hebrews, as it is yet among us; and
it is the fifty day after Easter. For as the people of Israel in the fiftye
day after that they had hallowed Easter in Ramosse, they came to mount Sinay,
and received the law, as it is said Exodus 19. So, the fiftye day after
Christ's passion, the holy Ghost was given to the Apostles in likeness of ^^eye
tongues: for that they should be renable of speech, and have good facunditie
in all manner of language, and seruent in love of charity. This feast is
called Penthecostes, and has that name of Pen^a, that is five, and Costs,
that is ten. For five times ten days passes from Easter to Penthecost: and
be departed and divided by seven weeks, for seven manner graces that was
given to christen men in coming of the holy Ghost. And about Pentecost is time
of chiualry, and also of orpednesse. And then young knights be girde with the
sword of chivalry: and then is time of cleanness of dryness: For then the
Sun heateth strongly the over part of the earth, and wastes and consumes the
sliminesse, and al superfluities of humors: and so he cleanses and dries
the earth. Also then is ye time of all gladness, of joy, and of mirth. For
then all beasts and fowls live in most love. Also it is the time of nurth and
of greenenesse: for namely then herbs be green, and woods bourgen, spring,
and spread Also it is the time of good smelles and of sweetness. For flowers
in gardens, woods, and m^^^ower give sweet smells all about. Also it is the
time of sweetness and savor: for then heat of heaven defieth moisture in
flowers, and changes them, and turns into sweetness: And therefore then is
couenable time to make home, and namely that time Bees use and haunt herbs
and trees, because of the flowers, as Aristo. says: and the honny that is
gathered in springing time, is much more sweet then honny that is gathered in
Harvest time. Also it is the time of riping: for in hot countries about
Pentecost, corn is ripe and gathered: and therefore in li. Number. it is called
the time of new fruits.

For in the Feast of Pentecost it was ordained that men should offer bread of
new corn: also then is the time of pasture, and of plenty of herbs and of
grass: and therefore then as well horses as other beasts be fat for the plenty
of new grass: also then is the time of hardiness and of boldness: for that
time by strong impression of heat of the Sun, Cholera is kindled, and by
kindeling thereof about the heart, wrath and hardiness is excited in beasts:
and therefore that time is most couenable to move war and battle against
enemies.

Of Cenophegia. Cap. 33.
CEnophegia is a feast among the Hebrews, and it is called Pitching of tents:
and was hallowed in mind of the speed and passing, when they passed out of
Egypt, and dwelled in tents, as Isidore says. And so Cenophegia has that
name of Scenon, in Greek, that is a tent. And this solempnitie was hallowed
always in the month of September: for when all the fruits were gathered, they
gave of each tithing to our Lord. And namely then they used gladness, joy,
and mirth, and covered their houses with boughs and branches: and they bare
in their hand fruit, that were Apples of Ceder. And in the tenth days of that
month they hallowed three manner of feasts the self same day, that is to
wit, the feast that is called Festum expiacionis: and another Feast that is
called Festum afflictionis: and the third feast, that is called Festum
propiciacionis. For the same day the highest Bishop cur^red and came in with
blood of a red young Ox, and washed and cleansed that holy place, that is
called Sancta sancturum. And therefore it was called Dies expiacionis, the day
of cleansing: The same day the people fasted, for their trespass that was
done in worshipping of the Calfe in desert. And therefore it was called Dies
afflictionis, the day of punishing. And that day was called Dies
propiciationis, the day of mercy and forgiveness. For in such a day they
heard tell that our Lord was pleased, and had forgiven them the trespass
of worshipping the Calfe.

Of Encenia. Chap. 34.
ENcenia is the dedication and hallowing of a new Temple: for Common in Greek,
is new in English. The Jews hallowed this solempnitye in diverse times of the
year, at the Temple was new builded, or else new apparelled in diverse times:
as it is read that Judas Machabeus hallowed and renewed the Temple. (...)
Marhab. 4.

FINIS LIBRI NONI.
INCIPIT LIBER DECIMVS. DE MATERIA ET FORMA.
THE foresaid treatise ended of the propertyes of time, and of the parts
thereof. Now we shall treat of the nether and material creatures, of the
propertyes of Elements, and of those things that be compounded thereof.

Matter and form be principalles of all bodilye things, as it is said in
libro de vnitate materie and form. And privation of matter and form is
naught else but destruction of all thing: and matter contrary to unity and
unlike thereto, as it is said there. And the more subtle and high matter is
in kind, the more able it is to receive form and shape. And the the more
thick and earthlye it is, and the more feeble from heavenly kind, the more
feeble it is to receive impression, printing of form and of shapes, as it is
said in libro de quinque Iubstontiis. And as it is said there, matter has
this propertye, that it takes form and shape, and to be taken and held, and
is not held. And matter is principal and beginning of distinction, and of
diversity, and of multyplyeng, and of things that he gendered: as it is said
in Septimo Metaphisice. For thing that gendereth, and thing yt is gendered be
not diverse but touching matter. And therefore where a thing is gendered
without matter, the thing that gendereth, and the thing that is gendered, be
all one in substance and in kind. As it fares of the persons in the
trinity. For matter is caused of two, dealing and departing a twain of
singular things, as Aristotle says 4. Metaphisice: the departing and dealing
of special in singular things is by matter, and not by form, as it is said.
10. Metaphisice: and so in substance, and being under one form, is one
matter, and under many be many matters. Also proper matter proprieth to him
his own form. Also matter of natural things, is matter that may be
endless being, because of continual quantitye and matter is subject of
continuance, and quantity in length and breadth and deepnesse. Therefore
accidents may not be delee, but by the dealing and quantitye of his subject.
Also matter is called ^ for he may be dealed in endless many parts, for he
has appetite to endless many forms and shapes: and therefore be cause that
his appetites be not restrained, neither limited in certain. And for he has
inclination to endless many forms and shapes, is called endless, and not that
his virtue is endless, and not limited in certain, neither constrained as the
virtue of God. And therefore Plato says, that matter flows without
streightning ^ but if form stint the fleeting: and therefore bodies that have
much of the matter, and little of form, wax and grow hugely, as it fares
in trees. And therefore bones have title feeling: for they have much earthy
matter, as Auice says: and in matter is hid a manner active might, that is a
manner of imperfect form: and this might is common to two contraries. Therefore
when that might is brought to deeds, and has taken shape, anon he has
appetite to be under a contrary shape. As this might is indifferent to heat and
to cold, when he has indeed received heat, anon he has appetite to receive
contrary. And so no forms of things, that be corruptible and genderable, may
sufficiently and at full have active might in matter. But that always it has
appetite to be fulfilled by another shape. And that form is not fullye, it
may not be brought into the matter but by corruption of the son that is
therein: then as the virtue of the thing that works and comes into the
matter, and corrupts and destroys the form that is therein: So it exciteth
the active form to a contrary form: and gives thereto some more perfect
being, till it be under the most perfect being of form. These properties and
many other, matter has, and it were to long to reckon them al in a row. But
look before in li. S. de Bonitate mundi.

Of form. Chap. 2.
OF the propertyes of matter, that be now rehearsed, follows the propertyes
of the self form. And Aristotle says, in lib. de quinque substantijs. Forma,
is as it were light giving to al things fayrenesse, being, and sign and token.
And form or light that is shed and comes into matter is feeble and dark,
as ye receiving of matter asks. And of form is diuersitye, by the which one
thing is diverse from another, as he says. And some form is essential and
some accidental. Essential form is that, that comes into matter, and
makes it perfect: and accords therewith to the perfection of some thing. And
when Forma is bad, then the thing has his being. And when Forma is destroyed,
nothing of the substance of the thing is found: Therefore in Philosophy it is
said, that Forma with matter is cause of all accidentalls. And Forma
accidentalis is not the perfection of things, nor gives, them being, as it is
said, S. Metaphisice. But each form accidental needs a form substantial,
that is cause of form accidental: and each form is more simple and more
actual and noble then matter. Therefore in li. de Anim. libus Aristo. says,
that form has it self as, it were a man. For it may inform many matters, as
a man may bring many women with child. And so the form asks, that shall be
printed in the matter, the matter ought to be disposed, and also arraied. For
if fire shall be made of matter of earth it needs yt the matter of earth be
made subtle, and pured, and more simple. And if againewarde: then againewarde.
And form makes matter known. For matter may never be seen nor felt but by
substantial form and accidental, but it be by way of privation: As
darkness is seen, is seeing nothing: and silence is known, if no sound be
heard, as Calcidius says super Pla. And the Commentor super.1. Metaphisice,
says, That matter is cause, that we see things that be made. And so nothing is
more common and general then matter: and nevertheless nothing is more
unknown then is matter: for matter is never seen without form, nor form
may not be seen in deed, but joined to matter: and whereas is more of
form, there is less of matter: as it is said.4. Metap. And againward, where
more is of matter, there is less of form. And the further matter is from
nobility of form, the more gross it is and vnpure, the more unworthy and
dark. And some form is spiritual, and some corporal and bodylye. And some
corporal form is heavenly form: and some elementall. And heavenly form is
to active, that it fulfilleth all the appetite and desire of his matter.
Therefore for the presence of the form, the which fulfilleth and perfecteth
wholly the heavenly matter, the substance of heaven may not be destroyed nor
corrupt, but rather by his form that is most perfect in his deed, is kept in
everlasting being.

The elementall form may not fulfill so great might in his matter, nor make
so perfect the appetite thereof: and therefore he leaves somewhat of his
material might of the matter not perfectlye fulfilled: wherefore always
elementall matter requires new form. And therefore such bodies be always,
corruptible in might, and all indeed: and the more noble and spiritual the
form is, and the more separated and sundered from the conditions of matter:
the more able he is to work, and the more virtuous: as it fares in Angels,
whose substance has no bring of matter, as it is said.3. De anima. In things
that have matter, is not intellect. Nevertheless I affirm not, that Angels
have not matter in their form: but whether the being of Angels be only
compounded of spiritual matter and form, or no. This is held for certain,
that the substance of them in comparison to bodily things, is most simple and
most actual: as a spiritual form is more actual then a bodily form as
Albumasar says: and so in comparison to matter of every meddled body, the form
is more noble: and the form of element is more noble then the form of a
meddled body: and the form of the fifte body, that is heaven is most noble.
But in nobleness and actualtie in deed of spiritual form, whether it be
Angel or man's soul, passes without comparison all material forms: and of
properties of matter and of forms, and as it longs to this work: this that
we have treted suffices for this time.

Of Elements. cap. 3.
AS Constantine says, Elements be simple and least particle of a body that
is compownded: and it is called least touching us. For it is not perceived by
wits of seeling. For it is the least part, and last in undoing of the body,
as it is first in composition: and is called simple, not for that an element is
simple, without any composition, but for it has no parts that compowne it,
that be diverse in kind and in number, as some meddeled bodies have: as it
fares in mettalls, of the which some parts be diverse: For some part is
air, and some is earth, and so of other. But each part of sire, is fire, and
so of other. Elementum has that name, as it were Ilementum, as Isidore says,
of I Will: for that he has matter of all bodies, and as it were the first
foundament: and other men mean, that he has that name, as it were Elementum,
or Alimentum. For all bodies be nourished, fed, and increased, by qualityes
of Elements, Qualities of Elements be roure: Two work, as heat and cold:
and two of them suffer, as dryness and moisture. The accord and difference of
these, be more plainly described before in ye third book: Look there. Even
between the qualities of elements, is contraciousnes and strife, by reason
whereof they work togethers, and suffer, and engender, and corrupt. And though
the Elements be never so contrary, every each to other: yet by influence of
heaven, and virtue of Planets, they be reconciled in their doings, and brought
to accord: and therefore they be onyd and joined with a wonderful bond in
kind. For fire and air accord in heat, though they discord in dryness and
moystnesse: and air and water accord in moisture, but they discord in heat
and coldness. And water and earth accord in coldness, though they discord in
moisture and dryness. Fire and earth that be elements in place most far
asunder, accord in drines, and discord in heat and coldness: for earth is
substantially most cold, and fire most hot: and of the four elements these
two be most noble, and most pure of substance, and most light, that be air and
fire, and therefore they move fromward the middle toward the roundnesse, and
move kindly upward. And these two elements take noblenes and worthiness
touching virtue in working and substance of ye body of heaven, of yt which they
receive influence of mouablenesse and of virtue: for the virtue of heaven
gives first influence upon the sphere and roundnesse of fire, and by and
through the fire, upon the roundnesse of the air: and therefore these two
Elements be more high in place and stead, than other Elements: more able to
move, more pure and clean, and subtle, in substance, more clear and bright
in form, more virtuous in working and deed And the two nether Elements,
water and earth, be kindly more heavy than the other twain, and move fromward
the roundnesse, toward the middle downward, and by gathering of parts and
compaction, they be sad and boystous and therefore they be thicker, sadder, and
dimmer, than the other twain, and more material, and have more of matter,
than of form: and so for sa^nesse from the sphere a roundnes of heaven, they
be not so obedient to the virtue of moving of heaven as the two other elements
be. And elements be never idle: but be continually in doing and suffering: and
so they never rest, nor cease off generation and moving. And though the earth
rest of moving, yet it never rests nor cease doing and working: and as they
be not idle from doing, so they be not barren of araieng or adorning, for
each Element has his araieng and ornament. The fire has stars, the air has
birds and fowls, the waier has fishes and beasts yt swim therein, ye earth
has beasts ye move and go therein, as Beda says. Of the which by help of
God, somewhat shallbe shortly said.

Of Fire. Cap. 4.
FIre is a simple body most hot and dry, as Constable. says, and has kind
appetite to be above the air: and if fire be violently holden in the air or
in the earth, it passes little and little into soft air, and vanishes, as
Isid. says. Denis in Hierarchia Angelica cap. 12. teaches the properties of
fire, and says in this manner: Fire is a sensible body, more excellent and
subtle than all other bodily things, and is next the spiritual kind: and
thereby it is showed, that it is most unlike to other things. And fire is in
all things, and custometh to give it self into al things, and is not removed
out of all things. But yet it is privy and hid, unknown, unmeasured, unseen,
and somedeale bodilesse: mighty to his own working, moveable, giving it self
some deal to all thing that comes him nigh, and moves all things that be
partners with him, and renews all thing, and is warden of kind, and
brightneth with wrapped brightness, he is clear distinguishing, sprankling,
and leaping, feeding, and moving upward, and passing downewarde, sharply
high, and not taking shame of decreasing, always moveable, taking, and
changing, coming again into it self and working mightily.

These words of the holy man Denis, are most dark and mistike, and descriueth
fire touching his substance, virtue, and working: and for declaration of the
foresaid words we shall shortly rehearse the words of the Commentour upon the
same place. For among all elements, fire has the highest place, and that for
he has most light kind, and therefore he is called high, for he wanting
weight, seeks and desires the high place: and is above all other elements.
And except fire, all that is bodily, is kindlye under fire, among all
Elements, fire has the most pure and subtle kind: and therefore he is called
some deal bodilesse, for by reason of subtilnesse of his substance, it is not
seen without subject matter. Therefore it seems, that fire is most nigh to
spiritual kind: for some deal it seems, that fire is middle and mean
between seen things and unseen. Inasmuch as he nigheth to nether things, he
is bodilesse: and inasmuch as he nigheth to the over parts, he is bodily. Also
he has kind more actual and more strong in working, than other Elements, and
therefore he is called vnmesured, for his virtue and working increases without
end: For if matter that fire works in, were endless, as long as the matter
suffices, fire fails not, but works always. Also he has full privy kind,
and therefore he is called hid: for in his being, he is not sensibly seen: And
he is called unseen and unknown, for fire is not perceived, without matter
subject, that is the matter that fire works in. Also what fire is in his
beginning and substance, uneath wit may know. Also he has virtue and kind
more mouable than other Elements: and therefore he is called mouable and
mighty of all things: for in fire is the head and virtue of moving, for he
moves himself and other, and is not moved by things that be lower than he.
Also he has kind more clear than other nether things: therefore it is said,
that he brightneth, for he brighteneth all things with his cleerenesse, but
that is with wrapped brightness. For bright beams of fire, shine without, but
they be wrapped, for they foume again to the priuye bosom of their own
substance, and be hid from our sight and feelyng. Also of subtlety of his
substance, fire has virtue more sharp and more thirlyng than other
Elements. Therefore he is called sharplye passing, for by moving of his own
virtue, he enters and thirleth all things without resistaunce and let: and so
fire has virtue to make himself and other things known and seen, and to
make difference and distinction. For in showing of himself, he shows other
things that be present, and presents colors, figures and shapes to them to
the eyes, and therefore he is called clear, and openly discreet and
distinguished. Also fire has virtue to draw nether things to the other, for
the matter in which fire works, fire makes stretch, and makes it thin, and
departs it, and draws it upward by vyolence of his heat: therefore he is
called feeding beneath, and drawing upward. Also fire has virtue of renewing:
for all things were aged, and old, and fail, if they be not kept and saved by
virtue of fire, as it fares in old men, in whom kind heat fails. And he
is called renewer of all things, and warden of kind: For without virtue of
fire may no virtue of bodily kind, endure nor abide. Also he has virtue of
changing: For he overcomes all things, that he works in, and changes
it, and tourneth it into his own kind. And therefore he is called receiving,
and taking, and changing: for the matter in which he works, he receives
and takes, and forfaiteth it not, but wastes it, and tourneth it to his own
likeness. And fire receives and takes, and is not received nor taken: for
when that thing is which he works is spent and wasted, he withdraws, and
leapeth and turns again: and therefore he is called leaping, and tourning
again. Also he has virtue and kind to commune and to spread himself without
dimunition and decreasing. And therefore it is said, that he takes not, neither
receives despite nor villainy of minishing and decreasing: for as fire
increases not, when he burns outward, so when he is received, he minisheth
^oot^ nor takes worship, in that it seems, that he increases and wareth:
nor ^^^alanie in that he seems less, and decreaseth. Also fire has: virtue
and kind of purging and of cleansing: for fire purges and cleanses off
sinder and rushe: and amendeth metal, yt he may not wast^ Also he has virtue
to change savors and humors, and therefore he seetheth and defieth in the
body, humors, and was steth superfluities, that be therein; and makes them
often sauourie and wholesome: Also he has virtue for to shed and spread his
substance into the substance of all meddeled bodies, for in all things, he is
closed and unseen, though he cannot be seen indeed closed in all things:
and this is known, for of froting and smiting of hard bodies together, fire
comes, and is smitten out of bodies, in whom men deemed no fire to be. Also
fire, by his substantial subtilnesse, has virtue to join and unite himself
to other bodies, as it fares in fire hot iron, and in burning coals full of
flame, and in other such: in the which all the parts of fire be joined to all
the parts of iron, and to all the parties of coals, that it would seem one
substance, and the sensible distance of the other, is perceived nothing at
all. Therefore Philosophers define three manner of kinds of fire: for fire is
light, and fire is flame, and fire is coal, Fire is in his own sphere, light:
but fire is called flame, in airy matter: and in earthly substance and
troubly, and boystous matter, fire is called coal.

Fire has these properties and many other. Socke before li. 2. in tractatis de
ordine Seraphin, and li. 3. in tract de qualitatibus element. ca. 3. of heat:
and this that is now spoken, is sufficient for this time.

Of flame. Cap. 5.
FLame is a fiery matter spread in ayrie substance. For air of subtilnes of
his substance, and mediamly neerenesse the which it has with ye sphere of
fire. it is light fired, and changed into fiery nature: and as the substance
of air is more pare, so the flame is more light and clear, and seems more
like to kind of light. And he ^^oueth kindly upward, and stretches from
every part of the thing that is kindered, and comes by by (...) into a
sharp shape, as it were into the shape of the point of a top, or of a
sphere, and is shapen in the end as a Pine apple; and so in his point and
sharp end he p^inteth therein the working of his heat full strongly. And
therefore in the most innermost point of his shape, that in a top wise, he is
most hot, and seteth on fire, and burns soon, matter that he touches: and
he is coal red, after as the matter that he works in, is disposed: and so if
the matter be troubly, If the fire be thick with smoke.
he gives him and dark light: and again ward, if the matter be pure and
clear he shines and gives bright beams all about. Flame: lighteneth dark
things, and shows things that he hid, and makes them known, and shows the
way to wayfaring men, and the perilles of ways: for by reason of his
lightness, and mouablenesse of the airie matter, in the which flame works,
he is in continual moving, and rests never. A full little puffing of wind,
kindles and stirs up flame: and if the puff be too strong, it sheddeth and
quenches flame. Always flame purteth the air not vpryght, but a manner
winding about.

Therefore be moves round about, and kindeleth things that he touches, do
^^^de Marcianus says. Therefore Volcanus was lame, Vulcan is termed to be
Jupiters smith and is also take a forfite.
when Juno had thrown him to the ground, as faining of Poets means. By
violence of his meaning stain smileth together parts of the matter, that he
works in, and makes noise and down; by smiting and beting togethers of the
parts. Flame busieth to move upward, and draws from the nether parts,
upward, to the which he is incorporate.

Of smoke. Cap. 6.
SMoke is a vapor dissolved and departed by virtue of heat, out of the most
subtle parts and humors of matter: and has heavy parts meddeled with
light parts, of whom he takes darkness and ^luteh^. And therefore he
makes the air black, and turns it into smoakie kind: and smoke of the
thickness of his matter; takes bitterness. And by the sharpness thereof, he
grieueth eyes, aside ^^^aheth them drop out scares, and griueth the sight
notably, and pearceth and comes in by his sharpness, to the brain, and
grieueth the spirit of feeling; and kindly spirit also. And therefore in
Animalium it is said, that smoke of the snuff of a candle, grieueth females
that go with child: insomuch that if a Marc in travail of foalyng smells
such a smoke, she shall soale a dead, col^e. Also smoke is enemy to Bees, and
grieueth Fawcons and other wales of pray. Also smoke dies soon after that he
rises, as the Gloss says: upon is the word, Sicud virgolae fumi: for it
moves swiftely upward, and passes away, and vanishes hastily or sodainlye.
Smoke comes of fire, and is seen ere the fire be seen, and is moved with
the wind, and disparpled, and diversely borne about. Also smoke shows out of
what part the wind blows: for smoke is moved thetherward as the wind
blows it, as Gregory says. Smoke makes the houses black, and infecteth
them; and nourishes, and gendreth soote in the roof, and in the walls. Smoke
draws to corners and places, and printeth therein; and abides also for a
token of infection. Also smoke that is resolved, and comes of sweet smelling
spicerie, pleases, the swit of smelling, and is good for ye brain: for it
comfort the spirits of the breast, and of the heart, and restores the head,
and straineth and binds noyous running of rume, and dries and consumes and
wastes and straineth such; n^^^^l running and opens pores that be stopped,
and pearceth and comes inward to comfort the sinews, and drives away Adders
and Serpents, and and other venomous beasts that creep. For Adversary
Serpents hate all smoke: and namely smoke of good smelling, as Gregory Called
and fumositie of and brain hoyling from the stomach to the head, or euaporation.
says. Also smoke that is cese hardene comes of meat and of drink, (...)
Strength of heat comes up to ye brain, and stops the sinews of seelyng,
and breeds sleep, and binds the utter wits of seelyng: and to gathers
kind heat inward, and comfort and helps the virtue in the inner parts.
And if the smoke be Melancholic, or too sharp and ^iting, or venomous, and
resolved, and ^^nueth of meat or of drink, or of ^oyfull medicine, is passes
up to the brain, and grieueth the virtue of feeling, and breeds dread and
fear, as it fares in Melancholic men: and awaketh frenzy: and woodnesse, as
it does in them that have Litargie, sleeping evil. Also he withdraws wit
and use of reason, as it does in Epitentes, that have the falling evil, and
brings in many other evil passions and ^oyfull to the body. Also in sake
that is drawn up out of ye earth or out of the sea by virtue of heat,
infecteth the air, and makes it thick, and breeds clouds and myste, and
is matter of wind and of ^emness, and of other passions of the air, and
withdraws from us the Sun beams in the air, and makes them dim. This
that is said of smoke is sufficient for this time.

Of a cole. Cap. 7.
A Cole is ^re incorporate indeed, and joined to earthie matter, as Gregory
says: and so are by his incorporation and joining to greater and thicker parts
of earthy matter and meddled therewith, is held beneth by a certain violence of
kind. And so as fire in flame moves upward, so in a cole it falls and
moves downward by heaviness of matter, Also when a cole is set on fire, it
turns into redness, and when it is quenched, it is wrapped in blackness,
and leeseth all the first fairness and lykenes of fire: and the fairer it was
by his first joining to the fire, the more unseemly he seems, and the more
unlike in quenching of the fire. And in a cole substanciall moisture is all
wasted, and therefore it is soon broken and bruised, when the humor that has
cause of joining ^^ parts is all wasted by violence of fire. And therefore in a
coal, that is quenched one part is soon broken from another: For in his
substance is nothing found of moisture, by the which the parts cleave, and
were there held together, as Gregory says, when only the earthly parts leven
and abide by mastry of dryness, is often soon set on fire: but after yt he is
kinled he is as soon quenched, or sooner, so that therein is nothing found nor
seen of fire, and that is because of the blackness. By his blackness a coal
defiles and smotcheth, and berayeth all thing that he touches. Also fire of a
cole has most sharp fire, and most mighty in working in thirling and in
percing; Therefore by his sharpness coal soudreth iron, and desolueth and
slaketh the parts thereof, and makes it soft. Also with his sharpness, coal
grieueth the head, and coal raked in ashes, holds and keeps air, and cole
uncovered and set in cold air, falls into multitude of ashes, and suddenly
vanishes away by it self, as Gregory says. And ^ire of a cole burns and
grieueth the soales of the feet, that tread thereon. Cole quenched, through if
grieve not with burning, him that treads thereon, it makes crushing and
great noyle.

Of a sparkle. Cap. 8.
A Sparkle is a little particular of fire, broke of fiery matter, by virtue
and reese of fire, that departs it. Therefore the moving of sparckles is
sudden moving: for it is suddenly departed and dealed, and moved upward, but
by heaviness of the earthie matter, it falls to ye middle downward, at last.
Also for ye moving thereof is clear and bright as a star, by shedding of
fire, and sparcklyng in the earth, it seems green with beams of light: and
therefore the moving thereof, is as the moving of fire works and is virtuous.
For of a little sparckle in a heap of towe or of tinder, comes suddenly a
great fire. By changing of air, sparkles vanish suddenly and be quenched, and
abides nothing of them but ashes. By temperate blast of wind, sparkles he
kindled, and quenched by strong blast, and thirleth the air by putting: but in
thirling ye air, it changes and soindeale alters it: the stronger the fire
is, the moving of sparkles and swiftness is yt more. Of green matter and of
moist, comes great sparckles and strong, thirling and pearcing in the toing
and working: but they be few, and not right many in number.

Of ashes called Fauilla. Chap. 9.
AShes be called Fauilla, and have that name of Fouendo, nourishing and
keeping, for they keep fire and cover it, and Cinis is little ashes left of
quenching of sparkling matter, as Isid. says, and Fauilla is small ashes, pale
and dry, and light in the utter part of a fiery coal cleaving thereto, and
dimmeth the shining thereof, and slaketh and abateth the strength and the
feruentnesse of the coal, and it is sparkled with a little puff and blast of
wind: and when it is sparkled, dreth it is ever after gathered again, as
Gregory says. It is soon set on fire and on flame; but for default of
feeding, it is suddenly quenched: also fixie embers is rauishing of wind: and
when it is quenched, it moves downward by his own weight: for it moves
downward by his own moving and is born upward, by ye force of other things.

Of ashes called Cinis. Cap. 10.
AShes be called Cinis, and has ye name of Cadendo, falling; for it falls
and is ge^dred and resolved of substance of earthy matter by strength of heat,
as Isid. says: and ashes be lost and of unworthy color, of bitter and sharp
biting savor, and have full little and small parts, yt be soon scattered with
a little blast. Also ashes have virtue of cleansing: therefore it is good and
helps to washing of clothes. Also it has virtue of gnawing, and biting, and
of drieng, as Con. says. Also if ashes be hot, it keeps and saves fire that
is ra^ted therein, and if it be cold, it quenches and destroieth fire, that is
raked therein, also by great blowing and violence of fire, ashes changes his
viles obscure shape sometime into the lykenes of glass, and into fiery
likeness and clear. For of the matter of ashes, glass is made, as Gregory
says. And ashes has this default and imperfection, that though he be every
day a^oys^ed and wet, and sprung with rain, yet he is always barren. And so
the earth, that ashes touches, it makes not plentrous: but if the earth be
barren, ashes makes it more barren, and more vile and unseemly in all things.

FINIS LIBRI DECIMI.
INCIPIT LIBER VNDECIMVS. DE AERE ET EIVS IMPRESSIONIBVS.
Air has that name, for he bears the fire, and is borne of the water, as
Isidore says. And some of the air pertains to the erthy part, and some to
heavenly kind, as Beda says: for the over part of the air, is pure and
clean, clear, easy and soft: For moving of storms of wind and of weather,
may not reach thereto: and so it pertains to heavenly kind. And the nether
part is nigh to the sphere of water and of earth, and is troubly, great and
thick, compact of moist and earthy vapors and corpulent, longs to earthy
parties. And this part of air brings forth of it self diverse kinds of
things. For as Isidore says, air strongly moved, makes winds, lightning,
and thundering: drawing together it makes clouds, thick, and rainy: and when
it is congealed, it makes snow and hayle: and when it is disparckled, it is
clear weather, as Isidore says, and Beda also, and has more thickness and
cleerenesse than other Elements. And Constantine says, That air is a simple
Element, substauncially moist and hot, by his own kind and substance. He is
moist, and by kind, of the roundnes and sphere, that nigheth thereto, it is
hot, and therefore by property of either quality, the air stretches kindly
all about, from the over part of earth and water, is the sphere of fire. And
by subtlety of his substance and thinness, air is clear and bright: and so
because of his cleerenesse, he receives influence of the virtue of heaven, and
impression and printing of the light of the sun, and are gives breathe to
all men and beasts, and is breathing of all men and beasts, and proper
dwelling place of fowls and birds, and he creature with soul, may ly^e and:
^^ene without air. And because of his substanciall lightness, air is kindly
mouable and also chaungeable, and may be turned into contrary qualities.
Therefore often times he is changed by vapoure of the earth and of the sea; for
if the ^apour stink, and is s^^rape and venomous, the air is corrupted and
in^ceted, to the which, such pestilentiall vapor is meddeled. ^^^^ if smoke be
resolved and comes of pure substance and clean, and is of y^^ ^^uou^ and
smell, by incorporation and medlyng with such a sweet smoke, the air
receives and takes a quality that is friendly to kind. Also the air that
beclippeth be, is to be most pe^^cable and necessary, for need of breath, and
also for continual fostring and nourishing of the spiritual life.

And if the air be clear, bright and clean, then the humors and spirits
shall be clear and bright: and if it be troubly and mystic, humors shall be
troublous and spirits shall be great and thick and infected, as Constantine
says, and Philaredus also.

And so the air is the Element of bodies and of spirits, for venting of air,
coming to spirits, is cause of amendment of them, and of cleansing, and of
purgation, and of swaging and letting humors, that they be not burned. For
air received and drawn by the lungs to the heart, and by the heart to all the
body, gives temperance thereto: and so the air transposeth and changes most
the body: for he passes to ye inner parts, and the spirits, and is meddeled
with the substance of them, which give life to the body. And so if that the
air be pure, and mean in his qualities, and temperate, it profits most to
keeping and saving of life: and if it be corrupt and distempered, then air
grieueth most the body and corrupts it, as Constantine says. And the farther
air is from the earth and the nearer heaven, the more clean and pure it is,
and the more like to the cleanness of heaven: and the nearer it is to the
earth, the more cold and fat, and the more like to the qualytie of the earth
it is. And so of vapors, that be drawn from the earth, into the inner parts
of the air, diverse and contrary things be gathered in the air: and the more
great and thick the air is, the more strongly the Sun printeth therein heat
of his beams, by rebounding and smiting togethers, and breaking of beams of
the Sun And of rebounding of the Sun beams in moist air and thick,
diverse colors be gendered therein, as it is said, lib. 3. Meth. as it does
in the rain bow, and other such impressions. And thickness of air comes
of three manner causes: Of vapoures that meddle their earthie and greater parts
with air: or of coldness, that freeseth the cold parts of the air: or of
generation of new air, taking in it self meddling thereof, and by putting it
to the first air, the air is made thick, as the Philosopher says. And
thicknes and subtilnes of air, comes of contrary cause: of wasting of
vapors that come up of strong heat, that make the air thin and clear: of
generation and fiery parts that be gendred of parts of the air, by ye least
thinness of his moisture, made by certain working: and by strength of heat,
the air is turned into fiery kind. The substance thereof and quality of
air, changes in many manner wise, as he says, and first by nighnesse to the
sun, or by virtues of the sun: for the air is made hot, when the Sun
nigheth to us ward, as he is made cold, when he passes far from us. Also by
changing of rising and down going of stars: for stars, as well Planets as
other, be cause, why the air changes in his qualyties. For when the Sun is
with a star, that breeds cold, as with Saturnus, in a cold sign, then is
bredde strong cold in the air: and if the Sun be with an hot planet, as with
Mars, he is cause of passing heat in the air. And so it is to be understood
and perceived of other. Also changing of air comes of diverse disposition
place and stead of the earth, for in the North side, air is cold and dry,
the South wind is hot and moist, the Western wind is cold and moist, the
East wind is hot and dry. Also of highness and lowness of the earth: for in
mountains and hills the air is cold, and in valleys hot: and Constable.
tells the cause thereof in Pantegni, and says, that the Northern wind
comes out of a high place, from a high circle, and so he passes freelye and
without impediment, and comes to his place, and stirs and moves airy
things, and makes them subtle, and so makes them cold: for all subtle
things, while they be high, by moving be made cold: and in valleys and low
places, air abides and rests, and so is hot. But M^crobius tells and
shows another reason, and says, that this comes of gendring of beams of
light, which are multiplied in valleys: and for thickenesse of vapors, that
be thicker in valleys than in mountains and hills: and therefore snow
melts sooner in valleys than on hills, for in valleys more heal is gendered
of the Sun beams, than on Mountains. And this accords with Aristotle. 1.
lib. Met. cap. 4. where he says that multiplication of light beams coming to
the earth, as to the middle point, is cause of this heat.

And also such rebounding and gathering of light beams in sharpness of
corners, and also abiding is cause thereof. Also changing of air, comes of
nighnesse of the sea: for nigh the North sea, the air is cold and dry, by
cold vapor and dry, that comes of the sea: for there heat is feebled, and
has little masterie, and therefore the North sea is but little salt, and the
Sea that is called Ponticum is as it were frost. The contrary is the South sea,
for the cause is contrary. Also changing of the air comes of nighnesse of
carrion, or of marryse, for by corruption thereof, the air is infect and
rotted, and made pestilentiall: and this rotted infection of air comes often
in the end of summer and of harvest, for then by his own kind, the air is
thin and clean, and therefore it is the more chaungeable. Therefore such
corruption falls therein by meddeling of evil fumositie, that comes up of
the rottingnesse of carrion and of marryse or of other corrupt things, as Ioh.
says. Therefore this that is said of the air in general, suffices at this
time.

Of fire parpendicular. Cap. 1.
NOW we must speak of impressions, that be gendred in the air: and first of
the impressions that be gendered and come of hot vapor and dry, as the
impression that is called, Ignis perpendicularis. That impression is sometime
seen in the air, and seems fire: and is naught else but impression gendred
of hot vapor and dry, that is drawn up in the first part of the air with
breadth in the nether part, and length in the over part, with figure and
shape of a flame, shaped as a shield, and kindeled by fire and moving of
heaven. The second is called Ignis longus, long fire, and is impression
gendered of hot vapor and dry, in the ouermost part of the air without
breadth openly known, in comparison to his length, and is set on fire and
flame, by moving of the firmament, and by virtue of fire, and this impression
is called, a Dragon spowting fire. The third impression is named Candela, and
is gendred of hot vapor and dry, in the over part of the air, with little
length and breadth even like much: but for because of fire, and moving of heaven,
it seems round in shape, burning as flame. The fourth impression Aristotle
calls Aslub, and is double: one moving upward, and another downwarde. And
this impression is gendered of subtle vapor, hot and dry, in the ouermost
part of the air, with great length and breadth, and proportioned togethers
when it is strongly set on flame and heated by fire, and by moving of the
firmament, then it moves upward for subtilnesse of matter, and for strength
of burning flame. Another impression is called Aslub descendens and is gendered
of hot vapor, dry, and thick, with euenly length and breadth, and is gendred
in ye over part of ye middle region of the air, and is set in burning flame by
fire and by moving of heaven, and moves downward, because of cold that is
there about, and because of heaviness of great matter and thick, as Aristotle
says. These be impressions, that the people ween to be stars, that fall by
night down from heaven, and fly upward to heaven.

( Addition.
As concerning the wonderful operations of fire, it is reported off in holy
scripture, that Sidrach, Misach, and Abednagon, being cast into the hot burning
Oven, the fire did them no harm, and yet it used his own kind, to burn up
the formentors. It also consumed the sacrifice of the prophet Elias, against
the malice of the false Prophets of ^aal. It consumed the Captains over
fifties at the voice of Eliah. The Lord God appearing to Moses, was seen in a
bush of fire, and yet the bush not burnt. Poliderus Virgilius, in his eight
book of the Histories of England, makes mention of Emma, mother of Edward,
the second King of England, being vn^usllye accused by Goodwyn, which after
many attempted iniuryes, ceased not to accuse her of adulterye, with the
Bishop of Winchester, the King therewith greatly disquieted: the Queen to
open view cast her self into a great fire, before her entrance there in, cried
with a loud voice, that these burning flames might consume her body, if she
were culpable of the faults, whereof she was wrongfullye accused: and having
ended this talk, she passed through the fire, in good safety, so the great
astonishing of the King and beholders. Guendolena, as Gratianus in his
Chronicle reports, ye wife of Henry the 15. Emperor of ye Almaines, tried
her accusation in like sort. It is also written of Policarpus, whom the Roman
Emperor Verus, persecuted, with other Martirs. He being cast into the fire,
the fire vanished away, and when those wicked tirants could not prevail by
fire, they slew those holy people with swords and weapons, whose blood cries
vengeance for such tyranny. Many hidden virtues are in fire, and wonderful
operations, it breeds kindly heat in bodies: it is the Nurse of life: it
appears airie in the Sun, from the Sun, in Comets: it kindles in herbs,
plants, mettalls, worms, fishes, and stones.

Of Winds in general. Cap. 2.
THere be other impressions ingendered of dry vapor, as wind, the which (as
Aristotle says) is moving of dryness of vapor, drawn up from the middle of
the earth with air, and incorporate in the air with some heavenly virtue.
And so (as Beda says) wind is naught else but air moved and shuffed about, of
fumosities and smoakes, that come up from the earth, and shoueth and puts
the air, wind is gendered, as he says. But in Topicis, Aristotle repriueth
this description: for a thing that is described is not generallye showed of his
description: For not every air that is moved, is wind. It needs that there
be full strong shouing and putting, and that a great deal of the air be put
and shufte long time, else it is no wind.

Therefore Constan. defines the wind in this manner: Wind is cold vapor and
dry, resolved and departed out of the earth and of the water, by heat and by
his incorporation, putting and ^oouing the air strongly. Other men put, that
the cause of wind is clouds that be in the air, and move and thrust with
their heaviness and weight, and shooueth hither and thither, and of such
moving, and putting, and shaking of clouds, comes wind. And other tell,
that wind is gendred of beating together of arms of the Sea in four parts of
the land. For if the South arm of ye Sea beats and strives in the North,
then the sea moves Eastward: and by the moving thereof, air is moved, and
thereof comes a wind, that is called Subsolanus, the Southeast wind. And when
he beats and strives in the west: then comes a wind, that is called
Zephirus, the west wind: and againward. And if the East arm and the west arm
beat and strive in the South, then comes a wind, that is called Auster. If
it be in the North, there comes a wind named Boreas. Of other middle ebbing
and flowing of the sea, they say, side winds be gendred. And yet other men
tell (as Beda says) that out of dens of the earth, comes wind in this
manner, for air is of slipperie kind, and therefore he enters and comes
into dens of the earth, and passes out thereof, and when any part inforeeth
to come in, h^^ is stuffing and strife, and the air is moved and thereof
comes wind, and therefore E^lia regio is called the kingdom of winds, for it
is a country full of dens under ye earth. And Aristotle allows the first
reason of generation of winds in ^. Metheorum. There he says, that there be
two kinds of vapors, that be dra^en by heat up from the earth. The one is
moist, and is matter of rain and of waters, as it is either more or less
thin. The other vapor is dry, and is matter of all winds. And whereof
soever it be, that wind is gendred, this I know, that wind is mouable, and not
resting, but shufting in the air, and makes therein moving and shufting. Also
wind makes tempests, and storms in the sea, and in the air. And also wind,
that is moderate and not contrarious to shipmen, leads and speedeth them in
their ways: and againeward. If wind be contrarious and vnmoderate, then he
brings peril and dread, and tarryeth and lets both way and speed. Also by
his subtilnesse and violence, wind perceth and comes into the inner parts
of the sea, and reareth up great tempests and great waves in the sea, and
stretches them, and makes them spread into contrary countries and parts. Also
for the North wind is cold and dry, it purges and cleanses rain, and
drives away clouds and mistes, and brings in cleerenesse and fair wether:
and againward, for the South wind is hot and moist, it does the contrary
deeds: For it makes the air thick and troubly, and breeds darkness, as
Beda says. Also when the wind finds resisting and let, then he shows his
might the stronger: and then he shows most his strength and violence: for
then he throws down houses and trees, that withstandeth him, and overthrows
them, and therefore it is called Venius, as Isidore says, for it is mighty and
vyolent: for his might and strength is so much, that not only he breaks up
stones, and renteth up trees: but also he disturbleth heaven and earth, and
makes great tempest in the sea, as he says. Also wind cleanses superfluities
of humors, and wipeth off slippernesse and uncleanness: for ways that be
made slipper and foul with great raines, be made clean and fair by blowing
of wind. Also a temperate blast of wind quickneth and kindeleth fire and
flame: and if the blaste be too swifte and too strong: it quenches both fire
and flame Also in his arising, wind is unseen and hid: but by gathering of
parts of vapors that be gathered, some and some in the earth, wind wexeth
more and more, and shows it self.

And therefore in libro Meth. it is said, that winds be feeble, when they
arise of the earth, and strong afterward by multitude of vapors, that be
thereafter gathered in great multitude in the air.

Also wind moves a slonte, and about: for vapor that comes first upward,
blencheth afterward, and moves round about in a Circle of the earth: and
therefore his moving passes aslonte or round about. Also a strong blast of
wind, bears up straw, and small chafe, and sparckleth powder and ashes,
and blows and stretches bladders by entering into them. Also wind enters
and comes into the hollownesse and parts of the earth, in the which be many
hoales, and wind gendereth earth shaking, when it is cloased in the
hollownesse of the earth. For then it is shaken and shuft, and put in the womb
of the earth, and thereof comes earth shaking, as Aristotle says. For wind
opens holes both of earth, and of beasts bodies, and comes into the inner
parts of the earth by subtilnesse of his own substance, and enters, and is
cloased therein. Also wind comes into watery parties, and makes water arise
in the over part with some thereupon. Also the wind makes the over part of
water, holly and uneven. For water should be even and plain above, if it moved
not by blast, shouing, and putting of wind, as Isidore says. Also windy
vapor, that is resolved by strength of heat, out of meat and of drink or of
other humors, breeds in bodies many passions and evils. For if such a wind
be closed in the stomach or the inner parts of the guts, it breeds gnawing
full grievous, and many other evil passions and sicknesses, as Dropsy, Gowte,
and such manner evils. Also in the ears wind makes whistling, whorling, and
ringing. And so wind lets and infecteth the spirit and wit of hearing.

Of wind oriental, and Subsolane. Cap. 3.
Winds be twelve, four of them, are called Cardinales, chife wind, and eight
Collaterals, side winds.

And the first of Cardinal Winds, is called Subsolanus, as some men mean.
But among other men, it is called Eurus, the East wind, that arises in the
East under the Circle, that is called, Paraellelus Equinoctialis: and sometime
there is great patting and shouing of air, that comes of passing beating of
earth and water into airie matter: and thereof comes a wind, that is called
Subsolanus, the East wind: for it arises and comes forth under the Sun,
for it comes forth under the circle that is called Toerida Zona, under whom
the sun moves always. This wind has two winds Collateralle that is to wit
Vol^urnus, that is the North East wind. And toward the South, a wind that is
called Eurus, that is the Southeast wind, and be in this verse. Sune
Subsolanus, Vulturnus, and Eurus coy, That is to understand, that these three
winds, be East winds, and these winds be hot and dry: hot, for they
bidelong under the Sun, and dry, far ye East sea is full far from us.
Therefore ere the East wind can come to us, if he has moist humor, it is
clean wasted away by heat of the Sun: and the even East wind is ^emperate
in heat ^^^ when at turns in the East Northeast wind, then it dries of
things: and when it tourneth into East Southeast wind, then he gendreth
clouds. And (as Constantine says) East winds be wholesome in the beginning of
ye day for they come of air that is subtle and temperate: For as he says,
the air of East lands and countries is clear and pure, and also dry and
temperate between cold and moist. Therefore such a wind makes waters clear
and of good savor. Therefore East winds keep and save bodies in health, for
temperatenesse of their qualities: and also for in East lands and countries is
more plenty of fruits and flowers, than in the North and in the West
countries. Also diverse ^requies that conne Eastward, and cater into the East
sea be better and more wholesome and clear than other. For by meeting of East
winds, and by beating and rebounding of the Sun in his arising, waters be made
clear and clean. The second Cardinal and chief wind is Fanomus, the West
wind, and arises in the West over ye circle yt is called Parallelas
Equinoctialis, of evenness of day and night. And this wind has beside him
two winds, the one is called Circius, the West Northwest wind, the other is
called Zephirus, ye west Southwest wind, and be contamed in this verse:
Circius occalo Zep^^^o Fanomus ^sl^^ot, That is to understand, these three
winds blow out of the west. And the West wind is called P^^^mus: for he
nourishes and feeds things that be gendred as Isidore says, or he resolves
and vnbindeth winter, ^^ brings forth grass, herbs, and ^^tures. And this
west wind is temperath cold and moist: cold, for the sun abides but a
little while in the west, and it comes to us, before it takes heat of the
s^nne beams: and so western winds be most wholesome and temperate in the end
of the day, for then the sun is in ye west, and purifieth and cleanses the
winds: For west countries and lands, have not and perfectly temperate in heat
and humor. Therefore their waters be chaungable and troublous, for because that
in the beginning of the day, they be not digested by the sun beams. For in
the beginning of the day, in the East lands, winds be very cold, and hot at
even, as Constable. says. The third Cardinal and chief wind is A^ffer, the
Southern wind: and he arises under the South star^e, that is called Polus
An^^iticus, by the same cause as did the first wind. And this wind has two
winds beside him: that one is Eastward, and is called Nothus, the Southeast
wind: and the other is Westward, and is called Affric^s, the South Southeast
wind: which be contained in this verse: Ar^die medio, Nothus haeirt and
Affricus Austro. The meaning hereof is yt these three winds blow out of the
South: and the South wind is called Ausser, and he has ye name of Hauiendo,
drawing, for he draws by waters. And this Southern wind is hot and moist
and makes lightning and gross air and thick, and norisheth mist with heat,
and be opens pores, and multiplieth and brings forth much rain with his
moisture, as Isid. saith^^ he breeds tempest in ye sea. for he blows
upward, as Beda says. Also he opens the pores of bodies, and lets virtue
of feelyng, and makes heaviness of body, as Ipocras says. Southern winds
(he says) grieve the hearing, and be dim, and they grieve heads, and be slow,
and also unbinding. For Southern winds unbind humors, and move them out of
the inner parts outward, and they cause heuinesse of wits and of feeling: they
corrupt and destroy, they heat, and makes men fall into sickness. And they
breed the gout, the falling evil, itch, and the ague. Also the Southern wind
rises in a circle and place nigh the star that is called Polus Antarticus, and
therein may no man dwell for the coldness thereof. And therefore he is kindly
cold and dry, touching his own arising, as the North wind that blows out of
the contrary line, that is called Axis. But when the Southern wind passes by
Torrida Zona, which is hot, there he takes heat. And for yt he comes toward
the South, where is more plenty of waters, and places full of vapors and of
dew:there he gets to him moisture. And so among us he is hot, and moist. And
other while he blows yt the air is full of ye foresaid vapor, and so falls
into rain. And because he puts and shooueth the air out of large country
into straight country, therefore he makes the air thick, and thereof come
clouds. And for those clouds that be between us and the Sun, the Sun
beams be thereby dimmed, as Isidore says. And the Southern wind has many
noble propertyes, for it is soft wind and makes soft: and is hot and moist.
And gives us rain and dew, and opens pores of ye earth, and brings forth
herbs, and grass, and seeds, and nourishes and f^edeth, and makes them
grow and spring, and renews the other part of the earth, and changes in
fowls and birds old pens and feathers, and dissolueth in the body cold
humors and thick, and exciteth to come out of the body, sweat, euoporation,
fumositie and superfluity of humors, and brings out of the dens of the
earth creeping beasts and earthlye worms.

The fourth Cardinal and chief wind is called Borias the Northern wind,
and arises under the star that is called Polus Articus, the Shipmans star:
and comes of the ^^^^ causes, of the which the foresaid wind comes, and
has by his sides two winds: that one is called Aquilo, and is by West, that
is the Northwest wind: That other is by East, and is called Chorus, the North
Northwest wind. These winds be contained in this verse: At Borias Aquilo
veniunt et chorus ab alto. The meaning thereof is, that these three winds
blow out of the North. And the Northern wind is called Borias, and has that
name of certain mountains, that be called Iperbore^. For they blow out of
thick mountains, as Isidore says. As the Southern wind of the Province of
Africa, is called Affricus, because he blows most out of that country,
also the North wind is called Septentuonalis: For he blows out of the part
of the North line, that is called Axis, and he rises out of watrie places,
that be frore and bound, because they be so farr^ from the circle of the
Sun. And they blow out of the high mountains, out of the which they come to
us. And for that out of that place vapors may not be dissolved, for the great
freesing, therefore the Northern wind makes the air bright and clear, and
bears down and puts of pestilence, that comes of the Southern wind,
as Isidore says. For by great strength of his coldness, the Northern wind
constrayneth and binds the over part of the earth, and of water, and
changes them, and tourneth them now into kind of Ise, and now into kind of
Crystal, as the hardness is more or less. Then these three winds for they
be cold and dry, make bodies hard, and open pores, and purify humors, and
clear spirits and wits, and they help the virtue of digestion, and
comfort the virtue of with holding: and makes pestilential air wholesome,
and increases the virtue of generation. Therefore libr. 14. Aristotle says,
that in conceiving of a child, if the wind be in the North, the child shall
be male, and againeward: if the wind be in the South, the child shall be
female. Also libro. 5. cap. 7. Constantine says, that the Northern wind
constrains evil humors, and holds and lets them, that they shall not
fall nor come in the other members. Nevertheless he breeds cough, because
of dryness of breast, and makes the bodies on earth rough, and clinkereth
with his coldness and dryness, and makes sinews to be constrained, and
smites them and makes them straight: therefore he greeueth members, and
lets them of working, and greeueth and corrupts blossoms, flowers, and
fruit, and smites vines that burgen and blow, and spoyleth heardes and
trees, and greyues, and dries utter and inner humors: and therefore he is
noifull to them that have the Tisick: by his dryness he renteth the lungs, and
makes in them pimples and whelkes, as Galen says; his wind is cold and
dry, and comes out of a straight Country into a large Country, and makes
the air subtle and thin, clear and dry, and freeseth the moist parts both
of earth and of water, and joins them in the utter parts. And therefore he
is called Aquilo, Quasi aquas ligan, for he binds waters, as Isidore says.

Of Clouds. chap. 4.
A Clowd is animpression made in the air, in the middle of many vapors,
gathered and bread into one body, in the middle region of the air, thickened
togethers by coldness of place. And so a cloud is commonly matter to snow,
rain, and hatle. And a cloud is gendered in this manner: The heat of heaven
by his own virtue, draws to it right subtle vapourable parts of water and
of earth, and wastes the most subtle parts thereof, and makes the other
deal thick, and ^ourneth it into a cloud of air. Thereof speaks Isidore
and says, That a clowd is thickness of air, gathered together by drawing of
vapors, and of fumosityes of the earth, and of the Sea. Also by lyghtnesse of
air and putting and shouing of winds, the substance of the clowd moves
hither and thither and about. And a cloud is kindly hollow, with many holes as
a spoung: and therefore he receives soon impressions of the ener bodies. And
therefore by entering and incomming of the Sun beams, a cloud represents
and shows diverse forms and shapes and colors, as it does in the rainbowe,
that is not else but a certain dew cloud in his substance, diversely shapen,
and colors gendered by the Sun beams: and a cloud is hollow within: and by
his figuration and shape with the sphere of heaven, to the which he is nigh:
the cloud is round, without and aside, the cloud has no certain forms nor
shape propried. For when a cloud comes aside half nigh to another, either
confirms himself to other in figure and shape, as Beda says. Also by
lightness of his own substance, a Cloud month upward and month more
swiftly or slowly, as it is more or less put with the wind. Also the more
subtle and pure the vapoures be, of the which a Cloud is compownded, the
more shining and bright impression of the Sun beams, the cloud receives:
and for that the clowd is clear, it passes there through, but it be when the
substance thereof is there gathered in the air of fumosityes that he great
and thick. For then the cloud is thick and dark, and takes away from: us
the light of the Sun, and takes it out of our sight, if he be set between
us and the Sun; Also a cloud set between us and the Sun, swageth and
bateth the heat thereof. Therefore the presence of cloud is pleasing to
reaping men and to other, that travail in strong heat of the Sun. Also a
cloud by heat of the Sun resolved and departed into rain, makes the earth
plenteous, and to bring forth herbs, grass, and seeds: and that by out
shedding of rain. Also for a cloud is full nigh, is as it were mother of all
things that be gendered in the air, and certain common matter of diverse
things, he sends to the earth of his own substance. And that is known:
for now he reineth, now he hayleth, now he snoweth, now he lyghteneth, and
now he thundereth. Also a clowd is gathered of waters of the Sea, and being
brought up before the Sun, by the benefit of the heat of heaven, tourneth all
the fal^nesse and bitterness into freshness. For such is cloud comes of
the water of the Sea: nevertheless when he is parred with the Sun, it has
neither smacke nor savor of the sea. Also a cloud is profitable to the earth,
when he is resolves and fallen into rain. But he is full grievous and noifull
when he tourneth into wind: That the clouds be nearer unto ye earth then unto
heaven.
for then he gendereth groan tempest both in sea and in land. Also as Cloud
that hangeth^ on high in the (...) of the air, seems joined next ^^ heaven:
and is nevertheless without comparison nearer to the earth then to heauen^
Also meeting and coming together of Clouds, sets often the air on fire
an(...), and ingendereth lightening and thundering: Also sometime of winds
(...) in hollownesse of Clouds, comes in ^odeine breaking of parts of
Clowde^. And by such departing of part from ^a^t^ the Cloud makes great ^^^^
and thunder. Also when corrupt vapoures be there drawn up out of (...) and
ditches, and from carteins, (...) corrupt things, of their incooporation in
substance of Clouds, nowhere shall great corruption, pestilence, and
infection. Also the nearer the cloud into the earth and the farther from
heaven; the more in quantity he shows to the sight of them that behold
them. Therefore the greatest cloud, when he is nigh heaven seems least. And
yt which is least in it self seems most when he is n^^^h to the earth, as
Beda says. Also often a cloud that is gendered only of dry vapors and windy
is deceiuable: for the signifies and betokens rain, and paieth naught but
wind, and whirling wind. Also rainy clouds, if they fall s^^irily and at
once to the earth: where they fall, there they be noyfull, for they do bround.
But if they falt some and some and dropying meal, they give great profit so
fruits that grow. Also often as a Cloud bespringeth the earth with dropping,
but wastes himself in ah^^ bespringing. For when he bespringeth at her
things and moysteth them, by his own dissolution he brings himself to
naught; as Gregory says. The violent meeting of ye clouds is by ye some of
strong winds.
Also when one Cloud is contrary to another, he is cause of tempest and of
motion in the air: for contrarynesse and mee^ing of Clouds comes of
contrary parting and shoouing of winds. And therefore of beating of clouds
comes great moving in the air.

Of the rainebow. cap. 5.
THE Rainebowe is impression gendered in an hollow cloud and dewie, disposed
to rain in endless many outters, as it were shining in a mirror, and is
shapen as a bow, and sheueth diverse colors, and is gendered by beams of the
Sun, or of the Moon. And is but seld gendered by beams of the Moon, no more
but twice in fifty years, as Aristo. says. Also the Rainebowe that is called
the heavenly bow, is a watery cloud, Of the renewing of the rainebowe.
thirled with the Sun beams into all the parts thereof, as Marcianus says
and is called a bow, for the lyknesse of a crooked bow. For he shows a
round back in the high part of the clouds, and bears and stretches a
manner of horns or corners to the earthward, as Isidore says. And in this bow
some manner things belong and perteine to generation thereof, and some to shape
and figuration thereof; and some to the virtue and working thereof. Touching,
the generation thereof, it is considered, that the substance thereof is
gendered of shining ^rebounding of beams of light in a heavy cloud, and a
rainye. Also that always he has respect to the Sun with full face, and the
S^^ne is even before the bow, and has respect thereto. Also the bow arises in
a circle wise from the earth, even to the heaven: for he touches the earth
with lin^ horses, and heaven with the back. For the more he is before, and
stretches downward, the more he arises in roundnesse, and into figure and
shape. He is round as a circle and clear as it were a mirror: and in color
he is in marrye manner of wise diverse and singularly singular. For in the
rainbow because of his cleerenesse, b^^ seen diverse forms, kinds, and
shapes, that be contrary. Therefore the bow seems colored: For as Beda
says, it takes color of the four Elements. For therein as it were in any
mirror, shines figures, and shapes, and kinds of Elements. For of fire he
takes read color in the ouermost part, and of earth green in the
neathermost, and of the air manner of brown color, and of water somedeale
bliew in the middle, as Beda says. And these colors be ordained togethers
and set in order, as Aristotle says to libro Meth. And first is read
color, that comes out of a light Beam, that touches the utter part of the
roundnesse of the Cloud: Then is a middle color somdeale bliew, as the
quality asks that has mastry in the vapor, that is in the middle of the
clowd. Then the nethermost seems in green color in the nether part of a
cloud there the vapor is more earthy. And these colors be more principal
then other. Forasmuch as the Philosopher says, yt no Painter may paint neither
feign all the colors of the Rainbow. And Aristotle says, that the cause of
the Rainbowe is smiting again and rebounding of beams of light, that turn
again to contrary vapor in the cloud, as brightness shining in water,
shines in the over part, and tourneth again to himself. And for the
Rainebow is not seen but by the Sun beam by day, or by the Moon beam by
night: the sight thereof is let by troubling of air, or by feebleness of
sight, or by darkness and thickness of the Cloud, that withstandeth and
lets the shyning of beams. And the Rainbowe is seen in rainy time: for
then there is resolved superfluity of vapors, that was in straighted in the
clouds. And thereof comes a little dewing, in the which shines the beam
that is there before, and so the Rainebowe is shapen, and takes thereof diverse
colors of diverse vapors, in the which the beam shines, as Aristotle
says. Touching the virtue thereof and the working, the bow is set before the
Sun, and tempereth and swageth the strong heat thereof. And by resolution
thereof and departing and tourning into rain or dew, the Rainebow, quickens
and despringeth the nether things, and makes them plenteous: By the shape
thereof and figure, and many diverse colors, it highteth over things, and
makes them fair and seemelye, and betokens great moisture in the air. And
therefore (as Beda says and the Master of Stories) fortye year before the
dome, the Rainebowe shall not be seen, and that shall be token of drieng and
of default of Elements, as he says. That the rainbovve shall not be seen 40.
years before ye dome.
The Rainebow betokens peace and accord between God and the world, and
shows and informs and brings to mind that Gods dome by water is passed:
and also certifieth us of the Sun. For by his presence the Rainebowe shows
in what side the Sun is in heaven For the Rainebow is never on the same side of
heaven with the Sun, but always before. For when the Sun is in the East the
Rainebow is seen in the West, and againeward. And when the Sun is in the
South, the Rainebow is seen in the North. But the Rainebowe is never seen in
the South, or high middaye, as Beda says. The Philosopher tells the cause
thereof. For in the high middaye, when the Sun is even in the middle of the
world, then the beam thereof shines all about like, and therefore he shines
no more in one side then in another. And therefore in the point of very middaye
the rainebowe is seen in no side, as Aristotle says. And is full seldom
seen by night, but in ye full of the Moon, as Beda says. And that falls
not but twice in fiftye years, as Aristotle says.

Of the Dew. chap. 6.
DEw is impression gendered of cold vapor and moist, not gathered into a
body of a Cloud in the nether part of the middle space of the air, meeting
with some little cold. And Aristotle says, that there is no dew but when the
Southern wind blows. For dew is little rain, and rain is much dew. And
so the Southern wind by his moisture gendreth and nourishes dew. And the
Northern wind by his dryness licketh up dew, and thrusts togethers, and
binds it with his strong cold. Also the Moon imprinteth her moisture in the
earth, and is cause of gendring and dew therein, as Ambrose says, and he
calls the Moon mother of dew. And therefore by night by virtue of yt Moon,
in the air dew arises up priuelye, and comes down at last, and is seen,
and sheddeth and falls lostly on the ouermost parts of grass and herbs. In
his rising and down coming dew gives virtue and strength to trees, herbs,
and grass, and things yt the heat of the day had dried, wasted, and bowed
downewardes: and them the night dew apparaileth and restores and makes them
stand upward. Also in the tops of herbs and grass dew gathers it self in
drops: And as though it would upward to his generation, to the which always it
ascends, it hangs it self in the ouermost part of leaves and of grass:
also dew susteineth not ye strength of the Sun, but is dissolved and falls
anon by working of ye Sun beams, and vanishes away: but it forsakes not his
virtue yt is printed in the air. For by presence of his shedding in yt air,
it leaves openly the effect of his virtue in grass and herbs and seeds.
And though dew be a manner airy substance and most subtle outward,
nevertheless in a wonderful manner it is strong in working and virtue: for it
moistureth the earth, and makes it ple^tious, and makes flower, pith, and
Marrowe, increase in corn and grains: Sap to increase.
And fatteth and brings forth broad Oysters and other shell fishes in the
sea, and mamely, dew of springing time. For by night in Springing time Oysters
open themselves against dew, and receive dew that comes in between the two
shells, and holds and keeps it: And that dew so holden and kept, feeds
the flesh, and makes it fat: And by his incorporation with the inner parts of
the fish breeds a full precious gemme, a stone that is called Margarita. And
the more noble that the margarite is, Common Pearls.
the more white it is, and the more in quality, as it is said in li. Ge^marum.
Also the birds as ravens, while they he whitlewe in feathers, ere they be
black, dew feeds and susteyneth them, as Gregory says. Also dew cools
and tempereth the air that is made hot by the heat of the day: And if it be
made to clear and thin by the heat of the day, dew by his incorporation
makes it temperatly sad and thick, as Albumasar says. Also dew withstandeth
and bears down the strength of venim in venomous beasts, that their venim may
not be shed by night so much as by day. Therefore Adders and serpents lurking
among grass, hurt men that pass by but little, while flowers, grass, and
herbs, be dewed: Also though dew seem in it self sauoured as water, and
werish, nevertheless in might, effect, and doing it is most sweet, and cause
of honny and of Manna in herbs and flowers. For in some country of Greece honey
is gendred in flowers that comes of the dew of heaven: and also Manna in some
herbs, as it is said in Plato: also dew gendred in corrupt air, is corrupt by
corruption of the place, and corrupts other things: And so such dew insedeth
tender flowers, and corrupts green corn, when it is eared, as Gregory
says: And such corruption is called Erugo and Rubigo. Robigo, the blast in
vines and corn.
Also as the Gloss says super primum Ioelis, there it is said, yt their life of
Brugus rubigo shall fret. That which is left of the Caterpiller, the Grasshopper
shall eat. The canker shall also consume the residue. Ioe. ver. 4. Bruc^s is
the brood of long flies that destroy corn and grass. Hieronimus says, that
Rubigo is when the tender corn is smitten and burnt with noifull dew: and both
the cares and stalks turned into red or foul black color. And this
mischief wastes and destroieth altogether stubble and hey:so far forth, that
they be not profitable neither to meat nor to doung. Some men mean yt Rubigo
is the mildew.

Of Rain. Chap. 7.
Rain is impression that comes of much cold vapor and moist, there
gathered in a cloud, the which vapor is more in quantity and substance then
ye matter that dew comes of, and more cools and moysteth then the matter
does. For suuiosities that be drawn out of the waters and of earth by strength
of heat of heaven, be drawn to the nethermost part of the middle space of ye
air, and there by coldenesse of the place they be made thick, and then by
heat dissoluing and departing the moisture thereof, and not wasting all, these
fumosities be resolved and fallen and turn into reine and showers, as Be.
says, Rain is called Pluuia, and has ye name of Pluralitate, plurality of
drops, as Isi. says. For it falls and comes down then, and then, and
dropmeale. And also rain is called Imber, and has that name of Imbuendo, for
it springs and tempereth the earth, and makes it bear fruit. For land and
earth that is not besprong with rain, is barren: And the farther the dow^ of
the which rain is gendred, is from ye earth, and the nearer heaven: ye more
softly the rain comes down, and with ye more small drops: And ye nigher
such a clowd is to the earth, the rain falls swiftlyer commonly and with
greater drops.

Also winds that blow up in the sea, gather much humor of the outer parts of
the water, and bearing them up with them into the air, at last they ^^rne the^
into matter of rain. When there is much matter in a watery clowd, and the clowd
is very thick: the impression of beams is strong upon the clowd, and of great
gathering of beams and rebounding thereof comes strong heat, and at the last
by virtue of yt heat the clowd is dissolved and falls and turns into strong
rain. As we often s^, yt after strong heat comes strong rain, as Beda says.
Also sometime is so great generation of heat by gathering of beams, and by
rebounding thereof about ye clouds, yt the vapor is as it were burnt: and by
strong burning heat it turns into red cholar. And therefore sometime the
people think yt it raineth blood, Every red cholar ^ha^ falls, is not blud
as some suppose.
as Aristotle says. And rain water is full constraining and binding, and
therefore it restrains and hindeth flure of the womb; as Constantine says.
But rain water is subtle and light of substance, and has more airinesse and
more lightness of air then other waters: And therefore it is seen
chaungeable, and turns soon into contrary qualities. And therefore it takes
corruption and rotteth soon, as Constant. says. But it is more fresh and
sweet then other waters, when it abides in his own cleernes and virtue. Then
if rain be temperate in quality and quantity, and agreeable to ye time, it is
profitable to infinite things. For rain makes the land to bear fruit, and
joins it together if there be many chinnes therein, and aswageth and tempereth
strength of heat, and cleereth the air, and cease and stinteth winds, and
fatteth fish, and helps and comfort dry complexion, as Constantine
says. And if rain be evil and distemperate in his qualities, and discording
to place and time, it is grievous and noyfull to many things. For it makes
deepnesse and uncleanness, and slippernesse in ways and in paths, and
brings forth much unprofitable herbs and grass, and corrupts and
destroys fruits and sades, and quenches in seeds the natu^all heat, and
makes darkness and thicknes in the air, and takes from us the Sun beams,
and gathers mist and clouds, and lets the work of laboring men, and
farrieth and lets riping of corn and of fruits, and exciteth ruin and
running flux, and increseth and strengthens al moist evils, and is cause of
hunger, and of famine, and is cause of corruption, and of morein of beasts and
sheep: for corrupt showers do corrupt the grass and herbs of pastures,
whereof comes needful, corruption in beasts, as Constantine says.

Of a Drop. chap. 8.
A Drop is moist vapor departed and dealed into full small parts. And drops
be great when the days be hot, and parts of Clouds be departed that
were before gathered with cold as Aristotle says. And where heat is in the
air, if cold come thereto, the freesing of water or of vapor is more strong.
Therefore in libro Animalum Aristotle says, That fishers cast hot water on
their instruments and takles, that they may be the sooner frore to sink the
sooner. And the nearer a drop is to the earth, the more great it is: and
againward. For the littleness thereof and ye roundnesse is caused as long as
he bideth in the air far from the earth, as Aristotle says. And it is
moist, soft, clear, and bright: and does moist seeds, grass, and herbs,
and slaketh heat and burning of the air, and cleanses and purges the air.
And though a drop be most soft in substance, yet it thirleth stones with
often falling. Seek within libro. 12.

Of hoare Frost. chap. 9.
HOare frost (as Aristotle says) is vapor frosen, or else impression gendered
of cold vapor and moist, not gathered in the body of the Cloud, frore in
the middle space of the air, by coldness of place and of time, in which is no
part of heat, as Aristotle says. Therefore in hoare frost is hardness, that
comes of coldness of place and of time, in which it is gendered. For
coldness draws and gathers together the parts of vapors: and so makes
the substance of hoare frost, hard. And because of full great coldness,
hoare frost is white, and makes herbs and flowers, upon the which it
falls to wyther, and burns them, and it vanishes away by ^ little beam
of the Sun, and tourneth again into dew: For hoare frost is naught else but
dew frosen, as Beda says. For dew comes down to the earth, and takes by
cold of the night, white kind, hard, and cold: and so turns it self in
the utter part into the substance of ye hoare frost, as he says.

Of Hail. chap. 10.
Hail is freesing of drops of rain by strength of coldness and of wind in
the air, as Aristotle says. For impression is gendered of cold vapor and
moist, chased and driven by cold to the inner part of the cloud, and that by
mastrye of heats that is about. And hail is gendered in clouds that be far
from the earth, as he says. And therefore the cause of generation thereof, is
vapor received in the hollownesse of a clowd, the which vapor is made thick
by coldness of ye air. For the moist parts void and fly heat of the air,
and come togethers into the inner parts of the cloud, and there finding vapor,
they gather the parts thereof, and congealeth and freeseth them into the
substance of hail: And therefore is ofter hail in Summer then in winter. For
lightly strong heat lets gendring of hayle, for it dissolueth and departs
vapor, and suffers not the parts thereof to be gathered togethers. And so
does passing cold in Winter. For then is no heat in the air that cold
should fly and put it self within the Cloud. And hail is small and round,
and comes out of the highest places, as Aristotle says. And the cause of his
smalnesse and roundnesse is his tarrieng and abiding in the air long time: and
so of his long trendeling about comes his roundnesse, and his littleness
comes of heat of the air, that wastes and resolves the watrye parts
thereof. In Hail gendered in places nighe to the earth, the contrary falls,
and that is by contrary causes. And so hail, through hoist ousnesse of the
wind, that violently shoneth and puts it, and through heat that
dissolueth, it falls down swiftly to the earth, and spreads upon the earth
as it were salt. Hail greeueth much corn, fruits, and flowers, and falls
more ofter by day then by night. And the cause is, for the heat of the day
drives coldness into the inner parts of the cloud: and also the Northern
wind is cold and dry, and freeseth and constrains the dew yt comes down
of the air, and tourneth it into the substance of the hail, as Beda says.

Of Snow. chap. 11.
Snow is impression gendered of cold vapors and moist, in the lowest part
of the middle space of the air frore into the body of a Cloud by mean
coldenesse in comparison to hoare Frost: and that is because of meddeling of
heat in part. The which heat being closed in the substance thereof, and
not overcome, anon by cold that is thereabout, dries the substance thereof,
and softeneth it: and takes whiteness in color because of mastrye of cold
at last: And for stretching and spreading of the parts of the Cloud: And for
the coldness that is feebled, of heat the matter is broke in broad parts, as
it were splentes of shelles, and that for feebleness of the virtue that
breaks, as Aristotle says. Then Snow is gendred is a cold clowd, but not so
cold as that, in the which hail is gendered: and that witnesses the
softness of Snow. For heat meddeled with Clouds lets the parts thereof,
that they may not be made thick, nor stronglye gathered together. Then Snow is
more hard and dry then water, and that is by coldness constraining and
binding, and is softer then Hail, and that is by meddeling of heat in the
womb of the cloud: and is white by mastrye of coldness in the utter part
thereof. With little heat Snow melts into water, and it changes soon
both out of hardness and whiteness. By abiding of Snow upon the land, the
land is fatted: for by his coldness he closes the pores of the earth, and so
by heat gathered inward to mores and roots of herbs and seeds, the inner
humors be drawn to moors and roots, and gathered togethers as glewe: And
thereby is land fatted: and Snow slays and destroys wades, and superfluity
thereof, and nourishes and feeds good herbs, and makes them rank. Also
Snow by his presence covers and hides stinking places and doung hills, and
ways and paths, and lets by his spreading, wayfaring men, and tarryeth
them. And in the high Sea Snow falls seldom, as Beda says. The cause
thereof is, for fumosities and exalations thereof be continually shuft and
sparkled by winds that blow therein, and are the mow be thicked and turned
into snow, they be resolved and turned into rain or into mist. Also Snow is
noyfull to wild beasts: for it hides and covers their Leeses and pastures,
and shows and discovers their hauntes and steps. And so in Snow time they
be soon taken with hu^^e^s. And Snow is often in high places and mountains.
And, abides and endures longer time in mountains and in hills, then in
valleys and low places. For in hills cold winds be freely more strong then in
valeyes. And also valleys and low places be more hot then hills and high
places. And that is for more gendering and rebounding of the Sun beams. And
therefore more Snow is in mountains then in valleys. Also Snow melted by
strength of heat, moisteth and s^ltneth the earth: the which it makes hard,
and constrains by constraining of coldness before that it is molt, as
Gregory says. Also snow for softness and lightness of his substance, makes
no sound or noise in his falling down to the earth, but falls privily and
softly, out of a privy place of ye air, and sets himself upon the earth,
and spreads all about like. And snow with his swiftness and fairness
comfort eyes to behold therein: ^^^ if men behold too long, it dispearpleth
and appaireth the spirit of sight. Also Snow water by his potentiall and actual
coldness refraineth and binds flux of the womb, and smites, and
shrinketh, and stops sinews, and in them that drink snow water
continually, it breeds mestrual superfluitye of great botches under the
chinne, and makes the members aston^ed, and as though they were a sleep, and
that soon: and it gendereth the stone in ye bladder, and feeds forth cold
dropsy, as Constantine says.

Of Mist. Chap. 12.
MIst is impression made of resolution and falling of clouds that be fallen
into reiny water, as Arist. says. For vapors so resolved and fallen and shed
and spread into all the parts of the air, breed and gender must; and ye nearer
mist is to ye earth, the more thick and dark and cold it is found. And when
it is high from ye earth, it is more clear and more nigh the Sun: and therefore
it is more cold and dark. And when mist is all smitten with the beams of the
Sun, it falls down and turns again into the matter that it tame of, and
vanishes and falls. And so the air is purged, and then it betokens fair
weather and clear. And sometime mist is corrupt by vapors, of the which it is
gendered, and is full grievous and corrupts veins that burgen, and breeds
in beasts diverse sicknesses and euilles. Mist is friend of thieves, and to
evil doers, for it hides their spiers and waitings. And mist lets
waye-faring men and Pilgrims, for in great mistes ways be unknown and
uncertain. Mist withdraws from us light and beams of the Sun, and other
stars, and therefore it is full heavy and perilous to shipmen, as Beda says.
For while dark mist covers the sea, and occupyeth it, the sternman doubts,
and cannot know whetherward he shall stir the ship a right.

Of thunder. Chap. 13.
OF impressions that be gathered in the air of double vapor, the first is
thunder, the which impression is gendered in watery substance of a Cloud. For
moving and shaking hither and thither of hot vapor and dry, that flies
his contrary, is beset and constrained in every side, and smitte into himself,
and is thereby set on fire, and on flame, and quenches himself at the last
in the clowd, and breaks the cloud, as Aristotle says. Or thunder is
gendered by beating and smiting together of clouds, as he says: when clouds
be moved and shuft by contrary winds, then the clouds smite togethers, and
of their violent breaking comes great strokes and noise in the air, that
was called thunder among old men. Thunder is called Tonitruus, or Tonitruum,
and has that name of dread and fear, for the noise fears men that hear it,
as Isidore says. For Tonus and Sonus is all one. For sometime it smites all
thing so hard, that it seems that it renteth and cleueth heaven. For when a
storm of full strong winds comes into the clouds, and the whirling wind and
the storm increases, and seeks out passage: it cleaves and breaks the
Cloud, and falls out with a great reefe and strong, and all to breaks the
parts of the Cloud, and so it comes to the ears of men and of beasts with
horrible and dreadful breaking and noise. And that is no wonder: for though a
Bladder be light, yet it makes great noise and sound; if it be strongly
blown, and afterward violentlye broken. And with the thunder comes
lightning, but sightening is sooner seen, for it is clear and bright: and
thunder comes later to our ears, for ye wit of sight is more subtle then the
perseverance of hearing. And therefore first he shows light and brightness
by shining yt comes before, ere we hear the noise and sound, yt comes
afterward. As a man sees sooner ye stroke of a man that heweth a tree, then he
hears the noise of the stroke. Huc vsque Isid. And this reason that Isid.
makes of the cause of thunder, accords somewhat with the Philosopher, yt
says, that thunder is a spirit of winds received in the bosom of clouds, and
breaks by the virtue of his moving, and renteth all the parts of the
Cloud, and makes great quaking, noise, and sound, and thunder. Therefore
heereto he says, That thunder is the sound of the spaces of the air that
runs therewith. In libro Meth. Aristotle says, That thunder is naught else,
but quenching of fire in a Cloud. For dry vapor arreareth and sets it on
fire and on flame, with heat of the air, and when it is closed in a cloud it
is sodeinly quenched. And of such quenching the noise of Thunder is gendered.
As when fiery hot iron is quenched in water, it makes great boiling and
noise. Often thunder comes with lightening: and then he greeueth much, as Beda
says. And so it scorcheth fruit, and corn, when he comes without rain. And
if he comes with rain he does good, as he says. And thunder with his
moving, beats and smites all thing: and stirs the brain, and fears the
wit, and distroubleth and stirs and co^umpeth wine in Tuns, Egereth vvines,
and se^^ieth beers and Ale.
as Aristotle says. And if it come in breeding time of fowls, it greeueth
their eggs, and makes women that travail of child, often to have dead borne
children, and smites with his roes, and throws down high towers, and
destroys high trees, and wringeth them out of the ground. And always he
greeueth often and more strongly in high places then in low, as Beda says, and
makes a manner of winding, and as it were a round voice, and smites the air
all about with a manner of running, even so that it makes and sowndeth
somewhat as it were in the manner of rolling and hurling of wheels, as C.
Isidoras says. And by this manner of wise such a round sown and noise comes
of roundenesse of Clouds, out of the which, vapour^ and wind that is cause of
thunder, is diversely wagged and shapen. For it moves now upward, now
downewarde, now forward, now backwarde in hollownesse of the clouds.

Of Coruscation. cap. 14.
ARistotle says, that this word Coruscacio, betokens diverse manner of
lightening: and lyghtening is properly called Coruscatio: and that manner of
lightning is seen in the air sodainelye, and is the appearing and showing of
subtle vapor set on fire.

And that showing passes and vanishes away in the air, without coming
down to the earth. And another manner lyghtening is called Fulgur, and
Fulguratio also, and is subtle fire, but this is more thick and great then
the lyghtening that is called Coruscacio, and comes down to the earth, and
pearceth and thirleth grass and herbs, and other soft things, as
Philosophers tell, as it is rehearsed in Te^cio Phisice Algazelis.

Addition.
Lightening does also melte iron, and burns not Lawne or silk, it scorcheth
steshe, and swells bodies of beasts and men: among all Trees, the Laurel is
least blasted.

Of Fulmine. Chap. 15.
THE lightening that is called Fulmen, is vapor set on fire, and so fast and
sad, and falls down with great swiftness, and is of more strength then
the lightening that is called Fulgur. And this lyghtening smites, thirleth,
and burns things that it touches, and multiplyeth, and cleaves and
breaks, and no bodilye thing withstandeth it. And so (as Isidore says,)
Fulgurare and Ferire to smite is all one. For as he says, this manner
lyghtening Fulgur, is compownded of the most subtle parts of Elements, and
has thereof more might and strength of pearcing and of thirling. And therefore
Isidore calls this manner lyghtening a stroke of the darte of heaven, and is
gendered and bread of great vapoure, compownded of diverse contrary things,
the which vapor is arreared and drawn up and set on fire and on flame by
great strength of fire, and is shuft and put by beating and shoouing, and
putting of Clouds, and comes down with great violence out of the
hollownesse of clouds, as it were a firye stone. For such lyghtening beaten
together as it were stones, is seen bright and running about in the air, by
force and strength of the burning flame. And though it be of firye kind, yet
by violence of moving against the kind of fire, he is compelled to come and
move downward as Beda says. And in his coming down he sets on fire and
burns, and has this name of Fulgur therefore, as Isidore says. Also he
peareceth and thirleth, and cleaves, and renteth: and then he is called
Fulmen, as he says. Also where he burns, he gendreth therewith full evil
stench and smoke, and falls often upon high places. In strong Summer and
strong Winter is lyghtenings but seld: but in the beginning of Harvest, and in
the ending of springing time, as Beda says, liber. 2. cap. 52. In Winter and
in Summer is lightning selde. For in Winter because of cold the vapor in the
air is not set in fire: and in Summer because of dryness and subtilnesse of
air, is no gathering of vapor in the Clouds. And in Harvest and in springing
time, the air is moouable and some deal thick and dim. Therefore then it
lyghteneth often. Also Chap. 53. he says, that there be many kinds of
lightenings For those yt come dry, burn not, but cleaves and departs, and
those which come moist, burn not, but swell and scorch.

The third manner lightning, which is called Clarum, is of a wonderful kind:
for he catches and draws wine up of the Tonnes: and touches not the
vessel, and melts gold and silver in pursses, and melts not the pursse.
What thing lightening is, and whereof it comes, diverse men tell diuersely.
For Epedocles says, that lightening is fire hid in Clouds, and is gendered
of the Sun beams. But Aristotle says, that this is false. For if it were
so, of every Cloud should come lightening: For in every Clowd be Sun beams
hid. And Anaxagoras says, That lightning is of air that comes down into
a cloud, or to a clowd, and hides it self therein, and the working and
shoouing thereof is lightening, and when that fire is quenched in watrye
Clouds, those bubbelings and cracking of that quenching is called thunder.
Other say, that lighting comes of hot winds and dry, closed straightly in
clouds, by the which winds clouds burn, and be set on fire: And the fire
that comes from then is lightening, and the shining thereof comes sooner to
the sight, then the noise and sound to the hearing. Other says, that lyghtening
is not gendered by fire, but by imagination of shining water which is seen by
night in Clouds by ye brightness of shining stars. But Aristotle says,
That this is error. For lightening is seen by day under the Sun beams, as
well as by night. And Aristotle means, that vapor is gathered in the
Clouds, and is set on fire by strong beating togethers and hurling of Clouds,
and so is made the matter of lyghtening, and for that it has some earthye
parts, by weight and heaviness thereof it moves downewarde. And for that
those lyghtenings be of strong subtilnesse, and not of strong setting on fire
and burning: therefore they seem white, and therefore they corrupt not,
neither infect bodies that they touch. Huc vsque Aristoteles in liber. 2.
Methe. Also the moving of lyghtening is sudden and unware. For sodeinlye it
is seen from the East, and in the West, and shows his moving sodeinly, and
hydeth it sodeinly. And as Gregory says, it comes out of his mother, as
sodeinly as the twinkling of an eye; and turns sodeinely, and forsakes not
the place, that it is gendered in. By his sodeine moving, it smites their
sight that look thereon, and makes them dread, and spreads it self into
all the world by seeming, and opinion, and dome of sight, and comes before
the thunder, and gives warning of his coming. Lightening is good and
profitable, if it come with Rain: And if it come without any rain, it
greeueth tender fruits and flowers, as Beda says.

Of Aura, light wind. chap. 16.
AVra is light wind moved, and it slaketh and cools them that be hot:
and heateth them that be cold. And the more pure and clean it is, the more
wholesome and pleasant it is, and if it be temperate, and passes not due
qualyties of time: then it is most according to man's life, and keeps and
saves health. And if it be in the contrary manner, then it is most noyfull.
For then it breeds Pestilence and great corruption. For Pestilence is
corruption of air, and comes of dryness and of distemperaunce of rain: And
falls often for trespass of mankind, as Isidor. says, And is called
Pestilencia, as it were Pastulencia. For it passes all the kind of man, and
takes pasture or feeding thereof. For when the waters and rain and air be
corrupt, the which we breath and eat, and be fed therewith: anon we be
corrupt and overcome with diverse sickness and euilles, as it is said before
in the same book, where it is treated of the propertyes of the air.

But this that is said shall suffice at this time.

Of the four Elements, and their qualities and mixtures togethers, forth of
Henry. C. Agrippa, de occ. Phi. Which are newly added.
First book Cap. 3.
THere are four Elements, and first grounds of al corporal things, Fire, Air,
Water, and Earth, of the which all things ellemented in these lower things are
made, not in manner of heaping up together, but according to transmutation and
uniting. And again when they are corrupted, they are loosed again into
Elements, neither is there any of the sensible Elements pure, but according to
more or less they are mixed together, and apt to be transmuted one into
another: Even as durtye and loosed earth is made water, and that being
ingrosed and thickened, becomes earth, and being euapored by heat tourneth
into Air, and that waring hot, turns into Fire: and this being quenched
tourneth into Air, and being made cold of his adustion or burning, becomes
earth, or a stone, or Sulpher, as it is made manifest by lightening. And Plato
thinks that the earth can never be turned into any other Element, and that
other Elements are turned into this and that Element, and one into another. The
Earth then not changed, is divided from the more subtle, but being mixed or
loosed into those which dissolve it, does again pass into it self: And every
one of the Elements has two special qualities, the first of which it keeps
to it self, in the other as a mean, it agrees with the quality following.
For the fire is hot and dry, the earth dry and cold, the water cold and
moist, the air moist and hot. And in this sort according unto two contrary
qualities, the elements are contrary to themselves, as Fire to Water, and Earth
to Air. Moreover, after an other sort, the Elements are contrary one to
another, for some are heavy as the earth, and the Water, and other light, as
the Air and the fire, wherefore the former are Passive, but ye latter Active,
as the Sto^ks have termed the^: Wherefore Plato moreover difemanishing after
another sort, assigns to every one throe qualities, to wit, to fire
sharpness, thinness, and moving To ye earth bluntness, thickness, and rest.
And according unto these qualities; Fire and Earth are contrary Elements. And
ye ofter elements do borrow qualities of them, so yt the air takes two
qualities of ye Fire, thinness and moving, and one of the earth, to wit,
bluntness. Contrariwise ye water takes two of the Earth, darkness and
thickness, and one of the fire, to wit, moving; but the fire is twice thinner
then the air, thrice more moving, and four times more sharp, ye air is
twice sharpen then ye water, thrice thinner, and four times more moving,
therefore ye water is twice sharper the^ ye earth, thrice thinner, and four
times more moving: wherefore as the fire is to the air, so ye air is to the
water, the water to ye earth, and again as the earth is to the water, so is it
to the air, and the air to the fire: and this is ye root and foundation of
al bodies, natures, virtues, and marvelous works: and he that knows these
qualities of Elements, and the mixing of them, shall easily bring to pass
marvelous and wonderful works, and shall be perfect in natural Magike.

Of the three fold consideration of Elements.
WWherefore there are four Elements as we have faide, Cap. 4.
without whose perfect knowledge w^e can bring forth no effect in Magike: and
every of the^ are three fold, yt so the number of four may fill up the number
of.12. and so proceeding by the number of 7 to the number of.10. one may come
to ye uppermost unity, whereof all virtue and wonderful work do depend.
Wherefore in the first order, are the pure Elements, which are neither
compounded nor changed, nor suffer mixing together but are incorruptible, and
not from the which, but by the which, the virtues of all natural thing are
brought to effect: none is able to express their virtues, because they can do
all in all. He that knows not this cannot attain to any work of marvelous
effects: The compounded Elements are manifold, diverse, and vnpure, yet apt to
be brought by art to a pure simplicity: which being then returned to their
simplicity, their virtue is above all things, giving a full perfection of all
hidden operation, and works of nature, and these things are the foundation
of all natural magike.

The Elements of the third order first and by themselves are not Elements, but
compounded again, diverse, manifold, and apt to be changed one into
another. They are the infallible mean, and therefore are called the middle
nature, or the soul of the middle nature, there are very few that understand
their profound mysteryes. In them be certain measures, degrees, and orders,
as a full perfection of every effect in each thing natural, celestial, and
supercelestiall. The things are wonderful and full of mysteries, which maybe
wrought by magike, as well natural as divine, for by them the bindings,
loosings, and transmutations of all things are made, and the knowledge and
foretelling of things to come: Also the banishment of naughty spirits, and the
winning or obtaining of good spirits, does descend from them: Wherefore
without these three fold Elements, and the knowledge of them, let no man trust
that he is able to work anything in the hidden science of Magike and nature,
and whosoever knows how to reduce one into another, the impure into the
pure, the manyfolde into the simple, and knows how to discern the nature,
virtue, and power of them, in number, degrees, and order, without division of
substance, he without doubt shall obtain the perfect knowledge and working of
all natural things, and heavenly secrets.

Of the marvelous or wonderful natures of Fire and Earth.
FOr the working of all marvelous things, Cap. 5.
says Hermes, two are sufficient, to wit, Fire and Earth: The one is the
Patient, the other the Agent: Fire as says Dionisius comes clearly in all
things, and through all things, and is removed, is lightsome to all, and also
is hidden and unknown when it is by it self, no matter coming, in the which
it may manifest his own action. It is unmeasurable and invisible, able of it
self for his own action, moveable, giving it self to all, after a sort
coming near unto it, making new, a keeper of nature, a giver of light, for
his brightness covered all about, incomprehended, clear, severed, rebounding
back, mounting upward, going sharplye, high, not to be diminished, always a
moving motion, comprehending another, vncomprehended, not wanting another,
priuelys growing of himself, and manifesting the greatness of himself to
receive matters, Active, mighty, at once present to all men, visiblye it
suffers not it self to be neglected, and as a certain reuengement,
generallye and properlye, upon the sudden bringing it self to a reckoning to
certain things, incomprehensible, in palpable, not diminished, most rich of
himself in all traditions, Fire is a huge and a great portion of the things
of nature, as says Plinye. And wherein it is doubtful, whether she consume
and bring forth more things. Fire is one, and pearcing thorough all things
as says the Pythagorians, but in heaven stretched abroad and shining over
all, and in hell straightened, dark and tormenting, in the middle partaking of
both. Wherefore the fire is one in it self, manifold in the recipient, and in
diverse distributed with a diverse mark as Cleanthos witnesses in Cicero,
wherefore this fire which we use commonly by chance it is in stones, which is
stricken out, with the stroke of Steel, it is in the Earth, which smoaketh by
digging, it is in the Water, which warmeth the Fountains, and Wells, it is in
the deep Sea, which being tossed with winds, wexeth warm, it is in the air,
which oftentimes we see to were warm, and all living things, and Uegitables,
are nourished with heat, and every thing that lives, lives by reason of the
included fire.

The properties of the fire supernall, above, are heat making all things
fruitful, and light, giving life to all things. The properties of the fire
infernal, are a burning, consuming all things: and a darkness, making all
things barraine.

Wherefore the heavenly and light fire, chaseth away the Demones, or Spirits
of darkness: and this our wooden fire drives away the same, as far forth
as it has the likeness, and the carriage of that uppermost light: yea, also
of that light, which says, Ego sum lux mundi, I am the light of the world,
which is the true fire, the Father of lyghtes, from whom, every good thing
given, does come: casting out the brightness of his fire, and communicating
it first to the Sun, and to other heavenly bodies, and by these, as it were
by mean instruments, pouring in that, into this our fire. Wherefore, as the
Demones or spirits of darkness, are strongest in darkness, so the good
Demones which are Angels of light, do receive increase from the light, not
only of God, of the Sun, and of heaven, but also of the fire which is with
us.

Heerevpon the first most wise appointers of Religions, and Ceremonies,
decreed, that prayers, psalms, and all rights, should not be do^e without
lights. Heerevpon grew that Posie of Pythagoras: Ne loquaris de Deo, absque
lumine, Speak not of God without light. And they commanded for the driving
away of naughtye Demones, that lyghtes and fires should be kindeled by the
carcases of the dead, and not to take them away, until that the purgings
being ended by the holy right, they were put in burial. And almighty God in
the old Law, did require that all his Sacrifices, should be offered with
fire, and that fire, So lykevvise in ye funerals of the Romans, were put
lamps, with fire, that continued a long season.
should ever burn on the Altar, which also among the Romans, the Priests of
Vesta, did always keep burning.

As for the Earth, it is the Bace, and the Foundation of all the Elements: for
it is the object, the subject, and the receiver, of all the beams and
influences of heaven. It contains in it the seeds, and seminall virtues of
all things, therefore is she called Animal, Uegetall, and Mineral, which
being made fruitful by all the other Elements and Heavens, is apt to beget
all things. Of it self, it is receyuer of all fruitefulnesse, and as it were
also, the first springing Parent of all things, the Center, foundation, and
mother of all things.

Take of it any portion be it never so secret, washed, pourged and ground
small, if thou let it stand for a season abroad, by and by being made
fruitful by the power of the Heavens, and as it were great with young,
brings forth from it plants, worms, living creatures, Stones, and also
brighte sparckles of mettalles.

Therein are exceeding great secreates. If at any time it be pourged by the
workemanshippe of fire, and brought to his singleness, by due washing. It is
the first matter of our creation and the truest medicine of our restoration
and preservation.

Of the wonderful natures of the Water, the Air, and the Winds. Chapter. 6.
THE other two Elements, are of no less power, to wit, Water, and Air,
neither does Nature cease to work in them wonderful things. For so great is
the necessitye of Water, that without it, no living creature can live, no
herb, nor Plant, without the moystening of water, can burgen or bud forth. In
it is the seminary virtue of all things, first of living creatures, whose
seed is manifest to be watrye: and although the seeds of shrubs and herbs
are earthly, yet it must needs be, that they must be corrupted with water, if
they are to be fruitful, whether it come to pass, through ye imbibed
moisture of ye earth, or through dew or rain; or through water of purpose put
unto it: for water and earth alone, are described by Moses, to bring forth a
living soul: but to the water be appoynteth a two fold bringing forth, to
wit^ of things swimming in the water, and of things flieng in the air above
the earth. Moreover, of things brought forth of ye earth, part are bound to the
water. The same the Scripture does testify saying: That after the creation,
shrubs and plants budded not, because God had not rained upon ye earth. So
great is the power of the Element, that the spiritual regeneration cannot be
without water, as Christ himself witnessed to Nichodemus. There is also an
exceeding great force thereof, in religion, in purgings, and purifications, and
of no less necessity than of ye fire. The commodities thereof are infinite,
and use manifold; and all things do consist of the power thereof, as that which
has the force of begetting, nourishing, and increasing. Whereupon Thales
Milecius and Hesiodus, did appoint the water to be the beginning of all things,
and said that it was the auncientest and the mightiest of all Elements,
because that it ruled over all the rest. For (as says Pliny) the water
deuoureth the earth, it quenches ye fire, it clymbeth aloft, and by stretching
abroad of clouds, it challenges heaven unto it, and the same falling down, is
the cause of all things growing upon the earth. There are innumerable wonders
of water, set forth by Pliny, Solinus, and many Historians. Of whose wonderful
virtue also. Ovid makes mention in these vearses.

Hamos sand. Jupiter Hamon, of ye sandy place, vvh^reon he built his tower
AT noonetide, horned Hamon, does, thy water clear, wexe cold:
and wexeth hot when Sun does set, and eke the day unfold.
Report does go, the water of Athainas sets on fire wood when the Moon does
wane, and into small Orbs does retire.
The Creones a river have, which drunk, does stony make the entrailis, and
does harden all, that of the moisture take.
The river Crathis and Cibaris, that near your quarters he, do make folks
hair like Amber, and like gold as is to see.
And which more marvel is, there are that have great power to change, not
bodies only, but minds also: which is a thing full strange.
Who has not heard of water foul, that Salmacis do breed: and of the lakes
of Aethiope, which makes men mad indeed:
Or brings them to deadly sleept, if they thereof do drink.
Who so does seek to quench his thrill, at Clitorius brinke,
He shunneth wine, and ioyeth still, in water clear alone.
Then runs out Lincestus stream, like unto which is none:
Whereof who so with measure does, receive within his breast, faltreth as the
Dronkards do, which pure wine esteem best.
There is a lake in Arcadie, Pheneus hight of old, suspected for the doubtful
streams, in which be not too bold,
By night, at what time who so drinks, they hurt, but not by day.
Moreover Josephus makes mention, of the wonderful nature of a certain
river, running between Archea, and Raphanea, Cities of Siria, which run with
their full channel, during ye whole Saboth, by and by as it were failing
through the stopping of the fountains, for six whole days together, a man
may pass dry shod, through the channel, and again the seventh day, the
causes of nature being not known it returns to the former abundaunce of
water, wherefore the inhabitants call it Sabbatheus, by reason of the vii.
day, holy among the Jews, and the Gospel does bear us witness, of the
Probatica the fish ponde, Silo.
into the which after the water was moved by the Angel, he which first came
into it was delivered of what disease soever. The same virtue and power is read
to have of the Nymphs Iomdes, which was in the territory of the Aelians,
Aelians.
by the river Cytheron into the which, he that went with a sick body, went out
of it whole and sound, without any grief of body. Pausanias reports that
there is in Liceum a Mountain in Arcadia, Liceum.
a fountain which was called Agria, unto the which, as often as the drouth of
the Country did threaten spoil to the Corn, the Priests of Jupiter Liceus,
entering after sacrifice offered, worshipping the holy water, with holy prayers,
holding a branch of Oak in his hand, thrust it down into the water. Then the
water being moved, the vapor being from thence lifted up into the air,
became clouds, which meeting together, did ouercast all the sky, which not
long after, tourning into rain, did wholsomly water the whole region. But
concerning the miracles of water, besides many other Authors, Ruffus Ephesius,
a Physician, has written wondrous things, and found in no other Author that
I know of: it remains to speak of the air. This is a vital spirit, going
through all things that are, giving life to all things, and making them to
stand together, binding, moving, and filling all things. Heerevpon the Doctors
of the Hebrews, do not reckon it among the Elements, but as it were a mean
and a gliew, joining diverse things in one together, and reckoning it as it were
the resounding spirit of ye worlds instrument: for he does next of all
conceive in himself, the influence of all celestial things, and does
communicate as well with other Elements, as with every mixed thing, and does no
less receive and retain in him as it were a certain heavenly glass, the
shape, form and kind of all things, as well natural, as artificial, and of
speeches whatsoever: and carrieng them with him, and imprinting in them, as
well in sleep as in waking, the bodies of men and living creatures, does enter
in through the poores, and ministers matter of sundry wonderful dremes,
diuinations and soothsaiengs. Heerof also men says, A note of great see^t.
that it comes to pass, why one passing by a place, in the which a man has
been slain, or a carcass newly hidden, does tremble with fear and dread:
because the air being there full of horrible shapes of murdering, does move
and trouble the spirit of the man, whilst together it is drawn in, with ye
like shapes and forms, whereof it happens that fear insueth, for every
sudden impression does astonish nature. For this cause, many Philosophers
have supposed, that the air is the cause of dreams, and of many other
impressions of the soul, by the bringing of shapes, similitude^, or shows,
which are fallen from thi^^s, and speeches multiplied in the very air, until
they come to ye senses, and at length to the fantasy and soul of the
receiver, to wit, that soul, which being clear from cares, and not let,
and meeting with such shapes, is by the^ instructed, for ye shapes of things,
although of their own nature, they be brought to ye senses of men and living
creatures, yet from heaven while they are in the air, they may get some
impression, whereby together with the aptness, they are rather carried from the
disposition of the receiver, to the sense of one, then of another. And for this
it is possible, that naturally and without all superstition, by ye means of no
spirit, a man may in a very short space declare to a man, the conceit of his
mind, be the distance and dwelling never so far: although ye time wherein this
happens cannot possibly be mesured, yet within 24. hours yt must needs be
done, and I know how to do it. Moreover, the Abbot Tritenius, in times past
know it and did it, And how certain shapes not only spiritual but also
natural, do flow from things, by influe^ce of bodies from bodies, and do
way strong in the very air, and do offer and show themselves unto us,
We^ders
by light and by moving, both to the sight, and to other senses also, and
sometimes do work maruailous things in us, as Platinus does prove and teach.

And we do see, how when the South wind blows, the air is thickened into
thin clouds, in the which as in a glass the Images being far distant, of
Castles, of mountains, of horses and men, and of other things, are reflected,
which immediately at the falling of the clouds vanish away. And Aristotle in
his Meteors, does declare the cause, for that the rain bow is gathered in a
cloud of the air, from a certain similitude of a looking glass. And Albert
says, that the shapes of bodies by the force of nature, may easily be
expressed in the moist air, after the same sort, that ye Images of things are
in things. And Aristotle reports, that it happened to one, through weakness
of his sight, that the next air unto him was his glass, and the visible raie
or beam, was stricken back unto him, and could not enter: whereupon which way
he went, he thought that his Image went before him face to face: likewise by
the skillful workmanship of certain glasses, the Images which we will see in
the air, are also cast a far off out of the glosses, which then ignorant men
seeing, suppose that they see the shadows of spirits or ghosts, whereas for
all that they are none such, but certain Images like to themselves, and void
of all life. And it is known if a man be in a dark place and void of all
light, saving that some where the Sun beam enter in through a very little
hoale, if a piece of white paper be put underneath it, or a plain glass,
those things are seen in it, which abroad the Sun gives light unto. And
there is another illusion more marvelous, where when Images are painted by a
certain workmanship, or letters written, How to know the secret of thy
friend, far off.
a man in a clear night, does set them against the beams of the full Moon,
through whose images multiplied in the air, and drawn up, and cast back,
together with the beams of the Moon, some other man being privy to the
matter a great ways off, see^th, reads, and knows them, in the very dish
or circle of the Moon: which doubtless is very profitable skill to bewray
secrets, to cities and towns besieged, in times past, practiced by Pythagoras,
and at this day not unknown to some, and to my self. And all these things,
and greater, are grounded upon the very nature of the air, and have their
reasons out of Mathematike and Optike. Perspectiue.
And as these Images, are reflected to ye sight, so are they often times to the
hearing, which is manifest in the Ecko. But they have more hidden workmanships
and skilles, that a man also a far off, may hear and understand what
another speaks and whispereth in secret.

The winds also consist of the Element of the air, for they are nothing else
than the air moved and stirred. Of these there are four principalls, blowing
from the 4. quarters of heaven, to wit, Notus from the South, Boreas from the
North, Zephyrus from the West, and Apeliotes or Eurus, from the East: Which
Pontanus comprehending in these two pretty verses says.

A summo Boreas, Notus imo spirat Olympo.
Occasum insedit Zephirus, venit Eurus ab ortu.
Fell Boreas blows from heavens high, but Notus blows his blast
From lowest part: Zephire from West: Eurus from East does cast.
The South wind is meridionall, clowdie, moist, hot and sicklye, which Jerome
calls the butler of rain, and Ovid thus describes him.

The South wind flies with moist wings, having his terrible countenance
covered with pitchie blacknes, his beard is laden with showers, water flows
from his hoare hairs, clouds sits upon his browe, and his feathers and
bosom are wet.

And Boreas being contrary to Notus, is a Northerly wind, vyolent and
sounding, and shril, which scattering the clouds, makes the air clear, and
freeseth the water.

Ovid brings him in speaking of himself in this sort: Apta mihi vis est,
etc. I have an apt or fit force wherewith I drive away sad clouds, I shake the
Seas, and overthrow currey Dakes, I harden clouds, and I drive down hayle
unto the earth. I my self, when I have gotten my brothers in the open air
(for that is my field) I strive and struggle with so great endeavor, that the
middle of the air does ring with my shaking, and six leapeth out of ye hollow
clouds. Even I when I have entered into the round holes of ye earth, and have
fiercely set my back under chinkes below. I stir up spirits (I make ye Devil
to stir) and set the whole world in a shaking.

But Zephyrus ye West wind, which is also called Fauonius, is very light,
blows from ye west, and brething pleasantly, is cold and moist, thawing
frosts, and snow, and bringing forth grass and flowers. Contrary to this is
Eurus, which also is termed Subsolanus and Apeliotes, A breeder of
Caterpillars, etc worms that grow
blowing from ye East: this wind is watery and clowdy, and of a swifte
devouring nature. Of these; thus sings Ovid, Eurus ad Auroram, etc.

Eurus goes to Aurora, and to ye kingdom of Nabathium, to Persia, and to the
quarters lieng under the beams of the morning. The evening and the sea
showers, which are warm with ye Sun gooing down, are next to Zephirus. And
shiuering Boreas inuadeth Scythia, and the 7. stars. The contrary ground is
moistened with continual showers and rain from the South.

Of the kinds of things compounded, what relation they have to the elements,
and how the Elements themselves, agree with the soul, senses, and manners.
Cap. 7.
AFter ye 4. simple elements, immediately follow 4. kinds of perfected things
co^pouned of the^, which are stones, metals, pla^ts and living creatures: and
albeit to ye generation of every of them, all Elements do agree in composition:
yet every of them, does follow and imitate one principal element, for all
stones are earthly, for by nature they are heavy and descend, and are to framed
by drouth that they cannot be molten. But mettalls are waterish, and apt to
flow, and which natural Philosophers confess, and Alcumistes do prove, are
ingendered of a viscus or slimie water, or else of waterish quick silver: so
plants agree with the air, that unless they burgen up abroad, they prove not:
so all living creatures have a fiery force, and a heavenly beginning, and fire
does touch them so near, that when it is quenched, immediately all the life
does fail. Again, eueryone of those kinds is severed in it self, by ye
degrees of elements, for among stones they chiefly are called earthly, which
are duschie and heavy: and waterie, which are clear or may be seen through,
and which do consist of water, the Crystal, Berell, the Pearl in shells: and
they are airie, which do swim upon the water and are spongeous, as the Sponge,
the Pomis, and the Tophus. There be that are fiery, out of the which fire is
set, and sometimes is resolved into it, or are engendered of it, as the under
stone, the stone called Pyretes, and as Abeston. Likewise among mettalls, lead
and silver are earthly, quicksiluer is waterish, copper and tin are airie,
gold and iron are fiery. In plants also the roots do imitate the earth, by
reason of their thicknes: the leaves the water, by reason of their juice: the
flowers the air, by reason of their subtlety: the seeds the fire, by reason
of their begetting spirit. Moreover, some are called hot, some cold, some
moist, some dry, and borrowing to them the names of the elements from their
qualities. Among living things, some are more earthy than others, Animales
and inhabit the bowels of the earth, as worms called Easses, Moles, and many
creeping things: some are watrie, as fishes: some are airie, which cannot live
out of the air, as the Bird of Paradise, and the Camelion. There are also
that are fiery, as the Salamander, and certain Crickets: and which have a
certain fierye heat, as Pigeons, Ostriges, Lions, and those, which the wise
man calls, beast breathing out a fiery vapor. Moreover in living creatures,
the bones represent the Earth, the slesh the Air, the vital spirit the Fire,
and the humors the Water: and these also are divided or parted by the
Elements, for red cholar gives place to the Fire, blood to the air, fleame
to the water, black choler to the earth. To conclude, in the very soul, as
August. witnesses; the understanding represents ye fire, reason the air,
imagination, the water, and the scuses the earth. And these also among
themselves are divided by Elements, for the sight is fiery, neither can it
perceive without fire and light: the hearing is airie, for sound is made by
the striking of the air: but smell and taste are referred to the water, without
whose humor, there can be no savor nor smell: to conclude, all the touchings
is earthly, and requires gross bodies.

Moreover, the deeds and operations of men, are governed by the Elements: for
a slow and heavy moving, betokens the earth: fear, sluggishnesse, and a
lyther work, signifies water: cheerfulness and friendly manners, the air:
a sharp and an angry vyolence, the fire. Wherefore the Elements are the first
of all things, and all things are of them, and according unto them, and they in
all things, and through all things, spread abroad their force.

How the Elements are in the heavens, in the stars, in spirits, in Angels,
finally in God himself.
Cap. 8.
THE consenting opinion of all the Platonikes is, that even as in the world,
being the chief pattern, all are in all: so also in this corporal world,
all things are in all, yet in diverse manners, to wit, according to the nature
of ye receivers: so also the elements, are not only in these inferior bodies,
but also in the heavens, in the stars, in spirits and Angels, to conclude,
in God himself, the worker and chief patron of all. But in these earthlye
bodies, the Elements are certain gross forms, drowned matters, and material
elements. But in the heavens, the elements are through their natures and
strengths: to wit, in a heavenly manner, and much more excellent then beneath
the Moon: for there is a heavenly massinesse of the earth, without the
grosenesse of the water: and an agilitie of the air, far from fleeting
abroad: the heat of the fire is there no^ burning but shining, and quickening
all things by his heat. Moreover of the stars, Mars and Sol are fiery,
Jupiter and Venus airie, Saturn and Mercury waterish, and they are earthlye,
which inhabit the eight Orb, and the Moon also, (which notwithstanding,
Conjecture.
of most men is thought to be waterie) forasmuch, as like to the earth it
draws unto it the waters of heaven, with the which, she being moystened,
does through the neernesse, pour them upon us, and makes us pertakers of them.
There are also among the Signs some herie, some earthly, some airie, some
watrie, and the elements rule in the heuens those sour triplicities,
distributing to them the beginning, the middle, the end of every Element: so
Aries has the beginning of fire, Leo the proceeding and increase, and
Sagittarius the end of fire: Taurus has the beginning of earth, Virgo the
proceeding, Capricornus the end: Gemini has the beginning of air, Libra the
proceeding, Aquarius the end. Cancer possesses the beginning of water,
Scorpio the middle, Pisces the end. Wherefore of the mixtions of these planets
and signs, together with the Elements, are wrought all bodies: and besides
spirits by this means are divided one from another, that some are called
fiery, some earthly, some airie, some watrie. Heerevpon those four rivers in
Hell, are said to be of diverse natures, so wit, Phlegethon fiery, Cocytus
ayrie, Styx watrye, Acheron earthly. And in the gospel we read of the fire of
hell, an everlasting fire (into the which the accursed shall be commanded to
go). And in the Revelation we read of the great poole of fire. And Isaias
speaks of the damned, Cap. 20.
The Lord shall strike them with corrupt air.

And in Job, They shall pass from ye waters of snow, to overmuch heat. And in
the same we read, of the dark earth, and covered with the dimnesse of death,
of the earth of misery and darkness. Therefore also these Elements are placed, in
the Angels and blessed intelligences, which are above, without the compass of
this world: for there is in them a stablenes of essence, and an earthly force,
whereby the seats of God are made strong: there is in them also gentleness
and pity, which is a watery virtue making clean. Heervpon the Psalmist speaks
of ye waters, where of heaven he says, Which rulest the waters that are above
him. There are also in them air, which is a subtle spirit: and love, which is
a bright fire. For this cause, the holy scripture calls them the wings of the
wind, and else where the Psalmist speaks of them thus, Which make thy
Angels spirits, and thy Ministers a burning fire. Of the orders of Angels
also, the Seraphin, the Virtues, and the Powers are fiery: ye Cherubin earthly:
the Thronenes and Archangels watery: the Dominationes and Principalities ayrie.
And concerning the very chief Patron, worker of al things, is it not read?
Let the earth be opened, and bud forth a Savior. Is it not said of the same?
The fountain of the water of life, cleansing and regenerating. Is not the same
the spirit breathing ye breath of life. And the same also as Moses and Paul
do testify, is a consuming fire. Wherefore no man can deny, that the elements
are found every where and in all things in their manner. First in these
inferior bodies, but dredgie and gross, in ye heavenly bodies pure and clean:
and in the super celestial bodies lively and blessed on every side. Wherefore
the elements in the chief Patron, are the Idee, or conceits of things to be
brought forth: in ye intelligenties, ye ^^osred powers: in the heavens, ye
virtues: in the bodies beneath, the groset forms.

Of the virtues of natural things, next of all depending of the Elements.
Chap. 9.
OF the virtues of natural things, some are Elementall, as to make warm, to
make cold, to make moist, to make dry: and are called the first operations or
qualities, and according unto Arle. For these qualities alone, do altogether
alter the substance, which none of the other qualities can do, but some are in
the things making, co^pounding such by the elements, even beyond the first
qualities, as are Maturatiue, digestive, resolutiue, mollificatiue, induratiue,
stiptike, abstersive, corasiue, caustic, apertiue, euaporatiue, comfortatiue,
mitigatiue, conglutinatiue, opilatiue, expulsive, retentiue, attractiue,
repercussiue, stupisactiue, elargetiue, lubrisicatiue, and many others: for the
elementall quality has much to do in mixture, which works not by it self:
and these operations Qualitates secondariae, because they follow nature and the
measure of the mixture of the first virtues, even as of them at large it is
handled, in the books of Physicians, as Maturation or ripening, which is the
working of natural heat. according to a certain measure in ye substance of
the matter. Induration or hardening is the working of coldness, likewise also,
Congellation, and so likewise also of the like. And these operations do sometime
work upon ye limited member, as provoking urine, or milk, or ye menstrual, and
are called the 3. qualities which solow ye fecond, as ye second do ye first.
Wherefore according to these first, second and third qualities many diseases
are cured and caused. Many things also are done by Art, which men do much
wonder at, as is ye fire, burning water, as in ye fire Ignis Grecus. Many
co^positions whereof Aristotle teaches in a treatise written heerof. In like
manner, there is also made a sire yt is quenched in oil, and is kindled with
cold water when it is sprinkled upon it, and fire which is kindled with rain or
wind, or with the sun: and there is a fire called Aqua ardens, which is very
well known, and wastes nothing but it self: and there are unquenchable fires,
and continual lamps, which cannot be quenched with wine, nor water, neither by
any means: which seems altogether incredible, if it had not ben for ye
famous lamp yt once gave light in the temple of Venus, wherein ye stone Bestus
did burn, Beston.
which being once kindeled, is never quenched. Contrariwise also is prepared
some thing apt to burn yt it may not be hurt by fire: and there are made
confections, with which the hands being anointed, we may carry iron red hot,
or put yt hand in molten metal, or to go into the fire without any harm,
and such like: and there is a kind of hemp or flare, The (...) fold for the
ha^^e of the Satlamander by the which many ^e deceived.
which Pliny calls Asbestu^, ye Greeks term it Asbeston, which is not
consumed with fire: whereof Anaxelaus says, that a tree yt is therewith
environed, is felled with deaf strokes, and that are not heard.

Of the hidden virtues of things.
Chap. 10.
THere are moreover other virtues in things, which belong not to any Element, as
to put away poison, to drive away carbuckles or botches, to draw iron, or some
such other thing: and this virtue is ye sequel of the kind or form of this
thing or yt thing. Wherefore also in a small quantity, it has no small effect
in working, which is not granted to ye elementall quality. For these virtues
because they depend much upon the form, therefore with a very small, matter,
they can do very much: but ye elemental virtue because it is material, does
desire much ^^ster to do much. And they are called hidden properties, Why
hidden properties are so termed
because their causes are hidden, so yt man's understanding is not able in any
wise to find the^ out. Wherefore ye Philosophers have attained to a very great
part of them by long experience, more than by ye search of reason. For as in
ye stomach yt meat is digested by heat which we know: so is it transformed by
a certain hidden virtue which we know not, not by heat truly, Meat being
sod, is the same, but not in the stomach.
for so in the chimney at the fire it should rather be transformed, than in the
stomach: so are there in things, qualities, overthrowing ye elements, as we
know, and are so created by Nature which we wonder at, and oftentimes are
amassed yt we know them not or seldom, or never see them, as it is read in Ovid
of the Phoenix, a bird alone, among all others renewing her self.

There is one bird that repaireth her self, and eft soones sows her self,
the Assyrians call her Phoenix, and in another place, the Egyptians meet
together at the wonder of so great a sight, and their rejoicing company
saluteth the rare bird.

In times past, one Matreas made the Greeks and the Romans greatly to wonder
at him: he said that he brought up a wild beast, yt which devoured himself:
wherefore also at this day, many do yet carefully search out, what yt wild
beast of Matreas may be. Who does wonder at fishes dug out of the earth, of
the which Aristotle, Theophrastus and Polibus the Historian, have written, and
that which Pausanias has written, of singing stones, are all works of hidden
virtues. So the bird called an Ostridge, does digest cold and hard iron to the
norishment of his body, whose stomach is said, not to be hurt with burning
iron. So that little fish called Echines, does so bridle the violence of the
winds, and tame the rage of the sea, that how cruel soever the storms are, be
there never so many sails full of wind, yet with his touching alone, he does
so calm and compel ye ships to stand, yt by no means they can move: so yt
Salama^der and the crickets live in the fire, and albeit they seem sometimes to
burn, yet are they not hurt. The like matter is said to be of a certain
Bitumen like to Pitch, wherewith the weapons of the Amazons are said to have
been smeared over, which is taken away neither with sword nor fire: wherewith
also, the gates of Caspia, made of brass, is fabulously reported, to have been
varnished over by Alexander Magnus. With the like Bitumen also, ye Ark of Noah,
is read to have been glued together, continuing yet from so many thousand
years upon the Mountains of Armenia. There are many other of these meruayles
scarcely credible, but yet are known true by experience. Such as antiquity
has left in writing of the Satyrs, which living creatures do consist of a
shape half like a man, and half like a beast, yet capable of speech and
reason, one of which, Saint Hierome reports did once speak to Saint Antony
the hermit, and did condemn in him ye error of the Gentiles, in worshipping
of living creatures, and did pray him, that he would pray to the common God for
him: and affirms, that one of them in times past, was brought openly alive to
be seen, and immediately was sent to the Emperor Constantine.

How hidden virtues are powered into the kinds of things from the Idee, or
conceits through the resons of the soul of the world, and beams of the
stars, and what things do most of all abound in this virtue.
Cap. 11.
THe Platonikes report, that all ye bodies below, are Ideadit or conceited by
the uppermost Idees or conceits: and they define an Idea to be one, simple,
pure, unchangeable, indivisible, incorporall, and everlasting form above
bodies, souls, and minds, and the same to be the nature of all Ideas. And
first they place the Idees, in ye very goodness it self, that is in God, by the
manner of the cause, to be differing only among themselves, by certain
relative reasons: least whatsoever is in the world, should be alone with out any
variety, and yet to agree among themselves in essence, that God may not be a
manifold substance. Secondly, they place them in the very intelligible part,
that is in the soul of the world, properly by forms, and moreover differing
one from another in perfect forms: so that all the Idee or conceits in God,
are one form, but in the soul of ye world many: they are placed in the minds
following or joined to the body, or severed from the body, severed now more and
more by a certain participation, and by degrees: they place in nature, as it
were certain seeds of forms below infused from the Idee. Finally, they place
them in the matter, as shadows. Besides this, there are so many seminall
reasons of things in the world, as there be Idees or conceits in the divine
mind, by the which reasons, it has builded it self in the heuens, beyond the
stars even shapes, and has imprinted properties in them all. Wherefore of
those stars, figures and properties, all the virtues and properties of kinds
below do depend, so that every kind, has a celestial figure agreeing unto
him: from whence also, proceeds unto him, a marvelous power in working,
which proper endowment, it receives from his Idea, by the seminall reasons of
ye soul of the world. For the Idea or conceits are not only the causes of
the being of any kind, but also are the causes of every virtue, that is in
such a kind. And this is the cause that many of the Philosophers say, that by
certain virtues, to wit, having a certain and a stable reason, not of
chance, or casual, but effectual, but mighty and not faylyng, working
nothing in vain, nothing without purpose, the virtues being in the nature of
things are moved, which virtues doubtless are the operations of the Idee,
which fall not, but be accident, to wit, through the impuritie and inequality
of the matter. For after this sort things even of one kind, are found more or
less mighty, according to the impurity or misorder of the matter. For all ye
influences of the heavens may be hindered by the vnabilytie of the matter.
Wherefore the Platonikes used to say in a Proverb, that the heavenly virtues
are infused, according to the merit of the matter: whereof also Virgil makes
mention when he sings.

Igneus est ollis vigor, and coelestis origo:
Seminibus quantum non noxia corpora tradunt.
Those seeds have so much fiery force and heavenly beginning, as the
unhurtful bodies do slacken: wherefore those things in the which the Idea of
ye matter is not dipped, that is, which receive greater similitude of severed
things, have more mighty virtues in operation, like to the operation of the
severed Idea or conceit. Wherefore the sight of heavenly things, is the cause
of all the noble virtue, that is in the kinds below.

How to get ones own Genius, and to seecke out his nature.
AS in heavenly things every country has a certain star and heavenly image,
Lib. 3. Cap. 21.
giving influence, to it more then other: so also in supercelestiall things, it
gets a certain intelligencie and understanding, ruling and desending it,
with infinite other ministering spirits or Demones of his order, which with a
common name, Beni Heloim Sabbath, that is, ye sons of the God of hoasts. For
this cause, as often as the most highest does determine of any war,
slaughter, desolation of any kingdom, and subduing of any people, in these
lowermost parts, then no otherwise, then these things should come to pass
upon the earth, there goes before a conflict of those spirits above, as it
is written in Esaias, Vicitabit unto in terra: of which conflict of spirits and
rulers we also read in Dan. 10. to wit, of the Prince of the Kingdom of the
Persians, of the Prince of the Greeks, of the Prince of the People of Israel,
and their conflict together, whereof also in times past Homer seems to have
written.

Tantus Coelesti rumor, precrebuit Aula,
Cum saeua alterni ruerunt, in praelia Diui.
Neptunum contra bellabat Phoebus Apollo.
Aduersus Martem certabat Pallas Athenae.
Iunoni obstiterat bello pharetrata Diana.
Latonam telis volucer Cyllenius vrget.
So great a rumor was in heavens court above,
When that the Gods together rusht, in cruel bloody war.
Then did the God Apollo sight, against God of the Sea.
Pallas also Athena hight, against Mars did contend.
Diana with her bow and shaftes, resisted Iunos force.
And Mercury did with his Darts, Latona sore assail.
Notwithstanding for so much as in every country there are all kinds of spirits
and Demones: yet those are there stronger then the rest, which are of the same
order with the ruler of that region. So in the region of the sun, the spirits
of the sun are of more force than the rest. In the region of the Moon, those
spirits of the Moon: and so of the residue. And heerof it arises and
follows, that when we change places and countries, diverse events of our
matters and affairs ofter themselves and follow, else where, here or there,
more fortunate: to wit, where the Demon or Genius shall have greater power: or
we shall get there a stronger Demon of the same order. So men borne under the
sun, if they go into a country or province, where the Sun rules, that is
under the sun, become there much more fortunate, because they shall have
there, their guides or Genij stronger, and more profitable: by whose excellent
rule in that place, all their matters oftentimes are brought to happy ends,
even contrary to opinion and the measure of their strength. Hereof it is, that
ye choice of ye place, country, and time, where a man does exercise himself,
according to the nature and extinct of his Genius, and also dwells and
haunteth, does very much avail to the happiness of his life. Moreover, the
changing of his name oftentimes does avail, for seeing that the properties of
names, are the declarer of things, as it were by a glass, declaring the
conditions of their forms. Thereof it comes to pass, that the names being
altered, it happens oftentimes, that the things are altered. Heerevpon the holy
Scripture not without cause, brings in God, when he went about to bless
Abram and Jacob, to change their names, to call the one Abraham and the other
Israel. And the wise men of ancient time do teach one to know the nature of
every man's Genius by the stars, and their influence, and by the aspectes of
the same, which are in every ones nativity: but with such diverse and contrary
doctrine among themselves, that it is very hard for a man, to be able to take
out of their hands these Sacraments of the Heavens. For Porphirus shows out
the Genius by the star being mysteries of the genitour.

But Maternus seeks them out, either thereby or by the Planets, which have
there many dignities, or either by him, whose house the Moon shall enter into,
after yt which she possesses when a man is borne. And the Chaldees searches
not out the Genius, but by ye sun, or by the Moon. But others, and many of the
Hebrews, think good to search him out of some quarter of the heuens, or of
them all. Other seek for the good Genius, from the 11. house, which therefore
they call Bonus Demon, and require the naughty Genius from the 6. house, which
they call Malus Demon. Wherefore seeing the search of these is very painful
and secret, we shall much more easily search out the nature of our Genius by
our selves, heedefullye working those things, which our mind does premit us,
from our first age diversely drawn with no co^tagions, or those things which
the mind being pourged from vain cares, and sinister affections, impediments
being laid aside: the mind also does prompt, the instinct of nature does
teach, and heaven incline. These without doubt are the persuasions of the
Genius, which is given every man from the beginning of his nativity, leading
us, and (persuading) us to that, whereunto his star does enclyne us.

The Star is but the instrument, the Planet is the same:
The signs also does represent, Iehouas mighty name.
In that all things created wear, each other to supply:
The strong, each feeble does vpreare, who can the same deny.
As God is soul to every man, and life to creatures all:
So rules he them that rules us, when stars by name he call.
Disdain not then the noble skill of Planets course and tide:
For they do rule thee by Gods will, yet God is still thy guide.
The gift of thine immortal state, is faith to God above:
Which teaches thee by reason here, how God imparts his love.
Glis. in lib. any. That every man has 3. keepers, and from whence each of
them proceeds.
Every man has a three-folde good Demon for his keeper, Chap. 22
the one holy, the other of his begetting, the third of his profession. The
holy Demon according to ye learning of the Egyptians, is assigned to yt
reasonable soul, desce^ding not from the stars nor planets, but from the
supernall cause (even from God, the very ruler of ye Demones or Angels, and is
universal above nature. This Demon directs ye life of ye soul, and does
always minister good thoughts to ye mind, continually working in us by
illumining, although we do not always mark him, but when we are purged, and
live quietly, then we perceive him, then he does as it were speak with us,
and does make us pertakers of his voice, being present before, in silence, and
does always study to bring us unto a holy perfection. By the help of this
Demon also, men may avoid ye malice of desteny, which if he be religiously
worshipped of us, in honesty and holiness, which we knew Socrates did. And ye
Platonikes think, he does wonderfully help us, by dremes, tokens, and signs,
and putting away evil things, and carefully procuring us good things: wherefore
ye Pithagorians were wont to pray to Jupiter, yt he would deliver them from
evil, or would show the^ from what Demon might be performed. The Demon of
begetting, which also is called Genius, does descend from ye disposition of the
world, and from the starcy circuits, which are occupied in generation. There be
some which thinks, yt the soul being now about to descend into ye body,
does naturallye choose unto himself, a keeper out of the company of yt
Demones, and not so much to choose unto him this guide, as again also, to be
wished by him to defend him. This Demon being ye executor and keeper of life,
does win life unto ye body, and when it is in ye body, has a care of it, and
helps man for the very same office, to yt which, ye heavenly bodies have
appointed him in his birth. Whosoever then have received a fortunate Genius,
are made in their works virtuous, mighty, and prosperous, wherefore of the
Philosophers, they are said, to be Been fortunati, or Been nati. The Demon of
profession is given by the stars to whom such a profession or sent, is
subject, which any man shall profess, that the soul sometimes, does priuelye
wish, when now in this body, he has begun to use choice, and has put on
manners. This Demon is changed when the profession is changed, and according
to the worthiness of the profession, they are present with us, more worthy, and
also more higher Demones of profession^, which successively have a care of yt
man, which daily gets this and that Demon of profession, as he does climb
up from virtue to virtue. Wherefore when profession does agree with our nature,
there is present with us, the like Demon of profession, and agreeable with our
Genius, and the life is made more quiet, happy and prosperous. But when we take
upon us a profession unlike or contrary to the Genius, our life is made
laborious, and troubled with iarring aiders, so comes it to pass, that some
man may profit in some Science, or Art, or ministry, in short space and labor,
which in other things he labors in vain, with much ^ weal and study, and
although no Science, no Art, no virtue, be to be despised, yet to the end thou
may, live prosperously, and deal luckely, chiefly know thy good Genius, and
thy good nature, and what good the disposition of ye heavens, and God the
distributer of all these, does promise these, which distributeth to every one
as him lists: follow the beginning of these, profess all these things, be
occupied in that virtue, to the which the almighty distributer aduanceth thee
and guydeth thee, who made Abraham excel in righteousness and gentleness, Isaac
in fear, Jacob in strength, Moses in meekness and miracles, Joshua in war,
Phine^s in zeal, David in religion and victory, Solomon in knowledge and
praise, Peter in faith, John in charity, James in devotion, Thomas in wisdom,
Magdalen in contemplation, and Martha in service. Wherefore have a care to
climb unto the top of that virtue, wherein thou shall feel thy self to
profit easily, that thou may persevere in one, that art not able to persevere
in all: yet despise not as much as thou can, to profit in ye rest, and if
thou shall have agreeable keepers of nature and profession, thou shall feel
and double profit and increase of nature and profession. But if they be unlike,
follow the better, for sometime thou shall perteine more good to grow unto
thee by a worthy profession, then by thy birth or nativity.

How diverse virtues are infused into diverse indiuidualls, even of one self
kind.
THere are also singular and wonderful endowments as well in many of
indiuidualls, Chap. 13.
as in the specialls, even from the figure of heavenly things and seituation of
the stars: for every indiuidual, when he begins to be under a determinate
Horoscope and heavenly constellation, draws therwithall with his being, a
certain wonderful virtue of working, and suffering a wonderful thing, even
besides that whith it has from his special, as well by ye influence of
heavenly things, as by the obedience of ye matter, of things generable to the
soul of the world, which doubtless is such, as the obedience to our bodies,
is our souls: for we feel yt in our selves, which we conceive to every
form, cur body is mouch pleasantly, or fearfully, or by flieng away: so
oftentimes ye soul celestial, when they conceive diverse things, then ye
matter is moved thereunto thorough obedience. So in Nature, many things
appear monsters, by ye imaginations of ye uppermost mouings: so also, not only
things natural, but sometimes also things artificial, conceive diverse virtues,
and this happens most of al, if the soul of ye worker bend it self thereto.
Wherefore Auicenna says, what things soever are done here, they must needs us
before in ye mouings and conceptions of the stars and Orbs: so are there in
things, diverse effects, inclinations and manners, not only framed by the
variety of the matter, but of the variety of the influence, and of the
diversity of the form: and this same not through ye specifical, but through
ye particular and proper diversity. And the degrees of those are diversely
distributed by God, ye very first cause of al, (who continuing one self same,
distributeth to every one as him lists) with whom notwithstanding the second
causes, and the Angelical and the heavenly causes do work, setting in order
the bodily matter, and other things committed to them charge, wherefore God
infuseth all virtues, through the soul of the world, yet by a peculiar
virtue, of Images and ruling intelligencies, and by a concourse and a certain
peculiar and harmonicall consent of the beams and aspects of the stars.

Stones. From whence the hidden virtues do proceede^
ALL men know that the Loadstone has a certain virtue, Chap. 13.
wherewith he draws iron, and that the Diamond with his presence takes away
the virtue of ye Loadstone: so Amber and Geat, being rubbed and warmed, draws
chafe or straw: The stone Abeston being kindled, is never or scarcely
quenched: The Carbuncle gives light in darkness: Aetites, or the Eagles stone
being laid upon, both strengthen the offspring of women and plants, and laid
underneath draws them. The Jasper stone stancheth blood: ye little fish Eckines
staieth a ship: Rubarb expels choler: The liver of the Camelion burned upon
ye tiles of an house, rayseth rain and thunder. The stone Helitropius does
dazzle the ^ies and makes him yt carries it invisible. The stone Lincurius
takes away illusions from the eyes. The fumigation of Lipparis, makes al
beasts to come abroad synochitides brigeth out the Ghosts below. Anachitides
does make the Images of heavenly bodies to appear. Ennectis laid under the^
which are a sleep, makes them to have Oracles. There is an herb in
Aethiopia, wherewith they report that standing pooles are dried, and all things
shut are opened. And we read that the kings of the Persians gave Ambassadors
the herb Latax, that wheresoever they came, they should have store of all
things. There is an herb called Spartanica, or Herba Scytica, which being
tasted or help in the mouth, they report, that the Scythians do endure hunger
and thirst.12. days together, and Apuleius says, That he was taught by a
divine power, that there were many kind of herbs and stones, by the which men
might get them an everlasting life, but that it was not lawful that men should
have the knowledge of them, who living, but a small time, did greedly seecke to
do mischief, and dare to attempt any wicked act, that if they should have
any longer time, they would not spare God himself: but from whence these
virtues are, none of them have left in writing, that have set forth great
volumes of the propertyes of things, not Hermes, not Pochas, not Aaron, not
Orpheus, not Theophrastus, not Thebyth, not Zenothenus, not Zoroafter, not
Enax, not Dioscorides, not Isaac the Jew, not Zacharias of Babylon, not
Albert, not Arnold, and yet all these have confessed, as Zacharias writes to
Mitridates, that their great force, and men's destinies, are in the virtues of
herbs and stones, wherefore a higher speculation is required, to know from
whence these things do come: Alexander the Peripaletike, not leaving his
senses and qualyties, thinks that these things proceeds of the Elements and
their qualities, which perchance might be thought true, unless these
qualityes be of one self kind, and the operations of stones many, agreeing
neither in the kind, nor in the kindred. Therefore the Accademikes with their
Plato, Generals. Specialls.
attribute these virtues to the Idee or causeites, the shapers or former of
things. But Auicenna does refer these operations to the intelligences,
Hermes to the starrrs, Albert to the special forms of things: And albeit
these Authoures seem to be against one another, yet none of them if he be
well understood, do swerve from the truth, forasmuch as all their saiengs in
many things do agree to one effect: For God the beginning, the end, and
original of all virtues, does first of all, give the seal of Ideas or
conceits, to the intelligences of his ministers, which as faithful executors
do seal with an Ideall virtue all things committed unto them in the heavens
and stars, as it were instruments, which heavens and stars in the mean
season do dispose the matter, to receive those forines which do rest in the
divine Majesty: As Plato says in T^nee, to be divided by the Stars, and the
giver of forms has distributed them, by the ministrye of the intelligencies,
which he has appointed rulers and keepers over his works, to whom that
faculty is committed, in things committed unto them, yt all the virtue of
stones, herbs, mettalls, and of all things else, should be from the very
intelligences bering rule. Wherefore form and virtue, does first proceed from
ye Idee or conceits, next from the intelligences ruling and governing,
afterward from the aspects of ye heuens ordering, lastly from the ordered
complections of the Elements, correspondent to the influences of the heavens,
by whom the Elements be ordered: Wherefore such operations are had in those
inferior things, by express forms, but in ye heavens by ordering virtues, in
the intellygences, by means coming between, in the chief Patron by the
examplar Ideas, consents or forms, all which must needs agree, in the
execution of the effect and virtue of every thing, wherefore there is a
wonderful virtue and operation in every herb and stone, but greater in a
star, more then also every thing gets himself many things from the ruling
intelligences, but chiefly from the uppermost cause, whereunto all things, as
depending one of another, and made perfect, are corespondent, sounding in our
melodious consent, always praising together ye almighty work, with certain
himnes, ever as they are willed by those holy youths singing in the Chaldes
fornasse, bless the Lord all things yt spring upon the earth, and all things
that move in the waters, all birds of the air, sheep, and cattle together
with the children of men: wherefore there is no other cause of the necessity
of effects, but a conection of al things, with the first cause and
corespondents to these divine patterns and everlasting Ideas or conceits, from
whence every thing in the chief pattern has his determinate peculiar place,
from whence he leueth and takes his beginning. And wherein all the virtue of
herbs, stones, mettalics, living creatures, words and prayers, and of all
things which are from God is ingrassed, which although it works by the
intelligences and heavens on those bodies below, yet oftentimes omitting those
means, or suspending their ministrye, God immediatlye does those things of
himself, which then are called wonderful works, for with the rule and order
of the first cause, the second causes which Plato, and others call ministers,
do of necessity work, and of necessitye bring forth their effects, yet
oftentimes God does so end or suspend them for his pleasure, that they quite
leave of from the necessity of his rule and order. And these are the exceeding
great wonders of God. So the fire in the fire of the Chaldes burned not the
youths. So the Sun at the commandment of Joshua, went back from his course
for the space of one day. So at the prayer of Ezechia: the Sun went back.10.
lines or hours. So at Christ's passion in the full of the Moon, the Sun was
eclipsed. And the resons of these operations cannot be found out or atteined
unto by no discourse of reason, by no Magike, by no knowledge be it never so
hid or profound, but are to be learned and searched out by Gods Oracles alone.

Of the Spirit of the world, what he is, and that he is the bond of hidden
virtues.
DEmocritus and Orpheus, Chap. 14.
a man of ye Pithagorians, most careful seeking out the force of heavenly
things, and the natures of things below, said that all things were full of
the Gods: and not without a cause, for there is nothing of such excellent
force, which being void of Gods help is content with his own nature. And
they called the divine virtues spread abroad in things: Gods; which Zoroaster
named Divine alurars, Scynecius, simbolicall inticementes, others lives, others
also souls, and said that the virtues of things did depend of them: because
it concerns the soul alone from one matter to be extended to other things,
about the which she works, as a man which extends his understanding to
things intelligible, and his imagination to things imaginable, and this is that
which they understood, saying. To wit, the soul of one sense or being, goes
out, and enters into another thing, bewitcheth it, and lets his
operations, even as the Diamonde lets the Loadstone to draw iron: but
forasmuch as the soul is primum mobile, and as they say, Sponte et per se
mobile, and the body or matter of it self not able to move, and swaruing far
from the soul. Therefore they say that a more excellent means is required, to
wit, that it is as it were not a body, but as it were now a soul, or as it
were not a soul, as it were now a body, whereby to wit, the soul is knit to
the body: and they feine that the spirit of the world is such a mean, to
wit, whom we term the quinticense, because he does not consist of the four
Elements, but is a certain fifth, a thing above them or beside them:
Wherefore such a spirit is necessarilye required, as a mean by the which the
heavenly souls are in the gross body, and bestow wonderful endowments.

This spirit doubtless is in a manner such in the body of the world, as ours
is in man's body: For as the power of our soul, are through the spirit given to
the members: so the virtue of the soul of ye world is by the quintecense
spread over all, for nothing is found in all the world which wants the spark
of his virtue: yet more and most of all, it is powered into those which have
drawn in very much of such a spirit, and it is drawn in by the rays of the
stars, as far forth as the things make themselves confirmable unto them:
By this spirit then, all hidden propertye is spread abroad, upon herbs,
stones, and mettalls, and upon living creatures: by the Sun, by the Moon,
by the Planets, and by the Stars, higher then the Planets: And this spirit
may the more profit us, if a man know how to sever him most of all from
other Elements, or at least very much to use those things which most of all
abound of this spirit: for those things in the which that spirit is less
plunged in the body, and matter is less ministered, do work more mightly and
perfectly, and also do sooner engender and beget a thing like unto them. For
all virtue generatiue and of seed is in it, wherefore the Alcumisla endeavor
to separate that spirit from gold and silver, which being well severed and
drawn out, if afterward they apply him to any matter of the same kind, that
is, to any of the mettalls, they shall immediately make gold or silver: And I
my self know how to do it, and once saw it: but I could make no more gold,
then the wright of that gold was, out of the which I drew the spirit, for
seeing that spirit, is form Extensa, Stretched out and bent in.
and not Intensa, he cannot alter an imperfect body into a perfect, beyond his
measure: which notwithstanding I deny not, but that it may be brought to pass
by some other skill.

How we ought to seek out and make trial of the virtues of things, by a way
taken of a similitude.
IT appears then that the hidden properties are not ingraffed in things by
the Elementall nature, Cap. 15.
but from above, are hidden to our senses: and finallye uneath known to
reason, which doubtless proceed from the life and spirit of the world,
through those beams of the Stars, which can be sought out by us none
otherwise, then by experience and conjectures, wherefore thou greedye man which
desire to travail in this study, ought to consider that every thing
moves and tourneth to his like, and inclines to himself according to al his
might, as well in property, to wit, in hidden virtue, as in quality, to wit,
in virtue elementall: Propertye consists ^^ hidden virtue, but quality in
virtue elementall.
sometimes also in very substance, as we see in Salt, for whatsoever stands
long with salt, does become salt, for every agent when he shall begin to do,
does not move to a thing lower then himself: but after a sort, as much as may
be, moves to his like, and match: which also manifestlye we see, in sensible
living creatures, in whom the virtue nutritive does change meat, not into
herbs or plant, but does turn it into sensible flesh, wherefore those things
in the which there is the excess of any quality or property, as heat, cold,
votonesse, fear, sorrow, anger, love, hatred, or any other passion, or virtue,
whether it be in them by nature, or sometimes also by act or chance, as
boldness in a harlot, do most of all move and provoke to such a quality,
passion, and virtue. So fire moves to fire, and water moves to water, and
bold person moves to boldness. And it is known among the Physicians yt the
brain helps the brain, and the lungs, the lungs. So they say, that the
right eye of a Frogge, helps the right eye, the left eye the left. Being
hung about the neck in a cloth of a natural color, helps blearednesse.
Whether a Torteise or a Hedghog
The like also they report of the eyes of a Crab. So the feet of an Hedghogge
are good for the gout, so bound, that foot may be hung to foot, hand to hand,
the right to the right, the left to the left. After this sort they say, that
every barren living creature, provoke to barrennes. and of him most of all
the stones, and the matrite or the urine. So they say that a woman conceiueth
not, that takes monthly of the urine of an Elum, or any thing stiped therein.
If the^ we will work for any property of virtue, let us seek for living
creatures or other things, in yt which such a property is more excellently, and
of them let us take the part, in yt which such property or virtue has most
force. As if at any time we will provoke love, let us seek for some living
creature, which most of al loves, as are ye Dove, the Turtle, the Swallow, and
the Wagtaile, and of them let us take the members of the parts, in the which
the venerial appetite have the most force, which are the heart, the stones, the
matrixe, the member, the sperms, and the Menserum: and let that be done at such
time, as these living creatures are most of all delighted with such affection
or desire, and bend themselves to the same, for then they greatly provoke and
cause love. In like manner to increase boldness, let us seek for a Lion or a
Cock, and of them let us take the heart, the eyes, or the forehead, and so
must we understand that which Psellus the Platonike says, that Dogs, Crows
and Cocks, tend to watching: so do also the Nightingale, ye Bat, and the night
Raven, and of those chiefly the head, the heart, and the eyes. Wherefore they
say, if a man carry about him the heart of a Crow, or a Bat, he shall not
sleep until he put him away: The same does the head of a Batte bound dry to
the right arm of him that is awake: for if he be put upon one sleeping, it
is said he will not awake until the same be taken away. In the same manner a
Frog and an Owl do make one to speak, and of them chiefly the tongue and the
heart. So the tongue of the water Frog laid under the head, makes a man
speak in his sleep, and the heart of an Owl laid upon ye left breast of a
woman sleeping, is said to make her utter all her secrets: the heart of a night
Crow, and the fat of a Hare laid upon the breast of one sleeping, is reported
to do the like. In the same sort all living creatures of long life, are good
for long life, and which to ever of them have in them a renewing virtue, are
good for the renwing of our bodies, and restoring of youth, which the
Physicians often times have showed themselves to know, as it is manifest of
the Uiper and the Serpent: and it is known that the Hearts renew their old
age up eating of Serpents. In the same manner the Phoenix is renwed by the fire
which be builds for himself. And the like virtue is in the Pelican, whose
right foot if he put under hot doung three months after, a Pelican is
thereof ingendered a new. Wherefore some Physicians by certain confections of
the Uiper and Heleborus, and by the confected flesh of some such living
creatures, do promise to restore youth, and otherwise restore if, some
oftentimes also they profer such youth as Medea promised and restored to old
Pelias her father. It is also believed that the blood of a Bear drawn out of
a fresh wou^d, by layeng thy mouth thereto, does by this kind of drink
increase the strength of the body, because that living creature is very strong.

How the operations of diverse virtues are powered out from one thing to
another, and do communicate the one with another.
Chap. 16
THou ought to know that the power of natural things is so great, that
not only they move all things that are near them by their virtues, but also
besides this, they power into them the like power, by the which through the
self same virtue, they also move other things, even as we see in the
Loadstone: which stone doubtless does not only draw iron rings, but also
gives them a force by the which they may do the like: whereof Augustine and
Albert do write yt they saw. In ye same sort it is said, that a common
strumpet in whom there is boldness (and bashfulnesse,) is banished through
the self same property, does move al things near unto her, which afterward
yield the same to others. Therefore they say, that if one put on the smock of
a whore, or carrye with him a looking glass, wherein she daily saw her
self, he shall become bold, unfearful, shameless, and lecherous. In like
sort they say that the cloth that has been at a burial, does gather thereby a
certain saturnall property of sadness: and that the rope wherein one was
hanged has certain marualous properties. Like to this is that which Plynie
reports, if one cast earth under a green Lizaard that has his own put
out, and to gather in a glassy vossel shut close, up rings of Massy iron or
gold, when it shall appear, that the Lizarde has received his light through
ye glass, the rings are good against bleared eyes: The same also is of force
in a Wesell, whose eyes being put out by pricking, it is evident also that
they have seen again. Likewise also rings are put for a certain time in a
Sparrowes or Swallows neast, which afterward is used for love or good will.

How by strife and friendship, the virtues of things are to be found out and
experienced.
IT now rests to see that all things have between them love and discord,
Chap. 17.
and every thing has some thing to be feared, and horrible, discording and
tending to destruction. Contrariwise some thing rejoicing, cherishing, and
comforting: So in Elements, fire is contrary to the water, and the air to the
earth, but yet they all agree together again in heavenly bodies, Mercury,
Jupiter, Sol, and Luna, are friends to Saturn: Mars, and Venus are his
enemies: all the planets saving Mars, are Jupiters friends: so also all hate
Mars saving Venus, Jupiter and Venus loves sol: Mars, Mercury, and Luna are his
enemies, all love Venus, saving Saturn. Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, are
friends to Mercury: Sol, Luna, and Mars are his enemies, Friends to Luna, are
Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn Mars, and Mercury, are his enemies. There is
another enmity of the stars, to wit, when they have opposite houses, as Saturn
to ye lyghts, Jupiter to Mercury, Mars to Venus: and the stronger enimitie of
them is, whose exalations are opposite, as of Saturn and the Sun, of Jupiter
and Mars. but the strongest friendship is of them which agree in nature,
quality, substance, and power, as Mars with Sol, and Venus with Luna, likewise
Jupiter with Venus. And there is a friendship of them, whole exaltation is in the
house of another, as of Saturn with Venus, One against another.
of Jupiter with Luna, of Mars with Saturn, of sol with Mars, of Venus with
Jupiter, of the Moon with Venus. And such as are the friendships and enmities
of the bodies above: such are ye inclinations of things under them in those
inferior bodies. Wherefore these friendshippes and enmities are nothing else
but certain inclinations of things among themselves, in desiring such a thing
or such a thing, if it be away, and to be moved unto it, unless it be
let, or to repose it self in that it has gotten, in shunning the
contrary, and fearing to come near it, and not to rest content therewith.
Wherefore Heraclitus being lead with this opinion, did confess that all things
were made by strife and friendship. There are also inclinations of friendships
in Uigetables and mineralls, as the Loadstone has to iron, the Emeralde to
riches and favor. The stone Iaspis to childbirth. The stone Achatis to
eloquence, A(...)
Naptha, draws fire unto it, and fire leapeth into it wheresoever it be
seen. Likewise the root of ye herb Aproxis draws fire unto it from a far
off, as Naptha does: and ye like inclination is between the male and female
date tree, of who^ when a bough of ye one shall tuch a bough of ye other, they
fold themselves into a natural embracing, neither does ye female bring forth
fruit without the male: And the Almond tree growing alone is unfruitful: Uines
love the Elm tree, and the Olive tree, and the Myrtle love one the other:
likewise the Olive tree, and the Fig tree. But among the living creatures,
there is friendship between the black bird and the Thrush, between the Choffe
and the Hearon, between, the Pecockes and the Doves.

FINIS LIBRI VNDECIMI.
INCIPIT LIBER DVODECIMVS. DE AVIBVS IN GENERALI.
FOrasmuch as the treatise is ended of the properties of the air, and of
things that be gendered therein: it is couenable to this present volume to
treat of some things, which belong to ye worship and adorning thereof, that in
those as in other creatures, the mighty magnifice^ce of God may be praised.

To the ornament of the air belongs birds and fowls, as Beda says: and
therefore by the help and goodness of Jesus Christ, somewhat of them shall be
treated consequently in this Book. Not of all, but only of such birds and
fowls, which be specially spoken off in the text of the Bible, or in the
Gloss. And first we shall speak in general, and then in special, and that by
the order of A.B.C.

Birds be called Aues, as it were Deuie, as it were without way, as Isidore
says. For their ways in the air, be not distingued in certain. And birds
with moving of wings, Limited or divided.
divide and depart the air, but anon after the flight, the air closes it
self, and leans no sign nor token of their passage and flight. And fowls
be called Volucres, and have that name of Volare, to fly, for birds fly
with wings, as Isidore says, and therefore they be called Alites, as it were
Alates, that is moving and rearing up themselves with wings. For they fly not
without wings, Lift up of mount a loft.
nor areare themselves from the earth up into the air without ye benefit of
wings: or else a bird is called Ales, and has that name of Alendo, feeding.
For he is fed of him that feeds birds and fowls of heaven, and gives
meat to all flesh, as Isidore says. The conditions and properties of birds
and fowls, be known by many things: by their substance and complexion. For
the substance of birds and fowls is made of two middle elements, that be
between the two Elements that be most heavy, and most light. For in their
composition and making, air and water has most mastrye: and therefore they
have less of earthly heaviness, and more of lightness of the air, then
beasts that go on land, and swim on water: By lightness of their substance
they be born up into the air, as Isidore says. And the air that is closed in
the hollownesse of pens and feathers, makes a Bird light, and disposes and
makes him able, and helps him to move upward. Therefore the more birds
have of hollownesse of pens and multitude of feathers, and the less flesh, the
more easily they rear themselves and fly upward: As it fares in Fowls of
pray, that be discharged of weight and flesh, and fly most high, and be
wonderful sharp of sight, and full bold and hardy, as Aristotle says li.
12. Also the condition of Birds is known by generation, for they have a
seminall virtue of kind pight in them: And by virtue thereof they be kindlye
moved to increase their kind by deed of generation, and to keep their kind
in order, as it is said of Aristotle. li. 6.

All birds (he says) and fowls, when they bring forth birds, lay eggs,
though it cannot be seen in all for scarcitye. And the beginning of
generation of a Bird, (as it is said there) comes of the white, and his
meat is the yolke. And after ten days of the generation, a bird is full
shapen in all parts, and the parts be openly distinguished and known. But then
his head is greater then all the body. And if the egg shell were then broken,
the head should be found bowed upon the right thigh, and his wings spread
upon the head. When the generation of all the members is perfectlye made, and
liniation and shape of the members, the shell breaks, sometime the eighteenth
day, or the twentye day, as it fares in hens. And then the chickens come
out of the shell alive being full shape, and sometime twain out of one shell.
But among such twins that come out of one shell, the one is more, and that
other less, and more wonderfullye shapen, as he says there, liber. 6. Among
all beasts that be in order of generation, birds and fowls be most honest
of kind. For by order of kind males seek females with business, and love
them when they be found, and fight and put them in peril for them, and be
joined to them only as it were by covenant, and wedding love. And nourish and
feed only the Birds that they get. And so kindlye they deem and know
between sex and sex, male and female, except few, whom kind goes out of
kind, as Aristotle shows an ensample of the Partridge, that forgets his
sex, that is to understand, distinction of male and female: and so be says,
that the male leapeth upon the male, and the female upon the female. But of
the eggs that come of such treading come no birds, but they be as wind
Eggs, and take an evil savor of such treading, and an evil stench.

Also it is said of the Culuour cock, that when he is old and may not tread,
but only bill, he leapeth upon another Culuour cock. And birds and fowls
gendering keep couenable time: for in springing time, when the generation
comes in, birds cry and sing, males draw to company of females, and
desire each other of love, and woo with beckes and voice, and build neasts,
and lay eggs, and bring forth birds: and when the Birds be gendered, they
feed and nourishe them, and bring them up: But when the office of generation
is full ended, then they cease off song, and depart from each other, and come
not together till the time of generation comes again.

Also Birds and fowls be known by the places that they dwell in. For some
birds and fowls (as it seems) love company, and dwelling nigh men, as
hens, Geese, Sparrows, and Storkes, and swalowes: And some dread and fly,
and be afearde of conversation of men, as fowls of woods, of mountains, of
rivers, and of marreyes. For by their diverse complections, they seek and
challenge diverse manner of places to inhabitie in. For those that be cold and
moist of kind use marries and rivers for gathering of meat, and for making of
neasts, for sitting on brood, and for to bring up and nourish up their Birds,
as Cootes and wild Mallards, and Swannes: In whom (as Aristotle says) kind
ordeineth wisely: For they have broad closed and hollow feet for needful
swimming, that they may by the breadth of their foo^e the better put and
shooue the water backwarde. And so when water is shooued backwarde, they
stretch themselves forward, as it were rowing. Also they have broad bills for
to gather grass and roots, cut them and bite the more couenable. And long
necks to take up their meat the more calilier out of the deep waters, and
also to seek meat in deepnesse. And birds and fowls that be of more hot and
dry kind, dwell in mountains, and on high rocks and stones, as Birds and
fowls that live by pray, as Eagles and Fawlcons, and other such, to the which
(as Arist. says) kind gives crooked claws and strong feet and sinewy, and
crooked bills and sharp, to hold strongly their pray, and to draw and
^eare flesh the more easily: and such birds and Fowls have little flesh and
many feathers, and be full bold and hardy, that they may be ye more swifter of
moving, and the stronger of flight, as Aristotle says.

Also they have long tails, subtle, and thin, by the which they rule
themselves in flight, as the helm rules and stirs the Ship. And as
Aristotle says libro penno. All such fowls love desert places and
wildernesses, and may not dwell with any of their fellows, but put from them
their own Birds. And anon when they may fly, they beat them with their
bills, and drive them out of their neast, and suffer them not to live in their
company, as Aristotle says. These and other Fowls of pray, have diverse
manner of doing in taking of pray. For some take their pray slyeng in the
air, and reeseth never on pray upon the ground. And some contrary wise take
their pray on the ground, and they never grieve their pray in the air. And
certain wild Fowls as Culuours know well the diverse doing of such Fowls in
taking of pray. And therefore when they see the pray takers of the air, they
fly to the ground: And when they see the pray takers of the ground, they fly
sodeinly up into the air. And they that were in peril on the ground, are sure
and safe in the air, as he says.

Also some wood fowls use and dwell in woods, and in thick tops of trees.
And some of these be more mild then other: as Birds that sing in Summer time
with sweet notes in woods and trees, as Thirstils and Nightingales, and other
such that sing most specially in time of love: And they make their neastes in
shrubbes and in bushes, and sit busilye abroode upon their eggs, and love
their birds, and bring them up. And other birds there be, that love namely
fields, and use to be therein and get them meat, and eat continually of
the fruit of the earth: as Cranes and Geese, both wild and tame. And such
fowls love to dwell togethers, both on the ground and in the air, and go and
fly in heardes, and love their own kind, and make a king among them, and be
obedient to him, and fly in order and in araie, and fight sometime full
strongly among themselves, and rent and wound and pull often each other with
their bills: But after that fighting, as they were reconciled, they fly
togethers, and leave not therefore company: And they have foreknowledge of
tempest of weather, and when they see that it comes, they gather and cry:
And they ordeine watches, and in waking change plates. All this is contained
in Ex^meron of Basile, and of Ambrose also. And likewise it is read in
Aristotle. Also Aristotle puts more heereto, and says, that the Crane that
walks for the watch by night, holds a little stone in his foot, that if
he hap to fall a sleep, he may be waked by falling of the stone. And also if
a Crane loose his fellowshippe, he flies up high, and calls and cries and
seeks his fellows, and till he finds them, uneath he comes down to have
meat: also he says, that the king of those Birds always lights down first,
and arises first from the earth, and takes first his flight. Also he
arreareth up his head and looks about after then other, and if he see one
coming, he cries and waketh all his fellows, and warns them of perils.

Also the propertyes of some Fowls be known by diuersitye of eating. For
some eat nothing but flesh or, blood, as all the birds and fowls of pray
with crooked beakes and sharp claws, that eat all beasts that they may hunt:
But they hunt not nor eat no foul of their own kind, as fish eat fish of
their own kind, as Aristotle says li. 7. And such birds and fowls drink
never water, as he says there.

And there be other birds that eat only seeds and fruit, and herbs that
grow on the ground, as Doves and Turtures and Geese both wild and tame. And
other fowls there be, that only eat now flesh, and now fruit
indifferentlye, as gladly that one as that other: as fowls of raven kind, as
Choughes, Crows, Rookes, Ravens, and Pies, of the which Aristotle says and
Basilius also, That fowls of Ravens kind feed their birds in youth, and the
young feed the old in their age. Also when the old wax feeble, the young
help them, and bear them on their shoulders, as he says.

And in all such Fowls kind mildness is praised, that men may be ashamed to
withdraw or to deny to serve Father and mother, insomuch he knows that
Birds serve and help each other, as Ambrose says. Also the propertyes of
birds and Fowls be known by disposition of members. For as Aristotle says,
I^^decimo tercio. In this all fowls accord, that all Fowls have bills, that
are not found in other beasts. But they be diverse in disposition: For some
have short bills and broad, and their life is quite and mild, for such a
bill is able to take meat that is nigh. And some have long bills and sharp,
for they take their meat out of deep places. And some have sharp bills and
crooked, for such a shape it needful to eat, to hale and to draw, and to
rent raw flesh. And all Fowls have these properties, that every foul has
two feet as a man. But in disposition of feet and of legs is most
diuersitye found. For the feet of clouefooted fowls be strong and sharp,
for they be able and according to pray and to hunting: And the feet of water
fowls be close, hollow, and broad: for they be able to swim. And all fowls
with long feet, have long necks, and fly stretching out their necks. And if
the neck be small and feeble, he bears it down in flyeng. And it is
general, that every foul that has a short ^eecke, has short thighs, and
againeward. And every foul has a nauil when he is bread. But when the foul
wareth, the nauill is hid and not seen. For it is continued with a gut by a
vain that is within.

Also properties of fowls may be known by swift or slow breeding of birds, as
a Culuour that breeds ten times in one year, and some lay many eggs as
an hen: and some lay often as hens and Couluoures, and hens that lay many
eggs, die soon, as Aristotle says. lib. 5. And fowls with crooked claws
that eat flesh, lay seldom eggs, for they lay but once a year, except the
Swallows, that only among fowls that eat flesh, lay eggs twice a year.

And fowls wax sick when they sit abroode upon their eggs, as it fares in
the hen, and in the Eagle, of the which it is said. li. 6. For then the Eagle
is sore grieved, and her wings wax white, and her claws goule and feeble.
Many other properties be of fowls, the which were too long to reckon all a
row. Here it needs only to know that among other kind of beasts,
generally Fowls are most pure and light, and noble of substance, and swift of
moving, and sharp of light, of flesh of good digestion, and good savor, and
turning into feeding and wholesome. Also fowls be full busy in making neasts,
and breeding and feeding of their birds. This that is said in general shall
suffice at this time.

Of the Eagle. chap. 1.
NOw it pertains to speak of birds, and fowls in particular, and first of
the Eagle, which has principalitye among fowls. Among all manner kinds of
diverse fowls, the Eagle is the more liberal and free of heart, as Plinius
says. For the pray that she takes, except it be for great hunger, she eats
not alone, but puts it forth in common to fowls that follow her: But first
she takes her own portion and part. And therefore often other fowls follow the
Eagles, for hope and trust to have some part of her pray. But when the pray
that is taken is not sufficient to her self, then as a king that takes heed of
a Comint, he takes the bird that is next to him, and gives it among the
other, and serves them therewith. And she sets in her neast two precious
stones, which he called Achates. The one of them is male, and that other
female. And it is said, that they may not bring forth their birds without
those stones.

And she lays in her neast that precious stone that is called Achates, to
keep her birds from the venomous biting of creeping worms, as Plinius says.
And ye Eagle is called Aquila, and has that name of sharpness of eien, as
Isidor. says. For she has so strong, and so sharp, and clear sight, (as it
is said) that when she is borne and flies up into the air, and houeth above
the Sea so high, that uneath she is seen with man's sight. And out and from so
great highness, she sees a small fish swim in the Sea, and falls down
anon, as it were a stone, and takes sodeinely the fish, and draws the prays
that is so taken sodeinelye to the cliffe. And is a Bird hot and dry of
kind, and desires prays, and is right strong, bold, and hardye, passing the
strength and boldness of other birds, and his strength is most ^e^ wings,
feet, and bill. For he has sinewye wings, and little flesh, and therefore in
his flight he may well away with travail. For in comparison to the
greatness of his body, he has but little flesh, and therefore he has much
strength and virtue. Also he has many feathers, and therefore he contains
much lightness. And among all Fowls, in the Eagle the virtue of sight is most
mighty and strong. For in the Eagle the spirit of sight is most temperate, and
most sharp in act and deed of seeing and beholding the Sun in the
roundnesse of his circle, without any blemishing of eyes. And the sharpness
of her sight is not rebounded again with cleernesse of light of the Sun,
neither dispearpled, as Ambrose says. Also Ambrose says, and Aristotle libro.
20. that there is one manner Eagle that he calls Almachor, and is full sharp
of sight, and she takes her own birds in her claws, and makes them to
look even on the Sun, and that ere their wings be full grown, and except
they look stiflye and steadfastly against the Sun: she beats them, and
sets them even before the Sun. And if any eye of any of her Birds
waters in looking on the Sun, she slaieth him, as though he went out of
kind: or else drives him out of the neast, and dispiseth him, and sets not
by him: and the bird that beholds and sets his eye steadfastly upon the
Sun, she feeds and loves him as her own bird, like to her in kind: and
though she set her sight never so straight and steadfast on the Sun, yet
she casts her eye to wait and epsy after her pray, as Gregorye says. And
Aristotle. libro. 12. says, that cloue footed Birds need sharp sight. For
they see meat from a right far place: and therefore the Eagle flies higher
then other fouler, and therefore she builds her neast in full high rocks,
there she makes her neast sure, and defends it with highness of place, as
Grego. says. The Eagle dwells sure and safe in most high places, and
nevertheless because of meat she looks and sees these low places: He
flies highest upward, and comes sodeinlye downewarde, when he sees a
carrion, or some other pray, he desires.

( Addition
In the.11. of Leuiticus wherein is expressed of beasts, fishes, and birds, which
be clean and to be eaten, ye text says, these be those kinds of birds yt
shall not be eaten. The Eagle, the Gosehawke, the Ospray, the Uulture, the
Kite, and all Ravens, the Estridge, the night crow, the Cockoe, the Hault, the
Fawlcon, the Cormorant, ye great Owl, the Back or flindermouse, the Pelican,
the Pie, the Storke, the Iay, the Lapwing, and the Swallow, the Gleed or
Bussard, the Redshanke, the Swan, the Stork, the Hearon, De. 14. ye Eagle is
called in Hebrew Neser, of the Chaldes Nisra, of ye Persia^s Ansi mureg, of ye
Latins Aquila, his color is brown on the back, and somewhat whitish, graye on
the breast, yeolowish legged, black talented and sharp sighted: he is enemy to
ye heart, to the Hare, and to the dragon, he overcomes the heart or stagge, by
lighting on his head: having gathered on his wings a great quantity of dust,
takes hold of his horns, and by beating of his wings, he forces the dust
into the Heart or stagges eyes, and cease not until he has over wearied the
beast that he fall down, of the which he takes his pray, and leaves the
rest. The Hare she strikes on the head, and carries clean away, and so of
young kids, lambs, pigges, and geese. Gesner in his third book of birds.
Sebastian Munster, etc.

Also the Eagle is a foul that seldom sits a brood, and seldom has
birds, and nourishes and feeds her birds.

Libro sexto Aristotle says, yt the Eagle lays three eggs at the most, and
throws the third egg out of the neast: for she sits a brood heauylye
thervppon. And he says furthermore, that at that time she is so much feebled,
that she may not well hunt birds of other fowls: for then her claws be
crooked, and her wings wax white, and then she is sore greened in feeding of
her birds. And if it happens that ye Eagle has three birds, she throws
out one of her neast, for difficulty of feeding and nourishing: But a bird that
is called Ossifraga, and is called Cebar in the language of Arabia, feeds ye
bird yt the Eagle casts so happily out of her neast, as he says. Also he
says, that there be diverse kinds of Eagles, and they feed diversely their
birds: for Eagles with white tails, travail more in feeding of their birds,
the^ Eagles with black tails, which travail less in such doing. And when
her birds be ready for to fly, she puts them out of her neast, and
exciteth and comfort them little and little for to fly, and makes them
fast and to be hungry, for to have the more desire to come after her into the
air, because of meat. And if it happen that they be slow to pass out of her
nest, then she smites them with her bill, and withdraws from them their
meat, to constrain the^ in that manner to pass out of the neast. And after
that they be full in strength and in feathers, she drives them away from her,
and is no more busy about the^, except one manner kind of Eagles, that
Aristotle calls Athat, that think long time on her birds. And when her birds
fly, she flies with them, and gives them meat, and flies sometime about
them, and takes heed of them, and is ready to withstand other fowls, if it
so be that they come to grieve or to noy her birds. Aristotle touches all
this. li. 6. as Gregory touches super Job.

It is said of the Eagle, that when her young birds be newly hatched: and
vnmightie to take and receive and defy great meat, then ye mother sucketh
blood, and fleeting humor out of her pray, and holds it in her mouth, and
puts the blood and such humor to the mouths of her birds. And feeds
them so with light meat, till they be strong and able to receive and take
stronger meat. And heereto Austen says and Pliny also, that in age the Eagle
has darkness and dimnesse in eien, and heaviness in wings. And against this
disadvantage she is taught by kind, to seek a well of springing water, and
then she flies up into the asre as far as she may, till she be full hot by
heat of the air, and by travail of flight, and so then by heat the pores be
opened, and the feathers chased, and she falls sodeinlye into the well, and
there the feathers be changed, and the dimnesse of her eien is wiped away and
purged, and she takes again her might and strength.

Also he says, that when the Eagle ageth, the bill wareth so hard and so
crooked, that uneath he may take his meat. And against this disadvantage he
finds a remedy. For he seeks a stone, against the which he smites and
beats stronglye his bill, and cutteth of the charge of the bill, and
receives meat and might and strength, and so becomes young again. And as
Plinius says, The Eagle fitteth on a rock or on a tree, and sets the sight
of her eyes against the cleernesse of the Sun, or casts her eien, and
looks hither and thither to epsy her pray, or else beholds her own claws
always. Her gall is full medicinable: for when it is done in Collirijs, it
sharpeth the sight, and helps against dimnesse, and other diseases of eien,
as Dioscorides says, and Constantine also. And has some propertyes less
worthy to be praised, as is a Bird passing in heat and in dryness: and
therefore he is bold and hardy and wrathful: And for strong wrath is not but
in bodies of great dryness, as Arist. says libro decimo sexto. The Eagle is
enemy to innocent birds and fowls, and pursues them with her claws, and
takes the Bird, and smites the head with her bell: and has a lowing voice,
and generally fearing all other fowls. For in the sight and hering of the
Eagle all fowls of other kind dread, and also fowls of pray. Therefore
Plinius says, That the gentle fawlcon or other such fowls uneath take prays
on yt day, that they hear the Eagle. And that perchance comes of great
dread. For generally all fowls have dread of the Eagle, that takes her pray
only in the air, and they dread less ye Eagle that takes her pray on the
ground, and least of all that Eagle yt takes her pray on the water. For no
fowls dread ye Eagle, but fowls yt have their living and conversation in the
water alonely. And such an Eagle goes much out of kind and of nobleness of
those Eagles that take their pray in the air, and on the earth, and that Eagle
dreadeth the Vultur. Aristot. li. 15. says, that such an Eagle Amachel
dwells and abides nigh the Sea, and fast beside great lakes and ponds, and
is fed with birds that be nigh the sea. When they come out of the water,
and happen to see the Vulture coming, they will be afearde, and so they fly
to the water, but the Vulture, that has a right-sharpe sight, flies always
about that place: and if they flush out of the water into the air or into the
land, the Vulture takes them anon. And such an Eagle be long in the water, he
is stifled. And ye Eagle has one foot close and whole, as the foot of a
Gander, and therewith she rules her self in the water, when she comes down
because of her pray. And her other foot is a cloue foot, with full sharp
claws, with the which she takes her pray. And ye Eagles feathers have a privy
fretting virtue, as Plinius says. For he says, yt the Eagles feather done and
set among feathers of wings of other Birds corumpteth and fretteth them. A
vvo^derfull and true secret approuedly tried.
As strings made of wolves guts done and put in a lute or in a harp among
strings made of sheep guts, do destroy, and fret, and corrumpe the strings
made of sheep guts, if it so be that they be set among them, as in a lute
or in a harp as he says.

Also the Eagle loves not company: but voideth and flies company, as
Aristotle says libro primo. It is not possible, that fowls with crooked
claws should abide with any of their fellows. Also the Eagle has claws in
steed of sword. And therefore when he sits on a stone he closes in his
claws, and as it were hides them within the flesh, that he hurt them not,
neither smite them against the stone, as Aristotle says, li. 13. A foul with
crooked claws bideth not long upon trees, nor upon stones. For the kind of
their claws is contrary to these two things. Also he is right cruel against
her own birds, when their eien be closed against the Sun: For then she
supposes that they be not her own birds, when their eyes be closed against
the Sun. Also to teach and to compel them to take pray of other birds, she
beats and wounds them with her bill, as Plinius says.

Of the Goshauke. chap. 2.
THE Gosehauke is a royal foul, Acciptre, a kind of Eagles. The Goshauke.
and is armed with more boldness then with claws, and as much as kind takes
from her in quantity of body, he rewards her with boldness of heart, as
Isidore says. And as he says, she is a covetous foul to take other fowls,
and for the taking of other fowls, and for pray she is called Accipiter and
Rapter, rauisher. Also Basilius in Exameron says: that such Hawks be cruel
against their birds: so that they take from them meat when they be flegge and
ripe, and they beat and drive them out of their neast, as the Eagle does her
birds. And for she doubts least they be not hardy, she comfort and
exciteth them to be bold, and hardye, and to take pray, least when they be
full of age, they should be dull and idle, and accustom themselves more to
the seeking of meat, then to be bold, and of hardye courage, as Beda says
and Ambrose also. And some such Hawks be thieves of the air only, and some
of the earth only, as Eagles be diverse, as Aristotle says in his sixth
book. The first manner of Hawks take only flyeng Birds, and the second
manner of Hawks smite and reese on birds that sit on the earth, and Doves
know which is which, and they know the diuersitye of Eagles, as it is said.
And Accipiter is an hot foul and dry, and poor of charge of flesh, and
addressed with diversity of pens and of feathers, and is in fairness of
feathers most like the O^stridge, and not pere thereto in boldness of heart:
And she flies now up to the air swiftly, and so high that no man can see
her: and then falls sodeinly down upon her pray: and her breast is most
sharp, and covered with little flesh. Thereof Aristotle speaks, and he says
lib. 14. that the more sharp her breast is, the better she is of flight. For
if she had a full broad breast, she should move much air, and should be slow
of flight. And her breast is not fleshie, but it is sharp: and should be
feeble, if it were covered with much flesh: as it is said there. Her most
strength is in ye breast, and in the claws, and in her bil, with ye which
soon she takes out the brain of her pray. Her gall is medicinable and
profitable meddled in Colbrijs medicines of eien: and it sharpeth the sight of
eien, and destroieth and wastes white speekles, which be in the eien: and so
does her dirt also: and the Gosehauke has this property as Gregory says,
that in age when she feels her self grieved with he heaviness and weight of
feathers, she spreads her wings against the beams of the Sun, when the
wind is South, and so by sodeine weather and resolving heat, the pores be
opened: and when the pores be so opened, she smites and flappeth her wings,
and in so doing the old feathers leap out and new grow: and so the new
feathers makes her in better state, and the more able to flight: and two kinds
there be of such Fowls, for some be tame, and some be wild: and he that is
tame takes wild fowls, and takes them to his own Lord: and he that is
wild takes tame fowls. And this Accipiter is of a disdaynous kind. For if
she fail by any hap of the pray that she ryseth too, that day uneath she
comes to her Lords hand: and he must have ordinate diet, neither to scarce nor
too full. For by too much meat she waxes fat, and then she waxes ramayous or
slow, and disdayneth to come to reclaim: and if the meat be too scarce, then
she fails, and is seeble and vnmightye to take her pray. Also the eyes of
such Birds should often be siled and closed, or hid, that she bate not too
often from his hand that bears her, when she sees a bird that she desires to
take: and also her legs must be fastened with gesses, that she shall not fly
freely to every bird.

And they be borne on the left hand, that they may some what take of the
right hand, and be fed therewith. And so Accipitres, such fame hawks be kept
in mewes, that they may be discharged of old feathers and hard, and be so
renewed in fairness of youth. Also men give them meat of some manner of
flesh, which is some deal venomous, that they may the sooner change their
feathers, and smoke grieueth such hawks and does them harm, as Beda says:
and therefore their mewes must be far from smoakie places, that their bodies be
not grieved with bitterness of smoke: nor their feathers infect with
blackness of smoke. They should be fed with fresh flesh and bloudye, and men
should use to give them to eat, ye hearts of fowls that they take. All the
while they be alive, and be strong and mighty to take their pray, they beloved
of their Lords, and borne on hands, and set on pearches, and stricken on the
breast, and on the tail, and made plain and smoothe, and be norished with
great business and diligence: but when they be dead, all men hold them
unprofitable and nothing worth, and be not eaten, but rather thrown out on
dounghills.

Of Alieto. Cap. 3.
Hali^etus
AS the Gloss says Super Deutro. 14. Alietus and a Fawcon is all one bird,
which coueteth pray, and is right bold and hardy, and assaileth birds and
fowls, that be much more greater than they, and reeseth on them, and smites
with breast and with feet. Some men mean, that Alietus is a little bird, and
takes other small birds. Thereof speaks Auctour Aurora and says.

Sparrowe hawk. The Hobbie. The Merlin.
Obtinet exiguas Alietus corpore vires. Sunt and aues minimae, praeda cibusque
suus.

That is to say, Alietus has small virtues and strength of body: and small
birds be his meat and his pray.

And some men mean, that this bird assaileth only feeble Birds and
vnmightie: and hereby it seems, that Alietus and a little Sparrow Hawke is
all one, that is called a Musket in French, or else it is called, the Sperhawke.

Of Bees. Cap. 4.
ISidore says, that Bees are called Apes for they are gendred without feature,
or for that they knit themselves together with feet. Isidore says, that they
be cunning and busy in office of making of honny, and they dwell in their own
places that are assigned to them, and challenge no other place but their own.
And they build and make their houses, with a passing wonderful skill, and of
diverse flowers: and they make honey combs, wound and writhen with wax very
curiously, and fill their celles, with many young. They have an host and a
king, and move war and battle, and fly and void smoke and wind, and make
them hardye and sharp to Battle, with great noise. Many have assayed and
founden, that often Bees are gendred and come of carraines of dead flesh. And
for to bring forth Bees flesh of calves, which be slain, is beat that worms
may be gendered and come of the rotted blood, the which worms after take
wings, and are made Bees, as Beetles be of Ox dounge, as Isidore says. And
Ambrose in Exameron says, That the properties of Bees are wonderful noble
and worthy. For Bees have one common kind as children, and dwell in one
habitation, and be closed within one gate. One travail is common to them all,
one meat is common to them all, one common working, one common use, one fruit
and slight is common to them all, and one generation is common to them all.
Also maidenhead of body without wemme, is common to them all, and so is birth
also: for they be not meddled which service of Venus, neither resolved with
lechery, neither bruised with sorrow of birth of children, and yet they bring
forth most swarms of young. For where all other Fowls, bring forth uneath
one birth in a year, every one Be brings forth two, and passes other,
with double plenteousnes of increase. Bees make among them a King, and ordain
among them common people. And though they be put and set under a King, yet they
be free and love their King, that they make by kind love, and defend him with
full great defense, and hold honor and worship to perish and be spilt for
their king, and do their King so great worship, that none of them dare go out
of their house, nor to get meat, except the King pass out, and take the
principalytie of flight. And Bees choose to their King, him that is most worthy
and noble in hightnesse and fairness, and most clear in mildness, for that
is chief virtue in a King. For though their King have a sting, yet he uses it
not in wreake. And kindly, the more huge Bees are, the more lighter they be,
for the greater Bees are lyghter than the less Bees. And also Bees that are
vnobedient to the king, they deem themselves by their own dome, for to dye by
the wound of their own sting. And of a swarm of Bees is none idle: some
fight, as it were in battle in the field against other Bees: some be busy
about meat: and some watch the coming of showers: and some behold concourse
and meeting of deawes: and some make wexe of flowers: and some make cells, now
round, now square, with wonderful binding and joining, and evenness. And yet
nevertheless among so diverse works none of them does aspye nor wait, to
take out of others travail: neither takes wrongfullye, neither steals
meat, but each seeks and gathers by his own flight and travail among
herbs and flowers that be good and couenable. But Bees have their stings, and
they shed venyme among honny, if any thing ouersetteth them, and they put
their lives with a kind of revenge, for defense of their houses. Also though
they be feeble in strength of body, yet they be full strong in might and virtue
of cunning: their fruit is soft and sweet to all thing, by his sweetness he
makes jaws sweet, and heals wounds, and gives medicine to inward botches.
Huc vsque Ambrosius. Other properties Aristotle touches libro decimo, where
these be set in. Also among other things they say, that workings of Bees are
diverse, for some bring to the hiue, things that need to array for honey, of
sprayes and flowers of trees, and of herbs, and namely such things that be
some deal gleymie and glewie, and bameth therewith the hiue, and that they do
for noyful beasts. And if the entering of the hiue be too large, they make it
narrow and straight: and they gather honny, and first they begin to make the
house that the King shall dwell in, then they make houses for other Bees, that
keep the hiue, and they take wax of flowers, and gather it with their
forseete, and then they gather to the middle feet, and then to the over most
joints of the hinder feet: and then they fly therewith, and then the
heaviness of the Be is known: and when a Be flies, be takes no heed of
the diversity of flowers; nor leaves one flower for another, all the while
that he finds therein that is needful, and turns then again to her own
place charged. But how they gather honny, and what is the matter of honny, we
may not lightly distinguish by feelyng: but they haunt much gladly leaves and
flowers of Olyue, and abide thereupon long time for thickness of leaves, and
when their king may not fly, then a company of Bees bear him. And if the
rector be on live, the males be in one party, and the females in another
party, and if he be dead, the males be with females in one house: and the
rectours females, is much more than the females of ye other Bees, and has a
more sto^rg sting than ye male. And many males be without stings, and they fly,
as though they would sting with stings, and yet they may not. The rectors be of
two manners, the one is black, and that other is red, and this is the better,
and is a good little Be, round and thick in it self, and small in the
middle, as though he were girded, and meanly rough. And Bees are diverse in
feeding, for some be fed with flowers of gardens, and there be other manner
Bees, which be fed with flowers of Mountains: and those that be fed in
trees of Mountains be less than other, and stronger, and may better away with
travail. Also Bees sit upon the hiues, and suck the superfluity, that is in
honey combs: and it is said, that if they did not so, thereof should spiders
be gendred of that superfluity, and the Bees should dye, and when there is but
little honnie in their houses, they forsake and come out of their houses, and
fight with them that will take away their honnie: and therefore they be seen
often sitting about their holes, as it were ready and arrayed to withstand and
defend, and the shorter Bees fight with the longer with strong sight, when they
eat much honey, and they busy themselves to drive these out of the hiues,
which do not make honey and labor.

Also the Kings be not seen without the hiues alone, but they have a great
company of Bees about them: and the king is in the middle, and he passes out
three days before the out passing of ye young Bees: then few Bees come out and
fly about the hiues, and depart themselves in companies, and with every King
goes one company. And if it happens, that one part of the Bees set against
the other, then these few Bees that remain, go to another King, and forsake
their first King, and they go to the King that has most number: and if the
King whom they forsake, does follow after them, they kill him. Also when
Bees sting, they dye right soon after, if they sting in all their sting, and
draw it not out of the place that is stung, for ye sting may not all come out,
except some gutte come out therewith, and the rectours of Bees sting seldom.
And if any Be dye in the hiue, the other Bees draw him out: for this beast is
more cleanly then other beasts, and therefore they cleanse flieng, and not in
their hiue, for stinking savor grieueth them full sore, and likewise so does
wind also. Therefore if there be great wind, the wardene of the Bees shall
cover the mouth of the hiue, that the wind come not into the Bees: and if the
hiues stink in any wise, they will forsake their hiues, and if it hap that the
Bees abide therein, they shall take sickness of the stench. And when they rest
too much, they were sick, and they throw and put out idle Bees from their
company. And hot places be according for the^ in Winter time, and cold in
Summer time. And if a man leueth to them much honey, they will not work much
thereafter: and if he leaves too little, then they wexe slow to work honey.
Therefore the warden shall leave them honey, as the multitude of the^ is more or
less, and if they lack honny to ease, then the warden shall feed them with
figs, and other sweet meats, least they should dye. And when they gather
them together and strive within the hiue, it is a token that they will depart
thence and forsake the hiue: and therefore the warden must power some sweet
wine into the hiue, and then they will abide still. Huc vsque Aristoteles.
liber. 8. si^e 9. Also liber. 4. he says, that Bees make no noise but in
styeng and spreading out and drawing in their wings by the a^^e, that falls
between the wings and the bodies. Also the hinder feet of them be longer
then their fore feet for going, that they may soon arise from the earth, when
they will fly, as he says. lib. 14. Also sometimes Bees have a sickness,
that Aristotle calls Ka^roys. l. 8. And that evil comes of little worms,
which be gendered in the hiue, and comes of corrupt hunnie combs. And when
those worms he waxen, they make a web like to the web of a Spider, and has
mastry over all the hiue. And therefore the hunny waxes corrupt, and the Bees
wax sick and die.

Also li. 16. he says, That Bees are not gendered by the service of Venus. In
those years that be dropping, many Bees are bread and gendered. For by
moisture superfluities be multiplied in bodies. And in temperate years be
few birds of Bees, as he says. Item in dietis particularibus it is said,
that Bees that eat flowers of Almond trees, make more temporale hunnye then
other, and more sauoury, and less sharp: and that hunny most cleanses
spiritual members. And Bees that eat wormwood and other bitter herbs, make
hunnie less sweet: But yet that hunnie cleanses most the stopping of the
spleen, and opens the liver, and helps them that have the dropsy, and
helps the biting of a mad dog. Look more of hunny in Tracttau de
liquoribus. And the other propertyes of Bees, shall ye find in Littera. A. in
Tractatu de animalibus secundum Pth. et Auicennam.

Of the. Owl. chap. 5.
THe Owl is called Bubo, and has that name of the sound of her voice, as
Isidore says. And is a wild bird charged with Feathers. But she is always
hold with sloth, and is feeble to fly. And dwells by graves by day and by
night, and in chinnes. And Diuinours tell, that they betoken evil: for if the
Owl be seen in a city, it signifies destruction and wast, as Isidore says.
Aristotle says li. 8. that the Chough fights with the Owl, for she is
feeble of sight at midday, and sees more clearly by night than by day. And
for ye cause the Chough takes the Owls eggs, and eats them by day, and
the Owl eats the Choughes eggs by night: for the Owl is stronger by night
than by day, and the Chough is stronger by day than by night. And other fowls
fly about the Owl by day and pull him, and therefore with the Owl, fowlars
take other birds and fowls. The fighting of these birds (as the fighting of
other beasts) is not but for meat, or for dwelling places. The crieng of the
Owl by night, betokens death, as Diuinors conjecture and deem. The Owl is
fed with dirt, and other unclean things, and is hated of other birds, and
haunteth Temples by night to have her fill of oil of lamps: and namely in
feathers and in beak, she seems like to fowls of pray. But she is all unlike
to them in boldness and in virtue. And when birds and fowls assail the Owl,
she lies upright, and defends her self, with her beak, and with her feet
and they hunt and ate mice, and reremice, and fly about by night, and hide
them in thins and walls by day.

( Addition
Of the kind of Owls, there be many, as Gesner terms them Solitary, the
one called Tachmas of greedines, the night rauener. Four kinds are common: the
first is reddish brown, full of feathers, and is the greatest, and is called
the Ass Owl, because his feathers stick up on both sides his head like
horns: the second, is more graye, and somewhat whitish breasted, finely
spotted, and has a more shriking voice: the third kind is lesser and of
brown color, with the which the birders make stales to take small birds: the
fourth is least of all, and breeds in stony rocks, and is ash colored.
Read Gesner.)

Of a Culuer or Dove. Chap. 6.
CUluers are called Columbe, and they have that name of Color, of ye neck: for
in the neck their feathers be sprung with many diverse colors, as Isid. says.
And Culuers be mild birds and meek, and haunt and love company of men, and
have conversation in their multiplieng. In old time men called them Venerias,
lecherous: for they use often neasts, and conceive with billing and love; and
use much lechery. And therefore a Culuer is called Columba, colens lumbos, as
it were tilling lands and reins, as Isid. says, For Culuers lay in all times
and have birds, if their dwelling be hot, and their meat ready. And they have
better birds in harvest than in springing time or in summer, and that for
plenty of meat, as Isid. says. li. 5. Arist. speaking of the kind of
Culuers says, That the Culuer is a lecherous bird, and they kiss or bill
each other, before their treading. And if the old male may not tread, yet he
cease not to bill. And often the female leapeth upon the female, when the
male lacks, and so in kissing and billing, they cast not Semen: but of such
manner treading sometime come eggs, and of such eggs come no birds, but they
be as wind eggs. And all birds that be like to Culuers, lay in springing
time twice or thrice, and lay two eggs, and lay not the third time, but when
the second laieng is corrupt and destroyed. Also li. 6. he says, that for the
most part, Culuers have two birds, male and female, and the first bird is
male: and some time one bird is hatched and comes out of the shell in one
day, and the other on the morrow. And the male sits on brood by day, and
the female by night, and the first egg fills it self, and sheddeth in
twenty days, and first the Culuer pearceth the shell, and then deals it.
And male and female heateth the birds in one time, and the female is more busy
about the birds than the male, and lays eggs ten times in one year, and
sometime xi. times or xii. as in Egypt, and the male treads the female after
one year.

Also lib 8. he says, That when the Culuer has birds, anon the male rules
the birds: and if the female tarry over long ere she come to the Birds, for
soreness of the birth, than the male smites and beats her, and compels
her to sit her self upon the birds. And when the birds wex, the male goes
and sucketh salt earth, and he gives and puts it in the mouth of the
birds to make them have talent to meat.

And when the male will put the birds out of the neast, he treads them both.

Also Culuers have this property, as Turtells have: they areare or lift not
up their heads when they drink, ere they have drunk enough, and generally
they live and breeds fifteen years. Huc vsque Arist. But the properties of
Culuers, that are usual and notably known, the Gloss touches upon this
sentence: Oculi tui Columbarum. Cant. 1. Where it is said, that a Culuer has
no gall, and hurts, and wounds not with the bill, but his own pere. And
moreover he makes his neast in dens and holes of stones, and feeds others
birds, and draws to the company of Culuers that wander and straye about, and
abides nigh rivers, and eats the best greynes, and has groaning in the
steed of song: they fly in flocks, and love company, and they defend
themselves with the wings and with the bill: and they eat no carraines, nor
other unclean things. The Culuer feeds two birds. The Culuer sitting on
rivers, sees the shadow of the Goshawke coming, and as seen as it sees the
Goshawke, it flies into the inner place of an hoale, and there hides it
self, as says the Gloss upon the foresaid sentence. And as Constantine says
in Viatico, The blood of a Culuer is medicinable, for it is said, that the
blood drawn under the right wing, and dropped in hot, swageth and slaketh the
ach of bleared eyes: and has burning dirt, and throws it out of the neast,
and custometh and teaches her birds likewise to cast it out, as Aristotle
says. The property of Doves.
The Culuer is messenger of peace, ensample of simplenes, clean of kind,
plenteous in young, follower of meekness, friend of company, forgetter of
wrongs: and the more it is feathered, the more plentuous it is in kind found.
Therefore rough sooted Doves breed well nigh in every month. The Culuer is
kindly fearful, and seldom in safety, but when she is in an hole of stone,
and there she rests for a time. The Culuer is forgetful, and therefore when
the birds are borne away, she forgets her harm and damage, and leaves
not therefore to build and breed in the same place, as Jerome says, Also she
is nicely curious: for sitting on a tree, she beholds and looks all about
toward what part she will fly, and bends her neck all about, as it were
taking aduisement: but often, while she takes aduisement of flight, ere she
takes her flight, an arrowe flies thorough her body, and therefore she
fails of her purpose: for that that she was about long to do, she performed
not in due time, as Gregory says. Also as it is said In dietis perticularibus,
Culuer flesh is hard to digest, and gleymie, and therefore it gives great
nourishing and thick, and namely flesh of young Culuers. But when they begin
to fly, because of moving and of travail, it loses much of that heaviness,
and the flesh is made more light and more able to digest: and the elder it is,
ye harder it is, and the worse to digest, and the worse nourishing it gives to
bodies. Also sometime a same Culuour is found and faught to beguile and to
despise wild Culuours, and leads them into the net. And to deceive them the
more stilye, it goes with them into the Fowlers net, and suffers it self to
be caught and wrapped therein, and draws them toward meat, as it were in
liknes of friendship, but so in feeding, draws them to grins and to their
destruction. Also (as Ambrose says in Egypt and in Syria, a Culuer is taught
to bear letters, and to be messenger out of one province into another. For it
loves kindly the place and the dwelling, where it was first fed and nourished,
and be it never so far borne into far country, always it will return home
again, if it be restored to freedom: and often to such a culuer, a letter is
craftily bound under the one wing, and then it is let go: then it flies up
into the air, and cease never till it come to ye first place in which it was
bred. And sometime in the way enemies know thereof, and lets it with an
arrowe, and so for the letter that it bears it is wounded and slain, and so
it bears no letter without peril: for often the letter that is so borne, is
cause and occasion of the death of it.

( Addition
Of Doves likewise, there are diverse sorts, the Stock-doue or Woodcoyst, the
house Dove, and the Turtle dove: these are common. The flesh of these Doves are
contrary to those bodies that are grieved with the gout, for that they cause
ache of bones, heat of blood, and ripen postumate humors. The flesh splitted
hot, and laid to any part of the body, draws the humor, where the
Physician will.)

Of a Curlewe. chap. 7.
CUrlewes are called Cotumices, and have that name of the sownd of the voice.
And be certain birds, that the Greeks call Ortigias, for they were first
seen in the land that is called Ortigia, as Isidore says. These birds have
certain times of coming, and make and lead flocks, and they dread the
Gossehawke, and while they see the Goshauk, they arise not from the earth: and
therefore they be called Ortigometra. Also these birds have guides and leaders
as cranes have: and for they dread the Goshauke, they are busy to comfort the
leaders, by the which leaders they be ware and warned of their peril and
harm, that they be not taken with the Gossehawke. The Curlevv has ye falling
evil.
Only those birds have ye falling evil, as as a man has, and the sparowes
also. And they pass the Sea, and when they be weary, they fall down upon the
water, and rest upon the one wing, and makes his sail of the other wing. His
best meat, is venomous seed and grains, and for that cause in old time men
forbad eating of them.

And an herb that is called Eleborus, is Curlewes meat, and if another beast
eats it in great quantity, it is perilous and poison: for beasts have broad
and wide veins, by the which ye smoke passes, and by strength of that herb,
the heart is suddenly cooled and dead: and Curlewes have straight veins about
the heart, and therefore venomous smoke has no through passage, but he bideth
in the stomach, and is there defied and made subtle, and so it grieueth them
not. And we call in common speech Coturnices crebros a veloci cursu, for swifte
running, for he runs upon the earth most swiftly, And such birds love
birds of their own kind: and therefore every of them cry to other, and come
together, as Ambrose says.

( Addition
Coturnix, is thought to feed on venomous seeds, and therefore not to be very
wholesome.

Of a Storke. chap. 8.
A Storke is a water foul, and purges her self with his own bill: For when
she seeleth her self griened with much meat, she takes Sea water in her
bill, and puts it in at her harder hole, and so into her guts, and that
water suitneth the hardness of ye meat, and biting the guts causes them to
put superfluities. Also this bird eases eggs of Adders and Serpents, and
bears them for best meat to her birds, as Isidore says. And this bird is
called Siconia, as it were Sicannia, for he smites or flappeth with his bill,
and makes a noise as it were with a Cane or a great Reeds, as he says. Also
he is messenger of springing time, and in her coming, betokens novelty of
time, and is enemy to Adders and Serpents, and beats and slays them with
her bill, and sometime swalloweth and deuoureth them, and haunteth and loves
company of men, and therefore they make their neasts on houses that men dwell
in, and they lean not lightly their first neaste, except they be compelled.
But ere they go into other countries against Winter, they fill their neasts
with earth, and draw the twigges and thorns of their neasts with fenne, that
no tempest of wind should break it nor throw it down in Winter, and in her
coming again in springing time, she occupies the same place, and defends
the neast from other that would occupy it: while the female lives the male
accompanies not with another with service of Venus, but keeps truly to her
in neast and in office of generation. And if the male espieth in any wise, yt
the female has broke spousehood, she shall no more dwell with him, but he
beats and strikes her with his bill, and slaieth her if he may, as Aristo.
says. The male treads not the female but in the neast: and in sitting on
brood, the male and the female change times, and love their birds, and keep
them with right great affection, and for busy sitting upon them, their
feathers fall, and when the male trauayleth about meat, the female sits in
the neast, and againward. And when the male comes home, the female flies out
for meat, and then the male sits on the neast, as Ambrose says. Storkes
fly over the Sea, in flocks, and fly together into hot countries, and in
their passing, Crows fly with them, and pass before them, as it were leading
the Storkes, and withstand with all their might, fowls yt hate Storkes, as it
is said in Exameron. And though storkes eat venomous beasts, as frogs, Adders
and serpents, and other such, yet nevertheless the venime overcomes not,
neither changes their kind, but is to them feeding and nourishing, that is
venomous to men and to other beasts: for by virtue of heat, that has mastrie
within them, the malice of venime is quenched. Also when their birds are
haught, they have feet, legs, and bills full black, as Swans have, but ye
blackness passes away little and little. And the more old they were, the
more read they have legs, feet and bills.

( Addition.
A Storke is in shape like unto the Heron, but more biggeriall white saving the
top of his wings: his bill and legs red. Naturally he is enemy to ye serpents
and kills them: when they be old, their young feeds them, and provides
meat for them. These breed in Germany, on the house tops, and as it is said,
of every third brood, they put forth one young, to the honor of the houses,
whereon they breed.)

Of the Crow. cap. 9.
THe Crow is a bird of long life, and is called Cornix among latins, that is a
name of Greek. And Diuinoures tell, that she takes heed of spiengs and
awaitings, and teaches and shows ways, and warns what shall fall. But it
is full unlawful to believe, that God shows his privy counsel to Crows,
as Isidore says. Among many diuinations, diuinors mean, that Crows betoken
rain with greding and crieng, Corax, Corax, as this vearse means.

Nunc plena Cornix plumam vocat improba voce.

That is to understand, Now the Crow calls rain with an eleinge voice,
and is a iangling bird and vnmilde, and grievous to men there they dwell, as he
says, and eats unclean meats and venomous, and lives right long.

In age their feathers wexe white. But in flesh within, the longer they live,
the more black they be, and hates the fore over all other beasts, and
fights against the Sparhawke, and against the Gossehawke, as Isidore says.
And is busy and greedy, and contrary to the Eagle, and other birds of pray,
and for she dreadeth to touch the Eagle, with crieng she pursues the Eagle.
But she has not always profit of her greediness: for sometime, after that the
Eagle has made as though he gave no force, suddenly he smites the Crow with
his bill or slays her, when she comes nearer the Eagle than she should. In
Exameron it is said of ye crow that Crows rule and lead storkes, and come
about them as it were in routs, and fly about the Storkes, and defend them,
and fight against other birds and fowls that hate storkes, and take upon them
the battle of other birds, upon their owns peril. And an open proof thereof
is for in that time ye storkes pass but of ye country, crows be not seen in
places, there is they were wont to be, and also for they come again with so^e
wounds, and with voice of blood, that is well known, and with other signs and
tokens, and show yt they have been in strong fighting. Also there it is said, yt
the mildnes of the bird is wonderful: for when the old crows in age be both
naked and bare of covering of feathers, then ye young nowes hide and cover them
with their feathers, and gather meat and feed them.

And sometime when they were old and feeble: then the young Crows underset
them, and rear them up with their wings, and comfort them to use to fly, to
bring the members that be diseased into state again.

Of the Raven. Chap. 10.
THe Raven is called Coruus of Corax also, and has that name of the sown of
the throat, as Isido. says. The Raven beholds the mouth of her birds, when
they yane. But she gives them no meat ere she know and see the likeness of
her own blackness, and of her own color and feathers. And when they begin to
wexe black, then afterward she feeds them with all her might and strength, as
Isidore says. It is said that ravens birds be fed with deaw of heaven all the
time that they have no black feathers by benefit of age: for all ye time they
be not fed with their usual meat, which is carren or other stinking things,
but with benefit of the deaw of heaven, as Austen says. And ye ravens in dead
carrens, go into the privy places with in as Isid. says, and is a crieng
foul, and has diverse sown and voice: for among fowls, only the Raven has
64. changings of voice, as Fulgentius says: and is guilefull bird, and takes
away things thee^^shly, and lays and hydeth them in privy places. Also he is
an unclean bird, and sits upon carrens, and asks and takes meat of
venomous and unclean things, and as Diuinours mean, the Raven has a manner
virtue of meaning and betokening of divination. And therefore, among Nations,
the Raven among fowls was hallowed to Appollo, as Marcius says. Aristotle li.
6. speaking of the Raven says, that only the female sits on brood twentye
days on the eggs, and the male brings to her meat, and they have many
birds, and sits on brood twentye days, and for they be many, they throw
away some of their birds: For fowls, which have many birds throw away some
of them.

Also li. 8. he says, that the black raven fights with the Ass and with
the Bull, and flies upon them, and grieueth them, and smites with the bill,
and smites out their eyes.

Also there it is said, that the black Raven is friend to the Fox: and
therefore he fights with the Brocke or Badger, and with other small beasts,
to help the Fox.

Also there it is said, that ravens fight stronglye, and smite together with
their weapons, that he bills, clees and wings: and be that is overcome, is
obedient to the Conqueror. Huc vsque Aristot.

Also only the Raven lays eggs, and breeds in the middle heat of summer
against kind of other fowls. There of it is said, that the raven lays eggs,
and breeds in the middle heat of the summer, nigh to ripe fruit.

Of the Swanne. chap. 11.
THe Swan is called Cignus in latin, and Olor in Greek, for he is all white in
feathers: for no man finds a black Swan. Olor is Greek, and is to understand
white, as Isid. says. The Swan is called Cignus, and has that name of
Canendo, singing. For he faineth sweetness of sweet songs, with accord of voice,
and he sings sweetly, for he has a long neck diversely bent to make diverse
notes. And it is said, that in the countries that be called Hiperbores, that
the harpers harping before, the Swans birds fly out of their neasts, and sing
full merely, as Isidore says. And as Marcius and Ambrose say, shipmen trow,
that it betokens good, if they meet Swans in peril of shipwreck. Always the
Swan is the most meriest bird in diuinations: shipmen desire this bird, for he
doppeth not down in the waves, and therefore he was hallowed to Apollo as
Marcius says: and his most strength is in the wings. When the Swan is in love,
A fond fayning that a svvanne sings, who has but a natural voice, as other
birds have.
he seeks the female, and pleases her with beclipping of the neck, and
draws her to him ward: and he joins his neck, to the females neck, as it
were binding the necks together. And after the treading, the female smileth
the male, and flies him, and the male batheth him often after the treding, and
so does the female also, ere she take any meat.

And when she shall dye, and that a feather is pight on the brain, then she
sings: and against the usage of other beasts in steed of groaning, the Swan
sings, as Ambrose says.

The Swan has most white feathers without any mingling of blackness or other
color, and has black flesh, and hard to be digested, and has a bill with a
manner bounching, that distinguishes the sight from the smell and taste, and
the bill is full black within, and inward full thick.

The Swan puts down his head into the water, and seeks his meat, and
cutteth it: and though he be nourished among fish, yet he eats them not. Also
if bread or other meat be thrown to him, he withdraws and gives place to
fish that follows him, and seeks and gathers his meal of herbs,
grass, and roots. And he has black feet and close, and hole and broad, and
full able to swim: and in swimming he uses that one foot, in steed of an
oar, and the other foot in steed of a stirrer, and rules himself
therewith, and dwells in lakes and in pondes, and makes his neast nigh
waters, where upon few sticks thrown togethers, the Swan sits on brood,
and brings forth birds, and feeds them busily, and brings them up, and
covers and defends them with wings, bill, and hissing. And if any man come
toward the Signets, the Swan puts her self among the birds, and prepares
to make resistaunce, and cease not to defend her birds, and is a bird of
great wayght and heaviness, and of much flesh in body: and therefore she
loves rest, and flies but seldom.

But wild Swans fly with strong flight, with their necks straight forward,
and feet straight backwarde: But they are not so great of body, nor so fat as
tame Swans that be nourished and fed nigh places thereas men inhabit in, as
Marcius says.

Of a Gnat. Chap. 12.
A Gnat is a little fly, and is called Culex, and has that name of Aculeo, a
sting: for he sucketh blood, and has in his mouth, a pipe like a prick, and
therewith he pearceth the flesh for to suck the blood, and is accounted among
Volatiles, as the Be is, though he have a body of a worm, with many feet:
For he has wings and flies therewith, and is gendred of rotted or corrupt
vapors of carrens, and corrupt place of marreyes. By continual flapping of
wings, he makes noise in the air, as though he hurred: and sits gladly
upon carraines, botches, scabbes, and sores: and is full noyfull to scabbed
Horses, and sore backed, and grieueth sleeping men with noise and with biting,
and waketh them of their rest, and flies about most by night, and pearceth and
bileth members upon the which he sits, and draws toward light, and gladly
he sees light, and so unawarely he falls into a Candle or into the fire, and
for coveting to see light, he burns himself often. And is best feeding to
swallows, for Gnats be taken for best beloved meat to swalowes that fly in
the air, and hunt flies. And they are called Sciniphes, that is to understand
small flies, but most noyfull in stings: for Scines in Greek, is Musca in
Latin, a fly in English: and thereof comes Scinomia, a hounds fly, and
with such flies the land of Egypt was smitten, as Isidore says. And Scinomia
is the worst kind of flies, with greater body and broader wombes, than other
flies, and less flight: but they be full tender, and cleave fast in the
members of beasts, on the which they smite. In wool, hair, and bristles of
beasts, and namely in hounds, such a fly hides her self, and sucketh and
drinks blood: insomuch that she gnaweth the flesh, and makes it swell with
botches and pimples, as it fares in ears of old hounds, the which ears such
flies gnawe and make them swell and full of sores. And so it is no wonder
though such Flies stink right foul, that are fed with such corrupt meats
and humors.

Of Cicada. chap. 13.
THere is a manner Grassehopper, that is called Cicada, and has that name of
Canendo, singing: For with a full little throat, he makes right sweet melody,
or shapeth a wonderful song, as it is said in Exameron.

Addition
It is falsely applied, for the Grassehopper makes a chirring noise, with
quick moving of his hinder long thighs, against the scale of his side, like
as the edge of a knife against a glass being drawn too and fro, makes an
noise, that sets teeth on edge. I have diligently tried the same, so that
Bartholome was heerin deceived, for want of experience.

This Cicada in the middle heat at midday, when trees break with heat, then
the more clear air she draws, the more clearly she sings. Also if a man
pour oil upon this Cicada, he dies anon. For the poores be stopped, that
they may not draw breath, but if men forthwith pour upon them vinegar, anon
they be relieved, for the strength of vinegar opens holes and poores that
were stopped by binding of oil, as Ambrose says.

Addition
The kind of the Grasshopper is to consume all green things, and is one of
Gods plagues for sin.

Of the Phoenix. Chap. 14.
Phoenix is a bird, and there is but one of that kind in all the wide world,
therefore ignorant men wonder thereof: and among ye Arabians, there this bird
Phoenix is bred. He is called Singularis, alone, as Isid. says. The philosopher
speaks of this bird and says, that Phoenix is a bird without Make, and lives
iii hundred, or v. hundred years: when ye which years be passed, she feels
her own default and feebleness, and makes a nest of right sweet smelling
sticks, that be full day, and in Summer when ye western wind blows, the
sticks and she neast be set on fire with burning heat of the Sun, and burns
strongly, then this bird Phoenix comes wilfully into the burning neast, and is
there burnt to ashes, among these burning sticks, and within three days a
little worm is gendered of the ashes, and waxes little and little, and takes
feathers, and is shapen and turned to a bird.

Ambrose says the same in Exameron, of the humor or ashes of Phoenix arises a
new bird and waxes, and in space of time he is clothed with feathers and wings,
and restored into the kind of a bird, and is the most fairest bird that is,
most like to the Pecocke in feathers, and loves wilderness, and gathers his
meat of clean grains and fruits.

Alanus speaks of this bird and says, that when the highest Bishop Onias
had builded a temple in the city of Heliopoly in Egypt, to the likeness of ye
temple of Jerusalem, and the first day of Easter, when he had gathered much
sweet smelling wood, and set it on fire upon the Alter to offer sacrifice:
to all men's sight, such a bird came sodeinly, and fell into the middle of the
fire, and was burnt anon to ashes, in the fire of the sacrifice: and the ashes
abode there, and was busily kept and saved by the commandment of the Priest:
and within three days, of these ashes was bred a little worm, that took the
shape of a bird at the last, and flew into wilderness.

Of the Crane. chap. 15.
A Crane is called Grus, and has that name of her own voice. For she cries
with such a voice, as Isid. says. And is a bird of grease wings, and of
strong flight, and flies high into the air to see the countries, toward the
which he will draw, as it is said in Exameron: and is a bird that loves
birds of his own kind, and they living in company together, have a king among
them, and fly in order, ruled as Ambrose says. And the leader of the company
compels the company to fly aright, crieng, as it were blaming with his
voice. And if it hap yt he wax hoarse, then another crane comes after him,
and takes the same office: and after they fall to the earth, cryeng for to
rest: and when they sit on the ground, to keep and save them, they ordein
watches that they may rest the more surely: and the wakers stand upon one
foot, and each of them holds a little stone in the other foot, high from
the earth, that they may be waked by falling of the stone, if it hap that they
sleep, as Aristotle says.

Also in youth cranes be colored like ashes, but the longer they live, the
blacker they be. And if any of them go amiss out of the company, they cry
and seek their fellows that be lost.

Also Cranes when they know that the Fawcon or ye Goshawke comes, they turn
upward their bills, and defend themselves as well as they may, with sharpness
of bills.

( Addition.
The Crane is of an Indie color, with a red plat on his head: but the Cranes
of the East Indias, are white bodied, red headed and some greenish.

Sebastian Munster writes yt the cranes fight with the Samoyes a short
dwarffe like people, etc.

Of the Cock. chap. 16.
A Cock is called Gallos, and has that name of gelding, for among fowls
only the Cock is gelded, and men in old time called them Gallos, that were
kerned, as Isidore says.

Plinius li. 29. cap. 4. speaks of the Cock and says, that Cocks flesh raw,
and laid hot upon the biting of a Serpent, does away the venime, and to the
same his brain is good, taken in drink. And if a man be noynted with his grea^t,
or with his juice, he shall be sure from Panthers and Lions. And if the bones
of a Cock or of an Hen, be meddled with gold when it is molte, they destroy and
wast the gold, and so Hen boanes be venomous to gold, and that is wonder.
Also the Cock is hot and dry of complexion: and therefore he is full bold
and hardy, and so fights boldly for his hens against his adversaries, and
assayleth and reeseth on them, and teareth and wounds them with his bill, and
with his spores, and when he has the mastry he croweth presently, and ere he
croweth he beats himself with his wings to make him the more able to sing.
And he uses late in the night to crow most clearly and strongly, and about
the morrow tide, he shapeth tight voice and song, as Ambrose says.

The Cock bears a red comb on his head, in steed of a crown, which
being left, he loses his hardiness, and is more slow and cowardlye to
assail his adversary. And he loves ieolouslye his hens: and when he finds
meat, he calls his Hens, together with a certain voice, and spares his
own meat to feed them therewith: and he sets next to him on the rooste,
the hen that is most fat and tender, and leueth her best, and desires most to
have her presence. In the morrow tide when he flies to get his meat, first he
lays his side to her side, and by certain tokens and beckes, as it were long
^aches, he wooeth and prays her to treading.

And he fights for her specially, as though he were jealous, and with bill
and spores he chaseth and drives away from him other Cocks, that come nigh
his hens. And in fighting he smites the ground with his bill, and reareth up
the feathers about his neck, so make him the more bold and hardy, and moves
the feathers of his tail upward and downward, that he may so the more ably
come to the battle. And he breeds a precious stone called Aflect^e^^^, like
to the stone that is named Calceduneus, Many have written by heart say bu^
fer^e by capr^^ence.
and the Cock bears that stone, and because of that stone (as some men trow)
the Lion dreadeth and abhors, and specially if the Cock be white: for the
Lion dreadeth the white Cock, as Plinius says.

The Cock he searches his meat with his bill and feet, and setayeth and
ouertourneth straw and duste. And when he finds a grain, he calls, and
cackeleth to him his Hens.

Also the Cock dreadeth the Eagle and the Gossehawke, which take their pray on
the ground. For such sowles of pray, spy and wait for Birds which go on the
ground. And the Cock is right sharp of sight, and therefore he looks
downwarde with the one eye to search his meat, an upward into the air with
the other eye, that he might beware of the coming of the Eagle, and of the
Goshauke. And if be set one of them come a far, anon he cries to the hens,
and flies away, and hides himself in houses among stones, or in hedges, as
he says.

Also a right aged Cock lays eggs, in his last end, and the Eggs are
small and full round, and as they were wanne or yeolow. And if any venomous
worm sits on brood on them in the canicular days, of them be bred and
grow Cockatrices, as Beda says. Constantine speaks of Cocks, and says,
that young Cocks be more hard to defy, and less moist then Hens. Also the
flesh of Cocks is some deal evil sauoures, but that savor wastes away when
it is sod. And if the guts of an old Cock be thrown away, and the Cock
stopped full of gardeine Saffron, and of Polipodie, and sodde in five pound of
water till the water he nigh all wasted, A restatitiue medicine.
this Cock is most profitable to them that have the evil, which is called
Cholera passi^^. For it purges gleamie and flumatike humor, and helps them
that he melancholy: and puts out great ventosity of ye stomach, and abateth
ach and sore, and helps swelling and ach of the wosen, and helps against
the long during of fever Etike, as he says.

Of the Capon. Chap. 17.
THe Capon is of a cock, made as it were female by caruing away of his
gendering stones, and is all changed in co^plection, as other beasts that be
gelded, and loses his boldness, and his voice and song, and knows no
difference between the hours of the night, nor beats himself with his
wings, nor araieth himself in fighting, but he sits on brood upon Eggs
that be not his own, as it were an hen, and takes upon him the office of a
female, and feeds chickins that be not his own, and leads them about, and
clocketh as an hen, and calls chickins together, clocking with an hoarce voice,
and accompanyeth with hens, and eats with them of their meat, but he
feeds them not, he is fasted with them, but he fatteth not them. And the
Capon is more coward of heart then the Cock, and more moist of flesh, and more
soft of feathers, and sometime his feet be broken to compel him to sit on broad
upon eggs, his spurs either be made blunt, or else they fall. When he is fat,
his feet be bound togethers, and his head hangs down toward the ground; and
is borne by the feet to faires and to markets. But Constantine speaks of a
gelded Cock and says, that the flesh of grided Cocks is more couenable then
the flesh of other fowls, and breeds more noble nourishing and better
blood: And their brain is better, and more profitable then the brain of other
fowls.

Of an Hen. chap. 18.
THe hen is called Gallina, and has that name of Gallo, the cock, as the
Lyonnesse has the name of the Lion. And as some me^ mean, if her members were
meddled with gold when it is molt, the gold should wast, as Isidore says. The
Hen is a soul of great laieng and breeding, and lays many eggs without
treading as Aristotle says, libro. 5. And they be called wind Eggs, and be
more unsavory and less worthy then other Eggs. And some hens have always
twins, two chickens in one shell. And one of the twins is little, and sometime
wonderfullye shapen. After that they sit on broode^ three days, anon tokens
and signs of Chickens be seen: And the Chicken is bread of the white, and
nourished with the yolke, as he says.

Also hens that lay too much be not of long life, but they die soon, as it is
said lib. 6. Other properties of hens that be known nigh to all men, be
touched in the Gloss super. Mat. 18. There it is said yt a hen is a mild bird
about chickens: for she covers chickens under her wings, and defends them
against the Kite, and takes sickness for sorrow of her chickens, and loses
her feathers, and feeds her chickens more then her self. And when she
finds meat, she clocketh and calls her chickens together, and to defend
her chickens, she puts her selves against a stronger then her self. And
also she fights with a man for defense of ye Chickins. When the chickins be
dispearpled, she clocketh and calls them together, and ^^nereth them wider
her wing. And defends them, that they be not taken with Hawke, nor with
Kite, and her kindlye love about her Chickinnes is known by roughness of
feathers, and by hoarsnesse of voice.

Of the Gripe. chap. 19.
A Gripe is called Griphes, and is accounted among Volatiles Deutronomi. 14.
And there the Gloss says, That the Gripe is four footed, and like to the
Eagle in head and in wings. And is like to the Lion in the other part of the
body, and dwells in those hills that be called Hiperborei, and be most
enemies to horses and men, and greeueth them most, and lays in his neast a
stone that is called Smaragdus, against venomous beasts of the mountain.

( Addition.
Of this kind of straeing beast, many be in doubt whether there be any of them
in the world, notwithstanding it seems by credible writers that there are
diverse, especially among the Hiperborie, people dwelling in the furthest part
of the North, and as some suppose under the North pole, called Polus Articus.
Pomponeus Mela writes, that the country is but little, having the Sun over
them, and is fertile of it self, the people very just, living longer and more
pleasauntly then other men, always without business and labor, (knowing
neither war nor debate) (as Mela and Solinus write) making good cheer with
their neighbors. And having g^rlondes on their heads, they throw themselves
from a certain rock into the Sea, esteeming that to be the best death, and
form of burieng: The Gripes are of color of a dark Oker on the ba^e, their
breast of purple color, their wings brown and white, their talents black,
and the beak turning, as does the Eagles, be is more higher then the Lion, the
hinder feet cloven, as the Stagge, able to carry away the weight of two men,
a stagge, or the like beast.

Of the Fawlcon. chap. 20.
THe Faulcon is called Herodius, and is a royal foul, and desires pray, and
uses to sit on his hand that bears him, and is a bold bird and an hardye,
as is the Gosehauke: and has little flesh in comparison to his body, and has
many feathers: and therefore he is more light to fly. For in him is little
thing that bears downewarde, and much that bears upward, as Gregory says.
And therefore he is right like to the Estridge in boldness and strength: and
also much like thereto in diverse feathers and colors. The Faulcon is full
bold and hardy, with most sharpest breast, and with strong claws, and hurts
more his pray with rising thereon with his breast, then with his bill, or with
his claws. And is so great hearted, that if he fail of his pray in the first
flight and reefe, in the second he takes wreake on himself. And so if he be
wild, uneath that day he seeks pray. And if he be tame, as it were for
shame he flies about in the air, and then uneath he comes to his Lords
hands. For he holds himself overcome, and as it were put out of kind, if he
takes not the foul that he flies to, as Gregory says.

This foul or bird is commonly called Falco, and Fulica also, as the Gloss
says Super Spalmum. And among all Birds and Fowls, these Fowls have little
affection, and take little heed of their Birds, as it is said in Exameron.
With the same office of business, that he feeds his own birds, with such
service he takes and feeds the birds that the Eagle throws out of her
neast, and is unknown to him. He flies and voideth carrion, and touches not
stinking flesh, not in strong hunger: But he may well away with travail, and
absteineth and abides till he may find couenable pray, which he seeks, as
Gregorye says.

( Addition
Hawks of pray are the only pastime of Princes: and next for idle persons,
that set more by an inch of pleasure the^ an ell of thrift, who bestow in Hauks
and hounds, more then would suffice twice as many poor men: for sometime the
taking of some one pray of.vi. d. ye charge of so much won, stands them in
twenty marks, which is according to the old Proverb, What is a Gentleman
but his pleasure: but who is more gentle, he that favors the poor to the
profit of a common wealth, or he that lasciuiously spends more in one year
then his parents got in.20. I refer to the prudent.)

Of the Swallow. chap. 21.
A Swallow is called Hirundo, as it were Arundo ab aere, and has that name of
the air, for he takes not his meat sitting, but flyeng in the air, as
Isidore says. And is a crieng foul, and flies not even but hither and
thither, and sometime about, and is busy in making neastes, and in feeding of
birds. And he says also, in making of neasts, the Swallow is most cunning. For
uneath man's wit were sufficient to make of any matter, the work that the
Swallow makes and shapeth of claye only with her bill.

Moreover, the Swallowe is full of feathers, and lyghtest and most swiftest in
flight of Fowls: and therefore other fowls reeseth nor distroubleth not the
Swallow, neither the Swallow is pray to other Birds. And flies over the sea
into hot countries, in which Countries he abides in Winter, as men suppose.
And also they keep certain times of their coming and going. Their again
coming is token of springing time, and witness of the fair Summer, and
resplendishing weather, as Ambrose says libro sexto.

Aristotle says, speaking of the swallowe. li. 6. That a wild foul treads
not nor lays eggs but once a year, except the Swallowe which lays eggs
twice a year, but sometime the first eggs be broke by coldness of Winter, and
the latter eggs be complete and bring forth birds.

Also there it is said, that birds that eat flesh, lay not eggs twice a
year, except the Swallowe, that has sometime Birds twice a year. Also there
it is said, yt if a man put out the young swallows eien, yet their eien come
again, for she fetches an herb that is called Celidonia, and baumeth the
eien of her birds with the juice thereof, and so their eien be restored to them
again. as Macro. says.

I once proved this, Addition
but it took not that effect, yet found I stones of strange colors.

Also in the Swallows womb be two stones sound, of the which one is whitish,
and is called the Female, and the other is red, and is called the Male. For he
is more virtuous then the white. These stones be called Celidonij, and be
precious stones, namelye when they be taken out of the birds ere they touch the
ground, as it is said in Lapida^e: there their virtues be described, as
Constanine says Blood drawn out under the right wing is medicinable to eyes,
as blood of a Dove is. Their dirt is full hot and full gnawing: and therefore
it greeueth eien. And the Swallowe techeth her birds to throw dirt out of ye
neast. And there be two manner of swallows, some are great of body, and have
black ridges and red breasts, and white wombes: and these love men's company,
and make neasts in men's houses. The other be less of body, and have black
breasts, and make their neasts in holes and chins of roches and of rocks, fast
by waters. But both kinds make their neasts is earth or in clay, and both
their tails be forked as a pair of sheeres.

These are called Martines, Addition
and are good to eat.

Also it is said, that among Swallows is one manner kind, and other Fowls
dread that kind, yea, ye Eagle and the Goshauke dread and fly ye swallow, as
it were their enemy, and dare not fall on their pray, while they see ye
swallow, for they dread the biting of her. For peradventure it is venomous, as
Plinius says. And Swallows fight against Sparrowes, and come into their
neasts, and drive them out with biting and scratching.

( Addition
This is called the sea Swallowe, that is as big bodied as a Thrush, and very
short legged, and of a marvelous swiftness, all black saving th^^ toward the
legs is gray.

Of Kaladrius. chap. 22.
AS the Philosopher says, the Bird that is called Kaladrius, is white of
color, and has no part of blackness. And the nether part of his leg
cleanses and purges dimnesse of the eyes. His kind is such, when a man is
held in great sickness, this bird Kaladrius turns away his face from him
that is sick, and then without doubt the man shall die. And if the sick man
shall escape, the bird Kaladrius sets his sight on him, and beholds him, as
it were fauning and pleasing: and this bird is other then the bird that is
called Calandra, that sings as a Thrustle, as the Gloss says, Deuteronomy. 14.
There it is said, that Calaudreon is another then Calundre, etc.

( Addition
Gesner says, that Calandra, is a small Bird like the Lark, and is supposed
to be the wood Lark, after Doctor Turnar, as for his singing at any man's
feet lyeng sick, if he be to be made tame, may hereafter be better known.

Of Larus. cap. 23.
THE bird that is called Larus inhabiteth sometime in waters and sometime in the
land. Therefore in Aurora it is written.

Latus est fluminis habitator et incola terrae,
Nunc natat vt pisces, nunc volat inslar auis.
That is to understand: Larus dwells both in rivers and land, and swimmeth
as a Fish, and also flies as a Bird.

Addition
This is taken for the Sea cobbe, and all other birds of that kind. Gesner.

Of Locusta. chap. 24.
LOcusta has that name, for it has long legs, as the shaft of a Spear.
Therefore the Greeks call her Hastagion, as Isidore says. And these worms
that be called Locust have no king: and yet they pass forth ordinatly in
companyes, as it is said Prouerbiorum. 30. They eat each other, for the more
eats the less, and be seen in Summer, and hid in winter. And their
hinder legs be longer then their fore legs, as the Gloss says super. 1 Joel.
And first when he is young, he is Athalabus, and afterward when the wings
be grown he is made Locusta. And greeueth more in youth while he is
Athelabus, then in age when he is Locusta. And has a square mouth, and a sting
in steed of a tail, and crooked, and solding legs. And they eat burgenings
of trees and of herbs, and gnawe them, and are gendered of the Southern
wind, and excited to flight, and they die in the Northern wind. And in
leaping they areare themselves, and in rearing they fall, and are fatted with
flowers of Almons.

Also this worm Locusta for the most part is all womb: and therefore it has
never meat enough. And has but one gut, and that is always full of filth, and
of uncleanness: but always he is hungered while he lives: and if he finds
any thing green, he gnaweth and cesaeth not. With little cold he falls as
he were dead. But he quickens again with heat of ye Sun: and their dirt
worms be gendered.

( Addition
This strange kind of Fly has long hinder legs, as the Grasshopper, he
burns corn with touching, and deuoureth the residue. In India be of them
three foot in length, which the people of the country do eat. D. Cooper.

Of the Coote. Chap. 25.
THE Coote is called Mergulus, and has that name of often dopping and plunging.
For by often putting down his head into the water, and dopping there under, he
shows signs and tokens of weathers: and before the coming of tempests of
the Sea, he flies crieng to the shore. For it betokens most certainly full
strong tempest in the Sea, if Cootes fly crieng to the shore, as Isidore
says. The Coot makes her neast close by the root of reeds upon few sticks,
and feeds and nourishes her birds with wonderful affection and love of
kind: And anon as they be hatched, they follow the dam, and dread not to fly
up and down on diverse waves of the sea, and they hunt and gather water worms,
and fish to fill their wombs with. In winter for scarcity of moving, they be
fat: and in Summer for freedom of flight they be poor of flesh and in
fatness. And when they be pursued with rauishing birds, then they fly to
water, and be delivered by manner of plunging and of diuing.

Addition
The Coote is black, his legs gray, and his flesh gross.

Of the Kite. cap. 26.
A Kite is weak in flight and in strength, Therefore he is called Miluus
quasi, molliter volans, as it were weakly flieng: For he is borne up above the
air with light feathers, and hooueth there as he were immovable. And in flieng
it seems uneath that he moves the air with soft touching. And is a bird
that may well away with travail, and therefore he takes Cuckoes upon his
shoulders, and bears them, least they fail in space of long ways, and
brings them out of ye countries of Spain, Many secrets in nature ^^ known
yet ^^t this is doubtful.
as Isid. says. And he is a rauishing foul, and hardy among small birds, and
a coward and fearful among great birds, and dreadeth to lie in wait to take
wild birds, and dreadeth not to lie in wait to take tame birds, and lies
often in wait to take chickins, and them that he finds unware, he says, and
he eats carrions and unclean things, and for little meat to fill tho wombs,
he flees all about the air: and is taken with the Sparhauke, and for his
faintness and towardness he is overcome of a Bird that is less then he.
And in youth there seems no difference between the kite and other birds of
pray, but the longer he lives the more he shows that his own kind is
unkind. And there is a manner kite that takes birds in the beginning, and
afterward he eats guts of beasts, and takes uneath afterward-flyes, The
Bussard whereof are i^ kinds, the one haunteth vvarrens and parks, the other
common.
and small worms, as Aristotle says. And he dies for hunger at the last, and
is a cruel foul about his birds, and is sorry when he sees the^ fat. And to
make the^ lean, he beats them with his bill, and withdraws their meat,
and has a voice of plaining, and of moan, as it were messenger of hunger. For
when he hungereth, he seeks his meat weeping with voice of plaining and of
moan.

Of the night crow. cap. 27.
THE night crow is called Nicticorax, and has that name, for he loves the
night, and flies and seeks his meal by night, and cries in seeking: and
their cry is hateful and odious to other birds, as Isidore says. And is a
Bird that flies the light, and may not see the Sun, and haunteth and
dwells in burials and in places of dead men: and they make their neasts in
walls and in places with chinnes and hoales, and eat the Eggs of Doves and
Choughs, and fight with them. Also this Bird is called Noctua, as it were
sharply seeing by night: for by night she may see, and when shining of the
Sun comes, her sight is dim. The Island Creta has not this Bird, if he
comes thither out of other lands, he dies anon as Isidore says.

( Addition
This kind of Owl is dog footed, and covered with hair, his eyes are as the
glistering Ise, against death he uses a strange whoup.

There is another kind of night raven black, of the bigness of a Dove, flat
headed, out of the which grows three long feathers like the coppe of a
Lapwing, his bill gray, using a sharp voice, whose unaccustomed appearaunce,
betokens mortalitye: he prays on Mice, Weesells, and such like.)

Of the Miredromble. Chap. 28.
THE Miredromble is called Onacrocalus, and is a bird that makes noise in the
Winter, and has small chins in his jaws, in which he takes first meat, and
then sends it to the second womb: For he has two wombes, in that one only
he takes meat, and in that other only he seetheth and defieth. But the
first is taken in steed of the crop of the throat, as Isidore says. In Greek
Onacrocalus is called a Bird with a long bill: and there be of two manner
kinds: One is a water foul, and that other a foul of desert, and he that
dwells in Water, is a bird of great gluttonye, and puts the bill down
into the water, and makes a great noise, and is enemy namely to Eeles, and
the pray that he takes, he swalloweth sodeinly, and se^deth it into his
womb. And then he cheweth and moves his jaws, as he held meat in his mouth.
This Bird rests on the cliffe, and turns upward his bellye to save himself
against the reese of the Goshauke, that he may in that manner the more safelye
rest and sleep, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
Of these kinds of Cormorants are diverse, whereof the one called Onocrotalus,
is as big as a Swan, which putting his head into the water, brayeth like an
Ass. Of water Fowls, there are diverse sorts that are here omitted, because
of the hinderance of other Authors: as the Mallard, the Ducke, the Bitter, of
Wigen, the Teale, the Puffin, the Barnacle, the Bargander, the Gulles, the
Twite, the wild Goose, and Sheldrake, with many others.)

Of the Pelican chap. 29.
A Pelican is a Bird that is called Porphitio. Leui. 11. and Deuteronomy. 14. And is
a Bird of Egypt, and dwells in desert, beside the River Nilus: and is
accounted among unclean birds by the law in Leuit. And there be two manner
of Pellicans: One dwells in water and eats fish, and the other dwells on
land, and loves wilderness, and eats venomous beasts, as Lisardes, and
other such. And all that the Pelican eats he plungeth in water with his
foot, and when he has so plunged it in water, he puteth it in his mouth with
his own soot, as it were with an hand. Only the Pelican and the Popiniay,
among fowls, use the foot in steed of an hand.

Also of the Pelican, the Gloss speaks super Psalmum, and the same Plinius
says in this manner. The Pelican loves too much her children. For when the
children be haught, and begin to wax hoare, they smite the father and the
mother in the face, wherefore the mother smites them again and slaieth them.
And the third day the mother smites her self in her side that the blood
runs out, and sheddeth that hot blood upon the bodies of her children. And
by virtue of the blood the birds that were before dead, quicken again. And in
the Gloss upon that place of the Psalm. Psa. 10^.6
Factus sum sicut Pellicanus. It is said that the Pelican slays her Birds
with her bill, and makes sorrow three days, and then sheddeth her hot blood
upon them, and makes them alive again in yt manner. Magister Iacobus de
Vitriaco in li. de mirabilibua orientalium regionum tells another cause of
the death of Pellicanes birds. He says, that in Egypt is a bird yt is
called Pellicanus, a Bird with great wings, and most lean. For all that he
swalloweth passes forth anon behind: for he has a right slipper gut. And
therefore he may not hold meat till it be incorporate. And the Serpent
hates kindlye this Bird. Wherefore when the mother passes out of the neast to
get meat, the serpent climeth on the tree and stingeth and infecteth the
Birds. And when she comes again, she makes sorrow three days for her
Birds, as it is said. The (he says) she smites her self in the breast,
and brings blood upon them, and reareth them from death to life, and then
for great bleeding the mother waxes feeble, and the Birds be compelled to
pass out of the neast to get themselves meat. And some of them for kind
love feed the mother that is feeble: and some be unkind and care not for the
mother, and the mother takes good heed thereto, and when she comes to her
strength, she nourishes and loves those Birds that fed her at her need,
and puts away her other birds, as unworthy and unkind, and suffers them
not to dwell nor live with her.

Of the Partridge. chap. 30.
THe Partridge is called Perdix, and has that name of her own voice, as
Isidore says, and is an unclean bird. For the male lepeth up and treads the
male: And strong liking of lechery forgets the sex and distinction of male
and female, as Isidore says. And is so guilefull, that the one steals the
Eggs of the other, and sits abrood on them. But this fraud has no fruit,
for when the Birds be haught, and hear the voice of their own mother: they
forsake her that brooded them when they were Eggs, and kept them as her own
Birds, and turn and follow their own mother natural, as Isidore says,
and Ambrose also. And the Partridge trauaileth not in layeng and in brooding,
like as other fowls do, as Arist. says. Some Fowls (he says) breed and
gender lightly, as the Partridge. And ye mother of the Partridge flies all
about the hunter, till her birds be flowen. And after the birds be flowen,
she the damme flies after, and calls her birds: the which young Partridges
soon after they be hatched they follows the damme, and seek their meat. And
the Partridge has few feathers and much flesh: and therefore he is feeble of
flight, and in flight he rises but little from the ground, and falls often to
the ground after a little while. Also ye Partridge dreadeth ye Sparhauk, and
flies her: and as long as he sees the Sparhauke in the air, he rises not
from ye earth into the air. And at the noise and ringing of a little bell, he
flies about upon the ground, and falls into the net or grinne ere he be
ware. Plinius. lib. 29. ca. 6. says, that the Partridges gull, with even
weight of honnie, cleereth much the sight, and therefore it shall be kept in a
silver box. Their eyes with honey sod in a brazen vessel, help to heal the
pimples of eien.

( Addition
The Phesant is also delicate foul both of beauty and (...) the (...) the
Ow^ell, the W(...) dainty Goodwille. (...) I Will of Eiery, the (...) She welar,
with many (...) smaller sorts. As by (...) is (...) bed their properties and
lands.)

Of the Pecocke. chap. 31.
THe Pecocke is called P^^e, and has that name of the sound of his voice. His
flesh is so hard that uneath it rotteth, and is full hard to soothing, as
Isidore says. And Aristotle says, that the Pecocke lives twenty year, and
has chickens in the end of three years, and after his wings be colored.
And the Pehen sits abroode thirtye days, and a little more: and soon after
the shelles be cloue, and has no chickens but once a year, and lays twelve
Eggs or few less. And the Pecocke leeseth his feathers when the first tree
leeseth his leaves, and his feathers grow first when leaves begin to grow on
trees, as Aristotle says. And the Pecock is a bird that loves not his young:
for the male searches out the female, and seeks out her Eggs for to break
them, that he may so occupy him the more in his lechery. And the female
dreadeth that, and hides busily her eggs, least the Pecocke might soon find
them. And Arist. says, that the Pecocke has an unsteadfast and evil shapen
head, as it were the head of a serpent and with a crest. And he has a simple
pace, and small neck, and areared, and a blew breast, and a tail full of
bewty, distinguished on high with wonderful fairness: and he has foulest
feet and riueled. And he wondereth of the fairness of his feathers, and
areareth them up, as it were a circle about his head, and then he looks to
his feet, and sees the foulness of his feet, and like as he were ashamed, he
lets his feathers fall sodeinlye: and all the tail downward, as though he
took no heed of the fairness of his feathers: and has an horrible voice. And
as one says, he has a voice of a feend, head of a serpent, pace of thief.
And lib. 29. cap. 6. Plinius says, yt the Pecock has envy to man's profit,
and swalloweth his own dirt: for it is full medicinable, but it is sold found.

Of Sparrowes. cap. 32.
SParrowes be small birds, and be called Passerci, of Patuitate,
littleness, as Isid. says. And the Sparrowe is an unsteadfast bird with voice
and iangling: and makes their neasts nigh to dwellings and habitations of men.
And is a full hot bird and lecherous. And the flesh of them often taken in meat,
exciteth to carnal lust, as Constantine says. Sparrowes lay many Eggs, and
are full busy to bring up their birds, and to feed them. And she makes her
neast in hay and in feathers, and keeps her neast clean without dirt. And
therefore she throws the dirt of her Birds out of the neast, and compels
her Birds to throw their dirt out of the neast; and they feed their Birds
with Spiders, Worms, and Flies: and they eat venomous seeds, as of Henbane,
without hurt: and they have sometime Leper and the falling evil: and the
female lives longer then the male, and the male is jealous of his wife, and
fights often for her, as Aristotle says: and the sparrow dreadeth the Weesell,
and hates her, and cries and warns if ye weesell comes. And waits and
biteth and billeth for to have the neasts of Swallows, and they love their
own kind. And birds that other Sparrowes leave by some hap, they gather and
feed and nourish, as they were their own. And if it happens that one of the^
is taken in a grinne, or in other manner wise, she cries for help. And a
multitude of Sparrowes be gathered togethers to deliver that that is taken, and
speed and have with all their might.

( Addition
The more of that which proves heat, she sooner is wasted the inner virtue,
the cause of the gout, if not the leprosy, hastours of death.)

Of the Estridge. cap. 33.
THE Estridge is called Strucio, and has that name of a word of Greek, as
Isidore says. For that he has a body as a beast, and feathers as a sense: and
also he has two feet, and a bill as a foul: but for weight and heaviness of
body be flies not with fowls in the air. She lays eggs as other fowls
do, but she neglects to brood her eggs, she which eggs be raken in grauel,
and on^^ be brought forth by heat and nourishing of the dust, as Isid. says.
And Aristotle speaks of the Strucio, and says, that the Strucio in making is
like to a foul, and in some point he is like to a four footed beast. For he
flies not up into the air; for his wings be not couenable to flight, but in
the making thereof is thin, as the making of her self, and for he is some deal
shape as a bird he has many feathers in the nether part of the body, and has
two feet as a foul, and is cloue footed as a four footed beast: and the
cause thereof is, for by the greatness of his body, he is likned to a four
footed beast, and not to a foul, and is so hot, that he swalloweth and defieth
and wastes iron. And Auicen says, kind that is wise and ware in all thing,
grants to the Strucio a property to lay greatest eggs and hardest of
shell, that being occupied about the generation of them, heat may be temperate;
for if the heat should be too vehement, it should be cause why he should die
the sooner. Other properties of the Estridge Gre. touches super lob. 29. where
it is said, that feathers of the Strucio be like in color to the feathers of ye
gentle Fawlcon, but not in virtue: the feathers have the likeness, but he
lacks swiftness of flight. He spreads out his wings to fly, but yet he
rises not up from the earth: He is clothed with thin feathers, and made heavy
with a great body. And when the time is come that they shall lay eggs, they
heave up their eyes and behold the stars that be called Virgilie or Pliades:
for they lay no Eggs but when the constellation arises and is seen. And
about ye month of June, when they see those stars, theyd dig in gravel and
lay there their eggs, and cover and hide them with sand. And when they have
left them there, they forget anon where they laid them, and come never
again thereto. But the grauel is chased with the heat of the Sun, and
heateth the Eggs that be hid, and breeds birds therein, and brings them
forth: And when the shell is broke, and birds come out, then first the mother
gathers and nourishes them: And the bird that she despised in the Egg,
she knows when it is come out of the Egg. And therefore it is said to Job.
He is made hard to his own children, as though he were not his own. Also
the Estridge hates the horse by kind, and is so contrary to the horse, that
he may not see ye horse without fear. And if an horse come against him, he
raises up his wings as it were against his enimye, and compels the horse to
fly with beating of his wings.

Addition
Of the feathers of the Estridge, the plumage is made for Princes, and nobles to
wear in their hats, caps, and other furniture.)

Of the Turtle. chap. 34:
THE Turtle has that name of the voice, and is a simple Bird, as the Culuour.
But is chaste, far unlike the Culuour. The Turtle is a chaste Bird, and has
that name of conditions. For he follows chastity, and if he leeseth his make,
he seekth not company of any other, but goes alone, and has mind of the
fellowship yt is lost: and groneth always, and loves and chooses solitarye
place, and flies much company of men: Nevertheless he comes down into
Orchards and gardens, and feelds of men, and there eats, whereby he lives.
And when he has meat, he passes again to high hills, and to privy places
of woods. He comes in springing time and warns of nouelty of time with
groaning voice. And in winter he leeseth his feathers, and then he hides him in
hollow stocks. And against Summer in springing time when his feathers spring
again, he comes out of his hoale, in the which he was hid, and seeks
couenable place, and steed for to breed in. And among thick boughs and
trees, of hard sticks and knottie she makes her neast, and lays Eggs
therein and sits abroode, and has Birds, and feeds and nourishes them,
as Aristotle says. The Turtle lays Eggs twice in Springing time, and not
the third time, but if the first Eggs be corrupt. And Turtles lay and
breed fifteen year, and light not upon slinking things, neither upon
carrion, because of meat: for she eats not carrion, but for meat for her
birds, she seeks out clean grains, and gathers them in clean places, and
lives thereby. When other Birds sing, she groneth, and his Birds be hot and
moist, as Culuour Birds, as Constantine says: and that witnesses heaviness
of flight. But when he begins to fly, his flesh is made more hot and light,
and more better to defy. Also the blood of her right wing is medicinable, as
the blood of a Swallowe, and of a Culuour or Dove.

Of the Vulture. chap. 35.
THE Uolture has the name of slow flight, as Isidore says. For of the
plenteousnesse of much flesh, he lacks swiftness of flight. And some men
tell, that her treding is not meddled, but yt she conceiueth, and is conceived,
and gendereth, and is gendered without joining of treading: and they tell, that
they live an hundred years, as Isidore says. This Bird is cruel about his
own Birds, as the Kite is. And if she sees her birds too fat, she
beats them with her feet and bill to make them lean by sore beating and
biting, as Plinius says.

Also he says, that in this Bird the wit of smelling is best. And therefore
by smelling he sauoureth carrions that be far from him that is beyond the
sea: and againeward Therefore the Uulture follows the host that he may
feed himself with carrions of men, and of horse. And therefore (as a Diuinour
says) when many Uulturs come and fly together, it betokens battle. And
they know that such a battle shall be, by some privy wit of kind. And
Aristotle speaks of the Uulture and says, that he fights with the gentle
Falwcon, and slyeth about him, and when he has overcome him, he dies. He
eats raw flesh: and therefore he fights against other Fowls because of
meat, and he hunteth from middaye to night: and rests still from the Sun
rising to that time. And when he ageth, his over bill waxes long and cr^oked
over the nether, and dies at the last for hunger, as Aristotle says there.
And some men say, by error of old time, that the Uulture was sometime a man,
and was cruel to some Pilgrims; and therefore he has such pain of his
bill, and dies for hunger, but that is not lawful to believe.

And so he says, when he of his meat leaves relief, he leaves not that
other fowls, as the Eagle does, but lays it in his neast to feed with his
birds: for he gets not ligthly meat: and their neasts be on high
mountains, and in thick woods. And if he sees any foul fly about his
birds, he beats them away: and feeds his birds till they may fly: and
then he drives them out of the neast, and suffers them not to come nigh that
place.

Also in lib. de Almacar, he says, that there is a manner water foul that
dreadeth the Uulture, and therefore flies to the water: and the Uulture flies
about far from thence, and is sharp of sight, and waiseth when the foul
comes out of the water: and then he takes that foul if he may.

Also the Uulture is a much stinking foul and unclean, and his flesh is most
hard and of evil savor, and of heavy smell. And therefore it is not
profitable for man's meat: For carrion he lights lightly to the ground. But
when he is alighted, vnueth he rises again from the ground, as Gregory says.
He flies high, and sees carrions that be full low: and for love of carrion
he comes down from the high country of the air, to the ground, as he
says. And when any beast sets upon him he beats his wings against the
wind: and so he, rises from the ground: and flies into the air more by
help of the wind then by his own strength.

And heereto lib. 29. ca. 3. Plinius says, that among fowls the Uulture is
contrary to serpents. For if his feathers be burnt, the smell thereof drives
away Serpents. And the heart thereof makes a man siker, and safe that brareth
it among Serpents and wild beasts.

His heart bound in a Lions skin, or in a Wolfes skin drives away feends.
His feathers bound to the left foot of a woman, that trauaileth with child,
delivers her swiftly. But then it must be taken away lightlye, least the
entrayles follow and come out after, Ointment made of Uultures grease, and
oil that is called Oleum myrti, and Wax, helps sinews, and beasts also.
His right foot bound to the left foot, heals that aketh; the left foot also
heals the right foot. His tongue plucked out with iron, and hanged about a
man's neck in new cloth, makes a man gracious, to get of a man what he
desires. So it is said, his boanes burnt to ashes, and meddled with Celidonia,
and given to beasts, heals their evils. Huc vsque Plinius, cap. 36. He
says that blood of Uultures, with the herb yt is called Cabeon, or else
Cameleonte, and Celdra, heals the Leper.

Addition
The Uulture is called a Geir, like unto an Eagle, a bird of a fierce stomach,
there are diverse kinds, there is one kind like the Fawlcon, bigger billed,
and talented. Read Gesner.

Of Vlula. chap. 36.
VLula is a foul that has that name of shrieching and crieng: And therefore
among Diuinours with cryeng he betokens aduersitye, as Isidore says. And
heerby it seems that Vlula and the Owl be all one, and among Diuinours her
voice is ungracious. Super Esai. 14. the Gloss says in this manner. Vlula is a
Bird of the quantitye of a Crow, sprung with speckes, and pitcheth his bill
into a myrye place, and makes a great sound and noise. And hereby it seems
that Vlula is a mice dromble, that is a Bird of the marryes, and dwells in
myrye places. Seek before in the Chapter of the Miredromble.



Of the Lapwing. chap. 37.
THE Lapwing is called Vpupa among the Greeks: for he eats man's dirt, and is
nourished and fed often with doung, as Isidore says. For it is a bird most
filthy and unclean, and is copped on the head, and dwells always in graves or
in dirt. And if a man anoint himself with her blood when he goes to sleep,
in his sleep he shall see feends busy to strangle and snare him: and her heart
is good to evil doers, for in their evil doing they use their hearts. Of
this bird Philosophers tell, that when he ageth, so that he may neither see
nor fly, his birds pull away the feeble feathers, and anoint his eyes with
juice of herbs, and hide him under their wings till his feathers be grown:
They call it yt black plouer.
and so he is renewed, and flies, and sees clearly, as Isidore says.

Of the Reremouse. chap. 38.
THe reremouse is called Vespertilio, and has that name of the euentide. The
Bat, or Rearemouse, or dormouse
For it hating light, flies in the euentide with breaking and blenching, and
swifte moving, with full small skins of her wings. And is a beast like to a
mouse in sownding with voice, in piping, and crieng. And he is like to a Bird,
and also to a four footed beast: and that is but seld found among Birds. Huc
vsque Isidorus. Also super Esaiam. 2. the Gloss says that these Reremise fly
light, for they be blind as Moles, and like powder, and suck Oil out of
Lamps: And they hide themselves in chins and cliffes of walls, and be most
cold of kind. Therefore the blood of a Reremouse anointed upon the eye
liddes, suffers not the hair to grow again, as Constantine says. And that
perchance is because it stops the poores with his coldness. And when he
poores be stopped, hair grows not again.

Addition
In the Island of Catighan are certain great Battes, as big as Eagles, of the
which the trauailers of the West Indias report they took one: they are good to
be eaten, and of taste much like a hen: Folio. 439. in the third Decade, and.^.
book Folio. 128. The trauailers over in the straights greatly tormented with
the biting of Bats, which are there so noisome in the night, that if they bite
any man in his sleep, they put him in danger of life, only with drawing of
blood, insomuch that some have died thereof, falling as it were into a
consumption through the malitiousnese of the venomous wound, etc.

FINIS LIBRI DVODECIMI.
INCIPIT LIBER XIII.
DE AQVA ET EIVS ORNATV.
FOrasmuch as the properties of fire and of air are described, now it is
convenient to remember somewhat the effects and doing of waters as it belongs
to this work. And water is called Aqua, as it were Equa, even. For it rests
never of moving, till the ouerside thereof be even, as Isid. says. li. 12. Also
Constable. says, that water is a cold element and moist, and more subtle then
earth, and bright and clean, and not held in with his own marks and bonds.
For water should all to shed and fall to naught, except it were stopped and held
in with other marks and bonds then his own. In Exameron Basilius describes ye
properties of water in general and says: that among all elements water is most
profitable, for water makes heaven te^perate, and the earth plenteous, and
incorporateth ye air with vapors, and makes it thick, and stieth up on
high, and chalengeth heaven. Water is cause of all that is bred and springs:
for it breeds corn and fruit, and brings forth trees, herbs and grass,
and wipeth of filth, and washes away foulness, and gives drink to man and
beast. For water joins with ye earth, and pearceth and fills it, and
nourishes the heat of heaven, and tempereth al ye nether things. For but if
these nether things were te^pered in their moving about, they should burn and
be wasted by strength of heat: this water drunk of beasts leads forth the
meat and feeding into living of flesh. This gives spirit and breath to fish,
as the air gives to other beasts, and joining of body and soul. This shed
into the inner parts of the earth, joins ye parts thereof. For by strength of
great drines ye earth should fall to powder, but if the parts were joined
together by moisture and water. Also this passing by the inward ways of ye
earth, takes changing in likeness and color, and savor of place by which
it passes. And therefore water is, and seems now salt, now sweet and fresh,
now clear, now troublous, now thick, now thin. For water has no determinate
quality nor color, nor savor, to ye intent it should so be able to take easily
all colors and savors, and therefore ye more clean and pure ye water is, ye
more dark and dim it seems, when ye Sun beams come not therein to give it
color and hew. This moves from ye middle toward the utter roundnes, and
stinteth not till the utter parts thereof be made even, and the parts thereof
like far from the middle point of ye earth. Also this takes light of the Sun
beams, and reboundeth it againeward toward heaven. And for it has ye utter
part of a mirror, and shows his kind, by working and doing of light
rebounded, likeness and Image of things be seen therein, and the faces of them
that look therein, be known and seen therein, as it were in a mirror.

Also this sheddeth abroad the beams that thirleth the substance thereof, and
spreads them more largely in breadth, and therefore it makes things that be
seen therein seem more then they be in themselves. These general properties
of water, and many other thou may find in Exameron. And there be many diverse
waters as he says. For water springs and comes of the air, as rain
water. And for this is heavenly water, it is most profitable to things that grow
in earth. Other waters spring and walme out of ye inner parts of ye earth, as
well water and pit water. And some water passes and runs on the earth, as
water of rivers: and some water beclippeth the feeds of the earth, and of ye
roundnesse thereof, as the sea of Occean, and of middle earth, that is mother
and general head and spring of all waters, as Constantine says. Then rain
water is of it self, bright, clear, thin, light, and sauourie. The
cleerenesse thereof shows, that none other thing is meddeled therewith. And
the lightness and sauourynes of it, shows the subtle substance thereof.
Among al waters this is best to plenteousnesse of ye earth, and namely when it
falls with thunder. For with his moving, thunder smites of vapors: and so
makes the water subtle and clear, pure and clean. And the water that is
meddled with Snow, or molten of Snow, is worse and not good for them that be
fasting. For it smites the stomach, and riueth it togethers, and breeds
cough, and sets the teeth an edge, as Constantine says. Of diversity of
waters, and diverse quality and working thereof, seek before lib. 6. of
drink. chap. 31. there ye shall find it more plainly declared and open.

And after Rain water, Well water is best, namely if it spring out of stones,
or fall down of high wells. For the well is head and spring of living water,
that springs and runs continually out of privy veins of the earth.
Therefore a Well is called Fons, as it were Fouens, nourishing, or Fundens,
shedding, as Isidore says. And has privy coming out of the veins of the
earth. And has his springing and rising out of day ways of stones, and a
Well multiplyeth his waters, and communicatiueth himself: for he hides
himself to nothing: And communicatiueth and parts himself as well to
Pilgrims and strangers, as to men of the same country.

Also he cleanses himself and other things: for well water that runs out
of sad stones is clear, and cleanses of most filth and hoare also. Also a
well renueth himself, and altreth other things, and helps, for always he
renueth his waters, and gives benefice of renewing and altring, to things that
plunge themselves in wells, as the Gloss says super psa. Also it abateth
thirst, and cools and refreshes wayfairing men in heat, and gives to them
that be a thirst, drink, that is contrary to heat and dryness. Also a well
makes the places plenteous yt be nigh thereabout, for places that be next to
wells, commonly have mo herbs and grass, and flowers, and be more fructuous
tha^ other. Also a well in the middle thereof, springs first up of the earth,
and casts away from it self powder and gravel yt be in his way, for a well
springs and walmeth up by violence of his moving, and passes through ye
earthy parts, and departs and deals part from part, and sheddeth and
sparpleth them asunder. Also a Well because of his cleerenesse (as it were a
myrrour) shows shapes and likeness of things that be there before: and
therefore men that look in wells, see therein their own faces, and as well the
riuelyng and other speckes that defile the fairness be seen in water of wells.

Also a well by qualytie of times, of winter and of Summer changes his own
quality. For as Macrobius says, in winter a well is hot, and cold in Summer
time: the cause thereof is, for in winter heat flies and voideth the master of
his contrary, and draws inward to the inner part of a well, and by presence
of that heat and continual beating, the mouth of the well is hot: and the
contrary in summer for contrary cause, for because of heat yt has masterie in
the air in summer, coldenesse flies to the inner parts of ways and veins of
the well, and therefore water that springs, is found the more cold that time.
Also by the highness of place of ye springing of water, the well sends his
water: for ye water is led as high in pipes, as ye place of spring of the water
is, that he springs in: for if a well springs in ye top of an hill, often by
pipes the water is led to ye same highness into another hill, and is not led
higher than his own springing place, except it be by violence. Also though a
well be little in his own spring: yet for it springs continuallye, it is
original cause of many great Rivers, for there is no River, but it springs
out of some Well, known or unknown, as Isidore says. Also a well amendeth
water of lakes, and other standing waters, as it were quickening the^ with
virtue. For when a well is little and springs or passes by a great lake, it
makes the water therein ye more wholesome, and the fish yt is therein ye better
in point and state. Also a well takes and receives heat, virtue, and savor of
ways and veins of ye earth, yt it passes by, as Isid. says. Therefore wells
be now hot, now cold, now smelling of brimstone, after ye diverse qualities of
the earth that it passes by, as Isid. says li. 12 In Italy is a well, and the
water thereof, often heals sore eyes: Also in Africa is a well, and the water
thereof makes the voice well sownding and singing. Also in Boetia be two
Wells, that one makes good mind, and that other makes forgetfulness. Also
in Aethiopia is a well of red color, and he that drinks thereof, shall anon
be wood or mad. Also in Cecilia be two wells, and one thereof makes females
barren, and that other makes them that be barren, able to conceive. Also in
Idumea is a Well, that changes color four times a year: for three months
it seems troublous, as it were tempered with powder, three months red as
blood, three months green, and three months a manner blue. Men of that
Country, call that Well, Jobs Well.

Also in Siloa at the foot of the mount Sion, is a well that runs not
always, but certain days and hours. Also in Sardinia be hot wells that help
eyes, and reprove thieves for their evil doing, and makes them known by
blindness. Also he says yt in Egypt is a well, in ye which burning brondes be
quenched, and quenched bronds are kindled. Also among the Garamantes there is a
Well so cold by day, that it may not be dronk, and so hot by night, that it may
not be touched. Huc vsque Isidore. Hereof it follows, that a well has savor
and kind of his own ground. For if the ground be sweet and pure, the water
shall also be sweet and pure, and againward. Also if the ground be brimstonie
or slimie, the water shall savor of brimstone and slime: and so if the well in
his own spring be corrupt and vicious, all that runs out is vicious and
corrupt.

Addition
There are in England, Waters that cure lame and diseased: at Bathe, at Saint
Anne at Buckstone, and Newman regis.

Of Pit water. Cap. 2.
A Pit is called Puteus, and Puteus, is a lake dug and dolue, and has that
name Puteus of Potus, drink as Isidore says: for of sweating and wosing of
clyues and dens of the earth, water springs, for then the small inner
veins of the earth be broke, and the water wose out as it were smoking. And of
that wosing, pit water is gendered, as he says. And as Constant. says, among
waters, pit water is thickest and worst to defy, for saltness of the earth,
and for standing of the water, and also for deepnesse and farnesse from the
air. By river sides pit water is soon found, and the substance of that water,
is likened to the complexion of the river water: and when a pit is nigh
another, the deeper pit draws the water of the pit that is of less
deepnesse, and gathers that water to it self, and takes savor of the earth
and ground that is there about, and therefore the water is showed now salt, now
fresh. Also pit water often takes corruption, when it is not moved, and
therefore to make pit water clean, and pure, it needs that it be often moved
and drawn: and the nearer that pit water is to the vein of the earth, the
more cold and the more fresh commonly the water is found. Also in winter
seldom or never pit water freeseth. For by presence of cold air in Winter
time, heat that is contrary to cold is there put into the inner parts of the
pit, and therefore the water thereof is changed by hot vapor, and is not
suffered to freese, but is found more hot in Winter, than in Summer. Also for
deepnesse of his place, pit water is got with difficulty, and is uneath caught
or drawn without great trial and craft.

Of a River. Cap. 3.
A River is called Flunius, and has that name of Affluendo, running. For as
Isidore says, it is everlasting running: for it runs continually, and
ceasseth not to run, but if the head thereof be stopped or turned and let. It
is to know in a River is everlasting running and deepnesse of place, and
winding and turning of moving: for often a river runs, by full long space of
countries and lands: also ye head is known of ye well spring, and the final
end whetherward it runs, and the manner of springing. For every river comes
originally out of the sea, by privy ways, and springs out in Well heads,
and pass often into the sea, by ways and passages that be known, as the Gloss
says, super Eccle. pri. there it is said, that all the rivers run into the
sea. There Jerome says thus, Philosophers tell, that sweet Waters that run
into the sea, be consumpt and wasted by heat of the Sun, or else they be
food and nourishing of saltness of the sea. But our Ecclesiastes, the maker
of waters says, That they come again by privy veins of the earth, to the
Well heads, and comes out of the mother, that is the sea, and walmeth and
springs out in Well heads.

Also it is to be considered, in a river the corpse, and the moving between,
and from the the beginning to the end, and also the savor and sweetness, for
river water is driued end cleansed in veins of wels, by whom he passes, and is
spoiled of saltness, and takes favor, and is able to be drunk, and turns
into sweeetnes as Isidore says.

Also as to the sight, the fair cleernes thereof is to be considered. For the
substance thereof takes light, and is clear, as a myrrour, and so images and
things, that be object thereto be seen in waters of rivers. Also touching the
substance of a river the cleanness and pureness is to be considered, and the
course thereof is downward and swift, and swiftnes is more virtuous: for it
bears down all lets that it finds in his course, and nothing withstandeth
the rauishing thereof. For with his swiftness he bears forth with his course
all that is thrown therein, or else drives it to ye brinke, and brimme, and
moves and bears ships laden, and puts them forth with his course, and
moves about, and turns full swiftly full heavy wheels by violence and
strength, and takes in himself hoare and filth, that is thrown therein: but
by swiftness of moving, he departs and disperpleth such filth and hoare.
And a river cleanses him self and the place that he passes by, and renews
waters of lakes and of ponds, there he comes in, and keeps them from
corruption, and feeds and nourishes fish of diverse kinds, and cleanses and
does away stench and evil savor, and changes ye qualities of fish of lakes
and of marches.

Also touching the effect and doing, a river has many profitable things, that
be couenable to the use of men: For he warns to nothing his benefice, but
co^muneth to all men as much as it self, for he serves even like both men and
beasts, less and more, and cleanses and does away filth and uncleanness both
of bodies, and of clothing, and refreshes and cools them that be hot, and
feeds with drink them that be a thirst, and moysteth and makes plenteous
the place that is nigh thereto by influence of his humors, and moysteth roots
and feeds, and makes them great and fat, as it fares in Egypt. There when
seeds lie sown as it were in gardens, all the fields take moisture of the
river Nilus, as Rabanus says super Deuteronomy. cap. 11. with his course about the
Cities, he wardeth and strengthens them, and other dwelling places, and
brings to Cities victuals, and Merchaundises, and makes men rich, and
gathers together heaps of grauel and earth, and makes Ilards, and also
couenable place for succor and strength. Constantine speaks of River water
and says, that river water is best that runs Eastward, Those springs,
whose current is tovvard ye rising of the sun are wholsomest waters.
and springs and comes out of high Mountains: and the river water that
runs West ward, less worthy. Also he says, that the farther the riuere be
from Cities, the more clean they be and pure, and the more couenable to
feeding of fish. Also filth and hoare of cities be cast into rivers, and
washing and bathing of siex and of other things, of the which the river water
sometime takes corruption, as he says. River water is good, that runs
swiftly: strongly upon small stones and grauelly ground, or upon clay ground,
sad, sauory and clear, for it takes savor and color of the ground that it
passes by and therefore as well the names, is the properties of Rivers be
diverse as the Gloss says (...) per Genesis 2. And though rivers have common head
spring of the Sea, yet nevertheless of the place that (...) springs up in,
and of the country, that he passes by, he takes savor and color and name.
And though a river takes in it self many waters and streams, that run
thereto, yet as long as the proper well springs of a lake, he leseth not
soon the first name: for he corporeth and joins to himself waters, and
runs thereto, both in name and in substance. Therefore though a River be
little and small, when he begins to spring out of the first well, yet ye
farther he passes from the head spring, the more he wexeth by running and
coming of waters and streams, as it does in Danubio, a river of Germany, yt
is called Downow in ye common speech, whereof Isi. li. 13. speaks and says,
yt this river springs and comes out of ye hills of Germany in ye west side,
out of a little well, and runs Eastward, and takes to it self lx. rivers,
and falls into the sea, named Pontitu^ in 7. mouths: and always alike that
river is profitable, while he passes not the bonds of his brinke, borders and
brims: but sometime by great rain, or by melting of snow the water arises,
and passes the channel and brimmes. And then often he destroys and drowneth
the playnes of the country, that is there nigh.

Of rivers be two manner kinds, as Isidore says. One is called a living
river. Whereof Virgil says, Donec me flumine viuo abluero, etc. That other
manner river is called Torrens, and is a water that comes with a swift reese,
and passes: and is called Torrens, for it increases in great rain, and
fades in dry weather. And the Greeks gave thereto a name of Winter, when it
increases, and we gave thereto a name of Summer, when it falls and dries:
and the course of such a water is full swifte and strong, and therefore it
overthrows and bears down all that it meets with, it self is swifte and
strong in moving, and there it runs it breketh earth, and diggesh and makes
dens therein, and gathers straw and stones on a heap, and leaves behind
a mark and token, and destroys ways, and drowneth things that be nigh
thereto, and falls into the sea.

Of Amnis, a River. Cap. 4.
AMnis is a River arrayed and set with woods and groves, with trees and
bushes, as Isidore says, and has that name Amnis of Amenitate, mirth, for
such a place is merry. And there by grow medicinable herbs in great plenty,
and wild fowls nestle, and breed in ye course and stream thereof, and wild
beasts take drink and cool themselves in burning heat, and nigh thereto be
leeses and pastures in great plenty, which are long in verdure fair and
green. And there be some rivers, of the which holy Writ makes special
mention, as Phison, Gion, Tigris, Dorix, Euphrates, Jordan, and other. And
Phison is that river that is called Ganges also, as Isidore says. lib. 13. and
has that name Ganges of a king that is called Gangantes. This River comes
out of Paradise, and passes about the land Eiulatha a Country of Inde, and
is called Phison, yt is to understand, fellowship, for he takes in it self
ten rivers: also Phison is to understand changing of mouth, for it changes
the quality that it has in Paradise, and that in three manner wise, as the
Master says In Historijs. In color he is clear, and some where dim, and
some where troubly in quantity. For some where he is little, and some where huge
and great, and some where wide, and some where straight in feeling, for some
where he is cold, and some where hot. In this River is much golden gravel,
and many precious stones. Also in the cliffes and brimmes thereof, grow trees
and herbs with sweet smellyng, and is medicinable.

Amnus a River in the Island Dolica, in Arabia. Addition


Of the river Gion. Cap. 5.
THE river Gion is called Nilus also, and is a river of Mesopotamia, and
comes out of Paradise, and is called the joining of the earth, or earthye,
for it is troubly, carthic, slimie, and wosie, and arises not far from
Athlante, and passes about the land Aethiopia, and comes down by Egypt,
and moysteth the Playnes thereof. And so Super Amos, he says upon that word,
Defluit, quasi riuus Aegypti. That River Nylus, by disposition of God, moysteth
all Egypt once a year, and heaps of gravel close the mouths thereof, that it
falls not inth^ Sea, and after the moysting of the land, the heaps of
gravel divide and fall away, and Nilus turns again into his own channel,
and passes into the sea, and is swallowed into the Sea at the last. This river
Nilus feeds and norisheth many manners of creeping and venomous beasts
noyfull and grievous, as Crocodiles, and a little beast, which is called
Enidros. Of whom Isidore li. 12. ca. 2. says, that that beast Enidros, is a
little beast, and has that name Enidros, for he dwells in waters, and
namelye in the river that is called Nilus. And if this little beast finds a
Crocodile sleeping, he walloweth and wrappeth himself first in senne and wose,
and then comes in at the mouth of the Crocodile and goes into his womb, and
all to renteth his guts and slays him, and so ^yeth. Also sup. Eccelesi. 24.
There the Gloss says, that Gion, that is river Nilus is troubly, and draws
much slime and wose and there because of slyme and wo^e that he bears with
him in his course, he makes the land that he ouerpasseth to be full plenteous
of corn, and fruit.

( Addition
Gyon called Nylus, a famous and great River, running thorough Aethiopia and
Egypt, and is supposed to be one of the Rivers of Paradise, called in the
holy Scripture, Gehon, that signifies the breast of slowing forth, that as
creatures are nourished of milk, so is the soil by ouerflowing the valleys.
Albeit it seems to me vnlykelye, forasmuch as in Genesis it is written, that
Gehon inuironeth all Aethiopia, where is no mention made, that it passes
through Egypt, albeit ye Egypt and the River Nilus, were more nigh to Moses,
when he wrote, the book Genesis, then Aethiope was, and also Nilus was famous
for the virtue of the water thereof, which ouerflowing the country of Egypt,
made ye ground wonderful fertile many years after: so that without laboring
ye earth brought forth abundaunce of sundry grains and plants delectable and
profitable. Also beasts of sundry kinds, without other form of generation:
especially, when the River came to the deepenesse of 40. Cubits. Likewise,
when it exceeded not eight cubits, there succeeded much famine and scarcity.
D. Cooper in his Dictionarie.

Nilus the most famous River of the world, from the time that the Sun be in
Tropico Cancri, until it come unto the Equinoctial line, in Libra again,
with an huge abundance of water, does ouerflowe all the Downs, and plain
Countries of Egypt. By the altitude and deepenesse of the floude, the
Egyptians foresee the plentye and scarcitye of fruits to come. Polidore
Virgil in his first Book, xv. Chapter.)

Of Tigris the River. Ca. 6.
TIgris is a river of Mes(...), and comes out of Paradise, and passes forth
against Assyries, as Isid says, and passes into the Red sea after many
turnings and windings, and has this name Tigris, for strong reese and
swiftness, as that beast that is called Tigris, that runs with great
swiftness. And Josephus says, that Tigris arises in Armenia, of the same
Well, of the which Euphrates arises, and is called Tigl^th, Tigris ^^risieth
^ellan arrow in the ^^^.
that is to understand, sharp or straight, for he runs straightly and
sharply, as it were an arrow. Therefore in ye language of Persia, Tigris, and
swift, and an arrowe are all one.

( Addition
This mighty River runs toward ye East side of Assyria. Genesis 2. ca.)

Of Euphrates the river. Cap. 7.
EVphrates is a river of Mesopotamia, and comes out of Paradise, and is most
copious in gems and precious stones, and runs by the middle of Babylon. This
river has that name of plenteousnesse, for in Hebrew Euphrata is to mean
fruitful, and runs in some place of Mesopotamia, and moisteth the land,
like as Nilus does Aegipt. And Salustius that is most certain of authority
says, that Tigris and Euphrates spring out of a well in Armenia, and pass
forth by diverse places, and between those two, is a space of land of many
miles. And the land that these two rivers beclippeth is called Mesopotamia. Huc
vsque Isid. lib. 13. cap. 1.

Of the River Dorix. Chap. 8.
THe Gloss super Eccle. 14. says, that Dorix is a river, and has another
name, and is called Ar^xis, or Ar^psis, a river of Armenia, and rises and
comes out of the same hist with Euphrates, and has yt name for his
sweetness and might. He overcomes and throws down all thing, that is in
his way, as Isidore says libro. 13. And so when Alexander would pass there
over, he made a bridge thereon, and the river arose with so great strength and
violence, that it all to brake despi^ously ye bridge. This river arises a
little from the head of Euphrates, and runs thence to the Sea, that is
called Mare Caspuim, as Isidore says. And is called Dorix among the Greeks,
of a part of their land, for in that country where that river runs, their
language is called Lingna Dorica. The Gloss says super Ecclesiasticum. 14.
This river seems as it were an arm of Tigris, or else of Euphrates, or else of
either: for it springs and rises out of the same Well in Armenia. Therefore
it is said, that he has plenty of precious stones, and of well savoring
herbs, which be couenable to medicines: For Dorix is to be understood,
medicine of generation. Also he says, that he comes out of Paradise by
moving of Tigris and Euphrates.

Of Iordane. Cap. 9.
IOrdane is a River of Jury, and has that name of two wels: one of them is
tailed for and the other Dan, as Isidore says li. 13. And arises under ye hill
or mount Libani, and departs Araby and Jury, and passes by many windings
about, and by Jericho, and runs into the dead sea, and is therein swallowed
and wasted. When wheat is ripe, that often ripeth in Palestine in springing
time, this river often arises more than in any other time, and that falls of
much rain, and of melting of snow, as it is said in Histor^^ and in Glosa
super Iosu. 3.

There it is said, Iordane fills the drinks and the brimmes of his channel
in reaping time etc. ^^t in Ecclesiasti. 24. the same is said. This river has
many priueledges. First, for he departs the country of right believing men,
from the country of misbeleeuing men, for he departs Jury from Araby. The
second, for he departed himself in presence of the children of Israel, and
made them way and passage, to go into the land of behest with the Arc of our
Lord, as it is said Joshua. 3. The third, for he washed and cleansed Naaman of
Syria of his leprosy. 3. Reg. cap. 5. The fourth, for by the dividing of it
self, it bare witness of the holiness of Elias, and of Eliseus, for he was
obedient to both their commandments, as it appears 4. Reg. 2. The fifth, for
against kind of other waters, he hid not in his bottom iron that fell
therein, but cast it upward, and areared it to the Prophets kind, that had
lost it, that he might it take, as it is read ^. Re. 6. The sixth, for he was
worthy to be hallowed by touching of the most clean flesh of our Lord, and by
mean thereof our Lord gave virtue of ghostly gendering to waters, and ordained
the Sacrament of salvation of mankind in water, as it is said Luc. 2. The
seventh, At ye baptism of Christ.
for in Iordane John Baptist was worthy to see heaven open, and to hear the
voice of the father, when he understood the mystery of all the Trinity in
christening of our Lord.

( Addition
Iordane, a fair river in Judea, which deuideth Galile from the residue of
Judea, and falls into the Red sea.)

Of the river Albana, and Pharphar. Cap. 10.
OTher Rivers be rehearsed in holy writ, Abanah.
as Albana and Pharphar, that be rivers of Syria, and run and pass by
Damask, and by the course and passing thereof, the gardens of Damask be
watered and moysted, and made plenteous, with multiplication of diverse trees,
of corn, herbs, and grass. Of these rivers it is written 4. Regum 5.

( Addition.
Damascus a famous city in Siria, supposed to be the first that ever was
inhabited.)

Of the river Gazan. cap. 11.
GAzan is a river of the Medes, and has another name, and is called Idapsis
also, and has that name, of one yt was King of Medes. And he rises in ye
East, and is received in ye Red sea. Upon this river, two lynages and an half,
which were taken Prisoners, by Salmanassar King of Assyria, and held in bonds,
were led and brought among the Assyrians, and compelled to abide exiled, as it
is said 4. Reg. cap. 18. as two ^mages were held in thraldom by Nabuchodonosor
upon his river Chobar, and held in Babylon long time, as it is said, Ezech And
Chobar is a river in Babilonia, and sheddeth himself into the marreise of
Babilonia, and rises out of Tigris or of Euphrates, and turns again into
the river of Chobar, or into one of them, as Jerome says super Ezech. In some
part of his brim be plenty of willowes and of sodge, as he says upon this
place of Esa. 18. Vltra torrentem salicis duceris. And he called this river,
the river of Babylon, upon ye which river Gods people made no joy, but wept
and made moan, as it is written. By the waters of Babylon we sat down and
wept, Psa. 13^.
when we remembered thee O Sion.

And many other rivers be right famous, but of them we shall not speak at this
time: for we have no mention of them in the Bible.

( Addition.
Idaspes, a river running in Parthia and Indie, and at last falls into the
great river Indus. In this river is found much gold and precious stones.

Of a Lake. chap. 12.
A Lake is receiving of privy waters, in the which water is taken and held,
and is not meddled with waves, nor ebbing nor flowing, as Isidore says li. 13.
And Greeks call a Lake Limum, that is a ponde: for wells fall into Rivers: and
rivers run into the sea, and a lake standely in a place and flows not, and
therefore is called Lacus, as it were a place of water as Isidore says: for
the water that he takes by springing or by running thereto, passes not out
thereof into other places. Fish of such a lake as Constantine says, is not so
good as river fish: for by his wose and slime he makes fish that breeds
therein, smell of slime, and fish of the lake breeds superfluity of herbs
and grass, and nourishes frogs and many worms.

Running water comes into lakes, and makes their water more fresh, and
keeps them from corruption, but often by too great coming of water in, lakes
and ponds be broke, and all that has been long time therein nourished is
suddenly destroyed. And lake water is more thick than river water, and worse to
drink: for such drink often taken, gendreth and breeds many evils in the
body, as it is said before in li. 5. of drink. And lake water takes diverse
virtues of place and ground where it is gathered, as Isidore shows ensample
li. 13. ca. 3. of diversity of waters, and says: That in Aethiopia is a lake,
wherein if a body be washed, he shines as though he were anointed with oil.
Also in Africa is a lake that makes good voice, and able to sing. Also in
Italia is a lake, that noyeth greatly them that drink thereof.

Also in the waters Reatins, hoofes and cl^^s of beasts be made hard, as it is
said. And in the lake that is called Affaltides, a lake of Jury, nothing may
sink, that has life and soul. Also even there is a pond, in the which
nothing fleeteth, but sinketh and is drowned. Also in Concidie is a lake, that
is three a day bitter, and as often fresh and sweet. All this Isid. tells in
the foresaid book, and all this and other such diversity of pit water and
lake water comes of diverse quality of veins of the earth and ground, by the
which such water passes, or else of kind and disposition of the ground, where
such water is gathered.

Of the lake Asphalti. ca. 13.
THere is a lake, that is called Lacus Asphalti, and is also called the dead
sea, for his greatness and deepnesse, for he breeds nor receives nothing
that has life. Therefore he has neither fishes nor fowls, but whenever thou
would have drowned therein any thing that has life with any crast or gin,
anon it plungeth and comes again up, though it be strongly thrust downward,
it is anon smitten upward, and it moves not with the wind, for glewe
withstandeth wind and storms, by the which glue all water is s^nt. And therein
may no ship row nor sail, for all thing that has no life sinketh down to the
ground. Nor he sustaineth no kind, but it be glewed, and a lantern without
his light sinketh therein as he tells, and a lantern with light fleeteth
above. This place is called Lacus asphalti, the place of glue, or it is called
Mare salinarum: and is in Jury between Jericho and Zachan. The length thereof
stretches even to Zoroas of Arabia, vii. C. lxxx. furlongs in length: and the
breadth thereof stretches a C. furlongs, or vsque a vicina Sodomorum. Huc vsque
Isid. lib. 13. ca. 3. De lacu and stagnis. As the master says in Historijs 3.
ca. de subuersione Sodomoru^, in sine, this lake casts up black clots of
glewe, and therefore it is called Lacus Asphaltides. In the brim thereof trees
grow, the apples whereof be green till they be ripe. and if ye cut them when
they be ripe, ye shall find ashes within them. And thereof Josephus says,
Fabula terrae Sodomorum fidem, etc. And so it is said in Glosa super 2. pe. ca.
super locum illum, Civitates Sodomorum in cinerem redigens, seruare voluit
Dominus regionem, contra positam speciem pressione pene. And there grow most
fair apples, that make men that see the^, have liking to eat of them, and if
one take them, they fade and fall in ashes, and smoke as though they were
burning.

( Addition.
Asphaltites or Asphaltum, a lake of Syria, called Mare mortuum: therein is the
lime mixed with brimstone, called Bitumen or Asphaltum, wherein no lively thing
can drown. Some suppose, that in that place stood the Cities of Sodoma and
Gomorrha.)

Of the lake Tiberiadis. ca. 14.
THe lake that is called Tiberiadis lacus has that name of a town, that is
called Tiberiadis, that sometime Herod builded in worship of Tiberius the
Emperor. And this lake and pond is greatest and most healthful and wholesome of
all the lakes of Jury, and more speedfull in cause of health. And stretches
lx. furlongs, as Isidore says lib. 13.

( Addition.
Tiberias a City in Galilee: Jesus passed over the sea of Gallilee, which is
the sea of Tiberias, and fed 5000. fowls with 5. barley loaves and 2. fishes.
John. 6.)

Of the pond Genesar. Cap. 15.
THe pond called Genesar as it is said there, is the most greatest lake in
Judea, and stretches C. lx. furlongs in length and lx. in breadth, with crispe
water and calm, and not strong wind, but they be crispe of themselves, and so
Genesar is a word of Greek, as it were gendering calm wether to it self.
Lakes yt stretch by great space and long, be moved by often blowing of wind and
wether, and therefore ye water thereof is ye more fresh and sweet, and the more
able to be drunk. Huc vsque Isid. This lake for his greatness, is often called
a Sea in the Gospel, but not that it is a sea, but for it seems so great a
water that comes of Jordan, as the Gloss says, super Io. ca. 6. For the
Hebrews use to call such a gathering of water a sea: and therefore it is often
called a sea.

( Addition.
Genezareth a great mere or pond in ye land of promission, called also Mare
Tyberiadis, whereon Christ walked as on dry land, and called to Peter,
comforting the disciples, that thought he had been a spirit. Math. 14. Mar. 6.

Of a Pond. cap. 16.
A Pond is called Piscina, and is water gathered to feeding of fish, though often
gathering of water without fish, is called Piscina by contrary meaning, as Isi.
says. To the goodness of a pond, needs sadness of ground: also it needs
cleannes of water, which runs and comes thereto, and continual running and
coming, for whereas the ground is fennie and mirie, there well sauored fishes
may not be norished, for where fresh water runs not nor comes, standing
water is soon corrupt: and therefore to renew and refresh ponds, fresh water is
led and brought by gutters, conduits and pipes, and the heads of pondes be
strengthened with banks and walls, for the water should not pass out too soon.
Also some pondes have streams to water and moist gardens and orchards. Also
near to ponds, trees and herbs be fruitful.

Of Riuus a lake. Cap. 17.
A Lake is called Riuus, and has that name of Rigando, wetting and moisting,
as Isidore says. For out of the well or out of the lake, stremes be led to wet
and to moist gardens: and a lake has the kind and effect of his welspring. Out
of the head well by running of the lake, come rivers and lakes, as Anselme
says. A lake washes and cleanses often uncleanness, and makes the earth
plenteous, and gives drink to beasts and to fowls, and nourishes and saves
greenness and virtues in herbs and in flowers, and draws with him small
stones, and gravel.

Of Fluctu, wallowing. Cap. 18.
sea waves
WAllowing of the sea is called Fluctus, and has that name of Flutu, blowing or
blast: For by putting and shouing of winds, water is moved and shuft, and the
over part thereof that moves always, is called Vnda, the wave, and has that
name Vnda of Eundo, going, and passing: for continually it moves, and rests
never, as Isi. says li. 13. And wallowings of the sea smites together, and
shoueth and puts each other, now upward, now downwarde. By often smiting
together, it gendreth some of himself, and medleth with himself gravel, and
diverse particles of the ground, and bears them upward, and puts and shoueth
fishes, and amendeth them, and makes them better by swiftnes of moving, and by
coming into it of windy air, wallowing of the sea arises and swells: and
moves now upward, now downward, by swift putting and shouing of wind. And
moves and shoueth the air by smiting together, and breeds wind, and
bears up ships, and puts them to cliffes and brims: And bears them with
him, and holds them straight, and makes sound and noise, and is always
moving, and may not rest: for either it fails at full, or moves and sheddeth
himself about.

Of Whoorlepits. cap. 19.
A Whoorlpit is called Gurgis, and is a deep place in a river, and has that
name of Gutture, a throat, as Isid. says. For it swalloweth in waters yt come
thereto, and throws them up again. So for his deepenesse he moves round
about, whirling and rebounding: Therefore swimmers be often perished. Also fish
hide themselves most in whoorlepooles, and are uneath taken, while they come
out of the whoorlepoole.

Of Streams. chap. 20.
A Stream takes ye first course straight and continual of water or of River,
and comes out of the well head, and leaves no channel of his way, for he
begins to run out of the well head, and runs continually within the
bounds of his chanel, til he come into the sea: and diggeth and wastes his
own ground, and is most couenable to row and sail in, and feeds and
nourishes great fish. For commonly the stream has most fresh water and most
clean ground, and runs more swiftlye then any other part of ye river. And
therefore he draws and bears forth ships and boats full swiftly, and
bundels of trees and wood. And therefore he has that name Trames, of Traho
trahis, or Transmitto transmittis, to bring or to send, or for he draws
swiftly all thing that is set therein, and brings it over. And the more fresh
the stream is in his own course, the more swift it is, and the more swift he
bears forth, and draws all thing with him.

Of Alluuione. cap. 21.
THere is a manner running water that has two names in latin, one is Alluuio,
nis: and the other name is Alluuies, and is privy and still rising of water,
and has that name of Abluendo, drawing and washing: for he washes the earth
that he passes by, and breaks thereof, and wastes it. And therefore
vnderhoaling and vndercreeping and wasting under brimmes that be hoaled and
hollow by water, is called Alluuio. Job. 14. It is said by vndercreeping and
privy running of water, the earth is wasted little and little: and then the
more strong the running and course that passes by privy hollownes and brims
and cliffes is, the more perillouslye he destroys and wastes the sadness
thereof, for the other part of the brim outward seems sure and sad without,
for there the destroying and wasting thereof is not seen within: and therefore
his foot slideth the sooner that treads therein. For the inward sadness is
wasted, and the privy hollownesse is hid and unknown, as Seneca says.

Of deepnesse. cap. 22.
AByssus is deepnesse of water unseen, and thereof come and spring Wells and
rivers: for out of the deepnes come all waters, and turn again thereto by
privy ways, as to the mother of water, as Isidore says li. 13. And therefore
Abyssus is said, as it were Abuisus, unseen and out of sight, for the
deepnesse thereof may not be seen. Or Abyssus is said as it were sine abisso,
without cleerenesse, because of farnesse from the well of light, it is without
hightinesse and fairness of light, as John Damascene says. Abissus is naught
else but much water, and the end and deepnesse thereof is unseen, for shining
of light stretches not, nor reaches to the end thereof. Or else Abissus is
said as it were sine base, bottomless, and the ground thereof is not seen with
eye. And therefore it was the primordiall and first matter in the beginning of
the world, and because in ye beginning it was not distinguished by certain
form, it is called Abyssus, as Austen would mean. Therefore li. confessionum
12. he says, that Abyssus, is that bodily thing that God made to be matter of
bodily things, and that matter was with form and shape without order and
without light. And so Abyssus is that same thing, which is Materia prima the
first matter, as Austen says in li. de Symbolis. And he says, that by this
name Abissus, holy Writ called and approved the matter that was made of
naught, to be first taker and receiver of shapes, and that by the most ordinate
gift of God, and for thereof all thing that has shape and form, should be
shaped and formed: and so the same matter is named water, for because that it
is fleeting, and running, and moving, and also for it takes and receives all
manner of forms and shapes. In likewise it was called earth, for the kindly
stedfastnes or sadness, by the which it was subject to generation and
corruption, and it was called Abyssus, for vnshapefulnesse, for it was
distinguished with no form nor shape. And it was called water for ableness to
take upon it form and shape, for by that ableness it might take all manner
form, and shape and quality, as Aust. says. Also Abissus, yt is, deepnesse
of water, has of it self dimnesse and deepnesse, and receives all water and
lycour that runs thereto, and has never enough: for it takes never so much
water, but it may take more, and may never be stopped, nor laued, nor emptied,
and is co^municable.

Of the Sea. cap. 23.
THe Sea is called Mare, and is gathering of water both fresh and salt, as
Isid. says lib. 13. And has properly that name Mare, for the water thereof is
bitter, as it is said there. And innermore it is said, that the sea is called
Eqoor, and has ye name of equality, euennes, for it is even and plain: for
though wallowing and waves of the sea, wallowe and arise, as it were mountains
and hills, yet when ye tempest cease the sea is plain again, as he says
there.

Psa. 89. Thou rulest the raging of the sea, Addition
thou stillest the waves thereof when they arise. ver. 10.

Also the sea is called Pelagus, as it were Pellens vndas, putting waters and
waves: for in the sea is continual moving and putting of waves and storms.
Also (as he says) though ye sea receives waters of all wels and rivers, yet
by so great coming of waters, the sea is never the more: and that is, for ye
sea is so great, that the waters that run thereto be not seen, or else for the
bitter water destroys and wastes the running water: or for the clouds draw
to them much water: or for the wind bears some thereof away, and the Sun
dries some: or for the sweetness of water is dried and cleansed, and turns
again by some privy holes, and comes often to the heads and wels or rivers.
Huc vsque Isidorus li. 13. And Ambrose says, and Basilius in Exameron, that
the Sea is gathering of water, multiplied by diverse places and names: but by
continuation is all one Sea, always moving and sounding, and foming, and
follows the kind of the Moon in flowing and reflowing, by whose virtue and
influence it is led. The Sea is head and receipt of Rivers, and fountain of
showers, and the thing whereby people far a sunder may come together, and the
sea helps in need, and is succor in perils, and speedeth passengers
shortness of ways, and furthereth profit, and winning or traffike of
trauaylyng men.

Also in libro Metheororum Aristotle says, that the sea is head and well of all
waters, and dispersed into other seas. And the cause why the sea is bitter and
salt, is, for in it be two vapors: one is moist, and that other dry, subtle
and watrie. And of the vapors that be moist and thin, the more subtle parts
be wasted by moving of the sun, and the thicker part abides and is made hot
and salt and bitter by heat of the sun, as sweat and urine: For by burning, a
thing is made bitter, when the earthy parts abide after that the watery and
moystie parts are consumed and wasted. And of bitterness by more strength of
burning comes saltness, as it does in ashes: For water that soaketh through
ashes, is salt.

In cod. li. Arist. says, that salt water of the sea, is more heavy and
thick, than fresh water: for sea water is more gross, and fresh water is more
subtle and thin: the token thereof to know it is so, is this, for an egg
fleeteth in salt water, and sinketh down in fresh water: and a ship falling
in fresh water, sinketh deeper than in salt water. And therefore in the dead
sea sinketh no beast, nor is gendred, for therein dryness has the masterie.

Also in li. de Animalibus he says, that in the sea is water, and the
saltness may be drawn out thereof: for if a man take a vessel of the earth,
new and raw, and closes the mouth thereof, and throws it empty into the
sea, and leaves it there a day and a night, fresh water shall come therein.

Also in li. Metheorum he says, the fresh water rises upward for freshness
and lightness, and salt water falls downward for his heaviness, and what is
salt abides in the earth, and what is sweet thereof, woseth out.

Also in li. de elementis he says, that the sea in his working follows the
kind of the Moon, as it is known. For always when the Moon, arises in any
time of the day or of the night, then the sea in that country where the Moon
arises, stretches it self, and withstandeth the course of rivers that run
thereto, and shoueth and bears again ye river water toward the place that it
comes from, as it were shouing by violence.

When the Moon is in the lower course, water begins to wane and ebb, and
when ye Moon arises, water begins to wexe and to flow: and so as iron
follows the Adamant stone, so the sea follows the course and the kind of
the Moon, Seek before in li. 8. ca. 29.

Also after the rising of the star that is called Canicula, the Sea wexeth
thick and changes color: and is now green, now blewe, now troublous, now
clear. In wexing of the Moon, the Occean holds this order. The first day of
wexing of the Moon, he is more copious than other times: for then the sea is
most full and high, and thereafter he abateth and lesseneth the second day, and
so downward each day even to the seventh day, and than the sea is in his last
default or ground ebb, and begins then again to spring more and more even
till the vii. day, so that when the Moon is xiiii. days old, and at the
full: then again is the sea full in his highest spring, and begins to
break and to wane and vadeth other vii. days, so that when the Moon is xxi.
days old, the sea is again at the lowest ebb, and yet springs and
increseth other vii. days, so that when the Moon is xxviii. days old, then
the sea again is at the highest spring: and so always every month, ye sea
changes four times in breaking and springing, twice in increasing, and twice
in decreasing as the Moon wexeth and waneth.

And so always the sea is at the highest and in most strength, when the Moon
is full shining, either toward heaven, as in the new Moon: or else toward the
earth as it does in the full of the Moon: and the more the Moon profits or
falls in taking or loosing of her light, the more the sea arises or abateth
in ebbing and flowing. Also in li. vegitabilium, Arist. says, that the ground
and shore of the sea, is hard, sad, and grauelly, and it is a token of
saltness, that the sea is upon gravel, for therein the dry earthy parts have
mastry, because they be salt, and the existence of the water, deals the clay
or wose in his own parts: and therefore earth that is nigh the sea is
grauellous. And among the gravel of the sea often be diverse precious stones of
virtue bred and gendred, and made fair and clean by froting of grauel, and
there through they be cast to land to the cliffes, by moving of waves of ye
sea, yet beside these properties of the sea, be some other properties, known
nigh to all men. And yet because of simple men, I think it good to reckon them
here arowe, to have matter to show hidden and privy things to simple men, by
ensample and likeness of such properties. The sea cleanses it self and
throws out of it self all carrens and unclean things, and smites off and
puts out all that be unclean and dead by strength of moving, as Gregory
says. Also the sea sheddeth it self by full privy veins of his deepnesse,
and gives always water of his flowing both to wells, and to rivers, as Jerome
says super Eccl. Also ye sea brings forth wonderful beasts and fishes
wonderfullye shapen of many manner forms and shapes, for ye sea brings forth
more wonderful beasts, and more wonderful things than does ye land, as Rabanus
says super Eccl. 43. There it is said, yt there be passing noble and
wonderful works, and diverse beasts, etc.

( Addition.
Item in Psa. 104. ver. 20. O Lord how manifold are thy works: in wisdom have
then made them all, ye earth is full of thy riches, so is the great and wide
sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.
There go ye ships, and there is that Leuiathan, which thou have made to take
his pastime therein. These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them
meat in due season. When thou give it the^, they gather it: and when thou
openest thy hand, they are filled with good: when thou hidest thy face, they
are troubled: when thou take away their breath, they dye, and are turned
again to their dust: when thou let thy breach go forth, they shall be
made, and thou shall renew the face of the earth.)

Also though the sea be substanciallye soft and running, yet it brings forth
most hard things, both with life and without life, as it does with shell fish,
and fish with hard skins and shells, and the stones be commonly precious, that
the sea casts up to the land. Also though the sea be not able neither
lyking to be dronk touching savor and taste, yet it is full profitable in effect
and doing, for it saves and heals many sicknesses, for it heleth men of the
dropsy, of botches, pimples whelkes, and of other scabbes, and of many other
evils, as Constantine says. Also though the sea, in it self be salt and
bitter, yet by sweetness of veins of the earth, by whom it passes, it
changes his savor, and takes freshnes and sweetness by clensing and drieng of
the earth, by ye which it passes, as Macrobius says, and Aristotle also.

Also be the Sea never so vnsaurryt and bitter, yet it nourishes and feeds
full fresh Fish. For the Sea has a priuye sweetness and freshness, which the
Sea Fish sucketh and takes, whereof comes couenable feeding and saueur, as
Ambrose says.

Also the sea is mouable without rest, and by his own moving it keeps and
saves his own substance from peril of corruption: for by continual
^ro^^ing, it is made more clear therein, and is so kept from peril of
corruption, so that it rotteth not.

Also though it be running and not standing by it self, nevertheless it is
stinted and held in by other things, so that it passes not easily over the
bonds of his own cliffes, as it is said Proverb. 8. Iere. 5. Job. 38. Also by
his bitterness and saltnes it swalloweth and withdraws freshness of wells,
and of other running waters. For the farther running water is from ye entering
into ye sea, the more fresh it is held. Also by beating and smiting together
of his arms, by the which it beclippeth the land, it breeds and gendreth
contrary winds, as Beda says.

Also it is most noifull to them that be not used to be therein, for it breeds
dread and fear, and head ach, and spuing and bolking, and withdraws appetite
of meat and drink. Also of the vaporation of fumosities that it casts
upward, it breeds mist and clouds, and makes dimnesse and darkness in the
air, and takes from us ye beams of the Sun and bateth heat thereof.

Also though it have no color of his own, it changes colors by quality of
winds. For now it is whitish and yeolowish, now white and clear, and now
black, as Isidore says l^^^ 13.

Also the sea contains in it self many perils. For with a little blast of
wind in the sea, be tempests and storms. And therefore the sea is called
Fretum, as Isi. says, as it were having fervent and strong moving. As it
fares in the sea yt is called Mare Cicilium, in ye which sea for ferue^tnes of
moving, making of noise and crieng, Scilla is a daungeion rock in the sea by
Cicil be, where of came this word Decid. 1. in Scylla cariens vita (...)
be Scilla and Caribdis, as it is said, Scilla and Caribdis be two perilous
places in the sea, in the which many ships be soon perished, Scilla is a
great high rock in the sea, having many rocks and heads, and the waves of the
sea beat thereon, and makes an horrible noise. And if ships fall therein, in
any wise, they escape not peril of wrack. And Caribdis is called so, for it
swalloweth ships in many privy swallows. For there ye sea is full of swalows,
as it were flowing in it self, whirling about, turning and winding. And
therefore it draws to it ships, and swalloweth and drowneth them, and thrice a
day he casts up great wallowing waves, and swalloweth them thrice a day. For
it swongeth water and swalloweth it, and casts it upward, that it may swallow
it again, as Isidore says lib. 13. capitulo de Estibus maris et fretis.

Also in the sea is another notable peril, that is unevenness of ground, when
the water is full deep in one place, in another thereby uneath is water to wade
in, and this peril is called Cutis, for there is gravel gathered in heaps.
For Cutis is Greek, and is to understand, a draught. And Papias says, yt in
the sea of Egypt be many such Cutis, and they be meddeled therewith. And so
it is sooth, that passing of the sea is perilous for privy rocks that be
hid under the water: and also for heaps of gravel that be drawn and
gathered togethers. For in such p^^ces ships be most hassely broke. Another
peril is called Bithalassum, when a ship laded smites on a ground that has
much glow, slime and wose: and may not deliver it self neither pass out thereof
for toughness and holding of slime and of wose. And Hugo says, that
Bithalassum is slime and an ouerhid print, and left in slime and wose. But the
Gloss says, that Bithalassum is meeting of two seas. And the master in
Historia says, that Bithalassum is called ye tongue of ye earth straight
hither and thither, beclipped with the sea. And is called Bithalassum, as it
were a Sea departed by the earth, that is between two parts of the Sea. For
Thalassum is Greek and is understood the Sea. Then when a ship smites in
Bithalassum, the foreshippe abides still and moves not, and the hinder
ship is broken behind with strong swiftness of the Sea, that falls
thereon, and ouertaketh it, as the master says there. Also generally men that
pass the Sea be in peril: because of air and wind, or because of the Sea.
For in the sea be many stones and rocks hid. Or if it be set and beclipped
with great rocks, it is not passed without peril: or if the ground be uneven:
now areared on high with heaps of gravel, now deep as a swallowe: then eft
passage is let. But when the Sea is above troubly and too high by winds and
storms, and waves beting, and smiting togethers with storms ^ wallowings that
wallowe upward and downward, then it is peril of the sail. For often in such
times the ship is broken or drowned with contrary storms. Also a peril
comes of wether that is troubly and dim and misty, and then it is full
perilous to pass the Sea, and namelye, when the ship is sodeinlye driven
into a perilous place, and the peril is not known. And also huge and great
winds be most dread, and namely if so be that contrary winds arise. For then
is peril and dread of breaking of the ship. And so the more the ship is
moved and put toward the haven by blowing of one wind, the more she is driven
and put toward peril by strength of another strong wind, that is contrary, or
else is held long time in danger to be lost between contrary wallowings and
waves.

Also peril comes of feebleness of the ship that is charged. For it is
peril and not safe to sail in a ship or boat that is too little, or
feeble, or broke and cloven. For such a ship or boat is not safe among
storms and waves of the wild Sea. For because of lyttlenesse thereof it is
overthrown and ouerturned with storms and waves of ye wild sea, or for
feebleness broke with strong blast of winds, or sunk and drowned by water
that comes in at chins and holes: and namely such a ship comes slowlye and
late to ye haven. And namely when good mariners lack in such a ship: for then
is most peril in the sea, when the ship has an unready governor and
unadvised. In these manner perils, and in many other, be men that sail in ye
Sea, both of middle earth and of Occean, as Isidore says. Both Greeks and
Latins call the sea Occean, for it beclippeth ye roundnesse of the earth
about, as it were a circle. For Occean goes all about the spheere that we
dwell in: And has that name Oceanus, of swiftness. For it passes and goes
swiftly about ye earth, or for it shines with a manner color of red and
green. And is called Oceanus, as it were Ceanus, that is a circle of heaven,
as Isidore says. lib. 13. The Sea Occean beclippeth the hemmes of lands, and
often comes and goes ebbing and flowing. And in blowing of winds Oceanus
remooueth Seas, or blows them up. And though it be all one Sea in
continuance thereof, yet by coasts and countries, it takes diverse names of
lands and Countries that be next thereto, as the French Sea, of French men:
and the British Sea, of Britons: and the Eaddish sea has that name of Gades,
where the entering out of the great Sea out of Occean is opened: there
Hercules, when he came thither did set his pillars, trowing or supposing that
there was the end of the earth. Huc vsque Isid. li. 13.

( Addition
The Sea water does make powdered flesh fresh, and the fresh flesh sauourie.)

Of Mari magno meditaraneo. Chap. 25.
THE great sea of middle earth comes out of the West, and out of Occean: and
passes toward the South, and then goes toward the North, and then is called
ye great sea. For other seas be little in comparison thereof: and is called ye
sea of middle earth. For he passes by the middle of the earth even to the
East, and departs and deals three parts of the earth, which be called
Asia, Africa, and Europa. Of whom the first coast is called Sinus Iuspauicus,
and Hibericus and Balearicus, and the coast that passes by the coast of Nerbon
is called Gallicus: Then followingly in the coast that is called Ligusticus,
and passes by ye city of Geen, and is next thereto. After is the coast that
is called Tirrenus, that stretches to Italy: then the coast that is called
Siculus, passes out of Cecilia to the land of Crete, and then it stretches
to Pamphilia and to Egypt. And the coast of Helespontum passes by diverse
turnings, and bends Northward, and at the last beside Greece and Illiricum,
it waxes narrow to the straightness of seven furlings: And then it passes
the Sea that is called Ponticum, and waxes straight, and makes the sea that
is called Propontides, that is in the straightness of.50. paces: and then he
is made and called Bothorus and Tratius, and that place is called Propontides:
for it comes before ye sea yt is called Ponticum: and that same place is
called Bophorus, and has that name of straight passage and narrow ways of
rothexen, as Isi. says li. 13. And from thence passes and spreads the
greatest coast yt is called Ponticus, and has behind the marreis yt is called
Paludes Meotides. And for cause of many rivers and fresh waters that come
thereto, that sea is more fresh and more mistie, and has no great fish but the
fish yt is called Foca, and the fish that is called Delphinus. And as the
earth, though it be but one, has diverse names because of diverse places: so
this great sea has diverse names in diverse countries and lands. Huc vsque
Isid. li. 13.

Great coasts of the Sea be called Sinus: and has diverse names, as of the Sea
of middle earth, one coast is called Ionicus, and has that name of Io, a king
of Greece: and men of Athens be called Jones. And therefore the sea that is
called Ionicum, stretches from Ionia to Cecilia. And even in the sea Occean
the greatest coasts be Caspius, Indicus, Persicus, Arabicus, which is called
the red sea. And that sea is called the red sea, for he is colored with red
waters and waves, and is not such of kind, but it is dyed, and takes such
color of banks of red grauel or sand, that be nigh thereto. For all earth
there about nigh to the sea, is red of color nigh as blood. Therein is found
most sharp Uermilion: and other diverse colors that serve for Painture. And so
for the earth has such kind, the sea is made red by beating of water and of
waves upon ye cliffes: And therefore in these cliffes be red precious stones
found. For small stones of that ground be wrapped among ye gravel of that sea
and of the ground, and so they keep still the color. This sea is departed in
two coasts, that one is called Persicus in the East, and the Perses dwell
there: And that other in the West side is called Arabicus, and the Arabees
dwell there, as Isidore says li. 13.

Of Pelago. chap. 26.
PElagus is the breadth of the sea without cliffe, and without haven, as Isidore
says: And has most deepnesse and unstableness, and continual moving, and
gendereth and feeds Whales and other diverse wonderful fish, and breeds many
vapors and fumosities, and has thereof thickness and mist: and takes many
diversities of colors by diversities of winds, and gathers about a foam of
smiting and beating of waves, and cries and makes great noise: and a crieng
sea and an unpeaceable is perilous, as is said before of the Sea.

Of a drop. cap. 27.
A Drop is a right little part of the sea, or of water, or of rain, departed
by some violence from the whole: and is called Gutta, when it stands or
hangs on euesings or on trees, as it were beglewed, as Isid. says. And when a
drop falls, it is called Stilla, and thereof comes Stillicidum, as it were
a falling drop. A drop whether it be called Stilla or Gutta, when it is
departed from a watery cloud, by the virtue of heat, or by strength of wind:
then it falls downwarde by his own heaviness and weight. And a drop is
called Stilla, while it falls, and Gutta while it stands or hangs. A drop
hanging, falling, or standing, is in substance most clear, round in shape,
little in quantity, and great in virtue. For it moisteth the earth that it
falls upon, and makes it plenteous and fruitful: and feeds and nourishes
roots and seeds, and makes them grow, and quickneth and saves greenenesse in
trees, herbs, and grass. And feeds and nourishes fish in the sea: and
makes Oysters fat, and breeds in them pearls and precious stones, as Isidore
says, and namely the drop of dew. And though a drop be most soft, yet by often
falling it pearceth that thing that is right hard, as this verse says, Gutta
cauit lapidem, non vi, sed sepe cadendo. That is, a drop pearceth a stone, not
by strength, but by often falling.

Of Foame. cap. 28.
FOame is called Spuma, and has that name, for it is foamed or skimmed, as
Isidore says: And is gendered of the corruption in water. Therefore should
all thing that is sod in water be skimmed and purged of foame. Foame comes
and is gendered of wind, closed in the over part of the water that is moved by
some manner of moving. And therefore for lightness of air that is closed
therein, water foameth, and the foame fleeteth above the water. And foame is
soon gendered by beating together of waters and of waves: but it is soon
departed and sparyled. Sometime foame of the Sea is gathered among stones, and
by fervent working of the heat of the Sun, that falls thereon, it is made
hard, and turns sometime into a Pomise; and sometime into a Sponge.

( Addition
The Pomise stones are commonly black and gray, hollow like a hunny comb. The
Sponge is soft and hollow much like the lungs of a beast, these serve to
diverse purposes.

Of Fish. chap. 29.
FIsh is called Pisces, and has that name of Pascendo, feeding, as Isidore
sath libro. 12. cap. 6. Fish licketh the earth and watery beaches, and so get
they meat and nourishing. Also they be called Reptilia, creeping, because in
swimming they seem as they did creep: for in swimming they creep, though
they sink down to the bottom. Whereof speaks Ambrose in Exameron, and
says: That between fish and water is great nighnesse of kindred. For without
water they may not long live: And they live not long with only breathing,
without drawing of water. And they have a manner likeness and kind of
creeping. For while a fish swimmeth, by shrinking and drawing together of his
body, he draws and gathers himself into less length: And anon
stretches himself again, and intends to pass forth in the water. And by
that diligence he puts the water backwarde, and passes it self forward.
Therefore he uses fins in swimming: as a soul uses feathers in flieng. But
all other wise in swimming a fish moves his fins from ye hinder part
downward: And as it were with arms or Ores he clippeth the water, and holds
it, and stretches himself forward. But a bird moves his feathers upward, and
gathers the air, and compels it to pass out backward by large stretching
of winds: and so by violent putting of air backward, the body moves forward:
And kinds of fish be diverse in many manner wise. For by diversity of place
that they be gendered in, and of meat that they be fed with, and of color
and shape, by which they be distinguished of substance, of which they be
compounded. And of the virtue, by the which they work diversely. In place that
they be gendered in, is great diversity, and in their dwelling and abiding:
for they build only in water: and sometime dwells in land, and sometime in
water. And such a manner fish (as Isidore says) is called Antiphidia and Dubia
in Latin, for he uses to go in the land, and to swim in water, and holds
the office of kind, as fishes that be called Foce, Cocodrilli, Castores,
Hippotami, that be water horses, and other such. Fishes have names of land
beasts, as Sea hounds and Wolves: For they bite other unreasonable swallowing
and devouring and hurts them sore, as Isidore says. As Torteises and Crabbes.
Among them that abide only in water, some abide only in the sea, and some
in rivers and ponds, and in other fresh waters: and some be mean between
those two manner fishes, Lopsters, and Creifishes.
and turn and come now to fresh water, and now to salt water to get them
meat. A^ the Sturgeon and the Salmon.
And fish that come out of the salt water, into fresh, have liking in the
freshness thereof, and be fatted: and again ward: and this fish now abides
in the sea, The Seals The Lampray, the Tench, and Carpe. So likewise the
Hadocke is blind in ye fresh water, and the Cunger and do thertly die.
and now in fresh water. And many River fishes may not taste saltness of the
Sea. For it he catches salt water, he dies sodeinelye, and tourneth by the
womb and fleeteth above the water, and that is token of death in all manner of
fish both of sea and of fresh water. And fish that is bred in the Sea has
hard scales and thick, because of dryness of the salt water. And river fish
have subtle scales, and soft back bones. Back bones in fishes be needful
to restrain the flesh thereof that is fleeting, for kind softness thereof.
And Auicen teaches to choose good Fish by kind of the place, wherein they be
nourished and sedde. And in liber. 2. cap. 7. he says, That in this manner
choice of fish is in place, in which it dwells. For such as abide in stony
places be best and sweetest, and in fresh running water, in which is no
corruption, nor any slime or wose, nor standing lakes, nor in Wells, nor in
small pittes that run not in rivers, in whom be no Wells: and he says
there, That some Sea fishes be good. For those that be subtle be best, and
be nourished in the deep Sea, and no where else. And fish that abide in
waters, that be vnheeled with blastes of wind, that blows the water sometime
from them, are better then those that be not so served. And those that be in
waters that be strongly moved and continually labored, be better then those
that be in standing Water: and so Sea Fish is better then River Fish. And
River Fish better then lake Fish, namely, if they be far from the river and
from the sea. For they that have rest in their rottenness and filth, are not
washed neither cleansed by river that comes therein, nor by sea. And
therefore such fish is evil sauoured, and soon rotten. Also both sea fish and
river fish is better in the North sea, and in the East Sea, then in the South
sea: for by strong blasts of wind the water is moved and cleansed and made
subtle. And therefore Fish of that water moves more and trauaileth, and be
more cleansed of their superfluity.

Also in kind of Fish is diversity, not only in diversity of place, that
they may dwell in, but also in diverse place of generation. For some be
gendered by layeng of Eggs, Row and melt.
and shedding of pesen, and some by gendering together of male and female, and
by shedding of sperme. Hereof Aristotle speaks li. 5. and says, that it
falls in kind of fish that lay Eggs and pesen, that when the female lays
eggs or pesen, the male comes after and sheddeth his milk upon the eggs:
and all the eggs or pesen that be touched with the milk of the male shall be
fish, and those that be not touched with that milk shall not be Fish. For the
female lays many eggs or pesen, and swalloweth the more part of them, and
also many other be spilt in slime and in wose, and none thereof be saved but
such as be laid in places where the milk of the male is shed. For if they
were all saved: then there should be too many fishes gendred. And fish keep
and save evenness and make, in their own kind, as Aristotle says there. And
he says, that there was never fish found, that made generation with fish of
other kind. Also fish love their frye, and feed and nourish them long time,
as Aristotle says there. All Fish feed and keep their young, except Frogs.

Also there it is said, that River fish and fish of marrcis, shed more their
pesen, and ofter then other fish. For commonly and for the most part, they
cast and shed pesen and milk after five months: and all other Fish bring
forth fish after one year, and small fish bring forth their brood in place,
wherein is but little water, fast by roots of trees, canes, and reeds.

Also there he says, that the more part of the pesen is lost, when the female
sheddeth pesen swimming about, if the male be not present: and then of the
seed and pesen is no fish shapen. And also they be eat of other fish and of
birds.

Also there it is said, Feles grovve of dew in May and air.
that some Fish be gendered without eggs or pesen, or without generation of
male and of female: and be gendered of slime and of wose, of gravel, and of
rottenness yt is upon the water. Also it is said, that in time of generation,
males and females of Fish swim the other as a slocke, and swim with their makes,
and many of them be sick when they breed: and therefore that time they be
most taken. Also there it is said, that some fish gender froting the womb on
gravel. Also in li. Iorath de Animalibus it is said, that a Fish yt is called
Effimeron is bred without generation between male and female: Ephemeron a
beast about the river Hyppanis.
And when he has lived three hours of a day, then he dies: and there is a
Fish that is called Murena, a Lampray: This is not likely because they are
forty ^^th spaune.
that of his like conceiueth not, but of an Adder, which he calls to love
with hissing, as Isidore says lib. 12. cap. 6.

The Greeks (he says) call this fish yt is called Murena, Stairmam, for he
holds himself in circles. They tell, that this fish is a Female, and
conceiueth of the Serpent. And therefore Fishers call it with hissing and
whisteling, and takes her in that wise. Unneth she dies, though she be smit
with a staff: and if she be smit with a rod, she dies anon. It is certain
that the soul of this fish is in ye tail, for they say uneath she is slain,
though she be smit on the head. And if she be smit on the tail, or if the
tail be smitte of, she dies anon, as it is said. And the contrary is of
the Serpent, for if the head be broke and bruised, or cut off, ye Serpent dies
anon, and if the tail be smitten, he lives long time. Also Iorath says,
that the Serpent does away his venim ere he gender with the Lampray: But when
the deed of generation is done, he takes his venim again: and therefore in
conceiving, the Lampraye takes no venim of the Serpent, nor gendereth not of
serpent kind, but only of his own kind, as he says.

( Addition.
The Adder is venomous in body and spearme: the Snake is not so.)

Also fish conceive of dew only without peson, and without Milk, as Oisters
and other shell fish. Hereof Iorath speaks and says, that fish that be
called Elich come out of the water by night, and conceive in land of the
morrow dew, and bring forth their brood: And in waning of the Moon their
shells be void. Also fish is stirred to conceive and to breed by rising and
down going of Stars, as Iorath says, and Isidore also. So he speaks of
fish that be called Australis, and says, that fish of that kind arise, when
the stars that be called Pliades begin to go down, and be not seen till
Pliades arise again. And though fish gender and be gendered: yet no manner of
kind of clean fish have gendering stones, nor no kind of Serpent, nor no
kind yt has no feet: and also they have no paps nor milk, except ye Dolphin
that has milk, and gives her children suck while they are little, as
Aristotle says, lib. 6. And Isidore. libro. 12. cap. 6. says, that the
Dolphins be called Symphones also, and they have that name, for they follow
man's voice and come together in flocks to the voice of the simphonie, and
having liking in harmony: and in the sea is nothing more swifte then Dolphins
be. For often they startle and ouerleape ships, whose leaping and plaieng in the
wauce of the sea betokens tempest. And in the River of Nilus is a kind of
Dolphins with ridges, thoothed as a Saw, that cutteth the tender wombes of
Crocodiles, and slays them, as Isidore says.

Also fish kind is diverse in manner of food and of nourishing. For libro. 2.
Auicen says, that that Fish that eats good herbs, grass, and roots of
plants, be better then they that eat filth, that is thrown out of cities
into watery places: and in Exameron it is said, that also Fish be diverse in
eating. For some eat each other, and be fed with each others Fish, and the
less is the mores meat: and so the greater eat them that be less, and so he
that eats the one, is eaten of other at last, as Aristotle says libro. 6.
and he says, That a fish that is called Carabo, overcomes great Fishes and
eats them: and another that is called Multipes overcomes the Carabo, and
eats him: also he says, That fishes be fed with dung and with dirt, and
with fenne, as the Carabo: and therefore he is heanie, and much fen is found in
him: and Fish that eat other fishes have strong teeth, as that manner Fish
that Greeks call Phagion. Isidore says, that that Fish has so hard teeth,
that he eats Oysters in the Sea: and therefore he is called Dentrix, as it
were a fish strongly toothed, and has that name for greatness and strength of
teeth: and in Exameron it is said, That other Fish have less tooth and n^^e
and thicker, and more sharp, that they may soon cut their meat that they
take: and they swallowe it anon, least the meat that they hold in their
mouths should be borne away by strength of water.

Also other Fish seek their meat froting in gravel, as Isidore says. lib.
12. And he says of the sea swine, that is commonly called Suyllus, that while
he seeks his meat he froteth under water in the ground, as it were a swine:
and has a manner mouth about the throat, and gathers no meat but he
pitcheth ye snowte in gravel.

Also lib. 7. Aristotle says, That for the more part, Fish eat Fish, and
eat each other in time of breeding, except the Fish Fuscaleon. And generally
Fish be gluttenous, and covet much meat, and namely the Fish that is called
Habatue: and therefore his womb stretches, when he is fasting, and often he
blows out his womb, and makes it stare, and throws from him other Fish:
for his womb stretches to his mouth, and has no stomach. Also of Fish is
diversity of time and place of meat. For some Fish seek their meat only
in Water, and some by night upon the land, as Hippotamus the water horse, and
has that name, for he is like to a horse in ridge and in mane, as Isidore
says, and abides in water on the day, and eats corn by night, and is bread
in the river Nilus, as Isidore says. And as Aristotle says libro. 7.
Generally Fish travail more by day then by night, and more before midnight
then after. And therefore as Aristotle says, they be hunted before the Sun
rise, and then Fishers set their nets, for that time Fish see not. Full well
they see when light increases: but by night they seek their meat by
smelling. For they have lyking in things of good savor. And therefore liber.
4. it is said, that kinds of fish smell and hear: and therefore it comes
ofter into new tackle, that is set for it, then into old: and comes not
lightly into old tackle, but into new: and be often beguiled by smell, as
Iorath says. And he says, that there is a great fish in the sea that is
called Belua, that casts out water at his jaws, with vapor of good smell,
and other fish feel the smell, and follow him, and enter and come in at his
jaws following after the smell: and he swalloweth them, and is so sed with
them. Also he says that there is a fish that is called Fast: ye water that he
takes in his mouth wareth sweet, and small fish follow him and go in at his
mouth, and he takes them sodeinly and swalloweth them anon. Also he says,
that Dolphins know by the smell, if a dead man yt is in the Sea eat ever of
Dolphins kind: and if the dead man has eaten thereof, he eats him anon: and
if he did not, he keeps and defends him from eating and biting of other
fish. And shoueth him and brings him to the cliffe with his own wroting. And
Aristotle says the same and Plinius also.

Also li. 7. Aristotle says, that fish that lives in clear running water,
fall not upon stinking things, but upon things of good savor: and so do birds
and fowls of such water. And in winter, fish die out of the sea, and seek
heat nigh to the land, and there they seek their meat, and does the contrary
in Summer: for then they fly from the heat into the deep sea. Therefore in
Winter they be hunted nigh the land: and in Summer in the deep sea: for
immoderate heat greeueth fish.

Item in eodem li. he says, yt some fish die for heat when the star arises,
that is called Canicula. Also great cold graueth them sore, and namelye them
that have stones in their heads, as Crabs, and other such. For the stone in the
head runs and freeseth, and such a Fish dies soon.

Also kind of fish has diversity of shape, and of disposition both in
quality and in quantity. For there is some kind of great huge fish, with
great bodies and huge, as it were mountains and hills, as Isi. says: such was
the whale that swallowed Jonas the Prophet, his womb was so great that it
might be called hell: for the Prophet says: In that womb of hell he heard me.
And there be some fish so small, yt uneath they be taken with hooks, as Isi.
says, li. 12. Asforus is a little fish, and for litlenesse it may not be taken
with books: and there it is said, yt Enchirius is a fish uneath half a foot
long, and has that name of Herendo, cleaving: for though he be full little of
body, nevertheless he is most of virtue: for he cleaves to ye ship and holds
it still steadfastly in the sea, as though the ship were on ground therein.
Though winds blow, and waves arise strongly, and wood storms, that ships
may not move neither pass. And that Fish holds not still the ship by any
craft, but only by cleaving to ye ship. Latins call this fish Moron. For by
strength he makes the ship to stand, as it is said.

( Addition.
As touching this strange fish, whose smalnesse with his virtue of staieng ships,
does pass man's reason: the Grecians call Ethneis, of the Latins Remora,
because she does stay ships. Opianus and Aelian write, that he delights most
in ye high seas: he is of length a cubit, that is half a yard, of a brown
color, like unto an Eele: diverse opinions are of this fish, but all authors
agree yt for a manifest truth such a kind there is, whereof one of these Fishes
stayed the Galley of Caius Caesar. Pliny meruailing says: Oh strnunge and
wonderful thing that all the winds blowing, and the most furious tempests
raging, notwithstanding the violence of the Tame, yet does this small Fish
hold steadie the ship whereto he is fastened. so great is the secret of
nature, by the ordinance of God. Moreover by travailing the coasts of
America, the later trauailers report to have felt the strength and virtue of
the same kind of fish.)

Also in Exameron it said of the same Fish, that when he knows and feels,
that tempest of wind and weathers be great, he comes and takes a great
stone and holds him fast thereby, as it were by an Anchor, least he be smitten
away, and thrown about with waves of the sea. And so he saves not himself by
his own strength, but helps to save himself by heaviness and weight, that
is not his own. And is made steadfast and stable against the coming of tempest
and storm: and ship men see this, and beware that they be not over set
vnwarilye with tempest and with storms, as Ambrose says, and Beda also.

Also li. 4. Aristotle says, that the female fishes be more long then male
fishes: and have more hard fish. And males be more hard before, and also
above: and females be more hard behind and beneath.

Also lib. 2. Auicen says, that those Fishes be best, that have not full
grease bodies, neither too hard Fish and dry in whom is not too great
fatness: nor too much griffle, in whom is no evil smell, nor evil savor.
Those that be of sweet savor, be convenient and couenable, not too fat, nor
with superfluity of fatness nor sowrenesse, which stinketh not, anon as it
comes out of the water. And those fishes that be somewhat hard, be better
when they be salted. And among Fish that is hard of Fish, that is best, that
is least soft. And so in Fish diversity is known of substance and of
qualitye, for as he says, generally fish is cold and moist: but yet some be
hotter then other some in comparison of the complexion of fish, and namely
when they be salt. And therefore when they be fresh, they breed watrye
fleame, and soft the sinews, and be not according but to right hot stomachs:
and if they be salted, they be more according to the stomach, and also to
medicine. And heads of salt fish burnt, heals the biting of a mad dog,
and the stinging of a Scorpion, and rooteth up dead flesh in Botches, and
helps rotted and festured Botches.

Also the juice of every Fish helps against venim that is dronken, and
against venomous stinginges, and has many other effects, as it is said
there: But this that is said of their qualitye and substance shall suffice
now in this place.

Also Fish be diverse in sharpness of feeling, and in sleyght of wit: for
many be very warye. And some be wonderfully slight and wily to escape, when
they be ware of gins of Fishers, as Isidore says. lib. 12. And he says, that
there is a manner fish that is called Mugil, which is full nimble and swist.
For where he is disposed to swim, and is ware of grins, and pearceth them,
and that he is beset with fishers: he turns sodeinly backward, and
ouerleapeth the net so swiftly, that it seems to them, which are present,
that he flies as a bird.

(* Mugil, a Sea fish, of all scaled fishes the swiftest, of color white,
having a great belly, and in greediness insatiable, when he is full he lies
still in one place, and being afraid, hides his head, as if the whole body
were also hidden. They are so desirous each of others kind, that when fishers
having gotten a male fish of that sort, fastened on the line or craft, all the
females resort unto it, and so be taken, and likewise does the males, they be
of the Greeks called Cestrei, Plotae, and Cephali.)

Also in like wise it is said there of a Fish which is called Estaurus: For
among Fish, only that Fish cheweth his kudde. And it is said that this Fish
is right wittye. For when he knows that he is entered, and is within the
danger of the Fishers ginne, he reeseth not forth headlong, neither puts
his head between the rowles of the gunne: but he beats fast on the other
with his tail, and begins to make him away with breaking and renting of
rods, and so pasieth backwarde. And if it happen that another Fish of the
same kind sees his doing, and how he trauaileth for to break out: he busieth
to help him, and takes his tail in his mouth, and helps as he may to
draw him out, and deliver him of the ginne. And yet he says, that the Cunger
has many wiles, and is wittye and wylye of getting of meat: for when he
sees meat on a hook, he dreadeth the hook, and biteth not the bait, but
holds the hook with his sins, and lets it not pass till he have
gnawen the meat.

Also the Crabbe is enimye to the Oyster. For he lives by Fish thereof with a
wonderful wit. For because that he may not open the hard shell of the
Oyster, he spyeth and awayteth when the Oyster opens, and then the Crabbe,
that lies in wait takes a little stone, and puts between the shelles,
that the Oyster may not close himself: And when the closing is so let, the
Crabbe eats and gnaweth the Fish of the Oyster. Oysters be called Oilica,
and have that name of shelles, that defend and ward soft fish within. And the
Greeks call an Oyster T^ll^m, and all that Fish with the shells is called
Ostrium in the Newter gender: but the Fish thereof and the meat that is wtin
the shells, is called Ostrea in the Feminine gender: And such shell Fish be
called Conche and Conchilia also: for when the Moon falls, such Fishes be
void: And the waxing of the Moon increases the humor, and the humor
vanishes, when the Moon vanishes. And therefore shell Fish ware, when the
Moon wareth, and be void, when the Moon waneth. And in shell Fish be
Pearls bread. And thereof speaks Plinius and other that write of such
things. For by night shell Fish come to cliffes, and conceive Pearls of the
dew of Heaven. And therefore the shell Fish be called Conchile and Margarete,
and Herelie, when in their fish precious stones be pight. And that precious
stone that is gendered of dew in Springing time, is most worthy and noble, and
the more white and bright he is, the more effectual and virtuous it is held.
And some shell fish is called Murice, and have that name of roughness and
sharpness, and have another name, and be called Conchilia. And if they be
kitte about with iron, of them drop tears of red color, and with those tears
purple is died, and this color and hiew is called Ostrium. For it is taken of
the humor of shel fish, as Isidore says.

Thou may find all these propertyes and kinds, and many other in lib.
Plinij, and Aristotle, and Isidore, and in Exameron Ambrosij, and Bas. but for
that we will not noy them that shall read herein, this is enough of this matter
at this time.

Also Plinius says, and Isidore libro 12. that there be in waters. C.xliiii.
manner of kinds of fish. And many of them know the order of their time, by a
manner wit of kind: and some go about in their own place without changing:
and some live without consideration of time: and some conceive whelps by deed
of generation between male and female, as the Whale.

Also the Whale and Balena is al one, and Balene be anou great and huge, and be
called Belue ab emittendo, of outcasting and shedding of water. For they throw
water higher then other great Fishes of the Sea. For Balen is understood out
casting. And the whale is called Cete for hugeness of body, as Isidore says
libro. 22. Also in libro Iorath it is said. That the Whale has great plentye
of spearme. And after that he gendereth with the Female, superfluitye thereof
fleeteth above the water: And if it be gathered and dried, it: tourneth to the
substance of Ambre. Of ye shed of the Whale comes Sperma Cete. Hereof
comes the siveet Amber greece.
And when the Whale hungereth sore, he casts out of his mouth a vapor, that
smells as the smell of Ambre. And Fish have liking in that smell, and for the
odor and smell of that vapor, they go into the Whales mouth, and be so
deceived and eaten. Also (as he says) in this fish earthly matter has more
mastrye then watrye: And therefore he is soon great and fat. And so in age
for greatness of body, on his ridge powder and earth is gathered, and so
dug together, that herbs and small trees and bushes grow thereon: so that
that great Fish seems an Island. And if ship men come unwarily thereby,
uneath they escape without peril. For he throws so much water out of his
mouth upon the ship, that he ouerturneth it sometime or drowneth it.

Also he is so fast, that when he is smit with Fishers darts, he feels
not the wound, but it passes through out the fatness: But when the inner
Fish is wounded, then he is most easily taken. For he may not suffer the
bitterness of the Salt water, and therefore he draws to the shore ward.
And also he is so huge in quantity, that when he is taken all the Country is
the better for the taking. Of the Whales flesh comes the train oil which is
a rich merchandise.
Also he loves his whelps with a wonderful love, and leads them about in
the Sea long time. And if it happens that his whelps be let with heaps of
gravel, and by defaut of water: he takes much water in his mouth, and
throws upon them, and delivers them in that wise out of peril, and
brings them again into the deep sea. And for to defend them, he puts
himself against al things that he meeleth, if it be noyfull to them, and
sets them always between himself and the Sun on the more safer side. And
when strong tempest arises while his whelps be tender and young, he
swalloweth them up unto his own womb: and when the tempest is gone and fair
weather come, then he casts them up whole and sound, as he says.

Also Iorath says, That against the Whale fishteth a Fish of Serpents kind,
and is venomous, as the Crocodile: and then other fish come to the Whales
tail, and if the Whale be overcome, the other Fish die: and if the venomous
Fish may not overcome the Whale, then he throws out of his jaws into ye
water a fumous smell most stinking: and the Whale throws out of his mouth a
sweet smelling smoke, and puts off the stinking smell, and defends and
saves himself and his, in that manner wise.

( Addition
The two enemies of the whale is the Sword fish and the Flaile fish, by the one
be is forced to leave the deep, by the other he is beaten down, so that it
happens often times, in his flieng from the^ he is fastened on shelues and
sounds, and so taken.)

Addition.
SInce the time of Pliny many wonderful things have happened, Addition
ye other no less famous writers of late years have as diligently set down in
writing. For Pliny lived about the year after our redemption.100. which
is.1482. years past. Also Plutarke, ^rogus Pompeius, anno.214. Beda Anglicus,
anno.724. this was a famous writer in those days. His book called Anglica
Historia, he gave to Offrike, king of Northumberland, Paulus Longobardur
Diaconus, an Historian. Anno.800. Strabus Monacus, Anno.840. John Serapion.
Anno.1140. with diverse commendable Writers, although the later sort, until
the time that Bartholomeus took his book of properties in hand, (who among
the rest wrote after diverse copies such as either to avoid idleness, they
imagined, or else their natures being changed, may as hardly of this last age
be believed) as appears by my notes set over against every Chapter, where any
notable thing worthy of plainer skill is set down thronghout the whole book. I
find latelye printed in the historye of the West and East Indias, a pretty
discourse of fishing, and of the names of some Fishes that Pliny speaks not
of, breeding in those coasts, as the Moxarre, Diahace, Dahaos, delicate fish:
Palamite, Lizze, Polpi, Chieppe, Xaibas, with sundry other that are not named.
The most chiefest sorts that the Indians is says to make account of, are three
sorts of fishes. The great Torteise, whose shells are an ell in length, and in
breadeth more then five yards, which I take to be the whole compass, for
observing the form of proportion: the Tiburon and the Manate, the Tiburon is a
very great fish, and very quick and swift in the water, and a ravenous fish,
they are taken by following the ship, although under sail, yet will the fish
flote after, the space of an hundred and fifty leagues: they are taken with
double hooks fastened to strong roapes, whereon is fastened flesh or fish, these
fishes have their teeth double rowed, and do bite daungerously, they are so
great, ye twelve or fifteen men are searce able to draw them forth of the
water, from six foot in length to twelve foot, and two yardes broad,
inform like to the Soul Fish, and in such sort skinned rough, the flesh is
very good and wholesome. The Fish Manate is bigger then ye Tiburon, the head
of this fish is like to ye head of an Ore, with also like eyes: in steed of
four legs, he has two short stumpes, flat and finnie, wherewith he
swimmeth, and is very gentle and fame, and comes often times forth of ye
water, and creeps on land near the shore, where if he find any herbage, he
catcth it, this fish is taken with harping yrons and hooks, this fish is reported
to be ye best of all other great fishes, for yt his flesh being cut is hardly
discerned from beef, in color raw, and in taste being sodde^, and will abide
pondring with salt, as our Beef does, and the young of these fishes eat like
veale, sweet and delicate. There is also ye Vihuella, this fish bears in the
top of his head a long blade, a strong and sharp finne like a sword, and is
bigger then the Manate, of some called the Sword fish, but not of that kind,
that is near the coasts of Spain, France, England, and Ireland. Many fishes
there are, that do fly with broad fins, as the Bats do with their tylme
wings, so long as their wings be wet, for they are so thin, that by the
sudden drieng of the air and wind, being stiff, they fall into the water
again. Also of the taking of Whales in Russe^ and of the trade of fishing in
other countries. Read the Decades, and the discovery of ye Indias. Ges. in his
book of fish.

FINIS LIBRI XIII.
INCIPIT LIBER XIIII. DE TERRA ET EIVS PARTIBVS.
AFter that by the help and grace of God, ye treatise is full ended of the
properties of the ouermost shining body, that is heaven, and of the middle
shining, and clear bodies, of fire, air, and water: now last it is to speak
of the properties of ye lowest body, yt is sad and dim, both in general and in
special. The lowest body and uttermost in comparison to heaven, is earth. Of
whose common properties somewhat shall we say in this work: and that touching
ye quality, substance, containing, or orname^t thereof, The earth contains for
orname^t within, quarry, dare, and all that grows under ground, as stones, and
metal, and other such. Wherefore without he contains things yt we know and
see, as beasts, trees, herbs, and grass. Of them all, some what shall be set in
this treatise, as it seems that holy writ makes mind thereof, for simple me^
think yt it is enough to set here simple things, yt well nigh all men know.
Therefore hereof we shall somewhat rehearse, and give greater things to greater
men: and in the beginning of this work, we will make a protestation yt we set
here of our own, little or right naught. But here we shall set on a row
authority of holy Saints, and some Philosophers, as we have done before in
other books.

Of the Earth. chap. 1.
ANd so the earth is set in the middle space of the world like far from all
parts of heaven and is called Terra in latin. and betokens all ye roundnesse
of the earth in ye singular number, and all ye parts thereof in the plural
number, as Isi. says. And he says that earth is called Terra, and has ye
name of the over part Que teratur, yt is trod. And is called Humus also, and
has ye name of the sea that is moist and joined thereto. And is called Tellus,
for we take fruit thereof: and is called Ops, for it heapeth with fruit. And is
called Arida, for it is able to be cared and tilled or for it is distinguished
from water by his own drines, and is moist, and has moisture of water, yt is
nigh thereto, as Isi. says. Basilius in Ex. describes ye properties of ye
earth, and says in this manner. The earth is ye lowest body and middle, and
like far from the parts of heaven, and therefore wise men call it ye middle of
heaven, and among al bodies the earth is most corpulent, and has least of
subtilty and of simplicity, and is the other foundation of ye world: and is
cold and dry in kind: and is least in quantity in comparison to heaven,
though it be most in it self: In quality it is obscure, and of it self
dark, and is round in shape, and not abiding together but by glue of water.
And the whole earth rests, though parts thereof move often. And is habitation
of bodies that have life, and is called the stool of Gods own foot.

Esa. 66. This says the Lord, heaven is my seat and earth is my footstole.

Mat. 5. But I say unto you, swear not at all neither by heaven, for it is
Gods seat, nor yet by the earth, for it is footstool.

The fairness of this element is least in ye body of ye world. For ye the
working of ye might of God is least seen therein: And therefore it is said, yt
God touches ye earth with his lowest foot: for in comparison to the greatness
and fairness of heaven, it seems that highness of this wisdom of God,
shows least in ye body of earth. And though the earth be lowest in
co^mparison to ye body of heaven, yet nevertheless it takes most influence of
ye lights of heaven, and is therefore most plenteous, as mother of al: and
brings sorth many, diverse, and most contrary kinds: and for yt it is in ye
middle of heaven, it takes on every side influence and effect of heaven. And
so that ye seems to lack therein of nobility in substance, is recouerd in
effect and in virtue. For in a manner it brings forth some more noble kinds,
then does heaven yt is high with stars, as we see. And for high^nes the earth
conceiueth and brings forth creatures with life, feeling, and reason as Basi.
says. Also heereto he says as ye Philosopher says, that ye earth is even way
with his own weights, and every part thereof busieth with his own weight to
come to the middle of ye earth. By that busieng and inclination of parts, ye
whole earth hangs in even weight above the middle point, and is euenly held
immovable, as it is written.

Psa. 19 The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
glorious work.

Psa. 24. The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the
world, and they that dwell therein.

For he has sounded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.

Thou have founded ye earth upon his stablenesse, etc. And therefore li. 12.
Isi. calls ye earth Solum, for it is a sad element, and bears up all ye
elements of every body be it never so heuie: therefore all heavy things yt be
above and from the earth, be without rest til it come to the earth that is
steadfast and stable, and rest when they come to the earth, and for the worthy
properties and noble effects of the earth, error of nations faineth, that
earth was God indeed. And therefore in old time, they did all reverence and
worship thereto, as Isidore touches li. 8. in Tractat^ de Dijs gencium and
nominibus. cap. ^^. And says, that in old time men called the earth Ceres,
the mother of God, and has that name of fruits that it brings forth: for
it defends and nourishes all that needs meat and drink, for ye earth is
mother of plenty, for nothing on live may grow, but if it be rooted and maured
in substance of earth. Also it is called Ops, riches, for the earth is better
than other riches: and also of the earth every creature on live, has riches
of meat and of liuelode. And also is called Vesta the Goddess, either for it
stands steadfast, or for it is clothed with trees, herbs, and grass. And he
says, ye Earth takes color of seeds, leaves and grass, which wither and
fade in winter: and of wether in springing time, and in summer: for then it is
clothed and hid with grass, herbs, and flowers, and is spoiled thereof in
harvest and in winter. And in sign and token of so great plenty, a great
female Image was made, and called Alma matter, ye high mother. And ye Image was
crowned with towers, and she was set in a chair, and Lions followed and were
subject to her, and she hare a key in ye one hand, and a taber or timbrell in
that other hand: and her chare-men brandished swords that they bare on hand:
And it was feigned, that Cocks followed the good wife that sat on the chair.
And ye earth was called Mother, for she brings forth many things, and
breeds meat and food to all things, which should else dye: and is called
Matter Alma, the high Mother, for she feeds all beasts, and is nourisher of
elements, as Isid. says. And it is said, that she bears on her head a crown
with towers, for ye earth is adorned with so many great Cities and Boroughs that
be builded thereupon: and is borne with a chair of wheels, for ye earth
hangs in the air that moves, and is sustained therein: and she sits in a
moving chair, for though other things move, it is said, that only the earth
moves not. And in that that Lions be mylde and subject to the Image of the
earth, it is to understand, that every kind, though it be never so sie^ce or
cruel, in time of ^eath he shall be overcome and subject to the earth: and for
that she bears a key in her hand, she betokens, that ye earth is cloased in
winter, and opened in springing time, that fruit may grow and sp^^^g: and for
that it is said, ye Cocks serve ye earth, that shows, that birds and fod^les
^eed seeds of the earth. Therefore fowls need to follow the earth, and light
down there to find therein seeds and me^^^. The sound and noise of the (...)
betokens, that in tillyng of fields is noise of instruments, of cultures, of
shar^e, and of mattockes, that are of brass: For in old time the earth was
filled with instruments of brass, ^re iron was found, as Isidore says. Her
servant be segned girt with swords, and betokens that often for to defend
and win earth and land, is war and battle, and swords drawn therein.
In this manner and in many other, the properties of the earth, be described in
mystike meaning of fables, as it is said and rehearsed of Isidore. And though
the earth be among Elements most stable, as it is said and rehearsed yet by
effect and doing, it is most passible of Elements. Also though it be cold in
substance, yet it contains in it self fiery vapors, that come out thereof,
as it does in the hill, that is named Aetna and Vulcanus; as he says there.
Also, though the earth be black and unseemly without, yet within it
contains many precious things: for by imprinting of influence of heaven, in ye
inner veins of ye earth, be gendred precious stones and noble metal: and so
the virtue of ye earth is hid within, by these likenesses that be without. Also
ye earth is beclipped about with the sea, and is beset and beat with the arms
thereof, and is by privy ways, thirled with moisture of the sea, least the
earth and the parts thereof should fall into powder, by masterie of dryness,
as Beda says. Also though the whole Earth be found and sad in substance
thereof, yet every part thereof moves kindly toward the middle point, and
because of meddeling of fiery and of airie parts, the earth is in some parts
thereof hollow and dim, and spoungie, and smokie. And windy vapor comes into
the hollownesse thereof, and shakes and moves parts of the earth, and
breeds earth quaking as Ari. says lib. Metheor. Cold wind (says he) moved
in the womb of the earth, makes that moving yt is called earth quaking. And
there it follows, as noise and sound comes of diverse beating and froting in
the air of bodies together therein, so noise and sound comes of diverse
shaking and moving of winds that are hid in the earth, and thereof this is
token, for it rests not till ye earth cleave, and the wind with a voice
issues out, etc. And there Aristotle says also, that in places where strong
concourse and running is of ye sea, and moving of waves, and in places with
much thinness in the earth, is strong earth shaking, as it fell in Hercules
time in some Islands, in whom the earth began to rise, as it had been an hill.
Then the place cloue, and out came a great wind, and it destroyed a great
City, whereof there remains remembrance to this day. Also he says there,
that with eueth shaking comes a manner dimnesse, that hides the sun with
out clouds, all the while the earth shaking dureth, by reason of dark vapors
and great. And before the earth quake, comes a token and shows his coming,
a long cloud and straight as a line is seen in heaven before the going down
of the Sun. And there it is said, that sometime the earth quake comes in
Eclipse of the Moon: for then ye heat of the Sun comes not to the air to
make it clear, nor to wast the vapor, that is cause of the earth shaking.

Also in li. de vegitabitibus Aristotle says, that earth shaking is not in
gravely place, but in place with many dens within, and hardness without, as a
place of hills and of mountains: For if the place be not hard and sad without,
the vapor issues and passes out by little and little, and so much vapor
gathers not together yt it is strong enough to move the earth: but when the
place is hollow, and full of dens and holes within, and sad and hard without,
the parts of vapors be gathered together, and then is strong shaking, so that
sometime it cleaneth and ^enteth the earth. Than in place that is all full of
holes, falls not lightly earth shaking, by reason that the vapors pass out
continually, neither in places that be full hard and sad, for there may not
much vapor enter, because of straightness of place and parts. But it falls
in places that be hollow within, and hard and sad without. Huc vsque
Aristot.

Also for the earth is an Element, the whole earth is like in substance to all
the parts thereof: but in quality ye earth is diversely disposed in diverse
parts, and changes complexion and kind by medlyng of qualyties of other
elements, and is not all of one manner of disposition, but changes now color
and now savor. This diversity comes of many manner of causes, and in many
manner of wise: sometime of highness and lowness, for the high place is
above, and the low beneath, and the over place is not so hot as the nether.
For as Macrobius says, the printing of the sun beams is more strong in low
places tha^ in high, for the air is more thick in valleys, than in
mountains: therefore in valleys is more gathering of sun beams, and more
hurtling and smiting of great air and thitke. In mountains and hills the air
is thin and clear, therefore the beams be sparpled and not fast held
together: and so the less heat is gendred there. Also by diverse taking of the
sun beams, for that that takes most and strong sun beams is most
plenteous and fruitful. And land that is far from the sun beams, is less
able to bear fruit and corn.

Also by diversity of kind of winds, for land on whom Eastern wind blows
continually, is temperate hot, and as it were mean between moist and dry, as
Constant. says. Therefore such land is full plenteous in bearing of flowers
fruit and corn, and most couenable for habitation of mankind. And therefore
the Western wind longs to coldenes and moisture, and makes the land less
temperate, and therefore Western wind is less plenteous. And Northern wind
dries and cools land, yet by reason of clean air, it makes it subtle and
pure, and so in the North, men be high of stature and fair of shape: because
of the outward air, the pores be stopped, and kind heat is held within, by
virtue whereof, the stature is great, and the shape of body fair and seemelye.
And for the Sothern wind is hot and moist, it makes the land that it bleweth
continually on, troubly, hot, and thick, and sad: therefore men of the South
land, be contrary to men of the North land in stature and in shape, and
therefore men of such lands be not so bold and hardy, nor so wrathful and
angry, neither so great ^anglers and boasters, as other be, as Constantine
says. Also the qualities or properties of the earth are diverse, as it is nigh
to the sea, or far from thence: for land yt is nigh to the South sea, is more
hot and moist, than land that is nigh to the North sea, for hot vapor and
moist, comes out of the South sea, and heateth the land that is nigh thereto.
The contrary is of the North sea, therefore the sea that is called Mare
Ponticum, is fresher or less salt, than other seas: for coldness has more
masterie therein, and therefore cold vapor that comes thereof, cools land yt
is nigh thereto. Also land changes and is diverse by working and travel of men,
for the more land is delued, and eared, and ouerturned, the virtue that is
therein, is the more meddled with all the parts thereof, and so laud is amended
and made more able to bear many manner of Corn and fruit. And when land
lies long idle and rests it pa^reth, and is the worse to bear corn and
fruit. Also if good land be bedewed or be rained, if fasteth and amendeth:
and grauelly land and stony is the worse, for it is the more hard.

Of an hill. Cap. 2.
AN hill is high swellyng and rearing of the earth or of land, only at foot
touching other land: or else hills be called mountains, for they pass upward
above that other deal of the land, as Aristotle says. Also in libro de
proprietatibus Elementorum, Aristotle says, that some men have said, that the
earth was first made round and plain, and no mountains, nor vallyes were
therein, for all was shaped all round, as ye ever bodies be: and so cause of
mountains and of valleys be naught else but moving of waters that dig and
wear the soft parts of the earth, and the hard parts that may not be dug,
be made Mountains, and places that were dug deep, were made for the sea and
for rivers. Also in libro Metheororum Arist. says, that sometime mountains be
made by strong earth shaking: for sometime the earth is lifted up and made a
Mountain, as of a great rain of water, comes hallownes, and is made a
valley. Also there he says, that the coming and the going of the sea,
wears and breaks the land in some place, and makes hills, and sometime
the Sea healed all the land, and bare always the soft parts thereof, and let
the hard abide, and threw the mud together, and that wered dry when the sea,
was passed, and turned to hills. Also mountains be hard and sad, reared from
ward the earth toward the heaven, but they are grounded on the earth, and be
sometime full of hollownesse and of dens and so because of voydnesse, it
draws and sucketh in water, and when the hollownesse is full, water runs
and springs out at well heads, and is cause of everlasting springing and
running: and so it is known that mountains with hollownesse and dens, draw
and suck in humor and moisture, and send thereof out always. Also mountains
contain noble metal, for noble metal is mined out of veins of mountains.
Also mountains ^eare fruit and sweet smelling things, for cleanness of air
that has mastry in tops of hills, fruit that grows on hills is more pure and
more sweet, than fruit that grow on valleys. Also hills receive sooner the
sun beams, than do vallyes, and hold them longer time. Also hills gender
exhalation, smokes and vapors, and of gendring thereof, in ye air come clouds
upon tops of most high hills, and thereof comes rain but seldom, as in the
top of mount Olympius as Arist. says: and that is for cleernesse of air, and
for scarciue of vapor, for vapor is spended and wasted ere it may come to
the top of the hills. Also the hills be set against the winds and storms,
more than valleys, and so because of cold that has the mastry on hills, snow
lies on hills, and is frosen with cold wind, that is therein. And therefore
snow lies and abides longer on hills than on valleys: as it does in mount
Caucasus and in Libano, and in other such high hills, that be always white with
white snow, as Isidore says. Also hills be ofter smitten with lightning, than
valleys, as Isidor. says, therefore the hills that be called, Montes Pirenei,
have that name of fire and of lightning, for fire is called Pir, in Greek. Also
the hills that are called Ceraunci, have that name of often smiting of lightning:
for lightening is called Ceraunos in Greek as Isidore says. Also hills that
be most high, be best places to stand on to look about, to wait and spy for
coming of enemies: men go up to top of hills, and wait about, and warn of
perils that they see a far. Also hills be sound, sad, and strong in kind,
therefore they be most able places to build in Castles and towers, and so
dwelling and abiding on hills, is more sure than in valleys, and namely if
they may not be mined for hardness and sadness of ground, and be so high that
it is hard to take the way upward. Also for in hills is plenty of herbs,
grass and lease, they be according to pasture of sheep, and of other beasts,
for herbs and leese of mountains, are more wholesome and better to defieng of
beasts, than grass and herbs that grow in valleys, though they be generally
more rank and fat, for humor of feeding that norisheth herbs and grass, is
more subtle and pure, than humors of plains and valleys: and therefore
heat of heaven defieth that moisture, and turns sooner, and changes it into
substance of herbs and of grass, both for subtilnesse of that humor, and
for cleernesse also of the air, that is there. Also in hills be higher trees
and thicker bushes, than in valleys, therefore Mountains accord to wild
beasts and fowls to breed and to dwell therein: therefore when wild beasts be
hunted with hunters in valleys, they fly to the Mountains, and be there safe.

Of the hill Ararath. cap. 3.
ARarath is the highest hill of Armenia, therein Noes ship rested after the
floude, as Isidore says, and yet to this day the timber of that ship is
seen in that mountain. And that hill has many names. Josephus speaks of
that hill, and says in this manner. The place where Noes ship is, the
Armenians call it Egressorium, and yet men of that country show timber that
was left of ye ship. And (as Josephus says there) Berosus Caldeus makes
mind of that ship in this manner. It is said, that the ship that came into
Armenia, is yet some part about the hill Cardiens, and thereof falls glue,
that men use most to cleanse. Also Josephus Egypcius, and Man^slus Damescenus,
in 96. hist. libro. write in this manner. In Armenia is a great hill that is
named Baris, and it is said, that in time of the great flood, many fled and
were saved therein, and that one came in a ship to the top of the hill, and
some of the timber was there kept long time. Also the Mountains of Armenia,
are called Ceraunei, for highness and often beating of rivers: for a river is
named Cerannus in Greek as Isidore says. These hills begin between Armenia,
and Hiberia as Isidore says, at the ports of Caspis, and stretches to the
well, where the River Tigris begins, as Isidore says.

Of the hills Bethel. cap. 4.
THe hills of Bethel be in Iurye, nigh to Jerusalem, where the house of our Lord
was builded in Salomons time. The hills of Bethel have plenty of wood and of
trees, of herbs and of grass, and be full of sweet smelling things.

Therefore Heart and Roe young and old, be therein.

( Addition.
Beth-el signifies the house of God. Bethel, the name also of a City, in the
Coasts of the Tribe of Benjamin and Ephraim. It was distant from Jerusalem
three miles. It was first called Luza: but after when Jacob being in that
place, saw the Lord standing upon the ladder, he called it Bethel. In this
place Bethel, Hieroboam set up the idolatrous worshipping of one of ye golden
Calves. In this place, the children which mocked Elizeus the Prophet, were
torn, and rent, and killed of Bears.

Of the hill Caucasus. Chap. 5.
CAucasus is an hill in the East and stretches out of India to the hill that is
called Taurus, and has diverse names by diverse nations that dwell nigh those
hills, as Isi. says. In ye East it arises and is a great hill, and for white
snow lies thereon, it is called Caucasus: For whiteness is called Candor in
ye Eastern language. And so the Cities that be nigh to this hill, call it
Crocasim: for Acasim in their speech, is understood whiteness or snow, as
Isidore says.

( Addition.
Caucasus, an hill, one of the highest in all Asia, situate above Iberia and
Albania, on the North part, and is a part of the mountain Taurus. One of the
parts of this hill, dividing India and Media, stretches toward the Red sea.

Philostratus.

Of the hill Heball. Chap. 6.
HEball is a Hill that is beyond Iordane. Thereon stood the fire lignages
after the passing of Iordane to curse all those that held not the x. precepts,
as it is written Deuteronomy. 26. And men say, yt it is an hill with hollownesse and
dens, and is often moved with earth shaking: and that accords to the meaning
of his name: that is to understand, an old swollowe. Also this was the hill
of cursing and of banning: for thereon men prayed wickedly for them that
trespassed. And this was held an hill of dispraising and despite. For 6. of
the most unworthy lynages that came of serving women, were set upon that hill
Hebal to curse the people. Deuteronomy. 27.

( Addition.
And these shall stand upon ye mount Ebal to curse, Ruben, Gad, Aser, Zabulon,
Dan, Nepthali, verse. 13. declaring that they should have cause to fear God
for his vengeance, if they would not obaye him for his love. On this mountain
was uttered the 12. curses, against abominable sins. Read the Chapter.

Of the hill Hermon. chap. 7.
HErmon is a little hill, and stands upon Iordane. Thereon is plentye of
herbs and of grass, of leese, and of good pasture: for the foot thereof is
scatered and moysted with the river of Iordane, and in the top with plenty of
deaw that comes from heaven. And it is embelished with running and influence
of water, therefore on that hill were ye beasts fed that should be offered in
sacrifice in the temple, and for the beasts that were fed and fatted with
plenty of deawe of herbs and of grass of that hill were offered in mount
Syon, that was in the Temple: Therefore as the Hebrews did, the Prophet said
that deawe of Hermon comes down to the mount in Syon, and might not be as
the letter says: For Mount Syon is more high than Mount Hermon, and they be
also far a sunder. For this cause it is said, that the deawe of mount Hermon
came down to Mount Sion, Psa. 133.
for grass and fatness of beasts that were sedde in mount Hermon, were offered
in Sacrifice in Jerusalem, to increasing of the fire of the Altar: And
therefore Hermon is to understand light areared, as the Gloss says super
Psalmum. For why light increased on the Altar, when fire of Sacrifice was fed
with such food.

Of the hill Ebron. Cap. 8.
EBron is a hill in Jury, as it is said, Iosu. 14. Therein is a City most
famous, and has the name of that hill, and is called Ebron, as Rab. says. The
vale thereof is called Vallis Mambre, that belonged in old time to the
friends of Aner and of Eschol, and was their possession. And it is said in
Gene. that this hill is a solemn place, because of holy Patriarchs, whose
bodies rest therein, as it were from ye beginning of ye world, and the greatest
Patriarch Adam lies there. Also most mightiest men had this hill in
possession, as it is said Joshua. 15. There it is said, he put out of that place
Calet, the children of Emoth, Sisay, Achimaan and Ptolome. Also in this hill,
as the most sure place, our Lord ordained the beginning of the Kingdom of
David, and warned him by inspiration, that he should come thither after Sanles
death, where when he had reigned seven years, he was at last king of all ye
whole kingdom of Jerusalem. In old time first men called this hill,
Kariatharbe, that is to understand the City of four: for there rested the
bones of four yt were most famous, as Jerome says, that is to wit, Adam,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

( Addition.
In the land of Canaan, Joshua blessed Caleb the son of Iephunie, and gave him
for inheritance Hebron, the Kenesite, because he followed constantlye the Lord
God of Israel. And the name of Hebron, was called in old time, Kiriath-Arba,
which Arba was a great man (a huge Giaunt) among the Anakims.)

Of the hills of Aethiopia. cap. 9.
THe hills of Aethiopia be seven, as it is said: among them the mount of Atlas
is chief, Atlas, is ye name of an hill in Barbary, high and small, which
perceth the clovvdes.
as Isid. says, li. 14. ca. 4. In the West Aethiopia is hilly and grauelly,
and wast in the middle Eastward, and stretches from the west side of the mount
Atlas, to the ends of Egypt, and is cloased in the west side with the Occean
sea, and in the North side with the river Nilus. In the mountains, and also in
the playnes of ye land, be much people and folk wonderfully shapen in face,
and horrible in figure and shape. Also in that land is great multitude of
wild beasts and cruel, and of Serpents and Adders: and there is Rinocerota,
that is the Unicorne, a beast with one horn. There be Camells and Libbards,
there are Cockatrices and most great Dragons: and out of their brains be taken
precious stones. There is Iacinctus found, and Chrisoprassus also: there Cinomon
is gathered. There be beasts gendred wild and fierce, as Dragons, Strucions,
Ostriges, Elephants and Apes. Huc vsque Isidor. Also there it is said, that
between Cyrene and Aethiopia is a Well, that cools in the heat of the day,
and heateth in the coldness of the night, against kind of waters of other
Wells.

Of the hill Aetna. Ca. 10.
AEtna is an hill in the land or I Will of Cecile, and cut of that hill breaks
fire with brimstone, as it were in hell, as Isidore says lib. 14. cap. 7. It is
said, that this hill has dens full of brimstone in the Southeast side, and
those dens stretch unto ye sea, and receive waves and waters, and gathers
wind, and that wind blows out brimstone, and gendreth fire thereof. Also
out of that hill, breketh bright burning smoke, and comes to the land, as
Isi. says there. Also it is said, that in this hill, a certain figure
appears, and often men of that country hear about this hill Aetna, groaning,
like a co^plaining voice of dole, and sorrow, and of woe. Therefore many deem
that there is a place of pain, and some souls be pained therein: but I affirm
not that, but it seems that S. Gregory, in his Dialogue, thereof makes mind.

( Addition.
Aetna, otherwise called ye mount Gibello in Cycill, whereof Saint Augustine
has made often mention, is a marvelous hill, at the foot whereof is a little
town of the same name, and woods, and trees of diverse kinds planted. On the
top thereof is a barraine ground mixed with ashes, in Winter time covered with
snow.

This contains in circuit twenty furlongs, and is inuyroned with a bank of
ashes, of the height of a wall. In the middle is also a round hill, of the
same color and matter, wherein be two great hoales, fashioned like unto two
cups, which be called Crateres. Out of these do rise sometime sundry great
flames of fire, sometime horrible smoke, sometime are blown out burning stones
in infinite numbers. Moreover before that the said fire appears, there is
heard within the ground, terrible noise and roaring: and also (which is more
marvel) when the smoke and fire is most abundaunt and fervent, yet round
about the top of the said hill, are always seen snow, and hoare frosts.
Plyme writes, that the fire appears always at night.

Of the hill Hecla in the I Will of Iseland, from the top whereof, is cast
forth the black and graye Pommice stones, wherout issues a hideous flame,
stinking of sulphur, and within a dreadful noise. The common people of that
Country, believe the said place to be a part of hell, because there are
diverse apparations of ghostes, that show themselves visible, and profer their
service to men. They appear for the most part in the form of those, which by
vyolent adventure have been killed or drowned: calling men by their names, and
bidding them go to the Mount Hecla. In the old time the mariners termed
these Goblines, Polantines: upon what occasion I find not written. Only the
soil distaunt from the hill, is very fruitful ground: as writes George
Agricola.)

Of the hill Esau. Chap. 11.
THe Mount Esau and Mount Seyr, is all one. In this hill is the City Idomea,
Idumea, a region in Siria ioin^^^ to Egypt, and ^ordering upon Pa(...)e.
and has that name of Esau Jacobs son, that first builded that City, as it
is said, as Jerome says super Abdian, for Esau was called Seyr, and Edom.
Also hereof the Gloss speaks super Deuteronomium 2. and says, that Seyr is
an hill in the land of Edom, where Esau dwelled in the country of Gabalena:
where first dwelled Torrens, and him slew. Chodorlaomor Genesis. 14. And this
hill is called Seyr, that is to understand, rough and hayrie, and has that
name of Esau, that was rough and hayrie. In this hill inhabited first the
Horreysees, men of Giaunts stature, that were horrible by expressing of the
body, as the Gloss says super Deuteronomy. 2. These huge men were put out, and Esaus
children dwelled there, as it is said Deuteronomy 2. Also the hills of the land of
Edom, be most high, and so it seems in some place that it touches the
clouds. And those hills be full of hollownesse and dens, as the Gloss says,
Super Abdian: wherein men dwell in Summer, for the heat is so great and streng.

Of the hill Ephraim. Chap. 12.
AN hill or mount Ephraim, is specially called mount Ephraim: therein Joshua the
son of Nun, took possession, as it is said Joshua. 19. and builded there a
City, and dwelled therein. And as Adamantius says, among hills of that
land, this hill was most famous with herbs and trees, and most full of
fruit, and most high in place, and most fair in sight, and most healthsull in
air, and most fruitful: for well streams compass and moist this hill:
Therefore that place was couenable for Ihesus to dwell therein, that is called
Joshua also, as Adamantius says. In this same hill Joshua lies buried, in the
North side thereof, as it is said, Joshua. 24. Also this hill, is nigh Sichem,
that was a City of succor, with suburbs thereof in mount Ephraim, as it is
said Joshua. 20. There be Iosuas boanes buried, as it is said Joshua vltimo.
Also in this hill, Joshua laid the knives and tyles of stone, with the which he
circumcised the children in Desert, as Adamantius says super Joshua. cap. 20.

Also in Mount Ephraim, dwelled Debora, a woman that was a Prophet, and sat
under a Palm, that was between Bethel and Rama, as it is said, Iudreum 3.
Also mount Ephraim had many peritcular hills and dens: For all the lot of the
lineage is most in mountains and in woods, as it is said Iosu. 17. Also in
these hills were slain the Princes of Madian, Oreb, and Zeb, and their heads
were borne to Ierion over the river of Jordan, as it is said Iudie. 7. Also in
Ramatha, on the mount of Ephraim, Samuel the Prophet was born as it is said,
Regum. 1. Also in the same hill Samuel dyed and was buried. 1. Regum. 25.

Of the hill Phasga. chap. 13.
MOns Phasga is a hill most huge, and contains in it self many particular
mountains, for in this hill be Abarim and Nebo, two hills, upon whom Moses
went up to see the countries of the land of behest or he should dye, and is
buried in the valleys of the same mountains, in the fields of Moab, as It is
said Number. 27. Deuter. vltimo. This hill was in the Countries of the Moabites
and of the Ammonites, and departed all their land from the land of the
Amorites, the which land after was possession to Ruben and Gad, and half the
lygnage of Manasse, as it is said, Deuteronomy. 3. The roots of these hills, touch
the Red sea, that is the saltest sea that is, as it is said Deuteronomy. 3. both in
text and Gloss. And so these hills depart the land in which the Moabites and
Ammonites dwelled in, and the land that the Children of Israel took in
possession, and so Moses came up to the top of that hill, and beheld out of
that place, all the land of behest, and dyed on that hill, and was buried in
the valley of the same hill, in the fields of Moab, and is unknown unto this
day. Balaam the Diuinour went on this hill Phasga, with Balaac king of Moab,
to curse ye folk of Israel, but our Lord turned his curse into blessing, as it
said Number. 23. And so it is known, that this hill was an hill of departing, for
it departs lands of evil men and of good. Also these be the hills of blessing,
for out of this hill, by Balaam our Lord gave his blessing to the children of
Israel and to the people. Also this is the hill of spieng, of sight, and
beholding, for out of this hill Moses espied and beheld, the countries of the
land of behest. Of this hill Jerome speaks in li. de nominibus lacorum, and
says that Abarym is that hill, in which Moses dyed, in the land of Moab,
against Jerico in ye top of mount Phasga, and the Countries all about has the
name of that hill, and is called phasga, and is showed to them that go from
Lidia to Mesebon, that is called Nebo also.

Of the hill Gosor. cap. 14.
GOsor is an hill or a down of Moabites: and this is a part of ye mount Phasga.
Balaac led Balaam on that hill to curse Israel, Number. 23. So says Hieronimus
lib. supradicto.

Of the hill Galaad. cap. 15.
AS Jerome says, Galaad is the mount to the which Jacob came the 7. day from
Carron when he fled Laban: and he says, that it is in the back of the lands
of Fenix and Arabia, and joined to the hills and dens of Laban, and stretches
over Iordane to the land that was sometime the land of Seon, king of Amorreis,
and fell afterward into the hands of Ruben and Gad, and half the Kingdom of
the lignage of Manasse. In that hill is a city builded, that has such a name,
and is called Galath, of the son of Machir, the son of Manasse. Among other
mountains this is most noble: for it is a mount of pasture and refection: for
it is most fertile of fruits, of leese, and of wels: also this is a mount of
medicine and of health, for in Galaad is rosen found that heals wounds
sicknesses and sores, as it is said Ier. 9. Galaad also is an hill of covenant,
of surety, and of reconciliation: for in the mount Galaad, Jacob made covenant
and surety with Laban, and was wholly reconciled to him: as it is said Genes.
31. Also it is an hill of witness, as it is said there. Therefore there it is
said, that the name thereof is called Galaad, that is understand, the hill of
witness. Also it is the hill of buieng and selling: for often chapmen came to the
mountains of Galaad, to buy sweet spices, as it is said. Gene. 32. He saw
chapmen come out of Galaad driving toward Egypt.

Of the hill Garasim. Cap. 16.
AS Jerome says, Garisim is a Hill fast by Jericho, and mount Eball is nigh
thereto against Garisim. In these two hills, blessings and cursings were cried
and showed to the people, yt should come into the land of behest, to comfort
them, that loved the law, and to draw them to God by blessing: and to fear
them that would break the ten precepts, by cursings. Also in Garisim, six of
ye most noble and worthy men with Priests, cried and showed the blessings, and
therefore was brought up an usage, that that hill should be in great worship
among them yt should come after, and should be frequented, because of sacrifice
and of prayers, therefore was strife of prayers between the Jews and the
Samaritanes. For the Samaritanes set mount Garisim before: and said that it was
more couenable place to prayers then the Temple in Jerusalem, and the Jews
said the contrary, as it is said John. 3. both in the text and Gloss.

Of the hill Gelboe. cap. 17.
AS Jerome says, Gelboe are hills of Aliens and strange Nations, seven mile
out of Sitopoli. In which mountains is a great street, that is called
Gelboes. In these hills, Saul with his son Ionathas, was perished and
overcome with the Philistines, as it is said 1. Re. ca. vlti. Aud^ David had
indignation of them, and cursed them for the slaughter of the people, and in
cursing he mad: them dry and barren, as the Gloss says 2. Re. 1. And says,
that these Mountains of Gelboe were plenteous before the cursing: and it is
said, they remain yet under cursing: also no rain comes therein any time,
as it is said.

Of the hill Colgatha. Cap. 18.
AS Jerome says, Golgatha is ye mount of Caluarie, there our Lord was nailed
to the cross for salvation of mankind: and yet this day it is showed in Helia
in the North side of the mount Sion, and is called the place of Caluarie: for
there condemned men should be beheaded, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
Caluaria a common place of burial: some men suppose, that it was the place
where Adam the first man was buried near to Jerusalem.)

Of the hill Gaas. cap. 19.
GAas is a little hill in mount Ephraim in the possession of Joshua the son of
Nun there Joshua died, and was buried in the North side of the same mountain, as
it is said Iosu. vlt. His grave is there showed to this day, as Jerome says,
li. supra dicto de nominibus.

Of the hill Ebron. Cap. 20.
EBron is a little hill in the lignage of Judah, against the North, 22. mile out
of Helia. There is a great town that is called Ephrata, as Jerome says.

( Addition.
All these aforesaid places, in times past called Palestine, or the land of
promise, they are now inhabited by ye great Turk, the enemy of Jesus Christ.)

Of the hills of Israel. Cap. 21.
GEnerally the Mountains of all the land of behest, both on this side, and of
that side of Iordane, be called mountains of Israel, and be often taken for the
land of the ten lygnages; that was full of mountains, namely of Dan and of
Ephraim. For the ten lygnages challenged that name of Israel under Jeroboam the
son of Naboth, that was of Ephraim, and reigned first in Samaria, over ten
lygnages, as Jerome says.

And it is said also in Historia. lib. 3. Regum 13. these mountains were full
of good pasture, and plenteous of fruit, and of good corn, of Olives and of
trees with fruit, and medicinable herbs and sweet spices. Thereof speaks
Isidore lib. 14. ca. 3. and says, that Samaria, is a Country of Palestine,
and took that name of a town, that was sometime royal in Israel, and now is
called Sabastia. This Country is to Jury word, and like there to in hind: for
it is rich of diverse riches, and bears noble corn and fruit, and is nobly
endowed with water and rivers, and is rich of balm. And so by grace of
Elements the Jews meaned, that honny and milk springs in that land, for
because of great plenty of leese and of pasture in the mountains of this
land, for endless many sheep and other beasts in flocks, be in mountains
thereof. Also there be plenty of Bees, which gather honey, and be fed with great
sweetness of herbs and flowers. Also in those Mountains for temperate air,
and plenty of deaw, corn and fruit ripe full soon, and there was mined
gold and silver, and other metals. Deu. 8. Out of the veins of the
mountains of Israel come wells, and rivers: and most firm places are builded
in those mountains. Also wild beasts, as tigers and Lions, dwell in those
mountains and woods.

Of the hills Hiperborei Chap. 22.
THe mountains of Scythia, be called Mo^tes Hiperborei: for the Northern
wind blows thereon, as Isid. says. li. 14. ca. 1. Also Ca. 3. Isidore
says, that many hills of Scythia be full rich, nevertheless in many places of
them is no dwelling for mankind. For in many places of the mountains of
Scithia, is right great plenty of gold and of precious stones, but for
hugeness of Griphons, men come thither but seldom. In those hills are the best
Smaragdis, and most pure Crystal, and be sent out of the mountains of
Scythia, into other lands. And there are sharp woods full of wild beasts, of
Leopards, Tigers, and of Panthers. Also therein be Hounds so great and huge, and
so fierce, that they bear down Bulls, and slaye Lions, and namely in Albania
and Hircania, that be countries of Scithia, with many hills and mountains.

( Addition.
Hyperborei. People dwelling in the farthest part of the North, and as some
suppose, under the North Pole called Pelus Arcticus.)

Of the hill Carmelo. ca. 23.
CArmelus is a mount of Jury, therein is a City that is called Carmela, and
there is two manner Carmelus, and of either mountains, either is called
Carmelus. One is on ye over side against ye South, therein Nabal liept flocks.
1. Reg. 21. The other mount Carmelus is in the other side of the land toward
the sea: in either is good pasture, fruit, herbs and grass.

Of the hill Libano. cap. 24.
MOns Lihani, is the highest mount of the Province that is called Prouincia
Phenicis. Of this mountain prophets make mention: and has that name Libanus,
of Thus that is gathered there, as Isidore says. His farther part toward the
East is called Aurilibanus, as Isid. says. Also Libanus is called whiteness,
for it is white with snow, both winter and summer always, and the snow there, is
never clean molten, but always in summer in diverse places thereof is snow found.
And Libanus is head and Well spring of rivers and of wels: for as Jerome says,
at the foot thereof springs two wels, Ior and Dan, and come togethers and
make the river Iordane. Then Libanus is a mount of much sweet smelling, for
there grown herbs of sweet odor and smell, and also trees that bear
frankencense, whose chosen gum, ye Physicians call Olibarum, as Hieronimus
says. Also it is the mount of suffisance and of plenty: for through plenty
of deaw and of rain, that comes there full often, there comes plenty of
beasts, leese and pasture, of best fruit and ripe: and therefore in mount
Labars and pastures thereof, were beasts fed and norished, that should be
offered in the Temple. Also it was a Mount of most passing highness: for as
Raba^us says super Reg. Mons Libanus passed all other mountains of the land,
and therefore shipmen that came to Tirus, full far sailing in the sea, might
see this hill, and know by the highness there of, to what haven they should
draw, as he says. Also it was the mount of influence, that fails not of
continual springing, and everlasting moisture. For though^ he be dry without,
yet he has within most noble veins of water, as it does in pits of springing
water, and run always with strength out of that mount that is called Libanus,
as Solomon means Cant. 4. Quasi Puteus Aquarum. Also this is the mount of
trust and of surety: for he that rests in mount Libanus, is strong and safe
from all manner of venomous beasts and serpents, for herbs, grass, and trees
that grow there, drive them thence with odor and smell: for Cedars that grow
there, drive away all manner of venomous beasts and creeping worms, and suffer
them not to live there, as Jerome says. Also it is an hill of fairness and of
nurth, for wonderful highness of Cedars and of other green trees, and
continual greennes of herbs and of grass, and sweetness of song of birds,
and plenty of rivers and of wels, make this mount Libanus merrye and lyking.
Also it is a mount of medicine and of health, for there grow sweet smelling
spices, that help and be remedy and medicine against many endless
sicknesses and evils. There be Cedars and Palms: and Cipres and Olives, and
the licour and resins of them, be chief medicines against evils and harms of
diverse sicknesses. Also it is the mount of gladness and of mirth, for on the
hills of Liban grow plenty of the best vines: which make men glad and merry.
Also it is the Mount of worship and of dignity, for among all the mountains
of Syria, mount Liban has principate in highness in plenty, in mirth, and in
wholesome air, as Jerome says.

( Addition.
Libanus a mountain between A^^bia and Phae^^cia, whereon grow very high
trees, especially the Cedar trees.)

Of the hill Moria. Cap. 25.
MOria is a mount in Jerusalem, where in S^l^mon temple was builded, as it is
said 2. (...). 3. And D^u^ bought this mountain of Ornan Iebusei, for two
hundred sycles of gold most pure, to build thereon an Altar to our Lord, when
for the numbering that David made, the people were smitten. In this mountain he
offered to our Lord and prayed, and our Lord heard him out of heaven in the fire
upon the Altar of sacrifices. In this mount A^^rah, in offered sacrifice for
Isaac, and our Lord had bad, ye Isaac should be offered in that same place.
Genes. 2^. where Ieromes Gloss says upon this word. Go into the land of
sight, and offer thy son upon one of the hills, etc. The Hebrews mean, that
this is the hill, in which afterward the Temple was builded in the flower of
Ornan of Iebuici, in the mount Moria, that is understood, lightening and
beshining, for there is Dabir, that is the Oratory of God, and the law, and
the spirit, that inspired Prophets, and teaches men soothnesse, as Jerome
says. Men deemed, Jacob slept in ye same place, and saw Angels coming
downward and upward upon a ladder, as it is said, Genesis 28. where the Gloss
says upon this word: here is not else but Gods house. This is said, for he saw
that the temple and worshipping of God should be in that place. And this place
was a little hill beside mount Sion, where David's tower was after made. And
hereof it follows, that mount Moriah, was a mount of revelation and of sight,
and a mount of sacrifice and of prayers, a mount of prophecy, and of teaching,
a mount of light and of shining, a mount of often coming of Angels, a mount of
appearing of God, a mount of forgiveness and mercy.

Of the hill Nebo. Cap. 26.
NEbo is an hill in the land of Mo^b, in the top of mount Phalga, against
Jericho. Out of that hill, Moses saw the land of behest, and dyed there, when
he had seen the land, as Jerome says, and the story. Number. 27.

Of the hill Hor. Cap. 27.
MOunt Hor, is a hill in the uttermost Countries in the land of Edom. In that
mountain Aaron dyed by wrech of God, Wrath or displesure because he had
displeased God.
the fourteenth year after that he came out of Egypt, when he was Cxviii years
old, as it is said, Number. 28. And there was the thirteenth mansion and
abiding, in the which the Children of Israel, dwelled and abode, after that
they came out of Egypt, as it it is said. Number. 20. When they moved their
tents and panillions from Cades, they came into mount Hor, that is the
uttermost countries of ye land of Edom. In this foresaid hill Aarons son
Eleazar took upon him first the principate of Priesthood.

Of the hill Oliuet. Cap. 28.
MOunt Oliuet is a Mount in Iurye nigh Jerusalem, and had that name for most
plenty of Olives, that grow therein. Therefore Austen super John, calls it
the mount of light, the mount of fatness and of feeding, the mount of
medicine, of curation and of help. And he says so, because of great plenty
of Olyues that grow therein. And ye fruit of them is vnctueus, shining and
liking, for as Isidore says, the oil of Olives rises out of bitterness of
the root, into the feeding of light, into medicine of wounds, and into
refreshing and feeding of the hungry. At the foot of this mount Oliuet runs
a brook that is called, Torrentem Cedron, between the drink thereof, and the
mount was an Orthard, in which our Lord often times entered because of prayer and
rest, and there was he first taken in a garden, that is called Gethseman, as it
is said Ioh. 19. For in the foot of that hill, fast by the brook Torrentem
Cedron, was sometime a little town, that is called Gethsemany, and yet that
time there were orchards of that town, as Austen says, and often our Lord used
that place of orchards. And that mount was in ye East side of the Temple, and
therefore it was beshined of the sun rising in the morew side, and of light
shining of the Temple in the even tide by night. And therefore it was worthelye
called the mount of light, for it received light both of heaven and of the
Temple: and also it gave to other plenty of oil and matter of light, as Aust.
says. In this mount was a little street, that was called Bethphage, that longed
to the Priests In the side of this Hill was a City that was called Bethania,
that was the City of Martha, of Lazarus, and of Mary, as the Gloss says super
Math. 21. And out of this Mount our Lord ascended up into Heaven, and shall
appear at the day of dome about the same mount, as it is said, Acts. 1. Both
in the ferte, and in the Gloss. In this mount Solomon builded Temples and high
places, as it is said. 3. Regum. 9. cap. And therefore it is called mount
Oliuet, that was the mount of forgiveness and of mercy. And it was called the
mount of offense and of trespass, for as it to said 4. Reg. 23. in those
mounts Solomon offended and trespassed against his own God.

Of the hill Olympo. Cap. 29.
OLympus is a Mount of Macedonia, and is full high, so that it is said, that
the clouds be there under, as Virgil says, Olympus passes the clouds, and is
called Olympus, as it were Olalampus, that is to understand, as it were heaven.
This mount departs Macedonia and Thracia, and is so high, that is passes all
storms and other passions of ye air: and therefore Philosophers went up to see
the course and places of stars, and they might not line there, except they
had spounges with water, to make the air more thick by throwing and sprinkling
of water, as the master says in Histori^s.

( Addition.
Olympus, a mountain or hill in Greece, between The^lalia and Macedonia,
above yt which appears no cloud, and therefore among the Poets it is usurped
for Heaven. Plutarchus in viti A^milij, says: That it is ten furlonges in
heyght, and a furlonge is taken for the ^yght part of a mile and a mile is a
thousand paces, so that the hill after that measure, was a mile and a quarter
high, upright is a great height: but I take it to be after the paces of
Hercules, which is said to be doubled, so that the hill upright might be two
English miles and an half: but after ye furlong of the Persians, which they
call Parasaugam, which contains the space of six miles and a quarter, each
surlong amounts to 60. miles.

Of the hills Oreb. chap. 30.
Oreb is a mount of Madian, as Jerome says, nigh to Arabia in the desert, to
whom in joined the desert of Sarasines, which is called Pharao: and mount Oreb
and Sion is all one, as Jerome says. In this mount Moses saw many sights, as
it is Exo. 3. Therein he saw the bush burn, that was not wasted with burning.
There he heard our Lord speak to him, and commanded to him many things, as it
shall be rehearsed after in the mount Sinay.

Of the hill Pernassus. cap. 31.
MOunt Pernassus is in These. lia., as Isidore says, nigh to Boetia. And ye
mount has two tops arcared high. as it were unto heaven. In which tops Apollo
and Liber Bacchus were worshipped sometime, because of the mirth of place, and
for great plantie of wine and vines.

Of the hill Riphei. chap. 32.
HIgh mountains that be in the head of Germany, be called Montes Riphei, as
Isidorus says: And they have that name of continual blasts and strong reesing
of wind and of tempests. For Ripheus is Greek, and is understood a strong
blast: and they be called Alps, that is understood mountains. To the tops
of them is no way, but high feet of downs, and of other lower mountains. And
in these high mountains is Snow always, many clouds, heads, springs of
wells, and of great rivers, and beasts fierce and wild, and many manner of
Birds and Fowls with wings, that shine by night, as Isidore says.

Of high Cragges. cap. 33.
HIgh cragges be highest mountains, most sad and strong passing the high
tops of other mountains, and receive always rooses of tempests, and showers
of rain, and therefore the earth is full washed above, and the harder parts
of the mountains be made more hard and turned to stones, and made endless
many cragges. And though cragges be never so hard and rough, and sharp
without, yet within they ^e somewhat spungeous and hollow. Therefore eft
humors that be drawn and ^^ hered therein, break and spring out at (...):
and winds and watere come into hollownesse and denues of cragges, and he
sometime cause of earth soo^ing. And sometime by violence and strength of the
shaking, the cragges all to break and fail: birds and fowls, as Egles and
Uul^ars come to the tops of those cragges. Also cliffes on the Sea be soon
wasted with cragges, and with leaping of them, and with strong reeses of
storms and waves, that smite against hard cragges, and couenable places for
defense and strength be found on cragges. Dens and neasts of Fowls and beasts
be made in crags: loppes of cragges be wrapped and beclipped with mistes and
with clouds. In the Sun rising tops of cragges be shined with beams of
the Sun: and cragges be called Rupes, for they be hard to break. For
without strength of iron cragges be not moved. And also out of deep veins
of cragges precious stones and diverse kinds of metal be often dug and
drawn. Also the most high strouting parts of cragges be called Scopuli, and
have that name of Scopin, that is to spy and maite, for out of such cragges,
right far places be perceived and espied.

Of the hill Sephara. cap 34.
SEphara is a mount of ye East in Iurye, as Jerome says, nigh thereto dwelled
the children of lethan, the son of Hember, Josephus says, they came after in
Sephora: to the which place Salomons ship came with merchaundise, and chaffer
commonly in three year. This place is the land Tharsis, and an haven of the
sea. Thence Salomons servants brought gold and silver, Apes and Pecockes and
Elephants teeth, as it is said 3. Reg. 10.

Of the hill Segor. cap. 35.
SEgor is a little mount, and is called Balo also, and is nigh Sodoma, as
Hierome says. In that mount was a City builded, that was saved at ye prayers
of Loath. There grow vines and balm, and apples of palms, a token of the old
plenty, and is upon the dead Sea. And therein afterward was set succor of
defense of Romans: thereof speaks Esa. 15. Whereon the Gloss says, that it
was called an Heighfer: For is held fast liking of lechery, for it was twice
smitten, and fell down at the third time with earth shaking, and should have
stood strong, and abid, if they had not sinned after the deliverance.

Of the hill Sinay. cap. 36.
SInay is a mount, and Oreb is a part thereof, and is in Arabia in the
province of Madian. Of this mount speaks Iesephus li. secundo Ant quitatum,
and says, that Sinay is a high mount and a noble, and worthy to pasture, and
bears best herbs and grass. And it was supposed ye God dwelled there: and
therefore durst no man keep sheep there, for the Shepheardes durst not presume
to walk there. Moses came toward this mount, and saw a wonderful sight. For
he saw that fire burnt a bush, and wasted it not: neither appaired the
greenenesse, neither flowers thereof, neither spraies that bare fruit, though
the flame was swift, and full strong and mighty. And out of that fire our Lord
spoke to Moses. Also in libro. 3. he says, that Moses went up to Sinay, that
is the most high hill in that country, and because of his highness and
greatness, and high strouting crags, it is not only hard for men to come
thereto, but also it may not be seen without travail. Therefore it was
said that our Lord dwelled about it. This mount was dreadful to all men, so
that no man durst come thereto. About the foot of this mount the Hebrews
pight their tents, and were worthy to see God in fire, and in a clowd, and to
hear him speak personallye. This mount is called Mons Sinay, the mount of
dwelling of our Lord, and often conuning of Angels, mount of light, and of
burning flame, mount of clouds and of darkness, and inourd of rain and of
dew, mount of Pasture, and of seeding, mount of wisdom and of lore. For out of
that mount our Lord taught Moses and the people, and gave them law, mount of
forgiveness and of mercy: For out of that foresaid mount gifts that were not
before heard, were granted to the people: Mount of righteousness, menassing
and threatening. For he was dreadful to them that saw him. Mount of lightening
and of seeming and blasing, mount of trumpes and of trumping: Mount of
friendship and of truice. For by the law there our Lord joined and knit the
people there to him in everlasting truice: Mount of pureness and of cleannes:
Mount of gladness, of solace, and of nursh, for none might come to this mount
but those that were clean in body and in soul. Also they that were clean
before our Lord, eat and drank with joy and mirth. Then mount of
forgiveness, of mildness, and of pity: mount of sacrifice and of prayers,
for they did sacrifice to our Lord, and heard that our Lord was pleased and
had mercy on them by prayers of Moses.

( Addition.
Sina, or Sinai, a mountain in the desert of Arabia, called also Oreb. It is
of Solinus called Casies: Justinius calls it Synaeus. On that hill God
appeared to Moses, and delivered to him the Tables of the law. Meade hereof
more at large in the old testament. Exodus 20. It is also a city of
Mesopotamia.

Of the hill syon. cap. 37.
MOunt Sion was a mount in Jerusalem, therevppon was David's Tower set for
fairness and defense of the City. In the one side of mount Sion was the
temple, as it were in the middle between the tower and the lower city, for
strength of the tower should defend the city. And therefore often holy writ
calls Jerusalem the daughter of Sion, as the mother defends the daughter,
(...)
and the daughter is subted to the mother, so the lower city was subject to
the temple and also to the tower. And among other mountains, mount Sion was of
so great authority and worthiness, that not only the city of Jerusalem, nor
only Iurye had the name of Syon, but also all holy Churches, that is
gathered both of Jews and of Nations, had the name of mount Sion, and is often in
Prophesies called sion, as in this place: Mount syon is founded in joy of all
the earth, the sides of the North, Psa. 43.2
the City of the great King. For mount sion was full high and full excellent,
great, strong, and steadfast, full plenteous and fair, and most merrye and
trustye, and most sure, most rich and joyful, perfect, rightful and holy:
Mount of lore and of teaching, as it is written Esaias. 2. Out of Sion shall come
law: mount of prophecy and of revelation.

Of the hill Selmon. chap. 38.
SElmon is a mount in the lignage of Ephraim, nigh to the coasts of the lineage
of Manasse, Abimelech went by into this hill, when he fought against the
Sichimites, as Jerome says. And it is read Iud. 9. that this mount is thick
of trees: and has much shadow. Therefore Selmon is understood shadow, and is
a moist mount with water and Snow, and is fat and full of pasture, as it is
said in Psalmo, anon they shall be made white in selmon: it is the mount of
God, the fat mount.

Of the hill Sophin. chap. 39.
SOphin is a mount in the lignage of Ephraim, in ye place of Charmachen, where
Samuel was borne, as Ier. says, it was a place set full high and plenteous of
herbs and of grass, and moist with water, and full of herbs and of trees,
and of liking.

Of the hill saron. chap. 40.
OF saron it is said Esaye. 35. That saron is a mount between mount Thabor
and the ponde Tiberiades. And of that mount all that land and country has the
name, and is called Sarona yet to this day, as Jerome says.

Also all the Countries and lands from Cesaria Palestina, unto the Town that
is called Ioppe, is called Sarona. Near to this mount be plenteous fields in
fruit grass, and corn, as the Gloss rehearses and says super Esaias. 28.

Of the hill seon. chap. 41.
DEutronomij. 4. it is said, That mount seon is a part of mount Galaad, that
stretches by desert over Iordane to the place, in the which Seon diuelled,
king of Amo^reis, and fell to the lot of Ruben and Gad, and of half the
lignage of Manasse, as Jerome says upon Iere. 46. upon that word Assendente
Galaud, etc. Look before in ye mount Galaad.

Of the hill semeron. cap. 42.
SEmeron is a mount, of whom it is written. 2. Par. 13. Now in that mount is
the City of Sabalte, there rests the Relics of Saint John Baptyll, as
Jerome says. And Samaria was built sometime in the same mount. And thereafter
all the land had the name of that City, and was called samaria, because of the
mount this City was most strong and most hard to win. Therefore the king of
Assyries with a great host, and most great array of warriors besieged the
City three year continually, and might never win it by strength, but uneath
with strong hunger. But as Jerome says and Io. also. He should never have than
ye city, if men yt dwelled therein had not offended the God of Israel, and had
trusted steadfastly in him, and had forsaken his law. Look the properties of
this mount before, De montibus Israel, there it is fully showed.

Of the hill Seyr. cap. 43.
OF mount Seyr is the most mention made in holy writ, and that mount is called
also mount Edom. Also thereof it is treated at full before: look de monte
Edom, that is called Monte Esau, for Esau had thee names.

Of the hill Thabor. cap. 44.
THabor is an hill in the middle field of Gables, as Hierome says super lere.
cap. 36. And is a mount with wonderful nurth and highness, and distanteth ten
miles from Diocesaria toward the East: And was in the marches of Zabulon,
Isacar, and Neptalym. Among the mountains of the land of behest, this mount
was most famous because of place, of plenty of mirth, of strength, and of
steadfastness. For the soil of that mount bears vines, olives, and other
trees very apt to bear fruit. There the air is wholesome, and ost deaw and
sweet rain, as well in the morning as in the evening, there be high trees
that leese not their leaves nor green color in winter neither in Summer.
There is songs of many diverse birds and souls: and their voice is liking to
the hearers, and diversity of color of their feathers is pleasant: to the
sight; and sweetness is liking to the taste, many birds and souls haunt that
place, therefore there be many Fowlers that lie and lay nets, springs and
grinnes, as Hierome says upon this place, Osee. 3. As a net is spread upon
mount Thabor, etc. Passing all other the presence of our Lord makes
commendable this mount and most worthy to be praised: for with his coming
thereto our Lord made this mount worshipful. For in this mount our Lords
taught, in this mount because of prayers our Lord abode by night sometime, in
this mount our Lord fed the people both with bodily meat and Ghostly: In
the top of this mount our Lord showed himself bassefull, and changed his
figure passingly before his Disciples, and gave them revelation in his own
body, of bliss and cleerenesse, that ever shall last.

( Addition.
Tabor a mountain in the Country of Galile, where Christ was transfigured.

Of the hill Ziph. cap. 45.
ZIph is a mount with much shadow, therein David hid himself when he
absented him from Saul: and is beside Charmela in mount Carmell. In the which
mount Nabal Cormolites dwelled sometime, that came of the kind of Calef, as
Ier. says. And that mount has many woods, vushes, and trees without fruit,
and many laundes, and wild beasts, as Roes and wild Coats be in this mount.
And this mount is full of deunes and of dry ditches and holes, and therefore it
is a couenable place for banished men and thieves to hide them therein. And is
perilous to strangers that know not the ways therein: for they may lightly
leese themselves.

Of a down. chap. 46.
A Down is a little swelling or arearing of earth, passing the plain ground,
and not reaching to highness of an hill. For a down is lower then an hill,
and higher then the plain: And is called Tumulus, as it were swelling land,
as Isidore says: and so often a down is the foot of an hill. For by downs often
we go up to high hills. And downs are called Colles, and have that name of
Colendo, tilling. For they be tilled with less travail then hills. And men
dwell in them sooner then in hills: and they receive sooner the good air and
heat of the Sun, then the lower lands: and therefore fruit ripeth sooner in
downs.

Also downs be more bedewed and berained then valletes: therefore fruit that
grows in downs is more sweet and sauourie, then fruit that grows in
valleies. Downs be mean between the lowest plains of the land, and the
highest tops of hills: therefore air is more thicker and greater in downs,
and more hot then in hills, and more small and clear then in valleys. For
downs receive of the over bodies, more clean and noble impressions and
influence, then in valleys. And therefore fruit, herbs, and grass that grow
in downs, be better and more wholesome then those that grow in valleies, and in
other places, as Constantine says. Also downs take sooner ye shining of the
Sun beams, and swifter moisting of the clouds, then valleys. Also from
mountains upon the downs, come down brooks and streams, and after from
downs they run to valleies and fields.

Of a Valley. chap. 47.
A Ualley is low lands set between mountains, as Isidore says. And a
valley receives and bears the water that comes of streams, and of wells:
and so valleies be moisted with streams that come out of mountains. And by
shedding thereof they be endowed with flowers, herbs, and fruits, and with
green twigges and branches, and be shadowed by rearing and highness of hills,
and of downs. Also in valleys is most meeting and gathering, and rebounding of
Sun beams: And therefore more hotter impressions be gendered in valleies
then in mountains. And also snow melts sooner in valleies then in
mountains, and by shedding thereof, the places that be nigh be wette and
moist, as Macrobius says. And therefore valleys be deemed by assaye, hot,
trowblye, thick, and vaporous. Men that dwell in valleys be often times
grieved with hot evils: and moist, as Constantine says. Houses that stand in
valleys, be less grieved with weathers then houses that stand in mountains.
For mountains stand between and defend the valleies from strong reefes of
weather and storms. Also men that dwell in valleys be seldom grieved with
earth shaking. And the cause is, for in valleys the parts of the ground be
set and thrust and cleave stronglye together. Therefore the wind may not
easilye thirle those parts, and come into such ground. For those parts be
not hollow neither full of hoales. Therefore they move not nor wagge with
strength of wind, that comes therein, as Aristotle says.

Also filth and uncleanness comes into valleys, and abides there long
time: for the air that is in valleies is sooner rising of great smoakie
vapors and of mist then in mountains. And so the parts of the valleies are
more deeper toward the center, then of mountains, and are more farther from
the circumference of heaven. Also in valleies for great coming of water, some
and sen be heaped together, and make so great marreis and mires that they be
hard for to pass, and by reason thereof passages over are found with great
difficulty. Also for plenty of humor, grass and herbs grow most in
valleies, willowes, and other trees, without fruit grown in valleys, more
then in mountains.

Of Campus. chap. 48.
ONe other manner field is called Campus, and that manner of field is plain
ground and low, as a valleye, and not reared on high as mountains, as
Isidore says: and is called Campus for even and plain footing therein. And
has that name of Camis, Greek: And Camis is understood, short, even, or
plain. And Campus is a plain place and not tilled nor eared with plough, nor
dounged with dirt, but is namelye ordained for walking and playeng, and use of
deeds of knighthoode. And is nigh to a City, that is common place ordained to
sight of all men, and to use of the communaltye: and it is appropried to no
man, but assigned to the profit of all men.

Of Ager, a field. cap. 49.
THere is another field that is called Ager, and has that name, for some what
is wrought therein, as Isid. says. lib. 15. And Varro says, every such field
either lies, and is a standing place, or bears trees, or is able to pasture,
or lies to leese for beasts, or bears flowers, and is necessary for Bees.
Therefore as men of old time meaned, that land that is tilled is called Ager,
and that land that is untilled is called Rus, as wood and lays, wherein is
both milk and beasts. And of this name Rus the vplandish me^ have their name
and be called Rustici. For that was the first and idle felicitye of vplandish
men. And also such a field is called Pascuus: for men that divide and depart
fields leave such a field to their neighbors to pasture and to leeses. And
Aluuius is a field, that is made a field little and little by drawing and
ouerturning of rivers. And so Artihmus is a field that is not contained in
certain measures of lines, but the ends thereof stretches to mountains, and
Towers, and rivers. And so a field that is first eared is called Noualis, or a
field that lies void every other year to renew his virtue. For a field
that is called Noualis bears fruit once and rests once without fruit. Also
sometime a field is called Squalidus, as it were Excolidus, and has that name,
for he passes out of tilth, as Exconsul is he that leaves the office of
consul. Sometime the field is called Vliginosus, yt is understood always
moist: for that is said to be moist, that is sometime dry. But Vligo is kind
humor of land, that never passes nor never fails. Huc vsque Isid. lib. 15.
cap. 14. Then the field is a place of business, of travel, and of sweat. For
the field is ^ylled with travail, beaten and dug with ^^^tockes, dolue and
turned with spades, opened and cared with cultures and shares, and sown with
seeds, raked and covered with rakes and harrowes, and moysted and watered with
dew and with rain, closed about with hedges of thorns, strained in Winter
with frost and with cold, and withered in summer with burning and with heat,
and is filled in Springing time, and in Harvest time fruit is gathered, and
the fields be eared again. And so the field is always travailed with one
travail or with other.

Of Predium. cap. 50.
PRedium is a field or demaine, that an husband ordeineth for himself, and
chooses before all other, as Isidore says. And properly it is a place, in
which an husband builds his house and dwelling place in the middle of his
own fields. Or it is called Predium, for that in old time men held fields,
that they took in battle and in war, in the name of a pray, as Isidore
says: and is called Predium, as it were Preuidium, purueiaunce.

Of a Meede. cap. 51.
A Meede has plenty of heye to feed beasts with, and is called Pratum in
Latin, and the old Romans gave thereto that name: for it is a place always
ready and pressed, and needs not travel of tilling, as Isidore says. And such
places be called Prata, for they be always ready to bear grass and hey, and
Prata, meedes, be watered and moysted with rivers, streams, and wells. And for
plenty of humors it gives always feeding and nourishing to moares and roots
of herbs. And meedes be springed with herbs and grass, and flowers of
diverse kind: and therefore for fairness and green springing that is therein,
it is said, that meedes laugh. Also meedes for they be green, they be
lyking to the sight, and for sweet odor, they be liking to the smell, and
feeding the taste with savor of their herbs and of their grass.

Herbs and flowers of meedes give honey to Bees, and breed plenty of milk
in beasts and in flocks, and heal wounds, and remedy against diverse
sicknesses and evils.

Of Desert. chap. 52.
Desert is a space of land, and is called Desert: for it is forsaken of many
men to dwell therein, and to come thereto: therefore men labor it not nor dwell
therein, as Isidore says: and that happens sometime, for the land is
barren, or for the air is not temporate, or for default of wells and water, or
for destruction made with enemies. And so desert is not labored, and is full
of thorns and pricking bushes, and is place of creeping worms and venomous
beasts, and of wild beasts, and it is the lodges of vanished men and of
thieves, land of thirst and dryness, land of burning and disease, land of
wasting and of horror, land of misgoing and of erring. For in desarte ways
be unknown, for the downs and paths be not worn nor trodden, but they be
grown and full of Broom, of furs, and of shrubbes, and of other bushes
without fruit, and the plains be full of gravel and of stones, of fenne and
of cloddes, and of other lets that grieve travailing men. And be called
Deserts, for they be not sown, as Isidore says. And so places of woods and
mountains, that be not sown be called Deserts: and also places that men
dwelled in sometime, and be destroyed by some hap, be often called Deserts, as
Isidore says.

Of Heremo. chap. 52.
HEremus is a wayles wilderness, and there dwell but few, except wild
beasts and fierce. Therefore men that desire to dwell in wilderness and out of
men's sight and company, be called Hermites. And Heremus is declined Heremus,
Heremi, and has that name of contrary meaning: For Hereo, here is, is for to
say, to tarry and abide: For few men tarry and abide therein. Or Heremus is
said, as it were cleaning land: for commonly land that is called Heremus, and
Solitudo, is hard, fast, and sad. In hermites place and solitarye, wild
beasts walk more freely, and abide more surely then in other places: for
thickness of bushes and many woods, wild fowls and Birds sing there most
sweetly, and also make their neasts. And for many wild beasts and fowls
haunt such places, though they be solitarye: yet sometime hunters come
thereto: and also there fowlers hide otten their grinnes and their nets. Also
men that inhabit in that place live in much travail. For now they be grieved
with Frost, and now with burning of heat, now falls upon them dew, now
rain, now hoare frost, and now Snow. And they be selde ouerset but happily by
thieves or by hunters. Therefore these places of Hermits have much greeuaunce
and travail, nevertheless it has a vauntage of commodity and rest.

Of a dark Cave. chap. 53.
A Dark cave is called Antrum, and has that name of Atro, black: for therein
is black and fearful darkness, as Isidore says. And is properly a lurking
and hiding place of beasts that dwell in tennes and hoales: therefore in such
places beasts lie and epsy and wait their pray. Antru^ is called Specus, a
place to abide in, to wait, and to spy. And has that name of Speculando,
waiting and espieng. For there they wait and epsy beastly, and spy their pray,
as Isi. says. And this place yt is called Antrum is cold in Su^mer and hot in
winter, and necessarily for wild beasts to feed and to hide therein their broods
and their whelps, and stinketh of sweat and vapors of beasts.

Of a Ditch. chap. 55.
DItch is called Fossa, and has that name of Fodiendo, deluing: for it is a
place made deep by strength and craft, and with wit of deluers moved: And the
more the land is arreared above the brinke, the deeper the Ditch is within:
And the more high and deep the Ditch is, the more hard and perilous it is to
pass over: for a man may soon fall therein, and after the falling it is hard
to arise and come out of the Ditch, as Gregory says. Therefore also Jerome
says. super Ez. 19. yt a lion is taken in a ditch: for in the bottom of a
ditch is a sheep or a Goat put, and by the smell thereof the Lion comes into
the ditch because of pray: But when he is therein, he is there held, that he
may not go thence. Also by the ditch in the one side is a place dug, as it
were a den: and therein is set a trap, as it were a coffer, ye closes soon,
and is hard to open. And when the lion sees yt he may not pass out of ye
first ditch, he dreadeth the coming of the hunter, and goes into the second
ditch, and is closed in the trap that is ordained there: and so he is taken and
held prisoner, as Hierome says. Also ditches be needful, for with ditches
cities and castles be strengthened against enemies. Also place of lands and
bounds of mansio^s be departed with ditches. And some ditches be full of water:
and therein is fish nourished and creeping worms of diverse kind. Therefore a
ditch is called Fouea, as it were feeding and nourishing of living water. For
in ditches is water nourished and kept, both running and standing Water. Now
come brooks therein, and now rain, and now well heads and streams of
springing water spring and rise therein. And often a ditch is the chief strength
and succor of all fortresses, walled towns and castles, when the Ditch is
arrayed in good order in breadth, in length, in highness, and in deepnesse: to a
place that is so strengthened is no coming, but if men pass ye ditch with
filling and stopping, or by boat, or by bridge, as Hierome says.

Of Spelunca. chap. 56.
SPelunca is a Ditch or hollownesse under the earth: and has that name
Spelunca, of speculando, waiting and espieng. For because of wideness thereof
it is an able place to abide in, and to behold and look about. And has a wide
mouth at entering, and open toward the light, and a straightend within. And so
spelunca is a place under the earth: first showing light at the entering, and
then dark and troubly in passing inward. And in the farther end hard and
straight, and rough and ragged in the outgoing at the farther end: if so be
that the out going may be found, as Damascene says. And namely in other places
there stones and metals be dug and mined, be such hollow ditches and dens
under the earth, and left so hollow and void, when stones and mettalls be
voided and taken thence. And the over part is underset with poasts and pillars,
that it may not fall. But often by great heaviness of ye earth, those pillars be
ouercharged, and fall for softness of their own matter: or the ground beneath
is moist, and falls, and the pillars fall, and so all those that be therein be
destroyed and utterly spilt. Therefore it is hard and perilous to abide in
mines under the earth. For they are cold and moist, dark, unstable, and
vnhelthy. And they be rough, hard, and heavy above: and hollow and deep
beneath. Also such places be couenable to hiding and lurking of wild beasts,
and to put therein filth and uncleanness, and to dwelling and abiding of
Serpents and of other beasts.

Of Cauerna. chap. 57.
CAuerna is earth or land dug and made hollow, and has that name of
Cauando, digging and making hollow. For some parts of the earth be dug and
made hollow and departed asunder with creeping worms and beasts or with
thrusting of parts, or with voydaunce and out casting. And in cauerns Mice and
creeping worms take their dens and neasts, and fly thereto, when they see
and dread peril or harm without. Also to hollownesse of trees and of stones,
sometime birds and fowls fly, as Culuours and Turtles, when they dread the
Egle and the hawke, coming in the air. Also hedghoges, connies, and hares to
hollow stones, when they hear hounds, and know that hunters come. Also in
holow holes and dens of the earth and of trees, Bees make honny, and some
manner of fowls make there their neasts and lurk therein. Also in hollow dens
lie Adders and Serpents that hurt and sting with venomous biting, man and
beast, that come nigh to such dens. And moreover when the earth is hollow and
full of dens, it shakes often and moves by winds that come therein, that
fills the dens, and gendereth earth shaking therein, as Aristotle says.

FINIS LIBRI XIIII.
INCIPIT LIBR XV. DE PROVINTIIS.
OF the parts of the earth, and of diverse provinces, by the which the world is
generally departed, somewhat by the help of God shall be shortly added to
this work. We will singularly entreat of them all, but only of such, of
which holy Scripture makes often remembrance.

Of the world. cap. 1.
THe world wide is departed in three, as Isidore says li. 15. For one part is
called Asia, another Europa, the third Africa. These three parts of the world
were assigned not like much in old time, by me^, for Asia stretches out of ye
south by the East unto the North. And Europa out of the North unto the West:
But Africa stretches out of the West and passes by ye South, and Asia
contains only one part, yt is the half part of ye land that men dwell in:
and the other two countries contein the other half. The great sea comes out
of the Occean, and stretches between these parts, and departs the^ asunder:
therefore if thou diuidest the world in two parts, of the East and of the West:
In one part is Asia, and in the other is both Africa and Europa. And so Noes
sons departed and divided the world after the flood among them: Sem with his
offspring had Asiam, and Iaphet Europam, Came Affricam, as the Gloss says super
Genes. 10. and super Par., 1. Gregory says the same, and Plinius also.

Of Asia. chap. 2.
ASia is taken for the half part of the world, and had that name Asia of a
woman that held the kingdom of the East in old time, as Isidore says lib.
15. This Asia disposed into the third part of the world, has by the East the
rising of the Sun, and by South Occean, and stretches unto our Sea, and
ends by North at lake or marreyes, that is called Meotides, and at the flood
Tanay. And has many provinces and regions, and diverse nations, and wonderful
in living, manners, and figures and shapes of body, and be wonderfully diverse,
in will, heart, and thought. Their names and places we shall shortly set,
following the order of A.B.C.

Of Assiria. chap. 3.
ASsiria is a Country and province of Asia, and has that name of Assure the
son of Sem, that first dwelled there after the flood. This Province has Indie
in the East side, and stretches to ye country of Media in the South side: and
has in the West the river Tigris, and in the North the hill that is called
mount Caucasus. Where be the gates of Caspic, as Isidore says liber. 15. Also
out of that country came first ye use of porpute, the ointmentes both of hair
and of bodies: also odours and smells: and thereof sprang the lecherye of
Romans, and of Greeks, as Isidore says. And is a land most temperate in
temperate countries: But in many places in the uttermost ends from distemperate
places, the land is vnpassible in beasts and serpents, and also in manners of
men, as Psini. says li. 3. Where he discribeth the ^creenesse of the men. The
Assinalis dwelled in this province, and has that name of Assure: they were most
mighty people, and held in old time the middle country of the land from
Euphrates unto the end of Indie, as Isidore says. li. 19.

( Addition.
Assyria, a region in Asia; called now Syria, in english Surrey, which marches
on ye East upon Indie, on ye West upon ye noble river of Tygris on ye south; it
has the country Media, on the North, the hill Caucasus. Assure a city in India,
builded by king Solomon.

Of Arabia. Chap. 3.
ARabia is a Province of Asia, and is called the holy Province: for there
grows Thus, as Isidore says lib. 15. There is most plenty of Trees that
bear frankensence, and other with sweet odor and smell. For the which
fragrant and aromatike savor, the Greeks call it Eudemon, and the Latins
Arabiam, that is understood blessed and holy, as he says there. And in far
parts of this Arabia grow most Mirre and Sinamum, and other medicinable things
be there in great plenty: There breeds a Bird that is called Phoenix, and
there is great multitude of other things, and of diverse wild beasts and
Fowls. Also in Arabia be diverse precious stones, as Isidore says, Plimus and
Orosius.

There is as these Authors say, three manner of Sardomes, and a precious
stone that is called Ires, and many diverse precious stones in number be
found. And there be sound many Dragons, and some Adders, and in the heads of
them be sound diverse precious stones. And in that land is Saba, and is so
called of the daughter of Jupiter. And is a part of the land of Arabia,
stretching upon the sea that is called Persie^, and ends toward the sea that
is called Mare Arabicum. Look within in Saba.

( Addition.
Arabia in Hebrew Saba, is a country in Asia, divided into three regio^s,
Petra, deserta, and Foelix, Petrea, (signifieng stouie), marches on Egypt and
India. Pliny calls it Nabathea, the chief City thereof is called Petra,
now called Arach, in holy Scripture it is called Petra deserti. By this
Country the children of Israel passed out of Egypt, it is as strabo writes,
plain, inwroned with Rocks of a great height, wherein be many springs of
fresh water. Without the circoit toward India, the more part of the Country is
desarte without water.)

( Addition
There is the great mountain Sina, called of Ptholome M^^^nes, where the old
law was given to Moses, and where the body of the holy Uirgin Katherin was
buried. Also another mountain called Casius, where the great Pompeius is
buried. Arabia deserta, of Strabo called Senaetis, has on the South the
mountain of Arabia soelix, on the North Mesopotamia, on the West Petrea. The
people of this Country have no certain habitation, but dwell in tents, Arabia
soelix on the South, lies between the two Seas Arabicum and Persicum, which
is so plentiful, that it brings forth corn and fruits twice in the year.
They have plenty of all fruit and cattle, except Horses, Mules, and Swine:
of all Fowls, except Geese, Cocks, and Hens. And there grows all kind of
Spices, and sweet gummes. The Towns are unwalled, because the people do live
always in peace. D. Cooper in Thesaurus.)

Of Armenia. chap. 5.
ARmenia has the name of Armenus, the companion of Jason of Thessali, ye which
when he had left king Jason, he gathered together the folk yt were sparpled
abroad and took Armenia, and called it after his own name, as Isi. says li.
15. This is the land of Ararath, into ye which Sennacheribs sons fled when they
had flame him in his prayers in ye temple of his own God, as the story tells
li. P^e.pri. And ye mount, upon the which Noes ship rested after the flood, is
called Ararath: and this Armenie is set between mount Taurus and caucasi, and
stretches from Capadocia, to ye sea Caspium. And has on ye North side ye
Mountains Ceraunos, of ye which ye river Tigris arises, as Isi. says. There
is two Armenias, ye over and the nether. And there is two Pannonia, and in
either of them is often found wonders, and things wonderfully shapen: But there,
where ye land of Armenie touches ye brinks and brime, of Tigris and of
Eufrates, it is most fruitful with herbs, corn, woods, and fruit. But it is full
of diverse kinds of wild beasts and cruel, and Serpents and Adders, as Isidore
says. And Plinius speaks much hereof libro. 2.

( Addition
Armenia, the name of two Regions. Mayor and Minor^ Armenia mayor has on the
North, Colehis, Iberia, and Albania on the West part Capadocia: on the East
part of the Hircan sea: on the South Mesopotamia: and the mountain Taurus,
Armenia minor has on the North and West part CAPPADUCIA, on the East, the
noble river Euphrates, and Armenia minor, on the South part the mountain
Taurus. The Armenians were christened of late years, but now they be subject
to the Turks, Latins, and Grecians: They have one great Bishop, whom they
call Catholicum, they keep holy neither the Nativity of Christ, nor his
Baptism, saying, he needed not to be purged nor cleansed of sin. Also they
take from all Sacraments the virtue to confer grace: They est-soones baptize
those that (...)^ from the church of the Latins to them, saying, that they be
not of the Catholyke says. They say that no man may be christened, unless he
receive the Sacrament of the Altar, and that infants need not to be baptized,
affirming that in them is no original sin: That the holy Ghost proceeds of
the Father, and not of the Son. That the Sacrament of the Altar may not be
consecrate of bread clean without leaven. Also in the consecration they put no
water to wine: Moreover, they say that the receiving of the Sacrament
profits only the body: That when Christ descended into hell, he led with
him all the souls yt were there: That matrimony is no Sacrament, and may be
dissolved at the will of the man or woman: That Christ did rise the Saterdaye
after good Fridaye: all these are said to be their opinions, and are condemned
as errors by sundry counsels.)

Of Aradia. chap. 6.
ARadia yt is called Aradine also, is an Island yt is all one city, and
stands in the sea of middle earth, not far from Tirus, as ye Gloss says
super locu^ illu^ s^^^. 27. Children of Aradine in thine army, etc. and be
seemly men and cunning in battle of the sea.

They of Aruad were with thine host round about the walls. Psa. 11.

Of Albania. chap. 7.
ALbania is a province of ye more Asia, and has that name of the color of
men. For they be borne with white hair: and is a more colder land then other
lands of Asia. This Albania has in the East side the sea Caspium, and rises
by the coasts of the North Occeane: and stretches forth by full barren places
and desert, to ye marreis that is called Paludes Meotides. In this land be
great hounds, so huge in body and so fierce in heart, yt they throw down bulls,
and stay lions, and overcome and throw down Elephauts, yt be strongest of huge
beasts: Plimus shows an ensample of an hou^d of Albanie, that was sent to
Alexander, and overcame in a furlong a Lion, a Bore, and an Elephant, as he
says li. 8. cap. de cambus Albanie. And the men have eien painted, and yeelowe
in the black, that they see better by night then by day, as he says, and
Isidore also libro. 9.

And Solinus tells the same for marvel.

( Addition.
Albania a County in Asia, having on the East ye sea Caspium, on the West
Iberia, on the North the hills Caecasus. The people there were first poor and
simple, and as shepherds: not having knowledge of money, nor of any number
above one hundred, living by exchange, not knowing weight, measure, nor
husbandrye, and yet ready in wars. They honored for God the Sun and the
Moon, having among them (as Strabo writes) six and twenty languages, and as
many Kings. Of these people are supposed the Albanises that dwell in Morea,
sometime called Peloponesus which be now under the Turk, or under the great
Cane.)

Of Attica. chap. 9.
ATtica is the same province, that was the old Grecia, a part or the City
thereof was sometime called Athens. Athens (...) and famous university of
Greece, and the place of eloquence.
And was sometime nourisher of Philosophers, and mother of liberal lectures:
and in Greece was nothing more noble, nothing more worthy, then that City,
while it gave business to study of love of wit, and wisdom, as Plinius says
and Isidore li. 15. Plato of Athens was Doctor of all the Province of Attica,
yt was Grecia.

( Addition
Athenae the famous City of Athens, between Macedoma and Achaia, in the Sea
coast, it once was called Actae, and after Attica. This (as Hyginus says) was
first builded by Cecropt, and called Cecropia, afterward by Mopsus, Mopsopia,
and last of all Athens, of Minerua, whom the Greeks call Athenam, for they
report that Neptune and Minerua contended for the name, that it was agreed
between them, that he should have the name that gave unto mankind, the
worthyest and most profitablest GIFFE, whereupon Neptune brought forth an
horse, and Minerua an Olive tree. The matter being put to voices which was ye
most profitable, Neptune was cast by one voice, and gave place unto Minerua.
This University was the inuentour and diuisour of all liberal Arts and
Sciences, and the mother and nurse of all ancient Philosophers, Oratoures, and
Poets: and therefore was called as it were the mart town of all good learing,
whether they resorted to study, out of all parts of the world. D. Cooper.
Thesaurus.)

Demosthenes with noble speaking made this City have a great name, passing
long time during, as Salustius says. But passing all other Ariopagita Saint
Paul's Disciple, commends and makes famous this City. For by his great wit
and profounde wisdom he lighted all parts of the world, as says
Epiphanius in the commendation of Denis Ariopagite, and Isidore says the same.

Of Achaia. chap. 9.
AChaia a Province of Grecia in Europe, so named of a king, that was called
Acheus in old time: This province is almost an Island, for it is environed all
about with the sea, except by North there he joins to Macedonia. For he has
in the East side the sea Cirenen: and in the North East ye Greekish sea, and in
ye south the sea Ionium, and in the South and West the Islands that be called
Cassodie. And only in ye North side it ioineth to Macedonia, and Achaia, that
is Grecia. The chief City of that Province is Corinthus, a place most strong,
as Isidore says. libro. 15. For uneath is any way to come thereto for
highness of place, and much solke, and for highness of the Sea, and also for
strength of Walls. Corinthus, the son of Hotestes builded this City. And
among the Greeks this City is called Corinthia, which is to understand
service of the common weal, as Isidore says li. 16.

( Addition.
Achaia a part of Greece, CONTAINING these countries, Attica, Floetia,
Megaris, Aetholia, and Phosis, it has on the West Epire, on the East the Sea
Aegrum, on the North Macedonia, on the South the sea Creticum. There is another
Achaia in Peloponesus, now called Morea, where was the city of Patras, in
which Saint Andrew the Apostle was martyred.)

( Addition.
Conrinthus, a famous, rich, and great city in Achaia, situate in the narrow
straight, entering into Peloponesus, now called Morea: By reason of the
commodious situation for resort of merchaundise out of all Countries, it was
the greatest mart Town in all the world, and thereby rose to so great wealth
and power, that the Romans began to suspecte and fear them, wherefore on a
time, when with proud words they abused ye Roman Ambassadors, (as Stra.
writes) they cast urine on their heads, as they passed through the City, the
Romans taking therewith great displeasure, sent there Captain Mummius against
them, who besieged the City, and within short space, so destroyed it, that
scantly any token of so noble a city which in few years remained: At the
burning of it, so many rich and costly Images, of sundry sorts of metal
were melted, that thereof after was found a kind of precious brass, called
Aes Corinthum, which long time after was had in great estimation. This
scornful Corinth and rich city was destroyed about the year of the
world.3818 before the coming of Christ.1 45. years. Lanquet in his Cronicle.)

Of Archadia. chap. 10.
ARchadia is a Province set between the Sea Ionium, and the Sea Egeum, as
Isidore says. Archas, Jupiters son put out the men yt dwelled in this land,
and called the land Archadia by his own name. And afterward the land was called
Sicionia, of a king which is called Sicionius, as Isidore says. li. 15.

( Addition.
Archadia a Country in Greece set in the middle of Peloponesus, or Morea, so
called of Archas the son of Jupiter, who reigned there. It was also called
Pelasgia, Parrhasia and Liconia, there was the Bagpipe fist invented. Also the
senne Leina, where Hercules slew the Serpent Hydra, is there: with the river
Grymanthus, a mountain of the same name, there is also sound the stone
Abeston, which being once hot may never be quenched, and is of the color of
iron.)

Of Alania. Chap. 11.
ALania is the first part of Cilicia, that is the first and most land and
Country of Europa, the which Europa begins from the river of Tanay, and
stretches downewarde and Westwarde by the North Occean, unto the end of
Spain, ye Southeast part thereof stretches upward from the sea Pontus, and is
joined all to ye great sea: And is ended at the Island yt be called Gad^s, as
Isid. says li. 10. And so Alania is the first part of Cilicia: (...) Alania
stretches from ye marreis Paludes Meotides, unto Denmark, and is a sall broad
land, and contains many fierce and strong nations, and is under a cold
Clima, and lies fromwarde the East toward the North.

Of Amazonia. chap. 12.
AMazonia, women's land, is a Country, part in Asia, and part in Europa, and
i^ nigh Albania, and has that name of Amazonia, of women yt were the wives of
the men that were called Goths, yt which men went out of the nether Scithia, as
Isidore says li. 9. and were cruelly slain, and then their wives took their
husbands armor and weapon, and teesed on the enemies with manly heart, and
took wreake of the death of their husbands. For with dent of word they flew
all the young meles, and old men and children, and saved the females, and
departed prays, and purposed to live ever after without company of males. And
by ensample of their husbands that had always two kings over them, these women
ordained them two Queens, that one was called Marsephia, and that other
Lampeta, that one should travail with an host and fight against enimyes, and
that other should in ye mean time govern and rule the communalties. And they
were made so fierce warriors in short time, that they had a great part of
Asia under their Lordshippe nigh an hundred years, among them they suffered no
male live neither abide in no manner wise. But of nations yt were nigh to them
they chose hus bands because of children, and went to them in times that were
ordained, and conceived children, and when the time was done that was ordained
to the office of conception: then they would compel their lovers to go from
them, and get other places to abide in, and would slay their sons, or send
them to their Fathers in certain times. And they saved their daughters, and
taught them to shoot and to hunt. And for the shot of arrows should not be let
with great breasts, in the seventh year (as it is said) they burnt off their
breasts, and therefore they were called, Amazones, that is to understand
without breasts, as Isidore says lib. 9. In old tune men called them,
Vnimammat. And as it is said, Hercules adaunted first the fierceness of them,
and then Achilles: but that was more by friendship than by strength, as it is
contained in deeds and doing of Greeks, and the Amazones were destroyed and
brought to death by great Alexander (...) the story of Alexander says not so ^
but it is said, that Alexander demanded tribute of the Queen of Amazons, and
she wrote to him again by messengers, in this manner.

Of thy wit I wonder, that thou purposest to fight with women, for if Fortune
be on out side, and if it happen that thou be overcome, then art thou shamed
for evermore, when thou art overcome of women: and if our Gods be wroth with
us, and thou ouercommest us, it shall turn thee to little worship, that thou
have the mastrie of women.

The noble King wondered on her answer, and said, that it is not seemly to
overcome women with sword and with woodenesse, but rather with fairness and
with love, and therefore he granted them freedom, and made them subject to
his Empire, not with violence, but with friendship and with love.

As concerning the Amazones, for the better credit of so strange a matter, I
find set forth in the A^rasotake, of Andrew Theuet: which book, he dedicated
unto Monsigneur Francois, Gonte de la Rochefoucand. Anno.1558. Chap. 63.

Addition
THe Spaniards did so much by their iourneyes, that they arrived in a Country,
whereas were inhabiting Amazones, Amazons of America.
the which would never have been thought: for that Historiographers have made
thereof no mention, because they knew not this country late found out. Some
may say, that they are not Amazonists, but as for me. I judge them such,
seeing that they live even so, as we find the Amazonists of Asia to have
lived. You shall understand, that these Amazones of which we speak, are
retired, inhabiting in certain Islands, which are to them as strong holds,
having always perpetual war with certain people, without any other
eter^ie, even as those of whom former writers have mentioned. These warlike
women of out America being fortified on Islands, are most commonly asseyled of
their Enemies the barbarous Indians, that aryue on the shores of these
Amazones, with barks and other vessels of a strange form, whereof some are
of the skins of beasts, set out and stiffened with a kind of slender frame:
with these they assailed their enemies, they fight with bows and arrows, the
women defend them with the like courage, using a strange kind of our crieng
noise: they make their bulwarks with the shells of Torteyles, which be very
great and strong. I find by the (...), that there are three sorts of Amazones
all alyke differing only in places and dwellings. The most ancient sort were
in Africa, among yt which were Gorgonists, yt had Meduse for their Queen. The
other were in Scithia, near to the river of Tanais, which since have reigned in
a part of Asia, near to the river Hermodon. And the thirds sort of Amazones,
are those which we do troate of. There is diverse opinions why they were
called Amazones: the most common is, for because that these women did burn
their breast ^^^ their youth to be more apt in war, ye which I find very
strange, and report me to medicines, whether they can burn those parts
without death, knowing the tenderness of the flesh, and the restenesse to the
heart. As concerning the Etimologlae of this vowell. A pri^atiue, and of Maz^
that signifies bread, for that they live not with bread but with other things,
which is as absurd as the other, for in that time they might ^^ll many that
lived without bread; Amazones, as the Troglodifes, and many others.

In like manner all the Indians. The word Mazo^ signifies nourishes without
woman's milk, the which is most likest to be true. Howsoever it is, these women
are named warlike. Moreover, ye shall note, that the Scythians, which we call
Tartarians, being driven out of Egypt, subdued the greater part of Asia. In
the mean time, the Scythians absenting themselves too long from their wives,
and although being requested to make return: regarded more the hoped victory
in Asia, than the company of their wives, was the cause of so strange and
division, as is now discovered of.

These wives void of hope, and head strong in fury, chose two chief
Governors over them, Lampedo and Marthesia, that they, not only defending
their country from invasion of their enemies, in maintaning their liberty: but
also made many Conquests in Europe and Asia, even unto the river Hermodon.

These women to maintain their posterity, did offer themselves to their
neighbors, without any other kind of marriage, and of the fruit that
proceeded, they killed the males, and reserved the females for wars, their
weapons were bows and arrows. The original of Amazons of America, are
uncertain.
The Amazones of America inhabit in little lodgings, like boothes or Cotages.
They use the company of men secretly and by night (for increase) they kill the
males, Supposed the scarre red brood of Pa^tesilla, which was at ye
destruction of Troia.
and they train up the female children to the exercise of shooting. When in
fight, they take any of their enemies, they hang them up, tied by one leg or
arm to trees on the top boughs, and so shoot them through with many arrows.
These flocking together, greatly amazed the Spaniards, who saluted them with
Gun shot, to ye spoil of many of those women.

Of Almania. Cap. 13.
ALmaine is a noble Country and a worthy in Europe, and has that name of the
river Lemanus beyond Danubius ^oud, as Isidore says, where men of that land
dwelled, and were called Alemanni, and have that name of the river Lemanus, and
this land is called Germany also, as Isi. says li. 15: There he says yt
after Denmark, that is ye end of the nether Siria, comes Germany, and has
in ye East side the river Danubius, in ye South ye river Rhene, and in the
North and west ye sea Occean. And there be two Germanies, the over that
stretches to the high mountains, that be commonly called Alps, into the sea
of middle earth or Adriaticum, where the great sea ends and stinteth in the
Country Aquilia, by ye marrise thereof. The other Germany is about the river
Rhenum. And either Germany is a rich land and noble of strength, and of riches,
and of men that be good warriers, and for plenty of gendring of people, it is
called Germany, as Isi. says li. 15. for it gendreth gerise and huge people.
And Isid speaks of them and says: that the nations of Germany be many, and
have huge bodies, and be strong and mighty, bold and hardy of heart, and
wild, occupied with hounds turning on hunting, fair of face, and well shaped
with long hair and yeolow locks, free of heart, mercy and glad, and namely
Saxons, that pass other in those foresaid things. Isid. speaks of them and
says: That the nations of Saxons is set in the ends and cliffes of Occean, and
be full swifte and mighty, and be called Saxons, for they are most strongest
kind of men; and better than other on the sea, for they pursue not their
enemies only on land, but also on sea. They pursue them ye grieve them, as
they were wood, they are strong and hardy, their lands be full of fruit, and
moist with water, and with best rivers. Also in their mountains be mined all
manner metals, except tin. Also in either Germany be other provinces, that
be not less worthy, as Astria, Bauaria, about ye river Danubius, and sueuia
and Alsatia about the river Rhenum, and many other, yt it were too much to
rehearse the^. Of the Saxons of Germany came ye Englishmen and their Offspring,
and had the Island Britain in possession. English me^ follow their language
and manners in many things yet unto this day, as Beda says li. de gestis
Anglotu^. Look within this letter. S. de Saxonia.

( Addition.
Germany, is a country called of some Dutchland, of some Almaine. It is
described by Ptholome ye 12. cha. to be bounded on ye west with the river of
Rhene: On the North, with the sea Germanicus Oceanus. The Southwest part with
the river Donowe, unto the hills of Sarmatia. The name of Germany extends now
farther: for there are contained, many great Countries and cities, which
sometime were part, of Gallia Belgica, that is to say, from the river of Rhene,
Westward, unto our Sea, Mare Britanicum.)

( Addition.
Ancon is a part of the River of Nilus: also a notable City and haven in
Italy, in the Country Picenum, which stands upon the sea Adriaticum: and was
so called because the Sea-bankes there, do bend in formelyke to an arm with
the elbowe. It was first builded by People of Syracusis, before the incarnation
of Christ.179. years. And the haven was augmented by the noble Tra^^nus
Emperor of Rome. After it was destroyed by Saracens, and eft soones builded
and inhabited, and is now a famous City.)

( Addition.
Anwarpe, a notable Mart town, in Brabant, called Antwerpia, of su^ptuous and
fair building, very rich in mercha^dize. The inhabitants of late years,
surmounting in attire and banqueting, are somewhat given to drunkenness and
lechery.)

Of Anglia. cap. 14.
ENgland is the most greatest Island of the Occean, and is enclosed all about
with the sea, and departed from ye roundnes of the world, and was called
sometime Albion: and had that name of white Rocks, which were seen on the Sea
cliffes. And by continuance of time, Lords and noble men of Troy, after that
Troy was destroyed, went from thence, and were accompanied with a great navy,
and fortuned to the cliffes of the foresaid Island, and that by Oracle of their
fained Goddess P^llas, as it is said.

And the Troyans fought with Giaunts long time that dwelled therein, and
overcame the Giaunts both with craft and with strength, and conquered the
Island, and called the Land, Britain by the name of Brute that was Prince of
that Hoaste, and so the Island is named Britain, as it were an Island
conquered of Brute, that time with arms and with might. Of this Brutes
Offspring came most mighty Kings.

And who that has lyking to know their deeds, let him read the Storye of
Brute.

And long time after the Saxons wan the Island with many and diverse hard
battles and strong, and their Offspring had possession after them of the
Island, and the Britons were slain or exiled and Saxons departed the Island
among them, and gave every province a name, by the property of his own name
and nation, and therefore they called the Island Anglia, by the name of Engelia
ye Queen, the worthiest Duke of Saxons daughter, that had the Island in
possession after many battles, Isid. says, that this land is Anglia and has
that name of Angulo, a corner, as it were land set in the end or a corner
of the world.

But Saint Gregory seeing English children to sell at Rome, when they were not
christened, and hearing that they were called English children: according with
the name of the country, he answered and said. Truly they be English, for
they shine in face right as Angels, it is need to send them message with
word of salvation: for as Beda says, the noble kind of the Land shone in
their faces. But of this land Plinius and Orosius speaks much. Isidore says
and touches in some more openly, than other, that speak thereof more darklye.
Britain, that now is called Anglia, is an Island set before France and Spain,
and contains about xlviii. times.lxxv. miles. Also there be many rivers and
great, and hot wells. There is great plenty of mettalls, there be plenty of
the stones Agates, and of Pearls: the ground is special good, most apt to
boar corn and other good fruit. There be namely many sheep with good wool,
there be many Hearts and other wild beasts: there be few wolves or none,
therefore there be many sheep, and may be safelye left without ward in
pasture and in fields, as Beda says.

Therefore one describes the Englysh land in meter, as it follows.

Anglia terra ferox, and fertilis, angulus orbis.
Insula praediues, quae toto vix eget orb.
Et cuius totus indiget orbis open.
Anglia plena iocis, gens libera, apta iocari.
Libera gens, cui libera men's, and libera lingua.
Sed lingua melior liberiorque manus.
These verses show, that England is a strong land and sturdie, and the
plenteoust corner of the world, so rich a land that uneath it needs help of
any land, and every other land needs help of England. England is full of
mirthe and of game, and men often times able to mirth and game, free men of heart
and with tongue, but the hand is more better, and more free than the tongue.

And he accounts much other worthiness, both of the men and of the Island,
which were too long to set here all arowe. Look within the chap. of Brit. (
Addition.
Anglia, the realm of England, part of the I Will called Britain. The people are
called Angli, of a people of Saxony, which were at ye time most of reputation,
and therefore their name longest continued, as well in the people as in the
country. Read more thereof in Brit. as follows cha. 28.)

Of Aquitania. chap. 15.
THe Country of Aquitania, Guyan, is a Province of Gallia in Europe, as
Isidore says lib. 15. And has that name Aquitania, of bending and winding
waters of the river of Leyre, which is the bounds of that land in many
places, and compasses it nigh all about, and is a fruitful land, merry and
noble, with towns, cities, castles and towers, moist with waters and fair
Rivers, Woods, fields, gardeines, and medes, set with vines and with
vineyards, with trees and fruit of diverse kinds, rich with diverse riches.

Many perticulars are contained under this name Aquitania, as Plinius says.
This land has in the North west side the Sea Occean, as Orosius says, and
that Coast of the Sea is called the Gyanish Sea: and has Spain in the west
side, and Gallia Lugdunensis in the North and in the East, and stretches to
the Province of Narbon, in the Southeast, and in the South, as Orosius says.

( Addition.
Aquitania, Guyan, accounted to be the third part of France, has on the West
the Occean sea, on the North the river of Loyre, or (as Caesar writes) the
river of Gerond, on the East the part of France called Lugdunensis: on the
South, the mountains Pireuei, which divided France from Spain. Albeit a
part thereof, contains Gascoyne, Foix, Bigor, and a few Countries more.)

Of Andegauia. chap. 16.
ANgeo is a Province of France, and nigh to Gyan, and stretches unto little
Britain, and the chief City thereof is called Andegauis, and by the name of
that City, all the Province about is called Andegauia, and this land bears
wine and fruit, and is rich of all fruit and goods, and is like to Aquitaine
with vineyards and fruit.

Of Aluernia. chap. 17.
ALuerne is a Province of France Lugdunens, the chief city thereof is called
Mount clear. This has Germany in ye northeast side, and Italy is in the South
side, and the province of Narbon in the west, and that part of France that is
called Gallia Belgica in the north: and is a land with many woods and trees,
with mountains and pasture, and beasts tame and wild, with fruit, corn and
wine in many places.

Of Apulia. chap. 18.
APulia is a Country upon the sea in Italy, that is a part of Europe, and is
departed from ye I Will of Cecilla, by an arm of ye sea, and is a land with much
folk, with gold and silver, with much sweet oil, and wine, and is noble and
strong with noble cities, castles and towns, and is plenteous, and bears
corn, and fruit, and is the end of Europe against the South, and is departed
from Barbary only by the sea. And it is said, that therein be hot wells, which
be medicinable to sick men. The chief city of that land is called
Brundusium. The Greeks builded that city sometime, and it has that name of
Brunda in Greek, that is to understand, Hearts head: For that City is shaped
as an Hearts head with horns, and so disposed, as Isidore says libro. 16.
cap. de nominibus ciuitatum. Beside this land lies a land that is called
Campania, mother of corn and of fruit: and by plenty thereof, many provinces
be sustained both on this side of the great sea, and also on that other side.

( Addition
Apulia, Puel a part of Italy, bordering on the sea Adriaticum, a country
populous, and has in it many towns and castles, abundaunce of Corn, wine,
Oil, and good Coursets for the war. The chief city thereof, is Brunducium.
There is also the mount of Saint Michael, called Garganus. This Country is
called by other names, as Iapigia, Messapia, Calabria, and Salentina. The
people are called Apuli.)

Of Africa. Cap. 19.
Africa, as some men mean, has that name, as it were Aprica: for it is
clear and open to heaven, and to the Sun, for it receives no strong cold,
as Isidore. says lib. 15. Other men mean, that Africa has that maine of
Affer, the son of Abraham, begot on Cethura. And it is said, that he
conducted an host toward Libia, and overcame his enemies, and dwelled there,
and called them that came there afterward, Affros, as Isidore says libro. 9.
etc. And Africa begins at the ends of Egypt, and stretches by the South
and by Aethiopia, unto mount Athlante, and is beclypped in the North, with the
sea of middle earth, and ends in the sea Gadiad. This land is called the
third part of the world, and is divided against Asia and Europa. In this
Africa be many Provinces, as Libia, Cyren, Tripol, Bizaneicum, Carthage,
Mauritania, Aethiopia, and many other. And that part of the world that is
called Africa, is less in space, than Asia or Europa: but to the quantity
thereof, it is more rich and more wonderful in quality, for it is more rich
of gold and of precious stones, and also of fruit, of Corn, and of Olyues.
Also therein be many wonderful kinds, figures and shapes, of men and of
beasts, which shall be known, when the Countries of Africa be described by
their own names. And is more burned with the heat of the Sun, than other
lands, and is environed with diverse ends of the Occean, and is barraine in
many places, because of heaps of gravel, and therein be Satires, Woodwoses,
Tigers, and horrible beasts, as it shall be more known after.

( Addition.
Africa, the third part of the world, wherein is Carthage, Numidie, and all
the countries now called Barbary, and also the great country called Aethiopia.
Africa semper aliquid noui apportat. A Proverb applied to unconstant and
wavering persons, never content with one state, but always desirous of
novelties. The most noble captain Scipio, was called Affricanus, because he
subdued that country, and conquered Annibal, and the people of Africa was
named, Scipio Affricanus Mayor. This Publius Cor^, Scipio was a Roman.

Of Asturia. Cap. 20.
ASturia is a Province of the hither Spain, in the march of Europe and
Africa, as Isidore says lib. 15. And so they that dwell nigh the river
Histurium, be called Astures. Their country is closed about welnigh with woods
and mountains, as he says. Only the people of ye land, be more pleasing in
heart and will, and more free of heart, and more goodly than other. The City
is called, Metro. In that land is scarce of wine, of wheat, and of oil.

For the land is cold and not full able to bear such corn and fruit, but
there is passing plenty of mile and of chest^ns. It is said that there grow
many manner fruit and apples, of which they make them drink in steed of wine,
and also they be most rich of beasts, wild and tame. And (as it is said) the
people is more generallye and kindlye merry and glad, with noble voice to sing,
and swift in course and in running, strong and hardy in battle, seemly of
kind, fair of shape, after the disposition of the country and of their land:
they be light of tongue to speak to scorn other men.

( Addition.
Asturia a country in Spain, between Galitia and Portugal: which sometime
was famous for mines of gold, and ambling hackneies called Astureones. D.
Cooper in Thesaurus.)

Of Aragonia. chap. 21.
ARagonia is a Province in Spain, with plenty of Uineyardes, and of corn,
moist with Wells and with Rivers. Aragothes dwelled therein sometime, and of
them the Country has the name yet to this day. For the Nations of Goths,
dwelled in that Province sometime: and so Aragonia is said, as it were
Aragotha, as Isidore says.

The river Hiberus runs there, the chief City thereof is called Caesar
Augusta.

( Addition.
Augusta Cesarea, a city in Spain, upon the river Iberus. Iberia, the
ancient name of Spain.)

Of Babilonia. chap. 22.
BAbilonia is a Province of As^a in Chaldea. In the head thereof is the City
Babylon, of whom the land has the name, and is called Babylonia: and was so
noble that Chaldea, Assiria, and Mesopotamia passed into the name there of
sometime, as Isidore says li. 15. Most noble rivers run thereby, among whom
the chief rivers are Tigris and Eufrates, that spring out of Paradise. And it
is the best land to bear all manner of Corn and fruit, and wine, and it is
full of sweet spices, herbs, and trees, and most rich of precious stones, and
of diverse mettalls, with most plenty of Camells, Horses, Asses, and Mules, and
other beasts. Therein is plenty of wild beasts and wonderful, and wonderfully
shapen, and namely in Desert place. The chief City thereof, was called
sometime Babylon, that is to understand, confusion: for the language was
confounded of them; that builded the tower Babel, as it is said, Ge. 11. Jerome
super Esaias. 11. describes the greatness thereof, and says, that Babylon is
the chief City of the Chaldes, the walls thereof were xvi. M. paces in square
from corner to corner, that makes in all lxiii. M. paces, and so the walls were
accounted for two leages and an half. Also there was a Tower, of three
thousand paces high, which contains of high two leages batred in breadth. The
matter thereof was made of vurnt tyle, that may not be departed nor vndound,
and therefore it might not be destroyed with fire nor with water: and for there
was confusion of language, it was called Babel in Hebrew, and Babylon in
Greek: and thereof all the land about has the name, and is called Babylon.
And there reigned sometime ye most mighty King Nabuchodonosos, among other
nations of the world, that is made subject to the Empire of Chaldes, he made
also Iewry thrall, and therefore in his Neuewes time Balthazar, Babylon was all
destroyed by Cyrus and Darius Kings of Persia and Medes, and it was never
builded again, but of the spoil thereof were two Cities builded, that one was
called Sephon, as Ier. says. And the place that Babylon was in, is desert, and
norisheth nothing but beasts wonderfully shapen. Look afterward, in Chaldea.

( Addition.
Babilonia, the Country where the City of Babylon stood, on the North it is
bounded with Mesopatamia: on the West, with Arabie the Desert: on the East,
with Susian: on the South, with the Red sea. In this Country is Chaldea, on
the which stands the great City Babylon, and signifies confusion or
mixture. It was the name of a Tower builded by Nemroth, before the
incarnation.2741. years. At the building hereof, was ye first confusion of
tongues. This was done in the land of Sennaar, in the country of Chaldea. The
Tower was in height five miles, one hundred seauentie paces. Afterward the
City was enlarged by Semiramis. It contained in compass sixty miles. The
walls were in height three hundred feet, in thickness of breadth seventy five
feet, and had an hundred gates of Brass.

There ran through the middle of it, the famous River Euphrates. D. Cooper in
Thesaurus.)

Of Bactria. chap. 23.
BActria, is a Country in As^a, and has that name of a River, that is
therein, that is called Bactrus, as Isido. says libro 15. The plain parts
thereof that bear corn, are compassed about with mountains. The contrary
parts to those, the rivers of Inde close about, and the other deal, the River
Ochus incloaseth. And therein are Camelles, most strong, that never stomble, as
Isidore says.

( Addition.
Bactria a City in the farthest part of Persia, the People whereof are called
Bactri, and Bactriani, in whom is such inhumanitye, that when their Parents
be very sick or old, they throw them unto fierce Dogs, which do rent them
in pieces, and devour them.

The women of that Country use sumptuous apparayle, with sweet Ointments, and
other rich attire, and are of their Servants more obayed, and reverenced
than the men are. They never come abroad, but on Horse back, with rich
Ornaments of Precious stones and Jewels. Chastity they regard not, but make
themselves, common both to their Servants, and to Strangers, their Husbands
finding no fault thereat, over whom they seem to have dominion.)

Of Braciana. chap. 24.
BRaciana, is a Country in Africa, and has that name, of two most noble
Towns: that one is called Andromethus, and that other Byzancium. This land is
plenteous in Corn and in Oil. The ground thereof is so fat. that seed that
is sown therein, increases and multiplyeth it self an hundred fold, as
Isidore says, libro. 15.

Of Bragmanis look in the end of this Book.

( Addition.
Byzantium, a City of Thrare, now called Constantinople, sometime builded by
Pausanias Duke of Spartans. The Inhabitants whereof were called Byzantij:
afterward, it was augmented by Constantine the Emperor, and was the chief and
head of all the Empire Oriental. It is now under the Turk, who wanne it the
year.1453.)

Of Brabantia. chap. 25.
BRabant is a Province in the end of Germanye, and stretches to the Country
of France, that is called, Gallia Belgica, and has the River of Rine and
Frisia, in the East side, and British and Flaunderish Occean in the North
side, and the nether France in the west side, and the higher France in the
South side. And the water that is called Mosa runs by this land, and Scaldia
the River, entering with flood and ebb of the Sea, with diverse other small
rivers and fountains, that moist the land.

This land in much part thereof is apt for Uines, it is heighted with
Woods, Downs, Meddowes, and Orchardes: it abounds of trees that bear
fruit, of beasts wild and tame, as hearts, wild boares, hares and connies:
and in this land be many famous towns. This land bears well fruit, and is
full of men of seemelye stature, and fair of shape: and be men of war, bold
and hardy against their enemies, pleasing and quiet among themselves, devout
men, goodly and benign.

( Addition.
Mosa Fluuius, a river which is called the Maze, and runs between the
Dutchye of Brabant, and the land of Luke.

Of Belgica. chap. 26.
BElgica is a Province of France in Europe, and has that name of a city,
that is called Belgia, as Isidore says lib. 9. This Province ( Orosius
says) has Germany, and the River of Ryne on the East side, and the
mountains that are called Alps Pennine, in the North east side: and the
Province of Narbon is in the South side. Therein is the City of Arelatensis,
and has the Province of Lugdunensis in the West, and the British Sea in the
North west and Britain, that is England, in the North side. This land is
plenteous of corn and of fruit, and bears wine in many places, and is full
of men, and is strengthened with Cities and with towns. And the men he fierce
by kind, as Isidore says libro. 9. The men be bold and hardye, the land is
moist with waters and Rivers, and fair with plenteous fields, and woods, and
meades, and full of noble beasts, with few beasts wonderfully shapen, with
few venomous beasts except frogs and Adders. And generally and commonly this
land is peaceable and quiet, and this land of Belgica, has many diverse people
and countries, with somewhat diverse language.

( Addition.
Belgae, The people that inhabit the Countries and Towns, incloased with the
Occean sea, and the Rivers of Rhene, Mame and Seyne, wherein be the Cities of
Tryre, Coleyne, Magunce and Reins. Also the Countries of Flautiders, Hollande,
Gelderlande, Iuliers, Cleues, Henawe, part of Fri^^eland, Picardie, the
greatest part of campaine, and all the Forest of Arderne. It was sometime
called, Gallia belgica.)

Of Bithinia. chap. 27.
BIthinia, (as Isidore says) is a Province of the less As^a, in the
beginning of the Sea that is called Pontus toward the East, and lies before
Th^^^^, and has had many names some time, for it was first called, Bithic^a,
and afterward Bithinia, and had that name of a King that was called Bithinius.
This is the more Phrigia, and the chief City thereof, was called Nicomedia:
thither Hannibal, Prince of Carthage fled, and dyed with venyme, as Isidore
says libro. 15. Fenix builded first Bithinia, that was first called,
Miramunda, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
Bithinia, a Realm in As^a, which now the Turk has: on the North, it has
the Sea called Ponticum: on the South, Mists, and Phrigis. It was called also
Bebrytia, and after Mygbonia.

Nicomedia a noble City in Bithinia, where Constantinus Magnus the Emperor
dyed. It is now called of the Turks, Nicho^.

Hannibal the son of Hamilcar, the most noble and valiant Captain of the
Carthaginensis who making war with the Romans sixteen years, contended
with them in prowess and policy, winning from them their Dominions in Spain
and Italy. Finallye, being vanquished by Scipio, he fled to Antiochus King
of As^a, afterward to Prusias King of Bithinia; of whom under the color of
amity he was betrayed, and should have been delivered to Fleminius, that time
Ambassador to Prusias: But Annibal perceiving it, choosing rather to dye, than
to come into the hands of the Romans, took poison, which he had kept for
that purpose, saying: Let us deliver the Romans from the ^axe mid fear, which
they have of us, with a few words of indignation, and so dyed, before he
might be delivered. D. Cooper.

Of Britania. chap. 28.
Britain is an Island of Occean, in Europe, and stretches forth along, and
has France in the South side, as Orosius says.

This land has in length the space of four score mile, and in breadth two
hundred miles, and in that place there is the endless Occean Sea. There are
the Islands Orchades: twenty of them are Desarte, and thirteen be inhabited.
Then comes the Island Tyle, seven days sailing from thence, as Plinius
says libro. 4. and Isidore. 15.

Addition
This Island Tyle, was thought to be the utmost I Will in the West.

And this Island Tyle, is departed far from the Island of Britains, as
Orosius says, toward the North, Northwest, and stands in the middle
Occean, and is known but to few men, for it is so far in the Sea, as Plinius
says libro. 4. chap. 17. This Britayne lies between the North and the west,
before Germany, France and Spain, with right far way between. First this
land was called Albion, and had that name for cause of white rocks and
cragges that be about the land. Afterward it had another name of Brute, and was
called Britain. And at the last it was called Anglia, and had that name of
Germans that dwelled there. Lake before in Littera A. of Anglia.

Also another less Britain is upon the Occean of Gyan, in the countries of
France. In that less Britayne dwelte and do yet unto this day, Britons,
that left the more Britain for fierrenesse of Germaynes, and yet there is the
Nation and also the name of Britons. And though this Britain be worthy and
noble in many things, yet may not the daughter be pere to the mother, and so
the less Britain may not be pere to the more: And is skilfullye called the
less Britain, for it may not be pere to the more Britayne, in the number of
People, nor in nobleness of ground and of land.

Addition.
The resitall by D. Cooper, forth of his book, Thesaurus linguae Romeo and
(...) of Britain.

BRitayne the most noble I Will of the world, Addition
wherein be contained England, and Scotland. It lies from Germany, West:
from France and Spain, West Northwest. The form thereof is like a Triangle:
the length is extended into the North to the furthermost part of Scotland,
called Calidonia, which Plinius, Solinus and Martianus do agree to be 800.
miles. The breadth of it after Martianus, is 300. Italian miles. The narrowest
distaunce between this I Will and Callis sands (called of Plinye, Gessoriacum in
Gallia) is 50. Italian miles, it is now gessed to be 30. English miles. Of ye
first naming of this I Will, is yet no certain determination: forasmuch, as there
remains no ancient History making thereof remembrance, the old Britain
books (such as were) being all destroyed by the Saxons: who endeavored
themselves to extinct (or blot out) utterly, the honorable renown, with the
name of Britones, like as ye Goshs dealt with the Romans. Also the part of
Titus Liuius, where the Conquest of Britain is remembered, with the Histories
of Julius Rusticus, and diverse other noble Writers, that wrote specially of
this Country, are utterly perished.

Such as remain, as the Commentaryes of Julius Caesar, Cornelius Tacitus,
Diodorus Siculus, and they that wrote of Cosmographie, have omitted the
original beginning of the name.

The Historye of Gyldas the Briton can not be found, who was after the Saxons
had invaded this Realm: and therefore might lack such Books, as should best
instruct him. As for Beda seems to have seen nothing written of that matter.
For where he says, that this I Will took the name Britania, of the inhabitants
of Britayne in France, it is nothing like to be true: For that Country, was
(not long before the time of Beda) named, Armorica, and Armoricus Tractus, when
this I Will was called of most ancient Writers, Brittania, and (as Solinus
writes) seemed to be another world, forasmuch as the West part of Gallia,
was thought to be the uttermost part of this world. Also Julius Caesar
writes, that the places of this I Will were unknown to French men, saving to a
few Merchaunts: and yet they knew no farther, than the Sea Coaste next toward
France. Moreover the same Britons affirm, that it was left among them in
remembrance, that the innermost part of the country, was inhabited of them,
which had their first beginning in the same I Will. This well considered, with the
authority of the Writer, both an excellent Prince, and also a great learned
man, and ^o^s himself in this I Will, it is not to be doubted, but that he most
diligently searched for the^ true knowledge of the ^uncientie thereof, etc. And
yet, because this I Will, excelled all the other in every condition, it was of
some privately called Albion, that is to say, more happy or richer. This
conjecture, approaches more nigh ye true similitude, than the other mentions,
except there be any ancient history, before the time of Gefferie of Monmoth
or Beda, which may more probably consute that I have declared: to such will I
gladlye give place.

Finallye, I thought it always more honoroble, to have received the first name
by such occasion as I have rehearsed, and the generation of the Inhabitants of
this land, to be either equal with ye most ancient, or mixed with ye most
wise and valiant people of Greece, vanquishers and subduers, of Trojans, the^
to take the name and first generation of a vain Fable, or of a man, if any
such were, which after he had slain his Father, wandered about ye world
uncertain where so dwell. Also to aduaunt us to come of the Troy^ns, ^anisers
of their own countries destruction, by fauolaring the adulterye of P^^ee and
Helena. Of whom soever proceeded any other notable monument, but that they
were also breakers of their oath and promise^ Yet this follye is found almost
in all people, which contend to ^^aetheir P^^ genitours comes first from Troy^
which fantasy may well be laughed at among wise men. The faith of Christ was
first received in this realm, after the incarnation. 156. years.

Britain or Brutaine, which by two names is called England and Scotland, is
an Island in the Occean sea, sertuate right over against France.

One part of which I Will, Englishmen do inhabit, another part Scotts: the
third, Welsh men: the fourth part, Cor^eth men. All they, either in language,
condition, or laws, do differ among themselves. John Stowe in his description
of England, etc.

The chiefest City is London, standing in Middlesex, on the North side of the
River of Tamise, over which River, is a great Bridge placed, of stone having
buyldings very rare, and marvelous, etc.

England is fruitful of Beasts, and abounds with Cattle, whereby the
Inhabitaunts be rather for the most part, Grasiers than Plough men, because
they give themselves more to feeding, than to fillage.

The original from Brute, of the Realm of England, (notwithstanding Lanquer
yields not that it was uninhabited when Brute arrived (after common
Historyes,) the year of the world, ^855. and the year before the
incarnation.1108.

Whereof after Brute, Locrine, he had the middle part of Britain, now
called England, with the superiority of all this I Will: unto Camber he gave
Wales, and to Albauact Scotland, etc.

Of Boetia. Chapt. 29.
BOetia is a Province and a part of Hellades in Greece, as Isidore says,
libro. ^5. And has that name of Bo^^an Ox, for this cause. For while Coamus
the ^^^^ of Agenor, by commandment of his Father sought his Sister E^top^,
that Jupiter had ravished, and might out find for, and m^ading sa^e his
Fathers wrath, he determined in his mine to live of Exile, and while it
happened that he followed the fore and trate of an Ox, he found the place
where the Ox rested, and he named it Boetia, by the name of the Ox, and there
he builded a City that was named Thebes, and there he held civil battles
some time, and there were borne Apollo and Hercules, the elder man of Thebes.
This same is called Eumona, and has that name of a Well that there is, that
was hallowed to Apollo sometime, as Isidore says, libro 15. In this land is
a lake of madness, so that who that drinks thereof, he shall burn in
woodnesse of lechery, as he says libro 14. chap. 3. De Aquia. Look before
of Wells.

( Addition.
Boetia, is a Country in Greece, wherein was the City of Thebes.

Now it is called Vandalia. It was sometime called Annia, Mesapia, Ogigia,
Cadmeis, and Hyantis.)

Of Boemia, chap. 30.
BOeme is a part of Messis, toward the East side and West by Germany in
Europe, and is cloased about, with most great Mountains and thick, and high
woods, and is departed from Germany and Pannonia, and other nations, with
mountains, woods, and Rivers, and is full strange in many places, with high
mountains, and is full fair in Plains of fields, and of meedes, and most
wholesome in the aspect of every blessed land to bear corn, and fruit. And
has plenty of Wives, and Uineyardes of Corn and of fruit, and most rich of
gold, of silver, and of Tin, and of other mettalls: moist with Wells and
with Rivers, for a River waters and moysteth the land that is called Albia,
a most noble River that rises out of the mountains of Boemia, and also many
Rivers, which run together to Praga, that is a royal City.

In the mountains thereof, are plenty of trees of Pines and of Fyrre. And
there be herbs without number, not of Pasture, only and of leese, but also
of sweet Spiceries and medicinable herbs. These be many beasts of diverse
kind, as Bears, Hearts, Capreole, Tragollaphi, Bubali and Bisontes. And among
these wild beasts, there is one as much as an Ox, and this beast is strong and
fierce, and has great horns, and large, and defends himself with them, and
has under the thin a great bag, and gathers water therein, and heateth
that water in that bag wonderfullye, and in his running he throws that
water upon hunters and hounds, that come too nigh him, and that water scaldeth
off their hair, and burns horribly all thing that it touches. And this
Beast is called Bom in the language of Boeme. And this land is compassed with
Morauia and Panonia in ye East side, and with Polonia in the North, and with
Austrich in the South, and is compassed with Bauaria Germanica, and with the
match of Misseneme in the West.

( Addition.
Boemia, a Realm called Beme, enclosed with the bounds of Germany, having on
the East side, Hungary: on the South Bauier: on the West the Country Noricum:
on the Northeast, Polonia. It is equal in length and breadth, each of them
being about three days journey. It is environed with the famous Forest, Sylua
Fierc^^. Through the middle thereof, passes the great River Albia, and the
river Moltania: upon the riuage whereof, is set the chief city Braga or
Praga: the language there is ye Slauone tongue. Notwithstanding in the
churches, ye people are taught in ye Dutch tongue; in the churchyardes, they
are taught in ye ^eme tongue: they vary from the Roman Church, in sundry
opinions, and do scorn all Ceremonies. In some places it is said, they
priuelye observe the sect of the Adamites, and Waldenses, in the act of
lechery. These Heretics took their beginning of a Pirard that came into the
land of Bo^ine, and said that he was ye son of God, and named himself Adam: he
commanded all men and women to go naked, and as they liked in just, so to go
together, etc. This horrible and most filthy sect began. Anno. 1412. Read
Thesaurus.)

Of Burgondia. cap. 31.
BVrgoyne is a part of France Senonens, and stretches unto the mountains
that be called Alps Peninos, and has that name Burgundia, of bourough
Towns: For the East Goths made there many bourough Towns and strong, when
they should go into Italye. The land is strong and full of mountains, and
of pasture, and of wood in many places, and moist with streams, Rivers, and
waters: And bears well in some places fruit and corn, and is in many places
barraine and dry, and vnmoyst and cold nigh the mountains, by reason there
is much Rain and Snow. And they that dwell nigh the mountains, have great
Batches under the chinne, of often use of the Snow water. Therein be abundaunce
of wild beasts, as Bears, Boares, Hearts, and many other.

Of Capadocia. chap. 32.
CApadocia is a Province in the more Asia, and in the end of Syria, and
touches stemenia in the East side, and the less Asia in the West, and the
fields that he called Consirij Campi, (the which the Amazones had
sometime,) in the North side and the Sea Tymericum. In the South side the
mountain that is called Taurus, and thereto belongs, Cilicia and Isauria,
even unto the Sea that is called Silicus sinus, that is before the land of
Cypres, thereby runs the River Albis, that divided sometime the Kingdoms of
Lidia from the Perses, as Isidore says lib. 15. and Orosius lib. primo. These
men came first of Mosoch, the son of Iaphet: And so yet there is a city
among them that is called Moreta to this day, as Isidore says lib. 19.

Cappadocia a Country of Asia, having on the South Cilicia and the mountain
Taurus, one the East Aemenie, and diverse other nations, on the North sea, ye
Euxinum, on the west Galatia, and is divided from Armenie the more, with the
famous River Euphrates. In this Country are bread plentye of excellent good
horses. It was sometime called Alba Syria, because the people there be whiter
then in the other Syria. The people thereof be called Cappadoces, whose
conditions are reputed so ill, that among the common people, if one had been
seen to be of ill fashion, they would say he was of Cappadocia. In that
Country were borne Basilius Magnus, and Gregorius Nazianzenus, two holy
Bishops and excellent Doctors.)

Of caldea, chap. 33.
CAldea is said as it were Casidea, and has that name of Caseth, the son of
Nachor, that was Abraham's brother, as Isidore says libro. 9. And so Caldei is
said as it were Cassedei, and has that name of Casseth. And that land is most
large, and lies beside Euphrates, therein is the hold that is called Duran.
In that field Gyauntes came togethers after the flood, and did build the
Tower Babel by counsel of Nembroth, of that Tower the city that there is
builded has the name, and is called Babylon. And afterward all the country
about was called Babylonia, as it is said before cap. ^2.

But here is to understand, what Orosius says of Babylon libro. 2. The first
King (he says) among the Assyries, that might pass other, was Ninus. When
Ninus was slain, his wife Semiramie Queen of Asia, made the City of Babylon
more, that Nembroth had begun, and she restored the City, and ordained that
City to be head and chief of the realm of Assyries. And that kingdom stood
strongly M.C. lxiiii years, until the reign of Sardanapalus him slew
Arbates, Presede of Medes and then began the Realm of Assyaies to perish.
But it utterly perished when by Cyrus and Darius Babylonia was so destroyed,
that uneath men might think, that so strong a City might be taken. For that
city was disposed as a castle with walls like long and square. The greatness
and strength of the walls may uneath be supposed. For the walls were fifty
cubits thick, and as much in height, and the city about was four hundred
and four score furlongs. The walls were of burnt tiles tempered with glewe,
and without was abroad Ditch and large seen far thence. Into that ditch ran
the river all about the city. And in the Front of the walls were an hundred
Gates, and about the walls were dwelling places for them that should defend
the City, and those places of defense were wonderfully strong and huge. And
though that City were so strong, yet it was soon overcome, taken, and beat
to the earth. For Cyrus divided the Rider in three hundred and three score
channells, as he had before divided the River Ganges, when he was wroth with
the river, he divided it in three hundredth and three score parts, for one of
his knights was drowned therein. And so when this river was withdrawn, that
ran about the City, the city was the sooner taken, as says Orosius. And ye
same year in which Arbates began to destroy Babilonia, Rome began to be
sounded: and so in one accord of time, that one city fell down, and that other
arose. And when ye first kingdom of the East failed for age, then the kingdom
of the West began to arise and to strive.

( Addition.
Chaldea, a Country, which (as Strabo writes) joins to Arabia and to the Sea
Persicum, Solinus and Plinius name that country Chaldaea, where the great
City of Babylon stood. In the new Cards and mappes, it is set in this wise:
On the West it joins on Mesopotamia, on the North upon Assyria and Media on
the East upon Persia, on the South upon Arabia deserte, and so it is far
from India. They have a proper language somewhat like to Hebrew, but their
letters are unlike to any other. Strabo means the Country where the people
Calybes dwell, Chaldea.)

Of Cedar. chap. 34.
CEdar is the name of a Country, in which dwelled the Ismalites, that were the
children of Cedar, that was Ismaels eldest son. For Ismael was Abraham's
son, ^otten on his servant Agar, a woman of Egypt. And more truly they be
there called Agareni then Savaceni, though they mistake the name of Sara in
vain, and be proud thereof, as though they were gendered of Sara, as Isidore
says li. 9. These men build no houses, but go about in large wilderness, as
wild men, and dwell in tents, and live by prays, and by Uenison. And
therefore Ismael was called Onager, a wild Ass: as the Gloss says: super
Gene. 16. This was a fierce man, etc. And he says, that he shall pass the
woodnesse of all beasts, and grieve sober men and easy. For, as Methodius
says, yet hereafter they shall once be gathered together, and go out of
Desert, and win and hold the roundnesse of the earth, eight weeks of
years, and their way shall be called the way of anguish and of woe. For they
shall overcome Cities and kingdoms. And they shall slay Priests in holy
places, and lie there with women, and drinks of holy vessels, and lie beasts
to Sepulcres of holy Saints, for wickedness of christen men, that shall be
that time. These and many other things he does rehearse, that Ismaelits men of
Cedar, shall do in the wide world.

Cedar a Region in Arabia. Addition


Of Cancia. chap. 35.
CAncia, ^sent, is a province of England upon the British Occean. The chief
city thereof is called E^us^terburye, and the land bears well to me and
fruit, and has many woods, and moist with wells and rivers, and is noblye
endowes with Havens of the Sea, and rich of riches, and chief in wholsomnesse
of heaven.

( Addition.
As concerning the setting forth of Rent, a province worthy of praise, as also
Master W. Lambert for his singular penning of the same, with others, in the
book entitled, The Perambulation of Kent, is sufficiently set down the
fertility of the soil, the good disposition of the inhabitants, and their
modesty: the only platform and beauty of England, whose customs and
manners are of greatest antiquity, liberty, and service: Kent lieng in ye
Southeast region of this realm, has on the North the river of Thamise, now
called Temmes, on the East the Sea, on the South the Sea and Sussexe, and on
the West Sussexe and Surreye, it extends in length from Wicombe in the
frontires of Surrey, to Dele, at the sea side.50. miles: And retcheth in
breadth from Sanhirst (near Roberts-bridge in the edge of Sussex) to the North
point of the I Will of Greane, almost 30. miles, and so has in circuit.150.
miles, or thereabout.

Of Cantabria. chap. 36.
CAntabria is a Province of Spain, and has that name of a City, and of the
River Hyberus. The men thereof be vnsteadfast in heart, apt to steal and to
rob, and glad for to strive, and always ready and pressed for to receive
strokes, as Isidore says libro. 9. Nigh to this land is Celtiberia, and has
that name of Gallis Celticis and Hiberis.

( Addition.
Cantabria people of a Country in Spain called now, Biscay.)

Of Chananea. cap. 37.
CHananea is a Country in Siria, that was after the sloud in the possession of
the children of Chanaan, that was the son of Cham. And of them were ten
Nations, as Isidore says lib. 9. And 8. Nations of them were of the children
of Chanaan, in which the curse that was given to them by Cham was ordained, as
it were by heritage: and therefore by bidding of our Lord, ye children of
Israel put them out, and occupied their lands, as Isidore says li. 9.

( Addition.
Cham, called also God Cham, is the name of dignity of the great Emperors of
Tartarians, called the great Cham of Cathay, or Cambalo, whose dominion
extends from the furthest part of the East, unto the Country of Russia
North West, and so unto the North west, and so unto the North Sea, on the South
east, unto Persia: so that by the map appears, there is under him as much
maine land, within little; as is the residue of all Asia, Europa, and Africa.)

Of Campania. cap. 38.
CAmpania is a Province of Italye, between the Territory of Rome and Apulia.
The chief City thereof sometime was Capua, builded by Siluius king of
Albanes. And has that name of Capacitas: For the land thereof receives all
manner of fruit of sustinaunce, and is the head of all the Cities of Campania,
and this City, Rome, and Cartage, were reckoned three of the greatest Cities:
and sometime all Italy had the name of this city, and was called Campania.
Many either Cities famous and full of men and rich, perteined to the Province of
Campania, as Neopolis and Penteolis, where Uirgills Bathes were in worship
sometime. And is a land with plenty of corn, of Wines, of Olives, of wild
beasts, and of diverse manner of fruit. There is another manner Campania
called Cisalpina, and is a province of France Senonens, the chief city
thereof is Treueris.

( Addition.
Campania a country in the realm of Naples, which was accounted the most
fertile and pleasant country of all the world.)

Of cauda. chap. 39.
CAuda is called an Island yt is narrow and straight in the beginning, and then
breader, and hard entering and trauailous, as it is said in Actibus Apost. ca.
27. And this Island is between Ciria and Italye, by Creta and Sardina.

( Addition.
But anon after there arose by a stormye wind called Euroclidon, that is the
North cast wind, or every East wind that is stormy. And when the Ship was
caught, and could not resist the wind, we let her drive, and were carried away:
And we ran under a little I Will named Clauda (this I Will was West and by South
from Candie, straight toward the goulfe Sirtes, which were certain bo^ling
sands that swallowed up all that they caught) and had much a do to get the
Boat. Act. 27. verse. 14.15.16.

Of Cilicia. chap. 41.
CIlicia is a Province of less Asia, and has that name, as men tell, of
Jupiters eldest son, as Isidore says lib. 15. This province has Liciam in
the west side, and the Sea Mare siculum in the South, and in the East the
tops of mount Taurus, in the North the River Cignus runs through the land.
The chief City thereof is Tharsimonia, that is called Tharsis: there was
Saint Paul borne. And Coroscos is a town thereof, and there is much Saffron
and best smelling, and passing gold in color, as Isid. says lib. 15.

Addition.
Cilicia a country in Asia, partly enclosed with the highest part of ye
mountain Taurus, and hardest to pass by, Strabo divides Cilicia into two
parts, one called Tracher, that is to say, rough or rockie. The other
Campestris, that is to say, plain. Josephus writes, that it was of old time
called Tarsus, or Tarsis, one of the sons of Iaphet, the youngest son of Noe,
Herodotus says, the people were called Cilices of Cilix, the son of Agenor
king of Phaenicia, where before it was called Hyppateus. Saint Hierom
interprets Cilicia, a congregation, a lamentation, an assumption, a
lamentable challenge or vomit. The people were by nature inclining to lyeng and
stealing, whereof grow this Proverb, Cylix non facile verum dicit. The
Cilician not lightly says true. A Proverb applied to a covetous man, which
always lies for his particular advantage, as now a days most men do which
live only by stealing.

Of Ciprus. chap. 41.
CIprus is an Island, and has that name of Ciprus, a City that is therein, as
Isidore says lib. 15. This land is called Paphon, and was sometime hallowed to
Venus, and was full famous sometime, and namely of metal of copper. And the
use thereof was first found there, as he says. The land bears wine, and the
wine of that place is full strong. Now many Cities be therein full noble: Among
whom the chief City is called Nichosia. The land is environed all about with
the sea, and is within all full of woods and fields, of modes, of viniards, of
corn, and of fruit: and is moist with wells and rivers: and rich of many
riches and liking. Often this land is called Cethim in holy writ, as Isidore
says lib. 11. And has that name of the son of Iosan, the nephew of Iaphet,
as Isidore says. Orosius li. 1. speaks of this Island, and says: that the
Island Cyprus is environed with the Sea yt is called Mare Siriacum in ye west
side, and with the sea that is called Mare Pamphilicum in the North: and with
Aulone and Cilicio. And is environed in the South, with the sea of Siria, and
of the province Fenix, and contains in length an hundred three score, and
fifteen thousand paces, and in breadth a leven hundred paces and five and
twenty.

( Addition.
Cyprus an I Will in the Sea called Carphathium, against the country called Syria,
on the North it has Cilicia, on the South and the East Egypt. It is in length
after the description of Strabo. 175. miles, after eight furlongs to the mile:
Some suppose it was at the first a portion of Syria, divided by Earthquake.
This country abou^deth in wine, Oil, metal, Uitrioll (called Copporas) and
Canes, whereof Suggar is made. Also Venus was there had in great reverence,
insomuch that men, before they did set forth their daughters in marriage,
offered them to such strangers as came into the Country, to be by them
deflowred, and afterward (with the game so gotten) married the^ to husbands.

Of Creta. chap. 42.
CReta is an Island of Greece, and has that name of one Crete a king, yt
dwelled there: and stretches in great length between the East and the West,
and is washed with waves of Greece in ye North side, and with waves of Egypt
in the South side: And was sometime possessed with an hundred noble Cities. And
therefore it is called Centapolis, that is to understand, a land with an
hundred cities. And this land was first enable with ears, armours, and
arrows. This was the first land that wrote law, and gave law written with
letters, and taught first companies of horse men. Therein was study of music
first found of Ideis, and taken to other men in the world about, and there
music was used, and the study thereof increased and made more. Therein be
many beasts, Goats and Hearts, and right few wild Goats, Wolves, Foxes, and
other noiful beasts be none therein. There are no Serpents nor noyfull Worms.
And if they be brought thither out of other Countries they dye anon. This
land is friend to Uines, and bears trees and medicinable herbs, as Diptanno
and Alnos, and such other: and also that land breeds precious stones, and
also a stone that is called Iothed actilicus, as Isidore says lib. 15. And
though it be an Island free and clean of any notable venim, yet nevertheless
therein breed Spalangie, that be venomous Spiders. Huc vsque Isidorus. li. 15.
Plinius tells the same at all points. li. 4. Orosius speaks of the same
Island, and says. Creta ends in the East at the sea Carpaceo, and in the West
and in the North at the Sea Creticum, and in the South at the sea Libicum, that
is also called Adriaticum: and has in length of paces. M. C. lxxx. vii. and in
breadth a M. and fifty. Look the disposition of Dedalus house in Creta.
Isidorus liber. 16. in capitulo de Ciuitatibus.

( Addition.
Creta, an I Will lyeng between Peloponnesius, and the Rhodes, it has on the
North parte^ the sea Aegeum and Cretense: on the South the sea of Egypt, and
As^ric. It is now called Candic. In this I Will was Jupiter nourished, whom the
Painims named their chief God. There Minos reigned, and Radamanthus governed
under him most exquisite justice: Of whose laws, other countries took their
first patron: yet notwithstanding the people of that country were noted to be
bicious, and shameful liers, as Epimenides wrote in a verse; resited by S.
Paul, in his Epistle to Titus, saying. ca. 1. The Cretians are always liers,
evil beasts, and slow bellies. This witness is true: This is now under the
Turk.)

( Addition.
Daedalus the name of an exellent Carpenter of Athens, which first found the
Saw, the Twible, and the ^uger, and made the place in Crete called
Labyrinthus, or a Maz^, as for pleasure are made diverse in Gardens, but this
was a strong hold.)

Of Ciclades. chap. 43.
CIclades were sometime Islands of Greece, as Isidore says lib. 15. And men
think that they be called Ciclades, for though they be far from the Island
Delos, yet they be situate about Delim: for ye Greeks called it the round
Ciclum. But some men mean, that they have that name Ciclades, because of rocks
and crags, that be about them: These Islands stand in the sea that is called
Hellespontus, between the sea Egeum and Malcum: And be environed with the sea
Indicum, and be in number 54. And stretch from the North toward the South
fifty thousand paces, and fifty thousand from the East toward the West, as
Isid. says: and after Orosirus M. CC. And as he says, the first of these
Islands Eastwarde is Rodus, and Northward is Cenedo, and Southward Capaduce,
and Westwarde Citeras, and these lands end Eastward at ye cleaues of Asia,
Westward at the Sea Icatum, Northward at the Sea Legeu^, and Southward at the
Sea Charpatium.

( Addition.
Cyclades, the fifty Isles in the Sea called Aegeum.)

Of Choa. chap. 44.
CHoa that is called Choes also, is an Island, and belongs to the Province of
Athica: therein Hippocrates the physician was borne. And this land was first
endowed with cloth making, as he says. Also in that Island be noble horses, of
whom Solomon had great joy in old time, as it is said 3. Reg. 1 Reg. 10 1.
Reg. after ye Gen chap. 10.
where it is said, that horse were brought to him out of Choa.

( Addition.
Solomon had horses brought forth of Egypt, and of Coa, which in the English
translations is left out. (The I Will Coa.)

Addition.
Hippocrates the name of a most excellent Physician, scholar to Democrates,
and lived in the time of Perdicas king of Macedonia, in his court. Artaxerxes
king of Persia, wrote of Hippocrates in this manner, to Hystanes his liuetenant
of Hellespont, as Gwydas witnesses. The great king Artaxerxes to his
liuetenant Hystanes sends greeting. I have heard of the same of the noble
physician Hippocrates, see therefore that thou give him as much money as he will
desire, with al other things necessary, and send him to me: he shall be in as great
honor with me, as the best in all Persia, etc. He died being. 104. years of age.
There were also of the same name and stock five other, all notable and famous
men in Physic, but this, far passed the^ all, he flourished about ye year
of the world. 4760. after Munsterus of his discreet manners and stature,
forth of the Cronicle, Cronicarum. folio. 73. he forbad all vol^nptuousnesse,
which he a^horred: of grave manners the only ornament to his Disciples, he
was of small stature, fair and well favored, but great heded, not easily moved
nor hasty to speak, saying: He that will be free, let him not desire that
which he cannot have: He that will have that which he desires, let him desire
that which he may have: He that will live peaceably in his life, let him be
like unto him that is bidden to a feast, who gives thanks for all yt is set on
the table, and grudgeth not for the want of any thing.)

The horses that were bred in this Coa were of great price, whereof 6. where
ioyued in every chariot, and every horse valued at 100. cicles of silver, which
amounts after 15. pence the cicle, and every cicle half an ounce, to ye sum
of 6. li. 5. shillings every horse, notwithstanding there were used sundry
cicles of diverse values, which I omit, and the horses might be of greater value.

Of Corsica. chap. 45.
COrsica is an Island with many provinces, and is corner wise in shape, and has
ye sea Tyrenicum in the East side, and the haven of ye city of Rome: and
Sardinia in ye South side: and Belliares in the west, and the sea Ligusticum in
the North: and co^teyneth in length. C. ixi. thousand paces, and 26. thousand
in breadth.

( Addition.
Corsica an Island in the middle sea, between Gean and the I Will of Sardina
called Cors. It is now under the city of Gean or Genua, which city has been
oftentimes reedified, the people are called Ianewaes, Roman Italians.

Of Dalmacia. chap. 46.
DAlmacia a Province of Greece by old departing of land, and has that name of
Delim, the greatest city of that province. This province has Macedonia in the
East side, and Messia in the North, and Hystria in the West, and ends at the
Sea Adriaticum in the South, as Isi. says li. 15. and Orosius says the same:
Men of that land be mighty and strong, and give them to prays, to robbing and
stealing, and many of them be Sea thieves.

( Addition.
Dalmatia a part of the great country called Illiria or Slauonia: it has on
the west Croatia: on the East Bossina, on the North the great mountain Albanus
mons, and the country called Seruia: on the South the sea Adriaticum, or the
goulfe of Uenice.

Of Dacia. chap. 47.
Denmark is a Country in Europa, and was first occupied with Greek Danes, as
it is said: And is divided in many provinces and Islands, and stretches to
Germania. The men thereof were sometime fierce and right great warriors: and
therefore they were Lords of Britain. of Norway, and of many other Islands and
countries: But li. 9. Isidore says, that the Danes came of Goths. And some
suppose that they be called Dacos, as it were Dagi, men come of Goths. But of
what nation the Danes be come of first, this is certain, that there be many
of them, and be seemly of stature, and fair of hair and of face, and
generally fair of body and shape. And though they be fierce against enlinies,
nevertheless they be kindlye mild of heart and pleasing to all innocents.

( Addition.
Dacia a country beyond Hungaria: they do not well which call Denmark, with
this name, which is Dania, Danes. Denmark is also called Danomarchia, a people
quicklye moved to revenge, wary in buieng and selling, regarding their laws,
which being once established, may in no wise be tied to their purses: sometime
the old conquerours of England, a people well minded to religion, their
original is supposed to come of a people called the Goths.

Of Delos. chap. 48.
DElos is an Island of Greece, in ye middle of those Islands that be called
Ciclades, and has that name, as it is said, for that yt after the flood, when
the night was dark many months, that Island was lightened with the Sun
beams, before all other lands. And for yt he was first showed, it is said it
has that name Delos, for Delon is Greek, and is understood, openly showed.
Also that land is called Ortigia, for the Curlewes were first seen, and the
Greeks called them Ortigias. In this land Latone bare Appollo, as Isidore
says lib. 15. And Delos is the name of an Island, and of a City also.

( Addition.
Delos, an I Will by Greece, where Apollo and Diana were borne, and is one of the
Isles called Cyclades.)

Of Dedan. chap. 49.
DEdan is a country in Ethiopia in the West side, as Isidore says, liber. 9.
there be many Elephants, and much abundaunce of Iuorie, and woods of Fur, as
the Gloss says super Eze. 7.

Of Europa. chap. 50.
EVropa is called the third part of the world, and has that name of Europa,
the daughter of Egenor king of Libia. Jupiter ravished this Europa out of
Africa, and brought her into Creta: And called the most part of the land by
her name Europa, as Isidore says, li. 15. Orosius speaks of Europa, and
says, yt the country of Europa and people thereof begin at ye mountains that
be called Mo^ces Riphei, and at the marreis that is called Paludes Meotides,
that be by East. And come downward toward the West by ye banks of the North
occean, unto ye country that is called Gallia belgica, and unto the river
Renum, that runs to ye occean, and then ye countries stretch to the river
Danubius, yt is called Hisirius also, that is by South, and passes Eastward
into the sea that is called Pontus, and is a coast of the great sea. And li.
15. Isidor. says, that Europa begins at the river Tanay, and stretches
westward by the north occean unto the ends of Spain. The East and the South
part thereof arises from the sea that is called Pontus, and is all joined to
the great sea, and ends at the Islands of Cades. The first Country of Europa
is the nether Scithia, and begins at the marreis Meotides, and stretches
between Danubius and the North Occean, unto Germania, as Isidore says lib.
15. And for strange nations the land is specially called Barbaria: and the
nations be in all 54. as Orosius says. Among whom the first is Alania, that
stretches to the marreys Meotides, and following is Gothia, then Denmark, and
after Germania, then Gallia and the land of Britain, Orchades, and many other
Islands, and at last the less Spain. In the ends whereof Europa ends
Westward. And in the over part of Europa in ye South be many great countries
and lands: As Panonia, Messia, Tracia, Grecia, with her boundings, and Italia,
with the countries and Islands thereof. And though this part of the world be
less then Asia, yet it is pere thereto in number and nobles of men. For as
Plinius says, it nourishes men that be more great in body, more strong in
might and virtue, more bold of heart, more fair and seemly of shape, then men
of the countries and Islands of Asia, or of Africa. For the Sun abides long
over the men of Africa, and burns and wastes humors, and so makes them
more short of body, more black of face, with crispie hair: and for yt the
spirits pass out at poores that be open, they be more coward of heart. And
the contrary is of men of the North land, for the coldness that is without
stops the pores, and breeds humors of the body, and makes the men more
full and great, and the cold that is mother of whiteness, makes the^ more
white in face and (...) skin. And for ye vapors and spirits (...) smitten in
ward, it makes them hotter within, and so the more bold and hardy. And the
men of Asia be meanly disposed in that: And their first land is by East, as
Plinius says.

( Addition.
Europa, the third part of the world, divided from Asia, with the great Seas,
Hellespontus, Propontis, Bosphorus, Thracius, and Pontus Euxinus, and has the
uttermost bounds in the North east, the river Tanais. And from Affrike it is
divided by the middle Sea. It was also the name of a fair maiden, daughter of
Agenor, King of Phoenicia, whom Jupiter (transforming himself into ye likeness
of a Bull) did ravish, as Poets writ) that is, forgetting kindly virtue, being
overcome in the Uirgins beutie, setting all humanity aside, used the force and
violence of a tyrannous beast,) it is also said, that Jupiter carried her away
by force in a Ship, in the deck or most whereof was a Banner or streamer,
wherein was painted a Bull.)

( Addition.
It is better that Princes be reproved for their faults, being alive, then
after their death to be so reported off, yt the concealing of their
wickedness for the time present, afterward is become more ignomious and
shameful, to their continual reproach for ever.)

( Addition.
In the later and of this book, you shall find a farther discourse of this
Europa forth of Ortelius.)

Of Eiulath. chap. 51.
EIulath is a province in the over Inde, and begins in the East, and
stretches by long space of lands toward the North: and has that name
Eiulath of Eiula, oue of the children of Hebe^, Patriarch of Hebrews, as the
^lose says super Genes pri. and ^on: where Eiulath is rehearsed among the
children of Hebar^, yt came of him and of his son lectane The river Ganges
runs by this land, and that river has another name, and is called Phison in
Genes. lib. 4 cap. 20. Plinius lib. 3 cap. 20. praises that river wonderfully,
and says that Ganges is a river of Inde, and receives into himself many, and
as it were endless rivers great enough to row and to sail in, as Idapsen,
Cantabeian, Bisepin, and many other, and is never broader then fifty furlongs,
neither deeper then 15. paces. This river runs about the land of Eiulath,
in which land is much gold and spicerie, as Bedelium, and precious stones, as
Onichius, Carbuncles, and other such, as he says, and the Gloss super
Genesis. In this land be many special Countries, in whom be many
Elephantes, as it is said.

( Addition.
In the second of Genesis, the ri^er Pison compasses the whole land of Heuilah,
where there is gold, and the gold there is very good, there is Edelium and the
Onix stone. Euille or Heuilath, a country in the Orient, about the which the
river Pison, which we call Ganges, yt comes out of Paradise does run. D.
Cooper.

Of Ethiopia. Chap. 52.
EThiopia, Negroes land, had first that name of color of men. For the
Sun is nigh, and roasteth and toasteth them, as Isidore says li. 15. And so
the color of men shows ye strength of the star, for there is continual
heat. For all yt is under the South pole about the West is full of mountains,
and about the middle full of grauel, and in the East side most desert and
wilderness: and stretches from the West of Athlant toward the East unto the
ends of Egypt, and is closed in the south with ye occean, and in the North
with the river Nilus. In this land be many nations with diverse faces
wonderfully and horribly shapen: Also therein be many wild beasts and Serpents,
and also Rinocerots, and the beast that is called Camelion, a beast with many
colors. Also there be Cocatrices and great Dragons, and precious stones be
taken out of their brains. Iacinctus, and Chrisophrassus, Topasius, and many
other precious stones be found in those parts, and Cinamum is there gathered.
There be two Ethiops, one is in the east, and the other is in Mauritania in the
West, and that is more near Spain. And then is Numedia, and the province of
Cartage. Then is Getula, and at last against the course of the Sun in the
South is the land yt is called Ethiopia adusta, burnt, and fables tell, yt
there beyond be the Antipodes, men yt have their feet against our feet, as
Isid. says lib. 15. His words be set here before de Ethiopia. Also he says
li. 9. yt the Ethiopia^s have ye name of Chus, of whom they took their
beginning. Chus in ye Hebrew tongue is called Ethiops. These men came so^time
from the river Nilus, and dwelled beside Egypt, between the river Nilus and
occean: in the South nigh under the Sun: of the^ be much people, as Esperes in
the West side Garamantes, and Troglodites, and other, of whom Plinius speaks
li. 5. ca. 10. The men of Ethiopia have their name of a black river, and that
river is of the same kind with Nilus, for they breed reeds and bull rushes,
and rise and ware in one time: In the wilderness there be many men wonderfully
shape^: some often curse ye Sun utterly in his rising and down going, and they
behold the Sun and curse him always; for his heat greeueth them full sore: and
other as Troglodites dig them dens and caves, and dwell in them in steed of
houses: and they eat serpents, and all that may be got, their noise is more
fearful in sounding, then the voice of other. Other there be, which like
beasts live without wedding, and dwell with women without law, and such be
called Garamanis, other go naked and be not occupied with travail, and they
be called Graphasants. There be other, that be called ^enn^j, and it is said,
they have no heads, but they have eyes fired in their weasts. And there be
Satyrs, and have only shape of men, and have no manners of mankind. Also in
Ethiopia be many other wonders, as he says lib. 6. cap. 11. there be Ethiops
(says he) among whom all four footed beasts be brought forth without ears,
and also Elephants. Also there be some that have an hounde for their king, and
divine by his moving, and do as they will. And other have three or some eyes
in their forehead, as it is said, not that it is so in kind, but that it is
feigned, for they use principal looking and sight of arrows. Also some of
them hunt lions and panthers, and live by their flesh: and their king has
only one cie in his forehead. Other men of Ethiopia live only by honny
suckles dried in smoke, and in the Sun, and these live not past forty years.

( Addition.
Aethiopia, a great country in Affrike, containing two regions, the hither and
the further Aethiop. The hither, that is above Egypt, has on the north
Egypt, Marmarike, and Libia, on the West the inner Libia: on the South the
further Ethiop, on the East the red sea: In this country is the I Will Meroe,
where Saint Mathewe is reported to have preached ye Gospel. The further Ethiop
has on the North the inner Libia, and the hither Aethiop: on the West and
South ye occean sea, on ye East the goulfe called Barbaricum, in this country
be ye mountains out of which Nilus (in whose brinks and banks the Crocodiles
breed, which are the destroiers both of men and beasts) issues.)

Of Aegypto. chap. 54.
Egypt was before called Esea, and after Egiptus of Danaus brother that after
reigned therein. In the East side under the red sea, this land joins to
Siria, and has Libia in the West side, and the great sea in the North side:
and passes inward in the South side, and stretches unto the Ethiops, as
Isidore says, lib. 15. and is a country not used with dew, and wherein falls
no rain. And only Nilus moysteth that land, and tunneth there about, and
makes ^it plenteous with rising and waxing: and has plenty of wild beasts,
and feeds a great deal of the world with wheat and with corn and fruit,
and is so plenteous of other merchaundise and chaffer, that it fills nigh all
the world with n^dfull merchandises. In the end of Egypt is Canopia, that
has that name of Canope, that was Menelaus governor, and was buried there.
Huc vsque Isidore. li. 15. And was first called Mepphayna of the son of Cham,
as Isidore says lib. 9. In this land be many particular Provinces, and full
famous cities, as Memphis ye Ephasus builded: that was Jupiters son, and
Raphnes the chief city of Aegipt, Heliopoleos, and Alexandria, and many
other, as Isidore says li. 16. And O^osius says, that there are two Aegipts,
the over and the nether. The over stretches into the East in length, and has
in the North side the sea of Arabia, and occean in the South. For it begins
out of the West and of ye nether Aegipt, and stretches Eastward, and ends at
the red sea. And conteyneth 24. Nations. In the over Egypt be many diverse
desartes, in whom are many monstrous and wonderful beasts. There be Perdes,
Tigres, Satires, Cockatrices, and horrible Adders and Serpents. For in the
ends of Egypt and of Ethiopia, fast by the well where men suppose is the head
of Nilus that runs by Egypt, be bredde wild beasts, that be called
Cacothephas: the which beast is little of body and vncrafty of members and
slow, and has a full heavy head. And therefore they bear it always downward
toward the earth, and that by ordinance of kind for salvation of man kind,
for it is so wicked and so venomous, ye no man may behold him right in the
face, but he die anon without remedy. For he has the same malice that the
serpent Cockatrice has, as Plinius says, li. 8. cap. 22. Also in Egypt be
full many Crocadiles and Hippotami, that be water horses, and namelye about the
water of Nilus.

( Additio.
Aegyptus, a country called Egypt: on the West it is bounded with Libia, and
the Country called Cyrenaica, on the North with the sea Mediterraneum, and
part of India, on the East with Arabia, and the Arabian sea: on the South with
A^thiopia. This country although it rain there but seldom or never, yet by
the ouerflowing of the river Nilus, it is made so fertile, that it has
abundance of all things saving vines, and brings sorth strange beasts.
Canopos is an I Will at the entry of Nilus, and took his name of Canapus, that
was master of Menelaus ships. Memphis a great and famous city in Aegipt, etc.
This country took his name of Aegyptus, son to Belus, king of Babylon,
Aegypti nuptiae, and proverb spoken by unlucky marriage, because the fifty
sons of Aegyptus, married the fifty daughters of his brother Danaus, were the
first night all saving one, slain of their wives by the counsel of their
father.

Of Ellade. chap. 54.
ELlas Elladis is a province of Greece in Europa, and had that name of king
Hellena Deucalions son, after him the Greeks were first called Ellenes. In
this Province is the Country Attica, wherein sometime was the noble City
Athens, mother of liberal arts, nourysher of Philosophers: sometime Greece
had nothing more worthy, nor more noble then this city. Next thereto is the
Province Achaia, as Isidore says libro 15. In this one Country Ellas be two
Provinces, Boetia, and Peloponensis. Of the first, that is to wit, Boetia, it
is spoken before. To this Country Ellas, belongs the coast of the sea, yt is
called Hellespo^tus, wherein be many great wounders, as Plinius says, li. 6.
ca. 3. By Hellespo^tus Tranges, Pergamcus says, that there be many manner of
men, that he called Ophioges, that hele smiting of Serpents with their teeth
and groping, and only with their hand laid to, they draw out slayeng
venimme. Also Varro says, that yet there be some whose spittle is medicine
against the stinging of Serpents. Hellespontus, is a coast of the sea of middle
earth, as Isid. says lib. 13. in the North turning and going in great goings
and turnings beside Greece and Illiocum, and is drawn by straightness of 7.
furlongs, where Xerxes the King made a bridge of ships, and so he went into
Greece for to war there. The same water spreads and makes the coast of the
sea the which is called Propontides; the which anon is constrained into ^^tye
paces. That coast of the sea has the name of Helles the sister of Frixus, she
fled the malice of her stepdame, and fell into ye sea and was drowned: and of
that falling, the sea and the land about had the name Hellespontus.

( Addition.
Ophiogenes people of Hellespont, which heal the stinging of Serpents with
touching the place.)

Of Eola. chap. 55.
EOla is an Island of Cicilia, and has that name (as it is said) of Eolu^ the
son of spote, which Eolus P^^ else faigne was king of Wind^s. Aeolus. ye king
of ye winds etc signifies the violent blustering or over bloing ships, trees,
and building.
And that was said, as Varro says, because he was ruler of ye Islands yt he
called Eolas and for that of mistes and fumeus vapors he told to unwise man
of winds that should rise: and therefore they thought that he held the winds
^n ^^s: power, ^ and had might over them, as Isidore says lib. 15. The Isles
that he called Eola^ be nine, and have that name of him, and he also called
Vulcan^, for the fire burns therein, as in mount Ethna, as he says. And each
of those Islands has his own name, the first is called Lippata, the second
G^tha, of most high cliffes so called; the third is called Strogile, the
fourth, De^^ and so of other.

( Addition
Eola is a region of the Greeks in Asia, between Ionja and s^odae, it is also
a region containing seven ^^^ between Italy and Cicilia Aeolia^ the daughter
or niece of Aeolus, also a country near unto Hellespont, called sometime
Mysia^

Of Franconia. chap. 56.
FRanconia is a province in Germania in Europa, and has that name of men yt
dwelled therein, and were called Franci: the chief city thereof is called
Herbipolis, and stands on a great river that is called Mogun. That province
has in the East side. The ^ing^^ ^ Sancon, Me^guntia, a noble city in
Germany called Nentz.
in ye South side ye river D^t^^id^, and B^^^v^a in ye west, the countries:
Sutula and ^lsacia, and in the North the country of ye Ryu. The chief ^^^y^
thereof is M^g^^^tia, and stands upon ye Kind, ^^ the river Mig^s comes into
ye Kine. This Freeconia is a full good land and plenty of corn, of woods, and
strong of Castles and Town, and full of people.

Of Francia. chap. 57.
France is called Francia and Gallia also, and has first that name Francia,
of men of Germania, that were called Franci, as Isidore says: and has the
Kine and Germany in the East side, and in the North east side, the mountains
Alps Po^^oni, and In ye South ye province of Narbon, and in ye North west the
British occean, and in the North the Island of Britain. ^traudre was called
Gallea bulgica, and has ye name of city Belgis, as Isi. says. li. ^^ 15. This
last of Fe^^ure is a ran^ country, and plentiful of trees, of vines, of corn,
and of fruits, and in noble by the affluence of Rivers and fountains, through
the borders of which ^anderun side most noble rivers; that is to wit^e Roden,
and ^thens, as Isidore says lib. ^5. Therein be noble charms and stones both
to build and to ^eate (...) uses upon, and speriti (...) special (...) stories,
and ^^^ely in the grown about Parts, that is most passing namely by (...)
faite and ^^ called Gip^^^, ye me of that Counti^^ is call Plasstre in their
l^^^g^^ ^e, for the grown is glass and bright, and ^^ ye mineral virtue
turns into st^^^ ^h^ b^^ist ^^^ed ^^^ water and ^^^ into ^^ments and to
thereof is made ^d^^^res and vautes, walls, and diverse pauements: and such
ciment laid in work, waxes hard anon again as it were stone, and in
France be many noble and famous cities, but among al Paris bears the price,
Paris called sometime Lutecia.
for as sometime the city of Athens, mother of liberal arts and of letters,
nourisher of Philosophers, and well of all sciences, made it solemn in
science and in conditions among Greeks, so does Paris in this time; not only
France but also all ye other deal of Europa. For as mother of wisdom, she
receives all ye comes out of every country of the world; and helps the^ in
all that they need, and rules all peacably and as a servant of truth, The
good report of France in times past, and the evil demenor, by murder of late
years agree not well together.
she shows her self debtie to wise man and unwise: this city is full good
and mighty of riches, it reioyseth in penee^ there is good air of rivers
according to Philosophers, that be fair fields, medes ^emditalhs to refresh
and comfort the eien of them yt he weary in study, there be couenable streets
and houses, namely for studiers. And nevertheless ye city is sufficient
toxiteius and to s^ld all other yt come thereto. And pusseth al other cities in
these things, and in such other like.

Of Flandera. chap. 58.
Flanders is a province of Gallia belgica, by the eliffes of the occean, and
has Germania in the east side, and the Island of Britain in the North and the
French sea in the West, and in the South ye part of France that is called
Gallia Se^^onensis, and Burgoine. Though this province be little in space, yet
it is wealthy of many special things and ^^^ For this lands is plenteous, and
full of pastures of eatiell and of beasts ^^^yall and reth of the best towns,
haneris of the sea; and of famous rivers, and well nigh all about is moisted
with Scaldeli. The (...) thereof be seemly: and fair of ^dy and strong, and
they get many children. And they be rich of all (...) ^^ chaften, and
generally faies and ser^^^lye of face, mild of will and fair of speech, sad
of beering, honest of clothing, peaceable to their own neighbors, true and
trusty to strangers, passing withyr^ in Wool craft, by their carftie
working, a great part of the world is succored and helped in woollen
clothes. For of the principal Wool, which they have out of England, with
their subtle craft be made many noble clothes, and be sent by sea and also
by land into many diverse Countries. And the land is plain, and bears good
corn. In many places thereof grow many trees, but not many woods. There be in
some places marrises and moors, in which they dig turues and make fire
thereof in steed of wood, often times thereof is made hot fire and strong, and
more effectual then of wood, but that fire is less profitable touching the
ashes, and heavy savor and smell.

Of the Province Fenicia. Chap. 59.
FEnix is a province, and has that name at Fenice the brother of Cathini. For
Fenix was put out of Glebis The bis in Aegipt, and driven into Sir^^, and
reigned in Sidon, and called the land after his own name Fenicia. It is the
land wherein Tirus is, against the which spoke Esaias, as Isid. says li. 15. and
9. This land has Arablam in the East side, and the red Sea in the South, and
the Sea of middle earth in the West, and mount Lebanian in the North. And so
this land is best in trees, chief in corn and fruit, with most plenty of
^^^ke, of Olle, and of bonnye: In this land be (...) ye mou^^^ fields moisted
with wells, and other Gaters. In those most it^^ies be ^^ into ^^ of diverse
^ine.

( Addition.
Phoenicia, or Phoenice, a region in Siria nere to India:)

Of Phrigia. chap. 60.
FRigia is a province of the less Asia, and has that name of Frigra the
daughter of Europa. This Country is nigh to Ga^^^ in the North side; and
Liddonia in the South: and femeth in some part to Liddia in the East side: and
ends at Hellespont ^^ in the North, as Isidore says, libro. 15. There be two
lands, and either is called Frigia ^^ the thore Frigia has there in Smirinam,
and Hillium is in ye less. The river Hernicis departs Licaonia and Phrigia
as he says. And Phrigiacis called Dardanica, and has that name of Dardanus,
he came out of Greece with his brother Dracius, and warn Phrigia, and reigned
therein, and called the land Dardanica by his own name: and Dracius occupied
Drachiam.

( Addition.
Phrigia, a Realm in Asia the less, having on the East, Cappadoria: on the
South. Lycaonia: on the West, Troas^ on the North, Galatia, Dardanus the name
of a Prince, reigning in that part of Phrigia, where Trota stedde, which was
of him called Dardania.)

Of Frista. chap. 61.
FRista is a Province in the lower parts of Germanye, and stretches full long
upon the Clyffe of Occean, and begins from the end of the Kine, and ends
at the Danish Sea. The men of Germany, call men of this land, Frisones, and
between them and ye Germaynes is great difference in clothing, and in
manner.: For welnigh all men be shorn round, and the more noble they be, the
more worship they account to be shorrse the more nigh. And the men are high of
body, strong of virtue; statue and flerce of heart, and swifte, and nimble of
body, and they use iron spears in steeds of arrows.

The lans is plain with much leese, and pastures, and with grass and herbs,
and without trees and wood, and they make fire of ^^rwes full of glowe, and of
the ^ou^ge or Deni and Kine dried and burned. The mind free, and not subject
so Lordship of other Nations, and put them in peril of death ^e^uss of ^r^^
duttie, and they had rather dye, than be under the (...). Therefore they for
sa^e dignity of ^^^ end suffer short ^^^ and to be greater among them; under
the Liti^ of ^^ig^^g^^ (...) but they^^ subject to judges that the (...) house
of themselves from year so year which (...) be Communnitie among them. They
love (...)tie, and punish all the unchaste, right grievously: and they keep
their Children chaste, unto the time that they are of full age, and so when they
be beedded, they got manly children and strong.

( Addition.
Frisij, People of Holland, whereof the Country is called Friseland.)

Of Insulis Fortunatis. ca. 62.
THe fortunate Islands stand in the Occean, before the left side of Mauritania,
and be full nigh to the West. And be departed a sonder with the sea, as Isidore
says, lib. 15. And be called the Islands of Fortune, for plenty of all manner
of good and namely of Corn and of fruits. And for noble ground and plenteous,
the error of Nations and makings of Poets deemed, that these Islands were
Paradise, as Isidore says libro. 15. and Plinius says the same li. ^. ca. 53.
And he says that there grow trees of T^lt foot. Therein to plenty of apples,
and multitude of Birds, and much honey and milk, and namely in the I Will that is
called Caprana, which has that name of Goats and of Wethers, for full many be
therein. There be wonderful strong hounds, and namely in the I Will that is called
Canaria, the which has that name of the huge number of great mighty hounds.

( Addition.
Fortunatae Insulae, the fortunate Isles which wet in ye great Occean sea, and
of Pliny are heeried to be and of Solinus ^^ of Ptholome a which he calls
also, ye Isles of ye Gods: for ye wholsomnes of ye air, and winds blowing there.
Also ye plenty of good fruits; and fertiltie of ye grow. It is thought of
soon me^, to be those Isles, which are now called Canaria, distaunt from spain
toward ye west. 12 do. miles, after ye account of Petrus Martyr. Of these Isles
are found to be 7. in number. First about ye year of our Lord 405. a French
more called Betimlio^, ^^ ye commandment of Katheren, then Dulicite of
Castle, found two of them, and called the one Launcelor, and the other, Fa^^e
V^n^^u. South after, one (...) in this He(...) and his wife found other two,
and called ye (...) Forream, and the other Gomera. After yt the great Canaria
was found, by ^^^fus de V^ris, and Michael de Moxico Last of all, by
commandment of Fernando; and Elizabeth, late king and Queen of Spain,
Teneriph and Palma, were found by Alphonsus Lugo, so that now all the seven
Isles, be under the Dominion of the King of Spain. Notwithstanding, some
suppose, that these be not the Isles, which were called Fortunatae, but rather
those, more south, called now of the Portugals, Insulae capitis viridis. D.
Cooper.)

Of Galilea. chap. 63.
GAlilea is a country in Palestina, and has that name, for that the men
thereof: he more white than men of other countries of Palestina: and Galilea is
double, the over and the nether, and they join togethers, and stretches unto
Siria, and so the Province of Ferus. In either is ground: very apt is be are
corn and fruit. There is plenty of dines, and of olyues and of water, for in
some part thereof, the river Iordane runs thereby. There be most noble
lakes, profitable and healthful, and be there called seas for hugeness and
multitude of Fishes. And (as Isidore says) there is the lake that is called
Lacus Tiberiadis, and has that name of a iowne that so is called, and is more
wholesome than all the other, and more effectual to health and preservation of
bodies. And contains ten, forlongs, Look before in the Lake Tiberiades and
in Lacus Genesar (...) ^ractatu de A^^^ and stag^^^t^.

Addition
Galilea, a country which ^^cheth on Synas Arabia, and A^^yps.

Of Galatia. chap. 64.
GAlatia is a Country in Europe, and has that name of French men that dwelled
therein and were called Galls as Isidore, says, libro. ^^^. and ^^. The King
of Bithinia, called the Gallen to help him and he had the victory, and
departed, the kingdom with them, and the Galls were afterward (...) and with
the Greeks, and were called Gallograth but now they have name of the old
Galls, and he called Galli. This land is full ^ide and large, and most
plenteous, and contains a great deal of Europe, and is now called Kufenea of
many men.

( Addition.
Gallatia, or Gallogrecia a Country in the less Asia, is joining to Phrigia
and Lidia)

Of Gallitia. chap. 65.
GAllitia is a Province in Spain, and has that name of whiteness of: the men
that dwell therein, for they be more white, than men of other Countries of
Spain, as it is said. This land bears well corn and fruit, and is nigh to
the Occean, there is plenty of much good and cattle. The men say, that they
come of the Greeks: and so they be strong in kind wit, as Isidore says
libro. 9.

For after the battle of Troy, many of the Greeks, came into Gallitia, and
abode there.

Of Gallia. chap. 66.
GAllia is a Province of Europe, between the mountains Alps P^nnine, and the
British Occean, and has that name of old time of whiteness of men: for
Gallia Greek, and is said, milk. Therefore Sybel called them Galls, that is
to say, white: and she said, that milk necks should be wreathed in gold: for
by diversity of heaven, face and color of men, appear the diverse qualyties
of their stomachs and bodies, Rome gendreth beuis^men, Greece light, Africa
^nylesalt, and France, kindles ^er^e men, and sharp of (...) Isidore says
lib. 9. This land has Germanye in the East side: Spain in the West, Italy in
the South, and (...) in the North, at the British Occean, as, Isid. says.
Sometime this land was divided in three ports that was called Tog^^^, Celtica
and Belgica: but now French man dwell in these Provinces and, of them the doubt
has that name, and is called F^^^: (...) is Litters. (...) and of Francia.

( Addition
Gallia at noble Region, set between S^^^ (...) the bordereth on the
mountains Alps. That which joins to Germany, was called Belgica, and was
contained between the rivers Scalde and sequana, or Seyne. That part which
marches to the mountains, was called Celtica, or Lugdunensis, and was
contained between the rivers Seyne and Garumna, or Geronde. That which
bordereth on Spain, called Aquitania, was bounded with the mountains
Pyrenaei, Caesar boundeth the part called Celtica, with the rivers Rhene and
Gerond. Agtippa describes Gallia between the river Rhene, the mountains
Pyrenei, the Occean sea, and the mountains Gebenna, and Iura. Moreover, that
which is now called Lumbardie, was called Gallia Cisalpina.)

Of Gadis. chap. 67.
GAdes is an Island in the end of Spain, and departs Africa from Europe,
wherein Hercules set wonderful and noble Pillars, in token of conquest. And
thence comes springing of the Sea Tirrenum, out of the wells of the Occean,
and is departed from the next land six score paces. The Tyres came from the
red sea and occupied this Island, and called it Gadis in their language, that is
to understand, separated; for that Gadis is compassed with ye Sea about.
Therein grows a tree that is like to Palm, the gum thereof like glass,
makes a precious stone, that is called Ceramina, as Isid. says li. 15. And
this land makes many countries of the world, rich of fruit and spicerie, and
namely Countries of the west.

( Addition.
Gades, two Isles in the further part of Spain beyond Granate, which in
worthiness of men before time have excelled. For at one time, there were in
Rome 500. men of this Country Citizens of the order and state of Gentlemen. In
the less of those two Islands, it is reported that grass is so battling, as
the milk of the beasts does cast no whaye, nor can have any cheese made of it,
unless it be mixed with much water. It is written moreover, that unless the
beasts there feeding, be often let blood, they will within thirty days be
stiffeled and dye with fat. Which fertility may seem to give occasion of the
Fuble of Gerions beasts, that Hercules drove away.

Of Grecia. chap. 68.
GRecia has that name of Grecus, and King that dwelled therein; and gave
thereto his own name, as Isido. says, lib. 15. The Provinces thereof he
eight, Dalmatia in the West, then is Epyrus, after Helladas, then Thessalia,
after that Macedonia, and after Achaia: and twain in the sea, creta and
cyclades, and is a Country most wide and large, and has many other names, and
is full plentiful of riches both of the sea, and of land, and is Lady of many
Kingdoms, nourisher of chivalry, mother of Philosophy, finder and mistres of
all good sciences. In old time, men thereof, were the best warriors, and
endued ^^^th gifts of wit and of wisdom: they were fair and most eloquent
speakers, subject to latre, mild to strangers, peaceable and easy to men of
that land, and were wroth and high hearted to men that would do wrong to their
neighbors, and would not suffer it, but withstood such wrongs, with all their
might, as Varro tells, in libr. de laudibua Grecorum.

( Addition.
Grecia, (the fountain of prowess and doctrine, and nourse of eloquence) a
great and famous Country, containing these noble Regions, Epyrus, Acarnania,
Aetolia, Phocis, Locris, Achais, Messenia, Laconia, Argos, Megaris, Attica,
Boetia, Doris, Phthiotia, Thessalia, Magnesia, Macedonia, and Thracia. All the
which of late years, were under the yoke of Christ's religion, and now alas, to
the great discomfort of all perfect christian men, are under the most cruel
subjection and servitude of the great tirant the Turk, and become barbarous,
living in the beastlye superstitions, of the false Prophet Mahomet.)

Addition.
GEre I have thought good for ye better understanding of ye christian reader,
Addition
to note what Mahomet was, which the great Turk so highlye extolleth. Machumet
was first a poor man, and a buyer and seller of Camells. Afterward he fell
acquainted with an Heretic Monk, called Sergius, by whose means he declared
himself to be a Prophet, and took upon him as well to reform the old Law,
as the new. He won great Realms, and at the age of forty years dyed (as
some suppose) of the falling sickness, which he long time did dissemble
faining, that the Angel Gabriel, was sent to him in message, whose brightness
he might not sustain.

Mahomete or Machumet, had to his father, one Abdalla, by stock an Auncestrie,
a Persian or Arabian borne, and had to his mother Emma a Jew, and was borne in
Iesrab, on a monday, being the 12. day of the month Rabe, about the year of
our Lord 597. or.621. his father dyed a little before his birth.

His geneologie is reuolued with monstrous and blasphemous sables, unto the
time of Seth and Adam, he was borne without any doloust or pain felt by his
mother: and when he was circumcised, he was merry and laughing, but whether
this is to be believed, judge you. At the very hour and time of his death, the
Idols fell down by themselves, and Lucifer was taken of Angels, and drowned
in the deep Sea Alcazum, from whence after forty days, being escaped,
calling together a counsel of Devils, he complained of the destruction of
his kingdom, beside many other frivolous and lyeng wonders.

As touhing his education, that the Birds and Winds did strine for his
bringing up, and that he was committed to one Halima: and that an Ass,
inclyning her self down said of Mahomet, Hic est sigillum Prophetarum, also
how three men drew out his bowels, and cleansed the Devils portion, out of
his heart, etc.

Mahomet could neither read nor write, as he himself testifies, In Alcarono
Azoara.17. being utterly unskillful and unlearned in his youth. He had a great
ioulte head, a face mixed with white and red, a long beard, and he was swift,
and of very nimble feet. He had a quick, subtle and crafty wit: and learned
all manner of sects. Simoneta li. 4. cap. 36.

Sergius the Bestorian Heretic coming to Mecha, instructed him, worshipping
Idols with his error, and delivered unto him, certain rules out of the old
and new Testament.

Mahomet married one Eadiga, a rich widow, whom he allured to love him by Art
Magieke, or witchery. And because he was often troubled with the falling evil,
he made his wife believe, that so often as he fell, the brightness of the Angel
Gabriel was ye cause, whose presence his bodily force, could not abide. Of his
function, of his works, of his doctrine, of his prophecies of his co^flicts,
of his filthy lusts, and of his death: read the book tituled, The Poor man's
Library, set forth by Master William Alley, Bishop of Exceter.1560.

Of Gethulia. cap. 69.
GEthulia, is a province of Africa, and has that name of Greeks, the which
descended either of the Greeks, or else of those men that remained of the
Nation of the Goths, as Isidore says, lib. 9. They gathered a great host,
and sailed into the parts of Libia, and those there their place, and be there
to this day, and for they come of Greeks, by deriuation of name, they be
called Getuli. And therefore is an opinion among the Greeks, that that Nation
is near of kin unto them, as Isidore says lib. 9. Beside these men, dwell
Gelones, people, that stretch from the South to the Hesperie Occean, which men
go about and straye in Desarte. This name Gelon came of an Island Gaulon, that
is beside Aethiopia, where no Serpent is bred, nor may live therein, as he
says. Also in the end of Africa, be as it were beastiall men that be called
Garamantes, and have that name of Garamant the King, the son of Apollo. He
builded there a Town, and called it Garama, by his own name.

Plynius speaks of them and says, that they be verily departed, and far
from company of mankind.

( Addition.
Getae, a People which some suppose to be those, which are in Norwaye and
Gothia. Some say that they be more in the Northeast in Scythia, pertaining to
Europe: some think that it is ye People of the Countries Valachia, and
Transylu^^ia.)

Of Gorgones. Cap. 70.
GOrgones be Isles of Occean, before the forland that is called Vesperaserus.
Therein dwelled women that were called Gorgones Feminine, and they are said
Alith^^ Veloci, in English swifte, for roughness and sharpnes of body, etc.
and of them the Glandes had the name, as Isid. says li. 15.

( Addition.
Gorgones, monstrous women, which were vanquished by Perseus, a noble Knight,
which delivered a fair Lady, called Andromada from a Whale, and also slew
Medusa, which turned men into stones: whether by her pride, her hayres were
turned to Adders, or by lecherous lust she brought all her lovers to a
shamelosse forgetfulness, for that Serpents signifies pride, and lecherye,
shameless hardiness.)

Of Gothia. cap. 71.
GOthia is a Province of the nether Scythia in Europe, and has that name as
men suppose of Magog the son of Iophet, as Isidore says libro. 9. And so he
says, that those old Nations were called both Gethas and Gotos, and were
sometime most strong men and huge of body, and used most dreadful manner of
armor and wepous. And men deem, that children that came of them occupied the
most part of Europe and of Asia: For their children be Danes and many other
Nations in the West. Getuli in Africa, and Amazones in Asia, came of the
Children of the Goths, as he says li. 9. and 15. And this land is yet full
wide, and has in the North side, Norwaye, and Denmark, and is compassed with
ye sea Occean in the other sides.

To this Country belongs an Island that is called Gothlandia, and is called
the Island of Goths: for Goths dwelled there sometime. The Island beaceth well
Corn, therein is much Pasture, and fish, and occupied in many manner
merchaundises and chaffer: for many manners skins and plenty of money other
merchaundise and chaffe^ are brought out of diverse lands and Countrayes in
Ships to that Island. And be ^dde thence by Occean into Germanye, France,
Britain, and Spain.

( Addition.
Gothi, and Gotthi, an I Will by Denmark, called Gutland, not far from Norwaye,
from whence the people first came, unto whom resorted a great multitude of
other people, as well out of the Countries now called Prussia, Liuonia,
Russia, and Tartaria, as diverse other parts called Scythia, and making sundry
Kings, did deporulate and bring in subjection, the more part of Europe, and
finally destroyed Rome, and inhabited the part of Italy, now called,
Lumbardye, and likewise subdued the Realms of Castile, and Arragon.)

Of Gnydo. chap. 72.
GNidum is a Country in an Island against Asia, between Siria and Italia,
toward Pamphiliam and Ciliclam, lyeng against Creta, as it is said in the
Gloss super Acta Aposto. 27.

Gnydus, a City in Licia. Addition


Of India. chap. 73.
INde is a Country in East Asia, and has that name of the River Indus, and is
cloased therewith in the West. This Country stretches from the South side
into the East, and out of the North unto the Mount Caucasus. Therein are many
manner of men^, and Towns, and also the Island Trabo, fult of precious stones,
and Elephauts.

Therein be also the Islands Grisa, and Arge, that are plenteous and rich of
gold and of silver, and also profitable in trees that never leese their leaves.
And in Indie be most noble rivers, Ganges, Indus, and Hippanes, that adorn the
Countries of Inde. Also Inde is most wholesome in Western wind, and bears
corn twice a year. Therein be men of dyed color, and great Elephants, and
Unicornes, and Popiniayes, and Hebeous a tree, that so is called, Cinamom,
Pepper, and a reed that smells full ^^^eete. It sends out thereof precious
stones, Berillus, Chrisoprassus, Carbuncles, Adamantes, Margarites, and Unions,
that great Ladies so feruentlye desire. There be hills of gold, and it is
impossible to come thereto for dragons and Griphous, and for many manner of men
wonderfully shapen, as Isido. says: and all these foresaid words be his, libro
decimo quinto. Also among all Countries and lands of the world, Inde is
greatest, most rich, most mighty, and most full of people. Therefore Plinius.
li. 6. ca. 19. tells wonders of the might and multitude of the Indes. And he
says, that in Inde be many kings, and some of them has under him four
hundred thousand men of arms, and some six hundred Cuneos of horsemen, and 9.
thousand Elephants, that take wages every day, and so the land is most full
of riches.

And some one has sixty thousand foot men, and a thousand horse men, and
seven hundred Elephants, and always these men be arrayed to war and to
battle, and so the land is strong, mighty and rich. And as it is said there,
some of the Indies till the earth, and some use chiualry, and some use
merchaundise and lead out chaffer, The commo^vveale very well governed
some rule and govern The comminte at best. And some be about the kings, and
some be Justices and domes men, some give them principally to Religions, and to
learning of wit and of wisdom: and as among all Countries and lands Inde is
the greatest and most rich: so among all lands, Inde is most wonderful. For
as Plinius says li. 7. chap. 3. Inde abounds in wonders, by a long space
toward Aethiopia. In Inde be many huge beasts bred, and more greater bounds,
than in other lands. Also there be so high trees, that men may not shoot to
the top with an arrowe, as it is said, and that makes the plenty and fatness
of the earth, and temperatenesse of weather, of air, and of water. Fig trees
spread there so broad, that many great companies of Knights may sit at meat
under the shadow of one tree. Also, there are so great reeds and so long,
that every piece between two knottes, bears sometime three men over ye
water. Also there be men of great stature, passing five Cubits of height, and
they never spet, and have never head ach, nor tooth ach, nor sore eyes, nor
they be not grieved with passing heat of the Sun, but rather made more hard
and sad therewith. Also their Philosophers, that they call Gimnosophistae,
stand in most hot gravel from the morning till even, and behold the Sun
without blemishing of their eyes. Also there, in some mountains be men with the
soles of the feet turned backward, and the foot also, with eight toes in one
foot. Also there be some with hounds heads, and be clothed in skins of
wild beasts, and they bark as hounds, and speak none otherwise: and they
live by hunting and fowling, and they are armed with their nails and feeth,
and be full many, above six score thousand, as he says. Also among some
nations of Inde, be women that bear never child but once, and the children
were white haired, anon as they be borne. There be Satires and other men
wonderfully shapen: of them it is spoken in the treatise of monstrous beasts.
Also in the end of Inde, about the rising of Ganges be men without mouths, and
they be clothed in moss, and in rough hairy things, which they gather of
trees, and live commonly by odors and smell at the nosethrills. And they
neither eat, neither drink but only smell odors of flowers and of wild
appples, and live so, and they die anon in evil odor and smell: and other
there be, that live full long, and seem aged never, but dye as if were in
middle age. Also some be hoar in youth, and black in age. Plini. rehearses
these wonders and many other more.

Addition.
Addition
INdea, a great rich Country, called in English Indv, lieng on the South part
of ye world, which as Ptholomeus writes, is divided into two parts. The one is
called Indie within the river of Ganges, which on the west is bounded with
Aracosia and Gedrosia: on the East, has the great river called Ganges: on the
North with the hill called Imaus: on the South and West, with part of the
Indian sea. The other part of Indie without Ganges, is bounded on the west with
the said river Ganges: on the North, with part of Scythia and Setica: on the
East with the Region called Sinaruni: on the South with the Indian sea.

Nearchus, great Alexanders Admiral, affirmed (as A^^anus writes) that it was
four months journey by ye plains of Indie, Megasthenes saite, that the
breadth of Indie, from the East to the west, contains 16000. furlongs, which
is 2102. miles. The length from ye North to the South 22000 furlongs, which is
2850. miles. Caesias affirms it to be as much as the residue of Asia: but
Onesicritus which wrote the acts of Alexander, denies it to be the third
part of Asia. There are always two Summers, and fruits and grain twice
gathered. The winds be always temperate, the beasts and Fowls much greater,
than in other Countries, and of more diverse kinds. The names of the
Countries and Cities there, be now otherwise, than they were in the time of
the ancient Writers. They which be now known, shall be declared in their
places, with the mountants and rivers which are great above all other.

( Addition.
Of the three principal rivers in Indie, Ganges, Indus, and Hyphasis: Ganges, a
great River that divides Indi, called in holy Scripture Phil^^. one of the
four rivers which come soorth of Paradise. Josephus does interpert if
Inundation The breadth thereof (as Soho^s writes) is in the narrowest place
eight miles, in the brodest, twenty miles. Ananus writes, that where it is
narrowest, it is in breadth one hundred furlongs, which is eight miles. In many
places, it spreads so wide, that where the gerunde is most plain, nor any
high place appears, no man may discern any thing of the other side: in the
shallowest place, it is an hundred foot deep. There runs into it,
seauenteene great Rivers, every one of them able to bear a ship. In this
River of Ganges is an I Will, and therein a great City, called Palibetia, the
Country is called Phrasia, the king whereof as Plyme writes lib. 6. cap. 19.
has always in wages 600000. footmen, 30000. hors-men, and 9000. Elephants.)

( Addition.
Indus is a notable River, that comes from the great Mountain Taurus, and
incleaseth Indie on the West, and runs into the Indian sea. Into this River
runs nineteen great and famous Rivers, the least of them is more, than the
great River of Donowe. Where he is broadest, Strabo says, that they which do
write most moderately of Indus, do affirm, that he is in breadth fifty
furlongs, which is twelve miles and a half. The water thereof causes great
fertility, when it ouerfloweth, and thereof many sundry pleasant and wholesome
fruits, do spring without labor.)

( Addition
Hypasis, or as some do write, Hypanis, Arianus calls it Hyphasis, a great
River, which runs out of the mountains of Scythia into Indie, and comes
into the famous river of Ganges, and is in breadth seven furlongs, as Diodorus
writes, libro. 17. The stream thereof is so swifte, that no man may pass
ever it, by the space of five days sailing. The water is fresh: after that it
comes within four days sailyng of the sea, it is wonderful bitter, by
reason of a bitter Fountain, which runs into it. At this River, the great
Alexander finished his journey, and went no farther into Indie, but did there
set up twelve Altars of Stone, every of them fiftye Cubits in greatness. D.
Cooper.

Of Hircania. chap. 74.
HIrcania, is a Province in Asia, under the mount Caucasus, and is a lull wide
country: and there be many men of diverse Nations and tongues, as Isidore
says lib. 15. Also Orosius says, that the land stretches from the mount
Caucasus unto Scythia. Therein are forty four Nations, that pass right far
and wide for plenty of the land. Some of them till land, and some live by
hunting, and some be cruel and beastiall, and wonderfullye shapen, and live by
man's flesh and drink man's blood, as Isidore says libro. 15. And he says
there, that Hircania has the name of a Wood, that is called Irrana, and lies
toward Scythia, and the Sea Caspium is in the East side, and the more Armenie
in the South, and Albania in the North, and Hiberia in the West. And it is
sharp of woods, with plenty of many great wild beasts, Parts, Tigres, and
Panters. There breeds birds that are called Hircanic, their feathers shine
by night, and such birds are found in Germany, as Isidore says. In the time
of Machabeus John Hircanus, the son of Simon the chief Priest, overcame ye
men of this Hircania. And the said John was called Hircanus because he
overcame that Country, as the master says in his history, in the beginning
of the story of the Gospel: and Hierome says the same.

( Addition.
Hyrcania, a Country in Asia, Hyrcanum mare, the Sea now called, Marc
Abacucke, or Mare de Sala.)

Of Idumea. chap. 75.
IDumea is a Country in Arabia, and has that name of Edom, that was Esau
Isaacs son: for Esau Isaacs son was called so. Also Esaus children that was
also called Edom, did expulse, and put out the Amorreis, and dwelled in that
land, and called it Idumea afterward. Idumea is to understand, the land of
Edoms children. And Idumea and Palestina, are departed by certain Deserts. The
bordets of Idumea strettheth unto the Red sea, and this land is strong, and
full of mountains, and is situate under strong heat of ye Sun: therefore
people of that Country, make them houses and caves under the earth, to heepe
them from strong heat of the Sun, as the Gloss says super Abdiam.

( Addition.
Idumea, a Region in Syria, joining to Egypt, and bordering upon Palestine.

Of Judea. chap. 76.
IVry is a Country in Palestina, and has that name of Judas Jacobs son. Men
of his lygnage, were Kings therein. This land was first called Canaan, and had
that name of Chams son: or else of ten Nations of Chananeis, the which being
expulsed and put out, the Jews possessed that land.

The length thereof begins at the street Arpha, and stretches unto the
street Iuliatem, whereas is the common dwelling of Jews and of Tires. The
breadth thereof stretches from mount Libanus, to the side of Tiberiades: and
in the middle of this Judea, is the City of Jerusalem, as it were the nanell
of all the Country and land, and is rich of diverse riches, and bears well
corn and fruit: and is only endowed with waters and riches of Baume. Therein
be many trees, Cedars, palms, Cipres, and other noble trees. Therein be many
vines and vineyards, Pomegranardes and Olyues. The land is rich of milk and
of honny, therefore, by the grace of Elements, the Jews suppose that this
land was promised to their forefathers, and that it flowed milk and honnie,
for it was promised to them by aprerogatiue of name, as Isi. says libro 15.
cap. 4.

Plinius speaks of this land and says, that Judea is a part of Siria, and
stretches far and wide, and is next to Egypt and Arabia, and the countries
therein be departed with sharp mountains, and the River Jordan runs there,
and departs Galile from other Countries of Judea. In Judea is Jerusalem, and
is the most noble City of all the Cities of the East, and in Judea be hot
wels, and healthful. Also in the end thereof is the dead sea, that is called,
Latus Asphaltes, and is so called, for it breeds nothing that has life: but
therein is glewe, and nothing lives therein: if any thing alive be thrown
therein, it swimmeth above, and this dead Sea, swalloweth the river of Iordane,
and spilleth good water meddled with water of pestilence.

( Addition.
Judea, a Country in Asia, which has on the West, Mare Cyprium, on the North,
Phoenitia, and Syria: on the East, Arabia: on the South, the Land of Egypt.
It received the name of Judas the son of Jacob, the Patriarch, where before
it was called Chananaea, of Chananaeus the fourth son of Cham.

Of the miserable estate of these people, remaining a common example unto all
nations of the world, to beware (that they likewise give not over themselves,
to open resisting of the truth of Jesus Christ, against the Majesty of God,
lest they come likewise to be dispearsed, and made a scattering generation)
which for their common contempt of Christ, as vagabonds, driven forth of every
Christian Kingdom.

Iudei, not only the people of Judea: but also they be so called, which do
observe their superstition. They were expelled out of the Realm of England,
in the time of King Richard the first, for their cruelty in slaieng of
Christian Children: like as they have been out of France, and Spain, and now
of late out of Portugal.)

( Addition.
In Iurye is God known, his name is great in Israel. At Salem is his
tabernacle: and his dwelling in Sion. Psalm. 76. Jury the land of promise
wherein Christ was borne. Israel are the faithful congregation. Salen is
Jerusalem. Sion the place of David, on mount Sion ^ above Jerusalem and in
Jerusalem was the holy temple.

Of Iberia. chap. 77.
IBeria is a Country in Asia, and nigh the sea that is called Pontus, and
joins to Armenia. In this land grow herbs, that be good for Diers, as
Isidore says lib. 15.

( Addition.
Iberia the ancient name of Spain, also another Country nigh to Armenia, it
is of some written with H.

Of Italy. chap. 78.
ITaly is a great Country in Europa, and sometime Greeks dwelled therein,
and was therefore called the great Grecia, as Isidore says, lib. 15. And
after that land was called Saturnia, and had that name of Saturnus the King.
For when Saturnus was put out of his place by Jupiter, he hid himself
there. And this land was called Italia at last, and had that name of Italus
King of Cicile, that reigned therein. The length thereof is more then the
breadth, and stretches out of the North north West, to the East North east,
and is closed in the South with the sea Terrenum, and in the North with the sea
Adriaticum, and ends in the West at great mountains called Alps. This land
is most fairest in all things, most kind ground to bear plentye of food:
therein be noble waters and lakes, as Benenatum, Auernum, and Lucrinum, and
many other Rivers, as Eridamis, or Padus, Tiberis, Herianus, and other such.
Therein breed precious stones, that is to wit, Ligurium, Gagates, Pearls, and
Coral.

Also there are bread Boa, the serpent, and Linx the wild beast, and many
other singular kinds of Birds. Also this Country is called Hesperia, and
has that name of a star that is called Hesperus, as Spain is called. For
Greeks sailing into Italaye and into Spain, take heed of that star.

But Spain is called the last Hesperia, for Spain is in the last place under
the West. Huc vsque Isidorus, libro. 15.

Among all the West countries and lands of Europe, Italye bears the price.
Therein are noble Islands, and solemn havens of the sea, and those Provinces
be full of riches, and Cities most full of people, and most strong walls and
Ditches, with other array of war, with plenty of gold and of silver. Lib.
2. Plinius says, that therein be twelve famous and most mighty particular
Countries, besides the Islands, of whom he treats largely. And this land is
cloased all about in the East, North, and West, with full high mountains
called Alps, out of which Mountains, spring noble rivers, the Rine and
Danubius, which run by Germany, and Rodanus and Secana, and many other, that
run by France, that moisten the Countries all about, and namelye, the parts
of France, that be called, Gallia Lugduniensis, and Gallia Narbonensis, and
Gallia Belgica.

( Addition.
Italia, a noble Country, which is environed on the West, with the mountains
Alps: on the North, with the Sea Adriaticum: on the East and the South, with
the Sea Mediterraneum, and Fretum Siculum. It also contains these Regions.
Liguria, Ethruria, Vmbria, Flammia, Larlum, Apiutium, Campania, Apulia,
Venetia, Picenum, Gallia cisalpina, called Lumbardie. The length thereof (after
Plynie) is 1020. miles: the breadth in some places between the two seas four
hundred and ten miles. It was sometime named, Magna Grecia, because it was
inhabited with Greeks, as Mirsilius writes. Solinus resembles the figure
thereof to an Oaken leaf, extending more in length, than in breadth, toward
the end being divided, as it were into two horns, whereof the one lies
toward the Sea Ionicum: the other looks to to the narrow Sicilie, called
Fretum Siculum. In the narrowest place, it passes not in breadthe, twentye
miles.

Italica, a City in Italy, which by another name, is called Confinium. There
is another in Spain, where Siliue Italicus was borne.)

Of Hispania, chap. 79.
THe country of Spain, was first called Hiberia, and had that name of the
river Hiberus, and was afterward called Hispania, and had that name of the
River Hispalus, (as it it said). And this land was called Hispera, and had
that name in old time of the West evening star. And this land is between
Africa and Europa, and is cloased in the North side with ye mountains
Pyreneis, and is closed with the Sea all about in the other sides, and the air
there is very healthy, there is abundance of all corn and fruit, and most rich
of precious stones and of metal. Most noble Rivers run through this land,
as Betis, Minius, Hiberus, Tagus, and Pactolus, that draws gold. Therein be
six Provinces, as Terraconis, Cartaginensis, Lusitania, Gallicia, and Betica:
and in the other side of the arm of the sea in the country of Africa
Trangitania. And there be two Spaines, the hither and the farther. Huc. vsque
Isido. li. 15.

Orosius says, that Spain is as it were a three corner to the roundnesse of
lands: for it is beclypped nigh all about with the sea Occean and Tirreni, and
is welneere made an Island: the next corner thereof is Eastward, and in the
right side thereof is the Province of Guyan, and in the left side it is
strained in with the Sea Balearicum: and nigheth the borders of Narbon. The
second corner thereof, is toward ye North Northwest, where is Bernagicia, a
City of Gallia, and reareth toward the sight of Britain. The third corner
thereof is toward ye Islands Gades before mount Athlant, that is in Africa, in
the other side of an arm of the Occean. Huc. vsque Orosius.

Also Plinius prayseth Spain in many things, and namelye in metal, and
says, that nigh in all Spain is plenty of gold and silver, of brass,
copper, and iron, of tin and lead, both white and black. Therein be men and
Nations great warriors, and strong. It is said, that some of them descended of
the Greeks, and it is said also, that some of them were descended, and were
successors of the Wysigothes, the same says Isido. For therein be many
special provinces, that we know, and there is Galitia. Men of that country
tell, that they came of the Greeks as Isidore says lib. 9. There in is
Asturis, and has that name, for it is closed all about with mountains before
the river Asturius, and there is Celtiberia, and has that name of Gallis
Gelcicis, that bwelled upon the River Hiberius.

(* Hispania, a Country in the West part of Europe, called Spain, sometime
called Iberia, and Hesperia. It is muyroned on the South part, with the Sea
Mare Meditaraneum, which divides Europe from Affrike: on ye North part, with
the Sea, Mare Cantabricum: on the west, with the great Occean Sea: on the East
with the Moun^ines Pyrenael, and the part of the Realm of France, called
Aquitania and Narbonensis. This Country is divided by Ptholome into three
Regions: Bethica, wherein is Granado, Syuil, Cordubia, etc. Lucitania, wherein
is Portugal, Galletia, etc. Tarrhaconensis, wherein is Castyle, Lions, and
Arragon. At this time it contains slew Realms, Granado on the South part
toward Affrike, Portugal on the West, Gallecia and Biskaye on the North,
Arragon on the East, Castile and Lions in the middle. Much of the West part,
by reason of Yorkes, Forests, and for lack of water, is not fertile, nor well
inhabited. The North part by reason of much cold, is not plenteous. The South
part is wonderful fruitful. It is in length, as Strabo writes, 6000.
furlongs, which is 850. miles: in breadth, 5000. furlongs, which is 625. miles.
Plinius next unto Italy, extolleth it in fertilite above all other Countries,
in plenty of grain, wines, oil, silver, gold, and iron.

Statius and Claudius do no less commend it. As touching for gold, and
silver, Spain is beholding to the Indies, from whence comes yearly an
infinite mass of treasure: which if sloth and distrust, had not been Pilates
of England in fin^os past, those Indies had served England and not Spain, for
the most part, as more plainly appears in the book tituled, the Decade of ye
West and East Indies, and Andrew Theuer.

Of Hibernia. Cap. 80.
IRelande is called Hibernia, Addition.
and is an Island of the Occean in Europe, and is nigh to the land of
Britayne, and is more narrow and straight than Britain, but it is a more
plenteous place. This Island stretches out of the South into the North, as
Isidore says libro. 15. The first parts thereof are toward the sea that is
called Hyberum Cantabricum Occeanum. And also this Island has that name
Hibernia, of the sea that is called Hyberum Occeanum. In this land is much
plenty of Corn fields, of wells and of rivers, of fairs meades and woods, of
metal, and of precious stones: for there is gendred, a six cornered stone,
that is to say, Iris, that makes a Rain bow in the air, if it be set in the
Sun. And also there is sound a stone that is called Gagates. And there is Iet
sound and white Margarites. And concerning the wholesome air, Irelande is a
good temperate country. There is little or none passing heat or cold. There be
wonderful lakes, pondes and wells, for there is a lake, in which if a staff,
or a pole of tree be pight, and tarieth long time therein, the part that is in
the earth turns into iron, and the part that is in the water, tourneth into
stone, and the part that is above the water, abides still in his kind of
tree. There is another lake, in which if that thou throwest rods of hasill,
it turns those rods into Ash, and again ward, if ye cast ash rods
therein, they turn into hasill. Therein be places, in which dead Carrions
never rot: hut abide there always vncorrupt. Also in Ireland is a little Island,
in which men dye not^ but when they be overcome with age, they be borne out of
that Island to dye without. Although the land, be free from vermin, the men are
not free from lice, which comes of sluttish and filthy use.
In Ireland is no Serpent, no Fragges, nor vencuious Spider, but all the land
is so contrary to venomous beasts: that if the earth of that land be brought
into another land, and sprung on the ground, it slays Serpenies and Toades.
Also venomous beasts flies Irish wool, skins and fells: and if serpents or
Toades be brought into Ireland by shipping: they dye anon. Many other wonders
are in that land.

Solinus speaks of Ireland and says, that Irelande is nigh as much as
Britain, but the inhabitants thereof, be fierce, and lead an vnhumaine life.
There is no Adder seen except it be seldom. The people there use to harbor
no guests; they be warriors, and They are more civil now.
drink men's blood that they slay, and wash first their faces therewith: right
and unright they take for one. There be no Bees, for if men throw power or
stones that is brought out of Irelande, into hiues, the swarms forsake the
honey combs. The Sea Hybernicum toward Britain, is full of waves, and unquiet,
and is in all the year uneath able to sail in, except it be few days, it is
an hundred and thirty thousand paces broad, etc. Huc vsque Solinus, De Mirab.
mundi. The Irish men live long, and be helthy of body: but strangers are
molested with the flixe, a deadly disease if they abide there.
Men of Ireland are singularly clothed, and unseemly arrayed, and scarcely
fed, they be cruel of heart, fierte of cheer, angry of speech and sharp.
Nevertheless they be free hearted and fair of speech, and goodly to their
own Nation, and namely those men that dwell in woods, marreyses, and
mountains. These men are plesed with flesh, apples, and fruit for meat, and
with milk for drink, and give them more to plays and to hunting, than to
work and travel.

Addition
As concerning Ireland, read Policronicon lib. pri. cap. 32.

Of Icana. chap. 81.
ICaria is an Island, one of Ciriades in the West side, and the sea Icarium has
the name of this land Icaria, and this land is between Samum and Cinthonum,
and is not able to dwell in for high rocks and cragges, and also for it is
hauenlesse in every side, and has this name Icaria, of one Icarus of Creta
that was drowned therein, as Isidore says libro. 15.

( Addition.
Icaria, an I Will in the Sea Icarium, which is also called Icarus. Icarus the
son of Dedalus, who having wings, (made by Art) with his Father flewe out
of the I Will of Crete, but when he flew higher than his Father commanded, the
ware, wherewith the feathers of his wings were glewed, melted with the heat of
the Sun: and ye feathers falling off, Icarus was constrained to fall into the
sea, afterward called, Mare Icarium, Icarus is also the name of the father of
the chaste Penelope, which was wife to Ulysses the Greek, and is also the name
of a mountain in the Region of Athens: the I Will Icarus, is called Ichthicusa.)

Of an Island. chap. 82.
AN Island is called Insula, and is a land compassed about with the sea, or with
a river, or with a water, as it were set in the sea, as Isidore says lib. 15.
An Island is beaten all about with waves of waters, but it is not broke, nor
destroyed with such beating, but by shouing and beating of water, and of waves
on the sides of an Island, the carthie parts be driven and fastened together,
and so an Island is made the more sadder and steadfast in the utter ^oes.

The utter parts of Islands be wasted, and undermined with beating of waters:
but about the inner parts they join the faster together, because of wasting
without. Also Islands be some time heyted with waves and floudes of water, and
be made more by bringing thereto of earth and of s^ime. Islands be green and
plenteous, by sucking in at hoales of moisture of waters and of humors.

Of Caria. chap. 83.
CAria a region in Asia, This chapter is added
having on the North side the great river Meander: on the west the great river
Icarium: on ye East Licia, and diverse other countries: toward the South, the
mountain Taurus. The people thereof called Cares, were good men of war, and
therefore every where retained for soldiers, as Suizars, or Suttheners be now.

(* Caunus a city in Caria, by the river Calbis, this city is very queasie
and dangerous to dwell in, both at other times of the year, and specially in
summer; and Autumn, as well for ye vntemperats heat of ye air, as for the
great abundance of fruits. Therefore it is reported, that the situation is
very unwholesome, and the air outrageous. When Stratonicus a pleasant
musttion, and merry conceited man, beheld the inhabitaunts thereof so wanne and
ill colored, he scoffed at them with this sentence of Homer, Tale quideni
genus est hominum, quale est foliorum: The men and the leaves of this Country
look very like: that is, both man and pale without linelye color. For which
scoff, when the people were much grieved, and bitterly railed at him, why
(says he) may I not iustlye call this a sicklye and queasie City, where dead
men walk: with which answer, he far more sharpelye nipped their deadly
colors and wearish looks then he had done before.

Of Carthage, chap. 84.
CArthage is the name of a City and of a province of Africa in Hispania: and
there be two Carthages, the more and less: and Dido made both, she went out
of the Province of Fenir, and builded a city on the cliffe of Africa, and
called the city first Carcada in the language of Fenicia. And afterward the
name was changed: and the city was called Cartago. This city when it was
most famous, and not less renowned then Rome, Scipio with his Roman host
destroyed and beat it to the ground: as Isidore says liber. 16. And now the
Romans have builded it again, as Isidore says. And another Cartage is in
Africa between Bisantium and Numidia, and joins in the North to the Sea
that is called Mare Siculum, and stretches in the South to the Country of
Getules. The next part thereof bears aboundauntlye corn: and has great
plentye of Oil and of fruit, and is full of metal. In the farther part
toward Nomidia is great plenty of beasts, Serpents, and great wild. Asses,
that go about in desert; as Isidore says. lib. 15. Also there be many
Elephants and other beasts, as plinius also affirms liber. 5. cap. 5.

(* Carthago) a famous City in Affrike called Carthage, almost environed with
the Sea: which City was in compass about the walls.360. furlonges; which
are.45. Italian miles: whereof seven miles and an half ran in length on the
ridge of an hill which went from sea to sea, where were set the stables of
Elephauntes, a very large place, almost in the middle of the City was a Castle
or Tower called Byrs, on the top whereof stood Aelculapius Temple, (the son of
Apollo and Cotonis, and was called the God of Physic; and honored in the
form of a Serpent) underneath were havens or Keys of the Castle, and a little
round I Will called Cothon, standing as it were in a great ponde, about which were
set the houses, yt serve for the navy of Carthage. This City continued wars
with the Romans forty years, and had many excellent men of war, of whom
Anibal was the most noble and famous. That City had in subjection, a great
part of Affrike, Scicile, the more part of Spain, and the Isles of the middle
Sea. It was at last destroyed by Scipio, before the incarnation of Christ.144
years. The country where it stood is now called Thunyse.)

Of Carinthia. chap. 85.
CArinthia is a little Province of Germania in Europa, and has Panonia in the
East side, and Italye in the West: and the River Denubius in the North:
Dalmacia and Salmonia in the South. And is closed with mountains in the one
side, and ends at the Sea Adriaticum in another side.

And this is a plentious land in many places: and has many wild beasts and
tame. The men do great warriors and strong, and mightily strengthened with
Castles and towns. The land is cold for high mountains be nigh thereto, there
is often rain and Snowither about the mountains for coldness of Snow water,
many have Botches under the thin, as it is said. There be many Bears,
Bisoums, and other wonderful beasts and wild. Also there be glifes, and men
eat them, for though they seem to be a kind of Mice, yet they be eaten, to
they flesh is both sauoury and far.

( Addition.
Carinthia a Country by Oustrike, joining on the South to the mountains Alps
and Italy, on the East and North to S^^na. The election of a new prince or
governor there is very strange. Pius writes in his Cosmographie, that in
the town called Sanctiviti, is a great valley where in a meddowe is set a
stone of Marble, of a good height, whereupon ascends a husband man, unto whom
that office by inheritance belongs: on his right hand stands a black
Cow: on his left hand an ill favored Mare. About him stands a great
multitude of Carles, common people. On the other side of the medowe comes the
Duke accompanied with his noble men; in their roabes of estate. Before him
goes the Earl of Goritia, the great master of his house, between.12.
Banners, bearing the Princes standard: The other noble men follow with the
Prince, cladde like an husband man, with a sheep crook in his hand, as he
were a shepherd: As soon as the Carle on the Marble stone perceives him
coming, he asks alowde in the Slauoine tongue: Who is this that comes with
so proud a gate. They that stand about answer: It is the Prince of this
Country. Then says he oftentimes: is he a righteous Judge, seeking for the
weal of the Country, a free man borne, and worthy to have honor: is he a
true christian man, and defendie of Christ's faith: They all answer, yea, he
is, and shall be: Then says ye Carle, by what right may be put me from this
place: Then answers the Earl of Goritia, thou shall have for thy place.60
groafes, these two beasts (the Cow and the Mare) and the Princes apparol,
which he did late put off. Also thy familye or kin shall be free, from all
manner of tribute. Then the Carle giving ye Prince a little blow on his
cheek; binds him be a good Judge, and coming down from the stone gives
him place, and so departs taking with him the Cow and the Mare. Then the
Prince goes upon the stone, and holding a naked sword in his hand, shaking
it, tourneth to every part of the stone, promising equal judgment to all the
people. Then is there brought to him cold water in a husband man's cap, which
he drinks, signifieng that he condempneth drinking of Wine. Then goes he to
a Church thereby, where after he has heard divine service, he puts of his
rusticall raiment, and puts on apparel of honor: And dining with his
nobility sumptuouslye, he comes often to the medowe, where he hears
matters, and ministers justice: The Duke of this Country is as it were chief
master of the Game to the imperial majesty.)

Of Cathay. chap. 86.
CAthay, a great region in the East part of the world, This chapter is added
extending to the East Occean sea: on the soath to yt over India: and is also
called Siuarum Regio; it is divided into nine Realms: all be under ye great
Cham. This Country is wonderful rich in gold and silk, abounding in grain,
wines, and other things necessary for man's sustenance. The people for the more
part honor: Christ as God, but they are not baptized: They are courteous and
reasonable, and very cunning Artificers.

As concerning further discourse of Cathai, or Cataia, read the book tituled,
A discourse of a discovery for a new passage to Cataia, written by Sir Humfrey
Gilbert, Knight Anno. 1576. wherein thou shall find many learned and
commendable notes.

Of Corcica. chap. 69.
COrcica is an Island, and has that name of a certain Duke, and is.30 mile
from Sardinia by the sea before Italy: and is an Island with most plenty of
pasture. And that is known by a Bull that often swamme thither out of Liguria
because of Pasture, and came again in noble point. For a woman yt is called
Corsa kept that bull and other beasts by the sea cliffes, and saw that Bull
every day go from his fellows and swim into the sea: and came again in noble
point and well fed. Then she would know what pasture the bull had found. And on a
time when the bull went from the other beasts into the sea, she followed him
in a Boat unto the Island, and came again, and told how plenteous the Island
was. Then men sailed thither, and called the Island Corcica by the name of the
woman that found the Island and was their guide and leader. The Island has many
corners, and forlandes, and bears best leese and pasture. And therein is
gendered a noble stone, which the Greeks call Bacem, as Isidore says, li. 15.

( Addition.
Corsica an I Will in the middle Sea, between Gean, and the I Will of Sardinia,
called Cors: it is now under the City of Gean.)

Of Lacedemonia. chap. 88.
LAcedemonia is a province in Europa, in ye ends of Greece, beside Thracia, and
has another name and is called Spartania: The men of that country be called
Lacedaemonians, and have that name Lacedaemonians of one of the sons of Sem:
These Lacedemons went out and warred against the Messenes: and feared that the
war should long endure, and they should be without offspring, and commanded that
their maidens at home should take younlings that were left at home with them,
and get and bring forth children. And the children that were got in that manner
were called Spartani, of the shameless doing of their mothers, as Isid. says
li. 10.

( Addition.
Lacedemon a noble City in Greece, called also Sparta, in the region of
Achaia. This Country is called Lacedemonie.

Of Lectonia. chap. 89.
LEctonia is a Province of Scithia: The men thereof be called Lectini, and be
men of comely stature, strong warriors and fierce. The soil of the country of
Lectonia bears well corn and fruit, and is full of moors and marreis in
diverse places, with many woods and rivers, waters, and beasts wild and tame:
and is strengthened with woods, moors, and marreis, and has little other
strength but woods, moors, and marreis. Therefore uneath that land may be
assailed in Summer, but in winter when waters and rivers be store.

Of Liuonia. chap. 90.
LIuonia is a special Province of the same country and language, and is
departed from Germania with a long space of the Occean. The man thereof be
called Liuones, and have wonderful manners and vsages: and the Germans turned
them from the false belief of feends, to ye worship and faith of one God. For
they worshipped many Gods, and asked aunsweres of feends with mil believed and
cursed sacrifice. And used auguries, and diuinations, and they used not to
burye the dead carcased, but the people made a great fire, and burnt them that
were dead all to ashes. After the death of one of their friends, they clothed
his kinsmen in new clothing, and gave them sheep and neat, and other beasts,
as he was worthy, his servants, men, and women, with other things, and them all
together they would burn with the dead man. And supposed that they that were
so burnt, should graciouslye come to that land of life with multitude of
servant, and of beasts that were so burnt, for his sake, and find the land
of temporal life and of wealth. With such error of ^^ends, this land was
bewitched in old time: now it is supposed, that by the grate of God, and by
strength of Germans this land is delivered of the foresaid errors, and many
countries and lands that belong thereto. (* Liuonia, a part of Sarmatia, beyond
Luten, Northward, having on the West the Sea called Germanicum.)

Of Licia, chap. 91.
LIcia is the name of a coast and of an haven of the sea, the chief city
thereof is called Listra. Out of that city men sail my Siria and Pamphilia into
Italy, as it is said Act. 28. This land by the true name thereof is called
Licaonia, and the Cities thereof were Listra and Derben. To these cities Paul
and Barnabas fled out of Iconius, and healed and saved a man in Listra, and
then the men of that country called Barnabas, Jupiter, and Paul, Mercurius,
and would have worshipped them, as it is written. Act. 14.

( Addition.
Lycaonia, a Country in Asia, after some writers, it is a part of Archadia.)

Of Lidia, Chap. 92.
LIdia is an old place of Kingdoms, the river Pactolus adorneth this land
with tokens and brooks of gold. Before this land was called Aurea Menea, and
might not suffice two brtheren that were kings, Liddus and Cirenus: Then by lot
Cirenus went out of that land with great strength of men, and occupied
countries in Gallia, and called the country Cirrenea. And Liddia had the name
of Liddus the other brother, that abode and reigned there. This land joins to
the less Phrigia in the west side, and has the city Smirma in the East side:
and the river Helles comes about it. By the fields thereof runs Pactolus
and Herinus, two rich rivers, with golden gravel, as Isidore says, libro. 15.

( Addition.
Lydia a Country in Asia, on the East joining to Phrigia, on the North to
Mysia, on the South upon part of Caria. In this region is the hill called
Tmolus, out of the which comes the river called Padolus. Tmolus is a
mountain in Lydia, whereon did grow great plenty of Suffron and bines: among
the gravel of the river Pactolus is found great plenty of grains of gold.)

Of Libia. chap. 93.
LIbia is a great land in Africa, and has that name, for that Libe ye
Southern wind blows from thence, as Isidore says lib. 15. Other men mean,
that Epscisus Jupiters son that builded Nephim also in Egypt, and get on his
wife Casorta, a daugther yt is called Libia, yt was after queen of Africa:
and by her name that land was after called Libia. And Libia is in the beginning
of Africa, and in the East side thereof is Egypt, and in the West be Sireos,
Maiores and Trogodites, and in the North side is the sea Libicum, and in the
South is Ethiopia and Barbaria: Therein be diverse nations and wildernesses:
to whom men may not come for wild beasts and sierce, for Serpents and for
Dragons that breed Cocatrices. Huc vsque Isid. li. 15.

Libia is a full hot land, and burning, and breeds in diverse places many
venomous beasts, and beasts wonderfully shapen, and many precious things in
diverse places, as precious stones, gold, and silver, much wheat, wine and
oil, and diverse manner of spicerie. Men of Libia came first of Puthericus the
son of Cham. Therefore a river that runs by the sea coast of Libia is
called Path: and all the land is called Puthensis: as the Gloss says super Genesis

( Addition.
Lybia was among the Greeks, the general name of all Africa: Notwithstanding
it is of the Romans taken only for that part of Africa, which is from
Egypt, to the West Occean, containing Syrenaica, Africa minor, Numibia, and
Mauritania. The Spaniards do commonly call them all Moors, Libia interior is
bounded on the North, with the two countries called ^auritania, with ^ffrike
the less, and Cerenaica, on the East with Ethiop, on ye South with Ethiop the
further, on the West with the Occean sea. In this country are the people called
Caramantes and Gatule D. Cooper.

Of Lothoringia, chap. 94.
LOthoringia is as it were the last province and end of Germania, and has that
name of Lotharius the king. In the East side thereof is Recia: yt is Beaban: In
the South side is the Rine, and Alsacia, and in the West Gallia Senonensis, and
in the North side is Gallia Belgica. By this land runs the river Mosa, and
in this land is ye city Metis, and is a country bearing in many places fruit
and wine, and is moisted with wells and rivers: therein be mountains, woods,
and groves, and many beasts wild and same. The people of this country be
meddeled of French men and of Germains. Therein are wonderful wells and
medicinable to help men of diverse evils if they drink thereof. Lothoringia, a
country called Loraine. Addition


Of Lucitania. cap. 95.
LVsitania is a province of Spain, and there is the river Paeum, and the town
Masia. The country is full of metal of gold and silver, iron, and Lead, white
and black, as Plinius says, li. 7. cap. 72.

Addition
Lucitania, the Realm called Portugal.

Of Mauritania. cap. 96.
MAuritania has that name of the color of men, as it were to understand, the
country of black men. For Mauron is Greek, and is to understand black. For as
French men be called Galli, and have that name of whitenes of men. So men of
this land be called Mauri, and have ye name of black color. The first
province thereof is Stiphensis: wherein is situate the town Stiphis: and the
country has the name of that town: and the other part and province is
Mauritania Cesariensis: yt is also called Colonia Cesaris, and the province
has ye name thereof: both provinces join togethers, and have ye country
Numidia in ye East side, and Maremagna in ye North side, and the river Malum in
the west, and the mount Astrixis in ye south. And ye mount departed the good
land from gravel. 112, that lies toward the sea occean. There is another
Mauritanta called Tingitana: and has that name of the city called Tingi. This
is ye last part of Africa, and rises out of seven mountains, and has the
river Malua in the East side, and the sea Caditanum in the North and the Occean
Athlanticum in the West, and Glansasium in the South: The men be spread into
the sea occean Hesperum. In ye country be wild beasts, Apes, Dragons,
Strucions, Estridges, and Elephants. Huc vsque Isi. li. 15. Also lib. cap. 2.
Plinius says, that in Mauritania be many men that be called Ancoles: and they
dwell beside the mount Athlant in a place full of woods, with plenty of
waters and of wells, where grows all manner of fruit without travail of
men, so the men that dwell there lack never plenty of liking. The place is
high above the clouds, and nigh to the circle of the Moon. And he tells
that often by night in that place is fire seen, and burning brands, and
wonderful sightes. Also there is heard, song of liking, melody of pipes, of
timbers, Labors, and Cymballs, as solemn Authors tell: The harmony of the
Zone
also there grow wonderful high trees, and the gum of them smells full
sweet, and be like Cipres. And some be grown as it were wr hair or with
wool, and thereof be clothes made by craft, as it were Bombex. Also there
grows an herb, called Euforbia, and has that name of him that found that
herb, the white juice thereof is wonderfully praised in cleerenesse of sight,
and in help against stinging of adders, and other venim, as he faith there.

( Addition
Mauritania, the country now called Morisco, of Moors, lieng on the West part
of Astrike, between the sea called Mare Mediteraneum, on the North, and Libia
on the south, Martianus says, yt in length it is 10.times 38.miles, which is
380. miles: It is divided into two countries, Tingitana, and Caesarencis,
Tingitana has on ye west side the occean sea, on the north yt straight of
Marroche, called Fretu^ Herculeum, unto ye river Masus, on the East
Caesariensis, on the South Getulia and Libia. Caesariencis has on ye west
Tingitana, on ye north the sea Sardoum, unto the river Amphagus, on the south
the mountains of Libia, and the country of Getulia.)

Of Macedonia. chap. 97.
MAcedonia had the name of Emacius the king, and was called at the first time
Emacia: But after that Macede the nephew of Deucalcon, was ruler thereof, he
changed the name, and called the land Macedonia by his own name, as Isidore
says, libr. 5. This land stretches to the sea Egenin in the East side, and to
Achnia in the South side, and to Dalmacia in the West, and to Messia in the
North, as he says. And was the great Alexanders Country, and is best country
in vemes of gold and silver. It broedeth a stone that is called Uiren: In that
country is mount Olimpus: and is so high that no clouds nor wind for rain
come on the top thereof, as he says.

Libet, 4 cap 20. Phinus speaks of Macedonia, and says, that Macedonia was
sometime called Emacia, and is set first of Empires of lands. This land
conquered Asia, Armenia, Hibernia, Albania, CAPPADOCIA, Siria, Egypt, Taurus,
and Caucasus. This land was Law among the Eactris, Pedes, and Persis, and had
in pussession all the East lands. This land is nurse of Inde, that followed
the steps of Liber Pater, and of Hercules. This is that Macedonia, of whom in
one day the Emperor Paulus Emilias took and solve 70. Cities, as he says.

( Addition
Macedonia a realm of Greece, first called Aemathia, on the North it bounddeth
(as Ptholomeus writteth) upon the sides of Dalmacia, Mysia superior and ^racia:
on the West it R^eticheth to ye sea Ionium. Puts deseribeth it to join South
and West to Thracia, and that the south side on the banks of Thellaba and
Magnetia, the North on Phoenea and Paphlayonia. That it has also on the south
Epirus, on the north Illyria, which varyeth not much from Solimus, who says
that it is divided from Thracia, with the river Strimon, it is now under the
Turk.)

Of Magnesia, chap. 98.
MAgnesia is a province of Greece, in the middle between Thessalis and
Macedonia: and contains many nations, cities, and towns, as Phanus says li.
4. cap. 10.

Magnesia a part of Macedonia. Addition


Of Messia, chap. 99.
MEssia has the name of Messis ripe corn, and is the first province that the
river Danubius closes unto the sea of middle earth, as Isidore says lib. 15.
This land joins to the mouth of Danobius in the East side, and to Tracia in
the North East, and to Macedonia in the south, and to Histria in the West, as
he says. And this country contains many nations, cities, and towns, and
bears good corn and fruit. Therein is plenty of veins, of oar, of Rones,
and metal.

( Addition.
Ptholomeus writes of two Countries called Mysia, the more and the less, and
both in Asia, beyond Eithinia, not far from Ida.)

Of Mesopotamia, cap. 100.
MEsopotamia has Etimelogia of Greek, for it is environed with two rivers,
Tigris in the East, and Euphrates in the West. And begins out of the North
between mount Laurus, and Caucasus: and in the south side thereof is Babylonia
and Chaldea, as Isido, says, lib. 15. This is a country in Asia, and is a huge
land in length and in breadth, plenteous of corn, of pasture, of beasts fame
and wildeifull of metal, and other RICHES.

( Addition.
Mesopotamia, a country in the East, lieng between the two noble Rivers.
Tigris and Euphrates, and has on the south Babylomon the North the great
mountains called Caucasus.)

Of Media, chap. 101.
MEdia has that name of Medue the king that first assailed that Province. And
Modia has the kingdoms of Parthia in the Wiest side, and is inuitaned with
Armenia in the North, and has the mountains Caspios in the East, and Bersida
in the South side. Only in this Country grows a tree that is called Medira,
and grows in none other land noor Country; as Isidore says, libro. 15.
This Country is full rich, it is moysted with many rivers, and is noble and
strong with Cities and Towns. In old time Kings of this land over, came the
great Babylonia, and the Emperors of Caldeis. Also the men of this land and
the Perses sailed into Africa, are meddled themselves with the U^baes, men of
Libia, and the Libees called them Mauros, in their corrupt and strange language
of Barbary, notwithstanding that Mauri in the Greek language are called at
black color, as Isidore says libro. 9.

( Addition.
Media a country in Asia, having on the North, the sea called Hiremum, on the
West Armenie the more, and Assyria or the south Persia on the East Hirca^ia and
Parthia.)

Of Melos, chap. 102.
MElos is an Island of the Ciclades, (...) to most round of all Islands, and
is therefore called Melos, that is to say, (...), as Isidore says, libro, 15.
And this land is full of much good, as Plinius says. And what lacks in this
land in quantitye of space, is rewarded and recovered in the goodness of the
ground.

( Addition.
One of the Isles of Sicilla, where inhabited huge Gyaunts, having but one eve in
their forehead.)

Of Midia, chap. 103.
MIdia is an Island in the Province of Irelande, and stands in the middle
place, as it is ^aide. And has that name of a thing that departed the land,
even in this parts among five daughters. And kept that part of the Island, as
his (...) use, us best and most noble place of the Country: And therefore as
moving Irish men that portion is ^s ^ealled Media, as it were in the middle of
other lands about. In this Country is good ground to bear corn and fruit.
Therein is plentye of pasture and of beasts, of Fish and of Flesh, of Butter
and Cheese, and of milk, and of other victualles. Therein be good River,
Wells and lakes, of many effects and virtues, as it is said, and there is
liking, aspect, good nyre and wholesome: And is right strange in the utter
parts with woods, and marreys, and multitude of strong Castles and towns:
for the common speech: this Country is called the chamber of Ireland. For
peace is there continually.

Mydia, an I Will named also Delos.

Addition
Of Misena. chap. 104.
MIsena a Province of Germania, and has that name of a City that is called
Missena: and joins to Boemis, and to Polonia in the East side, and to Baionia
in the South: To Saronia and to Turingia in the West: To Recia and to the
bordes of Rhenam in the North. And is a right wide land and a large: here
plain and there full of mountains, and is good land and full of pasture, and
moysted with best Matter. For that principal River. Albia runs forth in the
more part by the length, thereof. Also therein he strong Cities, Castles,
Tobones, and for(...). And generallye the people thereof be rich of Cattle, of
corn, of heas^en, and of metal. And though the man he long and very fair
strong and seemly of stature, yet nevertheless they ^^^ go^^^e and peaceable
by kind, and ^^^ ^^^e sierce in all thing the ^^e^nance her.

( Addition.
There are two Rivers of this name Albis, the one in Bosmia, which comes to
^all Gisle of Pra^e, the other in Germany.

Of Moseouia. chap. 105.
This chapter is added.
MOscouia, a long continued sail, rich of F^^^s, Tallows, Hiuers, and Hemp.
There is also good Tarrs and Mane. The comfort people b^^ of a ^onerly stature,
and of condour. Ur^wn; superstition^, and very lecherqus, the rest of their
manners traitable, the Most thaiter affirm, that their nation in old time was
called Russia, the speech is Slauoine tongue: Of the Princes that now reign in
Russia, the chief is the great Duke of Mascouts yt who possess with the
greatest part thereof. The second is the Duke of Lithuania: and the third the
king of Polome, who now obteineth the dominion of Polonie and Lithoania: In
authority and dominion over: his sabiectes, the Prince of Mosecuie, passes
all the Monarchies of the world, for he depriueth all his noble men and
Gentlemen of all their holds and munitions at his pleasure. He also uses
like authority over his Priests, and what he commands is done, without
acception of persons: he is very tyrannous in punishing. Moseour^ is dained
of the river Mosco. Read Sebastian Munster.

Of Mithilene, chap. 105.
MIthiline is an Island in the sea A(...) by the which land men (...) Cipred
into Italye, and ^^ is ^^^ to come to this Island I^y Bithala ^^^h it a cliffe
stretch dignity the Sea, and the Sea is departed and decade as it were double
by ^esting in ^^^^th or of gravel. And soshi (...) on the gravel be soon
b^o^^ (...) in Act. Apost (...) in the text and in the (...) though the ^^^ of
that ^^e be^^^^ ^^^ be they shawn and curetions to (...) that go there to
work, as mention is made there^ (...) Paul when he sailed ^^^ ar^ ^^n^e, (...)
there ^e escaped the (...) called (...) leaped out of the fire, and hung on
Paulas hand, and be swang the Adder into ye fire, and so the Ap^er was ^ad^t.
And also Paul did there many miracles, as it is said Act. ^^.

( Addition.
This owe the called Mitheline of the (...) of their books in his ^^^e does
declare hat baroinesse of the speath then used. The I Will is now called after
the Greeks phrase Meteline, and Melta, and last of all, Maltatnowe under the
government of the Turk. In this I Will was the Apostle Saint Paul bitten of the
Uiper, and escaped, death Act. 18.)

Of Nabathea. chap. 106.
NAbathea is a province of Arabia, and has that name of Nabe^le^isma. else
son: And is in the middle between Arabia and Judea; and rises from
Eupharates, and strecheth to the red Sea, as Isidore says, lib. 15. This land
is full fat, and bears welt corn and fruit, and seedeth many beasts. Therein;
he many precious stones and metal.

Lib. 6 (...) Plinius speaks of men of this province, and says, that
Nabetheis dwells dirts. Town that is called Betravita a ualley, and is almost
two mile broad, and is environed with high mountains that be hard to come to,
and a river runs between them, an(...) paces from the town that is called
Gaza, and 132: from the sea Petcisim.

( Addition.
Nabathaer, ^ people inhabiting the country called Arabia foeli ^, very
contienent, and in preparing and keeping, their commodities, right prudent, he
^trobo w^^tes^, in whom you may read shore abundauntlye of their manners, not
much expedient to be declared in this place.)

Of Norwegia, chap. 107.
NOrwaye is the largest Province of Europa, and is compassed with the Sea
wolting hall ^^ out, and is vunet the North^ and ^ret^hesh toward the
Countreye of Outhear. (...) South and in the East it is departed from Gothia by
(...) table^ Albi^ and is a right change and cold Countreye (...) Mountains
of W^^des, and of Croues. The men of this land had more by Fishing and hunting
then by broad: for corn is scarce there because of great cold. There be many
wild beasts, as white Bears: Also there be Caslors; beasts, that live both
in water and in land, and they geld themselves when they be hunted. Therein be
many beasts and rough wonderfully shapen. There be wells, and all Leather and
wood that is pat therein, turn anon into stone. In the North side of that
land many days space in the summer, about the stinting of the Sun, the Sun
is not seen go to covert or glaade. And so many days in the winter about the
stinting of the Sin, the Sun is not seen to show there. And so that time
men of that land most work by Candle. There is no Wheats, neither any Oil,
but, if they come out of other lands. The men be of great bodies and of
stature, of fair shape, and of great might and strength: And he strong
skumours and sea thieves, and mighty and bold of hearts. This land has
Gallacia in the East side, and Ilelandia in the North side, where the sea is
frore always, and Irish and British occean is in ye west, and ends in the
South, toward the Countries of Denmark and of Gothia.

Addition.
(This land is beyounde Denmark bearing toward Russie, and Frozeland.)

( Addition.
Norwegia or Norway, this was sometime a flourishing kingdom, whose dominion
comprehended Denmark, Friesland, and the Ila^ds far about, through discord it
came to subjection, and is now under ye dominion of Danes: from whence comes
the dried Haake called Stockfishrthe whales resort unto those northen coasts
that bear upon Wardhus, an Island, where there keep such a strange noise,
coming to engender, that it is oftentimes dangerous to ships, and there are
many taken, and of their flesh is made the common Oil. They are commonly
thirty yards in length. The Islands about Norway, are of such fruitful
pastures, that they bring, not their beasts into stables before the month of
November.)

Of Normania, chap. 108.
NOrmanop is called Normania, and Nuestria also, and has that name of the
proper Norwaies that came sailing out of Norwaye, and got the cliffe of the
French occean, and dwelled in the province there, about, and called the province
Normania. That country has the British occean in the East Northeast side, and
the sea of Gyan in the West, and France in the South, and occean in the North.
The soil thereof bears well corn, and is fat, and is noblye endued with
fields, woods, and meades: And is full strong of havens of the sea, and with
most noble cities and towns. The chief city thereof is called Rothomagus,
Roan, a noble city upon the river ye men of the country call Seyn: The men
thereof be strong and great warriors, gentle in clothing, sober in speaking,
mild in heart, and will, and peaceable in company.

( Addition.
The people and inhabitants of this Province or country were the last that with
William Duke of Normandy, Ann. 106and
subdued England.)

Of Numidia, chap. 109.
NVmidia is a country in Africa, and stretching to Carthage, and begins at
the river. Arnisiga, and ends in the land of Cogitanes. And has the place
that is called Sires minores in the East side, and stretches to the sea in the
North, and is before Sardinia, and has Mauritania Stiphensis in the west side,
and Ethiopes in the South side. And is a fair country with fat fields in many
places, and wild beasts in weeds: there it is dry, it breeds horse and wild
Asses. The further part thereof is full of Serpents and of beasts. In that
land is proper Marble that is called Numedium, as Isidore says, libro 15.

( Addition.
Numidia, a country between Carthage and Mauritania in Affrike, and now is
called Barbaria, where Masinissa did sometime reign. In that Country is found
most excellent Marble. The chief City there was named Cirta, which was very
strong, and so puissaunt of men, that in the time of Strabo, it might
arm.10000. horsemen, and 20000. footmen.

Of Narbonia. chap. 110.
A Part of France that lies upon the sea of middle earth, is called Narbon,
as Isidore says, and has that name of the river Narbo, that departs that
land and Italy in one side, and mountains Alps depart that land and Italye
in that side. And now some men call that land Gallia Brachata. No province is
worthy to be set before Narbon in array of men, in worthynesse of manners and
thewes, in plenty of riches: and shortly to speak, it should more freelye be
called Italye then a province. Therein be most noble rivers: among whom the
French Rodan is most plenteous. And comes out of ye mountains and runs by
the Province of Narbon: therein be many ponds and havens and forlands: among
who^ Marcel is chief. The length of all the province of Narbon contains
three hundred and tree score thousand paces, as Agrippa says, Hue vsque
Plinius.

( Addition.
Narbonensis prouincia, a part of Gallia, having on the East the mountains
Alps: on the South Mare Gallicum: on the West the mountains Pirenei: on the
North, the mountains Iura. It conteyneth the countries called Sauoy, Dolphyny,
Province, and Languedocke. It was in the old time called Gallia grachata.)

Of Ophir. chap. 111.
OPhir is the name of a Province in Inde, and has that name of one Ophir,
which was a man that came of the children of Heber: and this land was in old
time called Terra aurea, The golden land. For therein be golden mountains: in
the which be Lions, and most cruel beasts. And so there dare no man come but
in this manner. A Ship stands nigh to the cliffe, and men go on land and
gather the earth that Lions and other beasts dig with their claws, and they
bear that earth to the Ship.

And if they see that beasts come, they take the Sea with have, as Rabanus
says Super illum locum: Cum venisset naues Salomonsis in Ophir sumptum Inde
aurum, etc. 3. Regum. 9. cap. and Plinius says nigh the same. Sometime this
Province sent out gold and precious stones, Crisoprassus, and Adamants, and
trees Thinum, and Ebenum: and Birds, Popiniayes, and Perockes and Iuorie, and
Apes, and other beasts wonderfully shapen, as Isidore says, and Plinius also.
Men come into this Country Ophyr from Judea by long sailing about in the red
sea by the Island Osiongaber: the which the great Alexander destroyed
afterward. The men of the land of Ophir came of the lignage of Heber, and
dwelled and occupied the Country and lands from the river Capue, unto the
Country of Inde, that now is called Rhetia, as Josephus says. And all the
Province has that name Ophir, of one Ophir the nephew of Heber, as Rabanus
says super 2. Para. cap. 8. This Ophir was the son of Jectan, the son of
Heber, as it is said Genes. 10. This Country is nigh the land E^ulath, about
the which runs the river Gyon, as it is said Genesis.2. And it is like
thereto in golden mountains and sweet spicery, and in rich pirreye, as
Plinius says.

( Addition.
Arniensis ege^, the Country about Naruia (a Town in Italye as some write)
where the ground with rain waxes dustie, and in dry wether durtie.)

( Addition.
Neapolis, a noble City of Campania, set in the borders of the Sea called
Mare Mediteraneum, and was first called Parthenope. Of this citis the countries
of Campania, Apulia, and Calabria, be now called Regnum Ne^politanum, the
Realm of Naples. There is also a City of this name in Affrike, and another in
Cana.)

Of Hollandia. cap. 112.
HOlland is a small Province by the mouth of the Rine, whereas the Rine runs
into the sea, and stretches to^ Braban, and is nigh to Phrigia in the South
side, and to the Occean in the East side, and joins to the British sea
Westwarde, and is nigh to the nether France that is called Gallia Belgica in
the North side: and to Flaunders in the West side. This land is full of marreys
and of water, compassed nigh all about with arms of the Sea, and of the Rine,
as it wore an Island, Therein be lakes and many pondes, and is full of good
leese and pasture. And is therefore full of diverse beasts in many places
thereof. The sail thereof bears well co^ne, and in many places is full of
woods with many manner of good ven^son. Also in many places the ground is glewie,
and of it they make good fuel: and the land is rich of merchaundise that
pass by the sea and rivers. The chief city thereof is called Inferius
Traiectum in Latin, and the nether Verich in the language of Germania: for it
belongs to Germania touching the situation, manners, and lordships, and also
in language and tongue. The men be seemly of body, strong of might, hardy and
bold of heart, fair of face, honest in manners, devout to God, peaceable and
true to men: and take less heed to prays and to robbery, then other nations
of Germany.

Of Orchada. chap. 113.
ORchada is an Island of Occean by the British sea in Europa: Thereof many
other Islands that be nigh thereto have the name, and be called Orcades and be
33. in all.20. thereof be in desert, and men inhabit nigh.13. as Isidore
says, libro. 15. cap de Insules.

( Addition.
Orchades, 30. Islands in the sea by Scotland.)

Of Paradiso. chap. 114.
PAradise is a place in the parts of the East, the name thereof is turned out
of Greek into Latin, and is understood an Orchard, and is called Eden in
Hebrew: that is understood liking among us, as Isidore says lib. 15. cap. 2.
For Paradise is an Orchard of liking, as he says. For therein grows al manner
trees, and all manner trees bear aples, therein is ye tree of life. There is
no passing cold nor passing heat, but always temperate weather and air. In
the middle thereof springs a Well, that finds water enough is that place:
that well is parted in four streams and rivers, the way thereto is stopped
and unknown to mankind, after the sin of ye first man. For it is closed and
compessed al about with a fiery wall, so that the burning thereof reaches nigh to
heaven. And there is ward and defense of Angelics to keep Paradise, upon the
front wall, ordained of God to hold of wicked spirits. And so fire is ordained
to hold out wicked men, and good Angels to hold out evil Angels: So that
there is no way for evil spirits, nor for evil men to come to Paradise. Huc
vsque Isidorus li. 15. cap. 3. Vbi tractat de regionibus.

Also ca. 2. super Genesis the master of stories, says in this manner: God from
the beginning of the world ordained and araide a place of liking with herbs
and trees, and in the beginning of the world, that is in the East, and that
place is most merry and far in space of land and of sea, out of the country
that we dwell in: And is so high that it reaches almost to the circle of the
Moon: Where also by reason of the height, the water of the great flood could
not come, as he says. John Damascene speaks of paradise and says: because
God would make man after his own Image and likeness of unseen and seen
creatures, he create and made him as a King and Prince of all the earth, and of
all things in the earth, and so he made a Country and a land for him: in
which man should abide and lead a blissful life. And this land and Country
is called Paradise: and is set in place of liking with Gods own hand, and
planted with pleasure in the East, and that land is higher then all other
lands, and shines with most temperate air and clear always, full of plants,
flourishing; and leaves of good smell, and full of light bright shining of
fairness, joy, and bliss, it is the oes^er, passing the wit and
understanding of sensible creatures the kingdom of God, worthy for him that is
after his Image: in which nore unreasonable beast dwells but only man Gods
own hand^worke.

Also Serabus says and Beda also, that Paradise is a place set in the East,
and is departed from countries and lands that men dwell in, with occean and
mountains that be between. And is most far, and stretchet in height as it
were to the circle of the Moon, and was most convenient place to an innocent
man: for there is most fair wether and temperate. And there is never passing
cold nor passing heat, but everlasting fair weather and temporate, as
Isidore says. Also for plenty of all good. For as Austen de ci^tate Dei. 14.
ca. 10. says: What might they dread, where might they be sorry in so great
plenty of so much good, there nothing grieved, there was all that good will
desired: there was not that should offend or grieve the flesh nor the soul of
man yt loved bliss. Also for most mirth, for ye place was ^eller of all
sairnesse, as Damascene says: And that witnesses ye everlasting fairness of
trees, of flowers, and of spraies: For the trees wither not, nor their leaves
nor flowers fade. Also for most solace and mirth, and that witnesses
fairness of fruit: for there is all manner trees fair to sight and sweet to
eating. Genesis.2. Also that witnesses beautifulness of light. For
cleerenesse of light is proportioned to pureness of air, as Beda says. Also
for noble ground and plenteous, and that witnesses the multitude of springing
wells. For it is said Genesis.2. That a well sprung and moisted Paradise, the
which well is divided in four rivers. Also for surenesse of place, and that
witnesses the highness thereof: for it touches the circle of the Moon,
(...) Beda says and, Isidore also. That is to understand, that it stretches
to the air that is quiet above, after this troublous air, where is the end
and bond of moist erhalations and vapors. The passing forth and the rising of
such exhalations and vapors is listened to the body of the Moon, as Alexander
expounds: For Paradise reaches not fully to the circle of the Moon, but it
is said that it touches the circle of the Moon by a manner figurative
speaking, yt is called Hiperboli loqoutio: yt it might be known that the most
highness of Paradise passes yt nether earth without comparison. Also for
continual being without corruption: and that witnesses their long life
therein. For there is Elias and Enok yet alive without corruption, as the master
says in stories. For nothing alive may there die: and that is no wouber of
Paradise. For we know that in Ireland is an Island, in which dead bodies rot
not: and another in which men many not die: but in the last end they must be
borne out of ye Island. Look before in Ibernie, in literal.

Of Paradise, and of the situation thereof was opinion among nations, as Plin.
says, where he speaks of the Islands of Fortune, of which Isi. speaks also
li. 15 Among the which Islands in one yt bears all good: There the ground
bears al manner of fruit without tilling. On downs trees be always clothed
with fair green twigs and spraies with sweet fruit and good, where corn
grows as herbs and grass. Therefore error of nasions and ditie of secular
prophets, for goodness of ye ground meaned, yt these Islands were Paradise: and
yt is error. For the foresaid Islands be in ye west before ye left side of
Mauritania in the occean, as Isi. says, li. 15. And Paradise is in the East.
And in the top of the highest mountain of the^ falls waters, and makes
there a right great lake or pond: and makes so great noise in ye falling, that
men of the country by ye lake be deaf borne: because of passing huge noise yt
corrumpteth the wit of hearing in children, as Basilius says in Exameron and
Ambrose also and from that other place, as stoin one well head, come these
four rivers, that is to wit, Phison, that is likewise called Ga^^^ Gion, that
is also called Nilus, Tigris, and Euphrates. Of ye which rivers is special
mention made in Gen^. Look before sir F^^^stach de fluminibus.

Of Parthia. chap. 115.
PArthia, is the greatest Country in Asia, and stretches from the Borders of
Inde, unto the end of Mesopotamia. And for the great strength of the
Parthians, Assiria and other countries took the name of Parthia. Therein are
many particular Provinces, that is tolwit, Acathsia, Parthia, Assiria, Meosa
and Persia. The which Countries join togethers, and begin at the river Indus:
and be closed with the river Tigris. There in many places be sha^rpe the
hu^aines and many rivers, and the provinces have their own boundings, and have
the names of their Authors, in the manner: for Ara^usia has that name of a
town of that land. Men that came out of Scithia into Parthia, and dwelled
therein, gave to their own name. In the South side thereof is the Red sea, and
in the North Hircania, and in the west Media. Eighteen regions thereof stretch
from the sea ^espy to the Scithians. In Parthia are beasts wonderfully shape,
as Plini, says li. 5. for therein be fierre beasts, Perdes, Tigers, Linces,
and Adders that be called Alpedes, and Serpents most cruel and sterce by
kind. Also the people be hard and cruel and scarce in vittailes, and hold
them content with salt and Cardamonium, for all manner posage and food, as he
says there. And there it is said in Glo. super Dan. de Persarum regione and
Parthorum, es. 7. of a beast that is like to a Bear. TREVISA. He that will
know Cardanomium, look after in 17. book ca. de Cardamonio.

( Addition.
Parthia, a country in Asia, which has on the South the Red sea: on the
North, the sea called Hircanum: on the East, the people called Arij^on ye west,
the t^alme called Media.

Of Palestina. chap. 116.
PAlestina is a province of Siria, and was sometime called Philistea, and now
the chief City thereof is called, Aschalena, and was in old time called
Philistim, and of that city all the country had the name in old time, and was
called Palestina or Palestia, as Isid. says li. 15. and says the same li. 9.
in vocabul, gr^dium, Philistei (says he) be they that were called Palesteni.
Hebrews have not the letter P. but they take thereof, a letter of Greek that
is to wit Ph. that is in latin. Fi. And so they say, Philisteis for Palestins,
and so they be called Philistei of their own Citte, that was sometime called
Philistin. And they were sometime called Alophth, that is so understand,
alyens and strangers: for always they were strange to the children of Israel,
for they were departed fair out of their company and kindred, as he says there.
And as Isid. says li. 15. this land has the Red sea in the East side: and
nighesh to Judea in ye South side: and is closed in the North side with the
borders of Tiriis: and ends in the west at ye bounds of Egypt, as it is said
there. The Philistei came first of Chanaas son, that was called Chenlusim.
The Philistines came first of him and Chaetratinie also, as it is said Gene.
10. As Flerodotus says, men be always false and guilefull and wily and grievous
Enemies to the Kingdom of Israel, and that for they had envy at the
prosperitee of the Jews, and also for they were proud of the wealth of their
own land, and of great Islands that they had won with might and with strength,
as he says.

Of Pamphilia, chap. 117.
PAmphilia is called Isauria also, for yt it stands in all blasts of winds,
as Isi. says li. 15. and is a province in the less Asia. The chief city
thereof is called Seleucia, as he says. Seleucius Antiochus builded that
city, and Antiochia also, as Isi. says li. 15. And this country is nigh the
sea between Silicia, and Bithinia: out of this country men sail by the Ila^d
Cipres into Italy, as we find. Act. 17

( Addition.
Pamphilia, a Region in the less Asia, lieng on the South side of ye mountain
Taurus, and Marches on ye Realms of Phrigia and Caria.)

Of Pannonia that is also called Hungaria. cap. 118.
PAnnonia, is a Province in Europe, wherein dwelled the Hunies sometime: and
has the name of the same people, and is commonly called Hungaria, and is
double, that is to say, borderring near another Province, as Orosius says,
the more and the less. The more is in the farther Siria, beyond the marreys
Meotides. The Hunies came first out of that land because of hunting, and
followed the trace of Harles and of other beasts far ways and space of
marreys and of lands, and found the land of Pannonia at the last, and turned
home again, and gathered company, and came again into Pannonia, and put out
the men that dwelled first there, and gave a name to the land and to the men,
and called the land Hungaria, as Herodotus says. This Province is a part of
Messia, and the River Danubius lies thereby, and ouerfloweth it, and makes it
plenteous, as Isidore says. This land has Gallitia in the East side, and
Grecia in the South, Dalmatia and Italye on the West, and Germania in the
North, as he says, and is most greatest land, and plenteous, and most
strengthened with woods and with mountains, and moysted with many rivers and
waters, and most rich with veins of gold and of other metal. Therein be
most great mountains, in whom is found diverse kind of marble. Also in some
mountains thereof is best salt dug. Pannonia is full of beasts wild and
tame, for plenty of leese and of pasture, and the soil thereof bears well
corn and wine in many places. Therein be many Nations that differ greatly,
not only in language and tongue, but also in manners and in living, as
Herodotus says. Also lib. 15. Isido. says, that Pannonia has that name of
the mountains yt be called Pennini, which mountains depart Pannonia from
Italy. The Country is strong, and glad and merry, and is compassed in with
three Rivers, that is to wit, Danubius, Sana and Tycia.

And this land has Messia in ye East side, Histeich in the Northeast, and the
mountains Alps Pennini in ye South: and that part of France that is called
Gallia Belgica, in the West: and stretches to the River Danubius in the North,
which River runs by Germania. And this River is called Hyster also, and
runs about a land beside Pannonia, that is named Hystria.

( Addition.
Pannonia, the Country now called Hungaria, which took the name of another
Hungaria, now called Iulira. It lies in the North part of the world, not
far from Tanai^, and is tributary to the Moscouites. The bounds of Hungary
are now much larger, that they were of old time, and has on the west Ostrike
and Beam: on the South, the part of Slauonie, that lies on the Sea
Adriaticum: on the East, Seruia: on the North, Polonia and Mosconia. The
Country is fertille of grain, and rich of gold and silver: and as the
Inhabitants do report, there is a River, where in if iron be oftentimes dipped,
it will be turned into Copper. This noble Realm is now destroyed, and under
the captivity of the Turks, which is much to be feared, all Christendom
shall repent: for it was sometime repeated, the puissaunt Bulwark of all
Christian Realms, against the intolerable vyolence of Saracens and Turks.)

( Addition.
Pannonia superior, the Country called Austria and Styria. In this Country
stands Vienna. Pannonia inferior, has on the North Dunowe and Germany: on
the West, Pannonia superior: on the South, Liburnia: on the East Iazyges. This
Country is almost wholly under the Hungares.)

Of Paron. cap. 119.
PAron is an Island, and has that name of Paranto the son of Planto, that
called the town Paros by his own name, and the Island also, as Isidore says
li. 15. Therein is most white marble, that is called Parium, and there grows a
stone called Sarda, that is better than Marble, and most profitable among
precious stones, as he says.

Of Pentapoli. chap. 120.
PEntapoli is a country in the march of Arabia and Palestina, and has that
name of five cities of evil men, yt were desroyed with fire of heaven. That
land was sometime more plenteous, than is now the country of Jerusalem, and is
now desert and buried: for because of trespass and sin of men of that
Country, fire come down from heaven, and burned the country to ashes, that
lasts evermore: the shadow and some likeness thereof, is yet seen on trees.
For there grow green apples, and seem so ripe, that men desire to eat of
them, and if they take them in their hands, they change and fall into ashes
and smoke, as they were yet burning. Hue vsque Isido. li. 15. This province was
so rich before the destruction thereof, that among stones thereof were Saphires
found and other precious stoanes. Among the earth thereof gold was found, as
Job touches saying: The place of Sapphire, the stone thereof, and the soil
thereof is gold. Job. 28. But afterward all that country was turned into a
dead sea, and is called the dead sea. For it gendreth nothing that is alive,
nor receives nothing alive, for therein it suffers neither fish nor fowls,
neither ships, nor boats: for all thing therein that has no life, sinketh to
the ground. A lantern with light therein, fleeteth above the water: and
sinketh to the ground, if the light be extinct, as Isi. says, li. 14. Look
before, De marl mortuo, in tractatu marium and aquarum.

In the brinke of this sea, about the countries that be nigh to Sodoma, grow
the foresaid apples, and be fair to sight, and stinking and bitter in the
toast, as the Gloss says sup. 2. Epi. Pet. cap. 2.

Also another Pentapolis is in Africa, in the province of Libia, and has that
name of the five Cities, that is to say, Beruice, Centria, Apolonia, Polo, and
Tholomais: of the which Tholomais, and Bernices have the name of Greeks.

This Pentapole is ioyened to Libia Cerenensis, and belongs to the Bordets
thereof, as Isid. says li. 15.

( Addition
Pentapolis, a country between Palestine and Arabia, wherein were ye Cities of
Sodom and Gomor, burned by the vengeance of God, for sin against nature.)

Of Persia. cap. 121.
PErsia or Persida, is a country in Asia, counted among the kingdoms of
Parthes, and stretches downward from the East to the Indes, and has the Red
sea in the West side: and touches Media in the North, and has Germania in the
South, that joins and belongs to Persida, and their noblest town is
Incussa. In Persida, Art Magike was first found. Thither Nemroth the Giant
went, after the confusion of languages, and taught the Perses to worship the
Sun, for men nigh those countries, worshipped the Sun that they called Hell in
their language, as Isi. says li. 15. Persia has the name of Perseus ye king,
that came out of Greece into Asia, and daunted ye strange nations with strong
war and long lasting, and was victor at the last, and gave his name to ye men
that were his subjects, as Isi. says li. 9. and ca. de vocab. gentium. And he
says, that before Cirus time, the Perses were accounted unworthy, and as it
were of no reputation among Nations, and the Medis were always most mighty, as
he says. Persida is full wide and wealthy yt of people: there in is the noble
city, that is called Elam, and has that name of Elam the son of Sem: of him
ye Perses came first, as Isidore says. And the first Perses were called
Elamites, and had first that name of Elam. In Persida is a City most noble:
that was called Elemaida, and now is caled, Persipolis, thereof is mention
made. 1. Mac. 6. and 2. Macha. 9. In Persia, was the City Elemaida, most noble
and most rich of gold and of silver.

And therein was a full rich temple, and plates of gold, habourioynes and
shields, that Alexander of Macedonia the King left, etc.

( Addition
Persia and Persida, a Country in the East part of the world, which has on
the North, Media: on the West, Suhana: on the East, Carmania: on the South, the
Persian sea, called Sinus Persicus, where now the Sophy reigns.)

Of Pirenea. chap. 122.
PIrenea, is a province in Europa, an high land and full of mountains. The
mountains thereof, are called, Montes Pirenei, and they stretch from the South
toward the West, and depart full great Countries a sunder: For those
mountains called Alps Pirenei, depart between Spain and France, as well
France Narbonens as Lugdune^s, and has Germania in the East side, and Italy in
the South, and Spain in the West, and France in the North. And the mountains
Pirenei have ye name of often fire of lightning: For Pir is Greek, and is to
say fire, and these mountains Pirenei, be often smit with lyghtening, as
Isidore says lib. 15. cap. 3. De montibus. Pirenea is head and well of many
great rivers, mother of most great woods, nourse of many beasts wild and
tame, and contains veins of metal. Therein be strongly fortified Cities,
Castles and Towns: and therein be nourished many diverse Nations and people,
that be diverse both in manners and language, as Herodotus says.

Addition
Pyrenei montes, Mountains which do divide France from Spain, and are of a
marvelous height.)

Of Pigmea. chap. 123.
PIgmea is a Country in Inde toward the East, in the mountains about the
Occean. Therein dwell the Pigmeis, men little of body, uneath two Cubits
long, as Isidore says and Plynius also.

The Pigmeis gender in the fourth year, and age in the seventh. These gather
an host, and ride upon Weathers, and fight with cranes, and destroy their
neasts, and break their eggs, yt their enemies be not multiplied, as Plin.
says lib. 5. ca. De hominibus Indie monstruosis. Look before.

Addition.
Pigmei a dwarfish people in the uttermost mountains of Indie (as Plynie
says) inhabiting in a very wholesome, fertile, and pleasant country. In
height they are not past one cubite: and their women the fifth year of their
age, bears children, and in the eight they were old. The report is, that
riding on Wethers and Goats, armed with bows and arrows, they go in ye spring
time in great companies toward the sea side, to destroy the neasts, eggs, and
young breed of Cranes: which otherwise would increse to such multitudes, that
they should not be able to resist them. Their houses in steed of tile and
thatch, are covered with claye and egg shells.)

Of Pictauia. chap. 124.
PIctauia, Poydow is a Province of France Narbonens. Pictes, Englishmen and
Scots sailed thither in old time, and dwelled there, and gave at the last the
name of their offspring to ye men and to the land. as Herodotus writer of
stories tells. The which men came sailing out of the Countries of Britain,
and they sailed along the sea coast of the Occean of Guyan, and obtained a
place in the country at last, against men of the land, not without strong
battle, and builded and called the chief Town, Pictauium by the name of
Pictes, as Herodotus says: and now that town is called Poycters, and they
called a great Country about Pictauia, that is Peyto. Laire runs by this
land, and this land stretches along upon the sea Occean, and has Spain in
the East side, and the British Occean in ye South, and the less Britain in
the North, and the coast of Gyan in the West. This little Province is noble and
solemn in diverse things. For it is said that the ground bears welnigh all
manner Corn, fruit and wine, and is rich of all good that the ground
breeds. There be solemn havens of the sea, and noble cities and towns,
rivers and wells, most merry flews, meades and woods, and is most strengthened
with Rocks on the Sea side, as it fares at Rochell, uneath men may come to
that town, see straightness of place and of the sea, as be with. The men
thereof be meddeled w(...)tre^th men in tongue and in manets^ therefore, though
they have of the first Pictes, that men of that Nation, should be kindly strong
of body, and seemly of shape: yet of French men, they take, that they be
fierce; and more sharp of wit, than other Nations nigh about them. And no
wonder for as Isi. says li. 9. by diversity of heaven, face of men and
colors, quantities of body, wit of hearts be diverse. Therefore we fair, that
Romans be sad, the Greeks light, the A^trees guilefull, and French, men
kindlye fierce and sharp of with that makes kind of climes; as it is said
there. Therefore men of Peyto be strong of body, fair of face, bold of heart,
guilefull and deceiuable of wit, as Herodotus says.

Of Picardia, chap. 125.
PIcardia, is a province in France Belgica, also has that name of a town or
of a Castle that is called Ponticon, us Herodotus says, De regionibus, for it
is said, that the town that now is called Pichen, in the march of that land,
had Lordship unto the British Occean, in old time. And it is supposed, that
ad the men of that country had afterward the name of that towns. Their land,
and soil bears well corn and fruit, and is moist with welden and rivers,
and full of people, and to strengthened with noble cities, and most (...)
famous castles came towns as Belgue, yt is called Belgie count, and Amblanis.
Arrabatum Marium, and Lord^^um, as he faith. This province has the River of
the Rine of Germany, in ye East side, cover France in the Southward the Occean
of France at the West, and the more Britain, that is England in the ^oeth
Picardy is double, the over, that is next to France: and the other that is the
nether land, yt joins near to Flaunders and to Brabau, and is called
Baipula. Of both countries the men be seemly of stature, fair of face, bold of
heart, light and sharp witted, clear of understanding, ^ulde of will and
affection, and more great and boytous of language and tongue, than other
Nations of France.

Of Ramathea. chap. 126.
RAmathea, which also is called Chanir, is a region besides Derabilum, and has
that name, of the city Ramatha, in the, which Samuel ye Prophet was borne, and
has another name, and is called Arimathia. Of that city was Joseph the
righteous man, that with Nichodemus anointed our Lords body, and buried it,
worshipfully, as the Gloss says super Lucica^ 24. And this city is in the
linages of Ephraim, in Jury, in the most high mountains: and is therefore
called Ramathea, that is to say, high: for Rama is high, as Jerome says.
Though this land be full of mountains: yet it hears well corn and fruit,
vines and Olyues, and is moist with wells, and most healthful with clean and
pure air, and is full strong and steadfast in high places, as Jerome says, and
is full couenable place to stand in, to wait and espy far about.

Ramathea, called Chanir in the old Copy. Addition


Of Rencia. cap. 127.
REncia, is a province by the Rine, and is that Country, about the which the
Rine runs and has that name Rencia, for it is nigh the Rine, as, Isi. says
li. 15. And is a Country that has many full strong cities and towns. The
ground there of bears well corn and, wine in many places. The men be strong
and hardy, according with Germans in life and manners: but then love not
theft and robbery.

( Addition.
Rhenus, a notable, river in Germany, called the Rheyne.

Of Riualia. chap. 128.
RIualia is a little Province, and was sometime strange, and far from g^^^
belief, and is now under the belief of Christ, and is subject to the Kingdom
of Denmark. A part thereof is called Vironia; and has that name of Virore,
greenesse, for therein grow many herbs and grass. There is good pasture and
leefe, and woods in many places: the ground thereof bears meanly corn. This
land is moist with waters and ponds: there is plenty of fish of the sea, and
of lakes and ponds: there are many flocks and herds, and beasts. And this land
is joined to Scithia, and is departed from the Norpeges and Megardes, only
with a River that is called Narua, as Herodotus says.

Of Rinchouia. chap. 127.
RInchouia is a little land, and stretches from the city Maguncia upon the
brinke of the river of Rine, between mountains unto the town, which is
called Pinguia: and is called Rinchouia, of the river Renum, that runs
thorough the middle thereof. And though the land be little, yet it is in each
clyffe of this Rine, marvelous merry and right plenteous: for it is so fair
and goodly; and so incredible plentiful, that it is high delight, pleasure and
comfort, not only to them that dwell there, but also to them that pass that
way, and pleases and feeds them as an Ortharde of passing liking, and the
ground thereof is so sweet and so fat, that it brings forth right swiftly,
fruit and corn, in right great plenty. There in the same field grow apple
trees of diverse kinds, and nufs also: and yet notwithstanding so great plenty
of fruit, in the same field, grows well good corn. Also diverse trees let
not the vines: but in the same little field, grow together corn, wine, nuts
apples, Corbas, pears, and many other fruits. There be hot wells needful
medicine to bodies, that spring out of the ground.

There is much good needful to mankind, that were to long to rehearse.

Of Romana prouintia, cap. 128.
THe province of Romans, as Varro says, is nigh containing of all the world
wide, whersoeuer were any countries and lands that men dwell in. For might and
power of the Romans subdued all the parts of the world wide, and there was no
corner of the world wide, but it felt the sword fo ye host of Rome, as he
says. But sometime a part of Italy was called Romulea in old time, and had
that name of Romulus, that builded the City of Rome, and gave the name to the
men and to the City, as Isi. says li. 15. And there it is said, that the
Country was first called Saturnia, and had that name of Saturnus ye king, ye
first tought men of that country to till land: and for the passing plenty
that they had, they called him Saturnus, and worshipped him at the last, as it
were a God, among the stars. And afterward they were called Latini, and had
that name of Latinus the King, which after they were called Romani of Romulus
that enlarged and fortified the City. And there after they were called
Quirites, for ye Romulus was called Quirinus, for he used always a spear that
is called Quirie in the language of Sabins, as Isi: says lib. 9. cap. 1. de
gentium non-inatione. A pen may not write at full the praising of this
kingdom, and of the Kings thereof, neither a book may contain at full, ye
great deeds of Romans. Who that has lyking to know their deeds, read he in
the first book Machabeorurt. and or ^here de wonders shortly rehearsed at
their virtues and of their might.

( Addition.
Romulus, as the Roman stories affirm, the son of Mars by Isia yt daughter
of Numitor, but more berely ye son of Amuhus his great b^^h with of purposes
ranished Illa in the dark, being a virgin actual, to have asquartall to put
on to death: for king Numitor, h^^ a brother named Amulius, of nature wicked,
fleirs and cruel, who not ^^ving content to take the kingdom from his elder
brother and cast him in prison, did also murdere his son Laulus; and under
color of honor, made his daughter Il^a a virgin vestall, under the hands of
perpetual chastity, that she might not have any issue. But the being
afterward found with child by Mars, as the Romans would have men believe, was
delivered of two somies: which Amulius commanded to be cast into Tyber, and
their mother according to the law of the Ue:stalls to be baried quick. Is it
happened at that time the river of Tiber was swollen over the banckes, so that
men could not come to the deep of the channel: wherefore they that had the
charge of drowning the children, cast them into the land flood, where the water
suddenly falling, left them alive, and so were they found by Faustulus ye
Kings, shephard, who brought them home to be kept and nourished, of his wife
Laurensia, which because she was a strumpet, was named of the shepherds Lupa,
whereof rose the Fable, that the founders of the Roman City, were nourished
of a the Woolfe. When these children came afterward to age, being instructed
by Faustulus of their stock, and beginning, they gathered a band of
shepheardes, killed Amulius, restored Nursitor to his kingdom, and on the
mount, Palatine, where they were brought up, began to build them a new City.
And because they were Twins both of one age, there fell controuersis between
them, which should give name to their new City: This contention so grew,
from words to tumult and strokes, that in the vickering Rhemus was slain,
although the more common opinion be, that he was put to death, because that
scornfully he lept over the new walls of the City.

Romulus being then king alone, peopled his City by erecting a Sanctuary, for
sauegarde of all transgressors, that would come thither: ordained an hundred
Senators, called Fathers: procured wives for his people, by rape of all the
maidens of the Country, resorting thither, to solemn gains and plays:
overcame the people of Cenina, and slew their King: vanguished the Sabines and
people of Atemna, and received them into his City. with other diverse valiant
acts. Which when he had done, on a time calling an Assemblye, at the Marrice
called Caprea, in a great Tempest suddenly was gone, no man could tell how: as
it was thought, for his stearne government murdered priuelye of the Senators,
who to please the People, fained that he was a God, and named him Quirinus.
Under which name, the Romans ever after worshipped him.)

Of Romania. chap. 131.
ROmania, is called the new Nation of Romans: for Ne is Greek, and is to
say new. For since that time that Constantine translated the seat of the
Empire of Rome, out of Rome to Constantinople, a City of Thracia: all the
Country and Regions of Greeks were called Romania, that is as much to say, as
new Rome, as Rabanus says. Therefore unto this day, the Greeks call not
themselves Greeks in their common language, but rather Romanos. Look before De
Gree, in litera G. where thou shall find many other things of the Greeks.

Of Rodo, chap. 132
ROdus is the first Island of the Islands Ciclabes in the East side, where the
Capitoil of Robus was first found, while the City was there first builded. In
this City was one Coldsus of Brass, seventy Cubits high. In this same. He
were an hundred less Colosus, as Isidore says li. 15. cap. 1. de vocab.
Ciuitatum. Rodus is the same Island that is called Ciprus, as Isidore says, in
the same place.

( Addition
In times past, many Christians resorted thither to defend Christendom from
the Saracens: but after through treason the Turk wan it.)

Of Ruthia, chap. 133.
RVthia or Ruthenia is a Province of Messa, in the March of the less Asia.
And has the Countries of Romans in the East side, and Gothia in the North:
Pannonia in the West, and Grecia in the South. And this land accords most
with Boemes and Sclauones in language and tongue: and this Country has the
name of some part thereof, and is called Galatia, and the men thereof were
sometime called Galathe. To whom it is said, that Paul the Apostle sent his
Epistle. Look before De Galatia.

( Addition.
Ruthem, a people beyond Liuonia, of whom the Country is now called Russia.)

Of Sabea. chap. 134.
SAbea, is Country in Arabia, and has the name of Saba the son of Thus.
This Country stretches in straight length Eastward, toward the sea Persicu^:
and is nigh to Chaldea in ye north: and ends at ye sea of Arabia, in ye west:
and is to Lethiopia in the South. And this land bears Frankencense, and
gives good smells: for in woods and lands thereof grow Mirrhe, Cinamom,
Thus, and other sweet spicerie, as Isidore says libro. 15.

This land is rich of sweet Spicerie, of precious stones, and of metal.
There is a Bird, that is called Phoenix, and other wonders that Authoures
reckon in ye region of Arabia, of whom it is showed before of Arabia. The Queen
of Saba, was specially Lady of this Province, and nevertheless in her time,
she had principate of all Africa, as Herodutus says, for she was Queen of
Aethiopia and of Egypt: as ye Close says super li. Reg. 10. And so it is
supposed, that she had other Kingdoms of the West in that time.

( Addition.
Sabaea or Saba, a Country in the middle of Arabia toward the East, environed
about with great Rocks, wherein is a great wood of precious trees, some of
Cinamom and Cassia: some bringing forth Frankencense and Mirrhe. The length of
that Wood is twenty of their miles called Schaeni, which comprehends of
Italian miles, one hundred and fifty, Plinius. lib. 12. Theophrastus. lib. 9.
De histo. Plat.

Solinus writes that the region brings forth Frankencense, is from a Town
there named Atramicae eight mansions, which indeed contains two hundred
twenty four miles. Mancio, or stathmos, being of eight and twenty Italian
miles. The chief City of that Realm, is called sabeta, D. Cooper.

Of Samaria. chap. 135.
SAmaria, as Isidore says libro. 15. is a Region of Palestina, and had that
name in old time of the chief Town and City thereof, for Samaria was
sometime a royal City of Israel, and is now called Sebastia, and has that
name of Augustus the Emperor. This Region is in the middle between Judea and
Galilea: and begins from the freete that is called Eleis. The situation
thereof, is like to the kind of Judea, and has no difference thereto in
virtue, as Isidore says. And had the name first of a mount that is called,
Somer, as mention is made 4. Regum chap. 3.

Of this Country afterward came the men that are called Samaritani, that
passed out of Assyries, and dwelled in Samaria, that is to be understood,
keeping: For when the men of Israel were taken Prisoners, the Kings of Assyries
left them there to keep the Country, as Isidore says libro. 9. chap. De
vocabulis regionum.

Look before De eodem, de Samario monte in littera S.

( Addition.
Samaria, a Country and City in Syria, ioining to Judea, which was the chief
city of the ten Tribes of Israel, who being taken Prisoners by the King to
Syria, and led away Captives: thither were sent from Assyria, Panimes for
them, to inhabit the Country: which were afterward called Samaritani: and
they mixte the Law of Moses, with abominable Polatrye. the city was
afterward called Sebaste.)

Of sambia. chap. 136.
SAmbia is a province of Messia in Europa, and is set in the lower Scithia, as
it were in the middle Country between Pratenes, Estenes, Ofiliances, Liuenes,
and Turones, that were al subjects to the puissance of the Goths in the old
time, as Varro tells, and Herodotus also. And they dwelled on the cliffes of
Occean, and have the forelonges and coasts of the Sea, before the sides of the
North, as he says. Sambia is a plenteous land, and bears well corn, and
has much marreys, and woods, and is compassed about with many lakes and
rivers. Among other strange Nations, the men be seemly of body, bold of heart,
and pass other nations about them with craft, and in curious working.

( Addition.
Read Ortelius, and also this I Will is called Sanibria, and not Sambia, as
appears in the old Copy.)

Of Sabaudia. chap. 137.
SAuoye, is called Sabaudia, as it were a bold way and safe, as old men say,
for that way of old time men by goodness of Princes, were safe to travel by
mountains and desert of country, to pass out of the country of France into
Italy, for always there was most righteousness: and therefore as by common fame,
always ye wayfaring men were safe in high ways, without dred of spoiling and
robbery. And is a part of Pirene, the mountains there of, depart between
France and Italy. Look before De montibus pireneis, in litera P. This land
has another name, and is called, Prouintia.

Of Sardinia. cap. 138.
SArdinia is an Island in the sea of middle earth, beside Sicilia, and has that
name of one Sardus, begotten of Hercules, that came out of Lybia with a great
multitude, and occupied Sardinia, and gave thereto his own name. This land is
seen in the sea of Africa, to the likeness of the print of a man's foot
toward the East and toward the West, and more broad in even sides toward the
South and toward the North: and therefore of shipmen of Greece, it was first
called Ithos.

The land is seen in length of seven score mile, and in breadth of forty.
Therein breeds no Serpent neither Woolfe, but only a little beast that is
called Solifuga, Solifuga.
that is noyfull to wicked men. Therein breeds no venyme: but an herb named
Apium risus, Apium risus.
that draws and shrinketh together ye jaws of men, and slays as it were
laughing. There are hot wells that heal sick men, and blinds thieves, if
they swear upon the Water, and touch their eyes there with, as Isidore
says Libro. 15.

( Addition.
Sardinia, an I Will in the Sea called Ligusticum by Gean, not passing seven
miles from Corsica.)

Of Sarmata. cap. 139.
SArmata is a land of strange men, that be called Sarmate, and have that name
of study and business of armor: for they went armed, and spoiled many
Provinces, before that Lentulus withstood them, and would not suffer them to
pass over Danubius, as Isidore says, li. 9. These men be descended as well
of Goths as Gipides: and they use to fight, as well on horseback as on foot,
and therefore they were so called, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
Sarmatia, a Countreye of Europe, which bordereth on the North, upon the sea
called Sarmaticum: on the west, upon the river Vistula and Germany: on the
South, upon Sibenburgh, Dacia, and Mysea inferior: on the East, upon the
Sarmatia, which is in Asia, the river Tanais, and the Marish Meotis. Under this
be many Countries contained, Polonia, Rhussia, Frussia, Lituania, Linonia,
Moscouia, etc.

The greater part of this Country, is now under the King of Pole.)

Of Samo. chap. 140.
SAmo is an Island in the sea Aegeum, where Juno was borne: thereof was Sybel of
Samia, and Pythagoras Samius, that first found the name of Philosophers, as
Isidore says libro. 15. It is said that earthen vessels were first made in
this Island: and therefore they be called Vasa Samea, vessels of Samo, and so
it is known, that claye of that Island is tough as glewe, and therefore the
more able to make such vessels of, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
Samos, The name of two Isles in the sea called Aegeum, one by Thracia, and
therefore it is called Samothracia, and the other lies against Ephesus.)

Of Saxonia. chap. 141.
SAxonia is a Province in Germania, and it is said, nien of that Province came
of the Greeks: and dwell now in those parts that they arrived in by ship. And
they expulsed and drove out the Thuringes, that then there dwelled, and
occupied unto the cleue of Occean. The Saxons gate and wanne^ them places there
with many battles and strong, and dwell in the same Province to this day.
And the men were always the gretest warriors, seemly of shape, of stature
high, strong of body, hardy and bold of heart.

Saxony is a land most plenteous in Corn, and bears well Corn, and all
manner fruit, and is full of woods in mountains, and is full of fruit and
of leese and of fields, rich of beasts and of flocks, of silver, and of
Copper, and of other metal. And there are solemn mountains, in the which
stones be dug, the which being stronglye resolved by fire, turn into the
substance of brass. There be most noble rivers and famous, as Wesera, Limia,
Albia, Sala, and Odera, and many other that run thereby, over and beyond
Albina. There are salt wells in many places, in whom best salt and most white
is sodde and made.

Therein be many strong Cities, Castles and Towns, both in plains and in
mountains. Beside the mountain in the which Copper is dug, is a great
hill, and the stones thereof smell as vyolets. There, in some mountains is
fairest marble dug, and namely beside the river Danubius, and that stone is
called Saint Michaels stone. In those mountains is most plenty of venison and
of wild beasts, of Bears, of Boares, and Hearts: and therefore in those
mountains full of woods, is many manner of hunting used. These and many
other noble things be found in the Country of Saxons. Look before De
Germania in littera G. and in litera A. de Alemania. Saxonia has Boemia, and
Polonsa, in the East side: Westualia, in the west: and the side of Frisons
toward Occean, and men of Thuringe in the North: and Frenchmen in the South.
The men are noble and strong, and not overcome before this day, as Herodutus
says.

( Addition.
After the time of Arthur King of Britain, ye Saxons greatly molested the
Britons, and helds them in subjection, a long time.)

Of Sclauia. chap. 142.
SClauia is a part of Mesia, and contains many Regions: for Boemes, Paloni,
Metani, Wandali, Ruttheni, Dalmate, and Charinthi be Sclaues, for all these
understand each other, and accord in many things touching language and
manners, but yet they be diverse in rites and usage: for some hold yet the
faith of Panims, and some the usage of Greeks, and some the usage of Latins.
In all these regions is noble ground, and bears well corn, and also wine in
many places. All these Nations for yt more part have their bush cut round,
except the Ruthens, and those that be meddeled with Dutchmen, and with
Latins.

Sclauia is double: The more, which is called Selauonia, contains Dalmatia,
Saruia, Carinthia, and many other Regions. And some men of this Sclauia, dwell
upon the sea, and some in high mountains and in thick woods.

And some care and till fields and plains. The men be fierce and sharp and
unseemly, without devotion in Gods service, and lead their life in robbing on
the sea, and use to take prays by the sea and by the land, and namely those
that dwell upon the sea.

The other less Sclauia, from ye borders of Saxony, stretches to Pruse, and
to Wandales, and to the Boemes. And this Sclauia, is departed from Pruse, with
diverse rivers and waters, and from the Goths and Danes with an arm of the sea
Occean: which sea, when it is departed, the less Sclauia ends at the cliffe
thereof. And this region bears well corn and fruit: and is moist with
rivers and ponds. Therein is much wood and pasture, and milk and honey. The men
be strong of body, earth tillers and fishers, and more devout to God, and more
peaceable to neighbors, than those that dwell in the more Sclauia. And that for
meddling and company that they have all day with the Germans, as Herodotus
says. Sclauonia.

Of Sparta. chap. 143.
SParta is a Region besides Grecia, and is called Lacedemonia by another name,
of one Lacedemon the son of Semele. Look de Lacedemonia in litera L. The men
be called Lacedemones and Spartian also, as Isidore says libro. 9.

Of Seres. chap. 144.
SEret is a province in the East, and has that name of a town that is called
Seres. There cotton is gathered of trees, and silk is made of that cotton. The
Poet syenketh of men of that land and says. Ignoti facie, sed not vellere
Seres.

( Addition.
Seres, a people in Asia, having great plenty of silk, first increased of the
silk worm, called Bombax, and also much cotton wool called Bombazi. In the
old copy, Ignoti facie, voce fere mill Seres.

Of Selandia. chap. 145.
SEland is a land by the sea side, compassed about with rivers and arms of the
sea, as it were an Island. And has Holland in the East side, and Flaunders in
the South, and Occean in the West, and Britain in the North. And are many
Islands departed a sunder with arms of the sea, and those Islands be compassed
about with strong heaps of gravel, and quarries, and so warded and defended
against waves and strength of the sea.

The soil of those lands bear well corn and is bare of trees, for because of
saltness of the sea, trees may not have deep mores and roots, and therefore
when they be set and planted, they fail and dry anon. Seland is full of men
and people and of riches. The men be of great stature, strong of body, and
bold of heart, denout in Gods service, easy and soft among themselves,
beneficial to many, and grievous to no men, but when they must needs withstand
wrongful risers of enemies.

( Addition
Zeland is next adjoining to England, over against Ipswich. Brill, Dort, and
Midelbrough, are their chiefest holds, strongly fenced with the sea.)

Of Semigallia. chap. 146.
SEmigallia, is a little province beyond the sea Balticum, beside Cilica and
Liuonia, in the low Asta, and has that name, for Gallache dwelled therein,
meddeled with men of that land, and so they are called Semegalli, as it were
half Gallis: For they come of the Gallis, and of men of the land. The land
is good, and bears well corn, and is rich of Pasture and of meedes. But the
men be strange and unseemly, and sharp and cruel.

Of Gallia Senonensis. Chap. 147.
GAllis senonensis, is a Province of Frenchmen, and has Germania Treuerensis,
in the East side: in the South, the oner Burgoyne, and the Mountains Pennsnes:
in the West, the part of France, that is called, Gallia Engdune^sis in ye
North, Gallia Belgica. The land bears well corn, fruit, and vines also.
Therein be diverse wels, rivers and streams. These Galli Senones were sometime
called Zenones: for they received freely into harborow. Afterward that Z. was
changed into the letter S. and called Senonens, as Isid. says, Libro. 9. And
had that name of the City Senonensis, that is their chief City. The land is
full of people, and has many Cities, and many strong walled fownes, and a
river runs thereby that is called Serana.

Addition
Senones, a people in France.

Of Siria, chap. 148.
SIria has the name of Sirus, Abraham's neuely, got on Cethura, as Isidore
says libro. 9. and 15. This land ends at the river Eusrates in the East
side: and at the great sea and Egypt, in the West side: and stretches from,
the North to Armenia and Cappadocia: and from the South to the sea Arabicum, as
he, says. The space thereof stretches in great length, and is more narrow
and straight in breadth, and contains many provinces, as Comagines, Fenicia,
and Judea is a part thereof, besides Saracens, Nabathes. And it is a region
most full of people, and most plentiful of corn and fruit, neat, sheep and
great horses, Asses, and Camells, and is most rich of waze and sweet spicerie,
and of metal, most strong with cities and castles, moist with most noble
rivers, lakes, and pondes, and has noble havens of the sea, namely in
Palestines, Maritimie and Fenicis. The men be stern and great warriors, and
occupy in diverse countries and lands with diverse chaffer and merchaundises:
therein be diverse Nations, the which as they differ in faces, so they vary in
language, mind, and manners, of the which, some dwell, in Desert, as Nabathei
and Saraceni: some dwell in mountains, and some in woods, and greaues, of the
which there are full many, among the nations of those Regions and lands, as
Herodotus tells.

( Addition.
Siria, a great Realm in Asia, which has on the East, the river Euphrates on
the West, the middle sea, and the Realm of Egypt: on the North, Cilicia and
Cappadocia: on the South, Arabia.

Syria, called also Assyria, a great Country in the East, having on the North
part, Armenia: on the West, Mesopotamia: on the South, Susiana: on the East,
Media. It also contains, Phoenicia, Palestina, and Babilonia.

Of Sichima. cap. 149.
SIchima, is a little land in Samaria in the mids between Judea and
Galilea: and has the name of Sichem the son of Emor, that builded therein a
city that was called Sichem that now is named, Neopolis. ( Neapolis. There are
three cities of this name, one in Naples, one in Affrike, and the other in
Caris.) And the Country thereabout is called Sichima, as Isidore says libro.
15. Jerome says super Genesis. 18. This was the portion of that land, that
Jacob gave to his son Joseph over the lot. And so that land was in the lineage
of Ephraim, and there Joseph was buried, and there his tomb is showed unto
this day, as Ier. says. Jacob got that land, and bought it with money gotten
with great travel, and gave therefore an hundred Lambs, as it is said Genesis
24. Ier. says, that for that travel Jacob said, that he took that land out
of the Amorteis hand, with bow and with sword. There nigh was Terebintus a
tree, under the which Jacob bid the mawnets of his sons. And then he went up
out of Sichima into Lusa, that is called Bethel. Also as it is said Genesis
25. In this place Joseph's brethren fed and kept flocks: but when Joseph
cought them, he found them not in Sichem, but in Dotaym: where they spoiled
him, and sold him to Egyptians. And afterwade Abimelech the son of
Ieroboal, destroyed Sichima, and slew the men that dwelled there, and sowed
salt in the Country about, as it is said Iudie. 10. In this field was Jacobs
well, by the which our Lord rested, when he was weary of the way, and badde
the woman give him drink of the water of the Well, as it is said John. 4.
This place is most fertile, and wonderful merry and most steadfast.

OF Scithia. chap. 150.
SCithia is the greatest Region, and the over part thereof is in Asia, and the
nether in Europa. And this nether part begins at the marreis Meotides, and
stretches between the river Danubius and the North Occean to Germania, as
Isidore says, libro. 15. The first part thereof is Alania, the^ Meotides
Paludes, then Gothia, Dacia, Rhetia, the Germania, where Sweues dwell, and
occupye a great deal thereof, as he says. In Scithia be many regions and
lands ^ some thereof be rich, and some be inhavitable, and no men dwell
therein. For in many places is much gold and precious stones, but for great
griphons men come there but seld. There is best Smaragdus and most pure
crystal, as he says, There in many places in Scithia be many men,
wonderfullye shapen, and great wild beasts, as Linces, Tigers, and most
cruel Bears and Lions, and namely in the deserts and regions of Hircana.
Look before de Hircanis.

( Addition.
Scythia, a great Country, now under the dominition of the great Cane of
Cathaie, a savage and wild people.)

Of Sicionia, chap. 151.
SIcionia had that name in old time of Sicion the King, by his name it was
called ye kingdom of Sicionia. Archas the son of Jupiter and of Calissa,
after he had subdued Pelasgis to his ob^isaunce, he called that kingdom
Archathadia by his own name. Archadia yt is called Sicionia, Abeston, astone
that being kindled, does never quench.
is ye bosom of Archaia, as it were set between the seas Egeum, and Ionium,
and has a great river keimantum, and breeds Abiton a stone that, never
quenches, if it be once kindeled. There be gendered most whife Merules mau ^^^
as Isidore says, li. 15.

( Addition.
Sugonia, a city in Achaia, not far from Corinth, called now Clarencia,
where is great abundance of metal.)

Of Sicilia, chap. 152.
Sicilia was sometime called Scicania, and had that name of Sicanus the king,
and was afterward called Sicilia, and had that name of Siculus the brother of
Italus: and this land was in old time called Trinacria, for three furlongs that
be there, and be called Pelorum, Patheum, and Libeum, for Trinacria is Gree^e,
and is to say, three square, for it is divided three squares. This land is
departed from Italy with a little sea, and is before the sea Affricum. The land
bears well fruit and is rich of gold, and full of dens, chins, and caves, and
is full of wind and of brimstone. And there burns the heat of the mount Ethna.
In the sea thereof is Scilia and Caribdis, in which shiue be swallowed, or
sink, or be broken. This was the country of Ciclopes, and afterward nourisher
of Tyrants: And it bears well, corn, and is eared and sown with seed first
of all lands: The chief city thereof is Siracusa: there is a well Aracusa, and
the river Albius, that nourishes horse: Therein was first found the Island of
Comedia. In the river of Agath in Sicilia was the stone Achates first found:
And in ye sea of Sicilia is white coral ingendered, and salt that is called
Agrigentine, a wonderful manner salt: for it melts in fire and sparkleth in
water: all this land about contains the space of three thousand furlongs.

Also Salustius says, that Sicilia joined to Italy sometime: but ye space that
now is between, was broken and consumed with strength of the sea. Huc vsque
Isi. lib. 25. ca, de Insulis: there al these foresaid things be rehearsed, and
Plinius tells the same.

( Addition
Sicilia a noble I Will, first called Trinacria. afterward Sicania, and at ye last
Sicilia, it is in form 3. cornard, and therefore has ye name of Trinacria:
the one corner called Pachinus, extends toward ye part of Greece, which was
called Peleponensius, now Morea: the second corner called Pelorus lies toward
Italy: the third called Lilyhens, it extedeth toward Africa, of the which
Pelarus, exceeds in the temperance of ye earth, for with no wet there, may be
any nure: nor by any dries dust. This I Will contains in circuit (as Solinus
writes, (3000. furlongs which is of Italian miles.373. as Diodorus Syculus
writes.4360. But Plinius says, that the three corners be distant from
Pelorus, to Pachinus by land.165. miles: from thence to Lilybeum.200. miles:
from thence to Pelorus 170. miles, and says also, that Agrippa affirmed it, to
be in circuit.618. miles, which do not agree with Solinus nor Diodorus, which
may happen to be by the diversity of furlongs called sir Latin Stadia. The
fertilitye of this I Will in all grain, beauty of meadows, delicateness of
waters cold and hot, mountains and caves myraculous, and other things there
exceeding notable, many Authors have written and wondered at, both Greeks,
and Latins. D. Cooper in Thesaurus.

Of Sirtes. chap. 153.
AS Isidore says, libro. 14. Sirtes be places in the sea full of gravel, and
has that name of drawing. For Salustius says, it draws thereto all thing.
For Siren is Greek, and is to understand, draught or drawing. And such
drawing makes the ground and the sea uneven. In some place deep, and in
another place shallowe: and therefore it is perilous to pass that way.
Sirtes that induce such peril, are by the Sea of Egypt, and are meddeled
therewith in many places, as he says.

( Addition.
Syrtes are those which we call quick sands, whose bottomes are full of springs,
but of a marvelous depth, that ships lighting thereon, without a quick
flood, do sink out of sight, or utterly perish.

Of Scotia. chap. 154.
THe land Scotia has ye name of Scotis, that dwell therein, and is a long
stretching Country, as it were furlong in the Island of Britain: and is
departed from North England with rivers and arms of the Sea, and is closed
about with the Occean in either side: and is also departed from Ireland with
the sea Occean and the same nation that was sometime first in Ireland, and all
according thereto in tongue, in manners, and in kind. The men are light of
heart, fierce and courageous on their enimyes. They love nigh as well death as
thraldom, and they account it for sloth to die in bed, and a great worship
and virtue to die in a field fighting against enemies: The men be of scarce
living, and many suffer hunger long time, and eat seld before the Sun going
down, and use flesh, milk meats, fish, and fruits, more then Britons: and use
to eat the less bread, and though the men be seemelye though of figure and
of shape, and fair of face generally by kind, yet their own Scottish
clothing disfigure them full muth. And Scots be said in their own tongue of
bodies painted, as it were cut and slit: For in old time they were marked with
diverse figures and shapes in their flesh and skin, made with iron pricks, as
Isidore says, lib. 9. cap. de Vocabilis gentium. And because of meddeling with
English men, many of them have changed the old manners of Scots into better
manners for the more part, but the wild Scots and Irish account great
worship to follow their forefathers in clothing, in tongue, and in living,
and in other manner doing: And despise some deal the vsages of other men,
in:comparison to their own usage. And so each labors to be above, they
detract and blame all other, and envy all other: they derive all other, and
blame all other men's manners, they be not ashamed to lie: and they repeite no
man, of what nation, blood, or puissaunce so ever he be, to be hardy and
valiant but themselves, they delight in their own: they love not peace. In
that land is plenteous ground, merry woods, moist rivers and wells, many
flocks of beasts. There be earth tillers for quantity of the place inow:and
is not unequal to the land of Britain, as Herodotus says. And is a sage
insearcher of the world, as Plinius says.

Look before in Hibernia in litiera H. There Isidore says the same of
Ireland, in many things.

( Addition.
Scotia, Scotland, the part of Britania from the River of Tweede to Catanes:
Scot, Scots, or Scottish men, of whom Saint Hierome writes in this wise: Quid
loqua^ de caeteris nationibus, quum ipse adolescen tulus in Gallia viderim
Scotos, gentem Britanuicam humanis vesci carnibus, and quum per syluas
porcorium greges, and armentoru^, pecudumque reperiant, pastorum nates, and
foeminarum papillas solere abscindere, and has solas ciborum delitias
arbitrari? What shall I speak of other nations, since that when I was a boy, I
saw in France, Scots, and people of Britain, cut man's flesh, and when they
found in the forests herds of Swine, beasts, and cattle, they would cut off
the buttockes of the baies which kept them, and also the women's paps, and took
that to be ye most dainty and delicate meat. Notwithstanding the Scotts were
in S. Hieromes time, which is near 1195. years past, after the computation in
Lanquet, so rude a people. It seems although they be not all come home to
constancy, yet are they now abhorrours of such humans spoil, and tractable
enough with good government.)

Of Suecia. chap. 155.
SVecia is a regio^ of the nether Scithia in Europa, thereof all Gathia has
now the name, that is the greatest region of the kingdom of Dance and of the
Norwaies, and the sea Balticum is in the East side: and the British occean in
the West: and the hills of Norway and people, in the North: and joins to
Denmark Southward, and ends there. Suecia is called Gothia also: and is good
ground, and bears well corn, and has no vines, but in great plenty of
pasture, and of metal, it recompenseth the other defalts. For beside many
manner riches that it has of the sea, it passes many other Regions and
lands, in beasts wild and tame, in silver Oar, and in many other riches. The
men be full strong, their might of chiualrye daunted long time the most deal
nigh of Africa and Europa. And in great Alexanders time, the great
hardiness of Greeks dreaded to adventure upon them.

Also the great might of Julius Caesar overcame French men, Almaines, and
Britones, but he dreaded to fight with Danes, Goths, Norwaies, and other men
of the North, as the Writers of Stories ^ell both of Greeks and of Romans, so
whose words says may and ought to be given, in such things as are not
against our religion, faith, nor reason as Hierome says: It is worthy (says
he) so believe Stories and writings of Poets and of Writers, if their relation
be not against the faith, and good conditions and manners, neither contrary to
the truth that is known. Of these men came Amayones, women of womennes land,
as Orosius says, and Isidore libro. 15.

( Addition.
Swises, a people very fierce, the chief City is Tigure, first built by the
Sweues, the years before Christ. 1744.)

Of Scondia. cap. 156.
SCondia, Schondania, or Scondenmarchia, This chapter is added.
is as much to say, as fair Dania, or fair Denmark, Plinye names it
Scandia. It was named Scondia, by reason of the fairness and fruitfulness
thereof, replenished with fresh rivers, havens, mart towns, fish, beasts, gold,
silver, copper, and lead. It is supposed that the old Greek^ and Latins knew
of this, for that they held opinion, in the North parts the cold Zone or clime
was condemned to perpetual Snow, intolerable to all living creatures, the
Germans, and these people now va^^t the king of Denmark did use stra^^ke
togethers.

Of suenia. chap. 157.
SVenia is a Province of Germania, in Europa. The men thereof were wont to have
most Lordshippe in Germania, as Isidore says, libro. 15. and says the
same.3. Cap. de Vocabilis Gentium libro. 9. The Sweues, says he, be parted of
Germans in the end of the North.

Of them Lucanus speaks and says, Fundit ab extremo slauos aquilone Sueuos.
That is to say, that the Sweues with yelow hair come of the uttermost North.
And many men supposed, that in their land were sometime an hundred towns,
and much people, and the men be called Sweui: and have that name of a mount
that is called Sueuie, which stands in the entering of Germania. And those
men dwelled first in the Country about that mount as he says.

Also as he says, this Country has Danubius and Bauaria in the East side,
and the Rine and Alsacia in the West, and high mountains called Alps, and
Italy in the South, and Franconia and the nether Germania in the North. And
Sueuia is double: the nether stretches toward the Rine, and the over toward
high mountains Alps, and the River Danubius. Either is good land at best,
and bears good corn and Wine in many places, and has most strong Cities,
Castles, and towns: and also plains and mountains, rivers, and streams, and
many woods and herbs: and much pasture and many sheep, and other beasts: and
about the mountains, iron and silver, and other mettalls be found. The men be
many and full strong, bold and hardye, and good warriors, high of body, with
yeolowe hair, seemly and fair of face.

( Addition.
Sueuia, the chief country of Germany, in fertilitye, wholesomenesse, and
beautiful personages. It has on ye East Bauiere: on the West Halsaite, and
the river of Rhene: on the South the mountains Alps: on the North Frankland.
It was sometime called Alemania, whereof all Germany was called Almaine: In Dutch
it is now called Swaue.)

Of Tanatos, chap. 157.
TAnatos is a little Island of Occean, and is departed from Britain with a
little arm of the sea, and has wheat fields and noble ground, and is called
Tanatos, and has that name of death of Serpents. For the earth of that land
carried into any country of the world slays Serpents forthwith: as Isidore
says, lib. 14.

( Addition.
This is supposed to be the I Will of Tenet in Kent, which is for the bigness,
very fertile and good land.)

Of Trapobana. chap. 158.
TRapobana is an Island of Inde toward the South, out of that side, the Indish
occean begins. The land stretches seauentie mile and fifty paces in
length, and four store and fiftye thousand furlongs in breadth. And a river
runs there through, and is full of Margarites and of precious stones. And
some part thereof is full of Elephants and of other beasts, and men dwell-in
some part thereof. In this land men say be two Summers, and two winters in
one year: and flowers spring there twice in a year. And it is the profitablest
Island of Inde, and springs always. The leaves be always green and fade
never, as Isidore says, lib. 14.

Addition.
Taprobane, Addition
an I Will in the Indian sea, and was of some did Writers supposed to be in the
contrary part of the world against us, and therefore they called it an other
world: It lies in the point between East and West, the quantity thereof is
diversely described by su^ndry authore. For Strabo writes that it is in length
eight thousand furlongs, which is a thousand miles. Plinius, Martianus, and
Solinus, do affirm it to be in length seven thousand furlongs, which is eight
hundred lxxv. miles, in breadth.5000. furlo^gs, which is 625. miles: part of it
extends beyond the Equinoctial line, more south, and has on the Northeast
the less Indie. It is now called Samotra, and is under the dominion of the
great Came, and is governed by four Kings, in an exquisite form of justice,
notwithstanding that the people be Idolaters: They hunt Tygres, Elephants, and
Panthers, of the which there is great plenty. Also there be found Carbuncles,
Saphires, Iacincts, Topaces, Rubies, and Granates, in great numbers. There
grows Sinamome, Canel, Beniamine, and other sweet trees, in great
abundaunce. And they have money of gold, silver, and brass, of the same
weight and value, that the ancient coin of the Romans was. There is also
found great plenty of orient pearls.

Of Thracia. chap. 159.
THracia is a province in Grecia. Tiras the son of Iaphet came thither, and
called that land Thracia by his own name, as Isidore says, li. 14. Other men
mean, that Thracia has that name of cruelnesse of men that dwelled therein.
The City Constantinople is before this land in the East side of the sea
Propontis: and is toward Histre in the North side, and stretches to the sea
Egeum in ye South, and has Macedonia in ye West. Many diverse Nations dwelled
therein sometime, as Massagete, Sarmate, and Scithe, and many other. The land
is wide and large: and therefore many Nations might be contained therein. The
river Hebrum springs and runs in Thracia, and by many strange nations, as
Isidore says. li. 14.

( Addition.
Thrace, a region in Europa, on the North it is bounded with the land Mysia: on
the East with the higher: on the South with ye sea Aegum: on the West with
Bosphorus, Thracius, and Propontis. Therein is the city of Constantinople,
sometime called Bizantium.)

Of Traconitida. cap. 160.
TRaconitida is a region in Judea, over the which reigned Herodes brother
Philip. For all the Kingdom of the Hebrews was departed in four, and each of
the four was called Tetrarchia. And the Prince and the king of such a part
was called Tetrarcha. The first of those four was Galilea: Herodes was Prince
and king thereof. The second and the third was Ituria and the region
Traconitida: over that was Philip Tetrarcha of either region. The fourth Region
was Abilina: Over this Country reigned Lisanias, the brother of Herod and of
Philip. The land of Jews was departed in so many particular principates by
the Romans, to subdue the pride of the Jews, Luke. 3.
as the Gloss says super Luc. super illum locum: Tetrarcha autem Philippo
Iturie, and Traconitides regionis, etc.

( Addition.
Trachonites, a Country in Syria, joining unto Arabia.)

Of Thessalia. chap. 161.
THessalia, as Isidore says, libro. 15. is a Province of Grecia, and has that
name of Thessalus the king, and joins on the south side to Macedonia. In
Thessalia be many rivers, and therein be many towns, ye chief thereof is called
Thessalonica. There is also the mount Pernassus, that was sometime hallowed to
Apollo, and Thessalia was the country of Achilles, and thence came the
Laphites. And it is said of them, that they brake first horses with Bridles,
and sat on their backs, and seemed one body horse and man. Therefore knights
of Thessalia were scined to be Centauri, as Isidore says, lib. 11. cap. de
Portentis: In Thessalia were first found shillings of gold, and craft and use
of breaking of horses: as Isidore says, libro. 15. And farther be says,
lib. 4. that in Moses time tell a great flood in Thessalia, that destroyed the
more deal of the people of that land: And a few were saved by succor of the
mountains, and namely in mount Parnassus: about the which mount Deucalion
reigned that time: And such as fled unto him in ships he received, and in
the top of the hill Pernassus he nourished and cherished them. Wherefore the
Greeks fables feigned, that Deucation should restore mankind of stones, as he
affirms there.

( Addition
Thessalia a region in Greece, called also Aemonia, sometime Pandora, sometime
Pyrthea, of some Pelasgia: of Homer, Argopelasgicon. It is environed with four
great and famous Hills, on the East with the mountains of Pelion and Ossa:
on the North with Olympus: on the West with Pindus: on the South Othris.

It marches on Macedonia on the East. The people were valiant men on
horseback, and inumerble in battle, as Polihius writes, but very unjust of
their promise. The women there being wonderful witches, tranformed men into
the shape or form of beasts.)

Of Tenedos. cha. 162.
TEnedos is an Island of Grecia, one of the Ciclades in the North side. Wherein
is the city of Thene builded. And the land has that name of that city. For
one Thenes a young man was defamed, that he should have had to do with his
stepmother, which fled unto ye Island, wherein he found none to fill it: and he
gave to the city that he there builded, and to the Island his own name.

( Addition.
Tenedos, an I Will in the sea Aegenum, between Mytilene and Hellespont, not far
from Troia.)

Of Thile iusula. chap. 163.
THile is the last Island of Occean between the North country and South, six
days sailing beyond Britain: and has the name of the Sun, for there the
Sun stinteth in Summer, when the days begin to shorten. And no day is there
beyond. Therefore the sea thereof is slowly froze, as Isidore says, lib. 14.
And Plinius says, that ye place is vninhabitable: for in Summer nothing may
there grow for great burning heat, nor in winter for freesing cold. For from
the evenness of the day and night in March, when the Sun is in Ariese, unto
evenness of the day and night in Harvest, when the Sun is in Libra, the
Sun forsakes not that Island: And from that time to the evenness of the day
and night, again in March, the sun comes not there: and so there half the
year is day, and half night, as he says in cap. de insulis. lib. 14. and de
solstitijs, li. 2. Also Beda says the same, li. de naturis rerum, and Solinus
also.

( Addition.
Thyle, the I Will called Island, the old Cosmographers supposed there the end of
all earthlye soil: of late years found otherwise.)

Of Tripolitana. chap. 164.
TRipolitana is a region, and Tripelitana is the name of two Regions. That one
is in Fenicia, and has that name of Tripolis, that is a most famous city, so
strong and mighty, that he defends and succoureth all the Country about.
And the other Tripolitana is in Africa, between Pentapolis and Bizantium, and
has the name of three great Cities, that is to wit, Osea, Sabine, and Leptis
the great. This land has the more Sirtes in the East side, and Trogoditas in
the North, and the sea Adriaticum in the West: Bizantium, Gelulas, and
Garamantes in the south and stretches to the Occean of Ethiopia, as Isidore
says.

( Addition.
Tiypolis a Country in Affrike, and another in Syria, the third in Phoenicia.)

Of Trogodia. chap. 165.
TRogodia is a region in Ethiopia, the men thereof be called Trogodites: and
have that name, for they be so swift of foot, that they follow and take
wild beasts with running: In this Region is an Island, wherein grows the best
kind of Mirre, and most pure drops thereof is found there: and is called Mirre
Trogoditis, and has the name of the Island that they grow in, as Isidore
says, lib. 17. And though this province be in Ethiopia, yet it stretches to
the ends of Arabia: so that sometime it is said, it belongs to Arabia, as in
libro. 17. and sometime to Ethiopia, as it is said in lib. nono.

( Addition.
Troglodyte, people in the furthest part of Affrike, beyond Aethiopia, which
dwell in caves, and do eat the flesh of serpents.)

Of Troiana. chap. 166.
TRoiana is a province in Phrigia, and was first called Dardania, and had that
name of Dardanus: for Dardanus came out of Greece to Phrigia, and reigned there
first: And afterward his son Erictonius and then his nephew Tros, and of him
the City of Troy, and the country about had the name, as Isidore says,
libro. 9. And after that Troy was destroyed, many Trojans sailed by diverse
countries of the world to get them places, and they expelled and put out many
nations of their countries, and dwelled there in their stead afterward. Of
them came most mighty nations of the world: as most true stories of diverse
regions and lands tell.

( Addition.
Troia, the city of Troy: also the Country wherein Troy stood.)

Of Thuscia. ca. 167.
THuscia is a Province of Italye between Ligures and the Territorye of Rome:
and is strengthened mightily and stronglye with diverse mountains and strong
places, as Isidore says, libro.15. Thuscia has that name of often sacrifice,
and of Thus and Incense. For in those parts at burialles and Obsequies men in
old time used for relygigion and devotion to burn and offer much;
Frankenscence: and namely they wept and made great dole and sorrow for their
dead men: And they burnt Thus on Alters of Goddis. For as it is said, in
Thusria the craft of divination was first found, as Isidore says. This land
was first called Aemilia in old time: therein be many solemn Cities and
noble. And has the City Pise in the West toward Liguria, Senos, Lucani, and
Florence toward the North, the City of Arecium toward the East: and toward
the South Thurthon, Pernes, and Assise, that join and be in the valley of
Spolitane, and has the Sea Adriaticum, and the march Anconitana in the East
side: and the brinke Tyber, and Rome in the South: and Melan and Liguria in the
West: Romaniola and the Province of Padua in the North.

This land stretches much in length out of the East into the West, and has
less breadth of the North side into the South. This land is full high of
mountains: and the place is most strong touching situation, and the ground
bears well corn and fruit. The air is good and wholesome: The Sea makes
this land rich in two sides. Many Wells and lakes make this land moist and
plenteous. The River Aruis runs thereby, and adorneth it. Plentye of sweet
Saffron and Spicerye, that there grows, makes it singularlye noble and rich.
Many hot Wells that there spring, make it kind and solemyne.

( Addition.
Tuscia, a Country in Italy, wherein be cities of Florence, Seen, Luca, and
Pise.)

Of Thuringia. chap. 168.
THuringia is a province of Germania, in the middle between Saxons and
Francos, and Westualls, and has the Beemes and Saxones in the East side:
Francenes and Baua^es in the South side: Sucues and Alsaces in the West: men of
the Rine and Westualls in the North. And as the name of the Country means.
Thuringia, hard: so the men be hard, and also most cruel against their
enymyes. The Country is populous, and the men be fair and seemly of
stature, strong of body, hard, and steadfast of heart. Their land is
strengthened and closed with mountains all about, and is full plain within,
and bears well-corne and fruit, and is not without Uiniardes. There be many
strong castles and towns, not only in mountains, but also in plains: there
be rivers lakes, and ponds: there is good air, and there is great plenty of
good pasture: there be many Oxen, Sheep, and other beasts. There in mountains
be diverse mettalles mined, as Herodutos says, that sought and left
unsearched no privy marches of Germania.

Of Thuronia. chap. 169.
THuronia is a Province of the over France, and was sometime accounted a part
of Gyan, and has ye name of ye noble city Turon, and in that Thuron the
flower of Priests most holy Saint Martin rested, and is upon the river Ligeris,
that runs thereby, and moisteth it, and makes it rich in many manner wise.
The land bears well corn and fruit, wine, and pasture. Therein is most
wholesome air and many woods. Men be of bodies seemly of shape, hardy and bold
of heart, goodly in deed, and in speath sober.

( Addition.
Turones, people in France by the river Lei^.

Of Vasconia. chap. 170.
VAsconia, Gascoine is a province beside the mountains Perenei, and was
sometime accounted under Gyan, and has that name of the town Wastea, as
Isidore says lib. 9. And has the mountains Pirenei in the one side, and the
sea of occean in another. And is nigh to Peito in the third side. In that land
be many woods and trees, lands, and mountains. In many parts thereof be many
viniards, so many and so much, that it sends plenty of wine to countries and
lands that be nigh, and also into Islands of ye sea. The river Girunde departs
this land from Tholose, and runs by Gascoine, and enters into the sea of
occean beside Burdewes, the chief city of Gascoine, as Isid. says, li. 9.
cap. de Vocabilis gentium. The Gascoines have the name of the town Wascia, and
dwell by the long and large solitude of the mountains Pirenei, and be called
Uascones, as it were Uaccones by changing C into S. Pompeius when he had
subdued Spain: and hasting him to come to his triumph, he put these men out
of the mountains Pirenei, and gathered the^ into one town: and thereupon the
town was called Vrba conuenarum, as Isidore says, and Plinius, and Herodotus
tells, yt these men Gascoines be light and pliant of body, hardy and bold
of heart, fierce of hafly to battle.

Of Venecia. chap. 171.
VEnecia is said of old men the Province of Uenir, the which Province
stretches from the cliffe of ye sea Adriaticum, unto the river Padus, which
departs between ye cities and countries of the nether and the over Liguns,
that is to say, between Pergamenses and Medolanensis, so it stretched sometime,
as ye most true writer of stories of Lombards and of Ligures tells. In the
coasts of ye foresaid sea before and nigh to this province ye city of Uenice is
now builded: in this province are many other noble Cities. For as Isi. says
li. 16. Montus was builded of Mantis, the daughter of Resia, which after the
destruction of Thebes came into Italy and stands in Uenecia, and in the
French tongue is called Alpina. Also Uenecia is a province of Italia, yt had
Lordship of many lands and cities in ye sea and land in old time: and now at
this day the might thereof and Lordship stretches right far in the sea, and
even unto Grecia, and reaches from the countries of Germania, and subdueth the
theft and tyranny of skimmours and sea thieves of Dalmacia and of Sclauia, and
represseth them. And governs and rules most rightfully Islands, havens, and
coast of the Sea, that be under the Lordshippe thereof. And defends mightily
their subjects against enemies, and hold the common profit and civil under
rightful laws. And suffers within their bounds no sed to abide, that is
contrary to Gods law. I think it were superfluity to reckend the godnesse
and worthiness of these men. For the virtue and might, aduisement, and
readiness, and great accord and love of all righteousness and mildness of
men of Uenecia are now known nigh to all nations, as says the royal writer
of the story of Langobardes.

( Addition.
Read Ortelius concerning Venice, and also Munsterus.)

Of Westualia. chap. 172.
WEstualia is a province of the nether Germania, and has Saronia in the East
side, Thuringia and Bassia in the South, the King and Colaine in the West,
occean and Frisia in the North. And is closed in two ends with two most noble
rivers, that be Wesera and Rhenum. The Rine touches in the North West: and
Wespera toward the East. This land in some books is called the old Saronia,
and preserves and keeps it self clean from all spise of fornication, and
most straightly punishes aduiterers: and has in most reverence honest
wedlockes: although it was snared to the Pamins superstition til the seventy
year of our Lord, as Bonifacius writes in an Epistle to the King of England.
This land is full of woods and of pastures, and more apt to feeds beasts
then to bear corn: and is moisted with many rivers and wells, with Lipia, and
Kura, and many other wells and rivers, there are salt wells and mountains,
plenty of metal and Dare, In that land is much fruit, and many Orchardes,
apples, and nuts: also wild beasts, swine, and other beasts small and great.
The men be commonly seemelye and high of stature, fair of shape, and strong of
body, bold and hardy of heart. There is much chivalry, and wonderful hardy
and bold, and hardy of heart, always pressed and ready to arms, there are
strong Cities and well walled, and most strong castles and towns, both in
mountains and in plains.

Of Vironia. chap. 173.
VIronia is a little Province beyond Denmark toward the East. And has that
name of Uirore, green color. For it is full of herbs, grass, and wood:
there be many wells of waters. The ground thereof hears well corn. The men
were sometime strong, fierce, and cruel, and unseemly, and he now subjects
to Kings and laws of Danes, and all the land is occupied with Germans and
Danes. Look before in littera R. de Riualia. This land is departed from the
men Nogardes and Catheis, with a full great river that is called Narua.

Of Winlandia. chap. 174.
WInlandia is a Country besides the Mountains of Norwaye toward the Cast,
and stretches upon the cliffe of Occean: And is not full plenteous, but in
wood, herbs, and grass. The men of that Country be strange and somewhat
wild and fierce: and they occupy themselves with witchcrafte. And so to men
that fail by their coasts, and also to men that abide with them, for default
of wind, they profer wind to sailing, The Samoyes bordring on ye Russe, use
the like incha^tment
and so they sell wind. They use to make a clewe of third, and they make
diverse knots to be knit therein. And then they command to draw out of the
clewe unto three knottes or more, or less, as they will have the wind more
softs or strong. And for their missebeleefe seendes m^oue the air, and arise
strong tempest or soft, as he draws of the Clewe more or less knottes.
And sometime they move the wind so stronglye, that the wretches that believe
in such doing, are drowned by rightful dome of God.

Of Vitria. cap. 175.
VItria is a little Island in the British sea, and is departed from the more
Britain with a little arm of the sea: the ground thereof is best land for
Wheat. Therein be many woods and groaues, and many beasts wild and same, and
wels, and rivers that moist the land. That Island is most temperate and
wholesome country, and most plenteous of fruit, as it is said, and English
men dwell therein at this day.

TREVISA. Here lacks: for no mention is made whether ward this land bears
from Britain, nor in what side of Britain this land should be, Some men would
think that this Island is Wight, but Wight is commonly called Insula vecca,
and this I Will is here called Vitria.

( Addition
Whether this I Will be a part of that where the Uitrie canuas and linen cloth
was made in times past, or else being consumed with the Sea, there is now no
such I Will: or whether the making of glass, had there any original.)

Of Yselondia. chap. 176.
YSeland is the last region in Europa, in the North deyond Norwaye. In the
uttermost parts thereof it is always Ise and srosen, and stretches upon she
cliffe of the Occean toward the North, where the Sea is frore with great and
strong cold: And Iseland hash the ouet Scithin in the East side, and Norwaye
in the South, and the Irish Occean in the West, and the Sea that is far in
the North, and is called Irelande, as it were the land of Ise and of Glass.
For it is said, that there be mountains of Snow frore as hard as Ise or
Glass, there thristall is found. Also in that region be white Bears most
great and right fierce, that break, Ise and Glass with their claws, and
make many holes therein, and diue there through into the Sea, and take Fish
under the Ise, and glass, and draw them out through the same hoales, and
bring them to the cliffe, and live thereby The land is barraine, except few
places in the valleys, in the which places vitheth grow Oats. In the place that
men dwell in, only grows herbs, grass and trees: And in those places
breed beasts same and wild. And so for the more part men of the land live
by Fish and by hunting of flesh Sheep may not live there for ^old. And
therefore men of the land wear for cold, felles and skins of Bears, and
of wild beasts, that they look with hunting. Other clothing may they not
have, but it come of other lands. The men be full gross of body and strong,
and full white, and give them to fishing and hunting.

( Addition.
Those that go the thither on fishing, are meruailously troubled with a kind
of Fly like a Gnat, and stinketh foul.)

( Addition.
Island is interpreted the land of Ise, and is called of old writers Thyle, it
is extended between the South and the North, almost. 200. schones, in
longitude a schone is 60. furlongs, it is for the most part full of
mountains, and untilled, but in the plains very fruitful, the inhabitants
are feign to drive their castle from their feeding, least they should by
overmuch fatness strangle and die. There are three mountains of marvelous
height, the tops whereof are reuered continuallye with Snow, but the lowe^t
parts are of like operation as is the mount Etna, flaming forth fire and
Brimstone, Dry of these is called Helga, the other Mons Crosis. The third
Hecla, whose flames consumes not Flax nor Towe, nor yet is quenched with
water, the fire breaks forth with and hydeous casteling like Thunder, and
casts forth the pomisse stones of a marvelous height, near unto these
mountains are there rivers or chinkes, like deep raues, especially at the
foot of the mount Hecla, so deep that no eye can perceive any bottom, out
of the which Abisme, appears as it were shapes of men, as though they were
drownes, and yet breathing forth a sound, saying, that they must depart from
thence is mount Hecla: as touching the fearful noise of the Ise, Read R.
Eden, and R. Wells.)

Of Zeugia. chap. 177.
ZEogia is called Zeugis also, and is a province where as the thore Carthage
is, ^^ituate in the less Africa, between Bisantium and Numidis, as Isidore
says, lib. 14. This province stretches from the north sea into Siculum, as he
says. And stretches out of the South, to the country of Getules. The hither
part thereof bears well corn, and the further is full of Serpents and of
beasts that be wild. There be wild Asses, and other wild beasts. There be
found wonders, and beasts wonderfully shapen, as he says.

( Addition.
Zeugma, is also the name of a city in Dacia.)

( Addition.
Zygantes, a people by Carthage, among whom is great store of honnye, both made
by Bees, and also wrougnt with man's hand. They color their bodies with red
lead, and feed especially on Apes flesh, whereof they have great plenty.) D.
Cooper.

I have set down forth of Ortelius, the universal description of the whole
earth (for the better understanding whereof) Orbis terrarum, Nouus orbis,
America, Asia, Africa, and Europa. All which is added.
The introduction of Vesper before the discourse.
THE world is a wonderful gathering together of things created, the placing of
Elements, the mutiplyeng of Creatures, the dissoluing of Influences, the
beginning place of time, and the end by death. In which world there are in
infinite number of variables, and an endless number of discords:
Notwithstanding concord being placed by a secreate mysterye in the imperfect,
1. Cor.13. Idem. 15. John. 8.^
shows the value of the mind to be more noble, then the body, as the
Creator is far more excellent, then the things created: for all that is in
the world is not of the Father, but of the world made and created, but not
justified and saved: we live together, but not love together: the cause is
discord betwixt Error and Ueritye.

Herein appears the love of God among those in whom he abides ever, and is
called Mundus, which signifies cleanenesse, as also the world. The world was
made by him, and yet they knew him not, he came among his own, and they
received him not, he sent his servants, and they entreated them shamefully
and slew them. Herein appears the nature of Discord, the power of Error,
by Tyrtannye, and the simple interteinement of Ueritye, as appearth among the
several kinds of Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Worms, Flies, Flowers, Herbs,
Plants, Trees, Fruits, Seeds, and many other things of increase. And man
whom God has made clean bodied, cheerful countenaunced, swifte to hear,
prompt to speak, apt to learn, pour to believe, having all these Angelical
virtues, should stir by the mind, whilst he taking of material
nourishment abides, unto the singular consideration of virtuous exercises,
whereby the soul tasting with the body; might through Faith and good works,
feel that endless nourishment which is prepared for the children of God: but
whilst they study to subdue Kingdoms, to overcome their neighbors, to rob
the fatherless and Widows, to ravish the virginnes, to govern, and not to
be governed, the spirits of all such terrestrial ferryes do breed the shape
of sin, and hatch forth so many abominable evils, that their whole race of
years are spent in vain glorious beasting, and filthye living, whose ends is
dampnation, whose vellye was their God, and glory was their shame, because
they were worldly minded. The Earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the
round world, and they that dwell therein, Man was made, not to rob, kill,
and destroy, but to give a continual praising unto God, and to learn of God,
to be bountiful, merciful, and liberal, and to be contented with that he
has. Which who so regards not the very simplest creatures in their kinds,
shall be the only accusers of fleshlye violence before God, without
remission.

Consider that the joys of the world are disturbed by afflictions, and are
frail, and wear away, but the joy of Faith is not only disquieted by
extremityes, and by the cross of persecution, but is made perfect more and
more, and when those storms be most dangerous, then is Faith of most effect.
All the godly being fenced with the strength of Faith and patience, do
contain all the whole worlds, and the tirrannie thereof. Nolli intelligere vt
credas, sed creed vt intelligas: S. August.
Understand not that thou may believe, but believe that thou may understand.

Orbis terrarum.
THE map or table of Ortelius, does comprehend, and set out the portraiture
of the whole compass of the Earth, and of the Occean Sea; inuironing the same,
all which compass of the Earth, the auncientes, (to whom the new world was
not known) divided into three parts, that is to say, Africa, Europa, and
Asia: but which America was found out, our age added it unto them, for the
fourth part, and looks for the fifth, lyeng under the South pole: Gerardus
Mercator, the chief Geographer of our time, in his universal Table, never
enough to be praised, does divide this compass of the Earth, into three
maynes; The first he calls that which we said, the ancients divided into
three, and from whence it is divided by the holy Scripture, that mankind
took his beginning. The second, which at this days we call America, or the
West India: The third he calls the South land, which many fearme
Magelonica, discovered hither unto, with few Sea coasts, And Antiquitis has
taught, that the compass of this earth contains about, where it is widest,
five thousand and four hundred German miles, A German mile is supposed p.
English miles.
or 21000. 600. Italian miles, and the same the later age affirms.

And these so many portions of the Earth, (as Pliny says in his second
book of Nature,) nare rather as many have written, the point of the world,
(neither is the world any thing else universally) this is the matter of our
glory, this is the seat, here we bear honor, here we exercise Empire,
here we desire riches, here mankind falls together by the ears, or is in
an vproare, here we renew wars, even civil, and with killing one another,
we make the earth wider: And to pass over the public furye of Nations, this
wherein we drive away our borderers, and by stealth dig up our neighbors
stuff, and put it to our ground, or proper goods which belong unto him, as
for example in many Regions, they will yield the land to the owner, in lewe
of his purchaise and rent, but if in the bowelles of the Earth there be found
any mettalles of value, the purchaiser shall not be Lord thereof: with as
much equitye may be taken, when in the steed of Thifties, by painful
travail, and ^lling of the said ground, it after bring forth good corn,
that therefore, because now good Corn, and no Thiftles, the Lord may take
the Corn, yet replyeth the contrary and says, that mettalles were before,
and are therefore in the right of the Lord, because the Tenant d.d never
imploye charge, but for the thing ready provided. Let this reason stand for
law: yet says the guide of the Law: The Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 13
is like unto a treasure hid in the field, the which a man finds, and
concealeth it: and for joy thereof, goes and sells all that he has and
buyeth the field. Who hides the Treasure, God, by his universal creation,
who finds it? (Man,) by the gift of knowledge: Where good subjects he, there
Princes shall never lose their right.
To whom is it due? To him unto whom it is given. Wherefore has he that
found this Treasure boughte with all his substance this field? That
therefore the inheritance should not be his: the inheritance is not denied,
but the Treasure, and why? Because there is no difference, but either mine or
shine. I refer the equitye of his question, unto the more prudent and wise in
the world, that all things may be considered to the glory of God, as that
which has lymited the Countries far abroad, and has driven the dwellers
beyond their bounds: of what small parts of the earth takes it pleasure of,
or when for measure of her covetousness, she has enlarged it, what portion
at length therefore may a dead man have. Thus far he.

America. The new world, or the discouerye of the Gloabe of the Earth.
ALL this Hemisphaer (which is called America, and for his huge wideness, at
this day the new world,) remain unknown and unmentioned of the auncientes,
even unto the time of the year from Christ birth. 1492. in the which year it
was first discovered by an Italian named Christopher Columbus of Genoa, and
seems to exceed in each point the measure of man's meruayles.

For when the dillygence, both of the auntientes in describing and setting
forth the whole compass and Gloabe or the Earth, and the commonditye, and
opportunitye of very great Empires, to search out for unknown Countries,
was considered, and also the cruel, greedys, and infatiable desire of
mankind, gaping for Gold and Silver, leaving nothing vnaduentured and
assayed, to the end it might obtain, those things with the which those
Countries do wonderfullye abounds. I have (not without great cause) often
meruayled, how they could remain so long unknown to this part of the world.

There are some that think, how that this maine land is described long since
of Plato, under the name of Little of Atlantica, and likewise Marcianus a
Cicilian in his Chronicle that he wrote of Spain, says: That there was
here found in the Gold mines certain old coin, bearing the Pictures of
Augustus Caesar, and for the declaring of the truth of this matter, there was
sent unto the chief Bishop of Rome, by Doctor John Rusus Archbishop of
Constantine, a certain quantitye thereof. Many think, that Seneca stirred by
with a Poetical spirit of Prophesse, did foretell the finding out hereof, in
these Prophetical vearses.

Venient annis
Saecula seres, quibus oceanus
Vincula, rerum laxes, and ingens.
Patent tellas, Thyphisque nonos
Detegat orbs,
Nec sit terris vltima Thyle,
The time will come in years long hence, when the Occean Seas shall loose
their bands of things, and a great Earth shall lie open, and discover new
Countries to Ship Masters, neither shall Thyle then be the farthest known
land.

I have left out, the counterfaited Copy, reported of antiquitye, as
appears: and proceed in the true discourse.
ALL this part of the Gloabe of the Earth, is at this day sailed about,
saving that quarter, which lies toward the North: whose Sea coasts, have not
as yet been viewed over. From the North to the South, it falls down under
the form of two places, almost environed with Water, which are divided with a
narrow straight. That place: almost environed with Water, which is more
Northerlye, comprehends now Spain, the Province of Mexico, Terra florida,
and Terram nouam, the new found land. But that which lies Southerlye (which
the Spaniardes call Terra firma) contains Perreu and Brasill. The knowledge
of all which Countries, the student of Geographie, may read Liuius Apolonius,
Peter Martyr of Millaine, Maxinilian of Transiluaniae, who in the Latin tongue
have written, etc.

Of Asia.
ASia is divided from Europa, by the River Tanaic, and also by a line drawn
out from his fauntaines unto Granduie, the which is a Goulph of the North
Detean. But it is divided from Affric, by Istmus, which is between Mare
Mediterraneum, tetraneum, and the gulf of Arabia, the residue, the Occean and
the seas do compass about.

The Ancients have manifoldly divided this, but at this day, it seems unto
be, that it may stilye be divided into five parts, according unto her Empires,
by the which she is governed. The first part whereof, that which joins is
Europe, and obayeth the great Duke of Moscouia, shall be limited with the
frosen sea (with the river of Obil) with the lake of Bitaia, and with a line
drawn from thence to the Caspian sea, and with Istmus, which is between this
sea, and Pontus Eurinus. The second shall be that which obayeth to the great
Cham, Emperor of the Tartars, whose limits from the South, are Mare Caspium,
the river Iaxartes, the mountain Imaus: from the East and from the North, the
Occean: from the West, the Kingdom of the Duke of Moscouia, already spoken
of. The third part, the offspring of ye Ottomans do occuple, and contains
what land soever is between Pontus Eurinus, Mare Aegeum, (now called
Archipelogus) and Mare Mediterianeum, Mare Aegyptum, the Gulf of Arabia and
Persia, the River Tigris, Mare Caspium, and Istnu^^: which is to be seen
between this and Pontus Eurinus. Under the forth shall be comprehended the
kingdom of Persia, which at this day, is governed by the Sophy: It has the
O^tomanus (with whom it makes almost continual war) on the West: the
Kingdom of the great Cham, on the North: and to the East, it stretches almost
as far as the river Indus: But on the South it is washed with the sea, which
at this day is called Mare Indicum, and in times past, Mare Rubrum, the Red
sea. The fifth part shall have the rest, which now they term the Indies, as
it was also called in times past: which is not governed by one alone, as others
are, but by many small Kings, for every Region thereof, has almost his
Prince: many of the which, also are fributarie to the great Cham. Neither is
this to be passed over, that certain places upon the sea Coasts, which are
from the gulf of Arabia, commonly called, Cabo de lampo (which thou see to
the 30. degree of the latitude of the North,) are in manner all possessed by
the Portugal, or else are Tributarie unto him.

The Islands which are ascribed to this Asia, among all most innumerable, these
be the chief, Creta and Rodus, in Mare Mediterraneum: Taprobana and Zeilan in
the Indian Occean, where also in the remembrance of our forefathers, the
Portugals discovered both the Ianae, Borneo, Celebes, Paloban, Mindaneo,
Gillano, with the Moluccis, full of spicerie. Then Iapan was found, and of late
now Guinea, but this is the last: and whether it be an Island or fastened to
the land Antarctike, it is not evident.

Not only among all profane writers, as they term it, this part of the
earth, for the first Monarchs in ye work, as of the Assyrians, Persians,
Babylonians, and Medes, is greatly renowned: but also in the holy Scriptures
that is more famous then the rest, for berrin not only mankind was created by
the most blessed and almighty God: deluded and corrupted by his enemy Satan,
and restored by Christ our Savior, but also we read that well near all the
history of both Testaments was therein written and complete.

This Asia Strabo does handle in six books, beginning at the 11. Ptholome
sets forth in three books, the 5. the 6. and the 7. Likewise in 12.
tables, and attributes unto it 40. Provinces. Of the new Writers, none has
universally described it, Marcus Paulus and ^enel^an, Ludouicus Vartomannus,
and John Mandeuile, (but many Fables are set down of him) have written so
much of it, as they knew worthy of knowledge travailing over those
Countries, etc.

Of Africa.
THE ancients have divided this many ways, at this day, as John Leo writes,
divided it into four parts, to wit, Barbaria, Numidia, Libia, and the (...),
of the Negroes, (...) which they think the (...) they (...) (...) with the sea
Atlantic,snd the middle earth sea called Mediterraneo, with the (...) Atlas,
and with (...) Country bordering upon Egypt(...)which of the inhabitants is
called Beledi(...)da, and Brings forth Dates, (whereupon, of the Arabians it
has none other name) but the Date bearing Country) is ^^^^tted on the West,
with the sea Atlantic; and on the North with the mount Atlas, toward the East,
it runs out to Eloaeat, a City, ^n. hundred miles distaunt from Egypt: ye
deserts of Lybia, are on the South sides thereof. And as for Lybia, it is the
third part (...) called in the Arabian toongue Sarra, which word signifies
as much as Desert* it begins: toward the East, at the river Nilus: (...)
from thence it goes Westward to the Sea Atlantic and Numidia lies in the
North side thereof: Southward it joins it self to the Negroes, the name
being taken, either of ye inhabitants, which are of black color, or else of
the River Nigris, which passes through this country. This has on the North
side, Libia: on the South side, the Ethiopian sea: on the West, the Kingdom
of Gualatae: and on the East, the Kingdom of Goagae. We are to consider, that
in this manner they knit up all Africa, with the middle land sea, which is
Mare Mediterraneo, with the Sea Atlantic, also with the Ethiopian sea, and
with the river of Nilus, of whence both Egypt and Aethiopia be ascribed to
Asia: which notwithstanding properly I think good to join to Affric. For
Aethiope indeed at this day does contain, the Empire of Presbiter John, which
of all new Writers is assigned to be joined to Africa: and I think with
Ptolome, it is convenient, that it ought rather to be lymitted with the middle
earth and Occean sea, than with a River, and it shall have the form of A pena
insula, joined to Asia, with an Istmus or straight of land, which is between
the middle earth sea, and the gulf of Arabia.

The South part hereof, was not heretofore and we^ of the Auncientes, until
the year of Christ. Anno 1497. when Vasco de Gama passed first with (...) and
no ^^^ danger by the Promentorie or good hope, otherwise termed Bona spei, ^^^
^aylyng Abb^t Africa ^^^ to Cal^^u^. This part of the Persians and Arabians
is called Zanzibar.

^^^ he said Promentorie of good hope, the inhabitaunts are very black, which
I think meet to speak off (because all then think that the heat, and
neerenesse of the Sun is the only cause of their blackness. It is evident,
that it is less hot here, than it is at the sea of Magelan) if in respect of
the dissaunte of Heaven we will measure the heat of ye place, where
notwithstanding, they are said to be very white: and if we will attribute this
blacknes to the burning of ye Sun, we are to consider how the Spaniards, and
the Italians, and other Nations in the South part, have their bodies so white,
forasmuch as they are, as far from the Equinoctial line, as are the said
inhabitaunts of the Promentory of good hope: the one being toward the South,
the other toward the North.

They which live under Preter John, are brownish, but they which inhabit
Zeylan, and Malabar are very black, under one self same distance from the
Equator, and under the seen Parallel of heaven. But a man may more marvel
at this, that in all America, there are found no black men, saving a few in a
place, which they call Quareca. What then is the efficient cause of this
color? It can be no otherwise, but either the dryness of heaven, or of the
earth, or perchance a certain unknown property of the soil, or a certain
reason hidden properly in Nature unknown unto man, or altogether vnperteiued.

But these things I leave to be considered of the searchers out of the nature
of things.

This Country of the Greeks is called Lybia, of the Latins Africa, because it
is without the extremity of told.

Or (if we believe Josephus, it is so called of Afer, one of ye posterity of
Abraham). Another reason of the name, thou shall find in John Leo.

The nobler parts of this Island (for I think it not necessary to set down
all here by name) seeing they are to be seen in the Map or table, are
Madagascar, and the Island which they call Canariae, likewise that which they
call commonly, Capo Verdo (of Vividis) as also of Saint Thomas, situated under
the Equinoctial, which is rich in Sugar.

Among the Ancients, none has perticularly described this Country: But
thereof read in the navigations of Hanno, of Africa, and of Iacobus in Diodorus
Siculus. Of the fresher Writers, read Aloysius Cadamostus, Vascus de Gama,
Frauncis Aluares, which travailed over all Aethiope: but of all other Ioannes
Leo, has most diligently described it Joan Barrius does also promise, and
volume of Africa. Of Nilus the greatest River in all the world, there are
letters extant, of Joan Baptist Ramuseus and Hieronymi Fracastorius.

Of Europe.
EUrope, whereof it took this name, or who has been the Author of the name,
it is not yet known: unless we say it took the name of Europa Tyria, as says
Herodotus, in his fourth book.

Plynie names this the nurse of a people conqueror of all Nations, and the
goodlyest land in the world: sometime compared to Asia and Africa, not in
greatness, but in manhood. It is certain, that forasmuch as Europa is well
inhabited, it is not much inferior to any of them both, in abundance of
people. The Northerly and Westerly side hereof, is washed with the Occean: the
South side, is severed from Africa, with Mare Mediterraneum (the middle earth
sea). Afterward toward the East (as Glarean testifies) Europe is divided from
Asia, with the sea Egeam (now called Archipelagus) with the sea Euxinum, (at
this day called Mare maggiore) with ye mareys Meotide, (at this day called,
Mare delle Zabacobe) with the river Tanais, (commonly called Don) and with
Istmus, which from the fountains whereof, lies straight North and by this
means, it has the form of Apeni insulae, or a land like an Island, an may
be seen in the Map. The head hereof is Rome, sometime the conqueror of all
the world.

The Countries thereof, as we call them at this day, are Spain, France,
Germany, Italy, Slauonia, Grecia, Hungaria, Polonia, with Lithuania, Moscouia,
or more significately Russia, and that Peni Insula, whereon stands Noruegia,
Suedia, and Gothia. Of the Islands thereof, first presents it self England,
Ireland, Grenland, Friseland, placed in the Occean sea. In the middle land
sea, she has Citilia, Sardinia, Corsica, Candia, Maideira, Minorica, Corphu,
Negropont, and other meaner Islands. The names and scituations of every which,
the Map does unfold.

This our Europe has besides the Roman Empire over the whole earth, When Rome
surceased to be the ouerco^mer of the world, by svvord and violence: then she
practiced to subdue more dominions by supersticious Heresy making hie chief
capitain the former Tiranie.
28. Kingdoms, besides if thou add unto them the 14. which Damianos Agoies
does reckon in Spain alone, being Kingdoms in general, that have received
the Christian Religion: which is fertile beyond measure, having a natural
temperature, and air calm enough, not to be accounted inferior to any other,
in plants of all kind of grain, wine, and trees, but to be compared to the
best regions. So pleasant, and beautified with goodly Cities, Towns, and
Uillages, that albeit she be less in form, than other parts of the Earth: yet
she is counted the better, and always has been so accepted, for men's manhood
of all ancient writers most of all renowned, as well for the Empire of the
Macedonians, as especially for the might of the Romans, the commendation
thereof may be seen in Strabo, which has very well set her forth in his
third book, and in the seventh book following. Look also into other
Geographers, of the later and most approved Writers: among other, which have
gone about to describe Europe, are Volateranus, Sebastian Munster, Dominic
Niger, George Rithaymerus, in their Geographies, but peculiarly Pius the 11.
Christopherus, and Ancelmus Cellae.

Cherubinus stella, Ioannes Herbaceus, and George Meyer, has put in writing
many iourneyes, almost over all Europe, and have noted the distaunces of
places. The same has William Gra^arolus, done in the end of his book, which
is entitled, De regimme iter agentium, The Regiment of wayfaring men. Thus
much forth of Ottelius.

Of India.
WEll near all writers, with one consent do teach, that India is the noblest
part of the whole globe of ye earth: and that there is no greater Country
comprehended under one name. It is so called of the river Indus. The space of
India, according to Strabo and Pliny, is closed in the West with the River
Indus: on the North, with the hill Taurus: and the East, with the East season
the West, with his own sea, to wit, with the Indian sea. It is divided into
two Countries, the River Ganges running between: one of which, that is
Westerly, is called within Ganges: the other, that lies more to the East, is
surnamed, without Ganges. In the holy Scripture we read, that the one is
called Euila, and the other Seria, as Niger testifies, Marcus Paulus of Uenice
seems to divide it into three, into the more, the less, and the middlemost:
which he says, is called Abasia.

All this India, is not only happy, for the great store of people and towns
almost innumerable, but also for the abundaunce of all things, copper and lead
only excepted, if we give credit to Pliny. As the rivers there are very
many, so are they very great, through whose watery ouerflowing it comes to
pass, that in the moist ground, the force of the Sun approaching,
ingendreth or brings forth all things in great quantity: and seems almost
to fill the whole world, with Spice and Precious stoanes. Of which, it
abounds more than all other Countries of the world.

There are many Islands joining unto it, here and there scattered in her
Occean; so that worthily a man may ^at her, the world of Islands. First of all,
therein is Iapan, which is called of Marcus Paulus the Uenetian, Zipangri:
which for that few years past, it was not known of many, I think good in
this place to speak somewhat of it.

The Island stretches far abroad, and has almost the same elevation, of
heaven, that Italy here in Europe has. The Inhabitaunts are very denout,
being much given to Religion, learning, and wiseddine, and are very earnest
serchers out of the truth. They use nothin^^ more than prayer, which after our
manner; they exercise in their Churches.

They acknowledge one Prince, upon whose rule and beck they do depend: but
he also, has one above him, called of them Voo, in whose power is the greatest
authority of holy things, and Religion: perhaps, the one may be lykened to
the Pope, the other to the Emperor, to him the common people do commit with
all r^a^rence, the salvation of their souls. They adore one God alone,
portrayed with three heads, whereof notwithstanding, they are able to give no
reason. They study to keep down their bodies with fasting, for a testimonye
of repentance. They fence themselves with the sign of the Cross, against the
invasions of the Devil, as we do: so that both in Religion, and also in
manner of life, they seem to follow Christians.

There are also the worthy Islands of Moluccus, renowned for the fruitefulnesse
of spices, and famous for the Bird of them called Manucodiata, which we call
the Bird of Paradise, Sumatra, is also an Island known of the ancients, in
times past termed Taprobana. There are many other, as Iaua Mayor, and Minor,
Bornio, Timor, and others, all which are to be seen in the Card, or Map.

These Indius the Ancients have sit with with great praises, Diodorus
Sio^^lus, Herodotus, Pliny, Strabo, O^ute^^ ^^, and A^ianos in the life of
Alexander the great. There is ^^^ant, also ^ letter of Alexander the great,
written to Aristotle, touching the situation of India. Of the late Writers,
^^udouicus Vartomanus, Maxi^han^^ de Transiluanus, ^oanues Barteus, in his
Decades of Asia, and Cosmas Indopleates, whom Petrus Gellius recites Ipan
Macer a Lawyer has also written three books of the Histor^es of India.

The Empire of Turkey.
WE have gathered for the reader, out of the Histori^graphers of our time, in
these few word, the original and increase of the Turkish Empire, and how by
little and little, it has grown to this greatness, wherein at this day it
seems to threaten us. In the year after Christ's birth 1300. one Ottoman a
Turk, the son of Ziclius, a man of ba^e estate, began among the Turks, so
have ^ai^r and dignity, for his wit and skillfulnesse in martial prow^^e.
This man gave name so the family of the Turkish Emperors^ and first appointed
their king. And in ^8. years in which he ruled, he ^an Bithinta, and
Cappadoeia, and possessed ^e^ye many strong places, ^ieng upon M^re Ponticum
His son Orolianes succeeded him, who sacked Prusia, a very di^a^^cio tie, and
^rade it the head of his kingdom. The ^^. years of his reign: ^e fighting with
ill success; was slain by the Macetarians and left his son Amuramasim bear
rule: who being sent for by the Greeks being at variance, was the first that
came out of ^^^ into Europe. He took Callipolis, and Cherronesus, and over
came Abyous. When the Cities as Philipopolis and Hadrianapolis were brought
under his subjection, and that ^eru^a and Bulgaria were taken from us, entering
into the uppermost Mysia, he dyed, being stricken with a dagger, the 23. year
of his Empire. Whose Son Ba^^zotes, when his brother was stayne, did set upon
the greatest part of Thrace, subdued well near all Greece, and Phoc^s, a ^^^
^^ of Bulgaria but being overcome by T^^eberlane, di^^ without reno^me. When
the Father was taken, C^lepinus his son took rule in hand, and when he had
quite overthrown, Sigismond in battle, ^^^ had begun to spoil the borders
of the Emperor of Constantinople, dyed in the very flower of his age when he
had borne rule side years. Mahome^is after him took rule in hand, which made
very sharp war, upon the ^ldiathians, subdued the most part of Sclaudnia,
first passed over the river Danubius, brought Mace^onia into thraldom, and
came as far as the Ionian sea, removing his royal seat out of Bithinsa, he
placed it in Hedrianapolis, where he dyed the 14. year of his Empire.
Afterward Amurathes the second, took upon him the o^^^te of rule, who wan
Epirus, Aetolia, Achaia, Berlia, Attica and Thesialonica, and city ^^biect to
the Uenetians, Him succeeds Mahom^tes the second, who destroyed Athens, and
wa^^ Constantinople, by assault the 29. day of May, Antio, Do^^. 145^. he
brought under his subjection, the Empire Trapesuntindeth, he took Corinth, he
subdued by war the Islands of Lemnus, Euborae, and Mitylene, and overcome
Capha, a City of the Gen^wayes: he ruled 32. years. Bagaz^tes the second made
war against the ^enetians, and took from them Paupactise, Methona, and
Dirrahium, and spoiled all Dalmatia, and at the last died with poison. His
son Zelimus took rule in hand, who after he had overcome Alchair, a very
strong City in Egypt, and slain Sultan, he brought Alexandela and all Egypt
under his Empire, and took Damascus, Soliman the only some of Zelimus,
succeeded his Father, wann^ Belgradum, seek Buda the Kings City, in Hungary,
spoiled Sirigonium, and well near all Hungary. He gofe the I Will of Rhodes by
yielding, and ouerthrewe Quinq^ and Ecclesias, the ^^^^ Churches.

When the City Iula was taken, he besieged Zigothum, and died in the assault:
which City his son Zelimus the second, heir of the Empire spoiled in the
year 1566. And in this manner under 11. Emperors, they subdued unto
themselves by Turkish tyranny in 260. years, a great part of Africa, a
greater part of Europe, and the greatest part of Asia. But he that desires a
fuller knowledge of these histories, let him read Paulus Iouius, Christopher
Richerius of Seen, Cuspinianus, Baptista Ignatius, Gilbertus Nozorenus, Andreas
Lacuna, Pius the 2. in his 4. chapter of Europe, and other writers of Turkish
matters. Laonicus Chalcendilas has most dililigently set out ye original of
ye Turk, and the offspring of the Ottomans.

FINIS LIBRI XV.
NCIPIT LIBER XVI. DE LAPIDIBVS Preciosis.
FOR the properties of the Earth and of the parties thereof, is described in
general: by help of God, is now our purpose to plant here somewhat, of ye
beauty and ornament thereof in special. Of things, yt beautify ye earth, some
be clean without soul and without feeling, as all thing that grows under the
ground, and is gendered in veins of the earth, as stones, colors, and
metal: and of these we shall first speak by order. And some with life and
soul, as roots, herbs, and trees, and some with soul and feeling, as men,
and other beasts, of whom we shall last speak. And we shall show first by
order of A.B.C. the things that be gendered in the earth, and in the veins
thereof.

Of Arena. chap. 1.
Gravel is called Arena, and has that name of dryness. And if it were thrust
and bruised together in a man's hand, it should rattle and make noise for
dryness and hardness. And if gravel be thrown on a white cloth, it defiles
it not, as Isi. says li. 15. ca. 4. Also gravel of the sea is washed of all
manner slime and wose, and of gleamie fenne, as Aristotle says liber de
proprietatibus elementorum. And therefore because of great dryness it runs
not, nor turns not perfectly into stone. Also li. 4. Mcth. he says, that
pure earth turns not perfectly into stone: for it continues not, but
breaks. And therefore drines euerco^ming all moisture, suffers not earth to
turn into sadness of stone. Therefore it is ye gravel and sand is more hard
in substance then common earth, and more soft then a stone, and may be
departed in many parts. And so grauel and sand is cold and dry and small, and
most heavy in weight when it is thrust togethers, and though of it self it be
small and baraine for defalt of heat and of moisture, and mastry of cold and
drines, when a shower falls thereon, it breaks not, but sennye things is
washed away and wasted, and gravel and sand is more pressed togethers, and is
more pure and sad: for the parts cleave more together. Also the waves of the
sea is let with multitude of grauel and sand, and withstood with heaps
thereof, and constrained that it passes not the meares and bounds yt God has
ordained thereto, as Hierome says super le. cap. 5. He set grauel and sand
mark and meare to the sea, etc. Also he has universally kind of during and of
cleansing. And so water that runs through gravel is most clean and fresh,
as Constantine says.

Also it has virtue to cleanse metal, and to cleanse always the rustinesse of
metal. Gold, Brass, and Iron is made bright with froting of Gravel and Sand.

Also it has virtue to cool and to smite inward, and to stop and to swage
swelling, as it fares of Thimalia, that is, gravel and sand shaven or bruised
of a Smithes stone, which is good for all the foresaid things, as Constantine
says plainly, and has virtue like to oar of metal. And so among gravel
and sand both of rivers and of the sea, is found golden gravel often times, and
also bright polished stones, and precious stones are found in the sea cliues
among gravel. Also gravel of rivers and of the sea, be gathered to heaps
with contrary winds, that reaseth parts thereof hetherwarde and thetherward,
and stops and taryeth often the waters of the rivers, of course and running
into the sea, as Iero. says super Amos. 8. Ibi destuct sicut riuus Aegypti,
etc. There it is openly said, that the water of Nilus is lot with heaps of
gravel, that are gathered together in the month of the river, and suffers
not the water of Nilus to run into ye Sea: but constrains it openly, and
makes it turn again and ouerflowe the plains of Egypt: but the more the
water is let, and compelled to turn again with those heaps of gravel,
with the more course and might it runs and falls into the sea: and it is
said that it falls the more deep into the sea, when those heaps be departed
and avoided, as Ier. says there. Also it is hard and most peril to fall and
smile on heaps of gravel, hid in the sea under water, as it is rehearsed
before, where it is showed of perils of the sea.

Of Claye. chap. 2.
Argilla. Potters Clay.
CLay is called Argilla, which is tough earth, glewie and gleymie, apt and
meet to diverse works of Potters, and has that name Argilla of Arges, as
Isidore says lib. 16. cap. primo. For among them were first earthen vessels
made of such claye: and as it is said there, by working of heat that consumes
and wastes the moystie parts, and dries and hardens the earthie parts,
such claye turns into ^ile. Also often it happens, that cold freeseth the
water in such fennie earth, and the earth turns to stone: Also changing of
unctuous sen into stone, falls often by heat running and hardening the matter,
as it said 4. lib. Metheorer. Unctuous fenne is able to such changing and
turning into stone, by burning and hardening of heat: for an unctuous thing is
mean between a gleymie, and vaporatiue thing that passes out of things, in
breathing or smoking. And the thing that is unctuous has moisture in it self,
and so because of the party that is vaporatiue, it may congeale and be made
hard by heat: and because of the party that is gleymie, it may not all pass
out in vapors, but be more thrusted together and made thick and hard, and so
turned into stone, as the Commentour says. Claye by his coldness stauncheth
blood at the nose, A remedy to stop bleeding.
if clay be tempred with strong vinegar, and laid to the temples.

Of Alabastro. chap. 3.
AS Isidore says li. 15. ca. 5. Alabaster is a white stone, Alabastrites.
with strakes of diverse colors. Of such stone the ointment box that the
Gospel speaks of, Luke. 7.
was made: and of this stone, the ointment vessel is made at best without
corruption, and that stone that breeds about Thebes, in Egypt and Damascus,
is more white, than other: but the best comes out of Inde. And Dioscucides
calls this stone Intomar, and it is said, that this stone helps to win
victory, and mastrie. Also he says, that this gendreth and keeps friendship.

Of Gold. chap. 4.
Gold is called Aurum, and has that name of Aura, still wether, as Isidor.
says lib. 26. For it shines most, in air that is bright: for it is kindlye,
that shining of metal blase the more, if they be shined with other light.
Therefore things that make shining the more blassing, be called Aurarij, and
gold that is most blasing is called Obrisum, for it shines with bright
beams, and is of best color. And the Hebrews call it Ophar, and the Greeks
name it Chrusos.

And a thin plate, of the which golden threads are cut out, is called Brathea.
Huc vsque Isi. cap. de mettallis. In li. Metheororum parum ante fine Aristotle
says, that gold, as other metal, has other matter of subtle brimstone and
red and of quick silver subtle and white. In the composition thereof is more
sadness of brimstone, then of air and moisture of quick silver: and
therefore gold is more sad and heavy than silver. In composition of silver, is
more commonly quick silver than white brimstone as he says. Then among
metal, nothing is more sad in substance, or more better compact than gold:
and therefore though it be put in fire it wastes not by smoking and vapors,
neither lesseth the weight, and so it is not wasted in fire: but if it be
melted with strong heat, then if any filth be therein, it is cleansed thereof,
and that makes the gold more pure and shining. No metal stretches more
with hammer work than gold: for it stretches so, that between the anfield
and the hammer without breaking and renting in pieces, it stretches to lease
gold. And among metal, there is none fayrer in sight than gold, and
therefore among Painters, gold is chief and fairest in sight, and so it
darkeneth shape and color of other metal. Also among metal is nothing so
effectual in virtue, as gold. Plato describes the virtue thereof and says,
that it is more temperate and pure than other metal, for it has virtue to
comfort, and for to cleause superfluities gathered in bodies: and therefore it
helps against leprosy and meselrio. The filing of gold taken in meat or in
drink, or in medicine preserves, and and lets breeding of leprosy, or
namely hides it and makes it unknown: for often use of gold lets and
tarieth the breeding of Lepra, or makes it unknown, as Auicen says. Also the
some filing and powder, with the juice of Borage, and with the bone of the
heart of a Heart, A medicu^^.
helps against sownding, and against cardiaele passion. Also thin plates of
gold, fire hot, quenched in wine, makes the wine profitable against ye evil
of the spleen, and against many other evils and passions melancholic: and also
burning made with instruments of gold, is better than with other manner of
metal, for it keeps ye place that is burnt without stinking. Also powder of
the offall of gold heals spots of eyes, if it be therein. Also gold
comfort sore lymmes, though it be not corporate therein, and though it
norisheth them not, yet it does away with the sharpness thereof, superfluities
that grow in members, and cleanses them in that wise as Plat. says. Also hot
gold does away hair of members: and what that is burnt or froted therewith,
grows no more, as Consta. says. Also gold smitten, foundeth not as brass
does and silver, nor creketh nor cleaves, but strecheth even abroad, except
other strong metal be meddled therewith in some wise. For as long as brass or
latton is meddled with the substance of gold, it cleaves always under the
hammer, and is inobedient to take out shape by beating of the hammer: no
therefore it needs that all superfluity be put away, and the gold cleansed
by melting and made pure, that it may be able to be shapen with a hammer, to make
thereof some vessel with couenable shape as Gregory says. And when a plate of
gold shall be meddled with a plate of silver, or joined thereto, it needs to
beware namely of three things, Three special properties to be observed in
melting gold with silver.
of powder, of wind, and of moisture: for if any hereof come between gold
and silver, they may not be joined together, the one with the other: and
therefore it needs to meddle these two metals together, in a full clean
place and quiet, and when they be joined in due manner, the joining is
inseparable, so yt they may not afterward be departed asunder.

(*Gold makes wise men glad: and spendthrifts mad: Gold vpholdeth kingdoms:
Gold is preferred in many common wealths before Justice: and therefore to
those that put their delyght therein, it is called Auri sacra fames, of ye
misuse thereof. It is reported by late Writers, of the golden mountains of
Cibana, and of the wonderful riches of gold that the king of Spain has
yearly from the West and East Indies, gathered by a multitude of slaves,
ordained for that purpose: notwithstanding the usurers yt inhabit Britain, do
make more slaves that are free borne, by raising of rentes, engrossing of
lands, and hindering of tillage, for the quantity of ground in one year, then
is subject among the Indies in three years, to the utter overthrow of lands,
goods, wife and children.)

Of Laton. chap. 5.
LAton is called, Auricalcum, and has that name, for though it he brass or
copper, yet it shines as gold without, as Isid. says, for brass is Calco in
Greek. Also laton is hard as brass or copper for by meddling of copper, of
tin, and of Auripigment, and with other metal, it is brought in the fire to
color of gold, as Isid. says. Also it has color and likeness of gold,
but not the value. Also of laton be composed diners manner of vessels and
fair, that seem gold when they be new, but the first brightness dimmeth some
and some, and becomes as it were rustie, and so both in color and in smell
of copper, the first matter thereof, is known. Meat and wine kept in such a
vessel, takes an horrible savor and smell of the vice of brass: but
Colliria and medicines for the eyes be profitably kept in such vessel, and be
made sharp by the strength of brass, as Plat. says.

Of Auripigmento. cap. 6.
AVripigmentum is a vein of ye earth, or a manner of free stone that cleaves
and breaks, and it is like to gold in color. And this is called Lapis
Arcenicus by another name, and is double: read and citrine. And as Dioscorides
says, it has kind of brimstone, or burning and drieng, and if it be laid to
brass, it makes the brass white, and burns and wastes all bodies of
metal, except gold, as Diosc. says. And Plat. says, that Auripigmentum is
hot and dry in the fourth degree, and is a vein of the earth: and thereof is
double kind, red and citrine: and the citrine helps to medicine, and has
virtue of dissoluing and tempering, of drawing and of cleansing: and so it
helps Tisike and Etike, and those that have evil breath, that comes of
moisture, if they gave thereon, and take the smoke thereof. Of Auripigment is
made Pisilo cracium, an ointment yt does away hair and makes them fall, when
it is fodde in hot lime. Also it helps against tetars and scabes, if the
place be softly anointed with soap and with Auripigment: but the place must be
washed anon, for if the ointment lie long thereto, it will fret the good flesh
as well as the evil, and stay away the shinne, and it has kind of slitting,
taruing, and of fretting, and makes soul and unseemly nails fall, that
better nails may grow, as Platea says.

(* Auripigmentum, a color called Orement, of some Orpine or Arsenike, and
dangerous poison. The red and ftretting Mercury is of the like operation.)

Of Silver. chap. 7.
Silver is called Argentum, and has that name as Isi. says of the speech of
Greek, for silver is called Argiron in Greek: and wonderfully it fares. For
though silver be white, yet it makes black lines and streakes in the body that
is scored therewith or ruled therewith, as Isi. says. In composition thereof is
quick silver and white brimstone, and therefore it is not so heavy as gold, as
Richardus Rufus says. There be two manner of siluers, simple and compounded
and the simple is fleeting, and is called, quick silver. The silver compounded
is massy and sad, and is compounded of quick silver pure and clean, and of
white brimstone not burning, as Aristotle says.

Of Quick silver. chap. 8.
Quick silver is a watrye substance meddled strongly with subtle earthy
things, and may not be dissolved, and that is for great drines of earth, that
melts not on a plain thing, and therefore it cleaves not to the thing yt it
touches, as does ye thing yt is watery. The substance thereof is white, and that
is for clee^nes of clear water; and for whitnes of subtle earth yt is well
digested. Also it has whitenes of meddling of air with ye foresaid things.
Also quick silver has the property, that it cruddeth not by it self kindly;
without brimstone: but with brimstone and with substance of lead, it is
congealed, and fastened togethers. And therefore it is said there; that quick
silver and brimstone is the element, that is to wit, matter, of which all
melting metal is made. All this said openly, lib. Metheororum. And also
Richardus Rufus, expounds it openly, in this manner: Quick silver is matter
of all metal, and therefore in respect of them it is a simple element. Of the
virtue and kind thereof, diverse men speak diversely: But what the meaning of
the Physicians is thereof, it may be known by these words. Quick silver (as
Plato says) is hot and moist in the fourth Degree, though some men deem that
it is cold in the same degree. That it is hot, it is known by effect of
working: for it dissolueth, pearceth and carueth, but for it seems full cold
in touch, some men deem it amiss, and mean that it is cold. But some men
mean, that Quick silver is made by great heat of a vein of the earth: but
it is known that that is false, for by heat of fire, it is soon wasted away
in smoke: but of earth it is gendred, and is kept as it were fleeting water,
and is full long kept in a cold vessel and sound, and cleaves so together,
and so strong yt it may to nothing be meddeled, but it be first quenched, and
it is quenched with spettle when it is froted therewith: and namely when powder
is meddled with spettle, and specially when powder of bones of an Hen is
meddeled therewith: and quick silver passes out by euaporation is seething
and in smoking. The smoke thereof is most grievous to men that be thereby, for
it breeds the Walste and quaking, shaking and softening of the sinews. If it
be taken in at the mouth or into ye care, it thirleth and slays the members.
Against that peril, Goats milk is best, drunk in great quantity, with
continual moving oof the patient: for the same specially wine is good, in the
which, wormwood and Isop is sod. Huc vsque Plat. And it is called quick
silver, for it coniealeth matter in which it is done, as Isi. says li. 15. And
also there he says more to this. He says it is fleeting, for it runnenth, and
is specialy found in silver forges, as it were drops of silver molten, and it
is often found in old dirte of sinkes, and slime of pits: and also it is made of
Minis put in cauernes of iron, and a patent or a shell done there under, and
the vessel that is noynted therewith, shall be compassed with burning coals,
and then the quick silver shall drop. Without this, silver nor gold, nor
latton nor copper, may be ouergilte: and it is of so great virtue and strength,
that though thou put a stone of an hundred pound weight, upon quick silver of
the weight of two pound, the quick silver anon withstandeth the weight, and
if thou do thereon a scruple of gold, it consumes into it self the
lightness thereof: and so it appears it is not wayght, but Nature to which
it obeys. Taken in drink, it slays because of weight, and is best kept in
glass vessels: for it pearceth, boreth, and fretteth other matters. Huc vique
Isidorus lib. 16. chap. de metallis.

Then silver is white and clear, and sounding and pure, and may well be
wrought with hammer, but not so well as gold, and keeps and saves well
balm, and helps the virtue in the stone Iaspis, yt has more virtue in
silver then in gold, as it is said in Lappidario, and it will melt: and when it
is molt in the fire, it has the color of fire, nevertheless when it is cold,
it is again white and hard. And though it be of more great and boistous
matter then gold, yet among metal it bears the price after gold, in
worthiness and value: and is medicinable, and helps against many evils. For
the some thereof heals wounds, and fulfilleth the place, and fretteth away
superfluity of dead flesh, and lets it not grow, and brings in the whole
flesh, and cleanses filth and hoare of bodies, a marking instrument of silver,
keeps from stinking, and comfort feeble members, and lays and makes them
steadfast, and rusteth, if it touches the earth, and takes his color again,
if it be scoured with gravel, sand, and salt.

Of Adamant. chap. 9.
ADamas is a little stone of Inde: and is colored as it were iron, and shines
as Crystal, but it passes never the quantity of a walnut. Nothing
overcomes it, neither iron nor fire, and also it heateth never: for of the
Greeks it is called, a virtue that may not be daunted. But though it may not
be overcome, and though it despise fire and iron, yet it is broke with new hot
blood. Grauers use the pieces thereof to sign and to rule, and to hollow
precious stones. This stone is contrary to Magnes: for if an Adamas be set by
iron, it suffers not the iron to come to the Magnes, but it draws it by a
manner of vyolence from the Magnes, so that though the Magnes draws iron to
it self, the Adamas draws it away from the Magnes. It is said, that this
stone warns of venime, as Electrum does, and puts off diverse dreads and
fears, and withstandeth witchcraft. Huc vsque Isi. li. 15. ca. de Christallis.
Dioscorides says, that it is called a Precious stone of reconciliation and of
love. For if a woman be away from her husband, or trespasseth against him, by
virtue of this stone Adamas, she is the sooner reconciled to have grace of her
Husband. And heereto he says, that if a very Adamas, be privily laid under a
woman's head that slepeth, her husband may know whether that she be chaste, or
no: For if she be chaste by virtue of ye stone, she is compelled in her sleep
to embrace her husband: and if she be untrue, she leapeth from him out of the
bed, as one that is unworthy to abide the presence of that stone. Also us
Dioscorides says, the virtue of such a stone borne in the left shoulder, or in
the left arm pit, helps against enimars, against madness, chiding and
strife, and against friends that anoy men that dream in their sleep, against
fantasy, against dreamings and venime.

( Addition.
Adamas, A Diamond, whereof there be diverse kinds, (as in Pliny) and in other
it appears. His virtues are to resists poison, and witchcrafte: to put away
fear, to give victory in contention, to help them that be lunatike or
phrantike. I have proved (says D. Cooper) that a Diamonde laid by a Needle,
causes that the Load stone cannot draw the needle. No fire can burte it, no
violence break it, unless it be moysted in ye warm blood of a Goat.)

( Addition.
The principal Diamonds are found in the first India, in a Kingdom of the
Moors, named Decan, from whence they are brought to other regions. There are
also found other Diamonds, which are not so good, but somewhat white, and are
called Diamonds of the new mine, which is in the Kingdom of Narsinga. There
are made other false Diamonds, of Rubies, Topaces, and white Saphires, which
appear to be fine. Of these, some are found, that have half the color of
Rubies, and other of Saphires, other also of the color of a Topase, other have
all these colors mingled togethers. Of the whitest of these, they make many
small Diamonds, which cannot be known from the true, saving by touching of such
are skillful in that practice.)

Of the Agat.
( Addition.
In the borders of Scotland grows and is found the stone that is called Agat,
whereof some be with mixed colors of oaker red, bluish, and Icie colored.
Some like a reddish Amber, good to ingraue any feature, as for his virtue, if
it be no more, than the estimation of the stone, it is little worth.)

Of Christalines.
( Addition.
Beyond Bristow, on ye hill called S. Vincents rock, grows many: clear
stones, whereof some are very hard, and will race on glass. They cannot be
counterset, because they grow natural: of little estimation, as more worthier
things are, that ought to be more set by: but far fet, and dear bought, is
good, for the foolish.

Of Ametisto. chap. 10.
AMetistus is a stone of Inde, and is chief among precious stones of purple
color, as Isi. says. Amatistus is purple in color, meddled with color of
violet, as it were a blasing rose, and tightly rasting out as it were glisning
beams of light. Isidore says that the other kind thereof is much like to
blewe, and is not all fiery, but it has color of wine. And five kinds be
thereof, as Isidore says. But as Dioscondes says: The Purple red is most
noble and better then the other. For the virtue thereof helps against
drunkenness, and makes waking: and remoueth away idle thoughts, and makes
good understanding, and is soft, so that men may grave and write therein.

( Addition.
Amethistus, a stone called an Amethist, of color purple: but the more Rose
color the better.)

Of Achate. chap. 11.
AChates is a precious stone, and is black, with white veins, and has that
name Achates of a river, yt is called so: the which is in Cicilia. By the which
river that stone was first found, as Isid. says: and is now found in many
regions and lands: and a manner kind of that stone is in Creta, as Dioscorides
says, with bliew veins. And another kind is in Inde speckled with red drops,
as Isid. says. Men believe that the first manner thereof helps witchcraft.
For therewith tempest is changed: and slinteth rivers and streams, as it is
said. Also Dioscorides says, the same kind is good to the shape of Images of
Kings, and to show likeness of sleeps. And the manner kind of Creta changes
perils, and makes gracious and pleasing, and fair showing and speaking, and
gives might and strength. The third manner stone that is of Inde, comfort
the sight, and helps against thirst and venim, and smells sweet if it be
nigh, as Dioscorides says.

( Addition.
Achates, a precious stone, whereon are represented diverse figures. Some have
the Image of the nine Muses, some of Venus. It was one of the 12. stones, yt
God willed to be put in Aarons vestiment. It is supposed that the Magitians, by
the smoke of that stone, did put away tempests and storms. This stone is
interlined with white, and light bleiwish lines, etc.)

Of Abeston. chap. 12.
ABeston is a stone of Archadia with iron color: and has that name of fire:
if it be once kindled it never quenches. Of that stone is made that craftye
ingin, of the which nations taken with sacrilege wondered. For in a Temple of
Venus was made a ca^dle stick, on which was a lantern so bright burning, that
it might not be quenched with tempest, neither with rain, as Isidore says,
lib. 15. cap. de Gemmis.

Of Absciso. chap. 13.
ABscisus is a precious stone, black and heavy, straked with read vemes. If
this stone be heat in the fire, it holds heat seven days: as Isidore
says. cap. de Gemmis.

Of Alabandina. chap. 14.
ALabandina is a precious stone, and has that name of a region of Asia, the
which is called Alabandina: The color thereof is like to the stone
Calcidonius: but it is more tare, as Isi. says, cap. de Cristallis. And
Dioscorides says, that Alabandina is a precious stone clear and some deal
red, as Cardius. The virtue thereof exciteth and increases blood.

( Addition.
Alabandina, a red stone, mixed with bliew, provoking blood. D. Cooper.)

Of Argirit. chap. 15.
ARgirites is a precious stone like to silver with golden speckes. Andromaia is
like thereto in color: and is a stone with color of silver, as Isidore
says. And is four cornered in shape, as the corner of a Diamond. And Witches
believe that it has that name for that it refraineth sodeine passions, and
wrath of hearts, as Isidore says, cap. de Gemmis aureis.

Of Astrione. chap. 16.
AStrion is a precious stone of Inde, nigh like to Crystal. In the middle
thereof shines a star with cleerenesse of the full Moon: and has that name
of Astris, stars: for if it be set in the stars light, it takes light of
them, as Isidore says, cap. de Crystal.

( Addition.
Astrios, a precious stone in Indie. Astroites, a stone like a Fishes eye.)

Of Allectoria. chap. 17.
ALlectoria is a stone that is found in the mawes of capons, and is like dim
Crystal: and the most quantity thereof is as much as a Bean. And as witches
tell, it is supposed that in battle fighting, this stone makes men
insuperable, that they may not be overcome, as it is said in Lapidario.
Dioscorides speaks of this stone, and says, that Allectorius the stone
exciteth ye service of Venus, and makes a man gracious and steadfast, and
vidor, wise and ready, and cunning in plea, and accords friends, and
quenches thirst in the mouth.

( Addition.
Alectoria, a stone found in the maw or Gissard of a Cock, of the bigness of
a Bean, and colored like Crystal: This stone is not to be found in every
Cock, until he be old, etc.)

Of Asterites. chap. 18.
ASterites is a precious stone, and is white, and conteyneth light therein
closed, as it were a Star going within, and makes the Sun beams white.

( Addition.
This Jewel is found in the mawe of a pure maid, that is fifty years of age, or
else among the Troglodites. Such is and incontine^cie of the world.
Vesper.)

Of Amatides. chap. 19.
AMatides is a precious stone, if a cloth be touched therewith, the cloth
withstandeth fire and burns not, though it put therein: But it receives
brightness and seems the more clear: and is lyks Alam, that may be brosed.
And withstandeth all evil doing of witches, as Isidore says, li. 16. cap. 10.

( Addition.
Amatices, it is supposed that in the mawe of the Cock Turtle done this stone
is to be found, and has virtue to increase concord and love.)

Of Bitumine. chap. 20.
Glue is slimie gleab of the earth, and gleaming and gendering, namelye in
marreis ground. And (as Isidore says, lib. 16. cap. 2. it is a manner of
gleaming earth, and is found beside the lake Asphalti in Judea. The kind
thereof is burning and of fiery kind, and holds so fast, and is so clongie,
that it is not broke with water nor with iron, but only with menstruall
blood, and it is good to joining of ships. Of this Glue is mention made in
Plat. in this manner. Asphaltis glue of Judea is hot and dry in the third
degree, Hot and dry.
and is earth of black color, and is heavy and stinking. And some men
mean, that it is earth gendered of the foame of the dead sea, and is made hard
as earth, and has virtue of drawing, and sodering, and fastening, and
consuming, and is full good to heal and cloase, and to sowder wounds, and
Botches, if it be beat to powder and put in a dry wound, though the wound be
full long and full wide. Also it is good to help the passions of the mother,
that pearceth and thirleth the spiritual members, if it be put upon coals,
and the stinking smoke thereof be drawn in at the nose and at the mouth. Also
it helps flumatike men, and sleeping Litergicis, that have the sleeping
evil: For it purges well fleame out of the head, as Platea. says.

( Addition.
Bytume^, a kind of natural lime or claie, clammie like Pitch, in old time
used in steed of Morteir, and in Lamps to burn in steed of Oil, being of
the nature of Brimstone, it is a good siment for earthen pots and cups.)

Of Berillo. chap. 21.
BEril is a stone of Inde, like in green color to Smaragde: but it is with
palenesse, and is polished and shapen among the Indes in six corners shape:
that dimnesse of color may be excited by the rebounding of the corners. And
otherwise shapen it has no bright seining. And of Berill be ten manner kinds,
as Isidore says, cap. de Viridibus Gemmis. Also there it is said, that
Crisoberillus is a manner kind of Berill. And the pale greennes thereof shines
toward the color of gold. And this stone comes to us out of Inde.
Dioscorides describes the virtues of Berill and says, that among Berill the
stone that is most pals is best, the virtue thereof is good against peril of
enemies, and against strift. And makes one so that he may not be overcome, and
makes him mild, and gives good wit, and helps against diseases of the
liver, and against fighthings and sobbings, and against bolkinges, and heals
moist eien, and burns his hand that bears it, if it be held before the
Sun, and makes a man great of state, and joins will love of matrimony.

( Addition.
I suppose that the Berill is none other than a gross Crystal, engendered of
the cold air and dry water hardened: as the North wind freeseth the common
streams, but with a more violent operation being either a thin green or
yelow, is more earthie then airie, which is perceived by his peise and
heaviness.)

Of Calculo. chap. 22.
CAlculus is a little stone meddled with earth, and is round and most hard, and
pure, and most smooth and plain in every side. And it has that name Calculus,
for it is trod with feet without grief of his smoothness and plainness. And
contrary heereto is a little stone that is called Scrupulus chesell, and is
most tough and sharp, and full lightlye if it still between a man's foot and
the shoe, it griueth full sore. And so such stones that be sharp and hard are
called Scrupea, as Isidore says, lib. decimo quinto. ca. 3. And often in the
body of a beast, this stone breeds of hot humors and gleamy, now in the
bladder, and sometime in the reins, as Constantine says. Look before lib. 7.
de Passionibus renum, cap. de Calculo.

( Addition.
Calculus is fallen. For the smooth Pibble stones, that net of many gross
colors, but to small effect.)

Of a Whetstone. cap. 23.
A Whetstone is called Cos, and has that name, for it whetteth and sharpeth
iron to cut and to carue. For Cotis is Greek, and is to say, caruing, as
Isidore says. And there be diverse manner of Whetstones. And some need Water
and some need Oil for to whet, but Oil: makes smooth, and water makes the
edge right sharp, as Isidore says, lib. codem. capitulo. 3. The Whetstone
has this property, that it serves another thing in whet^ing, and wastes
himself some and some, as Gregory says. The powder of the Whetstone helps
well in medicine, and has virtue of drieng, and of smiting again
repercussiue, and of staunching of blood, as Constantine says.

( Addition.
The ponder of a Whetstone is as good for a fresh wound to stape the bleeding,
as is a Pigges turde to the nose of him that bleedeth: for the greet of the one
is a pricking in the wound, and the stench of the other, anoyance to the head.)

Of Calce. chap. 24.
LIme is called Calx, and is a stone burnt, by meddeling thereof with Sand and
with water, Cement is made. And lime is called hot, as Isidore says. For
while it is cold in handeling, it contains privily within fire and great
heat. And when it is sprung with water, anon the fire that is within breaks
out. In the kind thereof is some wonder: For after that it is burnt, it is
kindeled in Water, that quenches fire. And lime is needful to building. For
one Stone may not clean to another stronglye, but they be joined with lime.

Lime that is made of white stone and hard, is best for walls: and Lime made
of soft stone is best for roofes. Huc vsque Isidorus, lib. decimo quinto. ca.
3. And Plat. says, that Lime is hot and dry in the fourth degree: and Lime
meddeled with Oil helps whelks and wounds that be rotted, and cloaseth and
soudereth cutting, and fretteth superfluity of flesh in wounds, and suffers
it not to grow. Hot Lime sod with Auripigment and water, makes hair to fall:
For it opens the poores with sharpness thereof, as Constantine says and
Plat. also.

Of Cemento. chap. 25.
CEment is lime, sand and water tempered togethers and meddeled: And such
meddeling is most needful to join stones together, and to pergit and to white
lime, walls. In painting and coloring of walls the first ground and chief to
take color is sement, and cleaves to wet walls, and namelye if it be plaistre
stone. For as Isidore says, lib. 16. cap. 13. the best sement made of all
stones is of the flint stone, or of plaistre, that is called Gypsis: the which
stone shines as it were Glass, also it will be broke into many small pieces.

Of Carbunculo. chap. 26.
CArbunculus is a precious stone, and shines as Fire, whose shining is not
overcome by night. It shines in dark places, and it seems as it were a
flame. And the kinds thereof be twelve, and the worthiest be those that shine
and send out beams, as it were fire, as Isidore says, libro. 16. cap. 3.
There it is said that Carbunculus is called Antrax in Greek, and is gendered
in Libia among the Troglodites. Among these twelve manner kinds of Carbuncles,
those Antraciles be the best that have the color of fire, and be compassed
in a white vein, which have this property: If it be thrown in fire, it is
quenched as it were among dead coals, and burns if water be thrown thereon.
Another kind of a Carbuncle is called Scandasirus: and has that name of a
place of Inde in the which it is found. In this manner of kind as it were within
bright fires, be seen as it were certain drops of gold. And this precious
stone is of great price without comparison in respect of other. Another manner
of kind there is that is called Signs, and has that name of bright burning of
lamps. And this precious stone is called Remissus Carbunculus. And there is
two manner of kinds: That one is with beams, as purple, and that other is of
the color of red silk. And if this be heated in the Sun with froting of
fingers, it draws to it self straw and leaves of books. It is said, that
it with stands grauing. And if it be sometime graued and printed with wax,
it takes with him a part of the wax, as it were with biting of a beast, as
Isidore says there. Among manner of kinds of Carbuncles, Balagius is counted,
that is red and bright, as Dioscorides says: and also it is said, that this
manner Carbuncle is found in the vein of the Sapphire: and therefore through
neerenesse of the Sapphire, Balagius has a manner mist, as it were sparkeling
about ye fire, that compasses him without. And this is openly seen if men
take heed thereto.

( Addition.
The Carbuncle orient, is of the color of red Lead, and in the night sparkling
like a coal.)

Of Crisoprasso. chap. 27.
CRrisoprassus is a stone of Ethiopia, and is hid in light, and seen in
darkness. For it is fiery by night and goldish by day, as Isidorus says.
Therefore by day it is hid, as it were washed away, and leeseth his shining,
and wareth pals as gold. And there is another manner, kind that is called
Crisoprassus, gendered in Inde: and this Crisoprassus is like in color to a
stone that is like to Prassius, and is green as a Leeke and is besprong with
certain, drops of gold, as it is said in Lapidario.

Of Calcidonia. chap. 28.
CAlcidonius is a pale stone, and shows dim color, as it were means
between Beril and Iacinct, as it is said in Lapidario. And is gendered among
ye Nasamos: and comes and is gendered of the rain of our Lord, as it is
said: and is found by shining in ye full of ye Moon, as Isidore says, lib.
16. An(...)t found but of three colors, as the Lapidarye says. And all
kinds thereof withstandeth grauing, and draws straw to it self, if it be
heated and chafed. Isidore says, this stone pierced and borne about one,
makes him have mastrie in causes, and helps against iapes and scorns of
feends, and keeps and saves virtues, as Dioscorides says.

( Addition
Man's conjecture is far from the true operation of hidden properties.)

Of Crisolito. chap. 29.
CRisolitus is a little stone of Ethiopia, shining as gold, and sprinkling as
fire. And is like to the sea in color, and somewhat green. If it be set in
gold and borne on the left arm, it fears feendes and chaseth them away, as
it is said, and it helps night frayes and breades: And abateth an evil that
is called Menlancholy, or does it away. And comfort the understanding, as
Dioscorides says. One manner of kind of Crisolitus, is Crisolimphis, the
color thereof is deemed golden by day, and fiery by night. And another manner
kind of Crisolitus is called Crisolentus, and is colored as gold, and is
right fair in sight in the morrow tide. And then as the day passes, his
color waxes dim. And this stone makes most soonest heat: For if it be set
by the fire, anon it waxes on a flame, as Isidore says, li. 15. ca. de
Gemmis aureis.

Of Celidonio. chap. 30.
CElidonio is a little stone, but it is precious. Hereof is double kind,
black and read: And be taken out of a Swallows mawe, and be little and
unseemly: But in virtue they be no less of value then more stones and greater.
But they pass many other in virtue. For the red helps against the passion
Lunatike and against woodnesse, and against old sorrow: and makes a man kind
and pleasing. And the black helps against evil humors, and against Feauers
and wrath. And if it be washed in water, it helps ^ore eien. And this is said
in Lapidario.

( Addition.
As touching these stones. I my self trieng an old rule, did find in ye maws
of the young Swallows, a black stone as big as a Thistle seed, and another
red, and a third gray, spelled black, and after gave them away.)

Of Christallo. chap. 31.
Crystal is a bright stone and clear, with watery color. Men suppose yt it
is of snow or Ise made hard in space of many years. Therefore ye Greeks gave a
name thereto. It is gendered in Asia, and in Cipres, and namely in the North
mountains, where the Sun is most seruent in Su^mer: and they make this dure
long, yt is called Crystal. This stone set in ye Sun takes fire, insomuch if
dry tow be put thereto, it sets the tow on fire. His use is ordained to
drink, and works none other thing, but what cold thing may do. Huc vsque Isi.
li. 16. cap. 13. Dioscorides speaks of Crystal and says, yt it is hardened
and turned into stone, not only by virtue and strength of cold, but more by
earthly virtue, and the color thereof is like to Ise. The virtue thereof
helps against thirst and burning heat: and if it be beaten to powder and
dronken with honey, it fills breasts and teates full of milk, if ye milk
fails before because of cold: Also if it be dronke^, it helps against
Collica passio, and against the passion of evil guts, of ye womb be not hard.
The stone is clear, and so letters and other things that be put therein, be
seen clearly enough. That crystal materially is made of water. Gregory says
super pri. Ezech. Water (says he) is of it self fleeting, but by strength of
cold it is turned and made steadfast crystal: and so in Eccle. it is written.
The Northen wind blew and made crystal freese, etc. And heerof Arist. tells
ye cause in li. Meth. There he says, ye stony things of substance of oar, be
water in matter, as Richardus Rufus says. Stone oar is of water, but for it
has more of drines of earth then things that melt, therefore they be not frore
only with coldness of water, but also for dryness of earth that is mingled
therewith, when ye watery part of the earth and glassie has mastry on the water,
and the foresaid rolde has the victory and mastry. And so S. Gregory his
reason is true, yt says, that Crystal may be gendered of water.

Of Ceraunio. cap. 32.
CEraunius is a stone like to Cristall, and is infected with bliewe color,
and is in Germania. Another is of Spain, and shines as fire. These stones
fall out of the place of Thunder. And it is said that they help against the
strength of lightening, as Isidore says there. The same is said in the
Lapidari. Where it is said that when it thundreth horribly, and the fiery air
lightneth, and when clouds smite together, their stones falls from heaven.
Who so bears this stone chastely, shall not be smitten with lightning, nor
house nor Town where this stone is therein. Either has virtue of helping in
battles, and to have mastrie in war, and in causes of strife, and to make
sweet sleeps, as it is said there.

Of Corallo. chap. 33.
Coral is gendered in the red Sea, and is a tree as long, as it is covered
with water, but anon as it is drawn out of water, and touched with air, it
turns into stone, and under water the boughs thereof be white and soft, and
wax read and turn into stone when they be drawn out of the water with nets,
as Isidore says, cap. de gemmis rubeis. And if follows there: as precious as
ye Margarite of Inde is among us, so precious and more is Coral among the
Indes. Witches tell, that this stone withstandeth lightening, Isidore says,
the same is said in Lapidario. His might and virtue, as says Zorastes, is
wonderful, for it puts off lightning, whirle wind, tempest and storms
from Ships, and houses that it is in. And it is double, white and read. And
is never found passing half a foot long. And the red helps against
bleeding, and against the falling Evil, and against the feendes guile and
scorn, and against diverse wondrous doing, and multiplieth fruit, and
speedeth beginning and ending of causes and of needs.

Of Corneolo. chap. 34.
COrneolus is a red stone and dim, but it is full good and precicus, if it be
hanged about a man's neck, or borne on a finger. In strifes it alayeth wrath
that rise, and it stauncheth blood that runs of a member and all manner
running. And namely such a running as women have, as it is said in Lapidario.

Of Dioniso. chap. 35.
DIonisius is a black stone or brown sprung with read veins, and has that
name, for if it be ground and meddled with water, it smells as wine: and yet
it withstandeth dronkenesse. And that is great wonder in that stoue, as Isidore
says, li. 16.

Of Diadoco. chap. 36.
DIadocus is a pale stone: bright as Berill, and is apt to obtain answers of
feends, for it exciteth feendes and fantasies. And if it happens that it
touches a dead body, it is said that it leeseth anon his good virtues, for it
is ye stone that hates and is squeimous of the thing that is overcome with
death, as it is said in Lapidario.

Of Ere. chap. 37
Brass is called Es, and has that name of shining of air, as Isidore says.
For in old time ere the use of iron was known, men eared land with brass, and
fought therewith in war and battle. That time gold and silver were
forsaken, and gold is now in the most worship, so age that passes and vadeth,
changes times of things. Isidore says these words libro. 16. Brass and
Copper is called Fa, for either is made of the same stone by working of fire,
for a stone resolved with heat turns into Brass. Job. 28. Brass and Copper
be made in this manner, as other mettalls be of brimstone and quick silver, and
that happens when there is more of brimstone then of quick silver, and the
brimstone is earthly and not pure, with red color and burning, and quick
silver is mean and not subtle. Of such meddeling Brass is gendered, as
Arist. says, and as Isidore says, ca. de Ere. If Brass be meddeled with
other metal, it changes both color and virtue, as it fares in Latton and
in Brass, that is called Conchium, that is joined to diverse mettalls, and
some is white as silver, and draws some deal to brown color, and seems
gold, the third in which is temperatnesse of all. And another manner of Brass
there is, yt which is called Coronarium, that is beaten abroad into shinne
plates of brass, wrought with hammer, and is died with Bulls blood, and is like
to gold in crowns among posturing and painting Therefore it is called
Coronarium, And Brass yt is wrought with hammer is called Regular. And Brass,
ye only is melted, is called Fusile, but Brass that is fusile and molt, is
brittle under the hammer: And when Brass is well purged and cleansed of all
vices, then it is made able to be wrought with hammer and Regular. And all
Brass is best molt in great cold: Brass rusteth soon but it be nointed with
oil. Also among al metal Brass is most mighty. Huc vsque Isi. li.16. And
Brass accords most to the use of trumps and Belles, for sounding and during
thereof. The stone of the which Brass is blown, is most sad and hard. And it
breaks not easily, but it be burnt first with strong fire in the rock, it is
burnt: eight or nine times ere it be perfectly drawn out of the stone and
pured, as they that cleanse Brass in places where it is made, tell certainly.
Brazen vessels be some read and rustie, but they be often stoured with sand:
and have an evil se^uond and smell, but they be tinned. Also Brass if it be
without Tin, burns soon, as Isidore says, cap. de Stanno, and Platea,
says, that Brass burnt to powder has virtue of dissoluing, of washing, of
cleansing, and of purging of evil humors. And that powder heals wounds,
and cleanses dimnesse of cien, and fretteth superfluity of flesh; and
suffers it to grow no more, as Platea says, and Dioscorides also.

( Addition.
Of the rust of Brass comes a bliew substance called Verdigrese, which as it
is a color for Painters, so it is a fretting poison, used in ointments, on
festured sores.)

Of Electro. chap. 38.
ELectrum is a metal, and has that name, for in the Sun beam it shines
more clear then gold or silver. For in the Sun beam Electrum is effectual.
And this metal is more noble then other mettalls. And here of be three manner
of kinds: One is such, that when it runs first out of the tree, it is
fleeting and thin Gum, but afterward with heat or with cold it is made
hard as a clear stone, as it were crystal. That other manner kind is called
metal, and is found in the earth, and in and in price, The third manner is
made of the three parts of gold, and of the fourth of silver: and kind
Electrum is of that kind, for in twinkling and in light it shines more
clear then all other metal: and warns of venim: for if one deep it
therein, it makes a great chirking noise, and changes often into diverse
colors, as the rainbow, and that sodeinly. Huc vsque Isi. lib. 15. de Metallis
vlti Et super Eze. is mention shade of Electrum artificial. Greg. says, that
if hard gold be meddled with silver, then the filtier wiseth more clear, and
the gold tempered with cloerenesse of silver, loses not his virtue, but only
it wareth somewhat pale, and less fair by meddling of silver. And some men call
very Glectru^ Arpago. For if it be heted with fingers, it draws to it self
all leaves and straws, and hems of clothes, as Magnis draws iron, as Isid
says; li. 16. ca. de rubiis Gemis. And receives soon color and hiew, in
what manner a man will. And so it is soon died with the rote of Auense, with
Couchinello, as he (...)eth there.

Of Echites chap. 39.
EChites is a stone of Inde and of Persi, and is found in ye cliffes of occean,
both in ye coasts of the sea of Inde and of Persy, and is a stone with red
color, as it is said in Lapidario, and there is two sorts, as Hill. says, male
and female, and so always two be found in the Eagles neast, and the Eagle may
not breed without these stones. And therefore ye Eagles keeps these stones in
her neast. The male thereof is hard, and is like to a gum that is called Galle,
and this male is somewhat blasing. And the female is soft. And these stones
bound to a woman that trauaileth of child, makes her soon to be delivered:
and makes them sometime to bear dead children, if it be too long there, and
somewhat passes of the privy choice of the woman, except these stones be soon
taken from her that trauaileth of child, as Isi. says, li. 16. cap. 4. Also
this stone Echites contains and breeds another stone within him, like as it
were a woman with child: as Dioscorides says. And in Lapidano it is said: that
this stone contains another stone, as a woman with child. The virtue of this
stone Echites makes a man sober, and augmenteth and increases riches, and so
it does love, and helps greatly to obtain and conquer victory, and favor.
And lets and withstandeth the falling of them, which have the falling evil.
If there be any man suspect of fraud of poisoning, if he be guilty, this
stoud put under his meat will not suffer him to swalow his meat; and if the
stone be withdrawn, he shall not tarry to swallow his meats.

Of Emachite. chap. 40.
EMachites is a red stone and reddie and rustie, and is son in Africa and
Judah and in Arabia. And has that name, for if it be broken with blood, it
tourveth anon into the color of blood, as Isido. says. And is god against
flux of the bladder, and for sore eien, and against venim and against the
biting of an Adder, and stancheth, the flux of the womb* and restrains all
bleeding, and namelye the blood of women: and of the gums, as Dioscorid. says.
And in Plat. it is said, that it is of cold and dry complexion, and has
virtue to stanch blood. And has that name Emachites, of Emach, that is blood,
and Chites, that is stint. And so it helps Emoptoces, men that spue and cast
blood, and is special remedy for the bloody flixe.

Of Eliotropia. chap. 41.
ELiotropia is a precious stone, and is green and sprung with red drops and
veins of the color of blood, and has that name of effect and doing. For if
it be put in water before the Sun beams, it makes the water sees in the
vesell that it is in, and resolves it as it were into mist, and soon after it
is resolved into rainy drops. Also it seems that this same stone may do
wonders, for if it be put in a Basen with clear water, it changes the Sun
beams by rebounding of the air, and seems to shaddowe them, and breeds in
the air red and sanguine color, and as though the Sun were in Eclipse and
darked, the Moon set between us and the Sun is darkened, and for it seems
that it may change the cleernesse of the Sun, it is called Elitropia, that is
turning away of the Sun, as Isidore says expressly and Dioscorides also. And in
Lapidario the same meaning is said in this manner.

Ex re nomen habens est in elitropia gemma,
Quae solis radijs in aqua subiecta vacillo.
Sanguineum reddit mutato lumine solemn.
Eclipsimque nouam terris effundere cogit.
And Isidore says, that this stone discovers the soily of inchauntenes of
witches, that have liking and pride in their own wonders, for they begnile
men's sight in those things that they work, as the foresaid stone does: and
he sets an ensample thereof, and says, that an herb of the same name,
with certain inchauntmentes, beguile the sight of men that look thereon; and
makes a man that hears it not be seen. In many other things thie stone is
good and commendable, for it stauncheth blood, and puts away venimme, and
he that bears this stone may not his beguiled.

Of Enidros. chap. 42.
ENidros is a little stone, and droppeth always, and melts not, nor it is
never the less in any wise, and so it is said in Lapidario: Enidros that
stone, weepeth always as it were by springing of a full well with dropping
tears and welleth always. And there it is said, that it is hard to tell the
cause of these doings. For if the drops were of the substance of ye stone, why
is not the stone less, or melts away? And if a thing enters into the
stone, why is it that that thing that enters, puts not again that thing
yt goes out, but as seems me, it may be, that the virtue of the stone
makes the air thick that is nigh thereto, and turns it into water. And so
it seems that it comes out of the substance of the stone. Nevertheless it
comes of the substance of the air that is about the stone.

Addition
Perpetui fletus lacrimis distillat Enidros.
Qui velut ex pleni fontis scaturigine manat.
Dissoluing drops and tears full often, that Enidros the stone does drop,
Which as out of a fountain full, does always run and never stop.
Of Episte. chap. 43.
EPistes is a little stone bright and reddie, and makes a man safe that bears
it in the heart side. And cease guiles and decrites, and puts of long Flies
and barren fowls, and mist and hail from the fruit of the earth. And if it be
set in the Sun, fiery beams some out thereof. And if thou do this stone
in seething water, the seething thereof cease, and the water cools soon,
as Isidore says, and Dioscorides also.

Of Excoliceros. chap. 44.
EXcoliceros is a little stone, so named to: it is distinguished and diuersed
with forty colors, and is full little, and makes men's even that look
thereon to quake. And it is found in Libia among the Treglodites.

Of Iron. chap. 45.
Iron is called Ferrum, and has that name, as Isidore says, of Ferrendum
smiting: for it beats and smites, and by hardness thereof, over comes all
kind of metal. And though iron come of the earth, yet it is most hard and
sad, and therefore with beating and smiting, it suppresseth and dilateth all
other metal, and makes it stretch on length and on breadth. And as Isidore
says, it has the name of the land that it is dug in. And therefore it is
diverse, for by reason thereof it is found more hard or soft. And after ye mind
of Aristotle, Iron is gendered of quick silver, thick and not clean, full of
earthie hoales, and of brimstone great and boistous, and not pure. In
composition of iron is more of the foresaid Brimstone, then of quick silver,
and so for mastrie of cold and dry and of earthy matter, iron is dry and cold,
and full well hard, and is compact togethers in his parts. And for iron has
less of airy and watery moisture then other metal: therefore it is hard to
resolve and make it again to be soft in fire, as Ric. Rufus says. It is the
manner to temper iron ware with Oil, least by coldness of water it be too
much hardened, as Isid. says. Iron takes soon rust by touching of blood, and
if it enters into the substance thereof, uneath it is cleansed, as Isi says.
The rust is a vice fretting iron, and comes thereto either of uncleanness of
substance, or of touching of earth, and of nigh lieng thereto, or else of
touching of blood, or of some other quality that is infected. And he says
also, that with iron man's blood is spilt, and man's blood takes wreake of iron:
For iron takes rust of nothing so soon as of man's blood, if it be ^^ointeb
therewith. Iron has agreement with the stone Adamas, and so that stone Adamas
draws iron to it self: and so iron drawn, by mean of silver vessel or of
Brass, follows ye stone, and is subject and obedient thereto. Iron well
furnished, and anointed with Alam or with vinegre, shall be most like to
Brass. And iron furbushed shall not rust, if it be anointed with Sewet, or
with marrowe of an heart, as Isidore says. Fiery hot iron if it be often
quenched in Wine or in milk, makes that wine or milk medicinable to them
that have the evil of the spleen, and also to other sick men, as Constantine
says. Also as Isidore says, iron that is made fiery hot is corrupted, but it
is hardened with strokes. Iron that is read in the fire, is not profitable to
carue nor to cut, till it begin to wax white. Use of iron is more needful
to men in many things then use of gold: though covetous men love more gold
then iron. Without iron the comminaltie be not sure against enemies. Without
dread of iron ye common right is not governed. With iron innocent men be
defended: and full hardiness of wicked men is chastised with dread of iron.
And well nigh no handiworke is wrought without iron: no field is cared without
iron, neither tilling craft used, no building builded without iron. And
therefore Isidore says, ye iron has this name Ferrum, for that thereby Farra
that is corn and seed is tilled and sown. For without iron ^read is not
won of the earth, nor bread is not departed, when it is ready, without iron
couenably to man's use. Also iron is whet with iron, as Solomon says. For when
the coge of iron is dulled and blunted, with great froting it is often made
thin and sharp and couenable to cut all thing the more easily. Sinder is
called Scoria, and is the says of iron that is cleansed therfrom in fire: and
has that name Scotia, see it is smitten and departed from the iron by violence
of the fire, as Isidore says.

Of Ferrugine. chap. 46.
FErrugo is the powder that falls from the iron with filing, as squama is
that thing that leapeth away from ye fire with heating, and has virtue to make
dry and thin, and therefore it is good against stopping of the spleen.
Nevertheless it exciteth casting and spuing, when it is dronken, insomuch that
sometime it brings to death, but if the violence thereof be ceased with powder
of the Adamas stone, or with water, in which the stone lies all night. Also it
is said, that the powder thereof is best remedy against Emoroides: and also it
stancheth the flixe of the womb, as it is said in Platea. Also filing or
powder of yro^ is called Rubigo, also Corrosio, and has that name of
Corrudendo, fretting and gnawing: but it is properly called Erugo, and has ye
name of Erodendo, filing, and not of Eramento, as Isidore says. And it
infecteth and defiles the hand^ that touches it, and makes it soul. The
more pure and polished that iron is, the more rather it is defiled with rust,
and worst to be cleansed. And rust is not soon done away, but in three
manners. By burning of fire, or by fretting of a Salve or a File, or by froting
of an hard stone, or by scouring of gravel and sand, and pullishing. And rust
has this property, that infection thereof comes again by light occasion to
the place in which it was first mored and rooted.

Of Gleba. chap. 47.
A Clot is gathering together of powder in a clustre, as Isidore says libro.
15. capit. primo. For earth bound and clonged togethers, is a clotte, and if
it be broken and departed, it is powder: Earth hardened into a clot, receives
no seed, neither suffers the seed that is there sown to grow and to spring.
A clotte broken, covers and nourishes seed, and if it be then tempered with
rain, it gendereth a manner of fatness. and thereof seed takes nourishment
and feeding in roots. And grows and springs, as Gregory says. Also
sometime a clot contains in it self a manner of kind of oar. Therefore
diverse kinds of things be gendred and come of clots, as Gregory says, super
illum locum. 24. Job. Sapphire stones is the place thereof, and clottes thereof
is gold.

Of Gemma. chap. 48.
A Precious stone is called Gemma, and has that name, for it shines as Gum,
as Isidore says. Precious stones adorn well gold, and make it well fair in
diverse colors. Therefore Isidore says, that they be precious, for they be
dear and scarce. For all that is scarce and seldom had, is called great and
precious, as it is written. The word of God is precious, that is to say,
scarce. Isidore says, that no man shall wene, that it is doubtful or false,
that God has set virtue in precious stones. For it is said in Lapidario.
Ingens est herbis virtus sed maxima gemmis. That is to say, Great virtue is
in herbs, but most in precious stones. Of which precious stones some be found
in veins of ye earth, and be dug with mettalls. Some be cast out of the
bottom of the sea, and the place of their generation is unknowen. And always
such precious stones be found in cliffes of the sea, and in sand and in gravel
of rivers. And some breed in bodies of souls and of creeping beasts. But from
whence so ever precious stones come, they be found endued by ye grace of God
with passing great virtue, when they be noble and very. For Isidore ca. de
Gemmis ^urens says, in some kind of precious stones if is hard and great
difficulty to know between ye very precious stones and false. For often those
that be false and guilful, seem most like to them that be true and very, so
that uneath men may know between the true and guilfull. For as he says,
sometime men by craft array the stone that is called Vitru^, and put it forth in
steed of Smaragdos, and beguile some men's eyes with false likeness of true
and very Smaragdus. For no life of men is without guile, as Isido. says. And
we use to call al manner of precious stones that be not precious and shining,
blind. For they be dimmed with their own thickness and boistousnesse.
Isidore says, that they that deem so, be often beguiled: for often more virtue
is hid in a little Adamant with color of iron and dark, then in Sardio that
is most bright, or in Berall.

Of Gagite. chap. 49.
IEat is called Gagates, and is boistous stone, and nevertheless it is
precious: And was first found in Cicilia by the river that is called Gagas: and
was thrown up to the brinke by the course of water. Therefore it has ye name
thereof, though most plenty and best be in Britain, as Isi. says: and is
double, that is to say, yeolow and black. The black is plain and light, and
burns soon in fire, and drives away adders with smell thereof, when it is
kindled, right as Thus or insence. This gineth monition of them yt have seendes
within them. And is held contrary to seen^s: and gives knowledge of
maydenhoode. For if a maid drink of the water thereof, she pisseth not: and
if she be no maid and drinks thereof, she pisseth anon, and also against her
will, as Dioscorides says: And so by this stone a maiden is anon proved, as
diverse Authors affirm. Moreover the same stone both black and also yeolow,
being made hot with rubbing in ye fingers, draws light straw and leaves to
it self if it be put thereto, and a drink thereof helps them yt have the
dropsy: For it wastes evil ^apours. And it is said, that it comfort the
liver, and that is perchance by dryness thereof, and also by privy virtue and
quality. Also the powder thereof is good to feeble teeth and wagging, and
stre^gthneth and fastneth them. Also it is said, that this stone helps for
fantasies, and against veration of feends by night. Also fumositie thereof
exciteth Menstrua, if it be withdrawn by any day. Also it is said, that it
swageth womb ach, when the stomach is misturned by any way. Also it helps
against witchcraft, and fordoth hard enchantments, as it is said in Lapidario:
and it speedeth fast birth, and helps her that trauaileth of child, as it is
said in Lapidario. And so, if so boistous a stone does so great wonders, none
should be despised for soul color without, while the virtue that is hid
within is unknown. And Isidore speaks of this stone and says, that this
stone is kindled in water, and quenched in Oil, and that is wonder.

Of Galactile. chap. 50.
GAlactiles is a stone with color of Ashes, and has sweet taste and savor.
If it be smit, a manner of white milk comes out thereof, as Isidore says.
This stone closed in the mouth distroubleth the wit. And if it be borne about
the neck, it makes breasts full of milk: and if it be bound to the thighs,
it makes easy birth, and if it be meddled with water and salt, and sprung
about the field: then the sheep be full of milk, and cleanses them of
scabs, as Dioscorides says.

Of Gelacia. chap. 51.
GElacia is a white precious stone, shapen as an hail stone: and it is so cold
that it never heateth with fire, as Isidore says, and Dioscorides also.

Of Geraticen. cap. 52.
GEraticen is a black stone, but it passes ye color in virtue. For if a man
wash clean his own mouth, and bears the stone therein: he They cannot tell
what he thinks.
may anon tell what other men think of him, as it is said in Lapid. And makes
a man that bears it well beloved: his virtue is proved in this manner. If a
man be nointed with honey, and is set among many flies, if the stone be present,
the flies grieve him not; and if the stone be away then ye flies grieve, bite,
suck, and hurt the body.

Of Iaspis. chap. 53.
IAspis is a precious stone, and is green like to Smaragdus: but it is more
dim of color. And there be seventeen kinds thereof, as Isidore says. For
Iaspis yt is green, is called Gemma Pinnasin, and though the chief color
thereof be green, yet it has many other colors meddeled among. The virtue
thereof destroys feaners and dropsy in them that bear him chastlye: and
helps in travailing of child: and drives away fantasies: and makes a man
sure in peril, and abateth heat within, and stauncheth bleeding and sweat,
and withstandeth lecherye, and lets conception, and stauncheth menstruall
blood and Emoroides, if it be in powder, and took with milk, it helps and
heals old Torches and viles, and cleanses the eyes of foulness and filth:
And sharpeth and comfort the sight, and withstandeth witchcraft and
inchauntments, and is more virtuous in silver then in gold. In the head of an
Adder that is called Aspis, is found a little stone that is called Iaspis: and
men suppose that it is a stone of wonderful virtue. And some men suppose that
it has that name, as it were Aspis, and men suppose, that it has as many
virtues, as diverse colors and veins, as Dioscorides says. And ye best
Iaspis is found in the mountains of Scithia, and Griphons keep this stone, as
they do Smaragdus, as Isidore says.

Of Iacincto. chap. 54.
IAcinctus is a bliew stone some deal, and nigh of the color of a Sapphire,
and has that name of his own color, as Isido. says. The stone Iacinctus
that is found in Ethiopia is best, and is not too clear, neither too dim, but
mean and temperate between twain, shining. Isidore says, this stone shines
not always like, for in clear wether it is clear before the eien, and in
dark weather it is dim and dark. Isidore says, in the mouth it seems
cold, if it be therein, and is most hard to grave in. Nevertheless it may be
graven and written, and marked with the stone Ad^nae, as Isid. says.
Dioscorides says, that the stone Iacinctus is now bliew, now reddish, now
purple, and now bright bliew. And thereof be three manner of kinds, some be
citrine, and some bliewe, but among such manner stones, the bliew is best. The
stone is wonderful, for it consumes it most to the air. For in dim weather
it is dim, and in dright weather it is bright. And this stone has a singular
virtue, as Authors write: for it gives gladness, and is contrary to
melancholy quality: and has virtue of comfort, as Isidore says in the kind
thereof. Iacirctus has virtue of comfort, and does away eleignesse and
sorrow: and also vain suspicion. And withstandeth diverse pestilences that
come often of corrupt air, and gives strength and virtue to members, and life
to the sinews, and gives good savor and sweet and wholesome, and is most like
to the Sapphire. And Dioscorides says, that all men that treat of precious
stones, mean, that the more like the Iacinct is to the Sapphire in color and
in substance, the more virtuous it is. And such Iacinctus withstandeth venim,
and is contrary to poison, as Dioscorides says. Also an herb of ye same name
is like thereto in color; and equal thereto in many things, though it be not
all alike thereto in valewe, as Isidore sath.

( Addition.
Iacinthes grow in the Island of Zeylam, they are tender stones and yeolow, they
are best that are of deepest color: a Jewel of small value in Calicut, where
they are polished, ye cleerest are best, Bartholome has mistaken the color, in
that he says it to be a blew, when it is yeolow. Decades of the West Indies,
fo. 426.)

Of Iride. chap. 55.
IRis is a six cornered stone, as Isidore says, and was first found in
Arabia, by the red sea, and is now found in many a place, as in Germany, in
Ireland, and many lands of the North, and is bright and clear in color, and
like to Crystal, as Isid. says, and has name Iris of the likeness of the
rain bow, for if it be in a house in the Sun, it makes the likeness of ye
color of the rain bow, in the walls of the next house, as Isi. says. Men
suppose that this stone has the same virtue that Berill has, but that is not
found in quantity, as Dioscorides says. Also it is said, that this stone
helps women that travel of child, that they may the sooner be delivered,
and better suffer their throws, and dread peril the less.

Of Ienia. chap. 56.
IEna is a precious stone that is found in the eyes of a beast that is called
Hiena, and if this stone be put under a man's tongue, they say, that he shall
tell many things that shall befall, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
The beast Hiena is a kind of wild greyhound, very great and strong, and seldom
overcome and taken: and it may be when one may take him, whereas vi. men dare
not assault him, that the stone which is in his eye, may have a working virtue,
such as is reported: But it is doubtful. Read Gesner.)

Of Kamau. cap. 57.
KAmau is a stone, now white, now brown, now reddish, now divided with diverse
colors, and has that name Kamau of Kamatis, that is to say, burning or
kindling, for it is found in places of brimstone and of heat. And Dioscorides
says, the virtue thereof heals the Dropsy, and is graven with diverse Images
and shapes.

Of Kalbrate. cap. 58.
KAlbrates is a passing shining stone, like to Crystal: and men suppose, that
it gives fair speech and facunditie, worship and grace, and defends from
griefs, and from noyous things and venomous, and cures and heals swelling
of the liver, and of the spleen, as Dioscorides says.

Of Kalcophano. cap. 59.
KAlcophanus is a black stone, and makes clear voice, and defends the
grief of hoarcenesse, if it be borne in the mouth, as it is said in Lapidario.

Of Ligorio. cap. 60.
LIgorius is a stone like to Electurus in color, and has that name, as
Isidore says of a beast that is called, Linx. This stone Ligerius is gendered
among the grauel of the brine of ye beast, and the virtue thereof, draws
straw to it self, and helps against ach of the stomach, and stancheth flixe
of the womb, that is grieved. And helps them that have the iaundes, and that
be discolored: for it restores color, that is lost, as Dioscorides says.

Of Lipparea. cap. 61.
LIpparea is a precious stone, and comes out of the countries of Sirtes. The
property thereof is, that all kind of wild beasts come to his presence, and
behold thereon. And those beasts, yt hunters may not take with running of
hounds, they take and allure to them, with the sight and showing only of
this stone Lipparea, as it is said in Lapidario.

Of Margarita. chap. 62.
The Orient perle.
MArgarita, is chief of all white precious stones, as Isid. says, and has
that name Margarita, for it is found in shells and in shell fish of the sea.
It breeds in flesh of shel fish, and is sometime found in the brain of the
fish, and is gendred of the deaw of heaven, the which deaw shell fish receive in
certain times of the year. Of the which Margarites, some be called Unions,
and have a couenable name, for only one is found, and never two or more
together. And white Margarites are better tha^ yelow, and those that be
conceived of the morrow deawe, be made dim with the air of the even side.
Huc vsque Isido. li. 16. And some are found kindly pierced, and those be better
than other: and some be pierced by craft, as Plat. says. And they be best,
that are white and clear, bright and round. And they have virtue comfortatiue,
either of all the whole kind, as some men say, or else because they are
besprong with certain specialtie, they comfort the lyins. for by constrayning
and coarting, they cleanse them of superfluous humors, and they help against
the Cardiacle passion, and against sounding or failing of heart, against
feebleness that comes of the bloody flire, and against flire of the womb,
as Plat. says. And in Lapidario it is said, that Margarites be gendred of dew,
and the more of deawe and air that is drawn in, the more and the greater they
be. The Margarite is gendered of the deaw, but it is supposed, that no
Margarite grows passing of half a foot. Also it is said there: if that
lightning or thundering fall, when the Margarite should breed of the deaw that
is drawn in, the shell closes by sudden fear, and so the gendering falls
and is cast out. The best Margarites come out of Inde, and out of the old
Britain, as it is said.

Of Magnete. cap. 63.
MAgnes is a stone of Inde, The load stone.
colored somewhat as iron, and is found in Inde among the Troglodites, and
draws to it self iron in such wise, that it makes as it were a chain of
iron rings, as Isidore says. Therefore in the common speech, this stone is
called, quick iron. Also it is said, yt it draws glass molten as it does
iron. The might and virtue thereof is so great as Austen says, that if that
stone be set under a vessel of gold, or of brass, and iron set thereupon, by
moving of the stone that is beneath, the iron shall move that is above. And
also there it is said, that in certain Temples is made an Image of iron, and
it seems, that that Image hangs in the air. And in Aethiopia is another
kind of Magnes, that forsakes iron, and drives it away from him: also the
same Magnes, draws iron to it in one corner, and puts it away in another
corner, and the more blewe the Magnes is, the better it is. Huc vsque Isid. And
Dioscorides says, and also it is said in Lapidario, that this stone
reconcileth and accords men and their wives, and increases grace and
fairness, in speech and in words. Also with drink made of honey and of wine,
it heals the dropsy, and the spleen, and falling evil, and burnning. If the
powder thereof be sprung and done upon coals, in four corners of the house,
it shall seem to them that be in the house, that the house should fall anon:
and that seeming is by moving, that comes by turning of the brain. Also
Magnes is in likewise as Adamas, if it be set under the head of a chaste wife,
it makes her sodainlye to embrace her husband: and if she be a spouse breaker,
she shall move her out of the bed suddenly by dread of fantasy. Platea says,
that witches use this stone namelye. This stone Magnes is hot and dry in the
third degree, and has virtue of drawing of iron, and there be mountains of
such stones, and therefore they draw to them and break ships, that be nailed
with iron. Also namely the powder thereof laid to wounds, helps such as be
wounded: for if it be laid to ye wound, it draws out iron. Also the powder of
Magnes in the quantity of two dragmes, with juice of fenill, is good against
the drotsie, and against evil of the spleen, and against failing of the heart,
as Auicenna says.

Of Melonite. chap. 64.
MElonites is a stone, and has that name, for sweet juice comes out
thereof, as it were honey, as Isidore says: and has two colors, for it is
green in the one side, and like to honey in that other side.

Of Menophite. chap. 65.
MEnophites is a stone, and has that name of a place of Egypt, and is of the
kind of precious stones as Isid. says. If this stone be bruised and ground,
and laid upon the place that should be burnt or corued, or else with vinegar
smered thereupon, it stonieth so the body, that it feels no sore neither
grief of the burning, nor of caruing.

Of Mirite. cap. 66.
MIrites is a precious stone, and has that name, for it is like to Mirra, in
color. And if it be wrong and pressed, it smells sweet, as Nardus.

Of Medo. chap. 67.
MEdus is a precious stone, and is found in the land of Medes, and is sometime
green and sometime black, as Dioscorides says. The virtue of this stone is
against blyndnesse of eyes, and helps Podagre, if it be tempered with the
milk of a woman that has a male child. Also it is good for ache of ye reins
and for frenzy, and if the black stone be resolved upon a skin, and in hot
water, and that water be given some man to drink, it slaieth spewing and
ouerturning of the stomach: and if the forehead be washed therewith, it
strippeth wonderfully of the skin, and grieueth the sight, and takes it away
every deal, as it is said in Lapidario.

Of Merochite. cap. 68.
MErochites is a green stone like to Smaragdus: but it is more boystous green
than Smaragdus, and so it has the name of the color of mallows, as Isid.
says: and is bred in Arabia, and is full soft in substance, and nevertheless it
is full profitable, as Dioscorides says. And it keeps and saves children,
from noyfull and evil happes.

Of Marmore. chap. 69.
MArble is called Marmor, and has that name of the Greeks, for greenness, as
Isi. says. And he says also that marble stones be noble stones, and are
praised for speckles and diverse colors: for of marble be endless many manner
of kinds, but they be not all hewn out of rocks. But many manner of marble,
is found in diverse manner of places under the earth: as marble of Lacedemonia
that is green and precious. And marble is called Ophites, Called Serpe^tine
for it is speckeled like an Adder, and has therefore that name: and there is
double kind, soft and white, and black and hard. The Purfire.
And marble Purpurites comes out of Egypt, and is reddie with white points
among: and has that name Purpurites, for it is red as Purple.

There is other manner kinds, as Alabastrum and Parium: thereof we shall
speak innermore. Also another manner kind is called Coraliticum, and is found
in Asia, and passes not two cubits in measure, and is white nigh as yuorye,
and some black speckles, in diverse proportiens. Also another kind is called,
Thebaicum, and is sprung with goldish speckes, and is found among Egyptians,
and is kindly apt to grind colors thereupon, and Colliria ointments that
help the eyes. Other kinds of marble breeds in quarries and in rocks, as
Marble that is called, Marmor Corintheum. Thereof is made great Pillars,
pauements, and Towers. Also there is another manner kind, as Caristium, and is
green and best: and has that name, of aspect, for men that grave love it well,
for green color comfort the sight. Another kind is called Numidicum, and
breeds in Numidia, and makes a thing that is froted therewith like to
saffron, and has that name therefore. Lib. 16. Isidore sets ensamples of
many other diverse Marbles: but these are sufficient at this time. But Marble
is more hard and sad, more strong and fair, and more profitable than other
stones. In veins thereof is diverse master found, and precious stones, and for
hardness thereof, it is most hardly graven and polyshed, and for coldness and
solidiousnesse thereof, it is best to keep in spicerie, and ointments. Over
all things we may wonder, that Marble stones be not hewed neither cloven with
iron neither with steel, with hammer nor with saw, as they be with a plate of
lead, set between soft shingles or spones. For with lead and not with iron,
Marble stones be hewn, and cloven, and plained, as shingles or small stones.

Of Nitro. chap. 70.
NItrum (as Isidore says) is a stone some deal white, and may be hewn and
cloven, and is full clear. The virtue thereof dissolueth and tempereth,
draws and cleanses, and wastes superfluities of humors. Lib. 16. cap. 2.
Isidore says, that Nitrum has ye name of the country of Nitria that is in
Egypt. Thereof is medicine made, and there with bodies and clothes be cleansed
and washed. The kind thereof is not far from the kind of salt, for it has
yt kind of salt, and is made right as salt in dryness in old cliues.

The foame thereof, is called Affronitom, and is gendred dropping down in the
country of Asia, and then dried with heat of the Sun, and what is best dried,
is least heavy as Isidore says. And Platea says, ye Nitrum is a vein of
the earth, and is hot and dry, light, red, or white or citrine, and is bitter,
sour, and some deal salt in savor. Nitrum abateth falnesse. If it be taken
in the mouth, and consumes and wastes gleimie humors. Powder thereof consect
in honey, clarifieth and makes the face fair, and cleanses scabs and matter
of the stomach and of the guts, if it comes of a postume, and cleanses
lyce, and head scabs, and slays worms of the ears, cleanses most
perfectlye the matter and scabs thereof. Foam thereof with vinegar, heals
gnawing and swelling, and helps against the dropsy, and cleanses dimnesse
of eyes, if it be meddeled with honey, and slays venime, and destroys it,
and withstandeth mightily the palsy of the tongue, as Plat. says and
Dioscorides also. And Nitium is hot and dry in the end of the third degree,
and laxeth and cleanses, as Isidore says.

Of Noset. cap. 71.
NOset that is Orapondine, is a precious stone, some deal white, or of diverse
colors. It is said that this stone is taken out of a Toads head, and is
cleansed in the same head, and in strong Wine and water, as Dioscorides says:
and sometime the shape of a Toade seems therein with sharp feet and broad.
This stone helps against biting of Serpents and of creeping Worms, and
against venim. For in presence of venimme, the stone warmeth and burns his
finger that touches him, as Dioscorides says.

Of Onichino. chap. 72.
ONichinus is a stone of Inde, and of Arabia, and has in it self color
meddled like the nail of mankind.

The Onix of Inde has color of fire, with white veins and strakes, and the
stone Onix of Arabia, is black of color, and has white veins. And thereof
if five manner of kinds: one is Sardonix, and has that name of company of
two, of whiteness of the Onix, and redness of the Sardonius, as it is showed
innermore of Sardonice. It is said, that this stone Onix has many noyfull
effects, for as Dioscorides says, if it be borne about the neck, or on the
finger, it exciteth sorrow, eleingnesse, and dread, and multiplieth plea and
strife, and moves the heart to contention and debate, and exciteth in
children noyfull superfluity of spettle, and may not grieve in presence of the
stone Sardius. This stone Onix is clear of the kind of mirrors, and therefore
images and figures be seen therein, as it were in a mirror, but that is
darkly, as Dioscorides says.

Of Optallio. cap. 73.
OPtallio is called Oppalus also, and is a stone distinguished with colors of
diverse precious stones, as Isid. says. Therein is the fiery color of ye
Carbuncle, the shining purple of the Ametistus, the bright green color of
Smaragdus, and all the colors shine therein, with a manner diversity, and
has the name of the Country. This stone breeds only in Inde, and is deemed
to have as many virtues, as blewes and colors. Of this Optallius, it is said
in Lapidario, that this stone Optallius keeps and saves his eyes that
bears it, clear and sharp and without grief, and dimineth other men's eyes
that be about, with a manner cloud, and smites them with a manner blindness,
that is called Amentia, so that they may not see neither take heed what is
done before their eyes. Therefore it is said, that it is the most sure patron
of thieues as it is said in Lapidar.

Of Orite. chap. 74.
ORites is a precious stone black and round, and mother manner kind thereof
is green with speckles. The third manner of kind is white in the one side and
plain in the other, and is in substance as it were a plate of iron. This stone
borne upon a man, keeps him from biting of creeping worms, and of wild
beasts and other. Also this stone lets a woman to conceive, if she bears
it about her, and makes her to be delivered anon without due manner, if she
be with child.

Of Petra. chap. 75.
A Stone is called Petra, and Petra is a name of Greek, and is to understand
sad or steadfast, as Isi. says: for the substance of a stone is gendred, of
sad and hard parts of the earth. A stone has this name Petra of Penetrando,
Petra.
pearcing: for he pearceth the foot, when it is hard thrast and trod on: and
is also pierced with drops of rain and of water, that falls down of spoutes
and of gutters. A stone has another name, and is called Lapis, and has that
name of Ledens hurt and grief: for it hurts the foot with the hardness and
sharpness thereof, as Isi. says. But commonly, a plain; soft, or a round
stone is called, Lapis. Lapis.
And a stone that is hewn out of mountains is called Saxum. Saxum.
And a hard flint stone is called Silex, Silex.
and has that name of Exihre, for fire leapeth out there of Isid. says, though
a stone be most cold of himself, yet fire comes out thereof when it is
smitten with iron: For by strong violence and smiting of the air, between the
iron and the stone, ye air lepeth sparckling out of the flynt. Quarto Metheor.
Aristotle says, that a stone gendreth not of earth alone, for dryness has
mastry therein, and suffers it not to run. Stones are made either by
congellation, or else by conglutination. By meddling togethers of water and of
earth is clay made, yt is mean between earth and stone, and tourneth into
stone some and some, by constraining and fastening of parts, and so slimie
claye is most meet for such transmutation: for if it it be not fattie, it will
all to fall by masterie of dryness, and not contain and hold together.

Then by strong meddling and fastening of humor, earth tourneth into kind of
stone, and takes diverse colors of the diverse quality of the earth. Also
sometime stone is gendred by freesing of water. In some place water shed on
the ground, turns into stone of diverse colors, and that by some virtue of
oar, that is in that place, and freeseth the water that is the matter of
stones, as Aristotle says. Stone is bred of fat claye, by virtue of the sun
that makes ye fenne privily run, and the parties cleave and fasten together.
Other stones be bred of water frosen, by some virtue of ore, that brings
therein kind and shape of stone, and be matter of stone, and some is soft and
feeble of composition, and some strong: and some be gendred swiftly, and some
slowly, and some strongly, as the might of the qualities that work more or
less, and as the qualities that let and withstand, be less strong or more,
as these qualities be meddled in substance of stones. Stones be diverse in virtue
and in kind: For influence of heavenly virtue comes into their places, and
puts therein the effects thereof, and after as it finds matter more able
and obedient to his working, the more noble impression it printeth therein.
Therefore precious stones follow virtues of kind of Planets on effect and
working, as it fares of Topasius, that follows the M^^ne, as it is said, as
Ambrose, Basilius, Isidore, Dioscorides and other tell, as it shall be known
hereafter. The known properties of stones be these: for generally a stone is
cold and dry, sad and fast hard and heuie, and moves downward by his own
heaviness and weight, and lies heavy on the earth, and joins and mineth
together the parts of the earth, for it should not break and depart a sunder.
Therefore Ambrose says, that stones be the bones of the earth: for stones do
in diverse parts of the earth, as boanes do in the body, for stones make the
earth sad and sound, and hold the parts togethers; and helps that it falls
not nor departs asunder, by overmuch dryness thereof. Stones be not made
soft with lauing and washing with water: nevertheless they be bored and made
hollow with dropping of gutters, as Gregory says. Also if fire hot stones be
quenched in wine, they corrupt the wine, and turn it into vinegere, as Isidore
says. Also in stones generally needs pureness of matter, virtue, and precious
colors, diverse figure and shape, and many manner more profits: for stones be
needful and profitable, to making and building of houses and of walls, of
pauements and of bridges, and to put off enemies, wolves, and hounds, and other
evil beasts, and to draw metal out of the substance thereof, and to healpe
and heal men of diverse sicknesses and evils, and so make and to increase
Towers of Kings, to buyld and to strengthen Cities, Castles and Towers, and for
defense against wild beasts. Also stones are first taken out of the quarrie,
and then be bewed, playned, and squared, and laid and set in order in work of
building, the more under the less, and set together with Cement, and covered
without, and playned with cement.

( Addition.
At a place called Sutton in Kent, and at Boughton, are found a kind of stone,
as if it were clusters of Periwrinkles growing togethers: which stone being
wrought and polished, shows beyond Art, the shape of those shell fishes,
after a curious and cunning manner. Which stones, if they were not to be had,
but far off in some other Country, would here be esteemed of great price,
and hard and fair Marble greet.)

Of Pario. chap. 76.
PArius stone is a kind of noble marble and precious, as Isidore says. This
stone is found in the Island Paron, and is therefore called Parius. The
quantity thereof, passes not Lances and Crateras, and is good to keep men's
spicerie and ointments. The Gloss super Esaias says, that Parius is a kind of
most white marble, and betokens therefore chastity.

Of prassio. chap. 77.
PRassius is a stone as green as a leek, and comfort the feeble sight, and
is sometime found with red drops, and is sometime distinguished with white
drops. Of this stone it is said in Lapid. that no profit is therewith, but
that it is green, and makes gold seemly.

Of Pirite. cap. 78.
PIrites is a red bright stone, like to the quality of the air: much fire
is therein, and often sparkles come out thereof, and this stone burns his hand
that holds it right fast, therefore it has that name of Pir, that is fire. In
Lapid. it is said, that he will easelye and softly be handled and held, for it
burns if it be hard wrong.

Of Pionite. cap. 79.
PIonites is a stone that is said to be of female kind, as it is said. At
certain time it conceiueth and bears such another stone, and helps women
with child as Dioscorides says.

Of Panteron. cap. 80.
PAnteron is a stone of diverse colors, sprung and distinguished, for it is
seen black, red, green, pale, purple, yeolow, and also bright green in
color. This stone makes a man bold and hardy, so that he shall not be
overcome that day that he sees this stone early at Sun rising, as it is
said in Lapidario.

Of Plumbo. cap. 81.
LEad is called Plumbum, and has that name, as Isid. says de metal, lib. 16.
for first with balls of lead, men assaye deepnesse. He says that of lead are
two manner kinds, white and black, and the white is the better, and was first
found in the Islands of the sea Athlant in old time, and is now found in many
places, for in France and in Lusitania is a manner black earth full of
gravel, and of small stones, and is washed and blown, and so of that matter
comes the substance of lead. Also in gold quarryes, with matter of gold,
be small stoanes found, and be gathered with the gold, and afterward departed
from the gold, and blown by themselves, and tourneth all to lead, and
therefore gold is as heavy as lead, as Isid. says. But of black lead is
double kind, for black lead comes alone of a vein, or is gendred with
silver in meddled veins, and is blown, and in blowing, first comes tin,
and then silver, and then what remains, is blown and turned into black
lead, as Isi. says. But in Inde is neither brass nor lead found: but Inde is
rewarded again with Margarites and precious stones.

Isido. says black lead is best in trauellous works, as in pipes and plates,
and that Spaniards and Britons have proved. Huc vsque Isid. Quarto li. Metheo.
Arist. says, that of brimstone, that is boistous and not swiftly pured, but
troubly and thick, and of quick silver the substance of lead is gendred, and
is gendered in mineral places, so of uncleanness of vnpure brimstone lead
has a manner softness, and smoocheth his hand that touches it. And with
wiping and cleansing this uncleanness of lead may be taken away for a time,
but never for always, a man may wipe off the uncleanness, but always it is lead
though it seem silver. But strange qualities have mastry therein and beguile
men, and makes them err therein. Some men take Sal Armoniacum, as Aristotle
says, and assigns cause of this uncleanness, and says, that in voystous
lead is evil quick silver, heanie and sennye. Also that brimstone thereof is
evil vapor and stinking.

Therefore it freeseth not well at full. In li. 5. Alchimie Hermes says, if
thou hang lead over vinegar, it hurts it, for vinegar shall pearce the
substance thereof, and turn it into powder, and into white color of flower
of lead: and if thou powrest vinegar thereupon, it comes white, and destroieth
the might of vinegar. Burnt lead breeds red color and dim, and if the fire
be too strong, it turns into Citrine, and thereafter, with stirring, dryeng,
and tempring with vinegar, it tourneth into white color of flower of lead.

And if then make strong fire, it tourneth all into the first matter of lead,
and is made earth, as it is said there. Also lead meddled with other metal,
gathers togethers the kind parts of the metal, and departs and cleanses
away the other parts. Therefore lead is put with silver in the furnaice, that
the silver may be sooner cleansed: for the lead saves the silver parts from
wasting, and the lead is wasted and burnt, and cleanses the silver, Ier. says
the same in Glosa super. 6 ca, Fere ibi consumptum est plumbum, etc. Also
Hermes says, the lead in boiling, undoes the hardness of all sad and hard
bodies, and also of the stone Adamant. And in li. Meth. Arist. speaks of lead
and says that lead without doubt when it is molten, is as quick silver, but it
melts not without heat, and then all that is molten seems red. Wonder it
is, that though lead be pale or brown, yet by burning or resudation of vinegar,
often it gendreth seemly color and fair, as tawnie, red, and such other:
therewith women paint themselves, for to seem fair of color. And Lead is
good for medicine: For Lead is cold and moist in the second degree, as
Constant. says, and helps wonderfully against burning of fire and hot
postumes, and stauncheth bleeding wounds, and stauncheth and abateth running of
the eyes, and swageth smiting of Scorpions and Dragons, and lets the service
of Venus, if a plate of lead be laid to the 2. reins, and has other
medicinable reasons.

Look thereof innermore De coloribus, of the color that is called Stibium and
Cerusa, and is also called flower of lead.

Of Puluere. chap. 82.
Powder is called Puluis, and has that name for it is puf^e with the wind, as
Isi. says, for lightness thereof ye wind takes it up and blows it abroad.

Contrary winds comes into powder, and bears it about, and makes ye
whirle wind as Beda says. Powder beaten, shows the kind of the thing that
it comes of: now by savor, now by color, now by odor and smell. Therefore
powder is made of spicerie, that the inner virtue thereof may show it self,
that by medlyng and oning of parts, it may receive the larger virtue, that it
may give forth the more fragrant smell, and cause the sweeter taste, and that
it may the more effectually dry and cleanse putrified wounds, and eat and fret
away the dead flesh, that it grow no more, as powder of burnt lead dries and
cleanses away superfluity of wounds, and gendreth and saves quick flesh, as
Constable. says. And therefore of powder plasters, be made confections that be
called Thimiamata, and other diverse medicines, and ointments: Powder is made of
Thus, and of Mirrhe: with burning into powder, beasts were offered to our Lord
God. Also of powder is made noble electuaries, that helps and heals bodies
that be alive: also of powder is ointment made, that keeps and saves dead
bodies, that they rot not, nor fall into powder: also sen is made by meddling of
powder and of moisture, and turns into a clot by working of dryness, as
Isid. says. Also powder defiles the face and grieueth the eyes, and many
manner worms breed of powder and be sed therewith, and powder is bread to the
serpent, as Esa. says li. 12. Of powder, bodies with soul have beginning, and
ends and tourneth into that it comes off, as it is said to man. Powder
thou art, and into powder thou shall turn. Also powder infecteth the air,
and lets often the eye, that it may not see the cleernesse of the Sun, for
of powder meddled with moist air, often the mist is gendred between us and the
Sun, whose coming hides ye sun, that it is not clearly seen. Also moies
in the Sun beam comes of powder, and the powder is not seen in the sun
beam that comes in at the window.

Of Quirin. cap. 83.
QVirin is a stone that is found in Lapwings neasts, as Dioscorides says.
This stone bewrays and discovers in sleep counsel and priuitie: for this
stone laid and set under a man's head that sleeps, makes him tell as he
thinks sleeping, and multiplieth wonderfully fantasies. Therefore Witches
love that stone, for they work Witchcraft therewith.

Of Quandros. cap. 84.
QVandros is a stone of vile color, but it is of great virtue, as Diose,
says, and is found in the head of a vulture: and helps against all evil
causes, and fills teates full of milk.

Of Rabri. cap. 85.
RAbri is a stone, and has another common name, and is called Bolus Armenicus,
and is a stone or a vein of earth, and is of cold and dry kind, and has a
red color, and is found in Armenia, and has virtue to constrain and make
hard the womb, and to staunch blood out of what place of the body it runs.

Of Rubies.
This chapter is added.
THE Rubies grow in India, and are found for the most part in a river named
Pegu. These are of the best kind and finest, which they of the land of M^labar
call Nunpuclo, and are well sold, if they be fair and clean without spots. In
the Island of Zeylath, being in the second India, are found many Rubies, which
the Indians name Manecas: the most part of these, are pale, and fleshlye
colored, and very few in perfect beauty, which is as the red Rose and orient.
If abiding their first trial in the fire, they grow to a sparklyng clear
coal shining, called of the Greeks Anthrax, which signifies a coal of the
Latins called, Carbunculus. Their values in the Indies are 50. shillings, but
being brought hither, are sold for much more.

Of Reyben. cap. 86.
REyben as Auicen says, is a little stone and is found in a Crabs head, and is
sometime whife, and is sometime some deal yeolow, and is soft in substance,
little harder than the black of a fishes eye, and is in shape round and plain
without, and some deal hollow within, and is in virtue kindly cold and moist,
and helps against biting of Scorpions, and of the wesell, if it be beaten and
laid thereto in plaster wise. Also it is said, it helps against the biting of
a mad dog, if the powder thereof be taken in drink. If the powder thereof be
burnt, it cleanses teeth, and dries wounds, and helps scabs, and lets
tears.

Of Saphiro. cap. 87.
SAphirus is a precious stone, and is blew in color, most like to heaven in
fair wether and clear, and is best among precious stones, and most precious
and most apt and able to fingers of Kings, and is found in many places, but
that that is found in the East or in Inde is accounted best, and namelye if it
have as it were powder of gold meddled therein, and this Sapphire stone is thick
and not passing bright, as Isi. says. This stone is most praised in Lapid. And
for it is so noble and so excellent, it is called Gemma gemmarum, as it were
chief of precious stones, for it lighteneth the body, and keeps and saves
lims whole and sound, and has a bright star, and by brightness of that
star, his virtue is known. Another manner Sapphire is called Sirtites, and is
found fast by the place that is called Sirtes, among ye grauel of the sea
Libicum, as Diosc. says, and is also found in the veins of mines, where
Lasurium is also found, and in the same veins of Sapphire, in the middle, as it
were in the womb, is a certain kind of Carbuncle found. Therefore many men
deem, that the Sapphire is the Carbuncles mother, for many men mean, that the
Carbuncle is gendred in ye Saphires veins, and many men mean, that the
Carbuncle is some deal beshadowed with a certain blewe sparcle of the kind
of the Sapphire, as Diosc. says: and Diosc. says yt the Sapphire has virtue to
rule and accord them yt be in strife, and helps much to make peace and
accord. Also it has virtue to abate unkind heat, therefore in Lapid. it is said
of ye sapphire, that it cools heat of ye body within. For the Sapphire cools
much the heat of burning fevers, if it be hanged nigh the pulse and the veins
of the heart. Therefore he says, y^ it helps against much feauers, y^ have
time of cha^ging in access time. Also it has virtue to comfort and to glad y^
heart, therefore it is said, yt it helps against the Cardiacle, and against all
melancholik passions. Therefore it stancheth running and sweat yt comes of
anguish, and other sweat also, as it is said in Lap. He stauncheth sweat that
runs swift, etc. Diosc. says the same, and has virtue to staunch blood.
And so a Sapphire of the East stancheth bleeding at ye nose, if it be laid to ye
temples. Also he has singular virtue to swage blowing: For certain it is, yt
the Sapphire abateth and swageth swelling of postumes, if it be soon laid
thereto in the beginning of noiful drawing. Also ye Sapphire helps against an
evil postume, yt is called Antrax, for it puts out the might of ventosity
and malice of that Postume, for it overcomes and puts out the woodnesse
thereof, and suffers not the smoke thereof come to the heart, nor the malice
thereof to infect the spirits, as Dioscri. says. His virtue is contrary to
venim, and quenches it every deal. And if thou put a Spider in a box, and
hold a very Sapphire of Inde at ye mouth of ye bore any while, by virtue thereof
the Spider is overcome and dies, as it were sodeinly, as Diosc. says. And the
same I have seen proved often in many and diverse places. His virtue keeps and
saves the sight, and cleanses eien of filth without any grief: therefore it
is written in Lapid. that it takes away filth out of eien, and ach of the
forhead. Also this virtue heals biles and botches: For as Dioscor. says,
this stone beaten into powder, and meddled with milk, heals wounds, and this
also has been proved in wounds by experience. Also this stone was of so great
authority in old time, that men held that it it was most worthy stone to
their God, and so it was singularly hallowed to Apollo, for when nations asked
counsel of Appollo in time of sacrifice, they hoped to be certified, and to
have answer sooner, if a Sapphire stone were present, as Dioscorides says.
And this is touched in Lapidario.

And they that use Nigromancie mean, yt they have answer of God more thereby,
then by other precious stones. Also Witches love well this stone, for they ween
yt they may work certain wonders by virtue of this stone, and also this is
touched in Lapid. where it is said. This stone brings men out of prison
bonds, and undoes gates and bonds that it touches. Authors write those
doings and many other of the singular virtue of the Sapphire, and al Authors
accord in this point and say, yt the Sapphire is a precious stone, and loves
chastity, and therefore least ye effect thereof be let in any wise by his
uncleanness yt him bears, it needs him that bears it to live chaste, as
this story means, but he that it bears, is commanded to be most chaste.
Also in Lapidario it is said, that this stone does always envy, and puts off
dread and fear, and makes a man bold and hardy, and master and victor, and
makes the heart steadfast in goodness, and makes meek and mild, and goodly.
I ween that all this is said more in disposition then in effect and doing.
But this suffices at this time.

( Addition.
In the Island of Zeylam, are found the best and most true Saphires, being very
hard and fine, and of the color of Azure. Bliew: there are diverse sorts of
Saphires found in Calicut.)

Of Smaragdo. cap. 88.
SMaragdus of al green precious stones is the chief, as Isidore says. Men in
old time gave thereto the third dignitye after Margarites and unions.
Smaragdus has that name of green color, as he said there. For it is said
that all green things is bitter. In no herbs nor in precious stone is more
greenness then in the stone Smaragdus. It passes herbs and grass, twigs
and branches: And infecteth the air about it with passing green color: And
his green color abateth not in the Sun in any manner wise. Nothing
comfort more their eien that be grauers, then this stane: If the body
thereof be straight and cleansed or polished, then Images be seen therein as
it were in a mirror. Caesar Nero used to see fighting of sword players in this
stone, as Isidore says. Thereof be 12. manner of kinds, but the most noble are
found in Scithia, and in Bactria holds the second place: and Smaragdis be
found among and under stones, and in chinnes thereof, when the Northern wind
blows, for then the earth is uncovered, and Smaragdis shines among the
stones, for in such wind gravel and sand is most moved. The Egyptians have
the third. Other be found in metal or oar of brass, but they be gleyming,
for they have speckles like to brass, or to lead, or to salt. Though the
Smaragdus be green by kind, yet if it be meddled with wine or with oil, his
green color increases. There is a manner Smaragdus that goes out of kind
though it be green, for it is somewhat unseemly by beines of brass, and is
called Calcesmaragdus. Hue vsque Isid. li. ca. de viridibus gemmis. This stone
is taken of and from Griphons, and plenty of Smaragdus may not be found: for
great Griphons let the coming of men by the way that goes thereto, as Isid.
says li. 13. cap. 3. And this stone multiplieth his green color, of him
comes a beam that dies the air about him, and makes it green. The body
thereof is clear and of glassie kind, and shows figures, images and shapes
of things that be nigh thereto, and has of gift of kind and goodness of
virtue to heal diverse sicknesses and evils. Dioscorides says; it increases
riches, and makes men have good words and fair evidence, in caose and in
plea. If this stone be hanged about the neck, it helps the falling evil,
and saves and comfort feeble sight, and represseth wanton motions of
lechery, and makes good mind, and helps also against al fantasies and iapes
of fiends, and cease tempest, and stauncheth blood: and it is said, that it
helps them, that use to divine and guess what shall befall, as it is said in
Lapid.

( Addition.
Smaragdes grow in ye country of Babylon, where the Indians call ye sea
Diegn^n. They grow also in other parts of India. They are stones of fair
green color, and are light and tender. Of these stones many be counterfaite:
but looking on them warily toward ye light, the counterfaits show certain
burble^, as does glass, but in the true there is no such seen.)

Of Sardio. cap. 89.
SArdius is a precious stone of red color as it were red earth, and has that
name, for it was first found in Sardis, as Isid. says, and the Gloss sup.
Apoc. Though this stone be precious and fair, yet many account it least in
value of precious stones: for as they mean, except shining, there is no profit
therewith, but only that the stone Onix may not grieve in his presence: for as
it is said, Onichinus, that has some evil properties, may not show them in
deed, in presence of the stone Sardius. And Dioscorides says, that over this
virtue, Sardius has many other virtues. Of Sardius be five manner of kinds,
but the best comes out of Sardis, and is good: for it increases joys, and
puts away dread, and makes men bold and hardy, and sharpeth the wit, and in
his presence Onix may not grieve. Also he says, that Sardius, that is all red,
saves his bearer from enchantment, and from witchcraft.

Of Sardonice. chap. 90.
SArdonix has that name, of company of two stones, of Sardius and Onix. as
Isi. says, and is of three colors. For black is lowest, white the middle,
red as vermilion is highest. This stone only takes nothing of the substance
of the wax, when it is printed therein, and is found in Arabia and in Inde.
Hereof be five manner of kinds, but which of them has most colors and most
divided, and the thickest, is best. It is said that it puts of lechery, and
makes men meek and chaste.

Of Solis gemma. cap. 91.
THe Sun stone is called solis gemma, and is white shining, and has that
name for it shines with beams, as the Sun does shine in the world, as
Isidore says De candidis gemmis.

Of Silenite, cap. 92.
SIlenites is a stone of Persia, and is green as grass. His color is like to
ye stone Iaspis, as it is said in Lapidario, and shines with a white specke,
as though in brightness it contained the shape of the Moon: and the stone
Silenites follows the Moon, and wexeth and waneth as the Moon does, as Isi.
says, and Diosco. also. His virtue reconcileth love and accord. It is supposed
that it helps Tisike and sick men.

Of Stanno. chap. 93.
Tin is called Stannum, and is a metal, and has that name of Etimologic of
Greek as Isid. says. Tin departs, for in fire it departs mettalls of
diverse kind, and it departs lead and brass from gold and silver, and
defends other metal in hot fire: and though brass and iron be most hard in
kind, yet if they be in strong fire without tin, they burn and wast away: if
brazen vessels be tinned, the tin abateth the venim of rust, and amendeth
the favor. Also mirrours be tempred with tin, and white color that is
Cerusa is made of tin, as it is made of lead. Huc vsque Isidorus li. 16. cap.
de Metallis.

Lib. Metheororum Aristotle says, that tin is compouned of good quick
silver and of evil brimstone. And these twain be not well meddled but in small
parts compounded, therefore tin has color of silver, but not the sadness
thereof. In li. Alchemie Hermes says, that tin breaks all mettalls, and
bodies that it is meddled with, and that for great dryness of tin. And
destroieth in metal the kind that is obedient to hammer work. And if thou
medlest quick silver therewith, it withstandeth the crashing thereof, and
makes it white, but afterward it makes it black and defiles it. Also there
it is said, that burnt tin gendereth read color, as Lead does: and if the
fire be strong, the first matter of tin comes soon again. Also though
tin be more soft then silver, and more hard then Lead, yet lead may not be
soon soudred to lead nor to brass, nor to iron without tin: neither these may
be soudered without grease or Talow, and Rosen.

Of Sulphur. cap. 94.
BRimstone is a vein of the earth, and has much air and fire in his
composition, therefore it is called Sulphur, as it were Solum vrens burning of
the ground. Fire is called Vr. for the firye virtue of brimstone is known in
fervent waters, for water that runs and passes by veins of brimstone,
takes whiteness or heat thereof, fauorinesse, effect, and smell. And hereof
it comes that hot wels springing out of ye earth bring therewith ye qualities
of veins of brimstone. And nothing is so soon set a fire as Brimstone, and
breeds in the hot Island Eloijs between Cicilia and Italy, and some men
mean, that those Islands burn, and Brimstone is found and dug in other
places, as Isidorus says: of Brimstone there be four kinds. One is called
Viuum, the which when it is dug shines and flourishes, the which all only
among all the kinds thereof, Physicians use, as Isidore says. Another is
called Gleba, and serves only for fullers. The third is called Liquor, and is
good and profitable to cast and sparple on Wool: for therewith they make soft
and white: the fourth serves to light of lanternes, as Isidor. says. And
says thereto, ye the virtue of brimstone is so great, ye certain sicknesses
are perceived with brightness thereof. If the flame thereof comes straight into
a ma^s face, it breeds foul and evil palenesse to their sight that look
thereon, to the likeness of dead men, as Isid. says, li. 16. cap. 1. Auicen
and Pla. mean, that brimstone is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and is
turned into kind of brimstone in part of water, of earth, and of fire, and that
brimstone is sometime great and boistous, and full of dross, and sometime pure,
white, clear and subtle, and sometime mean between both.

And by this diverse disposition, diverse metal is gendered of Brimstone and
of quick silver, as it is said 4. Metheororum. There it is showed that
Brimstone and quick silver is the matter of mettalls. Some Brimstone is called
quick brimstone, such as it is when it is taken out of the earth: and some is
dead Brimstone or quenched, and is made by craft, and put in pottes or in other
vessels for medicine. The best is the quick with heat bright and shining
white, or green without stone, and that makes green color, and if it be
put in the fire, it has virtue of tempering and departing, of consuming and
wasting, and of making subtle and thin, and of restoring. Therefore it lets
the cough, and helps them yt have the falling evil, and cleanses scabs, and
withstandeth venim, and awaketh men that have the sleeping evil, and helps
for the gowtes, Podagre, and the palsy, if the remedy thereof be used in due
manner and medicinable, as Auicen, Dioscorides, Platearius, and other Authors
say.

Of Sale. chap. 95.
SAlt is called Sal, and has that name of Saliendo, leaping: for it leapeth
out of the fire, and flies the fire, though it be fiery kind, as Isidore
says. Other men mean, that it has that name Sal, of Sale, or of Sole, of
the sea, or of ye Sun. For it is gendered of sea water by working of the Sun:
for some of the Sea abides at cliffes, and is dried with the Sun, and is
sometime drawn out of salt pits, and sodde till water turn into hardness of
salt, that was fleeting before, and so made hard and thick with heat. And is
sometime gathered among gravel and Sand in waring of the Moon by night. For
often in Cerenia salt is found under Gravel and Sand. Also in some places be
rocks of Salt, and out thereof stones be hewn with iron, that turns
afterward into kind of Salt. As it fares in Arabia, and in Pannonia. Also
those stones be so hard, that they make houses of them, and the common salt
craketh and sparketh in fire, leapeth out thereof, but Sal agrigentinum of
Cicilia suffers fire, and melts in fire against kind, and starteth and
leapeth out of water. And salt is diverse in color: for Sal memphiticum is red.
In a country of Cicllia, where mout Etna is, is pure salt. In ye same Cicilia in
Pathmos is so bright and clear salt, ye Images be seen therein. In Capado, is
yeolow salt dug and mined, as Isidore says. Also salt varieth, and is
diverse in savor as he says. For in some place it is sweet in savor, and in
some place most salt, and in some most bitter. And the more bitter salt is,
the more hot it is, or is the more hotter deemed, as Auicen says. Salt is most
needful, for without Salt nigh all meat is wearish and unsavory. Salt makes
Potage and other meat sauorie, and exciteth good appetite in all meat. With
salt al meat is made sauory and liking. Men ween it has this name Salt of the
Sun: for nothing is more profitable then the Sun and salt. And so we see
diverse beasts come to pasture most for liking of Salt. Also milk and these
be the more abundant, for goodness of salt. Also salt hardneth and dries
things, and keeps and saves dead bodies from rotting: Huc vsque Isidorus.
libr. 16. cap. 3. Also Plat. and Auicen tell, that Salt has generally virtue
to undo, cleanse, and wast rotted humors. Also to depart and destroy
ventositie, and namely if powder of salt be sod and laid all hot in a bag to
the mouth of the stomach. Also this virtue joins and saves kind moisture
in the body, and wastes and destroys unkind moisture therein. And so water
of Salt wells dissolueth and wastes swelling and boiling, and also the
Dropsy, as he says. Also salt fretteth away dead flesh, and namely if the
Salt be burnt. For then it withstandeth best rotting: and dries, cleanses,
and thirieth into the inner parts, as he says. Also salt softneth the womb,
and brings out supersluitie, and namely salt that is called Gemma, and has
that name, for it is clear as a precious stone, and works wonderfully in
ordeining of the guts. And softneth what is hard, and putieth out
superfluity, and so does Armoniacum and common salt also. Also salt meddled
with honey, bread, and wine, heals the Postume Carbunculus or Antrax, as
Auicen says. Also Salt does away speckles of the face, if it be tempered with
water, and Camphora, and the face be washed therewith. Also Salt cleanses
the body of scabbes and Traters, namely if it be meddled with Soap. Also Salt
heals the venomous biling and stinging of Scorpions and creeping worms, if
it be meddeled with honnye and nuts, and with other certain things, as Aucien
says. Salt has these virtues and many more, that were too long to reckon all
arowe: but these shall suffice at this time.

( Addition.
The last that is made at the Wiches is most wholesomest.)

Of Topazio. cap. 96.
TOpazius is a precious stone, and has another name Topazion indeclinable, as
Isidore says, lib. 16. And is of shining kind, and shines with all colors,
and was first found in an Island of Arabia in which Island when the Troglodites
were diseased with hunger and tempest, they dug up roots of herbs, and
they found this stone therewith, and called it Testam nebulis. After that
ship men sought and found the stone, and called it Topazim in the language of
Troglodites. Therefore this stone that was so sought and sound is called
Topazius, and has that name of the Island. Topazim in their language, is to
say Siche, and is greatest of precious stones. Plinius wrote, that a stone of
this kind was found so great, that Philadech made thereof an Image of four
cubits long. In the Gloss super fixem Apost. it is said in this manner. The
more scarce Topazius is, the more precious it is. And has two colors, as it
were of gold and of clear air, and shines most when it is smit with the
Sun beam, and passes in cleerenesse all other precious stones, and
comsorteth men and beasts to behold and look thereon. And if thou wipe this
stone, thou darkest it, and if thou leadest him to his own kind, he is the
more clear. And in treasurye of kings, nothing is more clear nor more
precious then this precious stone. For cleerenesse thereof takes to himself
the cleerenesse of other precious stones that be about him, and it is said,
that he follows ye course of ye Moon: and helps against the passion
Lunatik. And so it is said, ye as ye Moon is more full or less, so his effect
is more or less, as it is said in Lapid. and stauncheth blood, and helps
them that have Emoroides, and swageth seruent water, and suffers it not so
boil, as it is said in Lapidario. Dioscorides says, that it swageth both
wrath and sorrow, and helps against evil thoughts and frenzy, and
against sodeine death. And has the shape of a mirror, and the Image that is
therein, is seen in a hollow mirror.

( Addition.
The Topaseis grow in the Island of Zeilam, and are named of the Indians
Purceragua: It is a hard and fine stone, and of equal estimation with the
Rubie and the Sapphire, because al these three are of one kind: the perfect
color of this is yeolowe, like unto fine beaten gold, whereof some be more
pale and some white, and therefore of less value. And of these are small
Diamondes, counterfeit.)

Of the Turquesses. cap. 97.
TVrquesses are found in Exer, This chapter is added.
in a place of Siech Ismael. Their mine is a dry earth, that is found upon a
black stone, which the Moors take of in small pieces, and carrye them to the
Island of Ormus, from whence they are brought to diverse parts of the world by
sea and by land. The Islands call them Perose. They are soft stones, of small
weight, and not much cold, and to know that they are good and true, in the
day they shall appear like the clear sky bliewe, and by candle green, and
the best sorts are not without some black spotte of the Mine whereon they
grew. The Indians know none other virtue but this fayrenesse.

Of Turgote. chap. 98.
TVrgotes that is called Torcois also, is a white yeolowe stone, and has that
name of the Country of Turkey, there it is bred. This stone keeps and saves
the sight, and breeds gladness and comfort.

Of Terra Sigillata. Chap. 98.
A Certain vein of the earth is called Terra sigillata, and is singularly
cold and dry. And Dioscorides calls it Terra saracenica and argentea, and is
some deal white, well smelling and clear. The chief virtue thereof binds
and stauncheth. And powder thereof tempered with the white of an Egg,
stancheth bleeding at the nose: and helps against swelling of the feet, and
against the gowte, if it be laid in a plaistre thereto, as it is said in
Lapidario.

Of Tartaro. chap. 99.
TArtarum is Wine drastes, and like to a soft stone, cleaning hard to the
sides of the tons. Whose kind is hot and dry in the third degree, and is
good against scab and scall, and uncleanness of the head: and it has virtue
to make thin, to wast, to cleanse, and to laxe, as it is said in Plat.

Of Vitro. chap. 100.
Glass (as Auicen says) is among stones, as a fool among men. For it takes
al manner of color and painting, and is called Vitrum, as Isi. says. For by
his virtue he is bright and clear, and light shining, there through all that
is contained inward in other mettalles and in veins of earth is hid. In
glass all manner licour is seen outward such as it is wtin, and is showed as
it were to closed eien, that look thereon, as Isidore says. And glass was
first found beside Tholomeida, in the cliffe beside the river that is called
Vellus, that springth out of the foot of mount Carmelus, at which shipmen
arrived. For upon the gravel of that river shipmen made fire of clots meddled
with bright gravel, and thereof ran streams of new licour, that was the
beginning of glass, as Isi. says. Now glass is made of ashes of trees and of
herbs, with strong blast of fire, with the which it is meddled, now glass, now
brass, and now both, and so turns into glass. When glass is molt in the
furnaice and perfectly cleansed, then it takes pureness, brightness, and
cleernesse. Glass is died with all manner of color, so yt it follows
Iacinctus, Smaragdus, and other precious stones in color and brightness. Also
it is so pliant that it takes anon diverse and contrary shapes by blast of the
Glasier, and is sometime beaten, and sometime graven, as silver, as Isid.
says: and no matter is more apt to make mirrours then is glass, nor to
receive painting. But most workmanship is in white glass, yt is next to
Crystal in color. For it is often chosen before silver and gold to drink in
as Isi. says. Also there he says, yt the stone Obseanus is reckoned among
kind of glass. And this stone is sometime green, and sometime black, and is
clear and bright. And is called Specularis, and is with fatly sight. Of this
stone many men make precious stones, as Isidore says. And all manner glass
has this property, that it is most pliant, while it is melting hot and soft,
and most brittle when it is cold and hard. And if it be broken, it may not he
amended without melting again. But long time passed, there was one that made
glass pliant, which might be amended and wrought with an hammer, as Isidore
says. And brought a Uiole made of such Glass before Tiberius the Emperor,
and threw it down on the ground, and was not broken, but bended and folded.
And he made it right and amended it with an hammer. Then the Emperor
commanded to smite off his head anon, least that his craft were known. For
then Gold should be no better then fen, and all other metal should be
little worth, for certain if glasen vessels were not brittle, they should be
accounted of more value the^ vessels of gold, as Isid. says. Then glass is
clean and pure, and specially bright and clear. And Images and shadows be
seen therein, and is pliaunt when it is melting hot, and brittle when it is
cold and hard. And receives all colors, and follows precious stones more
in color then in value, and cleanses away superfluity and filth as Auicen
says. Powder thereof cleanses the teeth, and does away weue of the eyes, and
helps greatly against the stone of the bledder and of the reins, if it be
dronken with Wine, as Auicen says.

Additio.
(But the powder of glass must be very fine, else will it frette a sunder the
guts and sodeinly kill the patient, for the powder made of glass mixed in
Butter, writ and Mice, it may as soon kill men, take some other medicine)

Of Ydaci. cap. 101.
YDachites is a precious stone of read color, and round in shape. And has
another stone within him, and sounds by tinking thereof. Nevertheless wise
men mean, that tinkling is not the inner stone, but some spirit that is
within, as Dioscorides says: This stone sweateth water, so that it seems
that it contains a manner well spring within it self. Therefore some men
tell, that this is the stone that is called Enidros. Look before in the same
book.

Of Yrachite. cap. 102.
YRachites is a stone, the man that bears it shall not be bit wish any flies,
neither stung with Bees, as Dioseorides says. And so men ween, that it
helps against venim.

( Addition.
That is when he can get such a stone, that has such a virtue.)

Of Zimiech. chap. 103.
ZImiech is a stone or vein of the earth, whereof Lapis Lazurij is made; as it
is salde in Lapidarie. The more lyker this stone is to the color of heaven,
the better it is, and has small pieces, as it were of gold meddled thereon.
Those that be whitest be most earthie, and therefore they be not so precious.
These may be long kept without corruption: and help against many evils, and
against sounding, that comes of melancholic fumositie, if they be given in
due manner to ye patient. It shall never be given without it be ground full
final, and often washed full clean. And the sign of perfect washing thereof is,
if the water that it is washed in, be little or naught died. This stone
cleanses and loses wonderfully the quarteine, and shall not be given with the
decostion. For then it should fall to the bottom, but after or before, and
that, with whey, as Dioseoriders says, as it is said in Plat. And as Cerusa is
made of plates of iron: so is Lazurum made of plates of silver with vinegar.
Often ye stone Lazurius is found among silver oar, and among gold oar. And often
in the veins of Lazarius be found Saphires, Iacincts, and other such bliew
stones.

Of Zingutte. cap. 194.
ZInguttes is a stone with glassie color, if it be borne about ye neck, it
helps against Victipola^. And stancheth blood, and puts off rauing and
frenzy. And if it be held to a tree that burns, it quenches the flame
thereof as Dioscor. says.

( Addition.
There are many mo stones, whose hidden virtues are unknown for want of
experience, which grow in fishes, beasts, birds, and men, as the stone in the
Crabs head, the stone that grows in ye Snaile, and the stone called
Bulgoldo^^, sorth of a beast in Indes, and there are good against all po^sons,
the stone that grows in the maw^ of an Ox; or in the gall, the stone that is
dred in the kindness of a man, and all these serve to great and secret uses.)

FINIS LIBRI XV.


INCIPIT LIBER XVII. DE ARBORIBOS ET HERBIS.
AFter that by Gods grace and his help, this book and treatise is now ended,
in which is openly showed ye propertyes of those things that be ^endered in the
earth within, as of precious stones and metal, and other things that be
gendered in veins of the earth: Now we shall shortly speak and treat of such
things as grow upon the earth by the help of God. As of ye properties of
trees, herbs, fruits, and seeds, and of mores and roots. But first we shall
speak only of trees and herbs, of who^ mention is made by name in holy
writ, in Text or in Gloss, after the form of the A. B. C.

Of a Tree. chap. 1.
A Tree is called Arbor, and has that name of Aruis, fields. For it cleaves
to the earth, and roots be fast therein, as an herb does, as Isidor. says
li. 16. ca. 5. A tree and an herb comes forth in one manner, and after one
way. For of one comes the other. For if thou sowest the seed of a tree,
first it shows and wringeth forth as an herb, and is then confect, and
rises and tourneth into the kind of a tree. And in space of short time, that
ye seemed an herb, turns into a tender and young Tree, and is then called
Arbusta, as it were the shafte of a tree. For the place wherein trees grow is
called Arbustum, and where Willowes grow is called Salictum, as Isidore says.
Of ye refreshing causes, by yt which trees and dry fruit
In libro. de Vegitabilibus Arist. sets these propertyes of trees and of
plants, and says that in Trees, and in plants is life and virtue, like as in
beasts; but diversely. For in plants life is hidden, and in beasts it is
openly known, perfect and complete.

For trees move not from place to place. as beasts do, nor change appetite
and liking, nor seeieth sorrow, though some philosophers mean other trise, as
An^aagoras and other, that Aristotle reprooueth. In plants is life vegitatiue,
and thereby humor is drawn to save and to ^ad the tree or plant, but therein
is no soul of feeling, and so it sorroweth not when it is bewen or cut, nor
has any seeling when it is nourished and fed, nor it waketh not, nor sleeps,
nor it breeds not in nor out, nor has other conditions, that belong to the
soul of feeling. Nor a Tree gendereth not, nor is gendered by meddling of male
and female. But a tree has virtue of it self of seeding, and may thereby
bring forth another like it self in kind. But this might and virtue works
not in deed, but by some outward help: as by help of times of ye year. Winter
needs to gather together ye seminal humor: Springing time needs to bring
out the humor. For then is not great cold, freesing nor thrusting outward,
neither strong heat burning ye seed, nor corrupting it. Also the Sun needs to
resolve and temper the parts thereof, that were before congealed by cold. And
heat comes in and departs ye humor seminal from ye humor yt nourishes
and scedeth. Also earth is more needful to trees and herbs, then to other
things ye gender: for yt well of feeding of a tree is of earth, as the Sun is
well of generation thereof, as of the cause that works Therefore in li. de
Plantis Aristotle says that the earth is mother, and the Sun father of trees
and of herbs. For the earth fredeth, as the mother, and the Sun works as
the father. In Trees and Plants, some men take beede of generation, of feeding
and nourishing, of increasing, and of the roots, yearelye renouation, and
seen no purgation by urine nor by dirt, suppose therefore that trees be more
perfect then beasts. But Aristotle reprooueth this, and says, That a tree is
bound to the earth, and has no moving of it self, nor of the whole, nor of
parts thereof: Neither has any determinate shape in the parts thereof, so
that the parts thereof be diverse, and ordained to diverse offices and doing
by diverse forms and shapes: as the eye of a beast for to see, and the care
for to hear, nor has a perfect soul, but a part of a part of a soul, that
is a soul vegitatiue. But a beast has mo workings and more noble then a plant.

A tree is diverse in substance, in virtue, and in working. For as Aristotle
says, lib. de Vegitabilibus. cap. 2. Some trees have Gum, and Rosen, and the
cause is, for passing much humor is not all defied of heat, neither tou^neth
all into feeding of the tree, but it is put outward, and is there cooled with
cold air that is thereabout. Also some trees have knots, by means of which
the parts gendered some after some, be bound togethers. Also they have veins,
that is chinkes: in the which kind moisture is kept, and passes thereby from
the earth into all the parts about. And have also Pith in them, in the which
the humor is sodde and defiaed before that it pass into the substance of
leaves, of fruit, boughs, and twigges, as he says. And has rindes without
to defend the trees within. For as the skin does in the body of a beast, so
the rind does to the body of a tree, as Isidore says. Also generally, as
Aristotle says, a tree takes soon fire and light: and has the name Lignum,
as Isid. says; for it takes soon fire and light. And is called Lychius, a
week, for it gives light to them that be present. Also the shafte of a tree
that stretches from the root up to the top, is properly called Lignum, and
has somewhat within, as the pith, and thereof kind has succone when moisture
of feeding and nourishing fails without, as it fares in feeding of a beast,
when feeding and nourishing fails in the members, then kind has succor of
the blood that is in the veins, as says expressly Auicen and Isidore also.
Also a Tree has, somewhat that belongs thereto outward, as the rind,
boughs, leaves, twigges, blossoms, flowers, and fruit, and the top above,
as Aristotle says there. A tree has the rind to save and to keep all that
is within, boughs, and twigs to spread up and about, leaves to save and to
defend fruit, that is tender, from harm and griefs, and has fruit to save
and multiplye the kind, and has a round top in complement thereof. And has
figure and shape as a pillar commonly all round, and that is, as Albumasar
says, for even spreading of humor into all the parts about, and for even
working of heat, that makes digestion in all the parts about, and yet every
tree and plant has a root, and in the root many manner knots and strings, and
the root is in steed of the mouth. By the root humor is drawn so feed all
the tree, and knots and strings be in steed of sinews, and bind together the
parts that be contained.

Also a tree has super fluitie of parts, that be not kind parts of office,
nor needful to the being of the tree: but such parts be in a tree, as hair
and nails in the body. And therefore leaves and fruit tall of trees, by reason
of withdrawing of humor, as hair falls of beasts. For when the humor of
feeding is scarce, then kind withdraws it from ye parts that be not
needful, for it should not fail in the parts that be needful. Therefore
generally leaves fall off Trees in winter time, yet nevertheless they abide in
some trees, as in bore, and such other, either for plenty of humor, or
gleaminesse of humor, or for sadness and soundnes of the tree, for Trees with
thin substance and not hard, but full of hoales and pores, loose their
lives, namely, when the humor of feeding is thin and scarce.

Also trees be diverse in multitude of parts, and in greatness and in
smalnesse, and in strength and in feebleness. And the cause is, for in some
great trees, humor is milkie, as it fares in fig trees. And such humor is
able to spread himself in length and in breadth. In some trees the humor is
gleamie, and may not spread himself, for the parts cleene together, as it
fares in Pech Trees. And this is the cause of witness and scarcity of parts
of Trees, herbs, and grass. But such gleaming is not cause of feebleness in
Trees, herbs, and grass, but of ye humor be too scarce, or the heat
insufficient and imperfect. Also in some Trees the humor, is sharp and of hot
and of dry complexion, and yt is (...) of strength and of might: hot things
is light and subtle, and chirleth, and therefore such humor spredeth, and the
tree ^^^^th in great quantity. Also in parts of Trees, men take hee^ of
coutinesse in quantity, and likeness, for a quality in (...) and likeness in
shape, comes of plein^^y of matter, with evenness of hear ye works: and
ye (...) of contrary cause. In the same wise, men take he in trees of
softness and ^adnesse, the softnes comes of head yt is not sufficient to
make the humor hard and sad. Also Trees, herbs, and grass, be adverse in
the manner of fruit bering: for some trees, as Aristotle says. Ware fruit
above ye leaves, and yt is for strength of the fruit, and needs of heat of
the Sun to make digestion in ye humor thereof. Some bear fruit under the
leaves, and that for feebleness of the fruit, least the fruit be corrupt
with great heat or cold. And some fruit hangs by a stalk, and the cause
thereof is, by reason of vnmightye humor, and ^^lmightie heat, yt may no
hold the fruit outward. And generally every Tree has a moist root, yt is
mean between the Tree and the earth, of which earth the Tree has feeding and
nourishing. Therefore the Greeks call the root the life of the tree. For it
brings life thereto, and has a stock or a shafte yt stretches upward, by
help of the root. And yt is needful, as Albumasar says, to sustain the
body thereof. Therefore it is lykened to the stature of the body of a beast
that bears all the limbs and members. And so that stock is a steadfast
foundament of the Tree, and holds up the boughs and fruits thereof. Also in
a hard Tree is soft pith. And Aristotle says, some men call the pith the
mother of the Tree. For therein the seminall humor of the Tree is fed, as a
child in the mother. And some men cast it the guts of the tree, saw therein
the pured feeding is departed from the vnpure as in the guts of a beast. And
some men call it the heart of the Tree: For thereof comes moving of life, as
life of feeling comes of the heart of every beast. Also every Tree has a
rind to make it steadfast and sad, and the rind bears off small humor,
drawn outward and dried with heat of the air, as the Teee within breeds
of great humor and dry essencially, and moist accidentally, as Aristotle
says, and Albumasar also.

And some Trees and herbs grow in Croftes and in Gardeines, and be ^ame.
Trees and herbs. And some grow elsewhere, and be called wild Trees and
herbs. And Trees and herbs of gardens should be wild, if they were not kept
and hared and shred, as Aristotle says. And some such Trees bear does fruit
and Oils because of vrictuous human ^and ^yrle that is sufficient, and some
bear none for default of such humor. And in some trees ye leaves fall soon,
by reason of thin humor and not farlye ye brieth soon: In some is the
contrary, for the cause is contrary. Also as Trees and herbs be diverse in
quantitye, so they be in fairness and soulenesse. For they be both fair for
evenness of matter, and for fair ordeining and setting of parts, and for
sufficient heat yt works, and stretches in right and due disposition of
kind. Foulness comes of the contrary, both in Trees and in herbs. Also
they be diverse in fruit, good and evil: and yt is for more or less
sweetness of kind humor, or for the heat yt works has less or more due
proportion to the matter, and to the humor material.

Also Aristotle says there, that wild Trees and plants bear more fruit then
Trees and herbs of gardens: and Albumasar says, that that is for more
plentye of humor that is little fattye and gleamie, and soon divided and
departed, and springs out and tourneth into kind of fruits. But fruit of
gardens is better then fruit of wild trees, as Arist. says. Albumasar says,
that the cause is plenty of more humor, fattie airie, and sweet, yt is perfect
in the matter of fruit of gardens. Also Trees and herbs be diue^s by
diversity of places that they grow in. For some grow in dry place, and they
be loss in quantity for defeit of humor, and some in moist place among rivers
and ponds, and by the sea side; and often such be great in quantitye. But Trees
yt grow by strond of salt, water, grow not fast, for much sand and gravel and
dryness of ye humor that is drawn. But beside the red sea this sayleth, as
Aristotle says, where be great Trees, and that is by reason of much humor and
great heat, as Albumasar says. Also they be diverse in leaves and in
variation of flowers: for some have sharp leaves and yt is by reason of mastry
of earth and of drines, and some have smooth leaves, for evenness of moisture
of water, and due proportion of heat, some have cloven and ragged leaves and
broad, as the vine, and yt is for mastry of earth, and privation of gleamye
matter, and vneuennes of heat, yt stretches not the matter euenlye all about.
For in such plants the fatty humor and gleamye passes into the matter of
fruit, and watrye humor and earthie into the matter of leaves, as Albumasar
says. Also Trees and herbs be diverse in figure and shape of the uttermost
parts. For in some the uttermost parts be shapen toppewise, or prickewise and
sharp. As it sareth in thorns, therein heat draws the most thin humor
swiftly to the uttermost parts, and dries it, and makes it sharp, and
joins it with the stock and the root, as Albumasar says: a contrary shape
comes of contrary cause. And this same is seen in fruit of Trees, as Arist.
says. For fruit is of diverse shape, and is not all cornered, neither all
straight on a straight line, but some fruit is round for evenness of matter of
humor, and for even working of the virtue yt works, and of heat, by the
which working the parts of matter is even stretched and spread from ye middle
to the roundnesse about, and cornered shape comes of contrary cause. Also
they be diverse in color and how for both fruit and flowers boughs, and
twigges be diverse in trees ^s Aristotle says. Of cold humor, earthie, and
melancholic, comes blackness in fruit, and foul color, and of hot humor
comes red color, and so of other, as Albumasar says. In all the foresaid
doing diversity of savor is gendred in diversity of humor, that has the
mastry, and of heat that works digestion and disposition in the substance.
Also trees and herbs be diverse in riping of fruit. For in some trees and
herbs fruit ripeth soon, as Aristotle saith^: as Mulberies and Cheries, and
other such, and that is for the heat is strong and mighty to work in the
moisture, and in make the fruit ripe swiftly and soon. For ye humor is
obedient, and lets not the working of heat that makes digestion, and some
fruit ripeth late for groseness of humor, watrie, and vnobedienth^ and for
unmight of heat that works digestion. And that falls most in wild Trees.
And for ye same cause some tree burgen soon, and some say. And leaves spring
soon by reason of much watrye humor undigested, and not fattie, that breaks
out soon is the utter parts of trees or of herbs: And of contrary cause
comes the contrary.

Of Arbore aromatica. Chap. 2.
A Tree of good savor has sometime the good smell in the rind; and sometime
in the flower, and sometime in the fruit, as it saves in Sinamom, that is a
rind, and the Mare is the flower, and the Nutmeg is the fruit. And Albumasar
says, that the cause of good smell is dry and earthie, and subtle, meddled
with subtle watrye matter, and as yt mastrie has more or less in one part of
the Tree, that part smells better then another, and some Tree smells well
in every part thereof, as it foreth of the Tree Balsamus. All the parts
thereof has good savor, as it shall be showed hereafter among trees and
herbs with good savor. Some grow and have in themselves matter seminall,
and come forth by ^ouenable meddling of elements. And some be multiplied by
planting, and of more and roots, or stock, and seeds. And some have
multiplication by grafting of stocks, as Albumasar says. Among all graffing
of Trees, the best is, when the graffe and the stock be like, as Aristotle
says, and this has double understanding, either plants of one ^ile kind, as
if a fig graffe be grafted on a Fig tree, and Wine on Wine stock, or else
of those trees that have humious proportional and according either to other,
so that the humor of that one be according to nourish, and to feed that other,
as when a Pear is graffed on an Apple tree, and again ward. And it is to
wit, that a graffe that is grassed on a stock, tourneth and changes the
virtue and quality of the stock into his^^ when virtue and quality. And if an
Olive be graffed on a stock of Beat, the virtue of the Olive comes down in
the stock of Beat, and makes it hard, and makes it dure a certain time. And
at last it draws the humor to himself, and tourneth and changes the
stock into his own likeness and kind, as Albumasar says; super finem primi
lib. And he says there, yt lightlye good trees come not of evil seed, nor of
good seed, or of a good root evil trees: though the contrary be often seen
among beasts. Albumasar says, that that is, for a tree is a fast in the
earth, and takes nourishing of the earth in one wise, and beasts do not so,
for diverse complexion and contrary appetite. Therefore it is otherwise to
beasts then in herbs and in trees. Also it is so of all kind of trees that
by tilling and craft wild trees may be turned and changed into the kind of
trees of gardeines. And Aristotle sets ensample thereof, and says, that by
craft of tilling, bitter Almonde trees be made sweet and sauoury, and so a
Pomgranard is made mean sour. Also be says, that a tree with thick rind is
made soon barren, and that is for default of fattie humor, that is the matter
of fruit, or else for the hardness of the rind, that lets the euaporation
of that humor, that is noyful in a tree, and he says, that if a root of a
tree be slitted and cloue, and a stone put in the cliffe, the tree shall bear
fruit again. And Albumasar tells the cause, and says, yt at this sleft,
the said noifull humor passes out, and then heat of the Sun and of ye air
about, comes and wastes the corrupt humor.

Also there it is said, ye Almondes and pomgranards leave their malice by craft
of tilling. For Pomgranards amend, if they be dunged with swines dirt, and
watered with fresh water. And Albumasar tells ye cause, and says, ye heat and
dryness of such dung, abateth superfluity of water in Pomgranards, but teast
passing heats and dryness, turns the fruit into bitterness, it is good to
put thereto fresh water, to temper the mastry of heat and of dryness.

Also if nails be pight in an Almond tree, grains of gum come thereof, and
that long time, and superfluity of water that lets the breeding of vntuous
humor that is the matter of fruit. And so thereby ye tree is altered from his
malice as Albumasar says: And there it is said, yt by tilling, wild trees and
herbs takes kind of trees and of herbs of gardeines, and bear well fruit.
To make a wild tree change from his malice into goodness, place and travail
in tilling helps most, and namely time of the year, in the which it is set
and planted, as Aristotle says, and he sets ensample of Baleno, that is
Henbane seed, Bolemis in the old coppie.
for that that grows in Persia is venomous: and it is good to eat, if it be
brought and set in Egypt, or in Jerusalem. And ye comes, as Albumasar says,
for ye te^perate place brings it out of vntemperatnes, and makes it good to
eat. Also time helps much such a changing. For Aristotle says, trees yt
need to be set, be most set in springing time, and yt for temperate heat and
moisture, ye comfort heat and moisture in trees and in herbs. In winter
be few set, and yt for passing cold the moisture; and also in Harvest for
cold and dryness, and least in Summer at the rising of the Star Canicula,
and that for passing heat and dryness that consumes and washes kind
moisture in herbs and in trees, and namely in the root.

In Aegipt trees be set once in a year, when the dryness of the land is
tempred with flowing of the river Nilus, as Aristotle says, and Albumasar,
also. Also there it is said, that in Trees grow diverse twigges and
branches. For some spring of the root, and some of the stock, and some by the
ground, and some in the boughs on high at the top, and some in the middle.
And the cause of this diverse springing, is diverse humor watrye and light,
thin, and not v^rtous, that is the matter of leaves, and is not like
plenteous in all Trees, and heat works diversely in Trees. And therefore of
that humor springs diverse twigs and branches. Also some bears fruit
once a year, and some ofter. But the last fruit ripeth not, but abides raw
and green, and not ripe, for heat may not ripe such fruit because that winter
is nigh^. The common use is most to bear fruit perfectly once a year, for
once a year feed is gathered, and once heat may spread humor to the utter
parts of the Tree, and turn it into fruit, and makes the fruit perfect and
ripe.

Also some Trees be fertile long time, for much heat and fattye humor, as it
fares in the fig Tree, and some bears one year, and rest another, as the
Olive. The cause thereof is, for in the second year ye tree is nourished, and
the humor restored. For in the first year so much humor tourneth into kind
of fruit, yt the second year needs to restore the humor, though it bear
many boughs in restoring time, yet it bears but little fruit yt time. Also
some Trees be more fruitful in youth then in age, for they have more heat
and humor in youth then in age. Some againewarde bear more fruit in age then
in youth. And ye reason hereof is, as Albumasar says, for in youth is more
moisture therein, then kind heat may defy, and so it is inobedient unto
heat: but in age is less, and so it is obedient to the heat digestive, as it
fares in Almonds, in pires and in Pears, as Aristotle lays an ensample
there.

Also Aristotle says, that both wild Trees and Trees of gardens he diverse,
for some be male, and some be female. For the male Tree is more thick, hard,
sad, and dry, and has ones boughs then the female and the fruit thereof is
more short and ripeth better, and the leaves he diverse, and the grasses also
and the cause of all this, as Albumasar says; is, for in the male Trees is
more heat and dryness, then i^ the female, that binds the parts of the
male trees fast and sadly together, and makes the Tree more thick and sad.
As strong heat multiplyeth humors and stretches and spreads into many
parts, and makes the Tree more thick of boughs, so great dryness wastes
moisture; and makes the Tree more dry.

Also in a male tree sad veins and straight lets much humor to pass to
one place of the Tree, that may turn into substance of fruit. Therefore the
fruit of a male Tree is short. Also the leaves of male and female be diverse,
for the leaves of the male be short; and less in quantitye, and more narrow
for mastrie of dryness, also ye male has harder grasses then the female, and
the reason of that is, for in the female is more moisture then in ye male. And
Aristotle says, that if leaves or the powder of leaves, or the rind of a male
Palm be put to the leaves of the female, so yt they clean togethers, the
fruit of the female shall be the sooner ripe. For it lets the falling of
the leaves, and of fruit, until the digestion be complete and the reason
hereof is, as Album. says, because the male Palm increases heat in the
female, and that by mean of the air that comes from ye male to the female,
and thereby ye heat of the female is excited to work digestion, the which
Aristotle calls Pepensim. lib. 4. Metheororum. And Aristotle says, that ye
male and female be known by burgening and springing. For the male burgeneth
and springs sooner and swifter then the female, and that is by reason of most
perfect heat, and they be known by smell, for the male smells more then
the female: for more small and subtle smoke is resolved of the male then of
the female. Also Aristotle says, that the wind bears smell of the male to the
female, and so the fruit ripeth the sooner together, for the parts of the
fruit of the female clean together til it be ripe, when the leaves of the male
be taken in the female. Albertus says, yt if the leaves of the male Palm be
put to the leaves of the female, they clean so together, that uneath they may
be departed a sunder, without cutting or carning.

Also Aristotle says, that wild figtrees help fig trees of gardeines if
they be set right before them. For the wild be more hot and dry then the
other, and therefore they excite heat, and comfort those of gardens. Also the
humor of a wild fig tree, resolved and laid to the root of a fig tree of
gardeines, comfort and helps the fig tree of the gardeine. And Arist.
says, that the Pomegranard helps and comfort Olives, if it be planted
therewith. These properties of trees we take of Aristotle's words, lib. primo de
Vegitabilibus, and of Albertus Glo. that translated and expounded the same.
Libr. 18. de Animalibus Aristotle says, that all trees that bear fruit every
year, be made flow. All trees (he says) that bear too much fruit, be soon
dry, when ye feeding turns into seed, that is, when ye humor that should
nourish and feed turns into matter seminal. Other notable and noble
properties of trees and of herbs, we may take out of the words of Aristotle
and of Albertus, li. 2. Vegitabilium, where it is said, that a tree has three
virtues. For it has fastening of the earth, and joining and on^ng of the
water, and steadfastnesse of parts together, and sadness of the fire, and
stretching and spreading and bearing and riping of fruit, of air and of fire.
For a watery thing is not fastened, neither holden togethers without heat of
fire, and it is showed there in Aristotle's ensample.

For burnt tile is not joined nor fastened to hold together without fire, the
wastes the watrye parts, and joins and hardneth the earthly parts. A tree
has softness and poores of Air, of Water, and fire together, and might to
grow and to wax of the water. For a thing yt is utterly hard and sad, may
not wax more and more, as Aristotle says there. Therefore the greatest tree
sinketh not in water, though it be heavy: where a little gold and small
stones sink anon. And that is for a tree with many hoales and pores has much
air within the pores: And therefore it fleeteth above the water. But trees
that be most sad and fast, as Ebenus, and such other like, sinketh in water
sodeinly to the ground, as Aristotle says there. It is also said, that the
air is passed out of the black Ebenus, and therefore it sinketh in water. The
other that is pory and unctuous seteth above the water, for it has much air.
And the water bears it up by kind, as it fares of leaves and feathers and
of all unctuous things. For as Aristotle says, it is the property of the
water to bear up substance of air, and to let heavy things sink. Therefore
things that be soft and full of holes, to take in air, fleet on the water.
And things that be sound and sad, sink down to the ground. Also earthie
vapors and watery, fastened and congealed with heat of the Sun by matter of
herbs and of trees, which being meddled with hot things and fixye, and by
virtue of the stars, takes perfect shape and form of herbs and of trees
touching seed and fruit. Also heat closed in the humor, that is coagulate,
draws fresh water to feeding and nourishing of the tree. And the utter heat
of the Sun helps thereto.

For working of utter heat of it self makes digestion in the kind humor in
the same place, and turns it into a tree, and so as Aristotle says, in
mountains for the ground is so sweet, and conceyueth sweet humors, therefore
therein trees springs, and fruit ripeth soon. For mountains draws to them
sweet humors. And the small and clear air helps both in drawing and in
digestion, and the humor tourneth soon into substance of a tree, as
Aristotle says. And there it is said, that sometime cold air drives the
heat into the earth, and then the parts thereof be gathered with moisture of
water. And by the heat that is driven into the earth by cold, the vapor that
is so coagulat turns into the substance of a Tree, and by strength of heat
the place cleaves and chinneth, and so thereout springs ye herbs or trees.
Also sometime air meddled with water and with earth in ye bottom of water,
runs together and is sad, and by doing of terminate heat, and digesting ye
mixed thing consused, the plant is gendered. As it fares in ye herb yt is
called Heniphar, In ye old coppye this herb is named Me^phat.
and in other small herbs and grass, yt are wont to grow in water. And the
leaves thereof covers ye water, and though these herbs and grass grow and
spread not full wide, yet they grow upward, for small air and fresh water yt
bears them upward, and for sadness of ye earth and ground yt susteineth the
roots. And of the ground the herb has greenenesse in the root, and
susteining of ye stalk in the rearing thereof.

And Aristotle says; yt in places essentially cold, and accidentally hot, as
those in which hot water runs often times, springs a plant. For heat of ye
water draws ye cold humor upward above ye earth to the place of meddeling.
And so of ye air and of the earthlye vapor, with watrye humor, by ye heat
of ye water and of the stars, the substannce of a plant is gendered. But yt
falls not, but in long time, as Aristotle says, by reason of accidental
heat, yt is not according to the gendring of such a plant. And Aristotle says
there, that herbs that men eat, grow better in plain places and in high,
and in hot places, then in contrary places thereto, for in plain places and even
is much moisture, and namely when the air is sweet and temperate. And so it
is in right high places, for there is clean and pure air, and much sweet
humor, and yt is by reason of spoungings and holes yt draws and receives
the sweet humor. And therefore often in mountains grows more fe^^^e and
better then in valleys. For in valleys is hard m^^^ing of the air. And so of
concussion of the air, thick vapor rotteth fall soon, and so there is evil
digestion. And thereof it comes, yt there is found salt humors, as Albertus
says. And salt water is more heavy then fresh, as it is showed in Aristotle.
Ensample, where he says, yt an Egg sinketh anon in fresh water, and swimmeth
in salt water. For salt water is earthie, and thick, and bears up ye
heaviness and weight of ye E^gge. Therefore fresh water is more easilye drawn
to high places then salt water. For fresh water is pure, thin, light, and
clear: and Aristotle says, that in fast claye and tough, and fattye, plants
grow soon. For such claye is soon changed and made fattye, as Albumasar
says: and farther, if a plant shall be durable, it needs yt it have humor
well digested and fattie. For plants yt have humor not well digested, wither
soon in great cold: and so a Canstock dureth not over three year, but if men
grass thereon a plant, and ye kind of ye graffe goes into ye stalk, and
thereof is made good digestion, and turns into ye kind of yt grass, it
dureth long time: also sometime an herb grows out of an hard stone, as Ari.
says, for air closed in a stone, busieth to pass upward, but when it finds
no free passage for hardness of ye stone, then it moves to ye parts of ye
stone, and of his own stirring it warmeth, and when it is once hot, it draws
upward the humor that remains in ye stone, and vapor with ye humor, with
a little resolution of parts of the stone goes out: and of yt vapor and
humor issued out of ye stone, sometime springs an herb by help of heat of
ye Sun, and helps ye air yt was before hot, and makes digestion of ye
humor yt issued out of ye stone, and turns it into ye kind and substance
of an herb or a Tree, but such an herb or a tree dureth not long, but it be
closed with earth, or watered with fresh water, and comforted with temperate air,
and that for scarcity of humor.

And Aristotle says, yt a plant springs the sooner if it be nigh the Sun,
that is to understand, toward the East, and that is because of sufficient
heat, and springs later toward the West, and that is, for it is far from
heat. And Albumasar says there, that every herb or tree is kept by temperate
weather. For over much moisture stops the pores and ways, by the which
feeding and nourishing should come upward to make the tree stretch and
spread. Also to much drives makes the poores shrink, so that nourishing may
not pass to feed and norish the tree. And Aristotle says, that every herb
and tree needs four things. Certain seed, perfect and ripe in his own
kind, and saved without rotting, and couenable ground to the generation of the
plant, and moderate water, that is to understand temperate humor, and meanly
temperate air. For as Albumasar says, if the air be too hot, than kind
heat passes away by the poores, which be opened: and if the air be too
cold, it shall stiffle the plant. The first twain need to generation of the
plant, and the other twain to feeding and preservation thereof. Also
medicinal spicerie and plants that grow in mountains, be less liking to
eating and their fruits is more hard to digesting, and that is for the
vehement coagulation by ye heat that works in the moisture: and therefore
such fruit nourishes not much as Aristotle says. For Albumasar says, the
more medicinable a plant is, ye less it nourishes.

Also in places that be far from the Sun, grow not many plants, nor there is
no great breeding of beasts in such places as Aristotle says: And the cause
is as Album. says, for they yt be straight under the even North star, have
continually half the year^ day, and half the year night. Therefore plants
and beasts breed there but seldom: for if may not be in Summer for
continual heat, neither in Winter for continual cold. Therefore as
Aristotle says: a plant that springs there, has no virtue, nor leaves, nor
fruit, and that is, for default of heat in one time of the year, and for too
much cold, in another time of ye year. And Aristotle says, that a plant with
many pricks, has much fattie humor, and when it moves it self by his own
heat, with help of heat of the stars, it is defied and turned into
substance of the graffe that is graffed therein: and heat of life in the
plant makes that digestion with temperate utter heat, and the plant grows
small and stretches upward, and so a plant with many pricks has this
property, that a graffe of other kind may be graffed therein: and yt is as
Albuma. says, for it has much unctuous humor drawn by outward heat, and so
fastened togethers, and put out by inward heat, in many places, so that the
over part of that humor is small, and thin, and pearcing, when it comes
upward in the stock, whereby it may open many ways and pores in the grass, and
enter therein and incorporate and consolidate ye graffe to the nether stock:
and a graffe yt is graffed in ye nether stock, changes and turns the stock
into ye kind of ye graffe, and not againward. And the cause is, as Albuma.
says, for the stock comfort the graffe with the humor, and heat that
ascends thereto, and then the graffe defieth the humor and tourneth it into
his own kind, and after sends his own virtue into the nether stock, and
altreth the stock, yt it is graffed in, and conuerteth the stock into his
own virtue and kind. Also as Ari. says, in five manner of wise, a plant is
ge^dred and comes forth: of seed, of rooting, of humor of water, of
planting, and of graffes of one into another.

Also Aristotle says, some herbs and trees bear fruit rather than leaves,
as those trees that have much fattie humor that is matter of fruit: and when
the humor is defied with kind heat and with heat of the Sun, it turns
into fruit and ripeth anon: and the abundaunce of fattie humor lets the
watrye humor, that is the matter of leaves, that it may not break out into
leaves in such a tree before ye fruit: and some trees bring forth leaves
before fruit and that is for default and scarcity of fattie humor, and for
plenty of watrie humor that is matter of leaves, and heat of the Sun
draws the humor sooner to ye place of springing of leaves, tha^ the fattie
humor so the place of springing of fruit. Therefore riping and fattie humor,
that is the matter of fruit, is tarried, and the leaves first breaks out and
springs. Also some leaves and fruit spring at once, as in those yt have the
foresaid humor according, and the inner heat even working with the heat of
the Sun, in the air, neither humor, and puts out the watery humor into
leaves, and the fattie humor into fruit. Also Aristotle says, that men in
old time meaned, that fruit and leaves are all in one kind, and they said
that leaves be not, but by cause of fruit, and they be not diverse in manner,
but by more digestion or less of watrye and raw humor: for watery humor and
thin is soon drawn by heat of the Sun, and turns into leaves: and the
humor that is more fattie and digest tourneth into matter of fruit.

Also Aristotle says, that though some trees be full of pricks, that comes
not of the intention of kind, that gedereth the substance of the tree: but it
happens of thinness of the tree, whereby there cold humor, that is but little
sod, and issuing out by ye thinness of ye tree, is gathered into a prick or a
thorn by heat of the Sun, and is great by the stalk or stock, and sharp
at the e^^s: for subtle humor, that is the humor material of thorns and
pricks, passes from the tree some and some, and stretches in length and in
sharpness, and so do all such trees, that be with parts shapen in manner of a
top. Also generally all trees be green without, and white within: for the
matter of the inner parts draws to white color, and the utter parts draw to
green color. For the matter that is drawn inward, and is driven outward
into the barks, is somewhat digested and turned into green, for green is the
middle color between red, that comes of the action and working of the
perfect and complete heat: and between white, that comes of imperfect.

Also Aristotle says, that trees be diverse in figure and shape: for some
stretch upward, and some downward, and some aside, and some hold the mean:
and those that have small and thin humor in their pith, the which humor is
moved and drawn upward by heat, be shaped or have the form of light of fire,
that moves in common virtue of fire.

And such that have in their pith thick virtue of humor and watrye, grow
downward and be small: and so those parts move downward by their own
heaviness; and be great and low by the ground. In those that have mean
humor and are temperate between thick and thin, some move upward, and is
cause of moving up of the tree, and some move downward, and is cause of
greatness thereof: and so as that humor is more or less digested in the root
and in the pith, the tree is more or less in figure and shape, for the first
digestion is needful in the root to the growing of the tree, and the second
digestion is needful in the pith, for perfection, riping, dilatation, and
conservation. This double digestion, suffices the perfection of trees and of
herbs, and the third is found only in beasts, as Aristotle says, and as
Albumasar expounds.

Also trees be diverse in boughs, and in leaves, as the humor is more or
less: and as strength of heat is more or less: for if the heat be strong
with much humor, then spring many boughs and leaves, and againward: and if
the humor be small and thin, and able to be wasted and foredryed, than the
boughs do wither and the leaves fall, and the tree abides all bare without
any leaves: and the contrary falls in the contrary cause.

Also Aristotle says, that not alonely shornes and pricks in trees, be shapen
in manner of topwise, but also the shape is found in fruit and in leaves: for
if the ways in a tree be first wide and large, and full thin in the beginning
of the humor, and afterward be made narrow by coldness and dryness: then
the fruit and leaves be great and large in the nether end, and small and
sharp in the oner end, and that is for drawing of the more light part of the
humor to the over end by strength of heat, and putting of the heavy humor
toward the nether end. But full often it happens, that fruit and leaves be
sharp in the ends, and shapen in manner of a top, when by the virtue of
heats and by the thin and small humor the over part is made light, and the
nether end is made sharp, the humor in the middle stretching and spreading
and so the substance of the fruit and leaves be made small and sharp at each
of the ends by mastrie of fiery virtue: and great ^ large in the middle, after
the manner of a top with two sharp ends. Also Aristotle says there, that
some trees and herbs bloome, and the blossom, comes out of small humor,
and specially pure, that is in the pith: and is not all hardened nor digested
and disposed into the ^ast perfection of fruit: But it is disposed to bring
forth fruite^^^. And for gleymie humor some trees have no blossoms because of
fatness, that humor may not be made small and thin to spread out blossoms, as
appears in the fig tree, that has no blossom, for the cause aforesaid:
and some have no blossoms, for the humor is too thin, and may not be made
thick, as it needs to the substance of blossoms, as it fares in plants,
and in other such, as Aristotle says.

And so as the matter in diverse in the which heat works, so colors are
diverse as well in flowers, as in herbs and trees: but it belongs not to
this matter to pursue all this: and for noyance I hold it good to cease off at
this time. Nevertheless, Aristotle puts too diverse properties in the end
of the second book, and I hold them not to be despised, there he says, that
a tree that has great bark, is full high and broad, and that is by reason of
stretching of humor and for putting of heat, for the thick rind, that
receives and takes the humor, suffers it not to shed: and also the
thickness of the rind suffers not the heat to open the poores to pass
out, and so the tree must needs stretch and spread, as it fares in the Pine
apple and in the Palm and in other such, as Aristotle says.

Also there he says, that trees with milk have great fatness, and strong
heat in the bark, and therefore the humors are resolved, and comes to the
utter parts of the tree, and breeds g^^^ sometime thin fleeting, and sometime
conicated and fastened with cold air without, and sometime hard as stones or
shelles, and that comes sometime of cold that fasteneth the parts together
and sometime of heat that comes and comes and wastes the soft parts and
binds togethers the great parts, as Albumasar says.

Also as Albumasar says, some trees change as the time of the year changes,
and for they be goldene in Summer, and pale in Winter, and yet their leaves
fall not, for they have strong heat incorporate within, and so the heat
draws into the inner parts of the tree, and of the leaves and wood, and
flies the cold air of the Winter, and therefore the utter parts be pale and
yeolow: but ye leaves fall not for cleaving humors, and for strong heat: And
there it is said, yt trees bear first bitter fruit, when they be new set
and then bitterness has masterie in their fruit or bitter sowrenes: and the
cause is, for the first digestion is sower, for the humor that is drawn in,
is thick and earthie for scarsitie and feebleness of the heat that works
digestion. Therefore such fruit is gendered without sweetness, for their
humor abides raw and undigested, but afterward when the heat is comforted,
and the humor is augmented and mored more pure, then the heat works and
makes the humor sweet and sauoury. For so Aristo. says, that a thing waxes
sweet in the fire: and that is, as Albumasar says, for the changing that it
voydeth of the fire, that makes the digestion. And there it is said, that in
sour places, cold, and dry, sometime grows sweet fruit; for kind heat
comes into the sour humor and is cold therein, and is helped by the heat of
the Sun, and defieth the sowrenesse, and tourneth it into sweetness. And fruit
is sweet though ye leaves be sour: and so it fares in other parts, in the
which is not so great digestion, and working of heat, as it is in the fruit.
But sometime it happineth, yt for superfluity of great heat yt comes thereto,
and also for burning, that such fruit, as was before sweet, tourneth into
bitterness, by reason of superfluity and over much heat and scarcity of the
other humor, and there it is said, that in certain temperate places, fruit
ripeth swiftly before springing time, and that is for sufficient heat and
temp^rate air without.

Also there it is said, that some trees bear first sweet fruit, and be
afterward bitter and sower, as trees of Mirabolanes, and the cause is, as it is
said there, for the fruit of such trees is full therein the hour of
digestion, and when the ways are great and large, there is sufficient heat,
that disposes the humor material to fruit, and ripeth the fruit: and so in
the beginning of digestion the fruit is sweet: but afterward the heat passes
out and wastes the humor in the veins and pores, and breeds dryness, that
makes the ways and pores straight and narowe, so that neither heat nor
humor may come to the place of fruit: and cold and dryness overcomes the
heat; and the humor before the fruit changes and is sower, for all passage
of kind heat and the humor be let by straight ways, that be made straight by
dryness, and so cold has mastrie in the fruit, for default of heat; and
then is great sowrenesse, for mastrie of dryness and of cold. But at the
last, heat is helped and areared to the place of fruit, and strengthened by
heat of the Sun, and so heat overcomes again coldness, and gendereth
strong heat and dryness, and so the fruit is bitter.

Also trees be diverse in setting and in planting: for Trees that be set right
in the full of the Moon, or in the new, or in the changing, they thrive full
evil, if they thrive, their fruit is full little, and is full of worms, and
fruit of such trees, rotteth full soon: and trees that are fel^ in such time
be soon fret with worms, and durenot long, as Isidore says. Look the cause
before lib. 8. de Effectibus Lunae.

Also between the tree and his fruit, is a stalk, whereby the fruit
cleaneth and hangs on the tree, as the child to the navel cleueth to the
mother, as Isi. says, and the stalk is first feeble and lethie, and that is
for default of hard humor. Therefore in yt time fruit falls with little
shaking, as with a strong blast or puff of wind: But afterward heat hardens
that humor by little and little, and the virtue sets fast and falls not so
soon: but at the last when the fruit is ripe and full grown, that stalk for
dries or rotteth, and the fruit falls soon, and the more deep the root
is in the ground, the more humor it draws, and if it bears fruit, it
bears the more plenty of boughs, of leaves and of fruit. If water boughs
and superfluity be pared off, the tree bears the better and the more fruit,
for then the humor passes into fruit, that should else pass into
superfluity. And this of kind and properties of trees in general, shall
suffice at this time.

Of an Almond Tree. Chap. 3.
AN Almond tree is called Amigdalus, and is a tree that blometh timely. And the
Tree is called Hec Amigdalus, and the fruit is called Hic Amigdalus. And so one
says in this manner. Sunt matura mora, pira, ficus, amigdala mora.

That is to say, Beries, Pears, Figs, and Almonds be soon ripe: But in some
place of holy writ, Hec Amigdala, le, is taken for the fruit. Number. 17. For (as
S. Hierome says) The law and the Gospel may not be subject to the rules of
Grammar. And as Isid. says, li. 17. Amigdala is Greek, and is to say, a long
Nut And some call it Nucida, as it were the less not. Therefore Virgil
speaks in this manner, when many nuts in woods be closed with blossom. This
Tree blometh first of all trees, and bears fruit before other Trees. Hue
vsque Isidorus, in libr. de Plantis. Aristotle says, that Almond Trees need
much tilling, and namely when they be old. And if they be beared with nails,
Cum comes out of them, and humor is pured in the pith yt is ye matter of
fruit. Therefore if they be well tilled, Almonds trees bear more fruit, when
they be old, then when they be young. And an Almonde Tree bears double
fruit, sweet, and bitter, as it is said in Plat.

Sweet Almonds be good to meat, and bitter Almonds to medicine, for they be
hot and dry. Hot and dry.
And Dioscorides says that the sweet Almond helps the stomach if it be
eaten new with the skin, but it grieueth ye head, and norisheth dimnes, and
kindles the service of Venus, and breeds sleep, and latteth drunkenness.
Also he says there, that if a Fox eats Almonds, he shall dye. Almonds does
kill the Fox.
Often ye thing that is wholesome and good for men, is poison to other beasts,
and againward. Also he says, that nigh all the tree that bears bitter
Almonds is medicinable: for the root thereof sod and brayed, cleanses the
face and does away speckles, and abateth head ach if it be laid to the
forhead, and cleanses, and helps rotted wounds, if it be meddled with honey.
Also the bark and leaves cleanses and heals: and oil of Almonds slaieth
long worms in the womb, and exciteth and purges menstruall blood, and
helps effectually against deafness, and cleanses and purges matter of ye
ears, if it be luke hot dropped therein, as Diosco. says. Also flowers
thereof sod in oil, awaketh them that have the Litargie, the sleeping evil,
and the flowers thereof braied with honny, heals biting of hounds and botches.
Gum of Almonde trees, The gum of the Almond.
mingled with a drink, helps him that casts blood, and so little or naught
is in the Almond tree, that accords not to medicine, as Diosc. says.

( Addition.
The eating of six or eight bitter Almonds fasting, is said to stay a man from
drunkenness that day. Dodoneus.)

Of Fur. cap. 4.
Fur is a tree and is called Abies, and has that name of Eundo, going or
passing, for it passes more farther, and stretches more high than other
trees, as Isid. says lib. 17. The kind thereof has no earthly humor, and
therefore it is able and light timber, and other things that he made of this
tree, be called Abiegna, and he that makes any thing thereof, is called
Abietarius, as Isi. says. Arist. says that Fur is a tree, yt stretches in
length upward, and has much rareness in substance, and small and thin
moisture, and therefore kind heat thereof with help of heat of the Sun,
reareth and bears upward that moisture, and turns it into substance of
trees, and so makes the tree grow full high. This tree is wonderful high,
and little or naught crooked, and that is, for virtue of heat, and evenness
of humor that is obedient to the working of heat. Therefore it stretches
upright without any crookedness: and though the tree be gendered and comes
of light humor and subtle, yet kind dryueth the superfluity of that humor
outward, and brings it between the Tree and the rind, and there by heat
of the Sun it is made clammye, and turned into kind of sweet smelling Rosen.

Also for gleamie fatness yt is incorporate to this tree, this tree Abies
kindles full soon and burns light. Also this Tree Abies helps to diverse
manner buildings, and namely for evenness and length and shape that is steeple
wise, more small upward then downward, thereof is good ship timber made and
shapen.

( Addition.
Abies, is the Fur tree, whose fruit is smaller and longer then of the Pine
tree, with the Timber is made Masts for ships, and the boordes and rest timber
is reserved for many uses, the wood is tight and well smelling. The old Fur
tree yields a white Gum, yt is sold for Frankensence: but that which
runs forth of the young trees is called Terebinthina Veneta, and is sold
for the right Turpentine, which we call Turpentine of Venice. Dodoneus.)

Of Aloa. chap. 5.
ALoes is a Tree with good savor, and breeds in Inde, as Papias says, And
it is a Tree with most sweet smell. And sometime a part thereof was set a
fire on the Alter in the steed of insence, and has the name therefore, as it
is supposed. Of the Tree of Aloes it is said in Platearius, that it is an hot
Tree and dry, and is found in the great river of Babylon, that joins with
a River of Paradise. Therefore many men suppose, that the foresaid Tree grows
among the trees of Paradise, and comes out of Paradise by some hap or drifte
into the river of Inde. Men that dwell by that river, take this tree out of the
water with nets, and keep it to the use of medicine, for it is a good
medicinal tree.

There be three manner kinds of the tree Aloes, as Constable. says in lib.
gradioni. The first is full heavy with knots and that is with good smell, and
with some deal bitter savor, and brown red coulor and lets not chewing:
and he says, when it is chewed, anon a good savor goes out of the brain
and fills it some-deale. The second is less heavy, and smells not so
well, neither is it so bitter. The third kind is some deal white and full
light, and has no savor nor smell, but little, except it be arrayed with other
things.

The tree of Aloes is fained, with a tree that is like thereto in weight and in
knots, and some deal in smell, and some men account the Tree of Aloes
Siluestris, as it were a wild tree. This tree is froted with lead to change
ye color, and ear wax is put thereto, to make it some deal bitter and red.
Then it is put into licour that the best Aloes was sod in, with Must to make
it have good smell: and is so made, that uneath it is known from the best, but
yet it is known, for it is full hard and may in no wise be chewed, and whiles
men champ thereon, the bitter savor within is not felt. The tree of Aloes
comfort the stomach, and makes good digestion, and helps against
feebleness of the heart, and the brain, and against sownding, and namely
against the Cardiacle passion.

And when Aloes is sod in wine, it helps against all evils and passions of
the heart, and feebleness of the heart, yt comes of cold: but it makes the
wine bitter, he should do but little therein, and for delicate men temper the
wine with rose water, and such wine may be kept long time, for it is much
amended by ye tree. The smoke thereof taken in at the nose, heateth the brain
if it be cold, and comfort it, if it be feeble.

And for to conclude the praising thereof in short words, it helps and
introureth in all feebleness of the body, if one ran use it in due manner.
Huc vsque Platea.

Of three sorts of the tree of Aloes, forth of the 20. chapt. of L.
Vertomannus nauigations.
YOu shall understand, Addition
that there is no great plenty of true Aloes or Luserpitium brought unto us,
because it is brought higher from the farthest parts of the world. Understand
furthermore, there are three kinds or sorts of Aloes, greatly differing in
goodness. The first they call Calampat, that grows not in the I Will Sumatra,
but is brought from the City of Sarnau. There is another kind of Aloes named
Iuba or Luba. The third kind is named Bochor. Provided, that none of the Aloe
Calampat, is brought unto us, because it comes from the kingdoms of Cathay,
Chini, Macyni, Sarnau and Granay, Countries much richer than ours, have much
greater abundance of gold, and kings of greater power and riches than are
ours, and also that the said kings take great pleasure in such kind of sweet
savors, and use them much more than our Princes do. So that by this means,
the true kind of Aloes, is worth in the City of Sarnau, ten crowns the pound
weight.

Of Aloe, chap. 6.
ALoe is the fruit of a certain herb, that is called Aloe. Addition


Aloe is a low tree, of whose gum very seldom comes any into this part of
the world.

This herb is found in India and Persia, and in many other places. The juice
thereof is wrong out and sod on the fire, and afterward dried in the Sun as
Platea says. Also of Aloe be three kinds, Citrinum, Epaticum, and Caballinum,
as Plat. says. And these three manner kinds be diverse in goodness: For
Caballinum, is good, Epaticum is better, and Citrinum is best.

And they be known by citrine color, and some deal reddish, and namely if it
be broken, the powder thereof, seems as it were powder of Saffron, and the
substance thereof is most clear, when it is broken into little pieces, and
that that is broken into little pieces, is less stinking, and less bitter.
The Aloe yt is called Epaticum, is like to the liver in color, and is brown
reddish, as the liver is, and has holes as it were mouths of veins, and is
dim, and not clear, and is more bitter than is Citrinum. The Aloe that is
called Caballinu^, is black, dim and drastie, and most bitter in savor, and
most horrible in smell. This Aloe Caballinum, if it be distinguished with
powder of Saffron and vinegar, and if it be ten times plunged therein, and
dried, then it takes new disposition, and changes color and smell, so that it
seems Epaticum or Citrinum, but yet this is known: for if it be broken, and
froted with fingers, anon it is found most stinking and most bitter, and so
fares not Epaticum nor Citrinum. All manner of Aloe, the less stinking it is,
and the less bitter, the better it is. Though Aloe be bitter by kind, yet it
is wonderful profitable and wholesome: for it purges fleumie cholar and
melancholy, and comfort sinewy members, and cleanses and purges the stomach
of gleymie humors and noyfull, and releeueth head ache, when fumositie of ye
stomach greeueth ye head, and makes it ache. Aloe cleanses the sight, and
vnstoppeth the spleen and the liver, and provoke menstruall blood, and makes
good color in a body that is discouloured and keeps from the dropsy, and
^ureth the Dropsy at the beginning. Powder thereof taken with honey, slays
long worms in the womb, and makes have abide and not fall, and helps
goutie men, and heals botches of the privy members, and eases itching of
eyes, and cleanses rotting and matter of the gums, and of the mouth, and
heals, soudreth, cleanses and dries green wounds, and is bitter to ye
mouth, and sweet to ye stomach: for it comforts ye cold stomach and feeble,
and helps digestion. All this is taken of Diosc. of Plat. and of Auice.

( Addition.
Aloe the juice of an herb coniealed like a gum, and is used commonly in
purgative medicines, because it is comfortable to the stomach.)

Of a reed. chap. 7.
A Reed is called Arundo, and is mean between a tree and an herb, and more
brittle and feeble than a tree, and more hard and boystous than an herb, and
is smooth without and hollow with in, and is norished in marreys, and waggeth
with the wind, and hurts ye hand soon with splinters. Isid. li. 16.
speaks of the reed and says, it is called Arundo, and has that name of
Aresco, drieng, for it dries soon. In pondes of Inde grows a reed, and out
of the roots thereof they wring full sweet savor and licour, which they
drink. Therefore Varro says, yt a reed of Inde grows to a small tree, and
humor is wrong out of the root thereof, and no sweet honey may strive with
that wose and lycour.

( Addition.
There are diverse sorts or kinds of reed, the long poale reed or cane in the
Islands of Canare: of the which the people use as staves and spears, for their
straigth and hardness. There is also the Sugar reed, very long, within the
which grows the juice, whereof comes Sugar. The common great: reeds grow in
marish grounds, as do ye small, with the which are made quilles for Weauers,
fishing rods, etc.)

Of Amomo. cap. 8.
AMomum has that name for it smells as Cannell does, that is called
Cinamom, as Isidore says libr. 17.

Amomum grows in Siria, and in Armenia. The tree thereof seedeth in clusters
cleaving togethers, and has a white flower like to the violet, and leaves like
to Brione, and makes sweet sleeps with the good smell thereof. Amomum is an
herb with good savor, as Dioscorides says, and is some deal red with
leaves joined, and with much seed, and with white flowers, as the Uyolet.

Of Amomum be three manner of kinds, for one is of Armenia, and is called
Armenicum, and that is best of all, and is reddish, and best of smell, and most
of virtue and of value. Another kind grows in moist places and watrye, and
is soft to handling, and has good savor. The third is called Ponticum, and
is red and not long. The best is that that is new and white and full of seed
spread upon red branches most sauouring and heavy in weight, and biteth the
tongue with a manner of sharpness when it is chewed, and has color not
diverse, as Auicen says and Dioscorides also.

These Authors mean, that all manner Amomum has virtue to heat and to dry,
and to heal smiting of Scorpions: and the water that it is sod in, comfort
the eyes, and releeueth them of sore ache. And Amomum has virtue to assuage
womb ache, and to destroy ventositie, and to excite menstruall blood, and the
lycour that it is sod in, helps and succoureth frentike men and Epatike, that
be sick in the liver, and them that have Podagre also. Also in all good
receipts and medicines, Amomum is often put, though some men use often to take in
steed of that, another herb, that is called, Amonides, and is like thereto
in color and hiew, and is all unlike thereto in virtue and in smell, as Auicen
says.

( Addition.
Amomum a little shrub growing in Armania, round together like a cluster of
Grapes, having a flower like a white Uiolet, and leaves like Wythwinde, or
white Uine: some ignorant Apothecaries, use Petroselium Macedonicum, and call
it Amomum, which is the very true parseley of Macedonye, whereas it grows
most plentifullye. D. Rembert Dodoneus. fo. 608.)

Of Aneto. cap. 9.
ANetum is an herb, and the seed of it may be kept three year in great
virtue, as Discorides says: but it is better that it be renewed every year.
The root thereof is somewhat worth while it is green, and of no valewe, when
it is dry, as he says.

And has virtue to heat and to temper hard matter, and to make it soft and
open, and to divide and depart, and to destroy ventositie and swellyng, and to
abate ache and gnawing of the guts, and of the womb, and to break the stone,
to excite menstruall blood, and to open the urine veins, and to abate the
year, that comes of fullness, to make one sleep well, and to temper hard
gathring in the body if it be sod with oil, and laid thereto in plaster wise:
and the flower thereof sodde with Wine does away head ache, if the head be
baulmed therewith: and ashes thereof laid to the dropping privy chose of a
woman, dries it, and stauncheth the dropping: and Anetum sod with oil,
releaseth shrinking and stonieng of sinews, and helps in many other
passions, as he affirms and says.

( Addition.
Anetum is hot and dry in ye third degree, it cures the bloody flixe, mixed
with the cups of Akornes, and so dronk in ale or wine, the weight of half an
ounce with half a pint. It is called, Dill.)

Of Aniso. cap. 10.
ANise has the same virtue that Anetum has, and is more sweet in savor, and
the seed thereof is more small and round, and many men call it Dulcinium, as it
is said in Plat. And has virtue to temper and to make soft, to consume and to
wast and destroy ventositie, and to comfort digestion, and to open the stopping
of the liver, and of ye spleen, and to break the stone, and to excite
menstruall blood, and to open and to amend all the inner ways, and so though
the seed be small in quantity, yet it is full good and profitable in virtue,
and full healthful and wholesome.

( Addition.
Anisum, Anise seed is ye only vital to Aqua vitae, it is good, ye powder
dronk in wine against poison.)

Of Allio. chap. 11.
GArlike is called Allium, and has that name of Olendo smelling, for it
smells strongly, as Isid. says li. 16.

The smell thereof is so strong, yt it passes and overcomes all other strong
smells: and therefore men yt must needs pass by stinking places, or make
clean uncleanly rotten places, arm and defend themselves with strong sauce of
Garlike, as Diosco. says. Garlike has many virtues and properties both good
and evil: for it is compouned of diverse virtues, as he says. Garlike
disturbeth the womb and the stomach, and breeds thirst, and breeds
whelkes and wounds in the body, if it be laid thereto: and if cholaricke men
eat too much thereof, it makes the body too hot, and breeds Lepra, and is
cause of madness and of frenzy and grieueth the sight and makes it dim.
Therefore it noyeth cholaricke men by kind, for it breeds red cholar, and
increases burnt cholar, and helps well steumaticke men and cold. Of Garlike
is double manner of kind, wild and tame. The wild is called Scordeon, among
Physicians. The flower thereof shall be gathered and put in medicines, and it
works not violentlye, as tame Garlike does. Of tame Garlike we use most the
heads. In the kind thereof be many manner virtues found, for therein is virtue
to dissolve, and to temper, to consume and waste, to put out venyme, and all
venomous things. Therefore it was not without cause called Triacle of churles,
among Authors in old time, as Diosc. says. It helps best against the biting
and venime of a mad dog, if it be eaten with salt and nuts, and with rue:
stamp these four togethers, and give often thereof to the Patient, in the
quantity of a great nut, and that with wine, and lay the same confection to
the sore without, for it helps the wound, and draws out venime and wastes
it, and keeps and saves and delivers of peril, as effectually as Triacle.
And Garlike has virtue to open, and to temper, and to divide and to depart, to
cut and wast great humors and thick, and therefore it helps them that have
the stone, and them that may not well piss, and exciteth menstruall blood, and
cleanses the womb, and slays long worms, and other worms in the womb, if
it be taken as it were sauce with pepper and juice of mint and vinegar: and
Garlike abateth the ache of the guts and of the reins also, if it be cleansed
and stamped, and sod with oil, and laid as a plaster to the sore place, and
it helps also against the Morphea, that is the Leprosy of ye skin, if the
place of the Morphea be garsed and froted with Garlyke, and stamped thereto as a
plaster should. Also it helps against the biting of an Adder, if it be
stamped and laid thereto with Oil of Bay, as Dios. says. Also it helps them
that have the dropsy, for it wastes and dries the humor between the skin
and the flesh, and swageth swellyng, and cleanses and heals great and foul
bloody wounds, and sounds them, if powder of Garlike burned be laid thereto:
and Garlic sodde with Well water, does away all sore and ach of the place,
and swelling also, but it needs to beware, that it be not taken in meats,
for it grieueth the eyes, and so mean these verses.

Allia, Vina, Venus, Pulius, Ventus, Faba, Fumus: Garlike is almost hot and dry
in ye forth degree.


Ista nocent oculis, sed vigilare magis.

The meaning is this, Garlike, Wine, and Venus, Powder, Wind, and Beans, and
smoke, grieve the eyes, but waking does more. In lib. de plant. Arist. says,
that Garlike is like to the Lily, and accords therewith in disposition of the
head, and in the cloves has virtue seminall, in the cloves of ye root, and is
the greines of the top of the stalk: and of ye cloue of the nether head of the
garlike, comes a plant of garlyke, and so does like wise of the seed that
grows in ye top of the stalk, and of a cloue of the over head comes also
both plant and seed. And therefore a cloue of Garlike, set in the earth,
brings forth a plant, and so likewise does the seed, and has many pills
and leaves steeple wise, and a hollow poorie stalk. Also garlike as the Lily,
first has seed on his stalk, the greines clustered together within a small
thin leaf: but the Onyon does not cluster his greynes together, but norisheth
and sends them out on small feet.

And Garlike has hairie roots, like as a Lily, and Saffron and other such:
But in this the roots of Garlike and Lilies differ, for the root of Garlike
spreads not in boughs, as the Lily does: and as the Garlike renews his
leaves, so it renews his roots, and seedeth but once in the second year
after that it is sown. Therefore garlike has many cloves spreading, that
those cloves may be feeding and nourishing to the second roots, and to the
second leaves, and to the stalk thereof. For when the second leaves grow and
the stalk, then the cloves thereof vanishes away in the earth: and so it fares
in Onions. In this Garlike and Onions be diverse, for of every cloue of Garlike
set comes a plant, and so it fares of the Lily, that of a cloue planted in
the earth, sends out a stalk, and that comes, for in every cloue of the
Lily and of Garlike is seminall virtue. And it fares not so in the Onion, for
there comes not of every cloue of the Onion, an Onion, though it be set, but
of the whole head springs a plant, if it be set: for the seminall virtue is
not in every cloue of the Onion, but in the whole head. And Garlike and the
Lily be diverse, for the stalk in ye spire of garlike springs out of the one
end of the cloue, and the spire of ye Lily springs out of the side of the
cloue, and not of the end. Huc vsque Anst. de plan. secund. nouam translationem.

( Addition.
There be 3. sorts of Garlike, Allium satiuum, Garden garlike, Crow garlike, and
Bear garlyke, called Ramsons.)

Of Wormwood. chap. 12.
ABseynthium, Wormwood, is a full sharp herb, hot and dry, full sowrish and
bitter, as Dioscorides says, there of is two manner kinds, that one is green
in color, and sower and bitter in savor, that other is some deal hoarishe,
and less bitter, and less virtuous, and is gathered in the end of springing
time, and dried in shadow, and kept all a year in great might and virtue, and
has contrary virtues, as Plate. says, for it laxeth and binds: it binds
by thick substance and sowrnes, and laxeth by heat and bitterness, and so
when it is taken into the body, if it find thick matter and hard, by sowrenes
and thickness of his substance, makes it the more thick and hard, and so it
is cause of more binding: and if the matter be able and digested, it tempreth
and softneth it with heat, and bears it down with sowrenesse, and puts
it out of the body: and sirop made of wormwood helps the liver, and
comfort the stomach, and exciteth appetite, and withstandeth drunkenness,
and heals the iaundes, and amendeth and changes the color. The juice
thereof with powder sod, vnstoppeth the spleen, and solueth and abateth ache of
the stomach, and womb ache, that comes of ventositie: and juice thereof
dropped into ye ears, dries up moisture that runs from the ears.
Wormwood stamped with a Bulls liver, and put into the ears, distroyeth
tincklyng, and ringing that is therein, and comfort and amendeth the
hearing. Juice thereof swageth head ache that comes of fumositie of ye
stomach. Wormwood with powder of Commin and honey does away moles and speckles,
and ache that comes of smiting, if it be laid thereto in a plaster wise.
Juice thereof slays long worms of the womb, and worms of the ears, if it
be dropped therein.

Juice thereof drunk, cleereth the sight, and does away redness and webs of
eyes, if it be often put therein. And Wormwood keeps and saves books and
clothes from fretting of mice and of worms, if it be laid therewith in
chestes or Coffers, as Macrobius says, and helps against biting of Wesells
and of Dragons, and heals it if it be drunk, and the licour that it is sodde
in, swageth ventositie and swelling of the womb, if it be drunk, as Diosc.
says. And has over these virtues, some conditions and properties that be not
full good: for it infecteth the taste with sowrenesse and bitterness, and
grieueth the smell with strong odor, and makes milk and wine bitter, and al
other sweet thing, that it is meddled with.

Therefore Bees yt use flower of wormewoode, make the honey bitter, as Diosco.
says. Plinius says, that wormwood shall not be given to them that have
feauers. Wormwood lets wambling in ye sea, if it be first drunk, and
exciteth sleep, if it be laid unwittingly under the head, and withstandeth
mothes and worms, if it be laid among clothes, and makes black hair, if ye
hair be anointed with ointment made of the juice thereof, and oil of roses.

Addition.
There are three sorts of Wormwood, the first Absynthium Latifolium, common
wormwood: the second Seriphium sea wormwood: the third Ponticum, wormwood
gentle or Roman. It is said in Dodoneus, that there are six kinds. Ink
being made with the juice of wormwood, keeps writings long from being eaten
with mice or rats.)

Of Apio. chap. 13.
MErch is called Apium, and is a common herb, known nigh to all men: and has
that name, for sometime victors had garlands of it, as Isid. says libro. 17
Hercules made him first garlandes of this herb. Roots thereof withstandeth
mightily venime, as Isi. says, but of Apium is many manner of kinds as he
says. One is called Petrosum, and has that name, for it is most like to
Apium in leaves, and Apium of the Greeks is called Silenum, and grows in
stonye places, and in mountains, and rocks: and therefore Latins call
Petrocilium Perseley, Petrapium, as Isid. says. Of Merch and Apium, is another
manner kind, as Dioscorid. says, as Apium of frogs, Apium of laughing, Apium
of Emeroydes: Marsh parsele or Smallach
Apium of frogs has that name, for it is often found in watery places, where
frogs be in, and if this Apium be sod with wine, and laid in a plaster wise to
the womb, and if it be laid to the reins, it helps and abateth the ache
thereof. Apium osus of laughing, has the name of working and doing: for it
purges melancholic humor, for of superfluity of such humor comes
e^e^gnesse and discomfort: and be tells, that if it be eaten or drunk in
great quantity, it slays a man with laughing, and helps also against the
stone, and against difficulty of pissing, if men piss often and little, and
exciteth menstruall blood, if it be sod in water or in wine, and the nether
parts of the body washed and bathed therewith.

Apium of Embroydes has yt name, for powder thereof laid thereto fordrieth the
bleeding. Commune Apium, common Merch, vnstoppeth and opens ye spleen, and
breaks the stone, and destroys the Iaundes, and helps against the
dropsy, and against frenzy, if ye Patients head, be often anointed with the
juice thereof meddled with oil of roses, and with vinegar. The root thereof
succoureth against venymous biting, and withstandeth venime, as Diosc. says.
And all Apium grieueth and noyeth them that have the falling evil, for it
dissolueth and softeneth the matter, and moves upward, and it grieueth
children also, because of much moisture and feebleness of virtue, and
straightness of members, and of ways, that age is disposed to that evil.
Therefore a nourice that feeds a child, shall spare Apium, least the child
take that evil, as Diosc. says, and Plat. also.

Of Aristologia. cap. 14.
ARistologia is a full medicinable herb though it be bitter, and thereof is
two manner of kinds, long and round, and either is hot and dry, and the
root is more medicinable, than the leaves, and shall be gathered in Harvest,
and is kept two year, and has virtue to dissolve and put out, and to wast
venyme, and makes good breath, and softeneth the hard spleen, and opens the
stopping thereof, and does away ache of the womb and of the side, and helps
them that have the Podagre and the falling evil, and men with lims and sinews
shronken. Powder thereof with the juice of mints helps against venomous
biting, and powder thereof fretteth dead flesh, easily and softly in setter and
the wound. The root of this herb puts a dead child out of ye womb, if it
be sod with wine Hactenus Dioscorides de Aristologia. Plinius says, and Isid.
li. 17. That it is best for women with child: for if it be drunk with pepper
and wine, it cleanses the filth of them yt travail of child, and purges the
mother, and exciteth and purges menstruall blood.

( Addition.
Aristolochia longa, Rotunda Clematitis, Pistolochia, Saracenica. These four
kinds are set forth in Dodoneus, called in English, Aristologia, and of some
Birthwort, and Hartwort. The second is called round Aristologia. The third is
called braunched. The fourth, long Aristologia: an herb good against poison,
and against the stinging and biting of venomous beasts. Aristolochia rotunda,
does beautify, cleanse, and fasten the teeth, if they be often froted or
rubbed with the powder thereof.

Of Agno Casto. chap. 15.
AGnus Castus is an herb hot and dry, and has virtue to keeepe men and
women chaste, as Plin. says. Therefore the women of Rome, used to bear with
them the fruit of this herb in Dirige and service of dead men, when they
must needs live chaste, for common honesty. This herb is always green, as
Dioscor. says, and Plat. also: and the flower thereof is called Agnus castus,
for with smell and use thereof, it makes men chaste as a Lamb. And Diosc.
says and Plat. also, that it makes chaste, opening the poores, and drawing
out, and wasting the humor and moisture seminall: and he says, that the
broth thereof helps against cold and white dropsy, if it be sod with
fenel seed, and a little Esula. And there it is said, that the broth of that
herb foredrieth superfluityes of the mother, and makes the mouth thereof
narrow and straight, and exciteth menstruall blood, and does away Litargia, the
sleeping evil, if it be sod in salt water with Apium and Sage, and the hinder
part of ye head strongly washed therewith, as Dioscor. says.

( Addition.
Agnus castus is a singular remedy, for such as would live chaste: for it
withstandeth all uncleanness, or the filthy desire to lechery: it consumes
and dries up ye seed of generation, in whatsoever it be taken, whether in
powder, or in decoction, or the leaves alone lead on the bed to sleep upon,
and therefore it was called Castus, that is to say, chaste, clean and pure.)

Of Artemisia. chap. 16.
ARtemisia, Artemisia Mugwort or Poutevveede, Damasomum.
is called mother of herb, and was sometime hallowed by men of nations to the
Goddess Diana, that was called Arthemis in Greek, as Isi. says. li. 17. And
is an hot herb and dry, and the roots and leaves thereof accord to medicine,
and is good namely against barrenness, that comes of moisture, and is naught
worthy in hot cause and dry, as Diosco. says. It exciteth menstraull blood,
and cleanses and comfort the Mother, and abateth head ache, if it be sod
in wine or in water: and brings out a dead child, and the bag that it is
in, and breaks the stone of ye reins and of the bladder, and drives away
fiends, as Plin. says, and withstandeth evil thoughts, and abateth feet ach
that comes of travel of going, and thereof is many manner kind, and it
said, that the Goddess Diana, found out the virtues thereof, and taught them
to mankind, as Plinius says and Dioscorides also. And Auicen tells other
virtues thereof.

( Addition.
This herb is called, Matter herbarum, and Mugwort, whereof are four kinds,
especially in a idle huswife, and brawling wife, a proud dame, and a dishonest
woman.)

Of Oats. chap. 17.
AVena an Oate, is an herb, and the seed thereof accords to the profit of
men and of horses, and has that name Auena, for that it comes and grows
soon after that it is sown, as Isidore says, and has virtue to relaxe, and
against swelling, and to relaxe noyfull hardness, and to cleanse off
uncleanness of the face, as it is said in Platearius.

( Addition
In the spire of the Oate is a rare secret, which being put into water, turns
straungely, so that it be understood the manner of the setting: Oat bread is
not agreeable for mankind.)

Of Balsamo. chap. 18.
BAlsamum is a tree or a shrub, that never grows passing the height and
quantity of two cubits, as Isido. says, and to like to a vine, and like in
leaves to Rue: But the leaves be more white, and change always, and fall
never. And the tree is called Balsamum, and the stock Orilo Balsamum, and the
fruit or the seed Carpobalsamum, and the juice Opobalsamum. For if the rind
of the stock be smitten with iron combs, then droppeth thereof noble
Opobalsamum. The juice thereof droppeth out of the hoales of the rind, as it
were out of dens. A den in English, in Greek is called Opo, and it faineth
drops by meddeling of Cypres or of honey. But such as is feined by honey is
known, for if a drop thereof be put in milk, it renneth as cruddes, and if it
be meddeled with water, it fleeteth above the water as it were Oil, yt is
feined with Oil. And if it is feined and put in fresh water, anon it sinketh
to ye ground, and defiles not a clean cloth that it touches. Pure and very
Balm or Balsamum may not be suffered in ye hand, if the Sun comes
thereto. Huc vsque Isidorus, Plinius libr. 12. cap. 17. says in this manner:
Balsamum is set before all other smells, and was sometime granted to one land
among all lands, that it is to wit, Judea. And was not had nor found but in two
gardens of the Kings. The greater Gardein was of twentye days earth or
earing: But afterward when the Romans were Lords, those fields of Balsamum
spread into many mountains and hills. This tree is more like to a vine then to
Mircus, and fills the mountains and spreads as a Uine, without railing and
vndersetting of boughs. For the boughs thereof bears themselves, and the
height thereof is within two cubits. It needs beware that the Tree be not
cut within with iron, and so it needs that caruing with iron pass not the
rind inward into the Tree. For if the Tree be hurt within, then all is lost.
The Tree is all medicinable. The chief grace thereof and first, is in the
juice, the second in the seed, the third in the rind, and the last in the
stock. The best of these is sweetest smell, in the greatest seed and most
heavy, biting in taste, and fervent in the mouth, and read in color. Huc
vsque Plinius. lib. 12. cap. 27. Diolcorides says, that there is a manner
kind of Balsamum that grows about Babylonia, where the seven wells be, and
if that manner Balsamum be set in another place, then it bears neither flower
nor fruit. In Summer time the boughs be softly cut with a knife of boane, or
with sheeres that be not sharp, least the Tree were hurt within, and so
perish. Under the rind that is thirled be set violls of glass to gather
therein ye drops that fall. If one drop be done to the roufe of the mouth, it
heateth the brain that it seems on fire. It has virtue to dissolve and
temper, and to consume and wast, and keep and save dead bodies without
rotting, forasmuch as it dissolueth and wastes, as it is said in Plateario.
And exciteth menstruall blood, and brings a dead child out of the womb, and
the Mola out of the Mother, and out of the womb: and breaks the stone in ye
bladder and in the reins, and does away the Illiaca passion, and all evils
of the head, if it be taken in due manner: And helps in feauers quotidian and
quartane, and withstandeth venomous biting, and has these virtues, and many
other noble virtues: yt were full long to reckon them here all arow: But these
shall suffice for this time.

( Addition.
Balsamita, an herb of length and bigness of a Lilly, with a lease like rue,
growing only in Judea and Egypt, of whose juice comes the precious Balm
Ointment.)

Of Bidellio. chap. 19.
AS Plinius says, lib. 12. capitulo. 10. Bidellium is a Tree, most named
Couth, and is a black tree, most like to the Olive in leaves and in might. The
gum thereof is most found in use of medicine. For the gum thereof is bright
and bitter in taste, and well smelling. And smells the more if it be wet in
Wine. Also in the Gloss Super Genesis. 2. It is said, that there Bidellium is
found, and the stone Omchenus. It grows (as Plinius says) in ye countries of
the East, as in Arabia, India and Chaldea. Libr. 17. Isidore says, that
Bidellium is a Tree of Inde, and of Arabia, and the Gunune of the tree of
Arabia is best, and smells well, and is bright, somewhat white and light, not
heavy. And is fat and like to ware, and is soon made soft, and is bitter
with good savor, and not meddeled with tree, nor with earth. And the Gum of
the tree is foul and black, and counterfeited with Gum, which is not so
bitter in taste, from whence so ever it comes. The substance thereof is
gleamie, and stops and draws. Therefore as Diocorides says, and Plat.
also. It is contrary to the bloody flux, which comes of sharp matter, and
is good for them that have the flux, which is ingendered and comes because
of strong drougs. And also is good against Postumes within and without: if they
be anointed duly therewith: and breaks the stone, and abateth the cough, and
withstandeth venim of creeping worms and beasts, and eases ath of the guts,
as Platea, says: And bealeth them at the best, that be limme broiten, so that
the guss falls in the bag of the Genitours, and soudreth well the inner
parts. With Gum of Bidellio, accords Vetnix, which is called Bernix also.
And yt is called a manner Gum: and men say, that it is Gum of a tree having
virtue to souder, to clarify and to save. Therefore. Painters occupye it most,
for it binds; as Bidellium does: but it is of another kind: For it is cold
and dry in the second degree: and Bidellium is hot and moist, as it is said in
Platearios.

(* Edellium. Pli. A Tree growing in Arabia: also the Gum of the same tree,
like to Wax, sweet of savor, and in taste bitter. D. Copper.)

Of Buxo. chap. 20.
Box is called Buxus, and is a name of Greek, somewhat corrupt among Latins,
as Isidore says, lib. 17. For among the Greeks it is called Pixos. And this
tree is always green: and for smoothness of matter it is able to receive
writing of letters and figures to be made on. For a Table of Bore which is well
planed receives white color, and thereupon diverse letters, and diverse
figures and shapes be written and made, and afterward may be put away easily
and soon, as Isidore says. All the utter Tree is called Hec Buxus, and the
inner stock, Hoc Buxum. Therefore one said on this manner.

Hec buxus crescit, hoc buxum crescere nescit. It appears that he would
mean, that this tree is called Buxus, while it grows, and is called Buxum,
when it grows not. And is a Tree of sad matter of fast. And the nutrimentall
humor thereof is full gleamie, and cleaving togethers, as Albumasar says in
lib. Vegil. Therefore the stock thereof is hard, sad, and heavy, and sinketh
in water, as Hebenus does, and that is because of sadness and fastness of the
stock, which has no pores where air might enter, by the which entering it
might fleet above the water, as Albumasar says. And therefore the leaves
thereof be long, grieve, and fall not soon, but some and some. And when one
falls, another comes in his steed. And has many small leaves and thick,
and little fruit or none. The shauing of Box, for it is cold and dry,
stauncheth the Flux, if it be sod in pit water, as Dioscorides says. And
dies hair, yt is often washed in the broth thereof. The savor thereof is bitter,
as Plinius says. lib. 17. cap. 17. The smell is heavy, and though it grieve
the taste with savor, yet it comfort the sight. For it is always, green, and
namely in Summer. In Winter ye leaves thereof wax some deal pale, but they
fall not, as Albumasar says. And the cause is of gleamy humor, that is
therein, and much fleeting moisture that is in the root, and therefore the
leaves fall not. When heat comes the humor is drawn outward, and then by
working of heat the leaves be green. And when cold comes, the humor is
suittest inward, and then is great drinosses; and so the color is yeolow or
pale. And Box grows in hot places and stony, and is therefore hard and sadly
warred; but the tree within is smooth, and couenable to be planed: And holds
long time shapes and figures, which be made therein: So thereof be made fair
Image and and long during. Also of Bore be bores ordained and made to keep in
Musk, and other manner of spicery, and is good to many manner of other uses,
and necessities, which were over noyous and greath letting of time to rehearse
them heere-all arowe. But such as we have rehearsed be now sufficient, as for
this slute.

( Addition.
The lennes of Box is hot and dry, and not used to medicine, and is very
hurtful for the brain.)

Of Balauftias chap. 21.
BAlaustia is the flower that falls of the Pomegranard, for when the Tree
shall bear fruit, the flowers cleave togethers in a cluster, and fall off the
tree sometime. And Physicians take and occupye them so the usage of medicines:
and then may be kept and preserved in great virtue all the winter long. And
Dioscorides says, this flower Balaustia is cold and dry, and has virtue to
bind and so fordrie humors ^ Therefore it helps and is medicinable against
the bloody flux, and helps also against menstruall blood, and, has also
virtue to staunch spuing and, admiting if it be sodden in Uine get, and laid
with a sunng to the breast pit. Also powder thereof heals and closes and
sendreth wound, and Powder thereof heals the game, and cleanses and date
away the rottings thereof: and fastneth and makes steadfast the roots of the
says, and also heals welks of ye lips. And Pisidra, the rind of the same
tree, does all the same things, and namely the fruit and apple of the same
tree: and the apple shall be taken when it is ripe.

( Addition.
Balaustium, the flower of a Pomegranard, very africtiue and binding.)

Of Beta. chap. 22.
BEta is a common a herb of gardens, as Diosc, says and thereof is double
kind, black and white, and of either the juice dropped into ye nosethrils,
purges the head, and abateth ach of the ears and amendeth and does away nits,
and other uncleanness of ye head, and speckles and moles of the face, and
restores and saves hair: and the leaves thereof shore and laid to, quenches
ye evil, which is called Sacerignis, the holy fire, and swageth green wounds,
and nourishes evil humors, if it be often used, as Diosc. says. Aristotle
speaks of Beta and says, and men may graffe on a Beat stock, as men does
on a Caustocke, and then ye Beat stock takes strength, and turns into a
tree, as it is said before, de natura Plantarum.

( Addition.
Beta candida, Beta nigra, Beta nigra Romana. Beetes are hot and dry, and
abstertiue especially the white Beete, yt which is of a more cleansing nature.)

Of Ceder ^ chap. 23.
CEdrus is a Tree, and the Greeks call it Cedros, as it were Ceomones
Dri^sticon, that is to understand, humor of a burning tree. The leaves thereof
answers to likeness of Cipressus, as Isidore says. li. 17. And he says
there, that Cedery is a Tree with merrye smell, and indureth and abides long
time, and is never destroyed with might, neither with: Terredo, that is the
Tree worm. And for the Ceder indureth always, thereof be Rastees and other
Timber made, belonging to places of kings, and to Temples also. The Gum of
this Tree is called Cedrina, and is most necessary, and keeps and saves
Books. For Books which be vermissed with that Gum, be not fret with
Worms; neither age in time.

This tree grows in Africa, and in Siria, and namely in mount Libany. Then
the Ceder tree is a most high tree, Lady and queen of all other Trees, as
Rabanus says super Psalt. and is most fair in sight, and always green with
good smell, and the smell of it drives away Serpents and al manner of veniuous
worms, as he says: and it is most sweet in fruit. And the Apples of Ceder
be great and long, and be of eitrine or else of yeolowe color, with and
wonderful smell and most pleasant savor, and has three manner of sauores:
for in the middle about the grains, the Apples be chrine and sour, and
without sweet by the rind, and mean between sweet and sour in the pith of
the fruit within. Then the Ceder is of many diverse and great doing and
virtues, and also full medicinable and wholesome For the gum thereof is shaped
some what in manner like to a top, and is sharp and seruent. And it burns and
dries, as Dioscorides says: and it wipeth and cleanses away dimnesse of the
eien. And it slaieth and destroieth ye worms of the ears, and it helps
against the ach of the feeth, and it helps against the biting of Serpents.
And also it does away tingling and ringing in the ears, with the juice of
Hisop. And swageth and abateth the swelling in the jaws, and heals certain
wounds in the lungs. And keeps and laueth soft flesh from rotting. The Ceder
tree anointed with his own gum, keeps and saves dead bodies from rosting
that be said therein. Also the seed of Ceder abateth the cough, and exciteth
menstruall blood and brings out Secundinas, bags that children Be wrapped
in, in the mothers womb: and cleanses and purges the Mother, and softeneth
and slaketh sinews that be shrunk with the Crampe, and makes one to piss,
and cleanses away the gravel in the reins and in the bladder: And
Dioscoride, sets many other virtues of Ceder, and of the juice and fruit
thereof. And Plinius speaks of a manner Ceder in this wise: A certain tree is
called Modica, and is first brought out of ye land of Medes, and the Greeks
call that Tree Agedia or Cedronilla. And has ye name for it seems, that the
apples thereof follow the virtue of Ceder, and the savor also, as Isidore
says, lib. 17. And Apples of the same Tree be contrary to venim, as Plinius
says, and he says, that this Tree is full of fruit nigh always: And some
fruit thereof is ripe, and some green and sour, and some in blossom. And
that is seldom seen in other trees. And many men call this tree Assyria, as
he says.

( Addition.
There are two forts of Ceder, great and small. The small fruit is also of two
fortes, the one with sharp prickly leaves like Ioniper, the other are not
prickly at all The Ceder is hot and dry in the third degree. Read Dodoneus.)

Of Cipresso. cap. 24.
CIpressus is called Ciparistus in Greek, as Isidorus says, lib. 17. For the
head thereof arises round and sharp upward as a top, or a Pineapple with
the point upward. And such a point is called Conon, as it were another
roundnesse. And the fruit thereof is of such a manner disposition, and has
this name therefore, and is called Conus. And to Cipresses are names and called
Consete. This foresaid Cipres tree has virtue much like unto the Ceder tree,
And is formable and necessary to edisteng and building of Towers and Temples,
and for other great and pompeous coifices. And for because it may not not,
^efayleth never, but abides and duteth and lasts always in the first estate
and condition: and has a right good savor A most sweetest smelling. Therefore
in old time men used for to make fire and fume of the branches and twigges
thereof, for to destroy and put away the stench and loathsome sauoure of dead
carrions, and other dangerous and conlagious airs. Huc vsque Isidorus.

The Cipres Tree is hot in the first degree, and it is also dry in the second
degree. The Apples of ye said Tree, and ye stock and leaves, be according and
right necessary to medicine, as Platearius says. For they be sour and
healing, and sendereth and fasteneth. Therefore they (...) for to help against
ye flures of the womb, which comes for defalt of the virtue retenlers; if it
be made in powder, and then received in meat or in drink and is medicinable,
and helps against the sickness, and the passion Illiaca: and helps against
the disease and ach of the loins, if it be prepared and fodde its pit water.
And Wine watered with the foresaid water and leaves of Cipres, cleanses,
purges, and puts away the corruption and filth of new wounds, and cures
and heals the: evil, which is called Sacer agnis, called in English, the
holy fire: and purges and cleanses sneeueling nosethrills. And does always
the stench, and stauncheth bleeding. The seeds of the said Cipres tree with
dry figs, tempereth the hardness of the Reume, of stauncheth the flux: and
helps against the venomous and deadly Postume, that is called Antrax, and
bears down the malice thereof, and lets the spreading thereof, and
withstandeth venomous biting. Dioscorides rehearses al these virtues of Cypres
and many more. Plinius lib. 17. cap. 33. says, that the Cypres is a tree with
many boughs and has voire knappes in steed of fruit, and has bitter leaves,
and a violent smell, and gracious shadow. Of Cipres is double manner kind, male
and female. The female is barren and fair in sight, ye boughs thereof be thick
at the top, and wound togethers. The boughs of the male dee more thin, and if
they be cut, they burgen as gain.

( Addition.
The fruit of Cypres taken into the body, stops the laske and blondy flixe:
it is good against he spitting of blond, the decoction made with water has the
same virtue.)

Of Cipio. cap. 25.
OF Ciprus it is written Can. 4. Cipricum nardo, etc. Li. 12. ca. 26. Plinius
says, yt the Cipre is a tree in Egypt like to Olive in leaves, but the leaves
be more green and more fat, with black flowers and white seed, sweet
smelling. And if the seed be sod or confect with Oil, out thereof in wrong an
ointment for kings, which smells well, and is most delicious, and is called
Ciprus. Also Isidore, lib. 17. and the Gloss Super Can. and Plinius means,
that the best of the kind of this Tree grows in Egypt upon the river Nilus,
in the region of Canopia: and the second in Alcalone, and the third in Ciprus.
And thereof the smell is wonderfully sweet. And as the says, to this Tree
another Trees is like, which is called Aspalatos, and is like to the Rose in
flower. And of the root and flower thereof is made a notable ointment. Also he
says, that in every schrub, where the Rainebowe shines straight thereon, is
the same sweetness of savor and smell, all the while that the Bow shines
there, and if the bow shines on the same Tree, it makes the smell and
fairness of it increase more then we man tell, and is like to a white thorn
and having the color of fire, or is read, and smells some deal as
Castorium: and some men call it Elizeus Scyepter, as he says there. Heereto
Diosc. says, that Ciprus is a medicinable Tree, of couenable and giving
virtue. The leaves thereof showed abateth swelling of the mouth. The broth
thereof flaieth worms of the head, and infedeth the hair, if it be washed
there with. The flower thereof sod with vinegar, does away head ach, as he
says. Ciprus is a tree yt is called Lentiscus by another name. Look the
virtue thereof in littera L.

( Addition.
Cuparisos, sorth of the Lentiske tree comes the excellent gum or Roseu
called Masticke, it is in small grains, as big as wheat corns, and it is
brought from ye I Will cyo, it is fair, clear, white, brittle, and of a sweet
savor.)

Of Cinamonio, chap. 26.
CAnel is called cinamum, thereof it is written Ecc. 1. and Exodus 30. And as
the Gloss says there, it is a shrubbe that grows in Inde, and in Aethiopia,
and passes not two cubits in quantity, and is called Cinamum, for it has
small stalks bended with color of ashes or of black color: and of them
when they be broke, comes breath that is seen. The more subtle and small
canell is, the more dear it is, and the more great it is, the less worth it
is held. And lib. 17. Isido meaneld, that Canell has that name Cinamoro, for
the rind thereof is small and round, as a Cane, and grows on a shore stock
with small branches, and when it is broke, thereof comes a breath as it were
a mist smelling most I weetly. Super Ecc. 5. cap. 24. the Gloss says ye Cauell
is a short tree with good smell and sweet, with color of Ashes: and is twice
so good in medicine as the Pipe. Also lib. 12. ca. 21. Plinius speaks of
Canell, and says. That of Canel of Cassia men told Fables in old time, that
it is found in Birds neaste, and specially in the Phoenix neast. And may not be
found, but what falls by his own weight, or is smitten down with Lead
Arrows: But these men do segine to make things dear and of great price: but
as the truth means, Canell grows among the Troglodites in the lydela
Aethiopia, and comes by long space of the sea in Ships to the haven of
Gellenites. And is a short Tree of two enbites long at the most, and a span
long at the least, and has a stock of four as six inches great, and
smells not but when it dries. For dryness is lyking thereto, and is most
fructuous in Winter, contrary to the kind of other trees. And grows among
briers and most thick bushes, therefore it is not gathered without great travel
and difficulty. And no man has leave to gather thereof before ye Sunrising,
nor after the Sun going down. And when it is gathered, the Priest by measure
deals the branches, and takes thereof a part, and so by space of time
merchaunts buy that other deal. The chief goodness thereof is in the most
thickest and smallest branch, and that that is in the middle of the flock, is
of little dame or of nothing for there is but little of the rind. In the rind
is the most virtue and grace of Canell. Therefore the tops and the over parts
be best of goodness. For in them is much rind. The Tree within is little or
naught worth in comparison to the rind. Huc vsque Plinlus. li. 12 Dioscorides
and Pla. mean, that Canell is he in the third degree, and dry in the second
degree. And of Canell i double manner kind, yt is to wit, small and great. The
great is less worth then the small, and leave in vornitiue medicines. And the
small is better and more needful in other vadirines. The best is shinne and
small, with sharp biting savor, meddled with sweetness, with some deal red
color and with much good smell. And the Canell that is some deal white, is
less worth. By good smell Canel has virtue to comfort the brain, and has
vermedy softness of parts to souder and to fasten. Canell has many manner
virtues, as Dioscori, says. For it abateth the cough, that comes of thick
moisture. Powder thereof meddled with vinegar, does away scabs, and dries
moisture of the ein meddled with Colirium, an ointment of the eien. And swageth
the swelling of the reins, and eureth this dropsy, and heals biting of
creeping Worms, and comfort the appetite, and exciteth menstruall blood,
and opens stopping, and defieth meal and drink, and dissolueth, vndeeth,
and destroys Postumes. And Canell drunk with Wine, brings out Secundinas,
bags that children be in, in the mothers womb. And wipeth away dimnese of
eyes, and succoureth and helps in sounding, and in the Cardiacle passion.

( Addition.
The Tree of Cinnamon is not much unlike a Bay tree, especially the leaves, it
bears Barries as does the Baye tree, but less, and white. It is doubtless
therefore, home other then bark of a Tree, and is gathered in this manner,
Every third year they cut the branches of the tree, of this is great plenty
in the Island of Zaylon. When it is first gathered, it is not yet so sweet, but
a month after when it waxes dry. The Bark is the only spice, and the wood
is like Fur tree very light.)

Of Casia. chap. 27.
OF Casia is mention made in Exodus 80. And is a certain kind of spicery, with
good smell and molde, and grows in Arabia, as Isidore saleth. And is a rod
with a strong rind and red Purple leaves, as the rind of Pepper, and is like
to Canell in virtue, but not so mighty in effect and deed. Thereof in medicines
double weight is taken in steed of Canell, as Isidore says. The Gloss super
Exodus 30 means: that Casia breeds in watrye places, and grows strongly,
and gives good smell, Leb. 12. ca. 21. Plinius speaks of Casia, and says,
that the tree of Casia grows fast by Cinamum in fields, and is three cubits
long, and his branch is greatet then the branch of Canell, and has three
colors. For the first is white, and then read, and then black, and that
part is best, and the white is less worth, for it is soon eaten with worms
and holed, and that for it is soft in subtaunce, and for less bitterness and
virtue of the rind. Casia is proved when it is new, by smelling, savor, and
color. For the noble Casia is some deal sweet and biting, sharp of savor,
and sweet and merrye of smell, and browns as Pepper of color, and heavy of
weight. And that casia is best that breaks not soon, but bends and
foldeth. And another manner of kind of Casses is like to Balsamus of Saba in
smell, but it is bitter. And therefore the first, that is black, with some
deal sweet and biting in savor, and with good smell, is more praised among
Physicians. Huc vseq Plinius. ibidem.

Platea and Dioscorides mean and speak of two manner Casia. The one is called
casia sestula, and the other Casia lienea, that is the rind of a little tree,
that grows nigh the marches of Babylonia. And threof is diverse manner of
kind. One is like to Canell, and is some deal read and round and sadds in
substance, and foldeth not when it is broken or beaten, but with stands, and
has a sharp savor, and some deal sweet. And uneath Physicians use this
manner kind. The other manner kinds is same deal bitter with some deal
diverse colors, and Physicians use this manner kind.

And that is best that breaks not seen, but bends and foldeth, and has
sharp savor meddeled with sweetness with good smell, and has when it is
broken somewhat white colors distinguished within, withred meddled among, and
is sometime teined with meddling of the rind of Capar, but is known for it is
some deal bitter of savor, and has virtue diuisitiue of his subtle
substance. Also Casia has a virtue to temper, to divide and depart, and has
of his own qualities virtue to consume and to wast. And has by good smell
virtue of comfort, and cures the rumes and cold causes, and helps them
that have the falling evil, and comfort the brain, and purges the reins
and the bladder, and ripeth and heals Postumes, and vnstoppeth the liver and
the splerie and the remes, and hides and does away the stink of the mouth,
if it be chewed, and exciteth menstruall blood, and comfort and helps
against fowning and failing of the heart, if a stroppe be made of the powder
thereof, and of roses, and of he boane of in Heart. Huc vsque Dioscorides and
plat.

( Addition.
Casia, a sweet shrob or herb, bearing a spice like Cynamon.)

Of Casia fistula. cap. 28.
GAsia fistula is the fruit of a certain Tree, that bears long seed, that
waxes in passing of time great of thick without, by working of heat of the
Sun, and the iuyre within is black and moist and sweet, and is meddled with
certain white grains within, and divided with small holes, as it were in the
holes of is hurry comb.

The best is the greatest and most heavy, for therein is much moisture. And
that that is light, and makes noise when it is moved, shall be forsaken. For
that betokens veronesse and emptiness. Casia fistula has virtue to make
slipper and soft, and to cleanse and to abate wonderfully the sits of blow,
and so cleanse and pure Chotera and blood, and to dissolve and destroy
Postumes of the throat, and is good for the guties, and profitable and helps
against evils of the breast, and brings forth new menstrual blood, that
comes of fat humor, and does away the swelling of the ropes and guts, if it
he drunk Huc vsque Dios. And though men use to write, and to sound Casia with
double S. yet it should be written and sounded with one single s. and so it
should be written and sounded Casia, and not Cassia, as Authors tell.

( Addition.
Casia fistularis, the common Burgation.) And so means Quidiusais Methamo;

Quo simul ac Casias and Nardi leuis aristas, etc. And to says Plinius vhio;
and other also.

Of Calamo. cap. 29.
Kalamos Aromatikos.
A Certain cane is called Calamus Aromaticus, thereof it is written Exo. 30.
and has yt for likeness of common caneas Isidore says, Calamus a loratu
lib. 18. and grows in Inde, with knots in many places, with sweet smell,
and smells wonderfullye sweet. And if it be broke or cut in many parts, it
is like to Casta in savor, with a little sharp biting savor, as Isidore
says Bapias means, that it has a seruent virtue. In Glosa super Exodus 30.
it is said, that Calamus Aromaticus is a manner of kind of spicerie ye
grows beside mount Libani, but where so ever it grows, it is a manner kind
of spicery, that is hot and dry in the second degree, as Dioscorides, Dlat, and
Plinius mean, and is the root of a certain small tree or weed, very like to
a cane, and has a great smell, and is hollow within, as a cane, and in the
holownesse a stick is found that should be taken out, for it is of no value,
but sometime it is left therein for to have the more weight. And the same
Authors mean and speak of double manner of kind of such Canes. The one is of
Persia, and is citrine in color, and the other is of Inde, and is some deal
while, and turns not very soon to powder when it is broke, and has a
wonderful virtue of comforting, and so it comfort the stomach, and helps
digestion, namely, if it be tempered with worms wood, our helps against the
Cardiacle passion, and against sowning and failing of the heart, with water of
Roses. And Plina, says, that the smelling Cane is of Inde, and is best when it
is somewhat red, full of knots and thick, and when it is broken in many parts,
that he full dry, and is medicinable almost as Basta, or Canell Look the
virtues of them before. It exciteth menstruall blood.

( Addition.
Calamus is altogether unknown in shops, for that which they use to sell for
Calamus Aromaticus, is no reed, nor no root of a reed, but in the root of a
certain herb like unto the yeolow stagge; or bastard Acorus, called (Spanish
ranes.) the which roof is taken for the right Acorus. The Cane reed is hot and
day, the Aromaticall and sweet Cane, is also hot and dry in the second
degree. Dodoneus.)

Of Calamo vsuali. cap. 30.
Straw, is called Calamus vsualis, as Isidore says, and has that name of
Calco, es, for it heateth somedeale when men blow therein. And properly it is
the middle stalk of corn between the root and the care. And in the care the
corn and seed is contained, and has another name, and is called Culmus, as
Isidore says, and is hollow within, and round and smooth without, with some
knots, strengthened, and clothed with many leaves, and hidells, thereby the
care profits and takes feeding and nourishing, and if this stalk or straw
fails, the ears is destroyed and lost with a little, blast of winds. This
stalk moves hither and thither, and breaks full soon, if it be moved and
wagged: and bears downward, and is uneath reared or regarelled again.

( Addition.
With the straw of Wheat they thatch houses, and with ^i^^ straw they commonly
make strawen hate^ because it is a tough straw and will bend pliant.)

Of Calamo scripturali. ca. 31
A Writing pen is called Calamus scripturalis, thereof it is said in psalm,
Lingua mea calamus scribe, Velocuer scibentis. Psalm. 44.
My tongue is the pen of the writer. And it is called a reed, for in old time
men used to write with reed, ere use of feathers were found. For as Plimus
says, lib. 16. cap. 34. A reed is good to many manner uses. And among water
shrubbes reed is chief, and is needful in peace and in war. For in the
North Country men thetch their houses well with reed, and hang the reed in
their dens ost to make them fair and gay, and pleasant. In the East Countries
men war and make them darts of Reed, and be so long in many Countries that
men use them in steed of Spears. And Reed has a quick root, and so if the
Reed be cut, In Tarratie.
then grows other new, more plentuons. And some Reed is full of pith within,
and some are all hollow within, which are very meet to make pipes off, but
pithie Reeds yt are thick and knotty, accord more to warriors and to fighting
men. And there in small reed, that grows in places that be less watrie, and
has thin stalks, and be full hard, and they have no pith in manner within,
and are smooth and clear without, With this common reed they cover houses, and
dress ships.
and not full of knottes, and such Reed is good to write with. And the fore
part thereof is cut and sharped, and made able to write, and is somewhat cloven
for to give Ink the better. And the right side of the cleft is somewhat longer
then the left side. There is other reed full of sweet pith, and is shredded
small, and sod with soft fire in a Cauoron, until it be thick, and first it
seems all turned to foame and to skumme, but after that it has rested, the
most best and thick salleth to the ground, and the foame abides above, and
some is feined and is known, for the good sprankleth in the mouth, and is full
sweet. And the evil does not so, but vanishes, as it is said in Plate.

Of Capari. cap. 32.
OF Caparis is mention made Ecclesiast vltimo, and is a weed that grows in
the East, and the rind, leaves, and flowers thereof accords to medicine, and
namely the rind that is in the root, as Plinius says, libro. 13. cap. 23.
and the same Isidore says. And as Isidore says, libro. 17. the Greeks call
it Capparis, for it has small round heads in the top. And Dioscorides
speaks of Capparis and says, that it is an herb or athornie shrubbe spread
on the ground, and is full of unction, and helps against the hardness of
the spleen above all other medicines, and grows in hard places and dry, and
namely in old walls, and softneth the womb: if it be eaten, it exciteth
urine, and sheedeth menstruall blood, and abateth tooth ach, and juice thereof
dropped in the Ears, slays Worms thereof, and has many roots good for the
said things. In Platearius it is said, that as some men mean, Capparis is an
herb, that shall be gathered in the beginning of springing time, and dried
and kept seven year in great virtue, and is good and noble, and falls not
to powder, when it is broken, and is some deal bitter in savor, and some
deal red in color. The flowers thereof be hot while they be closed, and of
no value when they be spread. They be salted, and so kept to good use: and
have virtue to excite appetite, and to defy humor in the mouth of the
stomach: and be both meat and medicine. This weed helps against deafness,
if it be sod in Oil, and put in the sore care. And powder thereof helps
against wounds that be feslured.

( Addition.
Capparis, the fruit Capers, which is used in Sallet with Mutton, a kind of
sengreene, cold and dry in the third degree, and not far different from
purselane: a help against gross fleame, but let, that sound and whole bodies
feed thereof, for it hinders generation.)

Of Cardamomo. cap. 33.
OF Cardamomum is mention made super Eze. And is the seed of a certain tree,
that seedeth in springing time, as Dioscorides says, and bears knoppes
hanging togethers as it were clusters of vines, and therein the seed is
contained. And Cardomomum is double, less and more, and the more is called
tame, and the less is called wild. The first is called the better, for it
favors better, and the better is some deal red with sharp savor meddled
with sweetness, and has virtue to comfort and to wast, and helps therefore
against the Cardiacle passion, and against wamblings and indignation of the
stomach, and exciteth appetite, and abateth spuing, and comfort feeble
brain, as Dioscorides and Platearius say.

( Addition.
Cardamomum a spice coming out of Inde, in steed whereof Apothecaryes now use
grains. The right Cardamomum is of the color of grains, but as big as
Pepper.)

Of Calamento. cap. 34.
CAlament is an herb like mint, thereof holy men in Glosa make sometime
mention, and is double, as Dioscorides says and Platearius also. One grows
in mountains, and is the better of the twain, and the other is as it were
tame, and not so dry as the first. And has virtue to fasten and to wast, for
it is hard and dry in the third degree, as he says, and helps against the
cough, and against evils of the breast that comes of cold, as does
Diacalamentum, which is a confection made of flowers and Powder of that herb,
and of other things, and heals the evil and ach of the stomach and of the
guts, and it helps against the reume and other cold evils, and heals
biting of creeping worms and beasts, and draws outward the venimme. The
juice thereof done in ye ears helps the sores, and slays the Worms, and it
chastises lechery, and helps against Lepra, and lets it, and tarrieth
and wastes, and destroys superfluity and moisture of the mother, as he
says, and has many other virtues, as Arthemesia: but this is sufficient at
this time.

( Addition.
There he three fortes of Calamyne, each of them having a several name and
difference, Cornemint, or wild Peniriall, Catmynt, and mountain Calamynte.
Read Dodoneus. fol. 247.

Of Carice. chap. 35.
CArix, Sedge, is an herb most hard and sharp, as it is said, and the
stalk thereof is three cornered, and cutteth and carueth the hand that it
holds, if it be hard drawn there through. And has leaves that cutteth in
either side, and be long shapen as a sword, and hutteth never man, but he
touches it. And it grows in a marreis place and soft, and yet it shows
that the substance thereof is has and keen, and is accounted among kind of
rushes, as Plin. says, and he calls it a three edged rush, and speaks
thereof and says, that the root of a three edged rush is of good smell, and of
good virtue, as the root of Calamus Aromaticus, but I understand this is not
general, but special, as he makes mention, lib. 12. Of Carix comes this
name Caretum, the place that sedge grows in, and the place that Wilows grow
in is called Salictum, a salice, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
Carex, Segges or sheregrasse, whereof is made mats and Hassocks to sit and
kneel upon, with the said Segs is made Hambroughs for the necks of horses, in
steed of Lether harness, and for other carlage and plough.)

Of Carduo. chap. 36.
CArduus is Greek, Cardus slellatus.
as Isidore says, and is a manner herb or weed with pricks. The kind
thereof is beting and cruel. Therefore the juice thereof cures the falling of
the hair. Dioscorides speaks of this herbs and says. That the root
thereof fodde in water, gives appetite to drinkers, and is most profitable to
the mother, and therefore it is no wonder though women desire it. For it
helps the conception of male children, as he says.

And Carduus is a male herb full of pricks, and in the top has heads with
pricks in stalks. In the which heads the seed is contained, that is black
without and white within. The pith and the seed is of virtue of departing, and
dealing, and helps against the stone both in the bladder and in the reins,
and grows in a desolate place, and is eaten of Asses, and trodden of beasts,
as it is said. 3. Regum. 14. capitulo.

Addition
Carduus Libani misit ad Cedrum qui est Libano, dicens, Da filiam tuam, filio
meo vxorem. Transieruntque bestiae saltus, quae sunt in Libano, and
conculcauerunt Carduum, etc. A Thistle that is in Libano^ sent to the Ceder
tree, that is in Libanus, saying: Give thy daughter to my son to wife, and
the wild beasts that was in Libanon, went the trod down the Thistle, etc.

And li. 20. ca. 16. Plinius speaks of Carduus and sateth, that Carduus has
leaves with pricks and pricking heads thereon: and the seed and the root may
be eaten. And there is one manner Carduus blometh all the Summer continually,
and when one falls, another springs, and when the leaves be dry, the
pricks leave to prick and sting. There is another manner Carduus, that is enemy
to corn, that grows in earth, as he says, and has much seed, and may
uneath therefore be destroyed where it once grows, but the weathers busily
draw up the moore and roots. And in drawing up of Carduus, men's fingers be
often grieved with pricks, by these properties it seems, that Cardui be
Thistles great and small.

( Addition.
Of the kinds of Cardus, Thistles, are diverse, Carduus Ramptarius, our Ladies
Thistle, the leaves green, and the daines of the leaves white. Spina
peregrins, the Gloabe Thistle, or the Oate Thistle. Acanthium, the common
field Thistle or Cotton Thistle. Leucacantha Carlina, white carroline Thistle.
Spina Arabica, the Arabian Thistle. Carlina syluestra, wild wood Thistle or
Saffion bastard, or Carthamus, Cardus Benedictus, ye blessed Thistle, whose
operation is hot and dry. Cardus syluestris, whereof are three kinds also.
Last of all are two sorts of Thistles, called Artechokes, which being eaten
raw and young do choke the heart, by breeding raw juice and Cholera, but
sodden, and with Uineger and Pepper seasoned, and a good quantity of sweet
Butter, the pith so eaten hurts very seldom those, who being pampered with
daintye fare, have eaten too much already, of small nourishment, and yet as
some write, they stir by lecherye in women, and diminish the same in men.
Whatsoever is else written of ye Arthichoke of late is fabulous, yet too good
for those that regard no truth. Read D. Turner. Aetius writes, that the root
of the Arthichocke sodden in Wine and drunk, drives forth stinking urine.
Galen says they have a naughtye juice, and makes evil juice in the body.
Pliny. Hesyodus, etc. Read Dodoneus. fol. 523.)

Of Carica. chap. 37.
CArica is a dry Fig Tree, and has that name of plenty. For every year it
bears fruit three or four times, as Isidore says, while one ripeth,
another springs and comes in the stead, and it is said, that if old men
eat often such Figs, they do away their riuells, as he says. Dioscorides
says, that among fruit dry Figs be sweetest, and be good in meats and in
medicines, and nourish much, and fatteth and breed much gross blood, and
comfort feeble men, and cleanses the breast, and abateth the cough, and
cleereth the voice, and swageth the swelling of the jaws, and purges the
reins, the bladder, and the mother, as Physic means.

And such Figs sodde in Wine with Wormwood, cures the dropsy, and purges
the itching of the Ears, if they be stamped or ground with That is now
called Mutstard iced
Seyneuey, but and they be too much used in meat, they breed swelling
ventositye, and Lice also, as Dioscorides says. Look other virtues
hereafter de Ficu.

( Addition.
Carice is a kind of Fig which grows only in Syria, there is the gardein
Fig with the wild Fig, whose operation are after the soil whereon they
grow.)

Of Cimino. chap. 38.
COmin is called Ciminum, and is a seed with good smell, and with pale
color, as Dioscorides and Macrobius say, therefore Persius says in this
manner.

Rugosum piper est, pallentis grana cimini. His meaning is, that Pepper is
riueled, and the grain of Comin is pale: and is hot and dry in the second
degree, and has virtue to temper, and to depart, and to distribute, and to
abate thickness of fumositie, and to comfort digestion, and to abate
ventositie and ach of the stomach: and to do away smelling, and to staunch the
flixe of the womb, if it be dipped in Uineger, and first perched and blown
into the nosethrilles, that it may make a man sneese, and it stauncheth
bleeding at the nose, and swageth and heals swelling and ach of the jaws,
and with Bays of the Laurel tree, it helps cold reume, and dissolueth and
does away bloudye reume in the eye, if it be well meddeled with clear Wax,
and laid often thereto. Powder thereof well meddeled with Wax, does always
wanne color, that comes of smiting, or otherwise, if it be laid often
thereto: but by often use thereof. the face shall be discouloured. Huc vsque
Dioscorides, and Plat.

And Plinius says nigh the same, libro. 20 capitulo. 16. where he says,
that some Comin is tame, and some is wild, and he says, it accords to many
medicines and remedies, and namely of the stomach: for it does away swelling
and blowing thereof, and destroys ach, and gnawing of guts and roayes.

( Addition.
Cumminum, called Seseli, as Dioscorides writes, is of three sorts, the first
is called Seseli Masilience: the second, Seseli Aethiopium: the third Seseli
Peloponnense. The seed and root are hot and dry in the second degree. The
seed drunk with wine comfort the heart, helps digestion, drives away
gnawing and griping in the bellye, it provoke urine, expulseth the dead
child, and setteleth the Matrixe, and is said to be good in curing the
falling Evil, so that the disease have not continued long.)

Of Coriandro. chap. 39.
OF Coriander is mention made Exodus, verse. 31. and is a smelling seed: and
the Greeks call it Corlon, as Isidore says, libro. 17. The seed thereof
taken in sweet milk, makes men the more pressed to serve Venus. But yet it
needs to beware. For without doubt, if men take too much thereof, it breeds
woodnesse and leesing of wit, and if a venomous herb to bounds, for it
slays them, if they eat thereof, as Isidore says, and Papias. And he
says furthermore, that Coriander taken in meat, heateth and constrains and
hardneth, and breeds sleep. And Authors mean, that it has compounded
virtue. Of the herb Coriander Macer says in his book thus.

Frigida vis herb Coriandri dicitur esse,
Austeraeque simul quiddam virtutis habere.
That is to say: The herb Coriander is cold, and has somewhat of cruel
virtue.

Galen says, that by this herb often men destroy moughts, and puts long
Worms out of the womb, if it be ground and drunk with wine, or meddled with
vinegar. And this herb has a good smell in it self while it is whole and
sound, and stinketh, if it be froted with hands, the seed thereof is white
and small.

( Addition.
This herb of some is called Caliander, and is cold dry, and a dangerous
seed, if it be eaten raw or unprepared, it kills the body.)

Of coloquintida. chap. 40.
OF Coloquintida mention is made 4. Regum quarto, and is a manner herb, that is
most bitter, and is called Cucurbita agrestis, as it were a manner wild weed,
for the spraye thereof breeds by the ground, and is like to the common
gourde, and has round fruit. This herb stretches and spreads in hedges,
as a vine does, and has much small fruit and round, as Isidorus says,
libro. 17.

Dioscor. says, that Coloquintida, that is called Cucurbita Alexandrina, is
sometime found alone, and then it is deadly and venomous, as is the herb that
is called Squilla, id est, Cepamarina and griueth not all thing so much, when
it is found with many other, and has pith, rind and seed. The pith is best
in medicine, and the seed is secondarie, and the rind is little or nothing
woorthe in virtue: and so the pith that is white, is good, in which the seed
is well pight: and of that that makes much noise when it is smitten, is little
force, and also if it fall soon to powder. It has virtue to dissolve and to
wast, and of his bitterness, has also virtue to depart and to deal, and to
thirle, and by subtlety of his substance, it purges sleume and melancholy,
and it is said that it helps the quotidian and quartane, and against scabs,
if it be given in due manner to the Patient, and heals tooth ache, and
brings out worms of the womb.

Powder thereof staieth worms of the ears, and opens the hardness of the
spleen and of the liver, if the juice thereof be drunk with Fenell. The broathe
thereof, opens the Emoroydes, and veins of blood, and brings out
menstruall blood, and has these virtues, and many other more, as Dioscorides
says, and Pl^tea, and Plinius also.

( Addition.
Coloquintida, is hot and dry in the thirds degree. Without discreet usage, it
is exceeding hurtful to the heart, the stomach and liver.)

Of Coccus the most fruitful tree in Calicut, and of all the world.
COccus grows in the West India, Addition
whose fruitefulnesse and sweetness, Passes all the trees of the world. It
bears certain fruits, like unto great Dates or Nuttes, and generally
brings forth ten commodities: for it bears wood most apt to kindle fire,
and Nuttes very pleasant to be eaten, also cords or ropes, which may well
serve for sailors. Likewise very fine cloathe is made of a kind of gosse like
wool, which when it is colored, shows like Silk. The wood is the best
that may be fonnde to make coals. It yields from the saype, wine, and
oditerous water: forth of the which tree also, as a kind of Turpentine or
Gum, proceeds a moisture lyquide as Oil, and a brittle juice, as Sugar
hardens, and is very pleasant. One tree hears many of these fruits,
whereof the greatest are as big as a man's fist, supposed the Nux Indica. The
cut branches will drop as the Uine, A pleasant drink. Taking away the
first rind or bark, they put it in ye fire, where it busneth quickly and with
great flame.

The second fruit under the same first rine or rhyme, is much like unto
Bombace or Silk; and is not unlike to beaten or wrought Flax. Of the flowers,
they make a certain kind of cloathe, not unlike Silk: of the course sow, or
refuse, they make cords: and of the finer, tacklyng for ships: so that what
serves not for cloth, serves for cords: within the Nut is a lycour sweet,
whitish and fattie.

This strange Tree bears fruit continuallye. They are so greatly esteemed
that in their greatest discordes or war, it is not lawful for any man to
hurt them, even in the lands of their Enemies. They live but the age of five
and twenty years.

Of Croco. cap. 41.
OF Saffron is mention made. Eccl. 4 and Tren. vlt. And Saffron is called
Crocus, and is an herb, and has that name Crocus of the City Coricius, for
there is most abundance thereof, as Isidore says libro. 17. And the herb
with the Flower, has that name Crocus, but the flower in the which is the most
virtue, is called Crocum. And the freshest and newest is best, yt is with good
smell, long and little, some what white, whole, and not broken in gobbets and in
pieces, and smells well, and couloureth the hands that touches it, and is
light and sharp, and if it be not such, it is known that it is old or wet,
and is sometime counterfaited with a thing that is called Crocomagina, for to
increase the weight with foil of silver ground, but it is espied, if it be
slow to grinding, or if it changes his own smell, when it is sod.
Crocomagina is called the superfluity of spicerie, of the which Saffron
Ointment is made. Huc. vsque Isid.

Dioscorides means and speaks of two manner Saffrons. One is called
Hortensis, and has that name of Gardens, for it grows therein. The other is
called Orientalis, and has also the name of the place that it grows in, and
is best, and shall not be put in vomitiue medicines, and it bears a purple
flower with a head as a violet, and in the middle thereof three flowers or
four, and the best thereof be somewhat red, or all red, and the whitest shall
be forsaken. Saffron may be kept ten year, and is hot and dry in the first
degree, and temperate in his quality, and therefore it is comfortatiue, and so
it helps much against the feebleness of the stomach, and failing of heart,
and does away redness of eyes, which comes of blood, or of defflyng, if it
be ground with roses and the white of an Egg, and laid to the eye, as Dio.
says and Pla. also.

And Saffron has another property, that it is green all the Winter long in
leaves, be the Winter never so cold: and in Summer the leaves of it falls
and fades, and withers altogether, and grows again after the middle of
Harvest, and then the flowers breaks out of small stalks, and as Arist.
says in li. vegita. Saffron is much like to an Onion, and to Ascolonia in
root, nevertheless it is diverse and varieth from either: For the root of
Saffron is continued to the body, and seedeth not as Ascolonia does, but all
the seminall virtue is in ye root, and all the cloves of Saffron be lean, and
the cloves thereof springs not out at one side, as it fares in Ascolonia,
and in an Onion of Gardeines: but the cloves of Saffron springs out of the
place of generation of veins of cloves.

And Saffron has this property, as Arist. says, it has very roots, and
cleaneth thereby to the earth, and sucketh nourishing and feeding, as Onions
and Garlike and other such, and when the head of Saffron is great and ripe, it
begins to be departed and to be dealed, and multiplied in many heads, with
their fell and skins and roots: and of every each grows a plant, and
thereby it is known, that in the head or root is the virtue seminall, and the
virtue of multiplication and preservation of the kind thereof. Plin. li. 20.
says, that Saffron is not soon tempered with honye nor with sweet lycour:
but it is tempred soonest with wine or with water, and it is best in medicine:
for it destroys all swellyng and boiling, and sore ache of the eyes, namely
if it be meddled with wine, and is best for the stomach and liver.

He that drinks Saffron first shall not be dronken, and garlands thereof
lets dronkennes, and lets a man yt he may not be dronken, it causes
sleep, and moves the head, and exciteth Venus.

The flower thereof, done to the evil that is called the holy fire, helps
and cures it. Of Saffron is made an ointment, that is citrine or yeolow, which
is called Clogomagon in Greek, and helps against running of eyes. The best
dies the teeth and the spettle, and pourgeth botches of the head, and abateth
swelling: and cures the biting of serpents and of Spiders, and stinging of
Scorpions. Huc vsque Plinius.

( Addition
Crocus Hortensis, and Crocus Saracenicus. The English Saffron is most best,
both for color and medicine.)

Of Cepa. chap. 42.
AN Onion is called Cepa or Cepe, and is all herb, that has all his virtue,
in the root and in the seed, and is therefore called Cepe, as Isidore says,
for it has naught but a head. In lib. de plants Aristotle speaks of the
^alon and says, that the Onion and Ascoloina bears leaves twice in one
year, and the Onion has a stalk and bears seed thereon, and has a root
be clypped, with many cloves, and has there under, other roots, as though it
were hayrie.

And thereby the great root takes nourishing and feeding, and radical humor
is sent into all the herb. And in ye first year this herb profits not in
the root, but in the second year after that it is solved, nor seedeth
commonly before the second year, nor bears seed in one skin as Garlike does
and other such, but in the top of the stalk the seed springs and spreads
on small stalks.

Of Onions is double kind, tame and wild, that Aristotle calls Canina, as
it were an Hounds Onion. This Onion Canina has white flowers toward heaven,
and somewhat green toward the earth; and such an onion helps against
postlimes. And the tame Onion has an hollow stalk without knots, and renews
both joints and leaves, as Aristo. says in libr. predicto. And Dioscorides
says, that the tame Onion is good and profitable both in meat and in
medicine, and is gleymie and cold of kind, and namelye that that is ruen
long, and the red more than the white, and more the dry than the new, and more
raw than sodde. And does away griefs of the womb, and abateth stinch of the
mouth, and softneth the womb and makes meat sauourie. And the juice thereof
helps them that have the Litargio that is the sleeping evil, and abaseth
often ache of the ears, if it be with woman's milk dropped therein. If it be
eaten couenably, it forekerneth and departs gleymie humors, and opens the
mouths of the veins, and exciteth urine and menstruall blood, and brings
out venime, and quenches biting of a mad dog, and helps in other venimes by
bitings, and clarifieth the skin and opens the poores, and exciteth
therefore sweat, and makes it break out and gives to ye body no nourishing,
when it is eaten raw: and it grieueth choleric men, and accords to
fleamatike men, and breeds thirst and swelling: and noieth and grieueth the
head with sharpness, and to eat too much of them, breeds madness and
woodnes, and makes dreadful dreams, and namely if men that be new recovered
of sickness, eat too much thereof. Onions when ye eat them makes the eien
watrye, and grieueth the light only with savor. Huc vsque Dioscorides.

( Addition.
There be diverse sorts of Onions, some white, some red, some round, some great,
some small, but all of one favor and property, saving that the one is
somewhat stronger in working, then an other, etc.)

Of Sepe Canino. cap. 34.
CEpe caninum, as it were an hounds Onion is called Squilla also, and is found
by the sea side. Therefore Platear. calls it Sepe marina, as it were a Sea
Onion, and is sometime found alone, and is then venomous if it be eaten, except
the venimme thereof be quenched. Men use to depart it in many parts, and
plant them in closed Gardens, and so quench the venimme thereof. And the
malice thereof quenches, if it be done a little space in Wine or in Oil,
and so it is put in medicine. This Onion shall be cut: and the inner part and
the utter shall be thrown away. For the utter part is venomous for too much
heat, and the inner for too much dryness: but the middle part is full
temporate and according to medicine.

Libro. 20. cap. 17. Plinius speaks of Onions and says, that among the
Greeks is many manner kind of Onions, and all their smell makes eien watrie,
and the most round are best, and the sharp and red are more bitter than the
white, and more raw than sod, and is both set and sown, and bears no seed
before the second year when it is sown. It bears seed, and then the head
is corrupt and destroyed. The head comes of corruption of the seed that is
sown, and seeding is corruption of the seed that is sown, and seeding is
corruption of the head. Onion seed will be sown in land that is dolue and
cleansed of roots and other herbs: the seed thereof is cut and gathered
when it begins to were black or it be all ripe. Onions be best kept in
straw, and to keep them without rotting, they must be washed with luke warm
hot salt water, and so they dure the longer, and be the better to eat: but to
set and to sow, they be better kept in sacks. And many men hang Onions and
Garlike in smoke over the ^^re, and be so kept, for they should not spire and
grow. Often Onions and Garlike spireth, though they be not in earth, but it be
let by craft and cunning. Also li 20. ca 7. he says, yt wild Onions be not
full wholesome nor full good to eat, but they be full medicinable, and heals
dimnesse with the smell, and exciteth most with unction, and heals boiches,
and cures hounds biting, with honey and with wine, and helps against biting
of Serpents, and heals tingling of ears and deafness, and helps ach of
the reins, with Goose grease or with honey, and pourgeth and heals wounds,
meddeled with honnie. Huc vsque Plinius.

( Addition.
Squilla, the sea Onion, the white field Onion, and Bulbus, which some call
Liltes of Alexander: temperate in heat and dryness.)

Of Cucumere. chap. 44.
CVcumer, cucumeris, is an herb of whom Isid. speaks, lib. 17. and says,
that those herbs Cucumers have that name, for they be bitter sometime, and
may not grow sweet, but if ye seed thereof be put in sweet milk meddled with
honey. And Dioscorides says, yt the kind of this herb is cold, and slaketh
the womb, and helps the stomach, and succoureth faint hearts with smell,
for leaves thereof stamped is medicinable for biting of hounds, and the seed
thereof bruised and drunk with sweet wine helps the sore bladder. Lib. 12.
cap. 2. and 3. Plinius says, that some Cucumer is tame, and some wild, and
the root thereof is white and gross, and of the juice thereof, is made an
Electparie, that is needful in many medicines.

( Addition.
Cucumbers are cold and moist, in the second degree.)

Of Cucurbita. chap. 45.
CVcurbita is a name of Greek, and the original thereof is uncertain to
Latins, as Isi. says li. 1^. and Plin. says the same, that there be many
kinds thereof. And some Cucurbita is tame, and some wild. The tame spreads in
boughs, and branches, and leaves, as a Uine does, and binds it self with
certain fastenings and bindings as a vine does, and bears somewhat white
flowers, which spring out thereof: namely against night, it bloometh and
bears blossom without vndersetling, but the fruit thereof fails and
rotteth, without that it be reared up from the ground, and rayled with logs,
and rods: as it were a vine. Platea says: that Cucurbita is cold and moist of
complexion, and temperate in qualities, and is most found in hot countries and
lands. Of the seed thereof sown, comes an herb, and thereof comes white
flowers, and fruit at the last, full of seed and of pith, and the rind
thereof is first soft, and then hard as a tree, when it is ripe. The fruit
thereof when it is new, accords to meat, and the seed to medicine. The
seed thereof has virtue to depart, and to shed hard matter: for the
substance thereof is subtle, and helps therefore against the stopping of
the liver and reins and bladder, and is to such, as have the Fever ague, both
meat and medicine, roasted or fried, for it purges the matter by urine, and
lareth and abateth the heat, and comfort the sick. The seed thereof is
gathered when it is ripe, and washed, and dried in the Sun, that it be not
corrupt by superfluity of moisture, and is kept three year in a dry place.
Huc vsque Plat.

And Plinlus says, that the juice of this herb, helps against the evil
that is called the holy fire, and against ye swelling of eyes, and abateth ache
of the ears, if it be milk hot put therein, and powder of the seed thereof,
fills up hollow wounds: and ashes of the rind helps against burning. Li.
20. cap. 4. Plin. says, there is a wild Cucurbita, as great as a finger, and
grows in stony places, and the juice thereof helps much the stomach and
guts, and the palsy of the loins and reins. The pith thereof with wormwood
and salt, does away tooth ache: juice thereof heat with vinegar, fasteneth
teeth that wag. The substance thereof without seed, heals postumes of the
feet: wine heat therewith, does away reeses of the eyes: leaves thereof sod
and stamped, helps wounds: seed thereof dronk with wine, overcomes venime,
and shall not be eaten, for it breeds swelling. Li. 17. Isid. says, that
wild Cucurbita is the same ye Coloquintida is, a manner Withwinde, a well bitter
herb, and springs in branches toward the ground, as Cucurbita does, and
has great leaves with heavy smell, as Cucurbita has, as Isid. says there.
Look before De natura Colloquintide. It seems, that the first manner
Cucurbita bears gourds, and that the worst manner cucumer bears Pinopins.

( Addition.
The Gourd is cold and moist in the second degree, whereof two kinds are
called Pompeons.)

Of Celidonia. cap. 46.
CElidonia is an herb with yeolowe flowers, the fruit staineth them that it
touches, and is called Celidonia, for it springs or bloometh in the coming
of Swallows, as Isid. says lib. 17. For a Swallow is called Celidon in
Greek. Or else as Isidore says, it is called Celidonia, because it helps
Swallows birds if their eyes be hurt or blind. And Plinius rehearses the
same, and says, that by the juice of Celidonia, Swallows eyes turns again
to the first state, if they be hurt or put out, and has virtues that be noble
and good, and dissolueth, draws and wasieth, as Dioscorides says, and
abateth ache, and purges the head, and menstruall blood, and cleanses the
Mother, and cure the F^ster and Canker of the mouth, as Plinius says, and
Dioscorides, and Platearius also.

( Addition.
Selidoniae, Salendine, it is called, Fig-wort, and Marsh Marigolde. The two
Selandines are hot and dry in the third degree. The Marsh Marigolde is not
used in Physic.)

Of Centauria. cap. 47.
CEntauria is a right bitter herb, hot and dry in the third degree, and is
called therefore the gall of the earth, as Isidore says: for one that was
called. Acheronecentaurus found and knew first the virtue thereof, as Isidore
says, lib. 17. And thereof is two manner kinds, the more and the less: the
first has more greater blossoms and f^^^tes, and is of more virtue than the
less, as it is said in Platearius.

And Constant. says there, that it is said, that the root of the more is hot
and dry in the second degree, and has some bitterness with sweetness, and
has the^fore virtue of fastening together, and of the bitterness it has
virtue of tempring and of dealing, and the leaves and flowers have more virtue
in medicine, than other things thereof. This herb abateth womb ache, and
cleereth sight, and vnstoppeth the spleen and the reins, and cures the pally,
and slaieth worms of the womb meddled with honey, the root thereof closes and
helps wounds, as Plinius says, and Dioscorides, and Platearius also.

( Addition.
Centorie, the herb is bitter, and of two kinds, the great, hot and dry in
the third degree, the less hot and dry in the second.)

Of Daphni. cap. 48.
THe Laurel tree is called Daphnis in Greek, and Laurus in Latin, as Isidore
says, li. 17. and this has the name Laurus of Lau^, praising: for in great
worship and praising Conquerors were sometime crowned with Garlandes of boughs
of the Laurel tree. In old time it was called Laudea, but afterward D. was
changed into R. and the Tree was called Laurus, as sometime ye vndertide, was
called Medidies, as Isi. says. And ye Greeks call this tree Daphnes, for it
is always green winter and su^mer. Therefore ^^ctors were specially crowned
therewith, as Isidore says: and says thereto, that the common fame is, that
only this tree is not smit with Lightening, therefore it was hallowed to
Apollo, by old time.

Of this tree speaks the Master in history, super illud verbum, Consiluit
Isaac Dominum, super Genesis 17. and says: that Rebecca for trembling of Nations
that she had seen in them that perished, she laid a manner Laurel tree that
she called Tripodem, under her head, and sat her upon boughs of an herb
that was called Agnus castus, for to use very Revelations and sights, and not
fantasies.

Lib. 16. cap. 30. Pliny speaks of the Laurel tree and says, that this
Tree is properly hallowed to triumphal worship of Conquerours, and is had in
houses of Emperors and of Bishops, for it worshippeth the house, and makes it
fair. And there is two kinds, one is called Delphica, and the other Ciprica:
With the Laurel Delphica, the Delphes were first crowned, when they were first
Uictors. And afterward with the Laurel Ciprica the Romans crowned their
victors. And now is many manner kind of Laurel tree, but they be diverse in
green color and in greatness of leaves, and in likeness of Bays: and is a
tree of many manner kind. And Plin. reckons thirteen manner kinds of the
same tree, among whom he reckons one manner kind, that was hallowed to the
great Jupiter, and to Appollo Delphicus. Therefore the land that bears
Laurel tree, is safe from lightening both in field and in house, and Appollo
used not to give answers, but in presence of Laurel trees.

And some men supposed, that this tree was according to the service and worship
of God, and for that cause it was had in worship in Triumphs and victory. And
it was not lawful to defile ye Laurel tree in dishonest and unlawful uses, for
it should be offered and set upon Altars to please the Gods therewith.

The Emperor Tiberius Caesar, in thundering and lightening, used a Garland of
Laurel tree on his head, against dread of lightening, as it is said. Also
there Plinius tells a wondrous thing, that the Emperor sat by Drucilla the
Empress in a certain gardeine, and an Eagle threw from a right high place, a
wonderful white Hen into the Empress lap whole and sound, and the Hen held
in her bill a bough of Laurel tree full of Bays, and Diuinors took heeds to
the Hen, and sowed the Bays, and kept them wisely, and of them came a Wood,
that was called Silua Triumphans, as it were the Wood of worship, for victory
and masterie: for afterward the Emperor bare Laurel tree in his hand, and a
garlande thereof on his head. And afterward other Emperors in ye same wise
should be crowned with Laurel tree of the same wood, when they had victory. Huc
vsque Plin. And Diosco. tells more of the Laurel tree and says, that it is a
tree of seemly shape and of great smell, and is good and of wonderful virtue,
for ye green leaves thereof, that smell full well, if they be stamped,
heals stinging of Bees and of Waspes, and does away all swellings, and
keeps books and clothes that it is among, from mothes and other worms, and
saves them from fretling and gnawing. The fruit of Laurel tree are called
Bays, and be brown or red without, and white within and unctuous.

They be round in shape, hot in complexion, and dry in the second degree,
with subtle substance and virtue of pourging and comforting, therefore they be
profitable to be put in many medicines. Of Bays is made precious oil, that
helps against many evils and cold passions.

( Addition.
The Bay tree is of some taken for the Lauriell: notwithstanding they are two
several trees, and yet the Lauriell is rather an herb than a tree. Read Dod.)

Of Diptanno. chap. 49.
DIptannus is a medicinable herb, and the root thereof accords most to
medicines. And the substance thereof shall be whole and not pearsed, and
falls not to powder when it is broke, and has virtue to dissolve and temper,
to draw and wast venime, and venomous biting, if it be dronk and laid to the
wound, as Dioscorides says and Platea also.

And it is said, that it has the virtue of ^riacle in many things, with few
things put thereto, and exciteth menstruall blood, and brings out the
Secundine, the bag that ye child is in, in ye mothers womb, and brings out a
dead child of ye mothers womb, and helps them that have the falling evil
and the palsy, with juice of rewe, as he says.

In Pli. li. 26. ca. 8 it is said, that a Hind taught first the virtue of
Diptannus, for she eats this herb, that she may calue easelyer and sooner:
if she be hurt with an arrow, she seeks this herb, and cateth it, which
puts the iron out of the wound, as Basilius says in Exameron, and Ambrosius
and the Expositor super ca. where he speaks of Hind calves. Isidore says,
that this herb grows in many places, but that that grows in fat fields,
is little worth, and that that grows in dry places and stony is best, and a
little thereof tasted, heateth the mouth, as he says. And libr. 17. Isidore
says in this manner, Diptannus is a mount in Creta now called Candie, and
thereof this herb Diptannus has the name. Virgil says, that a Hind
wounded, goes about in the lands and seeks this herb Diptannus. This
herb is of so great virtue, that it drives and puts iron out of the bedre:
therefore beasts smitten with arrows, eat thereof, and drive the iron out of
the body, for this herb has a manner might of war, to drive out arrows, and
darts, and quarells, as Isidore says.

( Addition
Dictani of Candie, whereof are three sorts: the right Dictani is hot and dry
like Heneroyall, but it is of subtiller parts, the other not so good.)

Of Draguntea. ca. 50.
DRaguntea is an herb and has that name, sea the stalk thereof is
(...)keled as an Adder, and has the lykenes of an Adder, or of a Dragon, as
Isi says, lib. 17. Many men call this herb Serpentaria or Colubrina, for it
has a red flower departed and shaped as the mouth of a Serpent, and out of the
middle thereof springs as it were an Adders tongue, sharp, black and round,
and in the middle of the flower thereof rises as it were an head with great
seed and round first green, and then red when it begins to ripe. This
herb has great virtue and might, as Diosc. says, for the root thereof
dried and made to powder with water of Roses ^i^anseth the face, and makes it
clear and of good color, and heals the Fester with French soap, and dries
it up, and makes the mouth thereof so wide, that the bone that is within
broken or rotten may be drawn and taken out at the full, and helps the
Canker with vinegar and hot lime. Leaves thereof sod in wine, ripeth Postumes
and botches. Juice thereof helps hearing, that is hurt and grieved by cold,
and cleereth the sight, and exciteth menstruall blood, and destroys the
Emoroides, and dries the nether veins that run full of blood.

The juice thereof drunk, makes a woman have child before her time, and
drives and chaseth away serpents with the smell, and a beast that is baulmed
with the juice thereof, shall not be hurt of a serpent. Huc vsque Diosc. and
Platea.

( Addition.
Dragons are of three sorts, Mayor, Minor, and Palustris. Their roots and
fruit are hot and dry in the third degree.)

Of Draganto. cap. 51.
DRagantum as Plat. and Auicen mean, is a manner gum of a certain tree, of
the which tree the kind humor is hardened by norishing of heat, or by
strengthening of cold, and thereof is treble kind, for some is white, pure,
and clear, and that is best. And some is some deal red and citrine, and that
is not so good as ye white, that has no earth meddled therewith.

The white accords to cold medicines, and the red and the citrine to hot, and
may be saved and kept forty year, and has virtue of cooling, of moysting,
and of cleansing, and that it has of cold and of moisture: and has virtue of
fastening things together, of the virtue of gum, and helps against the evils
of the breast, in Electuaries and sirops, for it moysteth the dry breast, and
restores humor that is lost, and abateth the rough, and bealeth chipped thins
and whelkes of the lyppes and of the mouth, and cleanses the face, and makes
it white, and helps them that have gowles, and against the bloody flux, as
it is said in Platearius.

Of Ebeno. chap. 52.
EBenus is a tree growing in Aethiopia, with black color, and is a plain
tree, and smooth in groping and handling, and is hard and heavy, and so for
straitness of pores, it sinketh anon in water down to the ground, as it is
said in lib. Vegitabilium, and is somewhat sower and biting in savor, and
takes fire anon, if it comes nigh thereto, and makes a loft and sweet smoke
and smell, and shows read color, if it be froted on the r^^de, and has
virtue to purge, and to comfort, and therefore it is put in Collirijs, as Plin.
says and Diosc. also. Coilirium is an ointment, that helps eyes. Lib. 17.
Isi. speaks of this tree Ebenus and says, that it grows in Inde and in
Aethiopia, and tourneth into stone, if it be long beaten. And the tree thereof
is black, and the rind is smooth, as the rind of a Laurel tree, with diverse
speckes: but that that has no speckes is best, if it be light and smooth as an
horn. It is often set by cradels, for black sights should not fear the
children, as Isid. and Virgil say. Plini. praises this tree Ebenus li. 12. ca.
5. and says, that Hebenus is the most precious tree, and therefore the
Aethiopes offered this tree Ebenus, with gold and yuorie to Emperors, in steed
of tribute: and so it is read, that ye Queen of Saba, gave such things to
Solomon the King. 3. Reg. 10.

( Addition.
Hebenus a tree whereof the wood is black as iente within, and bears neither
leaves nor fruit. First book of kings, and tenth chapter, after Geneua
translation.)

Of Edera. chap. 53.
IUie is called Edera, Hedera.
and has that name, for it cleaves to trees, as Isi. says: or it has the
name of Edus, a Kid, for it multiplieth milk in Goats, that eat thereof, and
with that milk Kids be fed and nourished. The root thereof pearceth things
that be full hard, and is cold of kind, and betokens, that the ground is of
cold kind, that it grows in, and is long green, and has sower and biting
savor. And 16. li. ca. 33. Plin. meuneth, that of Iuie is double kind, white
and black, male and female. The male is harder in leaves, and more fat and
greater. The white Iuie has white fruit, and the black has black.

Often Poets are crowned with Iuie, in token of noble wit and sharp, for the
Iuie is always green. And they went crowned with Iuie, that served in the
temple of Liber pater, that called Bacchus also, and so this tree was hallowed
to Bacchus God of wine, and to Mars.

Also therefore the great Alexander crowned his Knights with Iuie, when they
had the victory of Inde, as Plinius says, by ensample of Liber pater, that
dressed the Basnets of his men, with stalks of Iuie. And is a tree that
stretches much upward, while it finds a tree or Wall, whereon it may creep
upward, and has boughs and braintches and berries, but they be bitter. The
shadow thereof is noifull and grievous, and strong enemy so cold, and most
loved of serpents, and breaks walls and graves: therefore wonder it is, yt it
was in worship among men in old time. The leaves thereof be cloue with corners,
and heavy smell, plain and bitter, and worntes lark under ye shadow thereof.
Also ca. 34. the kind of Iuie is full wonderful in knowledge and assaieng of
wine: for it is certain, yt if wine meddled with water, be in a vessel of Iuie,
ye wine fleeteth over ye brink, and the water abides. Huc vsque Pli.
Dioscorides says, Iuie is medicinable, though it be bitter, and is strayning,
and heals the bloody flix. Juice of it dropped in the nose, purges the head
and abateth the ache of it. Juice thereof heat with oil put in ye ears,
helps against deasenesse. Also Iuie is compounded of contraries, and works
in contrary causes: And therefore, it has virtue of riping, of drawing and of
cleansing and of easing: and therefore often the leaves thereof be laid to
sores. The Gum thereof dissolueth and tempreth, and helps against the stone.
A Goat bucke fed with Iuie leaves, makes the more sharp blood to break the
stone in the bladder and in the reins. And there is a manner Iuie, and deaw
falls on the leaves thereof, and wereth gleymie, and turns to glewe: the
virtue thereof is great, and assayed by Physic, for smoke thereof exciteth
menstruall blood, and brings out the Secundines, the bag that the child is
in, in the Mother, and abateth the reume, and comfort the head and the wit,
and helps against the Cough and against the stixe of the womb, and is
profitable to be put in medicines.

( Addition.
Iule is medicinable for many causes: The gum of Iuie kills lice and nits,
and being laid too, it takes away hair. It is unwholesome to sleep under
the Iuie, or in an Iuie bush. It makes the head light and dizzie.)

Of Elitropio. cap. 54.
Helitropium.
ELitropium is a dry herb, and has that name, for it bloometh in the
stinting of the Sun in Summer, when the day is longest or else for it bears
and turns the leaf about with the mouling of the Sun. This is the
Roodwort, and is called. Solsequium in latin, as Isidore says lib. (...). For
the flower thereof vncloseth when the Sun arises, and closes again when
the Sun goes down. And this herb is called V^^ruca, for it destroys and
does away waries, if it be drunk or laid (...) pluister wise, as Isi. says.
And Plat. says, that this hear be Solsequium, is called the Suniles spouse,
and is a cold heard and moist in the second degree, and the juice thereof
drunk, helps against venime that is eaten or dronken, and helps also
against biting of hounds and other venomous biting, if it be bruised and laid
to the wound. Also it helps much against chasing and stopping of the liver.

( Addition.
There are of two sorts, the great and the less, called Tornesol, hot and dry
in the third degree, both kinds of great operation. Dodoneus.)

Of Eleboro. cap. 55.
ELeborus has the name of the River Eleborus, Helleborus.
for there grows much thereof, as Isi. says. And the Romans call this
herb Veratrum, for it brings wit that is moved, into good disposition and
health, if it be eaten or drunk: and thereof is two manner kinds, white and
black, and is called white Eleborus, for it has white roots, and cleanses
and pourgeth white and fleumatick humors: and the black has black roots, and
cleanses black and melancholic humors. Dioscorides and other Authors
mean, that it is a full violent herb, and shall be taken readely and warely,
for it grieueth sore and slays soon, if it be vnreadely taken of any person,
and helps nevertheless against many evils, if it be taken in due manner,
as Dioscori, says. For it destroieth the fever quartane, and Anieth worms of
the ears, and else where, and powder thereof helps them yt have the falling
evil, and them that have the Liturgy, the sleeping evil, if it be meddeled
with bread, and flayeth mice if they eat thereof, as Diosc. says and Plat.
also. Of the two manner kinds of this herb, the white Eleborus is the better,
and is hot and dry of complexion in the fourth degree, and grows in
mountains and in moist places, and has leaves like to the leaves of plant
^^ne, but they be more long and more sharp in the end, and the stalk is a
cubite long or more, and the root thereof laxeth both upward and downwards.
And we shall never use Eleborus, but ye master be digested and made ready
before hand, and yet then fall wiselye. Therefore Hippocrates says, if thou will take Eleborus, move thy body, least that thou over sleep: and has virtue
to resolve moist matter, and to turn it to ventositie, and thereof comes
stopping of spirits, and death, as Dioscor. says, and Platea also. And the
black Eleborus, is much more perilloua.

( Addition.
Read Fuchsius, Mattheolus, Turdar, or Dodoneus. This is a dangerous herb, to
cause a deadly sleep, whereof are two kinds, black and white.)

Of Esula. chap. 56.
Ezula.
ESula is a tree that is hot in the third degree, as Physicians mean, and dry
also, as Diosc. says, and the root thereof is best in medicine, and of this
herb is many manner kinds. And the virtue thereof is now in milk, and now in
humor, now in seed, and now in the root. Therefore it is said, Lac Anabula
parit, Cacaputis semine gaudet: that is to say, Anabula brings forth milk,
and Cataputia seed: and Esula helps by the rind of the root. And so the
virtue of the first is in milk, and the scoud in the seed, and of the third
in the rinds of the root. This root Esula has plain leaves, and of this
herb comes humor that fretteth and gnaweth, and makes whelks arise in the
flesh and skin, and pourgeth flumatike humors, and helps against the
Dropsy, and other passions and evils that come of fleumatike humors.

( Addition.
Pityusa Mayor, great Ezula, Spurge Giant, and Pine spurge, of two kinds.)

Of Eruca, chap. 57.
ERuca is a white herb, sometime foone, and sometime wild, hot and moist, and
softning and opening, and comfort the reins, and cures and heals the
Palsy, and exciteth urine, and purges the bladder and reins and is good in
meat, and in medicine: and Bees loves and haunteth the flowers thereof, as
Plin. says.

( Addition.
Of this herb, is found 2. kinds: the one same, which is ye common Rockat
most used, the other wild.)

Of Enula. chap. 58.
ENula is an herb, and is often called Enula Campana, and thereof is double
kind, the one grows in gardens, and the other in fields, and has more
virtue in the root, for the root shall be gathered in the beginning of
Summer, and dried in the Sun, that it be not corrupt with moisture, and has
virtue to plain and smooth, and to cleanse and purge, and to comfort the
sinews, and to consuins and moist gleymie humor, and helps wonderfully
against cold cough that is cooled, and against cold passions and evils of
the spiritual members. Thereof it is written in Macers book: Enula Campana
reddit precordia sana.


The meaning is, that this herb makes ye breast and spiritual membes whole
and sound.

( Addition.
Inula, and Enula Campana, of some Elecampane, Scabwort, and Horse-heele,)

Of Epithimo. ca. 59.
EPithimum is the flower of Thime, that is a herb, and all the virtue thereof
is in the flower: For only the the flower thereof is put in medicines, as
Dioscorides says, and Platearius also.

And has virtue to purge flumatike humor and melancholic passions and
helps against the Quartane and Quotidian, and also against difficulty of
passing, as Constantine says, and against Stranguria, that is a little pissing
and often, and against stopping of the liver, and of the spleen.

( Addition.
Thime is named of the ancient Greeks and Arabians, Ephithymum, Time.)

Of Ebulo. cap. 60.
EBolus is a Weed, most like to Elerna Tree, both in leeues, and in stalks
and roots and rindes, in flowers and branches, and are good in medicines, and
have virtue to temper and dissolve, to consume and wast great steame, thick
and gleymie humors. And the juice of Ebulus helps against goutes, and
shrinking of sinnewes of feet and hands, and against the Dropsis that comes
of fleumaticke cause, and of cold. And helps also against swellyngs and
gatherings of evil humors between the skinue and the flesh in every place of
the body, whereof and in what place it be gathered. And Ebulus helps best
against ache and sores, that comes of strokes, beating and falling: for if
the patient be often washed with broth thereof, it abateth both ach and swelling,
and gives might and virtue to the sinews, and ioynis of boanes. This herb
Ebulus stinketh in smell, and is not kind in savor, but in working and in
virtue. In medicine, it was accounted best among men of old time, as
Dioscorides, Plinius, and Platea mean.

( Addition.
This herb is called Walwort, or Dane wort, and is very like unto the Elder
tree tops: of some called, Dane weed.)

Of Ficu. cap. 61.
THE Fig tree is called Ficus, and has that name of fruitefulnesse, for it
is more fruitful, than other trees, for it bears fruit three or four times
in one year, and while one ripeth, another springs anon or soon. And and
Fig tree of Egypt is more fructuous holden, and the stock thereof done in
water, sinketh anon to the ground, and rises and comes up above the water,
after that it has lain in the mudde, against the common course of kind, for
when it is wet, it should by weight of the moisture, abide under the water.
Before Pithagoras time, Hawks were sed with figs, and after he brought them
to the use of flesh, that is the stronger meat. It is said, that figs do away
the shriueling of the skin of the face, or wrinkles on the hands of old men,
if they eat thereof among their meat: and tells that full cruel Bulls
become mild anon, if they be tied to a fig tree. And he tells that the
fig tree may be made to bear well fruit, by remedy of a tree, that is
called Capriticus. Huc vsque Isido. lib. 7. cap. 7.

In libra vegitab. Arist. says, that the humor of the rind of a tree, that
is as is were blood in beasts, is white, and milkie in some tree, as in a fig
tree, and in a Mulbery tree, that is called Morus, but the milk of the fig
tree has virtue of running together, to make cheese, as the flower of Corde^
casealis. The humor thereof is full unctuous, therefore the fig tree bears
much fruit, for what is unctuous tourneth into fruit, and what is thin and
watrye, tourneth into leanes, which be broad, and cloven, and sharp in the
ends. It is said if the genitals be baulined with the juice thereof, they be
moved to lechery. And such moving is spoken of in the Gloss sup. Genesis 3. Ibi.
Fecerunt sibi de folijs sicus perisumata. Arist. says, that it happens that
the fig tree wereth barren sometime for default of humor, and sometime for
superfluity of humor: and in either case needs medicine. In default of
humor, ye Gardeiner does thereto couenable dounge and fresh water. And if it
be for superfluity of humor, then he pearceth ye tree with nails, and
voydeth the superfluity of humor, as it is said before, De arborum medicina
lib. 14. ca. 8. Plinius speaks all that is before rehearsed of Isid. and
says, that ye fig tree of Egypt bears most, and is like the tree Morus in
quantity, to leaves, and in sight: and bears fruit four times in the
Summer, but the first springs and is not ripe: and heerto the fig tree of
Cipris is like, and burgeneth and brings fruit four times, but the
burgening thereof ripeth not, except they be first carved and cut, that the
superfluity of milk may pass out thereof. And knops thereof comes forth
without leaves in the end of boughs, and is like to Populer in the root, and
to Olive in leaves, and like thereto in greatness of the tree. And the fig
tree is a tender tree, and feeble, and is therefore soon grieved with strength
of cold, and namely when it begins to burgen or spring.

Also libr. 12. ca. 6. Plin. says the same: and he says, that there is a
fig tree of Inde, that bears certain small apples, and has many boughs
and thick, that bend so to ye ground by their own weight, that they stick in
the ground, and of them spring new branches about ye old stock, and makes so
great a shaddowe, that herds come and abide there under for succor against
heat, wind, and weather. And the ouermost boughs of this tree, stretch
upward full high, and the side voughes spread wide about the old tree, as it
were grown, and make a great shadow, and the leaves thereof are full broad,
and shaped somewhat like to a shield, and bears many apples, but they be
small, and pass uneath the bigness of a Bean, and be so riped among the
leaves with heat of the Sun, that they are so sweet, that it is accounted a
miracle. Heereto lib. 15. cap. 19. Plin. says: That there is a tree, that is
called a wild fig tree, and has another name, and is called Caprificus, and
ripeth never, but it gives to other, that that it has not of it self: for
often Gardeiners make cliftes in the rind and root of a fig tree, and graffe
thereon graffes of the Caprificus, and by couenable graffing thereof, the root
is disposed, and receives new air, and good humor, and also might and virtue
and green color. And so white humor, that is matter of figs, passes into
nourishing thereof, as it is rehearsed before, in ye tretise De causa
fructificationis arbonim etc herbarum. Also he says, that some trees shall be
set nigh Trees that bear well fruit, that blasts of wind may be borne
therefrom to the fig tree: and thereto the Southern wind is better than the
Northern wind, for the Northern wind grieueth the fig tree more than the
Southern wind. Therefore fig trees thrive the less in the North Country:
for the white humor thereof is some wasted and removed, where such wind has
the masterie. Of the effect and doing of the fig tree, touching the roots,
leaves, and rind, and fruit: look before In tarctatu de Carica, in litera C.
There it is openly contained.

( Addition.
Ficus satiua, and Ficus Siluestris. Figs pound with Salt, Rue, and Nutmegs,
withstandeth all poison, and corruption of the air: and this was a secret
Preservative, which Mithridates King of Pontus, used against all venime and
poison.)

Of Fraxino. ca. 62.
THE Ash is called Fraxinus, and is a tree that grows in rough places and in
mountains, as Isid. says, and thereof be made shaftes, and spears. Therefore
Ouidius says, Et Fraxinus vtilis hastis, that is to say: Ash is good for
shaftes and spears. Lib. 16. ca. 13. Pliny says, that among trees, kind has
gendered the Ash right profitable, and is a high tree, round and even, and
sharp upward in lease, and is made noble by praising of Homerus, and the
spear of Achilles, and is in some place so like to the Cedar tree, that it
beguileth the buyers, if the rind be away. The leaves thereof helps against
venime, and the juice thereof wrong and drunk, helps best against Serpents.
And Ash has so great virtue, that Serpents come not in shadow thereof in the
morning nor at even: and if a Serpent be set between a fire and Ash leaves, he
will fly into the fire sooner than into the leaves. In Greece ye leaves
thereof is poison to beasts, and grieueth not other beasts that chewe their
cudde, and grieueth not beasts in Italy. It bloometh first or twigs spring
thereof, and leaves not the leaves or it bear flowers. And thereof is double
kind, as the Greeks tell: the one is long and not knottie, the other is more
in leaves, and more hards, and like to a Laurel tree. Other men put difference
of the Ash, by diverse place that it grows in. That Ash that grows in
fields, has more crispe leaves: and Ash that grows in mountains has more
thick leaves, and of the leaves some be better than some. Huc vsque Plinius.
And Platea says, that Ash is a tree hot and dry in the second degree. The
rind and leaves thereof, with Anise and Mushrumpes that grows thereon,
accords to medicine, for it stauncheth the flire of the womb and spewing
also, if they be sod in rain water and vinegar, and laid to the stomach.

( Addition.
The lie that is made with ye ashes of the bark of the Ash tree, cures the
white scurffe: sees in the said lie, the Bramble leaves.

Of Fago. cap. 63.
Beech mast is good for Dear and hogs.
A Beeth is called Fagus, and is a tree, and the matter thereof is needful in
many things. And lib. 17. Isidore says, that the Beeth is a Tree that bears
mast, and has name Fagus, for sometime men lived by the fruit thereof, and
took meat thereof. For Fage is Greek, and that is to say eat, as Isidore
says, libro 17. cap. 7. And he says, that the mast of the Beech is cornered,
closed in a smooth skin, and is like to a Nut kernel, but the rind is more
soft. The marrow thereof is derest to mise, and fatteth Glires, that seems
Mise, and be somewhat more in quantity. And this fruit accords with Culuours
and Turtles, and feeds and nourishes them. The rind of this tree is full
profitable, and namelye among the north Picts, for thereof is made vessel,
serving to diverse uses and doing, as he says, cap. 10. Also there it is
said, that mast thereof is full sweet, and nourishing, and feeding. And flesh of
beasts that be fed therewith is full profitable, and may bo sodde and is
light. The Tree is not full sad and fast in substance, but pory and full of
hoales, and dureth therefore not full long, as he says, nevertheless the
substance thereof accords to many things, as to make shingles, and other
things that belongs to building. And substance of Beech that is clean and
pure, and not eaten with worms, is most needful to Glasiers craft, for of
ashes thereof with other things, and with blast of fire, glass is craftily
arrayed, and little fuel is found that accords so well in every manner to so
wonderful a work. The tree is smooth with many pores, and is soon eaten with
worms, and rotteth soon. And is soon cloue and set on fire, as Plinius
means. And Beech bears some flowers, as the Tree Tilia does, but not so
well smelling. Nevertheless Bees haunt the flowers thereof, and gather wild
honnie in hollownesse of trees.

( Addition
Men do not gather these Nuts of the Beech for man's use, yet Beech is sweet
and good for to cat, and almost as good in medicine, as is the kernel of the
Pine apple.)

Of Faba. chap. 64.
THe Bean is called Faba, and has that name of Ethimology of Greek, as Isid.
says, lib. 17. And is a manner Codwarr, and serves to Potage, and in old
time men used to eat thereof. And here of is double kind. One is called a Bean
of Egypt, and the other is the common Bean, which is sometime called Fresa,
for men gren often when they grind and break it, as he says. And Dios. says,
yt Beans be sown both in gardens and in fields. The stalk thereof arises
with edges and corners, and is great and hollow with knots, with a leaf or
leaves in every knop: and the leaves be broad and plain, and sound, and narrow
in the ends: and Beans bear white flowers, with red or black specks above in
the ends, with good smell. And Bees haunt much the flowers of beans. And in
the stalk be many coddes, that be think and long, and distinguished with in,
as it were many dens and chambers, in which the beans be set in their own
place, departed each from other: And the coddes be first green without, and
white within and soft, and hardneth little and little by heat of the Sun,
and is black at the last, and that is token of ripeness.

Dioscorides and Platearius mean, that the Bean is cold and dry, except it
be green, and is then moist in the first degree, and nourishes but little, if
it be eaten green, and breeds thick humors and swelling in the over part
of the womb, and greeneth therefore the stomach, and breeds thick blood
and melancholic, and also thick smoke, and greeueth the brain therewith. And
beans cause vain dreaines and dreadful. By seething and roasting thereof,
swelling ventositye is abated, but not all destroyed.

He ye eats Beans continually, both ach and gnawing in the guts and in the
roapes. Beans stop the spleen, and make hard the womb. Beans eaten with the
hulles be hard to defy, and breed much swelling, but the clean bean when
the hull is away cleanses, and so the cleansing thereof purges the face, and
cleanses the lungs if it drunk, and bealeth postumes of the teates and
pappes, and does away worms and blearinesse of eien meddled with roses, and
stencheth humors that fall and come to the eien, if it be chewed and laid to
the Temples, and stauncheth the blood that runs, if it be slit and laid to
a beine that is cut, and stancheth milk that runs out of breasts, and
helps them that have the Podagre and Goutes, if it be sod with sheeps
Lallowe, and laid to the sore, and smites against swellings and gatherings
and Postumes, if it be sodde in Uineger, and laid thereto in the beginning.

Libro. 18. cap. 12. Plinius speaks of the property and kind of the Bean,
and says, that among poulse that grows in rods, Beans is called the best.
And many meddle Beans with bread corn, to make ye bread yt more heavy.
Beans be dampened by Pithagoras sentence: for it is said, that by often use
thereof, the wits be dulled, and cause many dreams. Or else as other men mean,
for dead men's souls be therein. Therefore Vatro says, that the Bishop
should not eat. Beans. Among corn only the Bean springs with leaves,
and is full in wathing of the Moon. And is not sod in sea water, nor in other
salt water: and is sown before the going down of the seven stars, that be
called Pliades, and is ripe and gathered before winter. And loves most water
while it blometh, and drought when it is blossomed, and amendeth the land yt it
grows in, in steed of doung. Therefore in Thessalia fields ye Beans grow in,
be eared when the Beans bloome. In many places Beans grow without travail
of tilling, and namely, in Mauritonia, and in the lands of the North Occean:
but they be so hard, that uneath they may be sod. Beans grow in Egypt with
sharp pricks, therefore Crocodiles fly from them, and dread least their eyes
should be hurt with the sharp pricks of them. Such a Bean is x. cubits
long, with a head as a Popie, and therein Beans be closed, and that head is
red as a Rose: and those Beans grow not on stalks nor in coddes. The
Genicolatus and stalk thereof ha^^ ^enches and lar^e leaves. And the (...) is
somewhat bitter. The root thereof is eaten raw and sod. And is like in
quantity to the roots of the Reed. Rue vsque Plinius, lib. 18. cap. 12. And he
says the same chap. 17.

Virgillus inquit, intro et amurta fabam profundentibus, grandesiere came
promittit.

And one says, that Beans grow the sooner, and thrive the better if they be
watered in piss three days, ere they be sown. Hue vsque Plin.

( Addition.
Green Beans before they be ripe, are cold and moist: but when they be dry
they have power to bind. The wild field Bean serves to no use for man, that
is wholesome, nor scarce good prouender for a horse, except with Wheat bran
well baked and hard.)

Of Frumento. chap. 65.
Wheat is called Frumentum, and has that name of Fruendo, using in eating:
and thereof corn has his name Fruges, as Isidore says. And so the over part
of the root is called Frumen, and the savor of the meat is principallye
known. It is a property of Wheat to have eyles on high in the ear, and
grains and corn in hollow hoales. For in all manner Wheat the stalk
springs out of the root, and the ear of the stalk environed with small
holes, in the which the grains of corn be closed. And about the ear grows
small cyles and sharp, as it were darts, and thereof the ear has his name
Spica, for darts be called Spicula. And these eyles defend the ear, as it
were darts, for small Birds should not bite the ear, and take away the
grains of Wheat, nor other small beasts. And the stalk is compassed with
leaves, and bulls succored therewith, for it should not bend to the ground
by weight and heaviness of the corn in the ear. The stalk is called
Stipula, as it were Vstipula, and has that name of Vsto, burnt. For when it is
gathered, some of the straw is burnt to help and to amend the land. And
some is kept to fodder of beasts, and is called Palea: for it is the first
meat yt is laid before beasts, namely in some countreies, as in Tuscan. And
the kind thereof is cold, that it suffers not Snow that falls to shodde,
and is so hot that it compels Apples for to ripe. Huc vsque Isidorus, lib.
17.

Many manner corn is called Fenmencum, as Isidore says, and Pli. also lib.
18. as Wheat, Barley, Rye, and Meal, and other such, of whom it shall be
spoken afterward, each in his own place: But in all corn that is called
Frumentum, generally men shall take heed of the ground that it is sown in, and
of the quality of the ground: for some Corn thriueth in one ground, and
fails in another, and fordryeth, as Plinius says. And so it is to be
understood, of other corn and land. Also manner and time of sowing must be
regarded. For some corn is soon sown, and some late, for Winter seed is
soon, sown, and Summer seed is late sown. And some is sown under sorrow,
and some above, And some Wheat is sown in certain manner, and in time
certain: and Barley in other manner and time, and so is Meal and Commin, as
Hieronimus says expressly super Esaias. And man take most heed of couenable
time, both in sowing and in gathering of Corn. For Plinius says, libro. 18.
That it is done better in one time then in another, for Corn gathered in the
full of the Moon is saved from corruption. Also of fair weather and time.
Sow, is Serere in Latin, and comes of Sereno coelo, as Isidore says. And
Serenum coelum is clear Sky in this manner speech. And then men shall sow,
and not in great Rain and Storms, as Virgil says. And Plinius says
there, cap. 13. If the wind be too strong corn is apayred, and that in three
times, and state of the corn. When Corn bloometh, and when the blossom
falls, and when it ripeth. By any evil blast the ear fades and is
destroyed, and loses the fruit and corn. Also too much rain greeueth: for
then all is lost by cold humor, or else it turns unkindly into other herbs
and superfluity of leaves.

Also sodeine and immoderate heat greeueth, that is closed in a Cloud, for
while the humor is drawn into the inner parts of the root by strong heat,
then of hot humor and gleamie, Worms breed about the root. And by fretting
and gnawing of such worms, the substance of the corn is wasted. Also in Corn
and grains worms breed about the Jeaues, and destroy the grains of the
Corn, when the ears in rainye weather after passing heat be corrupt and
rotten. Also in passing dryness Corn lacks humor, and is so lost for
default of nourishing and feeding, or else green Flies breed therein, that he
called Cantharides, Cantharides, are log flies, yt be variable colored, and
very venomous, in operation and do also sting.
and fret all the thrift of the Corn: And sometime many long Flies more and
less breed therein, and destroy every deal. Also in the seed corn needs
cleanness and pureness. For as Plinius says there, cap. 17. If the seeds be
touched with Lallowe, or with grease, it is spilte and lost. Also in Corn that
grows, needs busily husbandry, for it needs ye Corn be clean weeded
and cleansed of superfluity of evil weeds. For as he says there, among the
best Wheats sometime grow evil weeds and venomous, as Carle and Rey, and
other such there comes for corruption and malice of the humor that is
drawn, or of might of the heat that works not sufficiently in all the
matter. Also there it is said, of corrupt dew, that cleaves to the leaves,
comes corruption in corn, and makes it as it werred or rustie. And among
all manner corn, wheat bears the price, and to mankind nothing is more
friendly, nothing more nourishing. But here of seek in littera S. and seek de
Mess and Segete.

( Addition.
The first and best kind of wheat, after the opinion of Columella, is read
wheat the second is the Spi^e wheat, and the third is called ye pound wheat,
or Su^mer wheat: Raw wheat chewed in the mouth is good for to be laid to,
against and biting of a mad dog. Wheat is most norishing seed for man.)

Of Farie. cap. 66.
FAr is a manner corn, and has that name, for sometime it was broken in a
mortar, before men had the use and craft of Mills. Of that comes Farrago, as
Isidore says, and is an herb that is of Barley kind, yet green, and the
fruit thereof breaks not to ripping.

( Addition.
Zea, far, Spelt is of two sorts, the one has commonly two corns or seed
joined togethers, whereof each grain is in his own skin, or chafe
covering. The other is single, and has but one grain. Spelt is of nature like
to wheat, but somewhat colder, drawing near to the nature of Barley, and
somewhat dryeng. The bread thereof is not much inferior to that is made of
Wheat, but it nourishes less. Of this grain is none used in England, but in
Almaine and Germany, fol. 131, Turner.)

Of Farina, chap. 67.
Meal is called Farina, and is the matter of bread, and has that name Farina,
of Far. For of Far or corn broken between Mill stones comes meal. Or else
that name comes of Farciendo, filling for when meal is made in bread it
fills ye womb. Or else meal is properly called Farina, when the corn is
well ground between Mill stones, and flower and bran meddeled and not
departed. And the stowre of the meal when it is boulted and departed from the
bran is called Simila, and Similago. Also it has another name, and is called
Pollen, and Pollis, and thereof comes Haec Polenta, and Hoc Pulmentum comes
of Pultes, as Isidore says, libr. 20. cap. 7. But some men mean that Polenta
is a manner Potage made of the most best and pured stowre, Thickened in milk,
and called pap for young children.
and has that name Pollenta of Polline, that is delicate meal, that flies
from the mill stone in ye mill. And is called Amolum by another name, for it is
thrown from ye mill stone for the lightness thereof as the stowre is that is
called Simila, small without greatness or weight: but Polenta has other
significations, as it is said in Glosa super Iosue. 5. Frumetie.
They shall eat polenta of the same year. And Haec Polenta is corn sod,
pilled, and hulled, and shalled with froting of hands, as though it were
pilled, hulled, and shalled, with beating and stamping in a Morier. And it is
called Polenta, as it were Pilenta, pilled and shalled in a Mortar: but what
name so ever it has, meal is good both in meat and in medicines. Thereof
bread is made by meddeling of water and baking of fire. Sometime thereof is
meat made for servant, and is called Cibarius, and is not full delicate
meat, and sometime sour bread meddled with sour dough, and some bake under
ashes, and some is baked, and turned and wend at the fire, and is called
Focacius, a Cake: and some is baked in an Duen, and is called Clibanarius. In
this manner of wise and many other by baking craft, bread is made of meal, as
Isidore says, li. 20. And all this manner bread comfort and nourishes, and
pleases man's heart, and restores that that is lost, and gives virtue and
strength to them that travail: but passing all other, fresh bread and clean
made of wheat, is most friend and accor^ine to kind: as Constantine says in
Dietis. Meal is ground at a Mill, and sisted with a Sieve, and meddled with hot
water with sour dough, and to have ye better savor, and knead and mould to
shape of loves, and baked afterward. And at last after many travails man's
life is fed and sustained therewith. Also meal is good in medicines when it
is meddled in ^^e manner with other things, that are according: for meal
meddeled with honey, heals and cleanses the face of scabs and of whelltes, as
Dioscorides says. Also meal of Wheat or of Rye sodde with Wine and with
grease laid to breasts and teats, heals and softneth the hardness that
comes in of tunning of milk, as he says, and ripeth Postumes and gathering
of evil humors, and slaketh sinews which be overcome, and spilt as it were
with the crampe, or shranke, as he says.

( Addition.
Many ways serves the use of flower, for Wafers, Egg-pies, Flawnes or
Custards, for the Summerset shiere Whitpot, and the Kentish Pudding, for
Pancakes and Friters, and the dainfye Fartes of Portingale, Sugar plate,
Biskets, Comfits, and Carawes, and last of all, the most euilly bestowed in
making starch to vlase ruffes for fondlings to fly withal, many ways besides
serves the use of flower needful and profitable.)

Of Fermento. cap. 68.
Sour dough is called Fermentum, for it makes paast fervent, and makes it
also arise, as Isidore says, libro. 20. cap. 1. Sour dough is compounded of
diverse virtues, and has substance and virtue like, therefore it has virtue
to heave paast and bread, and to change and amend the savor thereof, and to
turn into his likeness all matter that it is meddeled with, and has virtue
to draw soon evil humors out of the body, as Dioscorides says, and to
ripe and to open Postumes and Botches, if it be meddeled with Salt: and opens
the pores of the body by his subtilty, and dissolueth and tempereth humors,
and is called Fermentum in Latin, and Zima in Greek. And so paast made only
of meal and of water is called Asima, as it were Sima, without sour dough,
and Sima, sour dough reareth paast and bread that is meddeled therewith, and
changes the savor, and thirleth and distributeth parts thereof, as it is
said super Epistolam. 1. Cor. 5.

( Addition.
With Gran also called Curgings, and the dragges of Ale is made the famous
potage in Deuen-sheere, called Drouson.)

Of Fumo terre. cap. 69.
FVmus tar is an herb hot and dry in the first degree, and has that name,
for it springs and grows out of the earth in great quantity, as smoke
does, or fumositie that comes of the earth, as it is said in Placeari. And
the more green the herb is, the better it is. And is of no virtue when it is
dry: and is an herb with horrible savor and heavy smell, and is nevertheless
most of virtue: for it cleanses and purges Melancholia, sleme, and Cholera,
and helps against ye scabs and dropsy that comes of cold cause, and
helps them that have the Podagre, and stopping of the liver and at the
spleen: But this herb has a vice, for it breeds swelling and ventositie,
therefore the ventositie thereof shall be abated with Fenell, that it breed
not sretting and gnawing, as Platearius says.

( Addition.
Capnos fumoria, Fumeterre, is of two sorts, and of the common sort it is
called Fenistorye, hot and dry almost in the second degree.)

Of Feniculo. cap. 70.
FEnel is a common herb, and is of great virtue and might, and is hot and dry
in the second degree, and has virtue to temper and to shed, and to open, and
to carue and to cut. And that by subtle cause and qualities thereof, as it is
said in Pla. The seed, root, and leaves thereof accord to medicine. Thereof
Isidore speaks, lib. 17 cap. vlt. and says, that Latins call Fenell,
Feniculum: for the juice of the stalk and of the root thereof sharpeth the
sight: and it is said, that Serpents taste thereof, and does away the age of
their years: and ye Greeks call this herb Maratrum. Isidore takes this for
certain speech of Plinius. li. 20. cap. 14. Serpents (he says) makes the
Fenell noble, and they do away age by taste thereof, and restore the sight, and
makes it sharp with juice thereof, and says, that understanding of inwit is
arraied therewith, and dimnesse put off. And of the juice thereof full good
Collirium is made against dimnesse of eyes. Of Fenell is double manner kind,
wild and tame. The seed thereof drunk with wine, helps against biting of
serpents, and stinging of Scorpions. The juice thereof dropped into the ears,
slays Worms. And the juice thereof comfort and strengthens, and hardneth
the stomach, and abateth wambeling, and breketh the stone, and multiplieth
milk in the breasts. The root thereof purges the reins, and helps the
dropsy, if it be sodde in Wine, and heals biting of hounds. Lame Fenell does
all this, but Ipomaratum, wild Fenell works more stronglye, and does all
those foresaid things, as Dioscorides says.

( Addition.
Fenell is a most wholesome herb, the juice mixed with honaye clarified,
vnstoppeth the lungs, and cleanses the liver, etc.)

Of Ferula. chap. 71.
FErula is an herb, and the juice thereof is called Galbanum, as Isidore
says, libro. 17. Thereof is mention made Eccle. 24. where is mention made of
Storax and Galbanum. There the Gloss says, that Plini. says, that Galbanum
grows in Syria, in a certain hill, where plenty is of Ferula. And out thereof
Galbanum runs, as it were Rosen. And libro. 20. cap. 24. Plinius says, that
the seed of Ferula is like to Annet, and the leaves and the boughs thereof
sodde in Oil and eaten with honnie, accorteth to the stomach: but it makes
the head ache if men eat thereof too much. And a penny weight of the root
thereof dronk in two Cyates of Wine, helps against the biting of Serpents.
Juice thereof drunk in ye quantity of a Bean, says the womb. The green
pith thereof does away silth of the fare. The seed thereof dronken in Wine
stauncheth blood, and helps them which have the falling evil. And the juice
thereof helps cleerenesse of the eyes. Huc vsque Plateanus.

( Addition.
Of this Ferula, read Dodoneus. 2. bo. cap. 110. fol. 301.)

Of Feno. chap. 72.
GEye is called Fenum, and has that name, for it is fed and nourished with
flowers. A flower is called Flamma in some manner language, as Isid. says,
lib. 17. All herbs and grass which be ripe, or mowed and dried, may be
called Fenum: and namely if it accord to feed young beasts or old beasts,
for Heye is properly and right convenient meat to beasts. The Gloss super
Esaias. 40. speaks of heye and says, that in growing hey is green and fair,
and then hears flowers: and afterward is dried with heat of the Dunne, and
brought to powder at last, and so likewise man loses fairness by passing and
drawing toward age, and after draws to his death, and tourneth at last into
powder. For heye while it is green and springs, clotheth and makes fair,
downs and meadows, and makes men and beasts have liking to look thereon: and
comfort the eien with green grasie and herbs, and with flowers: and for
tender substance thereof, the moisture is soon wasted in the hot Sun. And the
herb, which sooned as it laughed while it bare flowers, is at ye last spoiled
and deprived of fairness and liking: For it fails and dries as it were
sodeinly, for hey that springs and grows this day, and is green, is the
next morrow dead and dry, and put into an Duen, as it is said in likeness of
the wicked man in Psalmo. Be he as heye that grows upon a house. Where the
Gloss says. The more higher hey grows, the less deeper be the moors and
roots, and grows the less, and the sooner dries and fails. And so Heye
is mowed, when it is full grown, and is put in the Sun to dry the better,
and is often raised, turned, and wended with pikes, forks, and raltes, for it
should not by superfluity of moisture appaire by the ground. And is then laden,
gathered, and made of heaps into cocks, and at last lead home in carts and
in waines, and brought into Barnes for diverse uses and needs: And hey that
grows in somewhat high places, and meanly dry, smells best, and is more
better to beasts then other heye that grows in low meadows, in marreis, and
in watrye places, as Plinius says. For in such high places and dry, the
humor that nourishes is more digested then in low places and watrye.

Of Flagello. chap. 73.
THE highest parts of Trees be called Flagella, and have that name, for they
suffer often blasts and winds, as Isidore says, li. 17. And some men call the
leaves there of Trees hair, and some call them Folia, as it were Fila threeds
for Foli^^o in Greeks, is Filuru in Latin and thread in English. And that is
because in leaves is some veins stretching out in their substance as it were
the ends. Therefore among Latins leaves he called Folia, as it were in
likeness of thread. And the knots out of the which spring leaves and
branches, he called Oculi, as it were even. For ^a^ru humor and third, that
has but little vnquositie, is drawene^ as reared by heabe from the root up to
the houghs, and breaks, out in diverse places by sharpness thereof. And
comes as it were out at so many even. And is there by working of the inner
heat, and of the air yt is without, turned into substance of leaves, as it
is said in Commento super librum, Vegitabilium Aristotelis.

And after the quality of the humor, that has yt in astry and the night for
feebleness of heat which works in the humor, leaves, be diverse in diverse
manner wise, as it is said before hayd in and same book V^^ a^itu^ de diyes
(...) quoad figura ^arian, soliorum. Look before in a same book in littera.

Leaves make fair the Tree and they defend the tender blossom flowers and
fruit, that it takes us wrong of strong blastes and storms of winds and of
weather and showers of rain. Leaves receive the driefts of hail and blasts,
and shouing of wind and showers, and strokes of rain as it were a shield, and
defends the blossoms and fruit. And leaves move about with a little Wind,
for then he light and thin. But they fall not soon for plentye of gleamie
humor till the fruit be ripe that is his under the leaves. Therefore leaves
spring and he green in springing time and in Summer, and fade and wither in
harvest time, and fall some and some against winter time and rot on the ground
at last.

Also leaves accord to medicines, and be meat so many beasts, as Juice
leanes, which winds and Goats eat most gladly, as Isidore says. Seek other
propertyes of leaves before in the same book, chap. 16.

Flowers (as Isidore says, lib. 18.) he called Flores, as it were flowers
fleeting and passing, for they fall soon, and be soon wasted and consumed.
Nevertheless in leaves be many manner virtues and gra^^^ of smel^ of savor,
of color, of smoothenesse, of virtue and of might, for then ^l^^se and comfort
the spirits with smell and the taste with savor, and the sight with color,
and the handling and tongue with softness and smoothness. And have many
manner virtues, for they cure many manner evils, and breed with western wind,
and ^^^le in the Southern wind, as Isidore says. Leaves beautify trees,
herbs, fields, gardens, and woods, with fayrenesse and make them pleasing
and lykeing with sweetness that they conceive of the dow of heaven. Therefore
Bees that gather house visit and haunt flowers because of gathering of honey
when sowres spring, they betoken change of time, and make men have ho^e of
fruit that springs thereafter. For flowers come, a(...)fore the fruit, and
are wont to leave behind them a hope that fruit shall follow; flowers come
and spring and break out of pure clean unctuous humor of the stalk of the
yard, and defleth not the yard, but beautifieth it, and makes it wonderfully
fair. Also often flowers open themselves in the Sun rising and close
themselves in the Sun going down. Many flowers for scarce and thin humor,
fall and wither by strong heat that wastes the moisture therein. Also flowers
sometime turn toward the Sun, and open themselves, and spread more and more as
ye Sun rises higher and higher, as it says in the herb Helicropia, yt is
called Solsequium also, or Turmolt. And many call it Cicoria, Succorie.
as it is said before C. And shows ye spring too late and in vntime, bode and
token sailing of fruit that should come thereafter. For such flowers be some
corrupt by sodeine cold, or with corrupt air, or if they spring to nigh winter
or harvest, then they ripe not for ^efalt^ of but beats as Plinius says libro.
20. ca. 5. And among flowers be sets the Lilly, Rose, and Violet, before
other, to beautify crowns of noble (...) of whom it shall be showed hereafter
Flos campi, Rose campion
is a special flower, and has that name, for it grows by it self in places
that b^e not ^^^ed neither eased with a shade, nor for dunged with dirt. And is
a little flower with a small stalk, and the flower is redish blood. Commonly in
ye flower he contained and distinguished (...) leaves, and neither mo nor
less; the virtue thereof is like so the virtue of Centaures, but it is not so
bitter of complexion. Centurie.
And though it b^e less in leaves and stalk then Centaure, yet was it deemed
of wise men in old time, no less worth in medicine then Centaurea. Centaure is
a less bitter herb, and is therefore called Serene. And thereof is double
kind, the more and the less, and has sweetness in the root, with a manner
bitterness. The juice thereof meddled with honnie, cleereth the sight, and
abateth swelling, and heals venomous biting, and helps against the deadlye
Postume, that is called Alitrax, and beats down the ma^^ice of the (...)
thereof, and lets the wildness of the matter, that it may not pass and
sp^^^d into the inner parts of the most noble members. Huc vsque Plinius,
vi^^pre.

Of Frctu. chap. 74.
FRuit is called Fructus, and has yt name of Frumen, as Isidore says. For
Frumen is the over part of the throat, and there through meal passes when it
is chewed, as Isidore says, li. 17. And thereof comes this name Fruges. Corn
and fruit of trees and of fields that we use and eat, is properly called
Fructus, though we speak improperly sometime, and call the brood of the
beasts, fruit. Also it is generally known, that the most noble and unctuous
part of trees and herbs, (...)
both in pith and in root, is often kindly drawn by heat, that blossoms and
flowers may pass out and spring in their time, and dispose the springing of
fruit, that matter of fruit may be gendered of the foresay be noble part, that
is so drawn out of the pith and root, and that the master may be nourished
and fed with goodness of humor and of heat, and defended with covering of
leaves, (...)
and be made perfect by heat of the Sun, and influence of the virtue of (...)
that the fruit may be taken to ye use of meat, when it is ripe at ^^st.
Green fruit and raw, and not digested, (...) bodies and make them swel and
^^mely bodies of children and of feeblesome, and breed in the womb long
worms; and other worms also. And nourish and feed evil humors and corrupt,
and appaire kind taste and savor, as it fares in women with cold, that wile
most green fruit that is for ripe, as Plinius says. But good fruit and ripe
afforde both to meat and to medicine, so that every manner fruit be taken in
due manner according, and drink be taken thereafter in couenable and due time,
as it is more plainly taught in li. Dietarum. Generally fruit is first green
and vndigest, and sour or bitter, but ye utter heat comfort the inner
heat, and makes digestion in ye sour humor, and dissolueth it, and the
earthy matter thereof. And the nearer ripe the fruit is, ye more sweet savor
and pleasing it takes. And fruit that grows most high in the tops of
boughs, and that is most straight before the Sun ripeth most hastily. Token of
ripenes is changing of green color or earthie and pale color, red, or
yeolow, and changing of bitter savor or sour into sweet and pleasing savor,
and liking to the taste. First, fruit springs green, and when it ripeth, heat
has mastry therein, and then fruit changes both color and savor. And ye
more hardness of earthy matter (...)ked and softened by might and virtue of
heat, and the more mastry moisture of water or of air has therein, ye nearer
ripe is ye fruit. Therefore ripeness of fruit is assaied, not only by sight
and color, nor by fast and savor: but by groping and brusing, if the finger
bruteth in thereto, and finds it soft, as Isaac says in Dieti^. And fruit of
trees that grow in mountains be more pure, more sauourye, and more wholesome
the fruit of trees yt grow in valleys and in low places. And that is for more
sweet and more pure, and more temperate feeding and nourishing, that is in
mountains, then in valleys, as Ari. says. Look before de diuersiete at boru^
quoad fructus circa^ sinem. And some fruit is first sweet and sauoury, and
afterward bitter and sour, as Mirabolani, as Aristotle says. Though such
fruit be not of himself good to eat, yet with other they be good and
medicinable. And sweet fruit, as Isaac says, is most temperate in four
qualityes, and be more temperate, and more moist and hot and more softning
then other. And cold fruit that is sour and hard, stops and constrains.
Nevertheless it comfort the stomach, and exciteth the appetite, specially if
it be eaten fasting: but and it be eaten after meat, it comfort ye mouth of
the stomach, and thrusseth togethers and shows downward the meat, and lays
and makes soft the womb. And if the fruit be sour and compounded of watery
matter and earthie, then it quenches sharpness of Cholera, and comfort ye
stomach, and dissolueth and departs thick humors and cold, and sharpeth
sweet humors, and gives to them virtue and might to thirle and to pass into
all the body. Unsauery fruit, in which watrye moisture has mastry, is less
worth then other fruit, and helps not the stomach, but breeds abomination
and wambling. And if fruit be perfect ripe, it has good savor and merry
smell, if it be not rotten, neither worm eaten, nor infected with evil
humors, nor with corrupt air. And such fruit is best kept, and dureth
longest in a clean place and dry, and namely in bey or straw. And rotteth
soon in a moist place or low by the ground. Also ripe fruit falls sooner
then the grain, and sooner by night then by day: for they be more heavy when
they be wet with the night dew, and fall the sooner. Of speaking of fruit this
suffices at this time, for much is showed of fruit before in ye same book, in
tractatu de arboribus in generali. Look there in A.

Of Germine. chap. 75.
BUdding is call Germen, and Germen is taken for a budding graffe, as Isidore
says, and has that name Germen, of Gerundo, bearing, and thereof comes
Germinacio, for in budding breeds the humor of nourishing, and the humor
and the virtue seminall.

And also kind heat thriueth and works therein, and is of most virtue and
might in effect and working, though it be of little qualitye in substance. For
the virtue of the root is drawn, and passes and turns into the substance
of budding. Therefore herbs accord best to medicine, while they budde and
spring, and have plenty of humor that comes from the root. And so budding
is called that that first breaks out of the root of an herb, or of a Tree.
For when kind heat is comforted, that is closed in the pith of the root,
then the root draws to it self humor, that is needful thereto, and that is
reared and borne upward by heat that is closed therein, and dried by air that
is without, and turned into the matter of budding. And for drawing cease not
in the root, increasing and springing cease not in budding, before there be
due perfection, and complement therein. Also heat of heaven thirleth and comes
to the pith of the root, and draws to it self the parts of the pith that be
most clear and thin, and most unctuous and pure, and fasteneth them together,
and brings them in by privy pores of the earth, and cease not to turn
them into substance of budding, as the Commentour says super librum Vogit. And
budding takes and draws green color, that is mean between red and
black by mastry of even parts that be fiery and earthie, for springing and
budding of earthie humor and thick and unclean, but by meddling of parts of
air and of fire, the color thereof is green, yt is accounted mean color
between red and black. Of budding comes the stalk, blossom, flowers, and
fruit. First spring many flowers, twigs, and branches, clipped togethers, and
kind makes them to keep and save kind heat and the substance of budding,
for the tender substance thereof might soon be hurt and grieved, but it were
defended and succored from outward noyances by twigs and spraies. It is soon
grieved with cold air, as hayle, rain, and with evil infectiue dew. And so
against such griefs it is defended and succored with many leaves and spraies
knit together, as it were with many garments. And this beginning of buddings is
fairness of earth, for all green things, ye spring of the earth come of
budding, and is sign and token of changing of time, and of coming of noueltye
of springing time, and warns that winter goes, and Summer comes with
novelty of fairness. And sometime budding of buds be gnawen and fret with
flies great and small, and with other worms, and then is no hope of fruit.

Of Gramine. cap. 76.
GRamen is a field herb, and has that name, for it buddeth, as Isid. says,
all herbs be gendered of humor of ye earth by goodness of heat, for the
heat of heaven comes within the earth, and gathers the most subtle parts
thereof, and turns them into kind of roots, which pight in the ground, closet
^ heat within themselves, and draws by virtue thereof humor of the ground
about to increasing and nourishing of the same root, and turns what is like
thereto into kind of it self, and sends the superfluity to generation of
leaves and of branches. And for roots be many fold, that come of the humor,
that is drawn by reason of moisture of the matter, therefore many herbs and
diverse spring of the budding, and grow together, and heal all the ground
about, and array it with green color, and with flowers. And the deeper the
roots of herbs be in the ground, the wider about stalks and leaves of
herbs spring and spread. In the beginning of springing of herbs, they
multiply themselves right fast, if they be not pared and ^ropt, and held
low: and if they be suffered in the beginning to grow too fast, then they
spire and seed too soon, and leese: too soon their fairness and green
color, as Plinius says. And herbs take diverse quality and virtues of the
ground that they grow in, and of quality of the humor that they be fed and
nourished with, as Plinius, Isaac, and other Authors mean. Therefore of
humors with contrary complections, sometime herbs and grass and all that
springs of the earth takes varieng and diverse working and virtue, as
Plinius, Constable. Isaac, and others Authors mean. Therefore as the same Authors
mean, herbs of mountains and of high places, be thinner and shorter then
herbs of Ualleys and of Medes, but these be good and according to sheep,
for they be sweet and wholesome, and meanly dry. And those that grow in
marreys, and in moors be more fat and large. But herbs that grow in
mountains and high plates be best of all. For as Isaac and Constantine say,
herbs of moors and marreys feed and nourish not best, for they brade watery
blood, and dissolve themselves soon from the members, and breed swelling and
gnawing and curling in the guts: But in contraryes be contrary doings. It is a
rule as Isaac says, ye rule is this. Among herbs if the root nourishes, the
seed thereof nourishes not. And if the seed of an herb nourishes, the
root thereof nourishes not. And grass comes of the grain, and is pleasing
in sight, and liking to beasts in pasture and meat, and comfort the sick
in doing, for as in roots, so in herbs and grass be many manner virtues, as
Palla, says. Herbs and grass love stern wether, rain, and great showrs,
for heat and color of herbs need much moisture. Herbs and grass grow and
spread in wild places, and fade without in strong cold, and in North wind, and
fordry and fail, as Beda says. And Dioscorides says, a certain herb, and
specially that that is called Gramen, has knots and branches spreading on the
ground, and broad leaves, and some deal sharp, and the root thereof is
knottie and sweet Oxen and other beasts eat gladly of the herb, and the
virtue thereof binds, and also heals and closes wounds, and binds and
stops the womb, and heals sores of the bladder and reins, and abateth
ach of the spleen. Hounds know this herb, and eat it to purge themselves, but
they do it so privily, that uneath men spy it.

( Addition.
Gramen Arundinaceum, the red grass. Gramen Marmum, our Ladies quishion.
Gramen Parnassi, grass of Parnassus. Read Dodoneus. fol. 510.)

Of Galbano. cap. 77.
GAlbanus is an herb, and the juice thereof is called Galbanum, and is like
in branches to ye herb Ferula: and as Varro says, Galbanus is the juice of ye
herb Ferula, as Isid. says, li. 18. This herb is cut in Summer, and juice
comes out thereof, yt is gathered and dried. Also ye best Galbanum is most
clean with many drops, and is like to Thus in color, with smooth grains, and
the grains thereof is not too dry, as Pli. and Dios. mean, and is dried in
Su^mer about ye stalk. The virtue thereof is fiery and hot in the third degree,
and moist in the first degree. And is feined with powder of Colophonie, that is
called Pitis in Greek, and with Beans shalled and broken, and the shalles
thrown away, and then that powder and the leaves meddled with ye best Galbanum
is softened and tempred. Uery Galbanum and pure may be kept long time, and has
virtue to dissolve and tempet, to swage, to draw, to make smooth, and to laxe.
Smoke thereof awaketh them that have the sleeping evil, and helps ach and
stopping of the spleen with vinegar, and brings a dead child out of ye
mothers womb, and cleanses and purges the mother, with honey the powder of
Galbanum slaieth long worms in the womb, smoke thereof constrains
menstruall blood, and drives away Serpents and venomous beasts, and worms,
and abateth tooth ach, as Diosc. and Plini. mean, and Plat. also. And there it
is said, that if Galbanum shall be put into medicine, it shall first be purged
of superfluity, and shall first be molt in a shell on the fire, and then put in
water, then the pure Galbanum shall fleet above, and the filth, as rind and
gravel shall sink to the bottom. But Dioscorides says, that Galbanum shall
be put in scalding hot water, and what sinketh shall be gathered, and what
fleeteth shall be thrown away.

( Addition.
Galbanum is also a gum or liquor drawn forth of a kind of Ferula in Syria,
called Metopium, griffly or crispe, not moist, nor too dry. Galbanum grows
upon the mountain Amanus in Syria.

Of Gutta. cap. 78.
GVtta right as Galbanum, is the dropping of a certain tree or herb, and has
another name, and is called Armoniacum. Twigges and branches of this tree or
herb, men of the country cut in Summer time, and the dropping thereof is
called Gutta, and Armoniacum also among Physicians, as Isidore says, and
Plinius also, the best kind of this Gutta is most clean and pure, without
meddling of earthie matter, and shall be white and fat as Thus, and seems if
it be broke, shining within and gummie, as Diosc. and Plin. mean, and smells
like Castorium. Bitter and sour Gutta is hot in the third degree, and dry in
the second degree, and has virtue to dissolve, temper, and to laxe, as it is
said in Plat. A scruple of it dronk with Oximel, heals evils of the spleen,
and abateth and purges smarting, uncleanness, and filth of the eien, and
slays long worms of the womb meddled with juice of wormwood, and helps
again the gouts meddled with hard pitch, and exciteth piss, and purges
menstruall blood, and abateth all swelling and bolning, as the Gloss says
super illum locum, Mirra and gutta, etc.

Of Gariophilo. cap. 79.
Cloves be called Gariophili, and be perfect fruit with sharp savor, and
somewhat black in color, hot and dry in working, and moist inwardly in
doing, and be less strong then other in their qualities, and be the fruit of
a certain tree in Inde. gathered in Summer time when they be ripe, and be kept
five year in great virtue and might: and they shall be kept in a place that is
neither too dry, neither too moist, for they rot in a place that is too moist,
and for dry in a place that is too dry, and be somewhat plain without, with
sharp savor and sweet smell, and wose some moisture, if ye nail be thrusted
therein. And sonie be joined with Powder of good Cloves, meddled with Vinegar
and Wine with good smell, and thereof they take moisture, and be uneath
known, for they be more sharp without then the other be, therefore that
sharpness is more without then within. But these yt be feined may not be kept
passing 20. days. Good cloves have virtue to comfort by the good savor of
the^, and to temper and to wast by the qualities of them, and they comfort the
brain and the virtue of feeling, and helps against failing of the heart, and
comfort well the spiritual virtue, and help also against indignation and ach
of the stomach, that comes of cold ventositie, for they help the natural
virtue, Huc vsque Dioscorides.

( Addition.
Cloves has virtue to comfort the sinews, also to consume and dissolve
superfluous humors, they be hot and dry in the third degree: sodden with
milk, it comfort the debilitie of nature. Sir T. Eliot. 2. boo. cha. 17.
Gariopillus is the cloue Bilowflowre, and Garlophyllata is Herb Bennet, whose
root smells as the Cloue.)

Of Genesta. chap. 80.
GEnesta, Broom, has that name of bitterness, for it is full bitter to man's
taste, and is a shrub that grows in a place that is forsaken, stony, and
untilled. Presence thereof is witness, yt the ground is barren and dry, that
it grows in. And has many branches knottye and hard, that be green in
Winter, and yeolow flowers in Summer, thick wrapped with heavy smell and
bitter savor, and be nevertheless most of virtue, as Dioscorides says. For
the broth of ye leaves thereof abateth swelling of the spleen, and helps
against the tooth ach, and straineth menstruall blood, and stauncheth the
bloody flire. And the juice thereof slays lice and nits, and the feed
thereof is bitter and black, and is in long cods and black grown, as it were
cods of Fetches of Pesen, and is good to the foresaid things.

( Addition.
Genista, Broom, whereof Besomes are made to sweep houses: Broom flowers
mixed with Swines grease, swageth the pain of the gout, being applied
thereto.)

Of Grano. chap. 81.
A Grain is the least part both of the seed and of the Tree, dealed and
departed and distinguished in substance. In every grain is both pith and
rind, in the which pith abides the cause and reason seminall, that a plant
may spring thereof, to multiply things of that kind, and to save them in kind
being. And so a grain is full little of substance, of pith, and rind, and
is nevertheless long and mighty in effect and virtue seminal. And as grains
be diverse in kind, so they be diverse in figure and shape, in place and
disposition. Hereof Aristo. speaks libro primo de Plantis, and says, That
some grain and seed is gendered in plants or cods, as it fares in Annes
seed, and in Feuell seed, or other such. And some is gendered in cods and
hulls: as it fares in Beans, and in other cod ware. And some bear seed in
has shalls, and in cappes without above the shalles, as Nuts and Olives. And
some grains be ordained in hard cores within the fruit, as it fares in
Apples and in Pears. Grains, yt be ordained in cods and in hulls be diverse
in many manner wise in place, for some be multiplied in coddes, as it fares in
Celidonye, which is a good herb for the eien, and some seed is enclosed in
the cod and hull, as the Erane and the Pease. And some in hull not closed, as
Wheat and other such. And some grain is neither in cod neither in hull, as
Early, but the grain is contained to the Straw. And some is double without
Interclose, as it fares in Celidonie, and some is double with Interclose, as
the grain of Nasturcium, Cresses, or town Cars. And some is double or treble
in diverse cells in the cod, as it fares in Mirtus. In the fruit thereof be
three celles, and in every cell three graynes or four joined without
Interclose, and thick between the grains, as in Casia fistula, and sometime
thick and soft Interclose, as in Cucumer, and Cucurbita. And sometime grains
have the Interclose of diverse substance, and of diverse kind, as in
Pomegranardes. Therein between the greynes, there is some interclose sad and
thick, and some small and thin. But as greynes be diverse in substance, so
they be diverse in figure and shape: for some be round, and some shapen topwise,
and some euenlong, and three cornered with many sides, as it fares in Ciceris,
Cherries. The euen-long greynes seems as though they were cloue in one side,
as it fares in wheat, and in other such like Greynes be warded and succored
with rindes, skins, or hulls and cods, for to save the inner pith, and kind
heat. Huc vsque Arist.

Of Gith. chap. 82.
Melanthium. Nigella, or black Poppie.
GIth is a manner pulse much like to commin, and is put in bread to make it
sweet, and is of black color, as the Gloss says super Esa. 28. And Platea
Aristotle, and Dioscorid, mean, that Gith is an herb hot and dry in the
second degree, and grows among corn, with small seed, and black, as it
were three cornered. And the seed is tempering and softening, and some deal
bitter, and has vertus to dissolve and consume, to waste and to open the
stopping of the spleen, and to swage ventoutie, and to abate the swelling of
Emeroydes, and to staunche the bleeding thereof, and to slaye long worms of
the wombs with honey.

And some mean, that this herb is Nigella, and the broth thereof slaieth
worms of ye ears, if it be luke warm hot dropped therein, if it be sod in
vinegar, and breketh postumes if it be sod in wine, bran, and line seed, and
Culuer doung, and so laid thereto in a plaster wise: and is accounted good
against Lepra, if it be laid too with Radish sod in wine, and a little salt, and
exciteth menstruall blood, and procures hasty bearing of child, if the woman
be smoaked therewith. If Nigella lie in wine all night, that wine drunk,
helps against the evil Seranguria, that is small pissing, and often against
the passion Illiaca, and shall not be sod, least it be too violent: for as
Constantine says, Nigella slays, if it be taken in great quantity.

( Addition.
Some learned men, suppose this Nigella, to be wild Commin, it is hot and dry,
in the third degree, take heed of this herb, if ye go beyond measure, it
breeds death.) D. Turner.

Of Ilice. cap. 83.
ILex, Ilicis, is a manner Oak, a tree that bears maste, and has that name
of Eligo, gis, to choose. For as Isid. says lib. 24. First men found and those
the fruits of this tree to their meat and food, before use of corn, men
lived by such mast in old time. Among trees that bear mast, this manner Oak
Ilex, is accounted most worthy and noble. The fruit thereof feeds many
Nations, as Plin. says li. 16. And Ilex is a tree with a great root and deep
in the ground, and most surest and saddest stock, and has most hardest and
thickest rind, with some manner riuels, and with many boughs and branches,
and by reason of many fair leaves and broad, it causes pleasant shadow, and
bears great plenty of fruit and of maste. The tree thereof is durable and
strong, and nigh unable to root, for stocks thereof laid under water, turns
as it were to hardness of stone, and the longer time they be in such moystie
places, the more hard they be. Therefore such timber is able to buylding of
Temples of Gods, and of Palaices of kings. And so for hard and durable matter
and kind of such tree misbeleeued men, made thereof Images and mawmets of
false Gods, as Plinius says.

( Addition.
Ilex, a tree called of some Holme One kind of it bears the grain, of
Apothecaries called Kirmes.)

Of Iunipero. chap. 84.
IVniperus is a tree, as Isidore says, and has that name among the Greeks,
for it grows broad and wide beneath, and narrow above, as fire arises. For
if it take fire, it keeps and holds it long time, so that if coals be
raked in the ashes thereof, it quenches not within a year, as it is said.
Fire is called ^ir, in greek, therefore this tree is called Iuniper' as it were
breeding fire. And some Iuniperus is great, and some is little and small, as
Isidor. speaks lib. 17. And either is a rough tree with pricks, and many
small leaves and sharp: and either bears, but the less bears more fruit
than the more, and bears many graynes small and round, and be first green,
and after purple, or as it were some deal read, when they be ripe at full.
Unneth this tree leeseth green color, either fruit or leaves, and is hot and
dry in the third degree, as Dioscorides says.

The fruit thereof is gathered in springing time, and is kept two year, and
has virtue to dissolve, to consume and to wast. The broth thereof if it be
sod in rain waler, helps against the six ye comes of sharpnes and
strength of medicine, if the patient he bathed therein. Of Iuniperus is made.
Oleum Iuniperu^, which is most effectiue against the Quartane, if the patient
take every day thereof, the weight of a drain in meat or otherwise, and
helps against the passion Illiaca, if the place be anointed therewith, and
helps them that have the falling evil, and, breaks the slone, if it be put
into the bladder, with an instrument, that is called Siringa. Siringa is a small
pipe, by the which the medicine is put into the bladder.

Wine in the which fruit of Iuniperus is sod, with dry figs, pourgeth the
breast, and does away the cough. Huc vsque Plutearius and Dioscorides.
Iuniperus grows in stony places, that is not ^illed, and in wilderness.
Serpents fly the shadow thereof, as Plinius says.

Therefore men suppose that the fruit there of helps against venime.

Addition.
The gum that woseth forth of the Juniper tree, is called Vernix. The operation
here of the whole tree, is hot and dry.)

Of Isope. chap. 85.
ISopus is a little short herb, and grows among stoanes, and cleaneth by
the root to the hard stoanes, as Cassiodorus means super Psalmum.

Dioscorides says that this herb is hot and dry in the third degree. The
virtue thereof is in flowers and in leaves, more than in the stalk or root.
And in summer when it bears flowers, ye must gather them, and dry them in a
clean place and dark that is not smoakie, and they have virtue to dissolve,
to temper, to consume, to waste, and to cleanse the lunges, and cleanses and
purges the breast of all manner evils that comes of cold, if it be sodde in
wine with dry figs, and the wine given to the Patient to drink: and does
aware ache of the stomach and of the guts: washing and bathing with the broth
and water that it is sod in, purges and cleanses the mother of superfluity
of humors.

This herb Isope heated in a shell, and laid on the head, abateth cold rume.
Volam codentem reprimit, and does away ache that comes of ventositie, and is
called Haec Isopus, and Hoc Isopum, also. And Authors mean, that ye middle
syllable thereof is short, and some say, that it is long. It is said in
Aurora.

Est humilis petraeque suis, radicibus haerens,
Et vitijs Isopus, pectoris herba medens.
These two verses mean, that Isope is a low herb, and cleaves to the stone
by roots, and is medicinable for evils of the breast, and who that can scan a
verse may know, that the middle syllable stands for a short syllable in the
seconds verse. And in Anticlaudiano, Alanus makes it long, and is made long in
three verses that follow.

Se celum terrae conformat Cedrus Isopo.
And again another says.
Pectoris herba cauas rupes incedit Isopus.
Yet follows another verse.
Ad Pulmonis opus confert medicamen Isopus.
So it is long in all these three vearses, that be heeere set for ensample
thereof. And Plinius says, though that this herb be little, yet it was of so
great authority among men in old time, that they supposed, that they might
not be cleansed in their Temples without sprinckling with this herb. Also
among the Hebrews, they that should be cleansed and purified, should be
purified with a bundel of Isope, as mention is made. Exo. 12. and Leuit. 12.
Levit. 14
and Number. 15. Number. 19.
Also the powder thereof helps against the dropsy, 3. Reg. 4.
as Dioscorides says, Psalm. 51.
and cleanses the body of wan color, John. 19
and causes full fair color in the face, and abateth tooth ache, Heb. 9.
and tingling of cares, and slays long worms in the womb, as he says.

( Addition.
Hissope, is of two kinds, and it is hot and dry in the third dergee. Read
Dodoneus.)

Of Iaceros.
Addition
THere is in Calicot a fruit, which they name Iaceros, the body of the tree,
is of the bigness of a pear tree: the fruit is of the length of two
handfulls, and as big as the thigh of a man. The fruit grows out of the
body of ye tree, under the branches, and some in the midst of the tree,and
some lower. The color is green, the fruit not unlike the Pineapple: but with
a more finer order of scales: when it is ripe it turns black. It is gathered
in December, it has the fast of a sweet Gourd, and of a peach, and bears
the relish of many fruits, as reports Jews Vertomannus in fol. 393 cap. 14.
lib. 2.

Of Iacincto. cap. 86.
IAcinctus is an herb with a purple flower, and has that name of a noble
child that was found dead among purple flowers. And the herb has that name
of the hap of the dead child, and is also like to a Uiolet in flower and
root, as Isid. says li. 17. Also there is a precious stone both of the same
name and of the same color, which is accounted among the twelve precious
stones in the Apocalips. Iacinctus is also the name of a man, of a stone, and
of a flower: The proper color thereof is the color of air or of heaven.
Purple has color of blood or of fire, and Byssas of snow. With these twelve
colors, bestments of Priests were arrayed in the old Testament.

Of Iusquiamo. cap. 87.
IVsquiamus in Greek, is in English called Henbane, Henbane.
and Canicularis in Latin, and has that name Canicularis, for in either side
of the stalk thereof grows as it were Crabs heads, as it fa^eth in
Pomegranards, as Isidore says li. 17

The mouths thereof be departed and cloven, and have diverse seeds like to
Poppie seed This herb is called I^s^na, mad; for the use thereof is
perilous: for if it be eat or drunk, it breeds madness, or slow likeness
of sleep.

Therefore this herb is called commonly Mirilidium, for it takes away wit
and reason. Isidore says, that this is a venomous herb, and has black
seed, red or white, as ^linius says and Dioscorides: the black is worst and
venomous, the red is less evil, and the white is least evil. Therefore the
use thereof accords most to medicine. and has virtue to constrain and
bind, and also to breed sleep: and those that have black seed, have black
leaves, and rough and hard, with Purple flowers, with hard leaves, thick and
sad. Those that have reddest seeds, have white flowers, and also butter
flowers, and leaves softer. And those that have white seed, have white flowers
and fat leaves and full of juice: the herb is cold in ye third degree, and dry
in the second degree. Therefore it abateth swelling, and binds the womb, and
stauncheth blood, and heals tooth ache that comes of heat, and abateth hot
reume. Huc vsque Diosc. and Plinius.

And Aristotle in libro vegitabilium speaks of Henbane seed and says, that
the seed of the Henbane is poison, and slays among the Parthians, and is
eaten at Jerusalem: and so by good ground or evil, where it grows, the
malice thereof and venime abateth or increases. Magister in historia sup.
Exodum says. That in the Crown of the chief Bishop, sloode a flower like to
an herb that the Greeks call Iusquiam^s. And under that flower in the utter
side of the Crown or Miter was a Circle of gold about the forhead, and the
noll and the circle was distinguished in treble order, and upon the circle
stood golden flowers like to Plantayne, from the Temple to the Temple. And so
in that these herbs were privileged, that the likeness of them were worthy
to be set in tokening and figure in the crown and Myter of the chief Priest.

( Addition.
Hiosciamus, black, yeolowe, and white: the black is most hurtful.)

Of Castanea. cap. 88.
CAstanea, the Casteyne tree, is a great tree and an high, and is called
Castenea among the Greeks as Isidore says: for the fruit thereof is double
in the likeness of Ginetall closed in an husk, and be taken out of the shale,
as it were by manner gelding. Therefore such Trees are called Castanie in
Greek, and have that name of Castrando, gelding. If this tree is field, Forth
of the old root springs young sprigges, which grovve to trees and bear
fruit.
there springs as it were a wood in the place all about, as Isidore says.
This tree is full profitable, for the stock thereof is good to building and
fuel, and the rind and the leaves to medicine. And though the fruit on ye
tree, be hid in a vile rind, rough and hard, yet when it is taken out
thereof, it is found sweet, and namely if it be sod or roasted. Isaac in Dietis
says, that this fruit is hot in the middle of the first degree, and dry in
the second, and is sweet because of heat, and sourish because of dryness.
But Casteynes breed swelling, if men eat too many thereof, and breeds also
head ach because of fumositie, that is closed therein: but to purge and cleanse
this fruit, it must be roasted or sod in water, that the earthy matter may be
wasted by the fire, and the fruit made less hard, and less fast, or else
that it may be tempered with softness and moystnesse of the fresh water, and
then it nourishes well, and breeds good humor, and tempreth dryness of the
body and the breast, and namely if it be eaten with Sugar Acata secundum alium
librum. And of cholaricke and fleumaticke men it shall be eaten with honey, and
is good by medicine, for it restrains wambling and spewing, and comfort
the gut that is called Ieiuniu^. Also a Casteyne tempered with a little honnie,
heals at best biting of a mad dog, or man's biting. Also this fruit made in
a Plaster, with Barley meal and vinegar, heals effectuallye swellyng of
breasts and of tears. Also the rindes and leaves burnt and made to powder,
tempered with vinegar, and laid to a young man's head in a Plaster wise,
makes hair increase, and keeps hair from falling. Huc vsque Isaac in
dictis.

( Addition.
Amongst all kind of wild fruits, the Chestnut is best, and meetest to be
eaten: for they nourish reasonable well, yet they be hard of digestion. Well
roast, and dipped in butter, they nourish best.)

Of Lauro. chap. 89.
THe Laurel tree is called Laurus, and is a tree of victory,and is worthy to
be praised in many manner wise. For singular excellency of grace and of virtue,
sometime Conquerours were crowned, with garlands of Laurel tree, when they had
the victory. And the Greeks call the tree Daphnis. Singular properties of
this tree we have set before in this same book, in litera A. Seek there, and
thou shall find.

Of Lentisco. chap. 90.
LEntiscus is a low and a medicinal tree, Mastike.
and is called Scinus among the Greeks and Hebrews by another name, as the
Gloss says super Dan. 13. The juice of the leaves thereof heals lyps, and
chinnes and whelkes, as it is said there. And is called Lentiscus, for the
prick thereof is blunt and soft and folding, for we use to call a thing that
is soft and plyant Lentus, as Isidore says lib. 17. Of the fruit of this tree
comes Oil, and of the rind comes Resina, that is called Masticke. And the
best breeds in the Island Chio, as Isidore says lib. 16. Dioscorides, Platea,
and Plinius mean, that the leaves of this tree be full hot and dry, and so is
all the tree, and have virtue to bind and to fasten, and to comfort, and
helps therefore against spewing, and all manner running of blood, and of
other humor. And the ^^^m thereof that is to say, Mistix, has such like
virtues. And this gum has the name of Mist^gand^ of the wing, for with
chewing it is made tough and cleansing, and hard as wax among ye feeth: and
to chewed, it cleanses and purges the gums of rotted humors, and fasteneth
wagging and rocking teeth; and makes them white and clean, and strengthens
and comfort the roots thereof, and cleanses and amendeth evil breath.
This Masticke is gathered in this wise. I^^the end of springing time the
rindes of this Tree Tenultus, be cut and fly, and the ground is made clean,
and clothes be spread there on, least the lycour that falls should fall into
the ground: and then the lycor that is fair and clear, and clean is best:
that that is dim and meddled with earth, is naught worth. Mastike cleanses and
purges the brain, and causes to spit much, and comforted the virtue of
digestion, and destroys ventositie and winds, and sowdreth and joins
together in a wonderful manner all broken things, as precious stones, and
other things that be broken, if it be molten on an hot tile or flate. And
Plinius and Dioscor. mean, that Lenti^cas is a tree with many pricks, and with ^
deep root in the ground, and cloven and divided in many parts. The fruit
thereof is like to Myrtus, but the greynes is less, and reared within when it
is ripe, and within is a manner rough wool, and the juice of that wool,
stauntheth the running and dropping of women.

( Addition.
Of the Masticke tree comes, the gum Masticke, which is in clear and small
greynes, of the quantity of wheat corns.)

Of Lilio. chap. 91.
THe Lily is an herb with a white flower ^ and though the leaves of the
flower be white: yet within shines the likeness of gold. Dioscorides and
Plat. speak of the Lily and say, that it is hot and moist. And some Lily is
wild, and some is same, and some bears a purple flower or yeolowe, and some
bears a white ^pure, and that is most mighty in working.

The virtue of the Lily ripeth dotches and sores, and therefore it helps
against Pastumes and botches, if it be stamped with Auxungia Greece. Also the
virtue thereof tempereth and fasteneth matter. Therefore it helps against
hardness of the spleen, if the place of ye spleen and the side about the
spleen be anointed with juice of Lilyes well meddeled and incorporate with
old Oil. And virtue thereof cleanses and purges, if ponder thereof be
meddled with Roses, and the, face washed therewith: and virtue thereof eases
sores, therefore leaves sod and laid to a sore that is burnt, heals the sore,
and the root thereof does the same, if it be bruised with oil, and laid thereto,
and virtue thereof tempreth and softeneth hard matter, therefore it brings
out menstruall purga^^on: and virtue thereof abateth swellyng, and helps
against postumes that come of swellyng ventositie, if the root thereof be
stamped with oil, and often said thereto. Huc vsque Dioscorides. And Plin.
says, that the Lily root makes the flower thereof worthy and noble in many
manner wise: for the root thereof drunk with wine, heateth biting of
serpents, and helps against ye malice and venime of frogs. And this root
sod in wine, and meddled with oil, helps Podagre, and knots of the feet, and
makes hair grow in places that be sealded and burnt. Also this root sod in
wine and meddled with honey, helps veins that he cut. Leaves thereof sod in
wine, heals sore wounds: and seed thereof brayed, is laid to the holy fire:
and flowers and leaves heal sore hotches. Huc vsque plin. li. 20. ca. 19. Item
in cod. lib. cap. 5. The Lily is next to the Rose in worthiness and noblenes,
and in a certain gathering of ointment thereof, is made a noble ointment and
oil, that is called Oleum Liliorum, as Oleum Rosaceum, is often made of Roses.
Of the root thereof springs a stalk of three cubits long, and in the top of
the stalk hangs a flower downward, that is narrow by the stalk, and wexeth
in breadth wider and wider, shapen as a bell, and she flower has with in as it
here small threddes that contain the seed. In the middle stands chiues of
saffro^, and so nothing is more gracious than the Lily in fairnes of consent in
sweetness of smell, and in effect of working and virtue. The color thereof
is treble, white, read, and purple. Huc vsque Plinius libro. ^0. capitulo. 5.

The roof of the Lilye has, many cloves, as the root of Garlike, as Arist.
says in lib. vegitab. and in every cloue, is virtue feminall, and of each
springs a plant when it is set alone. Seek more hereof before, in the same,
De Allio in litera A. And heereto Arist. says that the stalk of the Lily has
many knots, and if the stalk be bended and laid down, and covered with earth,
while the root is in the ground, and ere the seed bread, out and unclose,
then within few days, thou shall find of every knot, a small cloue sprung,
as it were out of the root, and that is wonder. Also there it is said, that
Lily flowers be first green, and afterward white, and if the stalk be cut,
all from the root, for all the kind humor of the stalk is closed in the
pith, the kind heat that is in the pith, tourneth so the over part of the
stalk, and makes digestion in the matter of the flower, and then the flower
spreads and is white, when the humor is full digested. Therefore it is said
that Uersifiers likened the Lily to wans in wit, that is busy at last to
things that ever shall last. And there it is said that the Lily has not the
virtue seminall in seed and in root: and in that the Lily is diverse, and
varieth from Leekes and Garlik, and other that have seminal virtue in diverse
places. Hereof look before, in the chapter of Garlike and Onions in litera A.
and C.

Also the Lily stalks with flowers new cut, put in a clodde of claye, keeps
the flowers fresh long time. The Lilye flower smells full sweet, white it is
whole and not broken, and stinketh full soul, if it be broken and froted with
hands.

And the Lily has only the, flower with the seed in sleep of fruit, and
all the virtue that the Lily has is stalk and in root in showed in the head
in the flower and in the seed, and the more higher the flower is on the
stalk, the more the head bends downward: and the flower thereof is plain
and smooth with out, and soft to touch and to handle, ^ound in shape, and
liking in sight, with goldish greynes contained within ye hollownesse of the
flower: the which greines dye and color more than saffron: and these dieng
greynes be borne on with vi. stalks. And the Lily flower is compouned of vi.
full white leaves that he full nigh togethers. And is beautified, with seven
golden greynes: in the middle whereof is the seed in steed of fruit, and is
wonderfully white, and is closed about with benefice of leaves of the flower,
that the seed may be kept and saved from grieuing of the cold air that is
without.

( Addition.
Lilium candidum, there is also the Orange color, and red purple Lilyes, the
wild Lily called Martagon and Amatilis Hispanorum. Read Mattheolus, etc.)

Of Lactuca. ca. 92.
LEctuce is called Lactuca, and has that name of plenty of humor, as Isido.
says, or else for it makes often milk in women, that nourish and feed
children. And in men this heard ye withstandeth moving of Venus, and thereof is
double kind, wild and tame. The wild we call Seralia, for the back thereof
has sharp pricks and sees as it were a saw, like as Isid. speaks in his
seventeenth book and the last chapter.

Isaac in Dietis. speaks of this herb and says that this herb wild
Lettuce, is like in shape to the tame, but it has longer branches smaller and
sharper, and less green for scarsitie of moisture: and therefore it is much
more bitter and drier. Therefore many men mean, that it exciteth menstruall
blood, and puts out raw humors, as Dioscorides says.

And the tame Lettuce is cold and moist, and temperate, that it passes not
measure in neither qualytie. Therefore use thereof accords both to meat and
to medicine, and is subtle of substance, and namely when it is fresh, and is
therefore soon digested, and abateth gnawing and burning that comes of
Cholera rubea, and cools heat and boiling of blood, and exciteth sleep, and
heals head ach, that comes of cholaricke humor and sumositie, and
multiplyeth milk in women, and Semen in men, and this is by reason of good
blood that it breeds in perfect quantity and quality: but when it is old
it is hard, and moisture thereof wihtdraweth, and the herb is bitter, and
then use thereof breeds blood at worst, and appaireth the sight, and makes
it fail, and slays the feelyng, for it stiffeleth natural feeling with
sowrenesse thereof. Such Lettuce is most grievous to such as will get children,
for it runs and consealeth the seminall matter, and namely the seed
thereof, if it be often taken in meat or in drink. Huc vsque Isa. in Dietis.
Lib. 20. cap. 8. Plinius speaks of Lettuce and says, that a manner kind of
lettuce grows of it self without tillyng, and that manner Lettuce is called
Caprina, for if it be thrown into the sea, flayeth all the fish that is nigh
thereabout. Milk thereof with vinegar, water and wine heals the Dropsy. The
herb with the leaves stamped and sprung with salt, heals sinews that are
forecut.

Another manner Lettuce grows in fields, and leaves thereof stamped heals
botches, if it be laid to them with meddle. And among ye Greeks, this manner
Lettuce is called Isopum, or Esoperum.

The third manner Lettuce grows in woods, and is called Stancio. Leaves
thereof ground with meal and flower, heals wounds, and stauncheth blood,
and heals rotted wounds. The root and the leaves abateth the evil, which is
called, the holy life.

Another manner Lettuce with round leaves and short, is called Heracia among
many men. Hawks scrape this herb, and take out the juice thereof, and touch
and heal their eyes therewith, and do away dimnesse and blindness when they
be old. The juice heals all the evils of the eyes, and namelye if a woman's
milk be meddled therewith. And it heals biting of Serpents, and stinging of
Scorpions, if the juice thereof be dronk in Wine, and the leaves stamped, and
laid to the wound, in a plaster wise, swageth and heals all manner
swellyng.

Also the seed of all manner Lettuce, wild and tame, chasteth in sleep,
dreams of lechery, and suffers not the body to be polluted neither desiled,
if it be often taken in meat: but often use thereof, and too much thereof eaten,
grieueth ye cleernesse of the eyes. Plinius thereto gives many other praisings
in the same chapter, but this shall suffice at this time.

Of Lappa. chap. 93.
LAppa, the Cle^e, is an herb with broad leaves, and thick about the ground,
and has in the tops of the stalk knots with crooked pricks, that often
cleaves to man's clothes. Lib. 17. Isid. speaks hereof and says, that this
herb is called Lappa, because it has great leaves disposed by the ground: and
is called Philantropos among the Greeks, for it is rough and cleaves to man's
clothes and grows by old walls, and is called Philantropos, as it were
loving mankind, for it cleaves to man's clothes, by a manner affection and
love, as it seems.

Thereof is double kind, sharp and round, disposed to the likeness of an
horse foot, therefore many men call it Vngula Cabalina, an horse hoof: and
either has leaves with heavy and mighty savor and smell, as Dioscorides
says. And li. 20. cap. 22. Plinius says, that this name Lappa, is the name
of many manner herbs, for it is the name of all manner Dockes, and be all
medicinable, for they heal smiting of scorpions, nor they smite not a man,
that is baulnied with ye juice thereof.

The broth thereof helps and also comfort the teeth, if it be luke warm
hot held in the mouth. The seed there, of (...) of the stomach, and helps
them much east blond, and them also that have the blondie flixe for the root
thereof wi^h wiar binds the womb, but the leaves meddled with salt laxeth
the womb. The seed drunk, heals them which have the stone. All the herb
stamped with Auxungia greece, helps against the botch in the breast. Huc vsque
vlinius.

And Plato. means, ye Lappa, which is called Lappatum also, is an hot herb
and a dry, and has virtue to dissolve, and to temper and to laxe, and to
open, and to kindle, and helps therefore against itching, and also against
scabs wet and dry, and against the shingles, and wastes the humors between
the flesh and the skin. And softneth and abateth hardness and swelling of
Postumes, and helps against the cold dropsy, and against stopping of the
spleen: and the juice thereof meddled with the juice of Rewe, purges the brain
of superfluity of fleme, if it be dropped into the nosethrilles in a bath, or
in a hot air.

( Addition.
Lapathum, there are five kinds, Dockes and Sorrel, Patience, as Rumex,
Oxilapathum, s^tiuum, etc. Read Dod. fol. 557.

Of Lappate. cap. 64.
LAppates is a manner meat made, compowned and confect of certain herbs of
gardens, as ye gloss says super Iud. ca. 15. And Alexander Nequam speaks
thereof, and says, that Lappates cibus est, et olus componet eundom. The
mening is, yt Lappates is a meat made of herbs. And other means yt it is a
manner kind of herbs and of worts, with broad leaves, as a Clete, but the
leaves of Lappates be soft, and fat, and plain, and wonderfully wralled and
lapped, and cleaving togethers with a short caulstock, knotty without, and full
of pith within. This herb accords to meat and to medicine, and thereof is
good meat made, that may be kept long time, if it be busily compounded and sod
with vinegar, smapie seed, and honey. And such meat is commonly called
Compositum, and has a singular virtue to withstand drunkenness, as Plinius
says, lib. 10. 20. For if it be eaten before meat, it kapeth from
drunkenness: and if it be taken after meat in drunkenness, it makes it
pass away. And the doctrine and teaching of Rasis means, yt there is nothing
better for broken bones, and is good to ye stomach and to the sinews.
Therefore he commands and bids, that this herb be given to them that have
quaking, and the pa^ste, and to them that spit blood, and to children: and
breeds plenty of milk. The juice thereof helps against venim and smiting of
Serpents; and namely the seed thereof helps against biting of hounds, as
Isid. says, lib. 17.

Of Legumine. cap. 65.
LEgumina, Codware yt serves to potage, has this name Legumina of Legendo,
choosing, as it were chose. For men in old time chose the best codware, and
made them meat thereof: and grains that be some deal more, and greater and
thicker then grains of Wheale or Baily, be properly called Legumina, and be
not gendered in hulls, as wheat, but in code: and be closed therein, as it
fares in pesen, fetches, and beans. And Legumina, codware, is diverse in
quantity, in color, in figure, shape, and savor. For among such Codware,
Lupines and beans be greatest, and pesen and fetches be mean, filles and
vaches be smallest in quantity: and be diverse in color. For some be white,
and some black, and some red, and some meddeled with diverse colors. In shape
they be diverse, for some be round, and some be euenlong, and some three
cornered, and some plain. In savor they differ, for some be sour and hard,
and made soft, and good to eating and seething. And some be bitter of
themselves, as Lupines, and be made sweet and sauoury, with good watring.

And Codware shall be gathered when they begin to ripe. For they will fall
soon out of the coddes, and be not well seen when they be shed: as it ^areth
of Lupines, as Plinius says, libro. 18. And such codware is in substance,
thick, fast, cold, and dry, and hard to defy, and is hard to seething, for
fast and hard substance, and may not well be sod in pit water: but to sees
such Codware well, needs running water of a well or of a stream Often of
Codware boysto^us meat is made, which accords to strong men of complexion
and of kind: for Codware of it self, is hard to digest, and nourishes much,
and comfort when it is digested: but it breeds swelling and ventositie,
but the ventositie is abated thereof by meddling of things that destroy
ventositie, as Comin and Anete, and other such, as Dioscorides says and
affirms.

( Addition.
Codware breeds swelling, and is to be used of them that can keep good diet,
for beans and pease of all sorts, do breed wind, etc.)

Of Lent. cap. 96.
LEns, lentis, is a manner of Codware, and is seruisable to Potage, as Isido.
says lib 17 and has that name, for it is moist and soft, and namely in
grass: and of Lens; lentis, comes Lencicula, the diminutiue thereof, and is
writ with c, for difference of Lens, lendis, that is a nit, a little head
worm, and is writ with d, in the Genitive case, and in all the other, except
the Nomnatiue case. Thereof one speaks in this manner.

Lens lendis capiti, Lens lentis conuenit o^i.

That is to say, that Lens lendis, is the nit in the head, and Lens lentis, is
the titl, and accords to the mouth.

The till is cold and dry, and compowned of contraries, as Isaac says: for
one virtue thereof is in the rind, and another in the pith and the meal: For
it has in the rind a manner sharpness, by the which it lareth the womb: but
the pith and the meal is sowrish, and comfort the stomach, and
constrains and binds, and gendreth thick and melancholic blood, and
fills the brain, with thick smoke, and is therefore cause of horrible and
dreadful dreams, and grieueth the stomach with ventositie and swelling and
stops all the passages and veins of the body, and dries the substance of
sinews and of skins of the brain, and is most grievous to the skins of the
eyes, for it distempereth the moisture thereof and fordrieth. And he says,
that it greueth whole eyes, and then much more it grieueth sore eyes, because
that it fordrieth. Often use of this, breeds in the body most wicked evils and
passions, and namely if that it be eaten with the skin and hulles, and if the
body be dry of complexion. But sometime it helps them that be hot and
moist. And helps them that have the dropsy, if it be eaten without the
skin, for it gendreth much swelling and stretching of guts, and of skins. Till
that is most great and fresh and easy to seething, is best, and that both to
meat and to medicine. The malice of Till is tempered if the skin be put
away, and the pith sod in fresh water, and then oil put thereto, and pepper,
Comin, and other such things Huc vsq Isaac in Dietis. Plin. says, lib. 17.
cap. 12. that the till loneth lean land more then fat, and dry wether and
air, and all Codware loves water before the blossom, and dryness after the
blooming.

( Addition.
Lentills, not common, and is hard of digestion, and causes dreadful dreams,
it breeds cankers, leprosy, and madness, yet it is medicinable.)

Of Lino. chap. 97.
BOth Flexe and seed is called Linum, Flexe or Lin.
and has that name, for it is both soft and smooth, and full liking, as Isid.
says li. 19. Li. 12. ca. 2. Plin says, that flax is sown in grauelly places
and plain, and that in springing time and is gathered in Summer. Flax grows
in even stalks, and be yeolow flowers or blew and after comes hoppes, and
therein is the seed, and when the hoppe begins to were, then the flax is
drawn up and gathered all whole, and is then lyned, and afterward made to
knots and little bundells, and so laid in water, and lies there long time, and
then it is taken out of the water, and laid abroad, till it be dried, and
turned and woond in the Sun, and then bound in pretty nitches and bundles,
and afterward knocked, beaten and braied, and carfled, rudded and gnodded,
ribbed and heckled, and at the last sponne. Then the thread is sod and bleaked,
and bucked and often laid drieng, wetted, and washed, and sprinkled with water,
until that it be white, after diverse working and crauayle. And there be many
manner Flexes, but the fairest of all, grows in Egypt, for thereof is Bislus
made right fair, and white as snow, as Plin. says li. 19. ca. 12. This flax
is not most strong, but thereof comes most winning, for thereof be kind
vestments made for Priests. Flax is needful to diverse uses. For thereof is
made clothing to wear, and sails to sail, and nets to fish and to hunt, and
thread to sew, ropes to bind, and strings to shoot, bonds to bind, lines to
meat and to measure, and sheets to rest in, and sackes, bags, and purses,
to put and keep things in: and so not herb is so needful, to so many
diverse uses to mankind, as is the flax.

And the seed thereof is hot and moist, or else temperate between moist and
dry, and so thereof is oil made, that is more needful to other use than to
meat. For Isaac says, Line seed nourishes but little, and is hard to
digest, and grieueth the stomach, and breeds much swellyng, but it tempereth
and softeneth if it be parched, and is the better if it be taken with honey. It
helps against the cough, and exciteth Venus, and moves to love, if it be
eaten with honey and pepper, and is good for postumes, for it ripeth them, and
swageth and eases, and makes thick humor clear and thin, and so it
dissolueth and destroys postumes of the mother, if the patient be often
nourished with the broth thereof, as Isaac says in Dietis.

( Addition.
Of Lin comes the Linseed, where of is made Painters oil, besides sundry other
uses.)

Of Malo. chap. 98.
MAlus, the apple tree, is a Tree, that bears apples, and is a great tree in
it self, but it is less and more short then other trees of the woods, with
knots and riueled rind, and makes shadow with thick boughs and branches, and
is fair with diverse blossoms, and flowers, and is liking with good fruit and
noble, and is gracious in sight and in taste, and virtuous in medicine, and the
apple is called Malum, mali, but the tree is called Hec malis, and Hec pomus
also: and has that name, for that the fruit thereof is round. And so apples
that be most round be called Mala, as Isidore says, li. 17. For Malum in
Greek, is Rotundum in Latin, and round in English.

The apple tree is diverse and varieng from other trees of woods: for the apple
tree, and namely the tame apple tree, is of double kind, for the stock
thereof, springs on the ground, and the graffe thereof springs of another
tree, and is graffed on the stock, and is so oned by graffing, that of twain
is one compowned, and the graffe so graffed, tourneth all the virtue of the
stock into his own kind and quality, as Affredus says, super finem primi
li. vegitab. Look before in the same book in the treatise of graffing of
trees, about the beginning.

The apple tree waxes barren, except it be pared and shredde, and discharged
of water boughs, and of superfluity, as he says. For ye humor which is
drawn from the root, suffices not to bring forth fruit, if it passes into
nourishing and seeding, of barren boughs and branches. Look before de
fructificatione arborum, et causa ciusdem.

Of Apples trees is diverse kinds, for some bears sowrish fruit and hard,
and some right sour, and some right sweet, with a good savor and pleasant.
And this diversity comes of diverse qualities, of the humors, and of more
feeble or more strong working of heat that is in the root, as it is touched
before in the beginning.

Of Malo granato. ca. 99.
MAlus Granatus in the Tree that bears Pomegranardes, Pomum granatum
and the Tree is the Feminine gender, and the fruit the Neuter gender, and is
called Malum Granatum: For it contains many greynes within the rind, and the
roundnesse, as Isi says li. 18. and the rind thereof is called Psidia, and the
flower, Balaustia, and some of the flowers be white, and some purple; and some
red as a rose. And these Pomegarnards be called Mala punica, for they came
first out of the Country of Punica, as Isidore says.

The tree is full hard with many knots, and boughs, and branches, and grows
more in breadth than in length, and may not well away with cold, and so the
flowers thereof be soon lost in hoare frost. And Arist. says, that this tree
leaves his malice, and changes out there of by craft of tilling. Look
before in this book, De arborum culture.

And Plinius says, that of this tree is many manner of kinds, but we shall
speak now of two manner at this time. For as Dioscorides says, and Isaac in
Dietis, Of Pomegranards is two manner kinds: One Pomegranarde Tree bears
sweet apples, hot and moist, and some bears sower apples, cold and dry,
and may be kept longer than other: but the sweet accords more to medicine,
for all the tree is medicinal, and the fruit thereof accords but little to
meat, and so Isid. means lib. 17. where he says, That Physicians deny,
that bodies should be nourished with meat of Pomegranards, but they suppose
that it accords more to medicine than to feeding of the body. And all the
tree, and namelye the fruit thereof, has virtue to constrain and to bind,
to comfort and to fasten, and to harden and dry thin humors and fleeting, and
to staunche cholaricke spewing, and to staunch blood, as Isaac teaches openly,
and Dioscor. and Plat. also. If it be taken in couenable manner and due order,
it helps against all passions of the body, both within and without: but ye
sweet breeds more ventositie and swelling, and they do less quench their
thirst, that be diseased with feauers, and therefore they agree worse with them
that have the Ago, than the sower do. And of ye joyce of the sower is a
drink made, yt is called Exizacra, that abateth the heat of fevers, and
defieth and changes the matter of fevers, and exciteth appetite, and
restores wonderfully, and repaireth and comfort kind that fails by
reason of too great heat, and helps against chasing of the lyner, and against
the Cardiacle passion, and failing of the heart. Flowers, fruit and rind
thereof slaieth old worms in the womb, if it be made into powder and drunk,
and most effectually comfort and purges both teeth and gumbes, and helps
against many other evils as Dioscorides and Isaac mean. Pomegranards help in
all the aforesaid things most effectually, and though they be yeolow and
discolored and sowrish, wearish, and dry without in the rind, yet
nevertheless wtin they be red, moist, soft and sauorie, and the greynes be
ordained in their own celles, by passing wonderful craft, as Isaac says.

( Addition.
The rind or seed of Pomegranets in powder given in ale, is good to stop the
flixe.)

Of Moro. cap. 100.
MOrus is a tree, which bears beries, Mulberye tree.
and the fruit of the same Tree, is called Morum, a berrie, as Isid. says
lib. 18. The Greeks call this tree Moron, and the Latins call it Rubum, for
the fruit thereof is red. Thereof is double kind, tame and wild, and herds
in desert eat the fruit of the wild berry tree, and leaves thereof slays
serpents, if they be thrown or laid upon them, and Ambrose super Mat. 17.
says, that the fruit of this tree is first white in the flower, and then
green, and then red, and black or brown at last, and the more ripe it is the
more black it is, and dies and smorcheth his hands and teeth yt eats
thereof. Plinius and Dioscor. mean, that Morus is a tree, and the seed thereof
laxeth the womb, and the juice thereof wrong and dried at the fire, or in the
Sun, constrayneth and binds the womb, and heals whelkes and sores of the
mouth, and swageth and abateth swelling of the lyps. The rind of the root sod
and drunk, laxeth the womb, and slays broad worms therein, the leaves
thereof stamped and laid in Oil heals burnings. The leaves sod in rain
water, makes black hair, and heals the biting of Phal^ngie, The field
Spider.
and of Attercops, and eases the tooth ach, and cleanses rottings, and matter
of the jaws. The berries thereof before they be ripe, be cold, and binds
and comfort the stomach, and the more they were ripe, the more hot they
were, and also the more sweet and moystie, and many thereof eaten after meat,
turns into corruption, and grieve soon both head and stomach, and be well
digested, if then be eaten fasting, and nourishes but full little. Leaves of
high Mulberie trees be great and broad, and are grieved with Palshrags and
flies, and gladly worms eat thereof, and so silk worms he best fed and
nourished with such leaves. All the tree is medicinal, and namely the rind,
fruit, leaves, and roots: for if the root thereof be slit, thereout comes
gum, that helps in diverse passions and euilles, for is laxeth the womb, and
heals tooth ache. Huc vsque Diosc. and Plin. Of Mulberies is noble drink
made, that we call commonly Moretum, Elephants drink thereof, and be the more
bold and hardy, as Rabanus says, super li. 2. Match. 5. ca. And thereof is a
Lectuarie made, that is called Diameron, that helps against the Squinancie
and evils of the jaws and throat, as Plat. says.

( Addition.
The Mulberie tree is known, as for the virtue of the berries, if they be ripe,
they hurt not greatly the stomach, etc.)

Of Mirto. cap. 101.
MIrtus is a little tree, and is so called, because often it grows in ye sea
cliues, as Isid. says. Virgill speaks of ye broad cloves of Myrtus, and of
the lovers of the cloves of Myrtha, and the Greeks call it Mirecie. And
Physicians write in their books, that this tree accords to many needful
uses of women. Huc vsque Isid. And Plin. and Diosc. mean, That Mirtus is a
little tree as it were a shrub, and grows namely by the sea side.

And fruit, flowers and branches thereof, accords to medicine, and the
fruit thereof is better than the flowers, and many be kept longer time, and
better in heat of the Sun than in shadow place, and the more fresh the
fruit is, the better it is. And all the substauncialls of this tree have
virtue of sowrnesse and of binding; and of his sweet smell has virtue
comfortatiue, and restores superfluity of running and dropping, by proper
kind thereof. And helps the virtue retentiue, to hold in the body, and so
helps against the reume that falls to the spiritual members, if they be
sod in rain water, and the breast washed therewith, and stancheth spewing, if
ae branch thereof be sod with vinegar, and laid to the stomach. Powder of
this tree heals wounds easily and soft. And Plin. says, that some Mirtus is
white, and some is black, and either is binding, but the black ye more, and
is therefore profitably taken against bleeding, and it moves urine, and
helps against venime, and against stinging of Scorpions, if it be drunk,
broth thereof helps against the evil Allopicia, and falling of hair, and
helps against swellyng of eyes, meddled with wheat meal.

Oleum Myrtum is made of the leaves and bays thereof, the which oil eases,
cleanses, helps and heals in all the foresaid things, and cleanses
matterie ears, if it be luke warm dropped therein. Huc vsque Plin, Super Esa.
ca. 41. Iero. says, that Mirtus has good smell, and rotteth not, and Mirtus
fastneth and restores and comfort weary members and lyms, and therefore it
betokens comforters of holy Church, and has virtue to swage, ease, temper
and to cool, as he says Super Esa. cap. 60.

( Addition.
The Myrtle tree grows in Spain and Italy about Naples. The berryes of this
tree is good to be given to them that spet blood or piss blood.)

Of Myrra. cap. 102.
MIrra is a tree in Arabia, five cubits high, and is like to a thorn called,
Achantum, the dropping thereof is green with great smell, and is bitter, and
has therefore the name Myrra, as Isidore says libro. 16. The dropping that
comes thereof by it self is best, and dropping that comes out at chins and
slits that be made therein, is accounted less worth. Mirhre, a precious gum
The Arabians make fire of shredding thereof, and thereof is full grievous
smoke, but if it be withstood with other smell of Storaye. For else of such
smoke, men should take incurable sickness and evils. Best Mirra and most
pure is gathered among Troglodites in Arabia, as Isi. says, and Plinius. li.
12. cap. 17. where it is said, that Mirra is a tree of five cubits high, and
grows in woods of Arabia. The leaves thereof be like to the leaves of
Olive, but they be more cripse, and have more pricks, and is like in boughs
to Iuniperus. Boughs thereof be carved and cut and slit in two times, but it
droppeth before it be slit; and that dropping is called Stacten, and is best of
all manner Mirra, and is called: Mirra electa, Mirre chosen. And of Mirra is
seven manner kinds, as he says, cap. 17. Oncees called Trogoditica, and that
is well chosen. The second is called Gelbanitica. The third is called
Diantrides. The fourth Colaticia. The fifth Pracena, and is called also Salbana,
and is more thin then other Mirres. The sixth is called Duratim and Odonferam,
and is more white then the other. And is feined with Gum and clods of
Lentiseus. The seventh is called Indica, and this is the worst of them all. And
there with other manner Mirres be feined. Huc vsque Plinius.

And Dioscorid. says, that Mirra is dropping of a tree hardened about the
boughs by heat of the Sun, and the best is citrine and red within, and some
deal bright, and hereof some is small, and some is great, and is called
Trogoditica, and has that name of an Island, which it grows in. And this
Trogoditica is hot and dry, and has virtue to comfort, and that in gathering
and increasing parts together by his virtue of good savor and smell, and
dissolueth and departs and consumes and wastes euenly the qualityes
thereof. And so dead bodies be kept safe and sound when they be balmed with
confections of Mirre. And Mirra is kept in his virtue nigh an hundred years,
and helps against all causes fleumatike, and against all inordinate running
and dropping, and comfort digestion, and purges gleamye humors, and
namelye in the spiritual members, and it amendeth stinch, and smell of the
mouth, and heals and dries all evils of the gummes, and heals and
destroys and wastes whelks of the lips, and comfort the brain, and
comfort strongly, and strengthens the mother, and fordrieth and wastes
all superfluity thereof, and helps conception, and slays worms in the
ears, and fretteth dead flesh, and breeds and saves quick flesh at best.

( Addition.
Mirrha is also the name of an herb, which we call Kixe, with a long and
hollow stalk. Read Dodoneus. fol. 616.)

Of Mirro. chap. 103.
MIrrum is an ointment made of Mirra, and of other spicery. By virtue thereof
sinews and other members of feeling be comforted, and humors in the joints
and toes be wasted. By the good smell thereof spirits of feeling be restored
and comforted, and slaieth with bitterness lice and worms, and lets
breeding thereof, and abateth stinking sweats, and keeps and saves bodies
whole and sound, that they rot not.

Of Mandragora. cap. 104.
MAndragora has that name, for it bears apples with great savor of the
greatness of the Apples of Macian, and is called Malum terre among Latins.
And Poets call it Antropomoros, for the root thereof is some deal shapen as a
man: Nor so, but as it is counterfeited.
the rind thereof meddled with Wine is given to them to drink yt shall be cut in
the body, for they should sleep and not feel ye sore cutting. Hereof is two
manner of kinds, the one is female, and is like in leaves to Letuse, and
bears apples. That other is male, and has leaves like to the Beete, as
Isidore says, libro. 17.

And Diosco. says, that Mandragora is a sleeping herb, and the leaves
thereof spread on the ground, and has two roots or three cleaving togethers,
black without and white within, with a thick skin. The male has white
leaves and thin, and root like to the other. And apples grow on ye leaves,
as galls grow on Oken leaves, and be yeolow and sweet of smell, but with manner
heaviness, and be fresh in favor, and accord not therefore to meat, but only
to medicine. For rindes thereof sod in Wine, cause sleep, and abateth all
manner soreness: and so that time a man feels uneath, though he be cut. But
yet Mandragora must be warily used: for it flayeth if men take much thereof, as
he says. For in Plat. it is said, that it cools, and some deal slays, and
makes to sleep stronglye, therefore the juice thereof with woman's milk laid
to the temples, makes to sleep, yea, though it were in the most hot ague: and
for that the herb is cold in substance, it is said, that the fruit thereof
quenches the evil that is called holy fire, and abateth the reese of Cholera,
and flux of the womb. Huc vsque Plat. But there it is said, that by kind no
shape of man nor of woman is in the root thereof, but it is rather so feined
of Churles or of Witches. It is said, that it makes women conceive, but it
seems Saint Austen says nay super Genesis 2. cap. 19. He says there, that
because of Rachel, that desired Madragora, he looked books of Philosophers
that treat of virtues of herbs, and found no such things in their books in
that time. But saving the authority of Saint. Austen, many authors mean, that
Mandragora has this virtue, and so Constable. Dioscorides, Plinius, and Plat.
mean, that Mandragora taken in due manner, disposes the mothers to
conceiving, the which mothers and matrices of conception were let by to much
heat and dryness. And so Mandragora disposes hot women and moist to
conception and to conceive. For Mandragora is cold and dry, as it is said in
Platearius, and that in disposition, but it lets women that be kindly cold
and dry of such disposition.

Mandragora has many other virtues, and smites off and destroieth swelling of
the body, as Dioscorides says, and withstandeth venomous biting, and
stancheth all droppigns and running above and beneath.

All that is set before is said in Plinius book. libro. 35. capit. 16. And
there it is said, that of Mandragora be two kinds, etc. And after it
follows in this manner.

They that dig Mandragora, be busy to beware of contrary winds, while they
dig, and make three circles about with a sword, and abide with the digging
until the Sun going down, and suppose so to have the herb with the chief
virtues. The nyre thereof is gathered and dried in the Sun, the apples thereof
be dried in the shadow. The smell of the apples is heavy, and breeds sleep only
with smell, as he says.

( Addition.
Mandrake of two sorts black, and whitish yeolow, they cause sleep to be
inwardly received, very dangerous. There is another kind called Mala insana,
raging apples, or apples of love. Read Dodo. fol. 439.)

Of Milio. cap. 105.
MIlium, Mile, is an herb with a long stalk and knottie, as the Reed, and the
seed thereof is full small, cold, and dry, as Isaac says in Dietis. And that
witnesses lightness and hollownesse thereof, and absence of gleaminesse and
of vnctdositie, and nourishes but little, but it comfort the stomach by
dryness thereof, and binds the womb. And as Dioscorides says, is
diuritike and assate, and swageth ach of the helly, and gendereth not good
blood, but it s^^leth and dries the stomach, as it is said in Dietis.

Of Menta. chap. 106.
MEnta is an herb with good smell hot and dry, and comfort the stomach,
and thereof is double kind, wild and tame, one grows in gardens, and the
other in woods and in mountains: and this heateth more then the first: and
this herb is called Colocasia in Greek, and Nepta, or Calamentum in Latin,
as Isidore says, libro. 17. cap. penul. This herb is full medicinable. Other
manner Mintes grow in moors and in medes, and be not so mighty in virtue or
in heat, but they have more heavy smell and savor then Mint of gardens, that
is an herb that multiplyeth it self, and springs soon out of the ground.
And if the stalk thereof be bended down to the ground, and heeled with earth,
it turns into a root, and brings forth anon a new Mint.

Mint of Gardeines is full virtuous, both green and dry. And dissolueth and
tempereth and wastes by proper qualyties thereof. And comfort and exciteth
appetite by odor and good smell, and by sharpness thereof. If it be sod in
vinegar, it both away stinch of the mouth: and cleanses and purges corrupt
and rotted gums. And abateth with vinegar perbraking and casting, that comes
of feebleness of the virtue retentiue. And helps by savor and smell against
sownding and feebleness of spirits, and comfort and cleanses superfluity
of the mother. And abateth if it be sodde in wine, ach of the guts and of the
reins. If it be sod with Wine and with Oil, and laid too, it cures and
heals hardness of breasts, and teates that come of running and crudding of
milk. The juice thereof withstandeth venim, and slays if it dronken worms
of the womb, and of the cares also. And Mint sodde in Wine and in Oil,
dissolueth and heals cold Postumes, and heals the cough. Huc vsque
Dioscorides and Pla. And also Isaac says the same, libro. 2. in Dietes. That
it takes away abomination of wambling, and abateth the yoring. And cleanses
and smootheth the tongue, if it be froted therewith, and exciteth Venus.

( Addition.
There are six kinds of Mintes, Curd mint, crispe mint, Baliac, Spear mint,
Heart mint, horse mint, and water mint. Read Dodo. fol. 245.)

Of Malua. cap. 107.
MAlua the Hocke is a soft herb, and has that name Malua of Molliendo aluum,
Softning the womb, as Isidore says, libr. 17. And he says, and Plinius also,
that he that is balmed with the juice thereof meddeled with Oil, may not be
grieved with stinging of Bees. Also members balmed with the juice of Hockes,
be not bitten of Spiders, nor stong of Scorpions, as Plinius says. Of Hocke
is double kind, the less and the more, that is called Altea. And either
herb is moist and temperate between hot and cold, as it is said in Dietis.
And that is known by virtue and working thereof. For it tempereth and ripeth
Postumes, and namely the root and seed thereof.

The broth thereof helps against flure of blood, and has somewhat of
gleaminesse: and tempereth thick humor of the reins, if it be drunk with
wine, and breaks the stone, and softneth hardness of the spleen.

The broth thereof makes sleep, if the face be washed therewith, and the utter
parts of the body. The broth of the seed thereof helps Tisicke men: and
helps against the cough. The seed thereof sod in Oil, tempereth hardness,
and softneth, and cleanses, and ripeth, as it is said in Plateario.

( Addition.
The holy hocke, or gardeine mallow, also the wild Mallow, and the small
Mallowe. There is also Althea, ye marsh Mallow. Of their properties read
Matheolus, D. Turnar, and Dodoneus.)

Of Nuce. chap. 108.
THe Nut tree is called Nux, and so is called the Nut also. It has that name
Nux, for dropping of the leaves thereof greeueth and noieth other trees about,
that be nigh thereto. And many Latins call this tree Iouelans by another name.
For this tree was sometime hallowed to Jupiter. The fruit thereof has so great
virtue, that if it be put among frogge stools and venumous meats, it spilleth
and destroieth and quenches all the venim that is therein, as Isidore says
libro. 17. The fruit thereof has a hard rind without and bitter, and a
sweet kernel within. And all manner Apples that be closed in an hard skin,
rind, or shale be called Nuts, as Pince, Castanie, and Auellane, and other
such, as he says, and the Nut tree is high and long, with large boughs and
knots, and with broad leaves and sinewy, even long, and sharp in the ends with
evil smell and savor. The shadow thereof grieueth them that sleep there
under, and breeds diverse sicknesses and evils, but the fruit thereof,
leaves and rind, accord to medicines. For as Dioscorides says, the juice of
ye root and of the rind, of the more Nut tree, drunk to the quantity of one
Oxagum, helps against the difficultye of pissing, and is contrary to Feauers
that come with shiuering and cold, if it be drunk with vinegar. And says
also furthermore, that it dies and cleanses hair, and lets falling
thereof, and has many virtues and might. The fruit thereof accords both to
meat and medicine: And there be many manner of nuts, but we speak most
touching meat and medicine of the more nuts, that be French Nuts, and of the
less that be Auelanes. The common Nut is called Gallica among many men, and is
diverse in substance, virtue, and shape^. For as Isaac says in Dietis. The
Nut in substance is green, or new, or ripe. In the first disposition the
skin and the rind is green and sour, and vitter, and smorcheth his hand
that handles it hard. And there within is a shell or a shale, ye waxes harder
and harder, and there within is the nut kernel, that is sauourye and full
sweet, and the kernel that is within the shale is closed in the skin, to
save the tender kernel from cold and hardness of the shale. And therefore
that skin is more soft then the shale, and more hard then the kernel, and
more bitter found of them that have assayed. And the nearer ripe the nut is,
the sooner the skin forsakes the shale, and cleaves the faster to the
kernel, so that uneath the kernel may be departed therefrom, but by hot water,
or by some other craft, that tempereth that skin, and makes it soft. And
the green Nut is kindly less hot and dry then the old, and greeueth
therefore the less. And is enimye to all venim, if it be with Rue eaten
fasting. And Isaac says, some Nuts be fresh and new, and some be old, and
some be mean between both. In the fresh is most moisture, and the mean be
more dry, and in the old moisture is wasted by working of heat that makes
digestion in the humors.

And the old be generally more unctuous. Therefore many thereof caten, turns
soon into chularike humors, and namelye men with hot complexion, if they
eat thereof many and often. For in them it breeds head ach, and makes them
turn giddy, but they be couenable nourishing to them that eat them
temperatly, and be of temperate complexion. For so they be defied well enough.
The virtue thereof is known by effect of medicine, for generally they keep
and save the body against venomous things. For by his ventositie it stops ye
veins, in the body, and suffers not venim to pass to the spiritual members.

Also Nuts euenly led with salt, rue, garlike, and honey meddled helps in the
viting of a wood hound, if some be swallowed, and some laid to the fore
without, for it draws out the venim mightily, and wastes it also. And nuts
stamped and meddled with honnye, tempereth wonderfully, and dissolueth cholarik
postumes and flematike also. Also Nultes stamped and laid as a plaster to the
navel, destroieth postumes that breed within, as Isaac, says in Dietis.

( Addition.
Walenuts are of two sorts, the bigger and the less, and according to the soil
whereon they grow, so is their goodness. The thinnest rinded or shelled nuts,
are commonly best and very wholesome, to eat against poisen, eaten before
great drinking, staieth the head from lightness.)

And Nuts be diversely shapen. For some be round, and some euenlong, and some
plain and continued within, as it fares in Auclane, and in Nutmegges. And
some have cleftes in the sides, and be distinguished in the top, as it were
with the shape of a Triangle: as it fares in great French nuts, in the which
generally the shape of the cross is printed within, as they know well that
take bred thereto.

( Addition.
Of late forth of the Indies has been brought diverse sorts of Nuts, whose
natural properties are not perfectly known, as Nux Indica, Coecus, some in
husks, like Beans, some like kidncies of a brown color, some round, some
square, and some shape: which nuties I have, but as yet no proper name to give
them.)

Of Auellana. chap. 109.
AVellana is a field nut, and a wood nut in comparison to the French Nut. For
without craft of Gardeners, it grows on Haselles, that be Trees that grow in
groaues, as Isidore says. And for they grow in common places, whereas men
pass thereby, and pull and gather thereof, they have worthily the name Auellana.
And Auellana, as Isaac says, be less hot in substance then other Nuts, and
store sour, and more fast in substance and unctuous. And be therefore hards to
defy, and the more slow to pass out of the body: but when they be defied,
they nourish much the body, and they engender much veutosity, Auellana
Coryllus. Mollusca Pontica Nax. P^cueslius. He^acleotica.
if they be eaten with the small skins. Therefore to take away the grief, it
is goo to blaunch them in hot water: and helps well then against many
passions and evils. The skin thereof meddled with honey, helps against
falling of hair, and makes hair grow in the body^, as Isaac says, and
Constantine also. There is also many diversities of Nuts, that accord to
medicine, as Nux Muscata, Mude Indica, and Nux Vomica, and other such. Nux
Muscata, the Nutmeg; is the fruit of a Tree that grows in Inde, in a shale
that is hard, and covered with a skin, as Auellana. And the ^inde thereof is
called Macis, and is right medicinable. And comfort namely the heart, and
purges the spirit of feeling in the Maine: and he heateth the cold stomach,
and comfort appetite, and this ^inde is somewhat bitter. And the bark
thereof is yeolow, and has a sharp favor, and somewhat bitter: and that that
is black or earthy, and has not a sharp savor, is to be forsaken: and the
Nutmegge taken out of the^ rind and of the shale, is environed with a thin
skin and plain. And the more heavy the Nutmeg is in weight, and the more
sweet in smell, and sharp in savor, the better it is. And so the best is
heavy and sound within, and seems reddy in color, and falls not to
Powder when it is broken, and has a strong savor and sweet, and it has
virtue to comfort and to heat the stomach: and to consume and wast ven^ositie:
and to heal head ach that comes of cold. The Nutmeg held to the nose,
comfort the brain and the spiritual members, as Plinius, Dioscorides, and
Platearius mean.

( Addition.
The Filbert is better then the basell nut, and inferior to the Almonde nut,
being new ripe they are best to be eaten, especially with bread.)

Of Nardo. chap. 110.
NArdus is a little herb with pricks, and is hot, and smells well. And so
among the Greeks, Nardus spica is called Nardostartes, as Isidore says
libro.17. And thereof is treble manner kind, Indica, Sinaca, and Celtica, but
none grows in Siria, but in a land having many mountains, that stretches to
Siria in one side, and to Indie in the other side. The best is smooth and
light, brown, and plain, with small ciles, and dries the tongue when it is
chewed. And Nardus Celtica has that name of the Country of Gallia, for it
grows therein, and is like to Nardus, or to Spicis Nard^, but it is more
white, and comfort by good smell, as Dioscorides and Platearius mean. And
helps against swowning and sailing of the heart, and also against feebleness
of the stomach.

(* Nardus, after Doctor Turnar, is called Spickenarde, which as he says,
grows in the Indie, and smells like unto Cyperus: of the which herb, it
appears, the greatest Doctoures are in doubt, it is rare and no common
herb, some will have it a root, others the top like unto our common Spike
Lauender. Read more of this at large in the second book of D. Turnar. fo. 62.
b.)

And it comfort the brain, if it be held to the nose. And abateth cold
rume, and helps against deafness and postumes of the ears, and does away
often evil smell of the mouth, and purges the gums, and opens the stopping of
the liver and of the spleen. And exciteth menstruall blood, and cleanses the
mother, and helps conception, and breaks the stone both in the bladder and
reins. This herb tempereth and softneth, and departs hard matter, and
thirleth and passes into the inner parts. And helps against Palsy of the
tongue, and comfort the sinews, and wastes humors that let the tongue.
Also it is said, that it helps against the falling evil, if it be ministered
in due manner to the patient: and is full good to many other things. And out
thereof woseth the Oil that is called Oleum Nardinum, and is most necessary
to all the foresaid things, and to many other.

( Addition.
In Dod. is set forth three sorts of herbs, called Nardus, which is called
in English, Ualerian, and has a sharp leaf, the second, herb Benet, the
third Asarabecca, yet suppose I none of these three to be the true Nardus.)

Of Olea. chap. 111.
OLea is a tree, and the fruit thereof is called Oliua, and the juice Oleum, as
Isidore says, lib. 17. But this tree is often called Oliua, and is a worthy
tree, and a tree of peace, as he says. For the story of the Remanes mean, yt
without branches of Olive no messengers were sent to Rome to get peace, nor to
proser peace to other men. Remigius says, that the worthiness of this tree is
known, for in token of reconciliation and peace made between God and man, the
Dove came to the window of Noes ship with a token in her mouth, that was a
branch of Olive, and of none other tree.

And libro. 15. Plinius says, that among the Athenienses, vidours were crowned
with Olive. And afterward the Greeks ordained, that their victours should be
crowned with Ol^aster, as he says. And the Olive is a fair Tree in croppe,
in green color, and in multitude of boughs and branches, with whitish
branches. And this tree is green all the Summer and Winter long, and has
small leaves with good smell, and hard rind, and bitter root, and fat fruit,
sauoury and sweet. For as Isidore says, the Olive springs of a bitter
root, that is nourishing of light, medicine of wounds, and feeding of the
hungrye. For Oil is put in Lamps to sustain and to nourish the fire, to sore
members, them for to heal, and in meat, men for to feed. And also to make
meat liking and sauourie, as he says. And Oil is nourishing of fire and of
light, remedy of evils and fores, and makes meat most sauourie and sweet,
as Isidore says. Then the Olive bears fruit, and is medicinal. And leaves
and rind and fruit thereof accords to medicine. The Tree thereof is most
sad and fast, and pure and clean without rotting. And though it be right
hard without, yet nevertheless within the pith, is much humor and fatness.

Libro. 15. Plinius speaks of Oleis, and of Olives and says, that many
manner Olive trees that bear fruit, thrine not in Countries that be too cold
or too hot, but in Countries that draw more to heat then to cold. Therefore
as Plinius says, Cato would have Olives set in hot ground, that is not too
fat nor too lean. For heaven comfort them well, and they love much the dew
of heaven, and fair weather. And if there be much Rain when they be ripe, then
the Oil is appaired and wasted, but if fair wether, come soon after to
temper the thickness of the Oil and liquor.

And Plinius says, cap. 3. That the Olive Tree needs not to be pared nor
shred with hook nor with Bill, as vines be, but it is betaken to the Sun, and
to the dew of heaven: and is glad in springing time, and begins the^ to
bloome. And fruit thereof is first gathered about winter, and when the fruit
is gathered, the tillers of Olives use to open the earth about the root, and
to pare away properly the bompes or knobs, and naughtye small sprayes of the
roots. And some Italians use to call such superfluity about the root, the
goutes of the Olive tree: and so when such superfluite is always, the Olive
thriueth the better, and bears fruit, and is wonderfully amended. And the
Olive will not be hard beaten with stones and powles to gather the fruit
thereof, as some men do that be vntedy and vnwife. For such beating tourneth to
harm of the tree, and to damage of the next year: For it bears the worse if
it be beaten, as Plinius says.

Of this tree is many manner kind. And each is known by diversity of fruit.
And Isidore says, that this name Oliua is the name of the fruit of the tree
Ole^: And thereof is many manner diversity sound, as Isaac says. For some
Olives be tame, and some grow in woods. The some bears fruit, sometime ripe,
and sometime not ripe, and sometime the ant between. And among these fruits of
the Olive, the first be earthy, four and green. And the second reddish, or
Iacinctuous, as Dioscorides says, and the last seems black: and ye more
black they be without, the more ripe they be within, and the more fat and able
to yield Oil. And Aristotle says, that it ripeth never perfectly on ye tree,
though it hang on it many a year: but to make the perfectly ripe, they must be
laid on a heap together, and they must lie so long time, yt by pressing the
heat and may be comforted, and come into the inner parts thereof, and ripe the
fruit at full. And Isaac in Die. says, that Olive beryes, if they be red, and
not full ripe, nor right la^, they comfort well the stomach, and be binding,
and excite appe^tite, also namely if they be art^ied with vinegar or with
sauce. Nevertheless they be hard to defy: and nourish less then other. And
the black that be as it were ^^pe, be froste and temperate, between moist
and dry. And nourish much, and seems the womb. For by fatness thereof they
^^ee^e in the from^elle, and come not downewarde into the place of digestion.
And they turn soon into corruption of humors, and be the less worthy to
meat. But they be good in medicine For if they be stamped and laid to a place
that is burnt with fire, or sealded with water, they keep, that blaines shall
not arise, and do bear them down, if they be risen, and opens the pores,
and makes the fumosity to pass but that is closed in the skin, of blaines
and swelling. Huc vsque Isaac in Dietis.

Libro. 15. cap. 3. Plinius says, that verses of Olive appaire not while they
be on ye tree. For they be the better: for they gather alwase virtues now and
new, and hang and fit the faster. The Bery thereof is compounded as he says,
of the fieruell, flesh, Oil, and drast yt is called Amurca, and is bitter: and
is nevertheless profitable in medicine. And ye shales when ye Oil is wrong
out, with leaves, be good to nourish fire, and make swine ^a^, as it is said.

( Addition.
The Garden Olives are better then the wild Olives: being green, they
strengthen the stomach, and provoke appetite to eat.)

Of Oleo. chap. 112.
Oil is the juice of herbs of Olive, as Isidore says. And the more fresh it
is, the more noble it is, and the more stilye it comes out of the hulls: the
better it is, and the more noble, as Plinius says, libro. 17. cap. 2. There it
is said, that Oil appayreth by age. Also there it is said, that it comes the
better and the cleaner out of the drasse in the wringing and pressing, if the
Beryes be before hand well, stamped or ground with a mill stone, and scalding
hot water thrown thereon. Buy such hot water the fatness, is departed the
better from the brasts: Hulles and drasse ^^eere above the water, and be
craftelye departed from the water at last.

As he says, the switter the Oil runs out of the press or of the
wringing, the better it is accounted. For what that is less meddeled with,
cat^^ye substance, the more fat and sweet it is. Heereto Papias says, that if
a man be under water with Oil in his mouth, and spouteth out that Oil there
in the water, all that is in the bottom and hid by the ground is the more
clear, and the more clearly seen of him (put all ye oil ascend against his
eyea, Addition.
by the force of the water, and so he shall see never a whit)

Kind, of Dise makes good savor in meat, and nourishes light and eases,
refreshes, and comfort weary bodies and l^ns, and softneth and slaketh
hard sinews, that be shronke or spilt with the crampe. And softeneth and
ripeth Postinnes that he hard, and namely Lyny Oil, of Linne seed. Many
diverse Oiles he pressed out of many diverse things. And some oil is simple,
as oil of Olive, oil of Nuts, oil of Popy, oil of Almonds, of Raphens oil,
of Linne seed Oil, of Hemp, and of other such. And some oil is meddled and
compouned, and thereof some is cold, and some is hot, some is binding, and some
is constraining, and some laxing. For composition of hot things, (...)
is hot Oils and of cold, cold oil: and of buiding things, binding Otle:
and of laratiue, laratine oil: therefore for diverse causes of evils, diverse
Oils shall be taken: as in cold causes and matter, Oil de Bay, Oleum
Laurinum, Nardinom, and Puloguim, shall be taken and in hot causes oil of Roses,
and oil of Uiolets shall be taken, are other such. Oil may be so hot, that it
shall breed the ^^cauers, if the pulse veins, and (...) and the pawme of the
hands and the sales of the feet be ha^m^d therewith, as oil in the which
Lions flesh is sod, as it is said in Compendeo Sa^ernitant. Also oil may be so
cold, that it shall ^^ony, the member that is ha^^ied therewith and stay it, so
that it shall have no feeling, as it fereth of oil of Mandragota, that is made
of oil, in the which Apples of Mandragota be soon, or kept long in. But
among Oils that be so compounded, the temperate Oils he best and most
medicinable.

And of simple Oils, Oil of Olive is best both in meat and medicine, and then
of nuts and of Almonds, and then Oil of popie: But that Oil is more cold
then the other foresaid Oiles, and more dry also, and is most made of black
Popie seed, and breeds sleep, and helps against hot Postumes in the
beginning, and against chasing of the liver, as Platearius says. And other
Oils be less according to meat, for heavy smell and strong savor, and be
good and profitable to medicine, as Isaac says in Dietis. And generally in all
Oil is much air and lightness Therefore ^^ fleeteth above al other liquors,
and has disdain to be under other liquors. Oil seaketh and spreads it
self. And is therefore better kept in glasen vessel then in treen vessel, or
in vessel with many holes and pores. Oil spotteth and in^citeth clothes that
it touches, and makes them smell thereof always. Oil shed in water, fleeteth
above in round drops, and then the water cannot be made all clean of the
fatness and savor of the Oil. Oil with sharp savor and strong, weddeled
with Amusca, or with the dragges, is not good so meats. For such greiteth
vomiting and spewing, and corrumpeth the mouth of the stomach. And Oil slays
Eres, and footlesse beasles with long and plyaunt bodies, if it be shed upon
them, as Aristotle says. And vinegar turnesh them again to life, if it be
shed upon them. And clean Oil heepeth bright won from rusting, if the iron be
no^nted therewith. If the Oil be corrupt or watrye (...) ^^sdd^led with Oil
drasts, (...) it destroieth and corrumpeth the iron that is nointed therewith
as Plinius says.

Of Olcastio. cap. 113.
OLeaster, is a wild Olive tree and has that name for it is like to the Olive
tree but the leause thereof be somewhat smaller then Olive leaves. And this tree
is barren and bitter, and not filled. And if a graffe of Olive he graffed
thereon it changes the quality thereof, and turns it into his own
analytie as Isidore says libro. 1^. This Tree has double dropping. The one is
like to Gum without any biting qualitye: and the other is bitter, and like
to gum Ammonicum, as Isidore says. Though this tree Oliaster be a wild tree,
yet the rinds, gums, and branches thereof accord to medicine, for the leaves
thereof be bindium, sour, and bitter, and heals botches of the head and of
the mouth with honey. The juice of the rind and of the branches thereof, is sour
and binding, and stauncheth all flure and running of humors and of blood, as
he says. And the gum thereof is good to many things, and namely yt that is
most biting. For it cleanses and heals wounds, and helps the gums that be
gnawen and corrupted and strengthens and comforreth the teeth, and puts of
and heals the evil that is called Erisipila, and the holy fire, that comes
of wood Cholera, and gnaweth and fretteth flesh and bone. And helps against
falling of hair, and dies hair, and hides or tarrieth hoarenesse of hair,
as he says.

( Addition.
Olives, condise in salt liquor, taken at the beginning of a meal, does cherish
the stomach, stirs appetite, and loses the belly, being eaten with
vinegar. They which be ripe are temperatly hot; they which be green, are
colder and dry. Sir Tho. Eliot.)

Of Olere. chap. 114.
Colevvortes.
COle is called Olus, and has that name of Olendo, smelling, for as Isid.
says. First men eat Colles ere they had corn and flesh to ease, be sore the
flood men eat apples, coals, and herbs, as beasts eat grass and herbs, as
Isi. says, libro. 13. And though all ye heart is yt grow in the earth be able
to be sod, and according to man's meat be generally called Olus in the singular,
and Olera in the plural, yet most commonly cole is called Olus in ye singular,
and Olera in the plural. The stalk and leaves thereof grow swifte and then
stalks or leaves of other herbs, as he says. And ye ouermost croppe thereof
is called time, as it were Come: and the natural virtue of this herb is namely
in the crop thereof. And therefore ye effect, and might of medicine as well of
this herbs as of other is most in the crop, as he says. The herb is cold and
dry, and breed to thick blood and troubly, and horrible smell, as Isaac says
in Die. and some cole is Summer cole, and some is Winter cole. And this herb
is compounded of contraries, for the substance is great and hard to defy.

The wose thereof and juice is running and sometime cleansing and drieng, and
sometime moisting and laring in the womb: But the substance without the
juice, is stopping and binding. The malice thereof is withdrawn, if it be
sod or boiled in water, and that water thrown away, and the cole then sodden
in other water with good fatness and sauoury, as it is said in Dietis. This
herb thriueth by setting and planting. For this herb is sown and grows
first in one place, and if it be then taken by and set in better land, it
grows fast, and thriueth both in quantity, quality, and in virtue. In Summer
the tender leaves thereof be eaten with small shags, and with other worms. And
be constrained in Winter with great frost and small, and be so made the more
tender to seething, and the better to eating. For when the heat comes into
the inner parts of the leaves, the substance thereof is the better defied, and
be the more soft.

And li. 20. cap. 10. Plin. praises strongly the Colewoort touching the use of
medicine, and says, that there is three manner kinds of coals: some with
crispe leaves and good for the stomach, and some softneth some deal the
womb. And another with broad leaves and thick, and is less worth in
medicine.

The third with thin leaves and simple, and is more better then the other, and
better in medicine. Leaves thereof bruised and laid too two days, heals wounds
of hounds, both new and old, and that wonderfully. Cole little sod, laxeth,
and binds, if it be much and greatly sodden. Cole withstandeth wine and
drunkenness, and comfort the sinews: and is therefore good for the Palu^e,
and for trembling and quaking. And causes abundance of milk for children in
their nurses breasts, and the juice thereof helps against venim, and also
against biting of a wood hound, as he says there, and Serpents fly the smell
of cole sod. And he reckons up many other virtues, the which and pass over
at this time for noyfull tarrieng. And he says, that Bractea, the wild cole,
grows without tilling, and has stronger virtues and working.

( Addition.
Colewortes being given to kine, causes them to yield abundance of milk,
and fattneth them in short time: but being in good plight they must be killed,
or else they grow to the rot.)

Of Ordeo. cap. 115.
Barley is called Ordeum, and has that name, Hordeum Barley.
for it is soon dry, as Isidore says: or it has that name of Ordo, for it
has sometime in the year six orders and rules of grains. This corn we call
winter bear, and so both Barley and bear be called Ordeum. And this bear
feeds more better beasts then wheat, and is more wholesome to men then evil
Wheat or Rye, as Isid. says. There is another kind of Barley that has two
rows of grains in the ear. The third manner Ordeum is called Trimense. For it
ripeth in the space of three months after yt it is sown, as he says.

Plinius speaks of Barley or bear, li. 18. ca. 7. Among corn bear is first
fowen, and among many nations right good and noble bread is made of bear or of
barley. And among the Greeks is a manner meat made thereof which is called
Polenca, and they do wet first this corn with water, and then dry it, and
grind it in a mill, and depart the meal from the bran. And Italians grind
Barley small without beating before or watring. Of all fruit barley is most noble
in meal, and will not be sown but in sad land, and dries and ripeth soon
and fast, for the substance thereof is soft: and no seed seems in less
danger of corruption. For it grows swiftlye, and is ripe before Wheat, and
gathered ere corruption or rotting fall upon it, and has foulest straw among
all corn, and unworthiest stubble. But within is much meal when it is arrayed
in due manner, as Plinius says.

And Isaac says in Dietis, that Ordeum is cold and dry, and drives and
cleanses, and has little ventositye in regard of the Bean, but the Bean
nourishes test then Ordeum, though the Bean breeds ventositie by kind, and
such things as make the womb rise and stretch, nourish not always best, as
Plinius says. And he says that many men use Barlye more in medicine then in
meat, but thereof is made both meat and drink, that nourishes the body, and
comfort the spiritual members. And of Barley shealed and sodde in water is
medicinable drink made, that Physicians call a Thisane. And this drink
quenches thirst, and keeps and saves health, and changes feuerous heat.
But of Thisane look innermore in littera T.

( Addition.
This Hordeum has three sorts, Politicum, Dystichum, Nudum, of the which is
brued good drink and wholesome, whereof some so well like of the taste, that
they drink three all-outs: the drink out of the pot, the wit out of the head,
and all their money forth of their purse.)

Of Palma. chap. 116.
PAlma is a Tree of victory, and has that name, as Isidore says, libro. 17.
for therewith the victore hand is ornated, or else for boughs thereof be shaped
as the palm of the hand, and is a tree noble and famous always fair and
green, and long time beautified with branches and leaves both in Winter and
Summer. And for it indureth and is green many a day, and long time, therefore
by likeness of the Bird Phoenix that lineth long time, the Palm is called
Phoenix among the Greeks. And is a Tree that bears fruit, that is far and
lykeing, but the fruit thereof ripeth not in every place, where that it
grows: But in Syria and in Egypt, often the fruit thereof is called
Dactylus, and has that name for likeness of fingers, and the names thereof
be diverse.

For some is called Palmule, and be like to Mirabolanes in shape and
disposition, and all diverse in savor. For these have savor most sweet and
pleasant, and M^^ssolim have horrible and bitter savor. And some be called
The bace and Nicholaus, and some Mutales, that the Greeks call Canathos. Hue
vsque Isid. And the Gloss super Psalmum touches, ye palm is a full high tree,
but not to high as the Ceber. The root thereof is rough and round, and full
fast and deep in ye ground; the stock thereof is sad and hard, and vnreth
without rotting. The ^ind thereof about the stock is hard and rough, and
somewhat pricking, and namely toward the ground. Therefore it is hard to
climb thereupon, and to come to the fruit thereof. The leaves thereof so long,
shapen as a sword. And though the Palm be hard and sharp about the stock,
yet in the crop it is pleasing and liking for man's fight in fairness and
liking of boughs. And Palm bears the fruit on high in the crop of the
boughs, and not in the middle of the leaves, as Plinius says libro. 13. And
the nearer the fruit thereof is to the Sun be arises, the more fructuous it
is, and also the more sweet and sauourie. The Palm grows in many Countries
and lands. And bears fruit no where else so well, as it does in hot
countries and lands, that are always in heat of the Sun, and in ground that
is mild and sandy, and not full of great stones. And therefore Judea, Jury,
is rich of Palms, as Plinius says, lib. 13. cap. ^. And he sets double
kind of Palms, male and female: and the male bloometh first, and after the
female buddeth and bloometh. And the female bears not fruit, but if she be so
nigh the male, that the smell of the male may come with the wind to the female.

In libro Vegitabilium Aristo. says, when the seed thereof is sown or se^ it
needs that the seed of the male and female be sown or set together, the
seed shall be set twain and twain together, and then of each springs a
plant, and thereof springs four planes, and clearie together as it were a
net and be joined each to other by a wounderfull craft of kind.

And the female grows not well, nor bears fruit with the male. And if the
male be feld, then is the female barren after two days out. If leaves and
flowers of the male be put above the roots of the female, then by comfort of
the male, as it were by comfort of the work of generation, ye female takes
often virtue and strength. And such trees loves not moistye places, nor fat and
smoakie, but they love Salt places and sandy. Therefore it needs too sow
and spring. Salt there as no Salt place is, and not fast by the root, but
somewhat nigh thereto is wast the superfluity of the humor of the ground, as
Plinius says. In the South Country is a manner Palm, that is alone in that
kind, and none other springs nor comes thereof: but when this Palm is so
old, that is sayieth all for age: then often it quickneth and springs again of
it self. Therefore men suppose, that Phoenix, that is a bird of Arabia, has
the name of this Palm in Arabia. For he dies and quickneth, and lives often,
as the foresaid Palm does as Plinius says there. And he says there, that in
Aethiopia be man^e manner Palms and diverse, and be not more wonderful, for
they be not wide known, then they be for lyking and sweetness. Among the
which the best be called Cariace, and be best of juice and of meat. For the
fruit thereof is most plenty of juice, and so out thereof is noble Wine wrong.
Hue vsque Plinius, li. 18. cap. 5.

Then the Palm is a singular tree, with a small stock, and rough in
comparison to the ground that it grows in, and sayre and liking in boughs
and top. The leaves thereof be long and plain, thick and according to
diverse uses, as to make wheels and cups, as Hierom says. But yet the side
corners be some deal sharp. Boughs of palm be called Elate, and rear
themselves upward, and be always green, and never bend downward: And ye middle
stiable of this word Elate is long as in Cant. 5. Come we elate palmaru^.
Elate or Elates in Greek, is called Ablea in latin; and after that makes the
middle stiable short.

And it seems that another letter means the same wise. Cant. 5. Crines
eiurs sicut Abietis. And so the middle stiable is made short, and not long. The
fruit of Palm is diverse both in shape and virtue, and that by diversity of
the tree that it grows on, and also of the ground, in the which the tree
grows, and by diverse receiving of the heat of heaven, that smites
diversely on the tops of Palms, as Plinius means, lib. 13. The first is,
for such Palms bear fruit seld or never: and this is for evil disposition or
insufficient heat, as it sareth in Palms of Italy, that bears fruit seld or
never, and if they bear fruit, the fruit is never perfectly ripe, as Plinius
says. And the second is proved by the foresaid things. For in ground that is
cold or too moist, too fat, or too famous, Palms thrive not, but sail of
perfect thrifte without remedy, as he says.

And the third is true, for in shadowy places that be not shined with the
Sun beams, Palm may not grow. And if it happens that it grows some
where in such a place, yet it may not bear fruit, and come to worthiness of
Palms. This is it that Isaac touches in Dietis, and says, that Dactila the
fruit of Palm is hot and moist in the second degree, and has diverse workings
by qualities of Countries and lands that it grows in. For it grows in cold
Countries that is not soon hot, and some in hot countries soon, and some in
mean countries and temperate between these twain. And Dactilus the fruit of
Palm that grows in some hot country, where the Sun is always, is most sweet
and sauourye, and somewhat unctuous for a manner gleaminesse, and though it be
full sweet and sauourie, and some deal unctuous, yet it may sometime grieve
bodies that eat thereof too often and too much, for it breeds boming and
swelling, and sore ach of the mouth of the stomach, and of the head, and
stops the ways of the liver and of the spleen, and so it is not good to use
continuallye all sweet things, for they grieve often both body and soul. And
fruit of Palm that grows in cold countries, that is not full hot, is not
perfectly ripe. And is therefore sower and dry, and as it were raw, and
nourishes not soon the bodies, but grieueth it full sore, for such fruit is
hard to defy, though it comfort somewhat the stomach, and breeds often
fretting and gnawing, as he says. And though fruit that grows in mean hot
Countries be ripe, yet in them is much superfluitye of watrye moisture, that it
may not be kept ripe, and so it fills bodies with raw humor. That is
matter of long during seauers, as Isaac says in Dietis.

Fruit of Palm is compowned of soft substance, as it were fleshie, and of an
hard kernel, as it were stony: In ye midst thereof seed is contained. But in
Siria and in Egypt is some Dactilus, fruit of Palm sound all without kernel:
and such fruit of Palm is called Spado, for in the substance thereof is no
reason seminall, as Plinius says. The more noble and old the Palm is, ye
better the fruit thereof is. And the Palm bears no fruit before an hundred
years, and then it has the first perfect and complete virtue.

And Dioscorid. affirms and says, that the fruit of the Palm Tree is good
and necessary in medicine, and makes smooth the roughness of Arteries, and
it clarifieth and makes clear the voice, and most namely when they be right
ripe. For the fruit of palm is full sour while it is green. And Plinius
says, some of Alexanders knights were choked with green fruit of Palm. And
so this fruit accords not to meat while it is all green, but only to
medicine, and helps against the flixe also if it be ordained in due manner.

( Addition.
Palma, a Palm or date tree, of the branches were garlonds made for
conquerours, or those that overcame. The Date tree grows in Africa, Arabia,
India, and Siria, Judea, and all the countries of the East or orient, the fruit
is hot and dry, almost in the second degree, eaten raw, they stop the belly,
but sodden, they comfort and restrore ye liver and melt, the fruit in shops is
called Dactylus.)

Of Palms. chap. 117.
Palms, is properlye a bough, or a branch of a vine. Thereof Isidore libro.
17. speaks and says, that Palms is the soft matter of a vine, and
springs out in new arms, and the branches bear the fruit that grows
therein. The leaf thereof is called Pampinus, by the leaf the branch is
defended and succored against cold and heat, and against all wrongs of frost
and snow, and other hard weathers that fall. And in some place the leaves be
plucked away, for the Sun should come to the fruit, and ripe it speedely,
and to do away the shadow, yt lets ye riping, as he says. The vine
draws all virtue and norishing yt it has from the root, and draws
strongly, because that it has strong heat, that is closed therein in pores
thereof, and draws much humor that passes into substance of branches, and
the other deal tourneth into matter of knops, of burgening of buds, of
flowers, and of fruit, as Plinus says lib. 13. Such as the humor of
nourishing is in the root, such it is showed in branches: and so Compendium
Salerni, teaches to make grapes of diverse colors in ye same vine, while a
vine is graffed on three branches, that springs out of one stock of the same
vine, and with one graffe slit, in time of graffing is done red color, and
with the other blew color, and with ye third yelow color. Then each of the
graffes springing of the branches of such color, shall bear Grapes like to
that yt was done therewith in the slit of graffing. But seldom in this
Country is one vine graffed on another vine, though sometime vines be graffed
on stocks or on trees. Therefore often fruit is changed in this manner: In
March, when the humor begins to pass upward from the root, the rind of
the Uine is warely opened, and when it is open, the color is put in about the
root, between the tree and the rind, and is then busily kept, that the
humor that comes upward from the root, pass not at the slit: and so the
humor that the branch draws by little and little from the root, is
changed, passing by the color. And some thereof is unctuous, and turns into
the fruit, and the likeness thereof, leaves in the fruit.

By the same trafte every plant may be turned and changed in color and in
savor, and some trees, which lundlye bind, by craft be made kindly to laxe:
and so of the contrary as he says. And Alfredus says the same, super l.
quinto plantarum. And that as diverse manner of kind of trees be craftily
graffed in the graffing time. Isidore speaks and says, that of the sprayes
and branches of the vine, springs small and little crookes, and by those
small crookes, the branches and sprayes beclyppeth and compasses the tree
round about, and is kept and held up thereby, and withstandeth by ye help
thereof, diverse and many manner of winds and storms, and wethers, that the
branches be not shaked and hurled with the wind, and to save the fruit from
peril of falling. The branches springs and spreads wide about, and for
the branch is full tender and brittle in the beginning, such holding is
needful, till it be strong by venefice of the Sun. Every year the
branches needs cutting and paring, and discharging of superfluity, to
spring and bear fruit the better. The vine that is not cut, spreads full
wide, and passes out of kind, and tourneth into kind of a wild vine. The
noble vine is known by thick or thin set knots: for as Plinius says li.
20 ca. 15. for thin setting of knots and sorre asunder, is a token of barren
vine: and thick setting of knots, is token of a good vine and bearing. Look
inner De natura vitis.

Of Propagine. ca. 118.
PRopago, propaginis, is a young branch of a vine, that springs of a slip of
a vine that is new set in ye ground, as Isidore says. The highest branches of
a vine are called Flagella, for they be wagging with blastes of wind, and be
set and pight in the ground to make the vine to spread, or to multiplye new
vines.

And thereof springs new plants and branches of Uines, and these branches
be called Propagines, for Propaginate, is to understand, to ses and plant
vines, and put new branches in the ground, that new vines may spring thereof,
to make the Uineyard spread wide and large: for Propagate is to say, spread and
spring, as Isidore says.

Also Uine branches bent down into a grippe of earth, and hid with earth,
conceiueth virtue of generation, and bears new branches, and so the virtue
of generation leaf is above in the branches, breaks out some and some, by
virtue of hence that turns outward into the branches. And some of that
virtue, is been down to the ground, and is meddled with earth, and tourneth
into roots, and thereof springs new branches, and draws nourishing and
seeding of the same roots, and turns all into roots at the la^e, ^ feeds
continually the veins that spring, and ye mother feeds ye daughter r^^^^
that that so took first feeding and nourishing is by craft turned and
changed into the kind of a nourse: For the branch that first took feeding
of ye root, is now, changed and become a root, and nourishes and feeds
all the branches that spring thereof, as the mother nourishes the daughter, as
Gregorye says.

Of Platano. cap. 119.
Sambucus Palustris, or Licostaphilos.
PLatanus is a tree and has that name ^so^ the leaves thereof no plain, broad,
and large for plain is Plants in Greek, as Isidore says libro. 17. Holy
Writ speaks of the virtues thereof, and says, As a Plane arcared Eccl. 14.
The leaves thereof is soft and tender, and like to vine leaves, as Dioscorides
says. And he ^^eth^ that the plane is a cold tree and dre(...) the leaves
thereof heals in hot co(...) for it destroys reume, and hot (...)olling
of the oyen. And the decoction both of rindes and leaves, heals ach of the
teeth, and other bones, as it is said, and has virtue to heal sharp and
sower evils. And so it is said, that it helps to ease scalding and burning
if it be laid thereto, with other things that eases. Broth thereof if it be
sodde in wine helps against venime. Plinius libro. 12. cap. 3. praises it.

( Addition.
Plain tree, is called the Marris Elder, Oil, or dwarffe plane tree, the
flowers white, the berries red shining. Also Platanus is of another sort,
whereof some grow in England. The fruit of this tree drunk with wine, helps
them that are bitten of Serpents, the fruit is round, rough, and woolly, of the
quantity of a Filbert.)

Of Populo. cap. 120.
POpulus is a tree, and has that name of multitude, for of the crop and root
thereof, springs many boughs, twigs, and branches, as Isidore says libr.
17. Thereof is double kind, black and white. The white has leaves on the one
side, and green on the other, and so there be two colors, as it were tokens
of day and of night, for it changes color in one manner in the Sun
rising, and another wise in the Sun going down, as he says. Also out of
this tree, droppeth Rosen in Italy and in Syria, and Diosco. and other account
this Rosen medicinable to staunch blood, and cease sweates and other runnings
and droppings O^te of the crop thereof is Ointment made, that is cold and
stopping, and swaging heat, and exciteth sleep, and among Physicians, the
Ointment is called Populeon, and is accounted needful in many cold passions
and evils. And also Isidore says, that Popular and Plane and Withie be soft
of kind, and able to grave and write in, and when such trees be shred and
pared, they spring and spread both in length and in breadth.

(*The Popler tree is of three sorts, the one white, the other black, and the
third is called Aspe. The Ointment that is made of the buds, is good against
all inflammations, and against all brusings, squattes, and falls, and against
swelling.)

Of Pino. chap. 121.
THe Pine apple tree is called both Pinus and Picea, and has that name Pinus,
of sharpness of leaves, for in old time, men called Pinus sharp. And this
tree is called Picea, for out thereof sweateth and woseth pitch, as Isidore
says libro. 17. In the Islands of Germania, of ye Pine apple tree comes
dropping and wosing, which is made hard with coldness or with heat, and so
tourneth into a precious stone, that is called Electrum, as Isidore says
there. And this Electrum has another name, and is called Succus, for it is the
juice of a Tree, and is there named and called Pinus.

Also this tree is good to all thing, that is kept and continued there-vnder:
as the Fig tree greeueth and noyeth all things that is there-vnder, as
Isidore says.

The Pine tree is an high tree, even and light, with many small hoales, and is
right strong, for therein be many knots, and for the Pine apple tree is right
strong, oftentimes thereof be mastes made for ships, and is right good timber
for edifieng and buylding: but this tree takes right soon fire, and burns
if it comes nigh the fire, and that is, for because of the plenteous
fatness, which is therein, for out thereof comes pitche. The rind of this
tree, is hard and rough with out, but the humor within is fat and gleymie, but
this humor is drawn out in Summer by the heat of the Sun, and changes
and tourneth into Rosin, and this Rosin is first white, and is right black
when it is sodde and pitch made thereof, and sauoureth full well, and so does
the smoke thereof: also by great seething the savor thereof abateth.

This tree bears many leaves, but they be small and sharp: and this tree is
of green color, both in winter and also in Summer. And though this tree be
most fattest, yet it grows in mountains, and in right dry places, and also
stony: and though this tree be of great springing, yet the more it is pared and
shred toward the ground, the more it springs and spreads upward toward
heaven: and grows slowly, because of gleimie humuor and thick, that is soon
deffed and digested. This tree is spoiled of ye rinds, for it should dry the
better. Between the rind and the Tree, worms breed, when the tree begins
to dry, and these worms fret and gnaw the tree, and therefore to save the tree
and keep it, it is accounted a chief medicine to take-off the rind, that
worms breed not of corrupt humo^^ that is in the rind, and between the tree
and the rind.

Also lib. 16. Plinius says, that ye Pine tree and Alloren tree, healed with
earth ^orye under the ground, dure and last long time. Pipes and conduiles made
of pine tree, and laid deep under the earth dure many years, and rotteth and
corrupts soon, if it lie above the earth in moist places, which altogether
hid under the ground, by running of water that runs thereon, it wexeth
hard, and dureth in an house long time, and rotteth not soon, neither is worm
eaten, but if it be corrupt with dropping of rain, but deep under the earth,
it cures and abides full long time safe and sound without any corruption, and
the contrary is of the Ver, that rotteth anon under earth, and dureth best
within the house and kept dry, as Plin. says li. 21. ca. 10.

( Addition.
Of Pine trees there are five kinds, as appears in Dudoneus Herball, and
bears a kind of wooden apples, within the which is Rosen: these serve for
diverse purposes. folio. 770.)

Of Pines. cap. 122.
PInea the Pine apple, is the fruit of the Pine tree, as Plini. says. And is
great and round by the stalk, and sharp at the end, and first green, and
more full when it is ripe, with color, as it were the color of a Castane.
The pine apple is the most greatest nut, and conceiueth in it self in steed
of fruit many kernells, closed in full hard shales, and be joined together in
a certain order, and nevertheless, for none should touch other, they be
distinguished and departed asunder with skins of the shales, as it were by
certain walls, as it were by wonderful craft of kind, and be so ordained, for
ye more greater kernels should occupy the more larger place, and ye less yt
lesser place. And be so set in most best wise, for the less should be in the
less place, under the weight of the more kernells: For the greater end of the
Pine apple hangs above, and is fast to the Tree by a stalk, and the sharp
end hangs somdeale downward toward the earth And a Pine apple holds fast
and closes the kernells while it is fresh and new, and not dried of his fat
humor by age. And the Pine apple fordryeth, when the gleymie humor and
fatness is wasted, and then the Pine apple all to falls: and so the one
part is departed from the other, and kernel from kernel.

Therefore Dioscorides and Platearius mean, that when the Pine apple kernel
shall be used, it needs to heat easily all the Pine apple upon coals, and
so the double rind thereof is taken away, the inner and the utter. And then
the kernells be full medicinable, and plain and smooth, and moisteth, and some
deal opens and cleanses the spiritual members, and eases the cough, and
helps them that have the Tisike, and be consumed, and increases blood.

The rindes thereof be medicinable, and by sowrenesse thereof stauncheth blood,
and namely menstruall, and binds and stauncheth bloody flixe of the womb,
as it is said in Plat. and in Plinius libro. 15.

Of Pice. chap. 123.
PItch is called Pix, and is dropping of the Pine tree, and is made hard and
black seething on the fire, as Isid. says. Of Pitch is double manner of
kind, the one is called ship pitch, for ships be pitched therewith, and chins
and crasing of ships be stopped therewith, to keep that water should not come
into ye ship; and pitch molten, is called pitch Liquida, and either kind of
pitch is hot and dry, and the hard pitch is compouned in one manner, and the
fleeting or soft in another manner. And many call this fleeting pitch
Colophora, or Pix Greca, Pitch of Greece: for in Greece is much thereof found,
and either manner pitch is medicinable, and dissolueth and consumes, and
wastes, and helps against stopping and evil of the spleen, and is put in
many other medicines and in playsters.

And Dioscorides says, that Pitche helps against venime and venomous biting,
stamped with salt, and pitch makes fire burn lightly, and defiles and
smorcheth hands by cleaving too, that it touches, and namely, if it be molten,
and defiles white color, and white clothes and clean, and such defiling is
uneath taken away from clothes, as touching the color and savor.

Of Pyro. chap. 124.
PIrus is the Pear tree, that bears fruit, and has that name, for the
fruit thereof is shaped as the flame of the fire: for the fruit thereof is
great and hard and broad at that one end, and narow and straight at that
other, as ye flame of fire, as Isidore says libro. 17. And the tree is called
Pirus, and the fruit thereof is called Pirum, a Pear, as he says: and so few
Pears weigh heavier than many apples, if they be on a beasts back, as he says.

And Isa. in diet says. Of pears is double manner of kind, wild and tame: and
of either kind, the boughs and branches be sower, stopping, and biting. But
the fruit is full diverse, for the wild pears be more sower and earthy, more
cold and dry than the tame, and more unsavory and hard in the taste, for
they be generally more vndigest, and accords not therefore to meat, but
only to medicine: for it binds and stops strongly the flux of the womb,
and stauncheth cholaricke spewing, if they be sad in running water, and laid to
the stomach. And tame Pears grene and not ripe, be sower, great and hard, and
unsavory, and evil to meat, but in seething in fresh water with honny, or
with some other sweet thing, the earthinesse and the roughness thereof may be
somewhat tempered: But yet they be not according to meat, but to medicines.

And tame Pears ripe be cold and dry, and the sower substance thereof, is
meddled with watery sweetness, and therefore according both to meat and
medicine, but they be better according both to meat and medicine after meat
then before: for after meat they laxe and bear down the meat to the place
of digestion, and comfort the sinews of the mouth of ye stomach. And many
pears eaten fasting, breeds worms in the womb, and Colliea ^a^sio
incurable, and sweet pears be more temperate of co^plection, and less cold
than other, and accords therefore, the better to them that be cold and dry.

And pears have this property, that if they be sod with toad stools, they
take away from them all grief and malice, and namely wild pears, for they
be full sower, as Isaac says. Powder or ashes of wild years drunk, helps
against Fronges tead stools, as he says. Always after eating of pears. Wine
shall be drunk, for as one says, without wine, pears be venime.

( Addition.
The drint and mellower that the pears be, the wholsomer they be: ill to and
cold stomach, but baked with, day, and hot spices, they are indifferent.)

Of Pruno. chap. 125.
THe Plum tree is called Piunus, and L^^n^'s and i^ P^unom and of that tree is
many ^^edner of kind; The Damacen plumme.
but the Damacen is the best that comes out of Damask, as Isidore says: the
fruit thereof, accords and heals the stomach. Only of this tree droppeth
and comes glowe and fast gum, Physicians say. ^ints profitable to medicine,
and for to make ink for writers use, as Isid says (...)

The fruit of the plum tree, is called, Prynum, and some is white, and some is
black, and some is red but ye black plum that is somewhat hard, dry and sower
is good for the stomach as they of Damask and the cold plum and moist, when
it is well ripe, moysteth and keeps the mouth, and be given against heat of
fo^uers and against day stopping and binding of the womb. And Papies says
that Prunus and Lentiscus is all one tree. But the Gloss says super Dan. that
Prunus and Lentiscus is the same. Tree and stands for the same. But since of
ye tree Lentiscus comes not Prunus, Puinus and Lenticus is not one tree.

( Addition.
There are diverse sorts of plums, the Damzen, the Apricot, the pear plum, the
wheaten plum, the Leuant plum, The whils shrag, the Bullis, the Sloes, the
s^ages; besides other strange plums that grow in other Countries, to us
unknown, as in Russie, the Yagadens, whereof there are also many kiudes.)

Of Papyro. cap. 126.
PApyrus is a manner Rush, that is my to kindle fire and lanternes, and is
called Pabulem ^gnis, the feeding of f^e^, for fire is called Pir in Greek.
And this herb is put to burn in wickets, and in tapers and is a green
herb and round, and full smooth without with soft pith white and dry sucking,
full of holes within. The rind is stripped off unto the pith, and is so dried,
and a little is left of the rind on the one side, to sustain the tender
with, and the less is left of the rind: the more clear the pith burns in
a lamp, and is the sooner kindeled. And the places wherein such rushes grow,
is as marreys and moors, by ^^eades and, water breaches: and is called Papyro
papyrionis, as Isidore says.

Of rushes be rushen vessels made, for all thing that is made of Rushes, is
called Papyrion. And above Memphis, and in Inde (...) such great rushes, that
they make boats thereof, as the Gloss with Super Esa. ca. 18. And Plinius
witnesses it. And Alexanders story says the same. And of rushes he charters
made in the which were Epistles writ and sent by messengers. Also of rushes be
made pauiers, bores, and cases, Iuncus.
and baskets to keep in letters and other things in as the Gloss says. And
Plinius says, that the pith of this rush, is good to draw water out of the
earth, for it sucketh it kindly, and draws it to it self.

Therefore with rushes, water is drawn out of wine. Lib. 13. Plinius speaks
of rushes and says, that in marreys of Egypt grow rushes, and in other
standing water of Nilus, where the waters pass not two cubits of height.
Rooles of rushes that grow in those places and bounds, be as great as an arm,
and be three cornered in the side, and thereof spring Rushes, passing ten
cubits of height. And people of that country, use those rushes to burn in
steed of wood. Of these rushes be made diverse things, that be needful in
households, and thereof they make and weaue boats and sails, and ropes for
ships, and also clothing. And also they make thereof Paper to write with, Huc
vsque Plinius.

( Addition.
Five kinds of rushes are written of: Mariscus the candle rush, Iuncus acutus,
the hard rush and fenne rush, Hotosehaenus, the bull rush or Mat rush,
Squinantum, in English Squinant, as reported D^don. in Fol. 511. Papyrus, a
great rush in Aegipt growing in fe^^s or istac^th grounds, whereof the first
paper was made: now it is used for paper to write or print on. The paper that
is now common, is made of old lynnen ran^ wrought in a ni^, and brought to a
perfection whereon is written the help of memory, the bewrayer of ^^^on^ and
the treasure of truth, which blusheth ^^ no man's folly, bewrays every one?
Paper is also called Oliarta, of the ^otters therein contained. Seeing we be
come so near the word Papirus, heat what shall be said of Papyrius ye name of
a young Gentleman, who being a child, (as the manner then was) came with his
father into the Senate, at such time as it happened w^^ghtie and very secret
matters to be talked of. When he came home, his mother was very carness with
him, to know what ma^de^ who handled in the Senate that day. He seeing no
other shifte, and yet loath to utter the truth said. To says mother, they
debated that it might be lawful for one man to have two wives. She thinking it
to be true, the next morning, when the Senate was again set, gathered together
the noble women, and with admiration of all men, comes into the Senate and
there with a solemn tale requesteth, that by the same law, it might be
lawful, for women also to have two husbands. The Senate at ye first meruailed
much at her words: But when the matter was declared by the young Gentleman,
they much praised his wisdom and towardness, and with rebuke dimissed the
women that showed themselves so foolish, and so curious to know that, which
nothing appertayned to them. D. Cooper.)

Of Paliuro. cap. 127.
PAliurus, furze is a thistle most rough and sharp with pricks, and grows in
rough land untilled, as Isidore says, with certain heads full of certain
pricks, foul and uneasy to touch: for it grieueth his hand that is fou^^eth,
and in those heads the seed is contained, and that is Dareticum, tempering in
so^^e things, and is good as Dioscori^ says, against venomous biting, and also
to break the stone. Also this herb has many pricks, and wounds feet is
that passes and treads thereon. The stalks thereof be so rough and so full
of pricks, that it suffers not Asses to touch them, neither to eat thereof.

( Addition.
This termed Thistle is Fur^e, called Genista Spinosa, or Goat Thistle.)

Of Papauerd. cap. 128.
POpie is called Popauet, and is a sleepie herb, and makes sick men to
sleep: and is double, common and wild. Thereof comes juice that Physicians
^as^ Opium or Oplo^. Of the common, some is white, and that is cold and moist:
and some is black and that is cold and dry: and some is read.

And this diversity of kind, is known by flowers, white, Purple, red or
whitish. And they have great hands, as Pomegranards: and therein is the said
closed, and the seed is unctuous, and thereof is Oil made, that is good so
diverse uses. Of the juice of the leaves and of the head thereof Opium is made,
that makes them sleep that have the Feauers, and shall be given wisely and
warely, for it is soon stopping, and cooling, and slaieng, and namely black
popie is good and wholesome in medicines, as Plat. and Plin. says, and Diosc.
means.

( Addition.
There be 3. sorts of Poppie, the black, the white, and the common Popie,
which is smallest: all Popies be cold and dry, almost to the 4. degree, a
prouoker to sleep, etc.)

Of Plantagine. chap. 129.
WEy bread is called Plantago, and is a cold herb, and is called Arnoglossa
in Greek, that is to say, ye lambs tongue, as Isid. says li. 17. For ye
leaves thereof be plain, and some deal sinewie, as the tongue, and be euenlong
with roundnesse. In the middle thereof rises and springs one stalk that is
strong with corners, and in the top thereof the seed is gathered, and is in
the shape of a mate: and the miter of ye chief priest was shape^ to ye lykenes
of this herb, as ye Master says in his story super Exo. And namely this
accords to medicine, for it heals sore wounds, and biting of wood hounds,
and abateth the swelling thereof, and helps against the dropsy, and is
contrary to venim, and namely to the venim of a Spider. The juice thereof,
slaieth long worms in the womb, and swageth and abateth strong womb ach, and
cleanses and dries mattry wounds, and abateth running of menstrual blood, and
sheddeth and smites off swellyng of Postumes in ye beginnning: and Wey bread
chewed, eases and cleanses swelling gums and abateth the swelling thereof, as
Diosc. says, that praises the virtues of Arnoglossa, in many manner wise.

( Addition.
Plantago mayor and minor, Ribwort, and sea Plantaine: these 4. kinds are
known. Buckhorne plantaine, and Cordnop plantaine, and Peregrina: these
several are rehearsed in Dodoneus, folio.94.)

Of Petrosilino. chap. 130.
PEtrosily is called Petrosilium, Petroselium.
and is an herb that grows in gardens, Apium Perselie.
and has good smell, and has that name Petrosilium, for often it grows among
stones and stony places. And of Percely is many manner kind, but the best is
Macedouicum, of Macedonia, sweet in taste, and with good odor and smell, as
Isid. says, and the use thereof accords both to meat and to medicine, and
is an hot herb and dry, soon tempering, opening, and departing, and
dividing, and consuming, and wasting, and making thin and subtle great humors,
comforting the stomach, and exciting appetite, and breketh therefore the stone,
and brings out menstrual blood, and helps against the dropsy, and opens
stoppings, of the liver and of the spleen, and helps against many other
passions and evils, as Plin. Dioscorides, and Plat. mean.

( Addition.
Garden Parsely is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, it is good
against the cough. Marsh parsely is Smallach, Paludapium. Read Dodoneus, like
of mountain parsely, and of stone Parsely, of great parsely or Alexander, of
wild parsely, water parsely, and red parsely.)

Of Pipere. cap. 131.
PEpper is called Piper, and is the seed or the fruit of a tree, that grows
in the South side of ye hill Caucasus, in the strong heat of the Sun, as
Diosc. says li. 17. The leaves thereof, be like to the leaves of Iuniperus,
and serpents keep the woods that pepper grows in, and when the woods of
pepper be ripe, men of that country sets them on fire, and chase away the
serpents by vyolence of fire, and by such burning, the grain of pepper, that
was white by kind, is made black and ri^ely. And of pepper are 3. manner
kinds, as he says: for some pepper is long, and that is not ripe: some is
white, and that is not corrupt by fire, nor blemished with fire, and some is
black and riuelled without, with parching and rosting of the heat of ye fire.
And black pepper is most virtuous, and may longest be kept in heat, and is
stronger than other Pepper, and the more heavy it is, the better it is, and
the more new, as he says, and is feigned new by scand and guile of merchandise:
for they cover the most eldest pepper, and spring thereon oar of silver or of
lead, for it should so seem fresh and new, because of the while husk. Huc
vsque Isid. And lib. 12. cap. 8. Plinius says, that Pepper is made black and
riueled, by long burning of the sun, and that not without wrong done to the
pepper: for Pepper should be white by kind, and wexeth, so black by
distempering of heaven, and men of that land suffers that, that it may the
better be kept, and the longer time. But Diosco. says, that Saracens puts
the pepper into an oven, when it is new gathered, and parcheth and rosteth it
so, and takes so away from it the virtue of gendring and of springing, for it
should not spring and bear fruit in other lands. And pepper is hot and dry
in the fourth degree, as it is said in Plat. And has virtue to temper and
dissolve, to consume and to wast, and to draw. Powder thereof makes sneesing,
and purges and cleanses the brain of flumatike superfluity, and fretteth
dead flesh, and consumes and wastes the web in the eye, and cleanses the
spiritual members of superfluities that be cold and gleymie, and namely if it
be taken with dry figs, and also it has virtue to heat, and comfort the
stomach, and to excite appetite, but the use of pepper is not profitable to
sanguine men, neither to cholaricke: for pepper dissolueth and dries, and
burns the blood, and breeds at last meselrye, and other full evil
sicknesses and evils, as it is said in Plat. Also the pepper grain is soul in
sight, and black without, and white within, hot in savor, with good smell,
little in quantity, most in virtue, cold in deed, and hot in might. The
virtue thereof is not felt, while it whole and sound, but when it is chewed or
ground.

It were long to reckon all the virtues thereof at full: and though it be
right precious among us, for the virtue thereof and might: yet for the great
plenty thereof among the Indes, it is accounted less worthy than Palegium, as
Ier. says, and Isidore also.

( Addition.
The elder Writers der set forth 3. kinds of peper, the long, the white, and
the black pepper. Pepper is hot and dry in the third degree.)

Of Pulegio. chap. 132.
PVlegium, Penny royal, is an herb with full sweet smell, and has that
name of Pululando, springing, as Isido. says, and is more precious than pepper
among the Indes. And Plate says, that Pulegium is an hot herb, and dry in
the third degree: and the virtue thereof is in leaves and flowers, and shall be
gathered when it floureth. And is double: the tame, that is called Sisinbrium,
and the wild. And either is profitable and medicinable, and has the virtue to
temper and dissolve, consume and wast, and to comfort, and to cast out and
destroy venim, and to destroy the cold cough, and to cleanse the mother, and to
constrain the gate of the womb: and to bring out menstruall blood, to comfort
the stomach, and to excite appetite, and to abate ventosity, and to swage
wonderfully ach of ye womb and the ^uts, which comes of cold, and to break
the stone, and to help conception, as Plinius says.

( Addition
This herb taken with honnye, cleanses the lungs and the breast from al
gross humor: the powder rubbed on the gums, fastneth the teeth.)

Of Porro. chap. 133.
A Leeke is called Porrum, and Porrum is a Nowne Ethroclitum. For it is
declined hoc Porrum in ye singular number, and hi Porri in the pluall. And is
so Newter gender in the singular, and Masculin in the plural, as this verse
following means.

Dat rastrum rastros, porrumque facie tibi porros.
This verse means, that these two nownes, Rastrum for a rake, and Porrum for
a leeke, be Neuter gender in the singular number, and Masculine in the plural
number. Also in li. Number. cap. 11. It is said in this manner.

Porri, cepae, and allia, in memoria nobis veniunt, etc.
( Addition.
In mentem nobis veniunt Cucumeres, and pepones, porrique, and cepae, and
allia. There came into Isreal's remembrance, the Cucumers, the pepous, the
leekes, and the onions, and the Garlyke, that they had in Egypt, etc.)

This authority means, and is here set for an ensample, that this Nowne
Porrum makes Potri in the plural, and is so the masculine gender.

Of a leeke is double manner of kind, one with whole head, and another is
called Sectile, and Sectile is called a little knot planted or set: and the
leeke with a head is more, Vaset leeke.
and is taken from place to place, as Isidore says libro. 17. The leeke that
is called set leeke, accords more to meat than to medicine, and the leeke
with whole head againward. And the head is white and full of meat, and
compassed about with small skins, and has in the nether end many mores and
roots in steed of hair, and cleueth thereby to the earth, and takes feeding
and nourishing, and the plant springs out of the middle of the head. In the
ouermost end of the stalk is a head, and in that head the seed is gathered,
and each grain of the seed has a stalk, whereby it cleueth to the plant,
and seedeth not the first year, but the second, as it is said in Dio. and in
Mac.

Ipocras used leeke in many medicines, for he gave only the juice thereof to
drink against casting of blood: and leeke is good against barrenness, if
young women eat thereof. The juice thereof drunk with wine helps against
biting of serpents, and against every venomous beast. Leeke stamped with honey,
heals wounds, if it be laid thereto, in a plaster wise. The juice thereof
meddled with milk stancheth the old cough, and heals evils of ye lungs. The
juice thereof meddled with Goats gall, with the third part of honey, luke warm
hot, dropped into the ears, heals ye ach thereof, and helps against
deafness. And the juice thereof dronk with wine, heals the ache of the
luynes. Leekes meddled with salt closes soon, and heals new wounds, and
laxeth hardness, and soudreth soon breaches. And leekes eaten raw, helps
against dronkennes, and exciteth Venus, and softeneth the hard womb, and
Plinius says all this libro. 20. capitulo. 7. There he says more heereto,
and says also, that the smell of leeke drives away Scorpions and Serpents,
and heals the biting of a mad dog with honey, and helps against tooth ach,
and slaieth worms thereof, and breeds sleep, and heals the kings evil
and the dropsy. But the leeke has some vice: for it gendereth swellyng and
bolning, and grieueth the stomach, and breeds thirst, and kindeleth and
heateth blood, if it be often and too much eat thereof. Huc vsque Plinius.

( Addition.
The Leeke is hot and dry in the third degree, of nature like the Onion, but
not so strong: they engender gross and evil blood, breed wind, and cause
heavy dreams, etc.)

Of Polanda.
OF the fruit Polanda or Apolanda, Addition
growing in Calicut, the tree whereon the fruit grows, is vi. or vii. feet
high, and bears not past four or five leaves hanging by certain slips,
every leaf so great, as will cover over or about a man from rain, or heat
of the Sun. Forth of the middle of the leaf, grows a twigge, like the
stalk of a bean, which brings forth flowers and also fruit, of a handful
long, and as big as a man's arm. These fruits are gathered unripe, because
they ripe best being gathered: they grow clustering, and many, and because of
such increase, they are sold there, after the rate of 20. a penny, with many
other rare fruits.

Of Quercu. ca. 134.
THe Oak is called Quercus, and that nowne is declined, Quercus, cus, cui, and
is a tree that bears mast, and is a fast tree and a sad, and dureth long time
with hard rind, and little pithe within or none, and there breeds on the
leaves a manner thing sower and vsanery. And physicians call it Galla, and
bears fruit which is called Akorne, and therewith Swine and Bores in
countries be fatted: and has a strong root and crooked, and is full deep in
the ground, and cleueth full fast thereto. The rind and fruit and twigs thereof
be sowrish, and so cold and dry, and be good to medicine. And has the name
Quercus, seeking or asking: for therein Gods of Nations gave aunsweres, as
Isid. says li. 17. Or else, for thereon men in old time sought akornes to eat,
as the Poet says.

Mortales primi ructabanti guttura glandes.
In old time, this tree was hallowed to Jupiter, as Ouidius says: Men desired
akornes of the broad tree of Jupiter. And Oaks grow in mountains and in
woods, and namely in the land of Basan, there grows Oaks that bears
akornes, and pass other trees, in hardness and in strength, as Jerome says
sup. Amos ca. 2. And Quercus and Ilex is all one. Look before in the same
book, in litera I. The fruit of Quercus is called Akorne, and grows among
the leaves, and no blossom springs before hand, And akornes be long and
euenlong with out, full plain and smooth, and some deal bright, as a mirror,
and clear as the nail, and so it is said in Diet. Akorns be cold and dry,
and therefore hard to defy, and vnobedient to digestion, and hardens the
womb, and comes slowly down from the stomach, and breeds head ache, for
thick fumositie passes thereof out of the stomach to the brain: and are
green in the beginning, and as it were brown red when they be ripe: and they
grow in shells shaped round, plain, and smooth, within the kernel it is full
sad, and has a little skin that departs between the kernel and the shale,
and the shale with the kernel and the husk, be full sower and dry, and not
well sauoured: but when they be well-ripe and roasted in the fire, or sod in
fresh water, they be better in savor, and takes better savor of the heat,
and sweetness of ye water And akornes helps against venime: for they stop
ways and pores that venime may not pass soon to the heart, and dries rotted
humors, and stauncheth and stinteth menstruall flux and running, as Isaac
says in Dietis.

( Addition.
The ripe Akorne beaten to powder and drunk in ale or wine, stays the
pricking of the spleen, called the stitche: the cup wherein the Akorne grows,
beaten to powder, and drunk in red wine stays the flixe or laske.)

Of Quisquilie. chap. 135.
Gulls and outcast of corn is called, Quisquilie, Chafe.
as it is said Amos. 8. cap. And falls off when corn is cleansed with a
sieve or with a riddle, and be of no value to man's meat, but they be meat to
swine and to fowls, and appaireth corn, if it be meddled therewith: and corn
has thereof no profit, but weight only, nevertheless the greines thereof be
light, hollow and void, and eaten with worms, and the pith within is wasted,
and therefore the hole is void and leere, therefore it heals not ye womb, so
much as it grieueth it, and makes it to swell.

Of Rosa. cap. 136.
ROsa, the Rose tree, as Plin. says, is a little tree with pricks, and the
most virtue thereof is in the flower, and the second in the leaves, and in the
seed, for the tree is medicinable in flower, leaves and seed. And the rose is
double: one is tame, and grows in gardens, another is wild, and grows in
woods. The rose of gardene is planted and set, and tilled as a vine, and if it
be forgrowen and not shered and pared, and not cleansed of superfluity: then
it goes out of kind, and changes into a wild rose. And by often changing and
tilling, the wild Rose tourneth and changes into a very rose, and the rose
of the garden and the wild rose be diverse in multitude of flowers, smell and
color, and also in virtue. For the leaves of the wild rose be few and broad
and whitish, meddled with little redness, and smells not so well as the tame
Rose, nor is so virtuous in medicine.

The tame rose has many leaves set nigh together, and be all red, or all
most white, with wonderful good smell, sowrish in savor, and somdeale biting,
with great virtue in medicine: and the more they be bruised and broken, the
vertuouser they be and the better smellyng: and springs out of a thorn, that
is hard and rough: nevertheless, the rose follows not the kind of the
thorn, but she araieth her thorn with fair color and good smell: when the
rose begins to spring, it is closed in a knop with greynes, and that knop is
green, and when it swells, then springs out hard leaves and sharp. In
the middle thereof springs out other soft leaves, and compass each other,
and wexe red little and little, and when they be full grown, they spread
themselves against the Sun rising, and for they be tender and feeble to hold
togethers in the beginning, therefore about those small green leaves, beneath
bered tender leaves and soft, and beset all about: and in the middle thereof is
seen the seed small and yeolowe, with full good smell, and that seed
cleaves upon the fruit of the rose. First, the fruit of the rose is shapen,
or the leaves spring out and spread at the full. And the fruit thereof is small
round knops and hard, with a manner roughness, and full of certain graynes
that be first green, but they are read, after that the seed and the leaves
be fallen in Harvest, and be soft when they be full ripe, and were black
about winter, and the savor thereof is biting and somedeale sour, as the
savor of Medlars, but they be not full good to eat, for roughnes that is hid
within, and grieueth within his throat that eats thereof. The Rose springs
sometime by sowing, and sometime by planting, and sometime by graffing, and the
rose amendeth by changing of place, and by cutting and paring. Huc vsque Plin.
li. 20. cap. 4. Among all flowers of the world, the flower of the rose is
chief, and bears the price, and therefore often the chief part of man, the
head, is crowned with flowers of Roses, as Plin says, and that is because of
virtues and sweet smell and savor: For by fairness they feed the sight, and
pleases the smell by odor, and the touch by nesh and soft handlyng, and
withstandeth and succoreth by virtue against many sicknesses and evils, as he
says, and accords to medicine both green and dry. Many medicines be made
of the green leaves of roses, as it is said in Plat. For roses shred small and
sod in clarified honey makes that honey medicinable with good smell. And this
comfort and cleanses, and dissolueth and departs in cleansing, and defieth
gleymie and fleumatike humors and thicks, and binds and stops with cold
water, and laxeth with hot. Of roses well bruised, and well incorporate with
Sugar, is made Succura rosacea, Sugar roset, that has virtue to comfort and to
bind, and helps against the blondie flixe, and against sowning, and against
cholarick spewing, and the Cardiacle passion.

Of the rose riped in oil, is made Oleum Rosaceu^, that helps against
chasing of the liver, if the place of the liver be anointed therewith, and is
needful in many causes, and helps against head ache of the forehead and of
the temples, if they be baulmed therewith, and helps against distemperaunce
of heat, and fierce agues, and makes to sleep. Of green roses, Aqua rosacea
is distilled by seething of fire, or of the Sun, and this water is good for
all the aforesaid things, and is good in Colliries, medicines for eyes, and in
ointment for Ladies, for it cleanses away webs and foul speckes of the face,
and makes the skin thin and subtle.

Also of dry roses be made many medicines: for the smell of dry roses releeueth
and comfort the brain: the decoction thereof in rain water, stauncheth all
flixe that comes of cold cause: powder thereof stauncheth bleeding at the
nose, and dries and wastes rotted humor, that corrumpeth and grieueth the
gums and roots, and comfort wagging teeth, that be in point to fall. Powder
thereof stamped with saffron, meddled with the white of an egg, effectually
heals sore ache of the eyes, and stauncheth the humor and the blood that
fleeteth and runs to the veins of the eyes, and abateth swelling of the
priuye chose of a woman, and releeueth it if it abate downward, Plinius lib.
10. cap. 19. touches these virtues, and many other virtues of the Rose.

( Addition.
Distilled water of Roses, is necessary to many uses: the red rose to preserve
and to medicine. Dodoneus writes of ten kind of Roses, among the which, the
Eglantine rose, and Musk rose, yeolow and white. There is one rose growing in
England, is worth all these, Rosa sine spina: which royal Rose growing in her
proper soil, is borne up of a well settled stalk, and armed with such
thorns, as are apparent to so gentle a kind, the leaves of Lilye hiew, called
the Orient green, notwithstanding, subject to ^awes of dreadful bla^es, as
all our common Roses be to tempesteous winds. Zeal constrains me somewhat to
speak of so wholesome a flower, cheerful in sight, mild in kind, and
merciful in justice, by whose means, as the smell of the rose is comfortable
to the sense, so much more is this Rose, for Englandes whole prosperity.
Finding so great good by the growing of so wholesome a flower, it shall be good
for the rest, herbs of the whole garden, to take heed of the superfluous
vanity of their present being, and rejoice not with the old weeds in time
past, which growing to all unthankfulness, said: Our life shall pass away as
the cloud, and come to naught as the myste that is driven away with the beams
of the Sun, and put down with the heat thereof: our name also shall be
forgotten by little and little, and no man shall have our work in remembrance,
for our time is a very shadow that passes away, and after our end, there is
no returning: for it is fast sealed, so that no man comes again. Come on
therefore, let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, and let us cheerfully
use the creatures like as in youth: let us fill ourselves with good wine and
ointment, and let there no flower of the time escape us; let us crown our
selves with Rose buds before they be withered. May not the buds be ye common
profits, that are made by daily pillage of the Clergy, in abusing the gift
of the Majesty, who are never suffered to be at rest by one extreme assault or
other, the faxe of rerages has almost beggered, the humble and dutiful
subjects. God grant ye view of this note to the royal Rose, that the Clergy
be no more oppressed. Those thistles, nettles and thorns, say, let there be no
fair meddow, but our lust go through it, let every one of us be pertakers of
our voluptuousnes, etc. Let us oppress the poor righteous, let us not spare
the widow nor old man, let the law of unrighteousness be our strength, etc.
Let us defraud the righteous, and w^y: he is not for our profit, etc. Wisdom.
ca. 2.)

De Radice. cha. 137.
A Root is called Radex, and has that name of Radius, a beam, for it
sticks fast to ye ground as it were by certain beams, or else it has yt name
of Rado, dis, to shane, for if it be shaven, it grows no more: then the root
is the beginning both of an herb, and of a tree, and is soft in substance
with poores, and is rough and crooked, and is soft and fat in substance for to
take the better incorporation of moisture, and has many pores to take the
sooner, and the more humor to send to feeding and nourishing of leaves and
branches, and it is rough for great drawing of nourishing and of feeding, and
has the same office in bodies of herbs and of trees, that the mouth has in
bodies of beasts, and cleaves to the earth by roughness, and draws to it
self that yt is according of humor, and sends it by pores as it were by
veins to nourish the plant: and is crooked, for to clean the faster to the
earth: and the root is diverse in shape and in disposition by diverse working of
heat yt works in the substantial matter of ye root. The which matter is
sometime thin and sometime thick, and sometime mean, as Al. says in Co^mento
super li. de Plantis. For if the matter be watery and thin, and strong heat:
then the root is euenlong, and sharp in shape. And if ye moisture of
nourishing be thick and earthie, then the root is hard and dry. For such
humor is strongly fastened and run by virtue of might and heat.

And if the matter be mean, and the heat strong:then the heat draws like
swift from all the parts. And because of equal moving of the parts, the
root is round in figure and shape. If the heat be feeble and the matter
gleamie: then the heat may not send up much matter, nor make it spread nor
rear, but the most lyghtest parts thereof, and the most heauyest parts
breaks hither and thither by their own heaviness and weight. And so therein
abides an even shape with knots and roughness. And the root is gendered of
humor of the earth by the working of heat, and the heat of heaven enters
and comes therein: and by virtue thereof agreeable feeding and nourishing is
drawn and incorporate thereto.

Also of place and disposition of the ground, the root takes disposition and
complexion. For that that grows in sweet ground, and meanly dry, and be
nourished with rain water, be better then other, and those that be nourished
in soft land and in marreys, where standing and rotten water is, whereof they
draw nourishing: and by reason of the malignitye and corruption of water, they
be worse then other, and least wholesome in meat and in medicine, as Isaac
says. The root is hid under the ground out of sight, and shows the virtue
thereof and working in flowers, fruit, and boughs. The root lies hid under
the ground, lives, and profits, and is better and better, and fails if it
be drawn out of the ground, and dries, and fordryeth. For of all the tree or
herb the root is a part counted less of price, nevertheless as the root is
mother and well of herb and tree: so it is of either the nourisher and most
needful susteiner, and the more deep the root is put in the ground, the
more steadfast foundation it is of herbs and trees: and though the root be
soft in substance thereof, yet by virtue and subtlety of kind heat, it
pearceth between hard stones, and comes into the innermost part thereof. In
winter time kind heat slieth cold air, and gathers it self to the
innermost of the root, and there it is multiplied to temperatnesse and
nourishing of it self. And then in winter time the root conceiueth and takes
water out of the humor, that is drawn, and sends it forth to nourish and to
breed the branches and flowers in springing time, ye spring that time, and so
trees and herbs that be dry, and as it were dead in winter time, when the
humor comes up to the over parts, they quicken in springing time.

Also the quality good and evil of the root comes up to boughs and twigs.
And often it is showed in fruit and in flowers, what virtue or vice is in ye
roots. But often sowrenesse and bitterness of humor of the root is defied by
benefice of air and heat of heaven, that purifieth the matter. And so often it
falls, that of a bitter root comes sweet fruit and flowers, as it fares
of the root of the vine, of the Nut tree, and of the Olive. Huc vsque Isaac in
Dietis vniuersalibus.

Also Aristotle says, that Trees when they be at a stay and bear no fruits
are wont to be remedied in the root. For the root is slit, and a stone is put
in the slit, and so the thick humor and the corrupt, passes out as it were
seething, and so clean humor and pure and new air is drawn and comes into
the root. And so the trees be renewed and healed. Also Isaac and Galen say,
that Muscus Atheniense said: that each herb with a root of much nourishing,
has seed that is not nourishing: as it fares in Pasnepis, and in Rapis,
Colevvortes. Carreis.
and in other such. And againward, if the seed of an herb nourishes, then ye
root nourishes not. And there is a certain herb that approprieth the name
of a root, and is hot and dry, and is like Raphane in virtue, and has virtue
to temper, depart, and dissolve, to consume and wast, and to open poores, and
so it helps against scauers, which come of cold, and opens stopping of the
spleen, and tempereth hardness thereof, and succoureth against the dropsy,
and has hard savor and sour, and accords more to medicine then to meat,
as raye againeward accords more to meat then to medicine, and is hot and
moist, and nourishes more then the other herbs or roots, as Isaac says in
Dietis, and makes soft flesh and sweet, for the ventositie and bolning
thereof. Therefore it nourishes the better if it be well sodde, and is hard to
defy, if it be raw and evil sod, and stops the pores and ye vein. And
also it is good by way of medicine: for ye juice of it is good for Podagre
feet, and the goutie places be aswaged of soreness and ache. Of the seed of
the rape, and also of ye seed of Raphane is Oil made, that is naedfull in
many uses, and namelye in Lamps, but yet it was not lawful to put such oil in
lamps of candlesticks in the house of God, as says the Gloss super Exodo. 27.
there it is said, with distinction it is bidden to offer Oil, not Raphon nor
Myrtum, or Mirtinum, but most pure oil of Olive trees, for it was not lawful
to offer other oil, as it was not lawful to light fire other then came down
from heaven, etc.

Of Rampno. cap. 138.
The small Fuize, Anonis.
THE Cambmoke is called Rampnus, and is a right hard Tree with knots, boughs,
branches, and pricks, for it has small leaves with full sharp pricks in the
sides, and does harm to his feet and hands that touches it or treads
thereon, and has soft leaves in the beginning, when it springs. And the more
it grows, the more sharp be the pricks. The master in History super Iud. 9.
takes witness of Josephus, and says, Chambmoke has this singular virtue,
that it gendereth fire of it self, for when the leaves thereof fall and be dry,
it is said that they be full dry with a soft fatness. And therefore when
there is strong fire in hot Countries or impression of heat of the Sun,
those leaves that be fallen so, and disposed to inflammation, by a little blast
of heat, wind, and brought, are set on fire. And because of that burning,
sometime woods and groans, that be nigh, be wonderfully light and set on fire.
And Plinius li. 24. cap. 14. speaks of Cambmoke, and says, that among kinds
of Trees, the Cambmoke is a pricking shrubbe, and has boughs and leaves with
sharp pricks, even and not crooked: and has in the boughs a manner red
hoales, and fruit, in the which is the sede. And has virtue to draw the
Secundinas, that be the bags that children be wrapped in the womb. And is
a tree of great bitterness, both in root and in leaves, and also in boughs and
in branches. And is nevertheless good and profitable in medicine. For of the
juice of the roots and of the stalks by decoction, is made a medicine, that
Physicians call Licium.

Some men call it Lucidus, for it makes clear eien, and does away webbes and
worms of the eien, and helps against blearednesse of the eyes: and against
other evils of liddes of the eyes, and also against itching of the eyes. And
heals and cures rotted gummes and spitting of blood. And is good against the
running of menstruall blood of women, and when they have much of superfluity
of humor in the mother, and closes the mother in the best wise, and also
wastes such humor, as Plinius says. And heals whelks and pimples of the
lips, and heals the chipperings of the tongue, as he says.

( Addition.
The Cammocke, Rest, Harrow, or pety whyn, is ground Furze. The bark of the
root taken with honny, provoke urine, and breaks the stone.)

Of Resina. cap. 139.
REsine, as Isid. says, libr. 28. is a dropping, which comes and issues out
by sweting of the trees, as out of ye trees of Balsamus, Ferule, Pine, and
Lentiscus, and of other trees and shrubs, which sweateth and woseth out liccur.
For Rein is Greek, and is as much to say in English, to sweat or to wose, as
well smelling trees of the East lands and countries, as the dropping of
Balsamus or of Ferula. The dropping whereof hardens and changes into
precious stones, and into Electrum. The first and the chief Resina, is
Therabinthina, and is chief and better then other, and comes out of Arabia,
Judea, Siria, Cipresse, and Africa, and out of ye Island of the Sea: The
second is Lentiscina, and that is called Mastix, and this comes out of the
Island Hedechio: ye third is Resine pinealis, and this is now soft now hard. Huc
vsque Isidorus. And only gum hard or soft is called Resin. Some Resin is
soft and fleeting as, Resin of Balsamus, and Tirebinthina, and some is hard,
as Mastix, Thus, and Mirra, and other such. And all Resin is first soft, and
fleeting, and gleamie in the first wosing of the Tree, and abides always soft
and fleeting, and waxes hard with heat or with cold. And all Resin is good
and profitable in medicine, and therefore Resin is put in noble ointmentes and
medicines. Look kind and virtues of all Resins in their own places.

( Addition.
Resine pituinae, Pitch, Resina, Rosen, Resina pini, Resina Colophonia, dry
Pitch, Resina arida, dried Rosen, etc.)

Of Rubo. cap. 140.
The bra^ble.
A Bush is called Rubus, and is thickness of thorns and of Briars, and of
other shrubbes and pricks, when it grows in a place together, as Isi. says.
And Rubetum, or Rubus is a name propried to shrub, that bears wild Beryes,
which herds eat for hunger. And the fruit thereof is first red, and spreads
in long branches, small, and round, and some deal thick, growing with sharp
pricks. And these branches be pliaunt and springing, and bending in it self.
The leaves thereof be short and cloven in the side, and some deal sharp, with
small pricks without, which be crooked, and lightly pricking. And thus Rubus is
full of pricks from the root up to the top, and the pricks thereof be some
deal crooked downward toward the earth, and is sharp as teeth.

The fruit thereof is first green, hard, and full sour. And then red and
somewhat sour. And is black and sweet at the last, when it is ripe at the
full. The ^ilyce thereof is red, and painteth and dies as blood. And the
fruit without is compassed with a full thin and wearish skin, and departed
asunder. And divided as it were small dens and valleys, and with a manner
roundnesse some deal upright, but it is full of moist meat within, and full of
grains, and is a medicinable tree with fruit thereof.

And this tree Rubus is cold and dry, as Platearius says, and Constant. says
the same. And says that the crop thereof is some deal sowrish, and helps
against hot Postumes and burning, and against redness of eien, if the croppes
of it be powned with the white of an egg, and laid thereto. Also juice of the
stalks and of the crops thereof, meddled in water of barley, helps against the
bloody flixe. Huc vsque Platearius. Of the goodness of the fruit thereof, look
before in littera M. de moris agrestibus.

This tree grows in barren land, and is best to close gardens and vineardes:
for the thickness of multitude of pricks lets and holds out men and
beasts, that passseth forth by of entering, and receives hares and other such
small beasts. And defends fowls that make their neasts therein, for to ye
intent their kind gives pricks thereto to defend it so therewith, as it were
swoords. And therefore grieueth and hurts and pricketh the hands that gather
fruit thereof, and suffers not adversaries to come there within. And Rubus
also is dark and shadowie, by reason of his thickness, and lets the
passing in of the Sun beam by the thickness thereof. And is therefore friend
to Adders, and to other creeping worms. Therefore of Rubus, a bush, Rubeta has
the name, and is a venomous Frog, that dwells in bushes. Therefore it is not
safety to sleep and rest nigh such bushes, for such venomous worms, as the
master says in History super libr. Exodum.

( Addition.
Of the bramble are three sorts. The great brier that is in every hedge bears
black berries. The long ground bryer, whereon grows a bigger bery black,
called the dew berye, which is very good to cool a hot stomach. The small
scratch brier:these briers be all medinable both leaf and fruit. There is
Rubus Idaeis, called the Framboys, Raspis or hinder Berrie, both read and
white, these grow in gardens, the juice is good to comfort a weak stomach, and
the berryes have a sweet smell: the Latins call it Crispina, Merum, Rubi,
Idaei. Dodoneus in fol. 662.)

Of Ruta. chap. 141.
RRow is called Ruta, and is a medicinable herb, and has that name, for it
is full fervent, and thereof is double kind, wild and tame, and either is full
fervent. But the wild is more fervent then that other, as Isidore says, li.
17. cap. vlcimo. Weesells teach that this herb is contrary to venim, and to
venomous beasts, for he eats first Rue, and balmeth himself with the smell
and the virtue thereof, before he fights with the Serpent, as he says. And
the Weesell knows the virtue of Rue, and eats thereof, and fights
afterward safely, and resith on the Cockatrice, and slaieth him, as Plinius,
Dioscorides, and Constantine say. And Plinius praises this herb in a manner
wise passing al other herbs, libro. 20. cap. 27. and says, that the virtue
thereof is hot and dry, and comfort the stomach if it be often dronk, and
puts a dead child out of the womb, and cleanses the mother, and brings
out filth and uncleanness thereof, and purges and cleanses the mother full
clean, and wastes the humor of Venus, and abateth in males the appetite of
Venus, for it kindeleth in them complectional dryness, and heat that has
mastrie in them, and by strength of these qualities the humor is wasted in
men, that is often the cause of the appetite of Venus service. And in women that
be cold and moist, it works the contrary by contrary cause. The broth of
Rue abateth hard torments, and gnawing of the womb, if it be drunk. And the
herb laid hot to the womb in a plaster wise, cleanses and heals the
lungs and the breast of all moystnesse and cold, that grieueth in the
spiritual members. And if it be sod with Oil, it slaieth worms of the womb.
And Rue eaten raw sharpneth the sight of the eyes, and heals and does away
the dimnesse of eyes, and stauncheth and dries bleeding at the nose, if the
juice thereof be dropped therein. And Rewe eaten or drunk, withstandeth
mightelye all venim and biting of venomous beasts, if it be stamped with Salt,
Garlike, and Nuts. And heals wonderfullye such biting. In the ear and nose
the juice often dropped, purges the head of fleame, and helps them that have
the falling Evil. The broth thereof helps and releeueth tooth ache. And
brings Paralitike often to feeling, and opens the poores that were before
closed. And destroieth mightily ventosity and wind in the guts, and abateth all
sore ach within: and rue eaten, meddled with the water of roses, and with Comin,
cleanses and heals blearednesse and redness of eien. And the smell of Rue
drives and chaseth away al venomous beasts out of gardens: and is therefore
planted about Sage, to drive away Serpents and Toads which love Sage best.

( Addition.
Ruta Hortensis, and Ruta Siluestris, herb grace, it is called Eriphion, and
the small Rue, Viperalis, in shops, Ha^mel: Rue is hot and dry in the third
degree, the wild Rue is stronger. These are good herbs, and serve for
diverse cures, the juice of Rewe drunk with wine cleereth the stomach from
venim. To anoint the body with the juice of Rue, no venomous Serpents, nor
noisome flies will either sting or bite the body: and excellent receite for
those that travail into the hot Indies, and other places where those are, it
kills fleas and gnats.)

Plinius libro. 19. cap. 9. speaks of Rewe, and says: That Rue would be
sown or set, when day and night be even of one length, in harvest. And hale
the Winter, doung, and humor, and thriueth well in dry weather. And will be
nourished. with powder and stones, and with ashes. Ashes should be meddled with
seed thereof, to destroy the wood canker, and other worms.

The Romans in old time did rue in their wine, that they drank against venim
and other evils. And virtue seminatine of rue is in the seed, in ye stalk, in
branches, and in root. For the branches and spraies thereof bended downward
toward the ground, takes root anon, and dries not soon, and takes
friendship with the fig tree.

Insomuch that Rue is never in more liking, nor thriueth better then under the
Fig tree, or nigh thereto. Also he says libro. 20. That Pythagoras erred,
that supposed that Rewe grieved the eyes. A canear, of warning.
For Grauours, Lymnours, and Paintours eat Rue because of the eyes, and to
sharp their sight, but beware women with child, least they eat Rewe. For
such meat slays the child in the womb. Rue is given against feminall
flux, and against the service of Venus, and to them that dreameth of lecherye.
They that be baulmed with the juice of Rewe, be not bitten with Spiders nor
stong with Scorpions, with Bees, nor with Waspes, nor infected with the juice
Cicuta, Herba veaenosa.
that is venim of venims. Huc vsque Plin. li. 20. cap. 14.

( Addition.
Cicuta, an herb much like our Hemlocke, but having smaller leaves: some use
this word for Hemlocke. The juice of it through extreme cold is poison, and
therefore the Athenians used it kill men in common executions.)

Of Saltu. chap. 142.
SAltus is a wild place, and wild trees there grow and spring on high, as
Isidore says; libro. 14. Wood, Groans, Forests, and deserts
And he says, libro 17. that Saltus is high thickness of Traes, and has that
name, for Trees spring and rise there in height. And Saltus and Silua be
diverse, for in a wood that is called Silua grows many trees, and more short
and more thick, and nearer togethers, then in the wood that is called Saltus:
And in the wood that is called Saltus, trees be more high and great. And so
Silua is a thick wood with short trees, and has that name Silua, of Silen,
that is a free, for many Trees be therein hewn and field and wasted.

And Silua, Nemus, and Lucas be all one: and be names of woods, but Sylua
comes of Silen, that is wideness or wasting, or of Silence, for a wood that
is called Silua, is where be wild places, wastes, and desartes, full of
silence. And the Wood that is called Nemus, has that name of Numen, that is
God, for therein Ido made a mawmet, and foreshaped it in steed of God, and in
woods that be called Nemora Trees be great, and make shadow with boughs and
branches. And the wood that is called Lucus is thickness of Trees, and
lets light to come to the ground, and comes per Antiphrasim, by contrary
of Lucco, luces, to shine, and so Lucus is to be understood, as it were not
shining, as Piscina is a poole or a water without Fish, as Isidore says,
libro 16. Then Saltus, Silua, and Nemus be wide places, Nemus. a grove or
vvood, serving for pleasure.
wast, and desolate, that many Trees grow in without fruit, and also few
having fruit. And those trees which be barren, and bear no manner fruit, be
always generally more and higher then that with fruit, few excepted, as Oak and
Beech. In their woods be often wild beasts and fowls, therein grows
herbs, grass, lees, and pasture, and namely medicinable herbs in woods be
found. In Summer woods be beautified with boughs and branches, with herbs
and grass. In woods is place of deceit and of hunting. For therein wild
beasts be hunted, and watches and deceites be ordained and set of hounds and of
hunters. There is a place of hiding and of lurking: for often in woods thieves be
hid, and often in their awayts and deceits, passing men comes and be spoiled
and robbed, and often slains. And so for many and diverse ways and uncertain,
strange men often err and go out of the way, and take uncertain way, and the
way that shall is unknown, before the way that is known: and come often to the
place there thieves lie in awaite, and not without peril.

Therefore be often knots made on trees and in bushes, in boughs and in branches
of Trees, in token and mark of the high way, to show the certain and sure
way, to waifaring men, but often ye thieves in turning and meeting of ways,
change such knottes and signs, and beguyle many men, and bring them out of the
right way, by false tokens and signs. Birds, fowls, and Bees fly to the
wood: Birds to make neasts, and Bees to gather honnie, Birds to keep
themselves from Fowlers, and Bees to hide themselves to make honnie combs
privily in hollow trees and stocks. Also woods for thickness of trees be cold
with shadow. And in heat of the Sun wearye wayfaring and travailing men have
liking to have rest, and to cool themselves in the shadow. Many woods be
marks and meares between diverse countries and lands, and departs them
asunder. And by weuing and casting together of trees, often men keep and
defend themselves from enimyes.

( Addition.
Saltus, as forest, a lawne in a park or forest:a wood wherein Dear and
other beasts do feed, and shadow themselves from Sun).

Of Salice. chap. 143.
A Wilow tree is called Salix, and has that name Salix for it grows soon
and spurteth upward after yt it is pight and set in a place, as Isidore says,
libro 17. And is a plyaunt tree and soft, and according to binding and railing
of vines, and vine branches, as he says. This Tree has no fruit, but only
seed of flowers. And it is said, that the seed thereof is of this virtue,
How a man shall (...) baren daghters.
that if a man drink of it, he shall get no sons, but only barren daughters
Huc vsque Isidore. lib. 17. Lib. 16. cap. 36. Plinius speaks of the Wilow,
and says, that of wilowes is diverse kind. For some bears long rods and
high, (...)siers.
and waxes great, and thereof be pearches made and raises for vines. The
rindes thereof be long and thick, and strong, white within, and green
without. And thereof be made bonds and hoopes. And though such Wilowes be
strong, yet they be not so plyaunt as the less. And therefore they break the
sooner, when they be wouen and bended to make withye, and bonds, and so Wilows
be less and more small and plyaunt then other, and passing plyaunt, and be so
pliaunt that they bear not, but they be made stronger with weauing and
tourning, as thread is with twining. And therewith men bind Wine pipes and
Tons for Wine. And the third kind of Wilowes is mean between the two
first, both in plyauntnesse and in quantitye. For it is more plyaunt then the
more, and more stiff then the less. And the boughs be white when the rind
is away, and plain and smooth to handling. And thereof be made diverse
needful things to householde, as stools, seats, paniers, and kippes. And
is thicker in boughs and branches, by plashing, shredding, and paring. And
though every Wilowe be barren of fruit, yet nevertheless they bear well,
and be not barren of boughs and branches: and namelye if it be shredde and
pared in due time, as in March or in April, as he says: and he says the
same, libro. 17. cap. 20. Among Trees that be set and planted, wilowes bear
the price: and if they be cut two foot from the ground, then they grow not
^n high, but spring and spread abroad, and so the may eft soones be shered
and pared without a Ladder: and each Wilowe, the more boughs and branches it
bears, the nearer it is to the ground: and in passing of time when the wilow
is right old, then it falls and rotteth some and some: and the corruption
thereof begins within the pith, and there, often the Wilowe abides all void
and hollow within, though it seem green and fair without. Often in the
hollownesse thereof lies venomous worms, as Adders and Serpents: and
therefore if no safely to sleep under the Wilow tree. Huc vsque Plinius.

And if the wilow tree be unprofitable in fruit, yet it is full good and
profitable in medicine, and is cold and dry, as it is said in Platearius,
and has virtue to stop and to bind, and to close and souder, and abate hot
feauers, if the juice of the leaves thereof be drunk: and powder of the rind
thereof burnt, helps against ye bloody flixe if it be taken in drink, and the
same powder heals and closes wounds with botches, and the same powder
drunk, and laid in a plaster without, does away wartes, and the branches
and leaves thereof sprung with water, cools the air about fenorous men, and
refreshes and comfort them, and makes them sleep. Huc vsque Plat.

Of Sambuca. cap. 144.
THE Elder tree is called Sambucus, or Sambuca, and is a little soft tree, and
thereof is a certain symphonie made, that is called Tibia, and Sambuca also,
as Isidore says libro. 12. or Tractatu de Musicis instrumentis, and is a tree
with long boughs, and round and plain, full sound and sad without, and full
hollow within, and full of certain soft pith. And the leaves thereof be
pleine, smooth, and fat, with heavy smell, and the flowers thereof be full
white and small, with strong smell, and has double rind. The utter is brown
read, and the inner is green. And that rind is full moist in deed. And the
juice thereof accords to medicine, and bears flowers and fruit twice in
one year, and that fruit is black, with horrible smell and savor: and this is
therefore unprofitable to eat. And the elder tree is hot and dry, and
rindes, leaves, and flowers thereof accord to medicine, as it is said in
Platearius, and has virtue Diuretica, to temper and soften, to distribute and
to draw, and to purge fleams, and helps therefore against the Feance
Coridiana, that comes of fleme. The juice thereof by it self, or with
honnie, slaieth long. Worms in the womb. The broth of the middle rind within
tempereth hardness of the liver, and of the spleen. And the same does the
leaves sodden in Oil. And the bark and fruit thereof sodden with Salt water,
fordoeth swelling of feet, if the feet be baulmed therewith. The juice thereof
helps against the dropsy, that comes of cold, the broth of the leaves and
of the fruits thereof sad in strong Wine, helps against Le(...), that
comes of fleame, if it be used, (...) purges, wonderfullye fleamatike
humor and corrupt, call such mours fleamtike disposed to corruption. And
wonderull it is to see in Elder, for if the middle rind of the stalk, or of
the root be shaven upward, then it purges upward, and if it be shaven
downewarde, it purges downewarde, as Plinius, Dioscorides, and Platearius do
mean.

( Addition.
The common elder is hot and dry in the third degree, especially in the bark,
the leaves and buddes, the tender crops or buddes sodden in broth: or Potage,
does open the belly, purges flegma and cholarike humors.

There is also Marris Elder, called Ople or Dwarf Plane tree, spoken of before.

The green berryes of the common Elder tree, gathered near the full of the Moon, and being dried, beaten to Powder, the quantity of half a quarter of an
Ounce put into white or redish Wine, six sponefulls, drunk fasting, is a rare
and special remedy to cure the stone Collicke, etc. He that takes this
medicine, must walk half an hour after the receipt, and keep good diet.)

Of Saliunca, chap. 145.
SAliunca is a little herb with sharp pricks, as Vgucion says, and has
that name of Saliendo, leaping. For it makes them leap that treads thereon:
and is called therefore Thauthetrape in French: For it takes and hurts the
foot that treads thereon. And it seems that Virgil says the same, and
says, that Saliunca is among red Roses. And hereby it seems an herb
with a great root and a long, fat and soft, and full of meat: as the
Parsneape, and is often done in Electuaryes, and has another name, and is called
^ringus, and thereof springs certain hard stalks with cornets, and in the
tops thereof grow certain heads with sharp pricks all about, as it were
Spears. And grows in dry barren land and sandye, and some men call it
Scorpio: for it stingeth him that touches the seed thereof, as it were a
Scorpion.

And libro. 20. capitu. 7. Plinius says, that Saliunca is a little short herb
with thick boughs and leaves as they were thrusted together, and smell full
well, nigh as Nardispica, and cleaves to the ground by certain small roots,
and grows in Pannonia in hard place and stony, and is a hot herb and dry,
and subtle in substance, and right tempering and softening, the root thereof
sodde in Wine, stauncheth spuing, and comfort well the stomach, as Plinius
says, libr. 21. cap. 10.

Of Stacten. chap. 146.
THE dropping of the Tree Mirra is called Stacten, and is the same that Mirra
is, as the Gloss says super Genesis, the dropping of the Tree Mirra 37. and is
declined Haec stacte, haius stactes, and is found Stacten indeclinable. Isaac
3. where he speaks de odoribus, speaks thereof and says, Stacten is
Incensum that wooseth out of pressing, and is a Nowne of Greek. Look before
De Mirra in littera M.

Of Storace. chap. 147.
STorax, as Isidore says, libro. 17. is a Tree of Arabia, and is like to a
quince Tree. The branches thereof wooseth out by dens about the rising of
the Star Canicula. The dropping thereof that falls on the ground, is not
clean, but if it be kept with the rind of the same. And the dropping that
cleaves to the springs and sprayes is white and clean: and is first made
brown read, by heat of the Sun. And some manner kind thereof is called
Calamites, and is fat and moist, and full of Rosen. And thereof comes sweet
lycour, as it were honnye, with good smell and merry, and is fastened together
and has the same name. For the Greeks call a drop Stiman: and Stirax in
Greek, is called Storax in Latin, as Isidore says. And the Gloss super
Eccle. ca. 23. says the same.

Also Storax is the dropping of the Tree Stirax, and is right virtuous in
medicine. For it is (as Dioscorides sai(...) Platearius) hot and dry with
glewie substance, and has virtue to draw. And hereof is three manner
kinds: one is called Calamites, and is good, and the first that droppeth out
of the Tree and wooseth: and the other is called Storax, and is read, and
comes out and droppeth after the first, and is more pure. The third is Storax
read in color, soft and fleeting, sweet in smell, sowrish in savor, much
and great in quantitye, and may be departed and made roughe with handeling
and kneding in the hand: and that that has sweet savor, is feyned: And what
is feined, is known. For if it be old, it falls to Powder while it is
iourned and wonde, and kneade in the hand, and falls in pieces. And if it be
fresh and new, it waxes soon moist, and cleaves not full fast to the hand,
and has more sweetness then it should, the soft and fleeting is not feined.

Among these three manner kinds, Calamita is of much virtue, and comfort
wonderfully the brain. Fumositie thereof stauncheth all manner running of
re^me. And a plaster thereof made, cleanses the gummes: and fasteneth and
strengthens wagging of teeth, and commands menstrual blood, and helps
well against coughing and hoarsnesse: and good Storax is put in ^^olls, and
kept against Nittes, whelkes, and pimples of the head, and against many other
passions and evils. Huc vsque Dioscorides and Platearius. The fumositie of
Storax purges the air that is corrupt, and drives away all pes^i^ntiall
vapor and fumositie, as Isidore says.

Addition.
(Storax, a sweet intense or Gum, whereof is made Stirax liquida, a strong
smelling moisture.)

Of Sicomoro. chap. 148.
SIcomorus is a nice Fig Tree, like in leaves to the tree that is called
Morus, and holds the likeness of a fig tree in other things, as the
Master says in History, libro. 27. Sicomorus and Morus be Nownes of Greek.

And Sicomorus has that name, for it is like in leaves to the tree that is
called Morus. And this tree is called Celsa among Latins: and is much higher
and greater then the tree that is called Morus. Or else as other men mean, it
has ye names Sicomorus of Sile, that is a fig tree, and Morus, that is folly
or nisenesse, as it were a fool, or a nice fig tree, as the Gloss says
super Lu. 19. And Diosc. means, that Sicomorus is a wild fig tree, and
bears certain sweet fruit, that is never ripe at the full, as it fares of
the tree that is called Caprificus, as Plinius says, lib. 15. cap. 19. The
wild fig tree ripeth never: but some men eat such fruit, and so Dioscorides
says, that if the Sicomorus be beaten with a stone, it sweateth and woseth out
dropping, as it were Gum, and that is medicinable, for it sucketh venomous
biting, if it be drunk, and abateth swelling of the spleen, and does away the
ach of the stomach.

Addition.
(Sicomorus is a great tree, like to the Mulbery tree, the fruits like a wild
fig, the fruit grows forth of the stock; or branch close by the maine
wood. This tree grows in Egypt, and in Alkaire among the Turks. Read
Matheolus, etc.)

Of Spina. cap. 149.
A Thorn is called Spina, and is a tree with sharp pricks, and is as it were
armed with pricks against wrongs of them that touch it, as Isid. says. And by
likeness thereof the ridge bone is called Spina. For the joints of the bones
in the ridge bone, be sharp as a thorn: and properly to speak, Spina, the
thorn, is the prick that grows out of the thorn or of herbs and trees
with pricks, and the prick springs out of the stock or of the stalk, and is
great next to the tree and stalk, and sharp outward at the point. Thou may
find the cause thereof before in the same book, where it is treated of trees,
and of disposition of trees in general.

There it is said, that it is not the intent of kind, that trees be sharp
with pricks and thorns: But it happens and comes of vnfastnesse and
vnsadnesse of the tree, by the which cold humor is drawn that is but little
^odde. And is drawn and passes by pores and hoales outward, and is hardened
by heat of the Sun, and made a thorn or a prick, and is made small and
sharp at the end for scarcity of matter. And sometime is sharp, and some
deal bending, as it fares in briers and rose trees, sometime the point is
areared upright, as it were in Darts. Often growing of thorns, is token of
barren land untilled. And it is as it were a general rule, that all shrubs and
trees with many thorns and pricks be wound and wreathed togethers, and
compassed and succored and defended each with other, and fight against them
that they touch, and wound their hands, and none of them hurts other. And
for thickness it lets the coming of the Sun beams and of the dew of
heaven, to things that be there under. And therefore that which is sown nigh,
or among thorns, thriueth not commonly. Often hands and feets be wounded
with pricking of thorns, and the ach cease not till the thorn be all taken
out of the places that be hurt. And for sharpness and pricking uneath thorns
be feld or plucked out of the ground without hook, Bill, Matock, or some other
edged tool. And when they be field or rooted up, they be bound in Fagots and
in heaps, and burnt in Ouens and in Furnases.

Also among thorns often be flowers scene, and also much fruit, but thorns be
not softened by softness of flowers, but when flowers and leaves fall, thorns
abide and be more hard. And for thorns be kindly dry, they be soon kindled
in the fire, and give a strong ley, and sparkleth and cracketh, and makes much
noise: and soon after they be brought all to naught, as the Gloss says super
Eccle. 7. The Laughing of fools, is as the cracking of thorns under a pot,
and that is a vain thing. Ecclesiastes. 2.

But thorns be not unprofitable, but they be good and profitable to many
manner uses. For of thorns men make hedges and pauises, with which men defend
and succor themselves and their own. And thorns bears many good fruits,
and defends the fruit. Look before de Rubo in littera R.

Of Lignis Sethim. chap. 150.
Certain trees be called Ligna Sithem, and such Trees have many pricks, and
be light and rotteth not, and be like to the white thorn, and be called
Acharitis in Greek, as it is said upon Exodus. 25. There it is said, that
Sethim is a name of an hill and of a Country, and of a tree, that is lyks to
white thorn in leaves. And is a most lyghtest Tree, and rotteth not nor
burns: therefore it is said in Aurora.

Ligna Sethim torpent nulla purtredine, iustos
Signant in coelum qui sine fine nitant.
The tree of Sethim fails with no rotting, and betokens rightful men in
heaven, that shine without end. And they be called thorns of Sethim: for by
might and virtue, and pains and torments men come to the Stars of God, as
Dioscorides and Plinius mean. And the virtue thereof stops and binds, and
stauncheth blood. The leaves thereof be rough and whitish, with thorns and
pricks, and has purple flowers and long branches, of the greatness of a
finger, and has in the top of the bough small beads with pricks and thorns,
and full of round seed. And the seed dronken, succoureth and helps rotted
members.

( Addition.
Setim, a tree like a white thorn, which does never rot, whereof was much of
the timber in Salomons Temple.)

Of Sentice. chap. 151.
Heath.
SEntix is a manner tree or an herb with rough leaves, and fat and cloue, as
Eruca. And has branches of two cubits long, and has that name Sentix of the
place that it grows in. For they grow among hard things, and be not
tilled, as thorns do, as Isidore says. And has heads as a rough Thistle,
and the root thereof is read, long, and fat, and is medicinable, and helps
sores of burning and of scalding, as Dioscorides says. And helps against
inward stopping of veins.

Of Sepe. chap. 152.
AN Hedge is called Sepes, and Sepes is declined, Sepes, pis, and is a manner
closing of briers, of thorns, and trees made. The souls and stalks be pight
in the ground, and there about be wreathed, wouen, and wound thorns and
rods. And so houses and Corn be succored and defended by strength of the
hedge. And is declined haec Sepes, huius sepis. Thereof is mention made Ecc.
36. where no hedge is, possession is destroyed.

Also about hedges lurketh and darketh venomous worms, Frogs, Serpents, and
Adders: And so of this Noune Sepes, comes this Noune Seps, and is a name of a
venomous Adder, that is so venomous, that the venimme destroys not only the
body, but also it wastes and destroys the boanes: and so says Lucanus. And
means, that this Adder destroys body and boanes, etc. And therefore it is
perilous to sleep under hedges, for dread of venomous beasts, that lurk
there. Hedges stand in great heat, and fail soon except they be renewed, and
while they keep and save other things, they stand in the heat of the Sun,
and be wasted themselves some and some: and at the last they be rotted with
dryness, and burnt in the fire. Of Sepes, an hedge, or of this verb Sepio,
Sepis, that is to understand close, comes this Noune Septum, that is a place
closed about. It is said, Intra septum templi, that is to understand, within
the closing or the clausure of the Temple.

Of Sude. chap. 153.
SVdes, sudis, is an heisaule or a stake sharped at the end, and this Noune
Sudes comes of Suo, is, to sow. For an hedge seems as i were sown with
such souls and stakes, for such souls and stakes be cleaned or they be pight
in the ground: and the faster they be pight in the ground and more stronglye
wouen and wound with rods, the more strong is the hedge. And Sudes is feminine
gender, and declined haec Sudes, huius sudis, as Hugo says, and Ouidius
Methamor. dicit. Que coniuncta est humeris ceruix sude figitur combusta, etc.

Of Siliqua. chap. 154.
A Codde and an husk is called Siliqua, and is a void thing of Codware, as it
were Balthis, or a bladder blown, and charge more then it feeds and
nourishes, as the Gloss says super Lu. 15. and Hugo says, that Siliqua is
the codde of all manner codware and purging, with the which Swine be sed. And
Isidore says, lib. 17. that Silique that is shortened among Latins, and is
called Siliquam, had such a name among the Greeks, for it is a tree, and the
fruit thereof is sweet, and a tree is called Xilon among them, and sweet is
called Liquon among them. And to this sentence accords Plinius, lib. 9. cap.
24. There he says, that fruit of Siliqua is sweet, and a finger long, and an
inch broad, and the skin thereof is eaten. And says there, libro. 13. cap.
9. that some men said, that it is a fig of Egypt, but that is open error,
for it grows not in Aegipt, but in Syria.

Of Sinape. chap. 155.
Mustarde seed, or Mustart seed.
SEnule is called Sinapis, and has that name of Syn, and Napus a Nepe, for it
is like to a Nepe in leaves, as Isi. says li. 17. And li. 20 cap. 24. Plinius
speaks of Senuey and says, yt among herbs that Pythagoras praises, it is
said, that he gave to Senuey the first and chief praising, and says, that
among herbs Senuye bears the price: And it is hot and dry in the fourth
degree, and wastes and purges thick humors and gleamie. And heals smiting
of serpents and of Scorpions, and overcomes venime of the Scorpions, and
abateth tooth ach, and passes to the brain, and comfort it wonderfully,
and breaks the stone, and commands menstruall blood, and exciteth
appetite, and helps them that have the falling evil, and heals the
dropsy, and helps them that have Litargie, the sleeping evil, and helps
them full greatly: and cleanses the hair, and lets the falling thereof:
and does away tinkling and ringing of the ear, and wipeth away dimnesse of
eyes, and smootheth roughness of the lips, and helps Paralitik men: for it
opens the pores, and tempereth and consumes and wastes the humor that
laxeth and smites sinews togethers, and takes away the palsy.

Plinius rehearses the praising and many other, and says, that the most
virtue thereof is in the seed and the seed is less in quantity, and most in
might and in virtue: For the seed heateth and opens, consumes and wastes
and multiplieth it self. Of one little grain comes a right great plant, and
springs and spreads greatly in branches, flowers, and seed. The seed
thereof grows in certain small cods, euenlong and round, and is kept by
defense of those cods until they be ripe. The flowers thereof be full yeolow,
with good smell. And though all the herb in substance be kene and fervent,
yet Bees love best the flowers, and haunt them as Plinius says. Nevertheless
Bees touch never flowers of Olive. And Plinius says, li. 20. ca. 12. that
senuie multiplieth so it self, that where it is once sown, uneath the place
may be delivered thereof. And there it falls once, it waxes green, and
springs anon, as be says. lib. 19. cap. 9.

( Addition.
Senuie bruised and ground with vinegar, is a wholesome sauce, meet to be eaten,
with hard and gross meats, either flesh or fish, it helps digestion, and is
good for the stomach, to warm the same, and to provoke appetite.)

Of Semine. cap. 156.
Seed is called Semen, and is sown in fields to bring forth fruit, though
the seminall humor of beasts is called Semen by a manner appropriation, as
Isidore says: and Sementes is the seed of corn, when it is sowing time, and
was called of many men the Goddess or the Lady of sowing: And Seminarium is
the beginning of every thing, or a vessel that seed is put in for to sow:
But Sementum is profit and winning that comes of the seed, as Hugo says.
Hereof be vearses difference in Grecismo, that mean that seminall humor of
beasts is called Semen, and grains of corn that be sown in the field is
called Sementis properly, and Sementinum. And Seminum is the well and beginning
of things. And as Plinius libro. 8. and 24. cap. says. Seed is good kept
one year, or two, or three: and is little worth that is kept longer time:
and the grain that is lowest in the threshing flower is best is seed, and is
best seed, for it is heauyest: and that is best, that is most heavy, and most
white within. And by qualytie of the land, seed shall be sown thick or
thin, soon or late, for it must be sown soon in moist land, least the
seed rosteth with rain: and late in dry land, that rain come soon
thereafter, least the seed lie long dry, and vanish, and be lost. And less
seed shall be sown in fat land, and most in lean land. For in fat land it
grows full fast, and destroyed it self: and one seed ouersetteth another at
the last by great multiplication of it self. And seed that is sown soon,
shall wax thicker then the seed that is late sown.

For late seed shall be thin, least it dry for thickness: and it is cunning
to sow even like thick. For the hand shall accord with the stepping, and
pass away forth with the right foot: and seed shall not be changed out of
cold place into hot, neither againewarde. For nothing shall be commanded into
the contrary. Of seed sown in lean land comes thin straw and small ears,
sometime void: and in fat fields, of one root of seed comes a cluster of
stalks: and in Harvest, when the day and the night be like long, the time is
contrary to seed time, and also in springing time. And men shall not sow in
full hoare frost: and that is sooth: for the winter seed is sown before the
hoare frost, and breaks and springs the seventh day. But after the frost,
uneath it springs within 40. days, Huc vsque Plinius. ca. 20. Then seed is
small grain and round, and has in it self virtue to multiply and to save
kind thereof: And when it is sown, it swells by humor of the earth closed
within, yt tempereth and makes subtle the humor and the earth all about. And
brings it and draws it to temperatnesse of ye grains: and so the grain
waxes soft and great: and so the small skin of the seed cleaves and the
burgening springs out little and little: the roots be pight downward in the
ground by the which roots the burgening seed draws away to it self
feeding and nourishing, and opens at the last priuelye the earth: and thereof
springs stalks, twigges, flowers, fruit, and seed. And though the seed yt
is sown, be right little: yet thereof comes a right great thing and an huge.
Fools account seed lost when it is sown: nevertheless in better wise it is
not kept then by sowing. Also in the seed is the virtue seminall, and kind
heat works therein. And humor of nourishing and of feeding is drawn thereto
by virtue of heat. To feeding and growing of the seed comes the stalks, and
of the stalk comes the ear that is called Spica, and has that name of
Spiculo, a dart or an eile, as Isidore says, libro 17. For in the ears
grows many eiles that be sharp as darts. Kind makes eyles in the corn
ears, to be succor and armor against sodeine reeses and biting of small
birds and worms, as Isidore says. After diverse kinds of seeds the ear is
diverse in figure and shape. For sometime the ear is broad, as it fares in
Barlye, and sometime four edged, as it fares in Wheat, and is sometime
round, as Plinius says and Aristotle also.

Also the ear is in the top of the stalk compassed all about with small
skins and bulls, and therein the seed is nourished as it were in the mother,
and kept and saved until it be ripe: and such hulls springing out first with
the grain be closed, and cleaves afterward some and some, and the grain
swells and wateth great, and namely in wheat, as it is said super libro.
Aristotelis de plantis. And generally in the beginning by working and rearing
of heat, the heads of corn ears be areared upward, but when it ripeth, then
it be^deth somewhat downwarde by heaviness and weight of the grains. And while
ears be green, they be sometime sprung and corrupt with corrupt air and
dew, and takes as it were rust thereof: and ripeth the better, if they be
sprung with couenable dew and rain, and have dew heat of heaven. And
moisture of dew suffers not the grains to fall out of the hulls, as Plinius
says, libr. 17. And Constantine, Isaac, and Albuma. mean the same. By
goodness of the land the goodness of the ear is known: for in good and fat
ground grows good ear in great quantity, and fruitful of grains, and in
dry land and lean againeward, as Plinius says.

Of Stipula. cap. 157.
STubble is called Stipula, and has that name of burning, as it is were a
thing burnt, for when the corn is ripe and gathered, the stubble is burnt,
that the field may be eared, as Isid. says, li. 17. Or else it has that name,
as Hugo says, of Stipo, as to beset and compass. And Stipula is properly that
straw with leaves and hofen, that is left in the field after that repers have
reped the corn with hooks, and gathered it home.

And many men gather this stubble, that is apt to many diverse uses: for some
men thetch houses therewith, and some feeds beasts therewith in steed of
straw and sodder. And some makes fire therewith and baketh bread therewith,
and sees meat, as Plinius says, libro. 18. cap. 30. Look before in Palea,
in littera P. Stubble is a little thing, hollow and dry, and is full soon
set on fire, and with tlowing of wind, as he says.

Of Simila. chap. 158.
THe flower of wheat meal is called Simila, and is chief meal of wheat,
most clean, delicate, and liking. Thereof is bread made for noble men of
renown, and that bread is properly called Similago. Ma^chuet.
and is the flower of most smallest meal, most clean, and most white and
soft: and accords to many meats, and also to medicines. Look before de
fauna in littera F. and de polenta in littera P.

Of Scopa. chap. 159.
SCopa is a tree, B^somes and broomes.
and has that name of Scopando; spewing, that comes of Scopis or Scopo, pas,
and is to understand, cleanse or purge^ for therewith houses he swept and
cleansed, as Isid. says, lib. 17. And many call to tree Birch, and has light
leaves, as the ^^pe. By this name Scopa, of such a ^re the late Writers make no
mention.
For the leaves thereof be full thin and full light, and moves and quaketh
with a right soft blast of wind. And has many hard twigs and branches with
knots, and therewith often children be chastised and beaten on the bare
buttocks and loins. And of the boughs and branches thereof be besomes made to
sweep and to cl^anse houses of dust, and of other uncleanness: and bears
seed that is void, as it were like husks or void coddes, and wild men of
woods and Forrestes uses that seed in stead of bread. And this tree has
much sour iny^e, and somewhat biting. And men use therefore in springing time
and harvest to stirte the rindes, and to gather the humor that comes out
thereof, and drink it in steed of Wine. And such drink quenches thirst, and
breeds much swelling, as he tells, but it nourishes not, nor makes men
drunk. Also ye same juice kept long in a vessel vnder-dung, and chafed with
the heat of the Sun, corrupts and rotteth, and turns into fatness, and so
it is made an ointment, and by seething of fire many me^ draw out thereof as it
were pitch And though it be right black and stinking, yet it is needful to
many diverse uses. Therefore wild wood men, in desert use the seed thereof,
and the juice in steed of corn and of wine, and of Olyue, as Plinius says
libro 15. treating of juice of trees.

( Addition.
In the book tituled the Calendar of miles, there is in Macedonia, a notable
City, in the which three sorts of people inhabit, which at this day is called
Scopia, three days journey from Thessalonica, Turks, Jews, and Christians:
the greatest companies, are Turks.

This City stands not far from the mount Olympus, etc. Muntles in lib. 4.
folio. 931.)

Of Stupa. cap. 160.
HArdes is called Stupa, and is the clensing of hemp or of flexe, and men in
old time called it Supa, as it were stopping or porring: for therewith chins
and cliftes of ships be stopped and porred. Therefore they that array it to that
craft, and make it ready thereto, be called Stipulateres, as Isido. says libr.
20. Vbi agit de lanis. Strippers of hemp
For with much braking, heckling and rubbing, Hardes, be departed from the
substance of hemp and of flexe, and is great when it is departed, and more
knottie short and rough, and is therefore not full able to be spun for thread
thereof to be made: nevertheless thereof is thread spun, that is full great,
uneven and full of knovbes, and thereof be made bonds and bindings, and
matches for candles, for it is full dry, and takes soon fire and burns,
and so when it is kindled, it falls suddenly into ashes, and thereof comes
when it is quenched, bitter smoke, that grieueth both the eyes and the nose,
and is good and profitable to medicine, when it is well wrought and purged of
stalks, and is good to dry and to heal wounds, and to ease burning and
scalding, and to abate swelling of eyes, as Plinius says, lib. 20. cap. 10.

Of Taxu. cap. 161.
AN Ewe tree is called Taxus, and is a tree with venime and poison, and is a
strong tree and an high, with great boughs piyant and long; of the which the
Parthes make bows, as Isid. says li. 17. The Doet speaks thereof and says
that such trees are burnt, and bows made thereof. The shadow thereof is
grievous, and slays such as sleep thervnder. The juice thereof is too
laxatiue, the substance thereof keeps the evil that is called Ignis Grecus,
that it shall not quench, as Dioscorides affirms and says.

( Addition.
The Yew tree is a fast wood, where of, because of the toughness, bows are made
for Archers, Ewe or Yew, is altogether venomous, and against man's nature. The
birds that eat the red berryes, either dye, or cast-theyr feathers.)

Of Tabula. ca. 162.
A Board is called Tabula, and has the name of Teneo, to hold: and Tabula is
in one signification a meat board, and namely of rich men, as it were Tenebula,
bolding morsells, for they hold morsells and vessel, that be set there upon:
and is areared and set upon feet, and compassed with a list about. And in
another manner. Tabula is a plaieng board, that men play on at the Dice, and
other games: and this manner of Table is double, and arrayed with diverse colors.
In the third manner it is a thin planke and plain, and therein be letters writ
with colors, and sometime small shingles be plained, and made some deal holow
in either side, and be craftily joined togethers, and filled full of wax,
black, green or red, to write therein. And such tables be called Tabulae, for
they hold letters that are written therein. And the more plain ye tree is that
they be made of, and the more hard and smooth, the better the Tables be.

In another manner, this name Tabula comes of Tegendo, as it were a heling or
a covering, and is a long shingle and broad, cloue with an axe or with a saw,
and such a boorde is needful to covering of houses, for of such boords be
tables made, and other buildings craftily arrayed, and be disposed, sometime in
fighting, with many manner craft and wonderful, Ingines.
and that after many manner casting, hewing, denting, and plaining: that such
tables and boords may be even and well joined. Boords and tables garnish
houses, nevertheless when they be set in soler flores, Planckes.
they serve all men and beasts that be therein, and be trodden of all men and
beasts that come therein, and have gyests or beams like far asunder, and be
fastened thereto, and defended therewith, that they bend not nor crook too
soon, when they be ouerset and pressed with stones and other heavy things
laid on them. Then they be dressed, hewed and plained, and made couenable to
use of the ships, of bridges, of bulks, and coffers, and many other needful
things of buylding. Also in ships mariners fly to a board, and be often saved
in peril.

Of Trabe. cap. 163.
A Beam and also a gyest is called Trabes, and is a tree that stretches
thwart over an house, and touches the walls in either end, and holds them
up, that they fall not for great highness, neither for leuieng, and is declined
haec Trabs vel Trabes, and has that name of Traho, that is to draw or to
reach, for they reach from one wall to another, and are joined and sticked
therein, as Hugo says.

And it needs that a gyest and a beam be long, strong, and great, and namely
in the middle, lest they bend and were crooked, if that they be too small in
the middle, and so for dread of bending and of crooking, often it needs to
underset them with posts or pillars, for such a thwarte over tree, set in that
wise, needs to be underset for succor, that they may be the better held
up, and bear heavy things that be laid thereupon.

Of Terebinto. chap. 164.
TErebinthus (as Isid. says li. 17.) is a tree that sweateth Rosin, and is
better than all the other, and the Rosin thereof is called Terebintina, and is
right medicinable: for as Dios. says ye leaves thereof, fruit, rindes and
seed be sowrish, and they are gathered as busilye as the ashes thereof, and be
contrary to venomous biting. The good Rosin thereof is clean and bright, and
clear, with good savor and red color, and has virtue to temper and moist, to
laxe and is ripe, and in therefore good against hard postumes and other
gatherings, that be in the head, and in the members. And Plin. lib. 14. cap.
7. speaks of this tree Terebintus, and says, that in Siria is Terebintus,
and thereof is double kind, as the male, and that is without fruit: and
female, and that is double: That one has red fruit of the greatness of a
Fetch, and that other has pale fruit of the greatness of a bean, and the
fruit has a merry smell, and is fat in handling and touching, and with much
Rosin, and is in Siria a great tree, and the matter thereof is right soft and
durable. And when they wexe black and shine for age, then the leaves be
thick, and have some manner cods, and thereof comes certain beasts as it
were Gnats, that gnawe and pearceth the rindes, and so when the rind is
pierced, thereof woseth and springs drops of Rosin. Also lib. 24. cap. 6.
Plinius says, that the root of this tree Terebintus and leaves sodden in
wine, comfort the stomach, and helps against head ache. Terebintina, the
smells best, pleseth, both of Siria, and of Cipresse, that is pure, bright,
and whitish, with a manner of redness and thick: and that that grows in
Mountains, pourgeth and heals wounds better then that that grows in
fields.

( Addition.
The Turpentine tree grows in Syria, especially about Damascus.

The fruit is hot and dry, provoke vryne, and stirs up fleshlye lust,
etc.)

Of Thina. cap. 165.
THina be certain trees most precious, as it were Hebenus, and thereof Solomon
made steires and greeces and posts in the house of our Lord, and so says the
Gloss 4. Reg. ca. 10. upon that place, a woman brought out of Ophir, vel Ephir,
timber of the trees Thina. And these trees Thina rot not, and also they have
pricks as a white thorn, and are round and white, and full clear as a
glass, or as the nail of the hand, and so therein be images seen, as it were
in the nail, and these trees burn not in fire, nor soften in water, as the
tree Sithim does not. And many men suppose, that the trees Sithim and Thina, be
one manner tree.

Of Tirso. cap. 166.
THe middle stalk of an herb or of a tree is called Tirsus, and has that
name, for it rises out of the earth, and springs upward, as Papias says.
And is the ouermost part of a plant, tender, most green, and most soft and
fair, and most far from the earth, and next is heaven, most sprung with the
deaw of heaven, and is most full of leaves, and tender boughs and branches:
for in the stalks is most virtue of herbs.

Of Tignis. cap. 167.
Roof of trees is called Tigna, and are trees areared and stretched from the
walls up to the top of the house, and bear up the covering thereof, and stand
wide beneath, and come togethers upwards, and so they nigh nearer and nearer,
and are joined either to other in the top of the house, and have that name
Tigna of Tegendo, healing, or of Tegula, slate, or shingle, Rasiers.
or laths, for it holds up heling slate, shingles, and laths: the lath is
long and somewhat broad, and plain and thin, and is nailed thwart over to the
rafters, and thereon hang slates, tile and shingles.

The rafters be strong and square and hewn plain, and be strong and great
toward the walls, and smaller and less strong upward toward the top, and be
charged without with slate and tile, or straw and thatch, and be made fair
within with fair gyests and boords, and are fast joined therein, and be called
Laquearia, that be boords joined to the rafters to make fair houses and
chambers with in, and be that arayeth the roof with rafters, is called
Tignarius, as Papias says.

Of Tritico. cap. 168.
Wheat is called Triticum, and has that name of Tritura, threshing or
treading: for it is threshed or trodde to have the most pure in ye barnes or
garners. Or it has that name, for ye grain thereof is ground or stamped and
bruised that it may be able to be eaten, as Isid. says libr. 17. And of wheat
is double kind, one manner kind is red without, and sharp at either end,
cloven in the side, and is most white within, and heavy in weight, and that
manner of wheats is best, as Plinius says.

The other manner wheat is yeolow without, and clear and white within, and is
light and not easily broken. Of general properties of wheat, look before in
litera F. de Frumento. Isaac teaches and shows in Dietis, that wheat is
diverse by diversity of ground and soil, that it is sown and grows in: for
in such land that is fat and well dounged, grows fat rank wheat and heavy
of weight, and also more nutritive and nourishing, than is the wheat that
grows in lean land and also dry. And so the goodness of wheat is known by
goodness of the ground and land that it grows in, and againward. Also wheat
takes diversity of diversity of tune, for wheat that grows in moderate
time, is perfect in qualytie and quantity, and is full of meal and of doure,
with right little bran, and nourishes at the best: and wheat that springs
in immoderate and uneasy weather and time, is imperfect.

Also wheat is diverse, for some is old and some is new, and some is in ye
mean: for when it is old and kept long time, it is too dry and hard so
defye, and nourishes but little, and then the substaunciall moisture thereof
is soon fordried and abateth by heat of air, and new wheat that is kept but
a little time, for superfluity of moisture and of gleimie earth, is moist and
gleimy, fast and hard to defy, and breeds swelling and ventositie, and
hurling and kurling in the womb, and wheat that is mean between the new and
the old, between too moist and dry is temperate, and is therefore the
better, and nourishes the more, for when the accidental moisture is wasted
heat of the air tempereth somewhat ye substaunciall moisture. And therefore
such wheat is the better, and nourishes the better, and is well digested, and
leeseth gleiminesse and thickness of earth, and as Isaac says, wheat is hot
and temperate between moist and dry, but bread thereof is the more hot, because
of heat of the fire and of baking, for the kind heat thereof is strengthened
by accidental heat of the fire. Also wheat has this property, that it
nourishes better than all other greines, and that because of likeness of man's
complexion, as he says. Also wheat by dryness cleanses and wastes, and
therefore juice of the meal thereof, cleanses and pourgeth the breast and the
lunges, and so does Tisanum made of wheat, as Tisanum made or barley, for it
cleanses more than Tisanum made of barley, and helps against the cough and the
bloudye flixe.

Also wheat sodde with Oil, and laid upon an hard postume dissolueth it.
Also wheat so with juice of rue, and dissolueth and softneth running and
kurding of milk, if the breast and teafes he balmed therewith. Also wheat
tempered with the juice of Henbane, and laid to the sinews, lets evil
humors, that they shall not fall downward. Also grems of wheat chewed, helps
against the biting of a wood hound, for it draws out the venime, as he says.

Also of wheat is made oil that helps in many things, and namely in itching
and in seads wet and dry, and shingles, if it be welt froted with a rough
cloth: and that is done, for the virtue of Oil should the better enter. Also
bran of wheat, dries and cleanses more than does the meal thereof: but the
bran norisheth little or else right naught. Also as he says, wheat fresh and
new nourishes but little, and breeds sleame and swelling when it is eaten
raw, and also ache in the sides, hurlying and curlyng, and is soon rotted,
and therefore often long worms and other worms in the womb be gendered of
such meat: and wheat roasted nourishes more, and breeds less ventosity,
and stops soon, and binds, and is most grievous, and breeds swellyng
and gleimie humor, when it is sod in water. Huc vsque Isaac. in Dietis.

Of Tisana. cap. 169.
TIsana, as the Gloss says super 2. Reg. 1. is barley dried, stamped in a
mortar and shaled, and thereof is made that, that accords to them that be
toothlesse. Also of Tisanis such barley is drink made that is good to them yt
have the fevers and other hot evils. Look before De Ordeo in litera O. It
abateth and changes heat, and quenches thirst, and declyned Haec Tisana,
huius Tisanae, and the middle syllable is long: and thereof Alexander Nequam
speaks, and says in this manner.

Cortice nudato, Tisanas Ordea dicas.

His meaning is that Tisana is called Barley shaled, and thereof is made a
drink called Tisanum, as Isaac says in Dietis.

Of Tribulo. cap. 170.
A Brier is called Tribulus, and is a shrub with pricks, is more soft than a
tree, and more hard than a herb: and thereof is double kind, the more that
grows by hedges, as Plin. says libro 21. cap. 16.

The brier is an hard-thing, that grows about closing of towns, and
springs upward on high, but when it lacks strength to stretche upward,
then it bends downewarde to the ground, and has many teeth, and sharp
pricks, and every branch thereof from ye crop to the root is full, and
succored with sharp pricks.

The other manner brier is less, and grows in moors and in fields, and is
less in length and in greatness, than is the more brier, and has small leaves
and round stalks tender and red, spredde by the ground all full of sharp
pricks, and bears white blossoms, and the fruit thereof is first green,
and afterward red and black at the last. Serpents, Adders and toades love this
fruit, and therefore it is not good for men to eat such fruit, and who that
will eat thereof, shall choose that fruit, that is most high from the ground,
und is not too ripe, but whole and sound, and not touched neither bitten nor
gnawen with flies, nor with other worms.

The brier that grows in field, as Plinius says, is enemy to ploughes and
to fruit, and is quick and sharp, and multiplieth it self swiftly, and may
uneath be destroyed in fields yt they grow in, and therefore it destroys and
ouersetteth corn, and hurts sore feet, legs, and hands of them that pass
thereby, and touch it, and makes often foot men stumble and fall, and renteth
men's clothes, and gathers off wool from sheep that go in leese thereby:
and therefore this nowne Tribulus comes of Tribulando, grieuing and working
woe: for it grieueth them that comes there nigh and does them much woe.

Of Thimo. cap. 171.
THimus, is an herb with good savor, and Virgil speaks so thereof, and
says, that sweet donie sauoureth of it. The flower thereof is called
Epithium, and is a medicinable flower, and cleanses and purges melancholy and
fleme, and helps therefore against the sickness called the ^uartane, and
against diverse and many other melancholicke evils, and grievous passions.

( Addition.
Thimum Creticum, Thimum duriue. Time of Candie, and common time. It is hot and
dry in the third degree, a medicinable herb.

Of Thimiamate. cap. 172.
THimiama is a certain confection most preciously ordained and made of Onice
and of Seacten, of Galbanus, and of Thus, as it is said, Exodus cap. 30. And
has that name Thimiama of a good smelling herb that is called Thimus, for it
smells sweetly as Thimus does, as Isidore says libro. 4. where he treats
of odours and smells, and such confections should not be made to man's use: for
our Lord bad and commanded that such confection should be offered in the
Temple, upon the Altar of Thimiama.

( Addition.
Thimiama, a sweet perfume, or odiserous savor made of herbs.)

Of Thure. cap. 173.
THus Frankencense, is the name of a tree, called Abies Fur, and of the gum
that woseth and comes out there of. Isidore lib. 17. speaks thereof and
says, that this is a tree of Arabia, and is great with many boughs, and with
the most lyghtest rind, to the quantitis of the tree Acer, and thereof comes
juice with good smell, and is white as Almonds, and is fat when it is tempred
and softened, and burns soon when it is set on fire, and is among us called
Masculus, for it is round shapen as the gendering stones. And the other is
plain and full scabbed, and not so good as the small, and fained by meddling
therewith of white Resine or of gum. But it is spyed and known, by his own
qualytie: For Thus burns in the fire, and Resine smoaketh, and Gamme made not
melts.

The tree that sweateth and woseth Thus, is called Libanus, and the gum
thereof is called Olibanum among physicians, and has name of a mount of
Arabia. But the gum that droppeth of the tree that is called Libanus, is called
Olibanum, and also Libanus (as Isido. says) and the Gloss super. Eccl. 24.
upon that place Ego quasi Libanus non incisus. And some men mean that Libanus
(...) Arabia, like to the Laureit tree in leaves, and bears fruit twice in
one year in springing time, and in harvest* And the gum that droppeth thereof
by itself in the beginning of Summer is the better: the which, in Summer when
the rind is slit is compelled to come out some and some. What droppeth in
harvest, is not so white nor so pure: but that that first cleaves to boughs
and twigs* That Thus is best that is white fast and sound, and euenlong as the
gendring stones; and is called therefore Masculinum. And Thus that comes out
in harvest, or in the beginning of winter, when the rinds be slit, is not like
to the other in virtue, nor in color for that is white and clear and bright,
and full clear, with full good smell: and the secondary I had is thin and
scabbed, as Isido says before. The Country where Thus grows, is fast of
mountains and hard to come to for high rocks and crags, as the Gloss says
super Eccle. And Plin. says all this lib. 15. cap. 10. There he says, that in
Arabia is a country, and Thus grows therein, Saba is a Prouiuce of the same
country that bears most plentye of Thus, and is a land that uneath men may
come to, for it is closed in the one side with rocks of the sea and in the
other side with mountains and crags and and so the tree that bears Thus
grows with out tilling, and loves claye land. And the Arabians tell that.
Thus shall not be gathered, nor the tree thereof pared, The Arabia^s used (...)
ceremony being Machomilles and no papists.
but of holy men and religious, that be not defiled by touching of women, in
time of gathering: and so they suppose; that meede shall increase by
obseruaunce of religion. Also he says there cap. 16. that the first kind
Harvest and gathering thereof as about the rising of the star Canis, in the
most strong heat. For then the rind thereof is right thin and slaketh and out
thereof woseth fat foam, and is gathered togethers, and hardens where the
kind of the place asks: and this is most pure and white.

And the second gathering thereof is when it draws to winter, when the rende
be slit, and this comes out red, and is not pure to the first.

Men deem that the gum of the young tree is most white, but the gum of an
old tree is most virtuous: And some deem, that the best gum grows in
Islands, and other donie and say, that no ginuine grows in Islands, Thus is
gathered and brought on Camels backs, to the City that is called Sabocriam,
and there is a gate opened therefore. And if is not lawful to lead it by
another way, and there it is fyed to the God that they worship. There the
Priests take thereof by measure and not by weight; and it is not lawful to
beg neither to sell thereof before due portion be offered to God ^ and is
assayed by witness if it burrieth anon^ to coals, and wexeth on light on
high, if it how not togethers the teeth when it is bitten, but breaks a(...)
and falls to powder. Huc vsque Before.

And Diosco^ and Platearius mean, that. thus is the gum of a certain tree in
Alexandria, and the best and most pure is called Olibanum Alexandrinum.

And the other is found beside Damascus, and is not so good nor so pure as the
first, and is hot and dry with well smellyng ^ight^ fat and gleymie; and
comfort by good smell thereof, and soudreth, b(...), and gleweth, and
restrayneth and stinteth mightily by virtue of gumminesse fears and ranning
humors, that run downward from the head, and namely when they run by the
utter veins of the face, and namely if powder thereof be laid in a plaster to
the temples with white wine and the white of an egg, and abateth also and
stauncheth tooth ache of the gumers. And Thus chewed lets the running of
humors from the head to the spiritual members, that be the breast and lungs,
and helps against feeble digestion, and sower bolking. And Wine in which Thus
is sodden, helps, and comfort, and cleanses the Mother: and the smoke
thereof helps greatly to conception.

Powder thereof meddled with vinegar, lesseth and thinneth foul breasts of
maidens, and helps brusing meddeled with pitch, and abaseth ache of the ears
meddled with wine. Huc vsque Diosco. and Plate. This nowne Thus comes of
Theos, yt is God, for it is offered in sacrifice of Gods. And in this manner it
is written, as Isidore says. Or else it comes of Tundo, heating or brusing,
for it is able to be stamped, and is often stamped: and the more it is stamped,
the more and the better it sauoureth and burns. And gives light in the
Summer, and is then writ without H. Tus. Of Thus set a fire, comes a good
smelling smoke, shapen as a rod, and small beneath, and full mouable, and
turning, and crooked with many bendings and wrinklyngs, and moves toward
contrary sides with most light moving, and spreads abroad upward, and
shaddoweth the air, and destroys stench of carayne by good savor, thereof,
and thyrleth and passes straight to the brain, and comfort and refreshes
the spirit of feeling, and spreads into the cells of the brain.

Of Vimine. cap. 174.
Osiers the small
PErsh is called Vimen, nis, and is a soft rod, and has that name Vimen, for it
has much virtue of greenesse, for the kind thereof is such, that if it be
dried and laid in water, it wereth often green and pliant, as Isidore says,
lib. 17. Of Persh are needful bendes and knitting made to bind up vines, and
hoopes for Tons, as it is said before in the same book in litera S. Look
there, De salice.

Of Virga. cap. 175.
A Rod is called Virga, and Virga is properly that that grows out of
boughs, and has that name of Virtus, virtue: for it has in it self great
virtue. Or it has that name of Viror, green, for the virtue that is hid in
the root, shows it self in the green color of the rod.

And Virga is said, as it were governing by virtue and might. Witches and
Inchantors used rods to make serpents as it were bounden. Also Philosophers,
Kings and Masters used a rod: and so does he that meateth, keeps and
departs fields, and threshing stoores, and meades, and so does Ambassadors,
messengers and heardes. Also a rod is compouned of three manner of substance,
of the rind, Hark and pith: and is nourished and lives by the pith: and
springs and is reared up by the stalk, and is covered and defended from
wrong of the utter air by benefice of the rind. For as the Commentor says
super. libr. de plantis, a tree has rind in steed of skin, and stock or
stalk in steed of bones, and pith in steed of veins. For kind heat that is
namely in the pith of the rod, draws thereto humor out of ye stock and
root, by the bough that is mean. And of the bough the rod springs, and the
kind heat changes the gross matter and thick and earthy, that is in the
humor that is drawn, into the stalk and rind, and turns the watrye parts
thereof into many twigs and branches, and brings the part that is most
unctuous and pure to the utter part of the rod, to bring forth thereof,
blossoms, flowers and fruit: and at the last, both flower and fruit, springs
and comes of the substance of the rod, without corruption or defiling of
the rod: for the flower breaks and springs priuelye out of the rod, and
does neither defile nor yet vnbeautifie the rod: but makes it more
plenteous, perfect and fair. Also the rod takes not strength of burgening,
neither might of gendring by meddling of seminal humor, as men and beasts do:
But a rod takes such strength and might of the deawe of heaven, and of beat
of the Sun.

And when a rod grows, it springs always upward, and holds and reareth
the top toward heaven, for to come to perfect nourishing: and the rod is
mean between the boughe and the stock or root that conceyueth thereof, and
between the fruit that it hears, by tenderness of the substance, the rod
is full plyant and bends lightly, and some toward every side. Also a rod is
dry, rough, and knortie without, and softs within in the pith, and sail of
humor under the rind: and the m^^^^ codde grows, the higher it passes from
the earth: and the higher it passes upward, the more small and sharp it is us
the ouermost roppe. Also a codde shall stretch upright of it self: but when it
is young and tender, and worth^^^tes happens that it crooketh and bends
downward toward the earth, and is hardened in that crookedness, then it is
hard to stretch it, and to make it again even ^ right. And sometime a
crooked^o^ and put in the fire, and by heat of the fire, the stiffenesse and
hardness is tempered and made soft ^ and so the rod is the more easily
straighted, and made even and right. Also children and hounds hate the rod,
for they be therewith chastised.

Of Virgulto. ca. 176.
Young hasil spring.
VIrgultum has that name of Virga, a rod, as Huguscion says, and is a place
where many rods gi^^s. And Isidore lib. 17. says, that Virgultum is a bough
that grows of the strength and stock of the same tree: but a rod grows and
springs without meddeling of ^^ede, and woreth vile in winter, and pleasing
in spring time: for then they burgon and bloome, and if they be cut, they grow
again and spring on high from the ground, and the more they grow, the more
they spring up toward heaven.

And sometime an Herbor is called Virgultum, Viridarium, or Viretum, and is a
green place, and merry with green trees and herbs, as it is said before De
Orto, Look in litera O.

Of Vite. cap. 177.
A Uine is called Vitis, and has the name of Venciendo, binding, for it is
bound. And Isidore says, that Vitis has that name, for it has virtue to take
some root and p^^^^.

Or else they be called Vites in the plural number, for they have virtue and
might to bind themselves togethers, and be porrued and railed and bound to
trees that be nigh to them. The kind thereof is plyant, and takes and holds
by strength, and imbraceth what it takes, ^^ it were in arms: and those
bonds by the which it takes and windeth about trees and stalks, be called
Capreoli; and have that name, for it takes and compasses trees, and holds
them each by order. These he crookes of the vines, by help and succor of
which, knots and branches of the vine, be help so sustain and to withstand
wind and storms, that they break not with blasts of wethers. And be also
called Corith^i, for they be as it were rings and bends, and haddeth things
that be nigh thereto, for boughs and branches of the vine, should not be
slaked far for the succormed shaken, and disperpled, and hurled with blasts
of wind: but they should so come, to bear and save the fruit without peril.
And these things accords most to vines, that the earth be opened about the
roots, and there made as it were a great hole, that the root may take more
plenty of moisture and of humor, and also that the sun beam may the better
come thereto, and work therein. Also vines need to be cut and pared, and
purged of superfluity and waterie boughs and vain. Also vines need letting
and planting, and thereof comes young vines, and be called Propagines, and be
the first twigs that spring and spread of the young vine: and vines need deluing
and paring of the ground, with shouell, spade, or mattocke, to do away
superfluity of herbs and of roots, that the vine may so be the better
nourished and comforted.

Also vines need to be rayled, to be the better sustained, and the latin is
for pitching of poles of railing, Paxillare, as Papias says, and comes of
Pango, gis, xi, and is to understand, pitch or set stakes, as he says. And
Isidore says, Pastinare is to understand dounging with dounge, or with fat
earth to feed and to nourish the vine to bear fruit, the more and the
better. Also them needs Pampination, that is to understand, pulling away of
superfluity of leaves, that the sun and pure air may the better come to the
grapes. Also that the grapes be not ouershadowed by leaves, for then they shall
ripe the better, and a vine leaf is called Pampines, as Isidore says. By the
leaves of the vine grapes be defended and succored from heat and from colds,
and against all wrongs: and the leaves be taken away, for the Sun beam should
the better come to ye fruit for to ripe it, and be called Pampini, for they
hang by boughs and branches that are called Palmites, as Isidore says libro.
17.

Also them needs Vindimacion; that is taking away of grapes, and that: is
done, when Grapes be gathered to make of them wine. And Plin. lib. 8. ca. 22.
speaks of the vine and says, that when a vine is cut in good time and due
manner, it takes virtue and strength of the cutting, and conceiueth matter,
of the which springs and comes afterward flowers and fruit: and but it were
chastised with such cutting, and clensing and purging of such superfluity, all
the vine should were barren: For nothing grows swifter than the vine, and
therefore but the virtue of fruit bearing be saved, the vine bears no
fruit: and in the vine is a kind, that the vine would rather bear fruit
than live. Therefore all that is taken away of superfluity of the matter of
the vine, is advantage to the fruit in paring and cutting time.

The sooner the vine is cut, the more water it sheddeth, and the later it is
cut, the more plenty it bears of fruit: so that the cutting pass not due
time. Small vynes needs to be soon cut, and great vines and strong needs
to be late cut; and the cutting shall be astone between two knots, so that in
the other side before the knot the kerffe shall pass, and therefore it shall be
a slont, and not even overthwart, for the rain drops should soon come and
fall away: For by often coming of such drops, and long abiding upon a plain
kerffe, the top of the vine should be grieved and hurt.

And the more small and lean the vine is, the more thereof shall be cut and
when the leaves shall be cut off, the leaf that is with grapes, shall not be
removed, but it be a now vine and young, but the other leaves that be far, for
these leaves should supplant the grapes. All those branches that spring out of
the vine, in other places than in the knottes, are accounted unprofitable: and
bastard, and should anon be plucked off and rased.

Also cap. 24. he says, that vines have a special evil, when the branch of
the new vine is to soon taken away, either too hastily cut in undue time, or
when vines be sprung with evil dew or rain in blooming time: or when new
twigs or burgening is appaired with frost, or with cold or when uncunning
Gardeners hurt and wound wrongfully the roots, and when they strip the root,
or spoil the vine of all the root. Among all, ye vine is most grieved, when
strong rain smites the twigges while they bloome: for then falls both
flower and fruit of corrupt air and corrupt heawe.

And rain gendreth and breeds certain worms, and Caterpillars and Snanies,
that grow and fret burgening and leaves of the vine, and leaves lightly the
vine so spoiled, gnawen and eaten: and this evil breeds in moist, time,
easy and soft. And there is another evil that keepers of vines call Araneum,
for of evil blastes of wind, and corrupt rain comes and breeds as it
were copwebbes, and compasses and wastes the fruit, and burns and grieueth
it.

Also the vine bafeth Cabage, and all manner Coleworts, and hates also Hasels,
for when such are nigh to the vines, then the vines be grieved and sick; and
Mitrum much like to salt, Alome, and sea water, and beans, and ^etches, and
namely in the last cutting, be venime to vines, and destroy them. Huc vsque
Plinius libro. 17. cap. 2.

And he says, that among men in old time vines were accounted among great
trees. And in some parts and countries be so great vines, that they make Images
poasts, and stocks of vines: as it fares in the Image and mawmet of Jupiter in
the city of Popoloma. And men stye up upon a vine to the top of the Temple of
Diana Ephesina. Also poasts and pillars made of such vines, dure and last
without corruption long time. And in few trees kind is more durable then in
vines, they grow without end, and spring and spread full wide, and may be
laid with railing about houses and towns. And springs upward into many
countries unto the tops of Olives, of Popler, and other high Trees, and
compasses them and holds with their arms, as it were by affection of
matrimonye. The vine is a good tree and medicinable, both in branches and in
fruit. And thereof comes licour, that is better, and passes the juice of all
trees. When the vine is cut, thereof comes dropping most clean and pure, and
that dropping is good and profitable, and put in Colliriis, medicines for eyes.
By passing out of that dropping the substantial humor of the vine is cleansed
and purged in the root. And therefore the vine bears afterward the more pure
fruit and sweet. The leaves of the vine be broad, plain, green, and soft
within, and some deal rough without, and cloued and ragged in the utter side
and sharp, and make a great shadow. And the shadow thereof in Summers time
is full pleasant to them that love to rest there under. And the leaves be full
medicinable, for they cleanse wounds, and heal full cleanly.

And the leaves sodde in water, abateth seuourous beat, and heals
wonderfullye burning and swelling of the stomach. If they be laid in a
plaster wise: and helps women with children, and exciteth sleep, and
refreshes and comfort the brain. The drop thereof often dronken, breaks
the stone, as Dioscorides says: and sharpneth the fight, and does away
^learednesse of eyes. And succoureth against venomous biting, and venomous
travel: and stauncheth the womb.

Also ashes thereof is good to the foresaid things, and the ashes thereof
meddled with juice of rue and with Oil, abateth end softneth, and does away
swelling of the spleen, as Plinius says, li. 24. ca. 1. where be says, that
vine leaves does away headache, and swageth inflasions. And Uine leaves with
Barley meal, heals hetie goutes: and helps them greatly yt have the bloody
flixe, if they drink it. The juice thereof with Oil laid to an hairie place
in a plaster wise, does away the hair, and namely the dropping that comes
of boughs of ye vine. The rind of ye vine does away wartes: and dry vine
leaves stauncheth bleeding wounds, and closes and heals wounds. Moreover,
the ashes of the vine purges and heals soon a fester, and abateth ach and
shrinking of sinews: and heals with Oil stinging of scorpions, and biting
of hou^ds: Ashes of the rind by it self, restores and multiplieth hair that
is fallen.

(* Vitis vinifera, ripe grapes are hot and moist in the first degree, and the
raison, or dry grape is hot and dry, as says Galen.)

Of a wild vine called Labrusca. chap. 108.
A Wild vine is called Labrusca, and has that name, for it grows in the
utter side of the land. And this Noune Labrusca comes of Labrum, that is a
lip or brimme, or the uttermost side of the land where it grows, as Isidore
says, libro. 14. And Labrusca the wild vine, is like a vine that bears wine
in leaves, and not in fruit, for it bears small fruit or none, and if it
bear fruit, it is hard, sour, and bitter. And often the vine that bears
wine, passes out of the kind, and fourneth into a wild Uine, and that when
it is not filled, neither dug, neither shred, neither pared. And
againewarde, often Labrusca turns into a vine that bears wine, and that is by
good filling and ^ut, and by shredding and knitting, as Plinius says. And
though Labrusca be not good to meat, yet it is good to medicine. For the
root thereof sodde in rain water, and meddled with wine, heals men of the
dropsy, and does away wens, and heals the cough. And pauder of the root
thereof, helps wonderfully against default of the stomach, as Diosc. says.
Also lib. 13. cap. 2. Plinius says in this wise, Labrusca is called
Ampeloesargia in Greek, and Labrusca has many leaves, and a rind full of
juice or wine, and bears somdeale red grapes, like as they were sod: and with
juice of those grapes, women purge the skin of the face, and those grapes
stamped with the juice and leaves, be profitably laid to the evils and sores
of joints, lendes, and loins: and the same grapes stamped with vinegar,
heals scabs of men, and also of sour footed beasts.

( Addition.
The fruit of the right vine or second kind called Labrusca, is also termed
Paslula de Corintho, in Englysh, Currants: a wholesome fruit, that purges
fleame, and comfort the heart.)

Of Vitulamine. cap. 179.
VItulamen has that name of Vitis, a vine, and is that bastard plant or
branch barren without fruit, ye springs out of the root of the vine, or
else where in the vine, and not out of the knots. And such branches be unkind,
and bear therefore no fruit, but they charge and grieve the vine, and lets
and taryeth the fruit: for it draws ye humor from the root to the
nourishing of themselves, that should be drawn to feeding and nourishing of
fruit. And therefore they must be plucked and rooted up, and done away, least
they let the growing of fruit of the vine, if they grow there long time, and
therefore such branches be called bastard. Vitulamina, that is passing out of
kind, and not kind branches as it is had lib. Sap. cap. 4. and this is the
letter of Rabanus, and of old men, though Austen in lib. de doctrina s^^^
s^^^na, mean; that it were better said: Adulterine plantagines, bastard
plantings, and that is said to understanding of simple men: but the very letter
and good to perfect understanding men, in Spu^ia vitulamina.

Of Vinea. cap. 180.
A Uineyard is called Vinea, and is a place where vines be set and grow, as
Papias says, and so we call Vinetu, the place where many vines be set. A
vineyard is busely tilled and kept, and purged and cleansed of superfluities,
and often visiled and ouerseene of the earth tillers and keepers of vines, that
they be not appaired neither destroyed with beasts, and is closed about with
walls and with hedges, and a wayle is there set in an high place, to keep the
vineyard, that the fruit be not destroyed, and is left in Winter without
keeper or wayter, but in harvest time many come and haunt the vineyard. In
winter the vineyarde is full pale, and wereth green and bloometh in springing
time and in summer, and smells full sweet, and is pleasant with fruit in
harvest time. The smell of the vineyard that bloometh, is contrary to all
venomous things, and therefore when the vineyard bloometh, Adders and Serpents
fly, and Loads also, and may not sustain and suffer the noble savor thereof.
A vineyard with green coleur and merry, pleases the sight, and is lyking to
the smell with sweet smelling, and sadeth the taste with sweetness of savor,
and is pleasing to touching and to handelyng with softness and smoothness of
leaves, and comfort the touching therewith, and loves clean air and fair
weather, as Plinius says. And loves not clouds, mystes, neither too much
rain, but they love hot land and dry, and meanly fat and sweet, for in
lands that is too fat and moist, the vine outrageth, and bears too many,
too great and long leaves, boughs and branches and little fruits: and in
grauellye land and lean, the vine over dries and sayleth, for they find not
sufficient nourishing.

Also in bitter land and salt, the root thereof is corrupted with malicious
humor that comes and enters into the substance of the root: and therefore
the vine loves sweet land and temperate in his qualities.

And so high mountains that stands well in the Sun, be best places for
vineyardes, for therein is sweet humor and strong heat: the more the
vineyarde is in the Sun, the more sweet grapes it bears. And first the
fruit the green, hard, and sour, and is afterward made sweet by working of
the Sun. Fores lurk and hide themselves under Uine leaves, and gnawe
couetouslye, and fret the grapes of the vineyard, and namely when the keepers
and wardens be neglygent and retchlesse, and it profits not that some unwise
men does, that cloase within the vineyarde hounds, that be adversaries to
Foxes, for few hounds so closed, wast and destroy more grapes that many foxes
should destroy, yt come and eat thereof theeuishly, as Isidore says. Therefore
wise wardens of vineyardes be full busy to keep, that no swine nor same
hounds, nor foxes come into the vineyard. From fretting and gnawing of flies
and of other worms, a vineyard may not be kept nor saved, but by his succor
and help that all thing has, and puriueth in his power and might, and keeps
and saves all lordly and mightily, as Isidore says.

Of Vua. chap. 181.
A Grape is called Vua, and has that name of Humeo^es, to wet and to moist.
And so Vua is as it were wet and moist, for it is full of moisture within; as
Isi. says, libr. 17. The grape is compowned of three: Of the hul of Glarea,
and of Arillis: the hulls be called Vineria, or Tece, therein in Glares
contained, and Glarea is the juice and fat humor of ye grape. And A^illi be
the small grains that be in the grape, and have another name, and be called
Acin^, and that Nowne comes of Acco, es, and shall be said. Hic Acinus,
Acina, as priscian says in maiore volumin, where it is said, that this word
Paulini.

Exprimit humentes acinos succumque liquentum.

The understanding is, that Acinus is Masculine gender: and also that Paulini
betokens the juice, and the grape that droppeth. But some men mean, it is
hoc Acinum. Also Uua is a general name, both of the cluster and of the grape.
For properlye Uua is gathering of many grains together. Racemus is taken for
one grain, and Botrus is a cluster of grapes and Racemus is gathering of many
grapes that be called Mo^sA^ine in French. And Papias and Isidore mean, that
Racemus is a part of the bough yt bears grapes, and is a little branch cut
off with grapes. And so this Nowne Racemus comes of Ramus, a bough, as Isidore
says. And Grapes be called Suburbane, for they be sold to be eaten in cities,
and fairenes and merry favor thereof praises the grapes. And of grapes is many
manner kind, for some be Precoque, and have that name, for they ripe soon, and
be before all other riped by heat of the Sun. And ye Greeks call them Lageos,
for they have to riping as ye hare hastes for feareland some be called Purple,
for they have such color. And some be called Uerticiarie, and have that name
of greatness; as Dactili have their name of length. And some is called
Stephanice, for they be round. And some is called Cetance, for they be red as
fire: And some is called Aminee, for they be white, and not meddled with red.
And some be called Apiane, and bear sweet wine, and if they be not gathered
soon, they be lost with wind and rain: and be namely destroyed with Bees:
and have therefore that name Apiane, of Apes yt be Bees. And some is called
Biculpite, and have that name of the country that they grow in, and may well
sustain and suffer at the best, rain, storms, and heat: and men say, that
the grape Basilica is such, and of such kind: and some is called Argite, and
if they be not gathered first they fall to the ground, or rot with corrupt
air, and humor: and some is called Elbolie and have that name, for they be
diverse, neither red nor black, and have the name of ye color that is called
Elbus, that is ye middle color between white and black: and there be many
other diuersityes of grapes. For grapes be diverse in savor, in color, and
greatness, and in virtue: but these be ye most diversity of grapes, as
Isidore says, lib. 14.

And Isaac in Dietis says, that grapes vary in four diverse colors: for some
Grapes be all white and clear, and full of juice, with little hard matter
within, and have thin holls and small grains. Also some Grapes be all black,
with thick skins and pith: but the skin is not full moist, and in these
Grapes be great grains. And some be citrine, according more with white then
with black. Also some be red, and accord more with black then with white. The
white nourishes easier, and be sooner defied: and thirleth the veins, and
exciteth urine. The black be of hard digestion, but they comfort more the
stomach, and nourish also more when they be defied: and the citrine and red be
mean in sowrenesse, as Isaac says, the more ripe the Grapes be, the more
they are to be praised, and the better they are to nourishing and to gather
good blood. And grapes that have less pith then humor, gender better humors
then those that have more pith then humor, but they nourish not so much.

Of Vua immatura. cap. 182.
A Green grape is called Vua immatura, and is cold and dry, and full sour,
and greiueth the roots and sinews of the teeth with cold, so that they make
the teeth on edge: so that it seems yt they be somewhat frosen: and have
virtue to bind and to stanch cholarike parbraking and casting, and to quench
the heat of the liver, and also thirst, and to abate sharpness of heat, and
to dry thick humors in the eyes, and in the lids: and to abate itching and
smarting of eien, as Isaac says in Dietis.

Of Vua passa. chap. 183.
REison in the singular number is called Vua passa, and is made in many manner
wise. For sometime the stalk thereof is woue and wound, so that the humor
may no more come to the grape from the vine. And so the grape in certain days
is fordryed by heat of the Sun. And this Grape and Reison is called Vua
passa: for they suffer heat of the Sun: and this is best to eat. And
sometime the grapes be wound in vine leaves, and be bound with thread, for
the grapes should not seed, and be put into an Oven so bound and wrapped after
that bread is taken out and be dried, when the heat is temperate, and be
Reisons when they be so dried. In such manner they be called Vue pass, for
they suffer a manner of violence of heat of the Oven. In such manner sometime
Vua passa is made in chimneyes. Alexander Nequam speaks thereof and says.

Dant vuas passas clibanus fumaria Phoebus.
The meaning is, that Raisons be made in Ouens, Chimneies, and in heat of the
Sun. Isaac says in Dietis, that Vua passa, that is perfect in sweetness, is
most hot, and namely if it be black, and not to binding nor to softning, but
mean in both. And Vua passa then tempereth evil humors, and abateth fretting
and gnawing, and namely when they be fat, with much pith and thin skin, with
few pepines and grains and small, such reysons help against sore breasts, and
cleanses and purges the bladder and raines. But such reisons accord not to the
spleen, neither unto the liver, if the spleen and the liver be hard and thick.
And sour reisons and biting be less hot then the sweet and moist, and namely
if they be white, and therefore they nourish but little, but they quench heat
and harden and bind the womb.

Of Vino. cap. 184.
WIne is called Vinum, as it were growing in a vine. Or else it has that name
of Vena, a vein, for drink of wine fills soon the veins full of blood, as
Isidore says, libro. 20. where he treats of drink. And strong Wine is
called Temetum, for it holds the wit, and makes it often to do amiss. And
wine is called Merum, when it is pure and not meddled with water, and is called
Bacchus, and has that name of Liber Pater, that was called Bacchus also.

It is said that this Bacchus found first wines. Or else wine has this name
Bacchus of working and doing, for by strength of it self (...) makes them
that drink thereof mad and out of their wits, and ^eese madly an other men.
The worthynesse and praising of Wine might not Bacchus himself describe at the
full, though he were alive. For among all lycours and juice of trees. Wine
bears the price, for passing all licours, wine moderatly monks; most
comfort the body, and gladdeth the (...), and heals and saves, wounds and
(...). Thereof speaks Isaac in Dietis (...) and says, that wine gives good
nourishing to the body, and restores the health that sweep (...) and
comfort and increases kind heat passing all other meat and drink, and
that for likeness and company that wine has with kind and so Wine breeds
most pure blood, and pursues and cleanses traubly and thick blood, and
opens and cleanses the smuth of the veins, and comes inward by his
subtlety to cleanse and to purge the inner parts, and lyghtneth and drives
away dark ^umas^ie, that breeds and gendereth cleingnesse and discomfort,
and strengthens all the members of the body, and gives to each might and
strength, and deed and working of the soul shows and declares to goodness
of Wine. And wine breeds in the soul, forgetting of auguish, of sorrow, and
of ^oo, and suffers not the soul to feel anguish and woe. Wine sharpneth
the wit ^ and makes it cunning to inquire things that be hard and subtle,
and makes the soul bold and hardye, and so the passing nobility of wine is
known. And use of wine accords to all men's ages and times and Countries, if
it be taken in due manner, and as his disposition asks, that drinks it.

Also wine accords to old men, for the heat of wine is contrary to their
coldness. Also wine accords to young men, as it were meat. For kind of
wine is like to kind and age of young men, and is meat and medicine to
younglings and to children. For it nourishes and helps their heat that is
yet imperfect, and consumes and wastes and dries superfluitye of moisture of
children. And strong wine clean and pure accords in cold co(...) and in
winter: And in Summer and in hot Countries small wine, and well meddled is good
and profitable. For it moistneth and cools the body because of meddling of the
matter, that is said, and comes full soon into the innermost members by
subtilty of the wine. Therefore men in old time called wine the great.
Triacle, for they found that wine helps in the (...)ries, For it heateth
cold bodies and (...) hot bodies and moisteth dry bodies, and ^h^teth and
dries moist body. Also the heat, and dryness thereof is ^^^^ly, and
moisture and cold thereof is, accidental, for by subtlety thereof it bears
water to members that needs to be cooled and moysted, as he says. And in
wine take heed of these things, of the licour, of color, of savor, and
smell. Be the substance and lycour of wines subtlety and cleernesse is
known, and so is his earthynesse and thickness. And me^ly wine that is
subtilt clear, and thin, is white and clear and accords to the stomach,
for it is soon defied and ^^areeth and thirleth, and comes to the veins,
and purreth not norgrieuesh: the wit, neither grieueth the sinews neither the
brain. Great wine and earth it is contrary for subtilt wine, for it grieueth
ye stomach, and it pearceth slowly. Of colors of wine be four manners,
white, black, ^u^ane, and red: and both white and black be less hot then
other wine. And white wine is more moist then black, because of cleerenesse and
watrynesse that has mastrye therein: And black wine is more dry because of
thickenesse and earthinesse that has more substantial^ye mastrye therein, and
wines of mean color are hotter and then other, and so wine citrine or of
golden color, and red wine, be more h^^te then white wine or black, and that
is as they be farther from white or black; and the more that they be farther
from white wine or black and the nearer they be in color to white and black,
the less hotter they be.

Of Vino rubeo. cap. 185.
REd Wine that is full red as blood is most strong, and ^ic^eth much the
head, and notes the wit, and makes strong drunkenness: and needs therefore
^^^be right well watered. And so if it be watered when it needs to be dronken,
it needs to be watered as it accords and is seemly to age, time, countries
and usage: and is full good, for it dissolueth and tempereth thick humors,
and cleanses the ways of veins of matter and rottenness and puristeth the
blood, and namely if is be (...) pureness and cleanness. And accords
therefore to old men, in that it comfort their hearts, and dissolueth and
tempereth many cold humors, that be gathered in the bodies of old men: and
red Wine needs, so have biting, savor and sweet, and it needs that the
licour be mean between thin and thick, and the odor and smell mean
between strong and softs and such wine is more temperate then other to
nourishing and to seeding, and turns soon to blood, because of likeness
that it has with blood with licour, savor, and color. For sweet Wine that
is full red, helps and is right necessary to cleanse and to purge diseases of
the breast, and in likewise of the lungs, and tempereth full lightly, and
cleanses and wipeth and puts away uncleanness and gleanious humors. And
take deed dilligently of the good odor and smelling of Wine for it
manifests and shows openly, and betokens, that the licour is clear and
temperate, and clean from all filths. And makes best digestion: and gendereth
therefore clean blood and clear; and comfort and gladdeth the heart, and
puts out thick smoke, dark and troubly. And so Ipocra^ says, that wine
with good smell is more subtle and clear then other, and is more light, and
is sooner defied, and nourishes better. For kind shows and betokens, that
working therein is complete and profitable. And Wine without good smell
shows that it is venteous and thick: and is therefore the less worth to
nourishing, and clarifieth not the blood, nor comfortheth: but breeds and
gendereth great humors and thicken, and troubly imbake and dark. And Wine
with most strong odor and smell, and with sour savor i^ (...) for it
grieneth most the body, and gendereth worst blood, and gives to the body
noyful nourishing, and namely if the Wine be full black. For to such
pertains and belongs thickness of licour, heaviness of smell, and
sowrenesse of savor.

Also Wine that is temperate in ye foresaid qualities, and is drunk
temperatly, and in one manner, helps kinds, and gendereth good blood, and
makes savor in meat and in drink, and exciteth desire and appetite, and
comfort the virtue of life and of kind, and helps the stomach too have
appetite, and to have and to make good digestion: and exciseth the virtue of
out putting, and to pour out the drasts, and quenches thirst, and changes
the passions of the soul and thoughts out of evil into good. For it tourneth
the soul out of cruelnesse into mildnes, out of covetousness into largeness,
out of pride into meekness, and out of dread into boldness. And shortly to
speak, wine drunk measurably, is health of body and of soul. Huc vsque Isaac
^^ Dietis, and Plinius li. 13. ca. 9. where it is said, that kind of Wine and
drinking, kindeleth and heateth the guts within, and kee^eth without members
that be washed therewith, and to virtues of the body nothing is more profitable
then Wine, if it be taken in due manner and measure, and nothing is worie taken
passing out of measure. And so Adronides a clear man of wit and of wisdom,
wrote to the great Alexander, to restrain Wine kind in drinking, and said in
this manner: King have mind, that thou drinkest blood of the earth, for Wine
drinking vntemperatly is to mankind heavy and venime.

And if Alexander had done by his counsel, truly he had not slain his
own friends in drunkenness, as Plinius says. And touches there in the same
book, cap. vltimo, and rehearses euilles and harm that wine does immoderatly
drunk, and says that it turns wit into woodnesse, and into evil raises, and
into forgetfulness of good. And the dronken man's face is pale, his cheeks
hang, his eyes be full of welke and pimples, and of blearednesse. The dronken
man's hands tremble and shake, and his tongue is bound and knit, and his
stomach bolketh and gives up in the morrow tide some foul and abominable
stinking thing, as it ware a pit, wherein some dead carrenlieth, and feels and
is grieved with sore pricking and aching in the head. And the palet or roof of
the mouth waxes bitten by Cholera, that is beat by hot fumositye of kind,
the throat is tormented with dryness, burning, and thirst, For this property
follows wine, that use of drinking breeds appetite to drink often. And wine
dronken men fare as the Worms that suck blood, for ever the more the vine
dronken man drinks, the more he is a thirst. And to these words of Plinius,
Isaac says in this manner: if wine be often taken, anon by drunkenness it
quenches the sight of reason, and comfort beastly madness, and so the body
abides, as it were a ship in ye sea with out stern, and without loades man,
and as chiualry without Prince or Duke, therefore the dronken man favors the
thing that should not be favored, and grants that should not be granted:
and prayseth yt should not be praised worthy in it self, and makes of wise
men fools, and of good men and well willed, drunkenness makes evil men and
wicked: For drunkenness is nourishing and cause of evil vice. And
drunkenness falls often in man slaughter, and spouse breaking, and in theft.
And therefore men that will keep and rule men, it needs to keep them from
Wine, that they drink not more win then is speedfull to their virtue and kind.

Of Musto. chap. 186.
NEw wine that is new taken out of the press or wrong, is called Mustum, and
has that name, as it were holding Mus, that is earth or fenne. For Mus in
Greek, is called Tetra in Latin, Earth in English, and so earth is called
Humus humeficta, made moist. In Must be earthy parts and drasty, meddled with
watery parts and airie, and virtue of odor and of heat works therein, and
makes full strong boiling. For the fire and airye parts move, upward, and
earthy parts moves downewarde, and of such disturbaunce and strife, and
contrarynesse comes strong boiling, and dureth until the heat has mastrie:
and departs the clean and pure from the uncleanness and vnpure: and makes
full digestion. And the strength of seruent Must is so strong, that it breaks
full strong vessels that it is put in: but they be vented, as Constantine
says, and Gregory super Job. For by venting foame and other uncleanness is
brought up to the mouth of the vessel by strength of heat, and it casts it
out: and it passes out always until the Wine be full clean purged. And in the
beginning when Must is so trodden, wrong, and pressed, it is troubly and thick.
And therefore Isaac says, that Must drunk, gendereth thick fumositie and
dreadefull dreams, and evil humors: and makes kurling and swelling in the
guts. And new Must is full windy and smoakie, for departing and distributing of
parts by virtue and might of heat.

And so Galen says, that new wine has virtue and might to lead and to bring
meat in to all the body, and gendereth therefore ventositie and swelling, and
abomination or wambling. The longer the Wine dureth after wringing and
pressing out of the press, the more clear it is and pure, and the heat
thereof is the more strong and mighty. And while the wine is Must, it rests
not of boiling and seething, nor the earthye parts fall not at the full in
their place, nor the fiery parts come up at the full to the place, and so the
Must abides yet vndigest.

And therefore when the wine is stale, clear, and well purged, it is bright,
and good friend to kind. For then the heat of the same Wine is always
comforted, and is always better and better in smell and savor, and also in
virtue: but if it happen to be appaired by corrupt air or by a fustie vessel.
For if the vessel in which the wine is kept; be fustie, or corrupt, then
needs the wine shall be fusty or corrupt. Also often wine is corrupt by corrupt
air, or by great distempering heat or cold. And therefore now wine fordrieth,
and now fasteth, and now rotteth all and some: and is then first and most c^^my
to man's kind: and shall therefore be forsaken as denim, and not drunk. Also
sometime most oldest Wine is passing in temperate heat, and therefore changes
savor and color. And such wine with sharpness thereof greeueth the brain,
and the wit, and burns the substantial humor by defnesse thereof, and
quenches the kind heat thereof. And (...) wine that is not soon to neither
too old; but mean between both is good. For therein is ^ good rate, neither
too new nor too old: for such wine is most temperate. Huc vsque Isaac in
Dietis.

Of Vino condito. chap. 187.
WIne is made by craft of good spicerie and herbs, as it fares of the Wine
that is called Saluiato, and of the wine that is called Rosatum, and
Ganohlatum. And that wine accords both in meat and in medicine, for virtue
both of spicery, and also of herbs changes and amendeth this wine, and
gives there to a singuser virtue, and therefore such Wines be wholesome and
liking, when wholesome spicerie and herbs be incorporate there, in due
manner. For virtue of spicery keeps and silueth wines, that they be not soon
corrupt; therefore such wines with their savor please the taste, and excite
appetite; and comfort both the brain and the stomach with their good odor
and smell, and cleanses also the blood, and thirleth into the inner parts of
the veins and of the members, as Isaac says.

( Addition.
Compound Wine with spices, is called Ipochresse, whereof is read and white.)

Of Vino corrupto. Chap. 188.
WIne is first sweet and temperate in savor, and is corrupt by long (...)king
of the Sun, or of the air also by long boiling, and turns m(...) when it
has no virtue, by the which it may be kept and saved, as Isaac says in
Dietis. ca. de Aceto. For by accidental heat that passes over and overcomes
the virtue of kind, the licour is made then. And by boiling and seething of
accidental heat, kind heat is cure quenched^ And to the wind that was
first kindlye hot, is made cold by substance of (...) ^^pte heat, and
turned into vinegar, and is more dry then cold, for it cools moderately in
the first degree, and s^orpeth strongly in the third degree, as he says. And
so by subtlety of the substance thereof, and by feebleness of the coldness,
it thirleth the body soon, and comes to the well worse place: and so neither
the juice of Pomgranard, nor other sour licour has virtue to thirle and to
come into so deep a place, as vinegar. For the juice of a Pomegranard and
other such works much more roughly in nigh places then in far. And so who
that will abate the heat of the stomach or of the members and places that be
nigh thereto, shall use more profitablye the juice of Pomegranards then vinegar.

But for to cool places that be far off, vinegar is more profitable then the
juice of Pomgranards or of green grapes, for it has a liuelye virtue, by the
which it comes and passes into farther places, therefore if dissolueth and
tempereth, cutteth and departs and makes thin, and therefore it dissolueth
and departs milk, which is crudded and run and fastened in the stomach if
the vinegar be dronk. Also (as he says there) vinegar comfort the stomach,
and exciteth and augmenteth appetite, and bears down mightily all things
that come down to the stomach: and helps against venim, and also against
venomous beasts which slays, as Opium helps, and Iusquiamus, and Euforbium
also. Huc vsque Isaac.

And Plinius says, and Dioscor. also means, that strong vinegar done upon
iron or upon the cold ground, boyleth and seetheth anon. Also vinger
stancheth the flux of the body and of the womb, or running of blood, and
dissolueth and laxeth if it find the womb full, and binds if it find the
womb lere: and helps them yt have the Litergy, the sleeping evil, and
frantike men also, and cleanses new wounds, and suffers them not to swell:
and wipeth and washes away the stench of the mouth, and of the gums, and
puts away the stinch of the teeth, and makes them to be soon on edge: and
stauncheth perbraking and wambling, if the mouth and the other part of the
throat be washed therewith, and thrown out again. And helps deaf ears,
and opens the hearing and the ways: and sharpneth the sight of eyes, and
fretteth metals, and thereof are gendered diverse colors, as Sorusa of lead,
green brass of copper, and Lasurium of silver. And an Egg laid in vinegar
makes the shell soft as a small skin. Drasts of vinegar helps against the
biting of a mad hound, and of the Cokadrill. Huc vsque Plinius. li. 23. cap. 10.

Of Vinacio. chap. 189.
THE after Wine that is wrong out of the grapes is called Vinatium, and
Vinarium also, and is as it were drasts of all the wine. And the small skins
and hulls of the grapes be called Vinacia, and the pepins of grapes be called
Acini: and hulls and pipins abides when the Wine is clean wrong out, and
gathered, and be then thrown out. Hereof Gressisme speaks and says in this
wise.

Pelles vuarum vinacia dic fore tantum.
Et dicas acinum quod vua cernis acutum.
These vearses mean, that skins and hulls of grapes be called Vinacia, and a
pepin is called Acinum. And Swine eat gladly the drasts thereof, though they
give them but little nourishing, for they do swell more then nourish in ye
manner of wise.

Of Vinaria. cap. 190.
SEc Vinaria, rye, is a celler or a place where Wine is kept in, and the more
dry that the place is, the better it is to save and keep that that therein
comes in vessels of wine. Therefore stony places be dug under the ground,
and deep cellers be made to keep and to save wine in them from corruption of
hot air, yt the wine be not made sour thereby, neither corrupt in any manner.

Of Viola. chap. 191.
VIolet is called Viola, and has that name for strong smell, as Isidore
saiteth, and thereof is three manner kinds, purple, white, and meline, that is a
manner white color that comes out of the Island Melos. But all manner
Uiolets have leaves cold of kind, and watery, and therefore unbinding: And so
violet sodden in water with honey, laxeth and softneth the womb. And also if it
be meddled with Sugar, and set long time in the Sun in a glassen vessel, it
laxeth the womb, and abateth swelling, and changes feauerous heat, and
quenches thirst. Sade thereof casts out conception of women, and slaieth long
worms in the womb, and helps against chafing of the liver. Uiolet is a
little herb in substance, and is better fresh and new, then when it is old,
and the flower thereof smells most, and so the smell thereof abateth heat of
the brain, and refreshes and comfort the spirits of feeling, and makes
sleep, for it cools and tempereth and moystneth the brain: and the more
virtuous the flower thereof is, the more it bends the head thereof downward.

Also flowers of springing time spring first and shows Summer. The
lyttlenesse thereof in substance is noblye rewarded in greatenesse of savor
and of virtue, as Diose. and Plinius mean.

( Addition.
There be two sorts of Uiolets, the garden, and the wild violet, there is a
third kind bearing flowers, as white as Snow. Of their properties, read Dod.
in his. 2. li. cap. 1.2.)

Of Vlmo. chap. 192.
Elm.
VImus has that name, for it grows better in moist places then in other. And
this tree is not at liking in rough places, nor in mountains, as Isidore
says, libro. 17. The roots thereof be put deep into the ground, and draws
and sucketh humor out of the deep guts of the earth, to feed the boughs,
twigges, and branches: And has many boughs with knots, and makes with
thickness of leaves shadow to wayfaring men, and is a barren Tree and
accounted of Plinius among Trees that bear most: and has white flowers sweet
smelling, as the Tree Tiha, and has certain grains, as Cucurbite, but that
fruit is unprofitable. And Bees haunt flowers thereof, and gathers thereof
sweetness of honnie: and though the Tree be barren, yet it is profitable to
vines that bear fruit, for this Tree reareth up and susteyneth boughs, fruit,
and branches of vines. And has a hard rind and rough, but the Tree within
is soft and full smooth, and full able to be graven therein, as Tiha is, as
Isidore says.

( Addition.
Of Elm trees there are three sorts, the standard Elm, the hoppe Elm, and the
Wych Elm. The first grows high and is common, the second great and knottye,
and casts of a thin leaf like to the hoppe, with a seed, and bears
brounches of a very great bigness: the third grows as the second, but more
graye, and a tougher wood, wherewith in some shieres they make bows. This
wood made into piles and plankes for water work, will not rot in a meruaylous
time.)

Of Vitica. chap. 193.
THE Nettle is called Vitica, and has that name, for it burns the body that
it touches. And it is of firye kind, as Macer says. And the virtue thereof
is full fervent holden and great, and so it takes that name Vitica, not
without cause, for it burns things that it touches. And of Nettles is double
kind: One burns and biteth and gendereth bleines and itchinges, and has
sharp leaves and rough, and some deal read, and rough stalks with edges,
and burns his hand that it handles. And is heavy of smell and somewhat
bitter and sour. Another manner of Nettle is that which is called the dead
Nettle, or the blind Nettle. And has leaves more white then the other has,
and more rounder. And biteth not them that it handles, and has flowers now
red and now white, with full heavy smell and savor, and each Nettle is
medicinable. For the juice thereof drunk with Wine helps against Collica
passio. And heals with honnie an old cough, and cleanses the lungs, and
abateth and strageth swelling and bolning of the womb. The leaves thereof
stamped with Salt, helps and cleanses hoarye and soul wounds, and also
biting of hounds and of Cankers. The root thereof stamped with Salt and with
Wine, and sodde in Oil, helps against swelling of the spleen. The juice
thereof stauncheth the bleeding of the Nose, and stauncheth menstruall blood
meddeled with Mirca. The seed thereof drunk with Wine moves Venus, and
recites courage, and namely if it be meddeled with honnye and with Pepper.
The fresh herb sodde, softneth the womb, if it be eaten. And so Plinius
commands to sees the fresh Nettle when it grows first in March, and eat
it, as it were Oil against many evils and sicknesses of the body. But the
Nettle is better in medicine then in meat.

( Addition.
Nettles be of diverse kinds, Vitica, Siluest^i^, Mayor, Minor, and Lamium,
called Archangell, or dead Nettle, although they be common weeds, yet are they
very medicinable for many griefs.)

Of Zizania. cap. 194.
RAy is called Zizania, and is a certain herb, of the which Isid. speaks,
li. 14. and says, that Peets call this herb Infelix lol^u^ vngrations to
kill or ^rad, for it is unprofitable and ungracious, and is feminine gender in
the singular, and neuter gender in the plural, as he says. And it grows
among Wheat in corrupt time and day. And is like to Wheat when it is grass,
and may uneath be taken therefrom when it grows first. And it stuffeth and
grieueth the wheat, but if be wisely and warily looked thereto and departed
therefrom with great flight and wariness. It shall not be plucked up when it
is green, least men pluck up the wheat in steed of ray, for likeness that
the ray has to ye wheat: Therefore it is more wisely done when it is known
between the raye and the wheat, to suffer and let either grow til they be
ripe, and then when the raye is known by the seed fro^m the wheat, to gather
the ray and depart it from the Wheat, and make thereof bundels and kitches, and
burn it in the fire when the wheat is in the barn. And ray has a sharp
strength and working, and some deal venomous, and gendereth swelling and
venitoutie, and makes therefore men drunk, and distroubleth the wit, and
greeueth the head, and changes savor of bread, and infecteth bread that it is
meddled with and put in. And greeueth full soon, and slays sometime if it be
eaten in great quantity. And it is grievous within the body, if it be eaten,
but it is full good in medicine without. For if it be meddled with Barley meal,
and with powder of Thus and of Saffron, it helps conception and birth in women.
And ray meddeled with Brimstone and with vinegar, helps against scabs, wet
and dry, and against Leters, and against itching: And if it be meddled with
Linseede sod with wine, it dissolueth and helps Postumes. And if it be sodde
seed, rind, and root, it cleanses rotten wounds, and helps also against
the Fester and Canker, and exciteth wonderfully menstruall blood: and cleanses
the mother, and disposes and arayeth, and makes ready conception, as Plinius
and Dioscurides mean.

( Addition.
Z^z^uia, ^olium, Darnel, and Ray, the meal mixed with birdrs grease, (is
said) being bound to the head, eureth the ac^.)

Of Zinzibero. chap. 195.
GInger is called Zinziber, and is the root of an herb, and is hot and
moist, as it is said in Platearius, and some Ginger is tame, and some is
wild, the wild Ginger has more sharper savor then has the tame, and is
more sadder and faster, and not so white, but it breaks more sooner, and
helps and releeueth against cold evils of the breast and also of the
lounges, and eases and abateth cold ach of the stomach, and of the guts,
and puts out easily wind and ventositie. And if Wine that Ginger is sodden
in with Comin, be dronkes hot, it comfort the stomach, and makes good and
profitable digestion, and sharpneth the sight, and destroys and wastes the
web that grows in the eye: and that does much better tame Ginger then wild
Ginger, and the more whiter it is, and the more new, the more sharp it is, and
the more better: and Ginger is kept three years in good might and virtue, but
afterward it wareth dry, and worms eat and gnawe and make holes therein, and
rotteth also for moisture thereof. Isaac says therefore, that who that
purposes to keep Ginger by long continuance of time, shall put Ginger among
Pepper, that the moisture of the Ginger may be tempered and swaged by dryness
of the Pepper, as he says expressly.

( Addition.
Ginger heateth the stomach, and helps digestion, but it heateth not to soon
as Pepper, but afterward the heat remains longer, and causes the mouth to be
moister: being green and well confectioned in strop, it comfort much the
stomach and head, and quickneth remembrance, if it be taken in the morrow
fasting: it is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.)

Of Zedoario. cap. 196.
ZEdoarium is hot and dry, and the tame is best; and that is most citrine,
thin, and also long, and sharp in savor, and not thirled neither hoaled.
The wild is whitish, and somewhat sharp in savor. And is good and necessary
to the same things that Ginger is good for: and comfort the stomach and the
body, and exciteth and moves appetite, as pla. says.

Of Zucaro. chap. 197.
SUgar is called Zucarum and Sucara also. And is made and issues out of
certain Canes and Reeds, which grows in lakes and pondes fast by a River
that is in Egypt called Nilus. And the juice that issues out of those Canes
or Reeds, is called Canna Mellis, and of that juice is Sugar made by seething,
as Salt is made of water. The Canes be broken and put in a Caudron, or in
another great vessel, and is sodde with easy and soft fire until it be come
thick. And first it seems that it turns all to foame: but after that it
has rested, it becomes thicker and thicker. And the most purest and best
thereof sinketh down unto the bottom of the vessel, that it is sodde in, and
that which is fatty and foamie abides and fleeteth above. And is less of
sweetness and full of holes, and cracketh not among the teeth when it is
chewed, but vanishes sodeinly and melts: And the best and most purest death
y^ contrary: and that that is best is put in a vessel, and wareth all hard and
white at the fire and at the Sun. And some is ritrine and more hot then the
other, and shall not be given to sick men that have the fever ague. And good
Sugar is temperate in his qualities, and has therefore (as Isaac says in
Dietis) virtue to dry and to cleanse, and to dissolve and temper, and to make
thin and clear, and to moist ye womb without any fretcing or gnawing, and to
cleanse the stomach, and to plane and make smooth roughness of the breast and
of the lungs: and profits in cleerring of the voice, and does away hoarsnesse
and cough, and restores the humor and moisture that is spent and wasted: and
it tempereth sowrenesse and bitterness of smelling spicery: and is most
profitable and necessary in medicines and in Electuaries, in pouders and in
sirops, as Isaac says. But it makes the womb somewhat to swell, and namely if
it be taken after meat, for all sweet things by kind breeds swelling. Also
Sugar changes soon and turns into red Cholera, if it be given to cholarike
men. For as Sugar abateth and quenches ye coldness and sharpnes of Cholera:
so the sweetness as it were contrary thereto, exciteth and whetteth and
nourishes Cholera, as Isaac says in eodem cap.

( Addition.
Sugar is a thing very temperate and nourishing, and where there is Cholar in
the stomach, or that the stomach abhors honnie, it may be used for honnie
in all things wherein honey is required to be. With Sugar and vinegar is made
sirop Acetose.)

FINIS LIBRI XVII.
INCIPIT LIBER XVIII.
DE ANIMALIBVS IN GENERALI.
FOrasmuch as the foresaid treatise is ended and finished, as touching those
things that beautifieth and makes fair ye earth, touching their virtues and
properties, as of ^are, metal, stones, and things that grow under the ground,
and of trees, herbs, and grass, and weeds, which grows and springs out
of the earth, of whom mention is made in holy writ: now follows to our
purpose to show and entreat of the virtues and properties of those things
that have life and feeling. And first in general, and after in special, of
all beasts tame and wild, and of all Worms that creep on the ground, that
he named in Text and Gloss.



And all that is comprehended of flesh and of spirit of life, and so of body
and soul, is called Animallia beast whether he be airse, as souls that fly:
or watery, as fish that swim or earthy, as beasts: that go on the ground and
in fields, as men and beasts, wild and tame, or other that creep and glide
on the ground.

And Moses assigns three manner of beasts in kind, tame beasts and wild,
and other that creep on the ground, as it is written Genesis 1. Hereof Basilius
speaks in Exameron, verse. 29.
and calls tame beasts Iumenta, and says, that they be beasts granted and
ordained to use and to help of mankind. And some be ordained to travail, as
horses. Oxen, and Camells, and other such: and some to bear wool for clothing
of men, as sheep and other such, and some to be eaten, as swine and pigges.
Those be creeping beasts and worms that pass from place to place by
stretching of the body, and drawing again togethers, and move and pass
upward by such drawing and stretching of the body, as the Worms, Adders, and
Serpents, And three manner kind is of such, for some draws by the mouth, as
small Worms that draw themselves by the mouth, and some draw so forward by
strength of the sides and plyauntnesse of the body, as Serpents, Adders, and
Snakes: and some creep on feet, as Eweuetes, and Botractes, that be venomous
Frogs, and other such beasts, and be called Bestie, as it were Vastie, wasting.

For they have kindly kind of cruelnesse, and reeseth and shows their
strength now with claws, now with strength of horns, now with teeth, as
Bores, Lions, Tigres, and wolves. But commonly some be called Bestie, that be
not tame but wild, and be kindly more stirring then tame beasts, and more
mild then cruel beasts, as Hearts, and other such. And in all beasts is
virtue of moving and of feeling, but in some more, and in some less, for as
the blood is more pure and clear, some feels better and have better estimation
and knowing, and be more wittye and wilye.

Therefore it is that the Ox is slow and stable, and the Ass dull of wit, and
horse seruent in desire, and covetous of females, the Woulfe wild, and not
tamed, the Lion bold and hardy, the Fox wilye, the hound with mind of
friendship, and so of other beasts. And some goodness of males of manners in
beasts follows goodness either malice of complexion, as Basilius says.
And Aristotle says the same in libro de Animalibus, and says, that beasts be
diverse in manners, for some be right mild, as the Cow and the Sheep, and
some be right wild and not tame, as the Tygres and the wild Boar, and some
be right hardye, bold, and proud, as the Lion. And some beasted be strong,
wild, and guilefull, as the woulfe and the Fox, and other such. And this
diversity comes of diuersitye of virtue, that works diversely in diverse
beasts. For as he says, libro. 1. Some beasts have blood, and some have none,
as Bees and other beasts with riueled bodies. Infecti. Flies with parted
bodies.
But such beasts have other humor in stead of blood.

And beasts that have blood, be more then other in body and in virtue.
Therefore it is, that some beasts love fellowshippe, and go in company, and
are wild, as Hearts, wild Asses, and Camells: And some fly and void
company, and may not dwell together in company, as fowls, and birds with
crooked cleas, and beasts that live by pray. Heereto Auicen says, that some
beasts be tame, and some be wild, and some live in towns, and some in
fields. And among all beasts, man yt may not live alone, as Cranes, Bers, and
Ampts, that accords with man in that. And also he says, that beasts be
diverse in nourishing and in feeding, for only some eat flesh, as the Lion or
the tiger, and the Woulfe, and other such: and some eat flesh, and other meat,
as Hounds, and Cats, and other such: and some eat grass, corn, and other
fruit, as horses and hearts, and other such. And Arist. says, libr. 1. some
beasts have their own savor and taste, that them likes, as Bees have liking
in taste of honey, and few other sweet things, as the Spider has liking and taste
in flies, and lives by hunting of flies; and some beasts hu^t other beasts, as
the Lion and the Woulfe, and other such: and some gather store of meat and
feeding, as the Irchin and the Ampt. And why every beast needs meat and
nourishing it is, as Auicen says, Moisture of substance, and heat that
dissolueth and wastes moisture, and hot air that is about the heart. And so
always by working of heat, is wasting and loss of humor: and that that is
lost, is needful to be restored, and that by goodness of meat and nourishing.
And some beasts seek their meat by night, as souls that hate light, and some
by day. And Aristotle and Auicen say, that some beasts be always wild, and
some always tame, as Man, Mule, and the Goat: and some be soon made tame, as
the Elephant. Of all kind of tame beasts, some be found wild, as a wild man,
a wild Fore, wild Horses, wild Hounds, and wild Swine. And some beasts be
full cruel, ready to reese and to fight, and namely in time of love, and in
all service of Venus. In all beasts is appetite of love liking, and then the
males wooeth and pleases the females, and fight for them. And some beasts do
slily and warily, that their horns and tuskes be hard and sharp in that time,
as wild Swine frote themselves against trees, and their tusks whet, as Arist.
says. And some refraineth them much, and some be right wrathful and angry and
of great memory, as the hound, the Camel, and the Ass: and some have but
feeble memory, as the Estridge and Culuer. And only man calls to mind that
that was forgotten, as Aui. says. But many beasts hold in mind things yt
they see and learn, as Arist. says li. 1. And only in man is mindfulnes, as
the mind is obedient to reason. Therefore li. 11. de Ciuitate Dei, Austen
says, yt in unreasonable beasts is wonderful readiness and wit, but in them
is no science properly to speak of science: but in them likeness of science
is found, for they have readiness of wit, in breeding and rearing of their
brood, and in building and making of bowers and dens, in seeking and getting of
meat and nourishing: In medicine and healing of wounds, in flight and voiding
of harm in boding or changing of time and weathers, of knowing of love of
their makes. For the Heart loves the Hind, and the Lion the Lioness, and the
male bear the female, and so of other.

Also Aristotle says, that in every beast is a radical member, that is well
and head of all the virtues natural and spiritual, and of feeling, and that
member is the heart, or somewhat else in steed of the heart, of the which root
or heart, as Auicen says, begins creation, making and shape of all beasts.
When an unreasonable beast is perfectly made and shapen, the face thereof boweth
toward the earth, that is the original and material matter, whereof it
comes, and only to man, kind ordeyneth and dseth upright stature, wherein
mankind is wonderfully made noble, and passing all other beasts, as the Poet
says.

Os homini sublime dedit coelumque videre.
Kind has given to man an high mouth and virtue to look on heaven. Therefore
Basilius says, that if a man be defiled with lust and liking of flesh in
obeieng to lechery of the womb, he is made pere to unwise and unreasonable
beasts, and is made like to them. Also Basilius says, that all beasts of the
earth be comforted and hearted to gender and to get broods of their own kind,
to multiply after them, by gendring heat that tickleth and pricketh, and that
falls most in springing time, when the virtue of the heat of heaven
begins to have mastrye of bodies of beasts. And in such form means
Aristotle. And also Auicen says, that every beast that has Semen, gendereth
another beast, which is like to it self. And therefore to every beast, which
may not keep and save always kind in it self, kind gives it a member, by
which it puteth out Semen, and another member, wherein it may be received, as
the mother in the female takes Semen: and this is general in all kind of
beasts, in the which is male and female. For the male is at it were a manner
worker and shaper, and the female as it were matter to work in. Therefore
every female beast has such a member, called the mother, or else somewhat else in
steed of the mother, wherein she may receive semen and brood. And that falls
diversely in diverse manner of beasts: for otherwise in such beasts, which lay
eggs, than in other manner of beasts, which contains perfect beasts within
themselves, as Auicen sets ensample of many, following Aristotle. And he
sets all beasts with blood, before beasts which have no blood. and says,
that they be always more noble and more huge and great in quantity and in
virtue, except a few beasts of the water and sea. And he says, yt every beast
having noble blood, moves with four instruments, as unreasonable beasts,
with four feet: or else it moves and stirs with two hands and with two
feet, as it fares in mankind: and some moves and stirs with wings, and
with two feet, as it fares in birds and in fowls with feathers.

But diverse and many manner of beasts be found, having more feet than four,
as it fares in fishes that be called Crabs, and small shragges, and other
such. And also some have more wings the^ twayn, as it fares in butterflyes,
and in Bees, and in some long flies, and in such is but little blood, which is
treasure of kind. And therefore the sore lims work more effectually in the
first manner, then many lims do in the second manner, as in beasts the sore
lyms are more able and work more effectuallye than the hinder: for they have
more heat, and more part of heat of blood of the heart, and be near thereto.
And Auicen touches ye general properties of beasts and says.

In some manner, some beasts communeth and accords in members, as man and
horse in flesh and in sinews, and are diverse in many things: First in quality
and in manner of setting and moving of members, both of the simple members and
of the compouned, as it fares of the Snaile, that has shelles, and of the
Irchin, that has pricks, and man has none: and the horse has a tail, and
man has none.

And beasts be also diverse in quantity, as many in mouth, and in opening of
eyes. The opening of the Owls eye is much: and the opening of Eagles eyes is
little.

Also the members be diverse in number and tale, for in some beasts are two
feet, and in some four feet: and in some be more foete than four, as it
fares in Spiders: for some Spider has eight faete, and some other Spider has
ten feet. Also in quality, color, figure and shape, or in softness and
hardness: as and Ox foot is full hard, and a man's foot is full soft. And
are also diversely set, as it fares in the teates of a Mare, and an Elephant:
for an Elephant has teates under the breast, and the Mare in the flank,
between the thighs behind.

And are also diners in working, as it fares in the nosethrills of ye
Elephant, with the which he fights. And are also diverse in suffering, as it
fares in the eyes of the Reremouse, which be full feeble and in the eyes of
the Swallow, which contrariwise are right strong, as Auicen says. And be
diverse in appetite, for some have a great appetite and desire to serve Venus,
and some feeble, as the Elephant and the Turtle: and some have appetite to
serve Venus with all manner kind of beasts, and some only with beasts of
their own kind: and some are continent and chaste always, as Bees. And some
be great gluttons, and great deuourers of meat, and therefore they hunt by
night, as Wolves which be called Hahala.

Addition.
( Hahala, is no proper word; For Lupus in Hebrew, is called Zeeb in Chaldiacke,
Deba in Arabicke. Deba and Alsebha, is the name if all four footed beasts
that have claws, that do scrape tear and rent, as with teeth and biting. In
the Siriacke, Dabha, Aldabha and Dahab, of his furious ravening. Gesner in
folio. 717. in his book of heasts.)

And some of those ravenous beasts seek food by day, as the Goshawke, and
the Eagle: and some other both by day and by night, as Cattes.

Also in every beast needs diverse members to serve each other for diverse
workings. And so the bones be needful to sustain all the body: the gristles
be needful to defend the flesh from the hurting of the bones: and sinews be
needful to bind and to join members togethers, and to bear and to lead, and
to bring foeling into all the members, and be hard to cutting, and plyant to
stretch and to bind flesh, and be right needful to the Well of life, and for
gendering of spirits.

The lungs be right needful for breathing, and for gathering and drawing of
cold air, that it may cool the seruent heat of the heart. The stomach is
needful for the first digestion of meats. The liver is needful to gendering
of blood: veins be needful to bear blood into all the members of the body.
The guts be needful to hear the drastes and dirte to void it out of the
body. The raynes be needful, and the gendring stones, to saving of kind: the
gall is needful to comfort digestion: the spleen is needful to gathering
superfluity of the humor melancholicke: the head is needful to wits that be
therein, to give feeling and ruling to all the body: the neck is needful for
joining of the head and the body together, and to bring meat and drink to the
stomach: the breast is needful to defend the heart and spiritual members:
the arms and hands be needful to works and deeds: the sides and ribs to
keep and to save the kind members: feet and legs to underset and to move
swiftlye from place to place: the skin is needful to keep and defend all
that is within from outward griefs and hurts: vaires be needful to save the
skin: nails be needful to keep the uttermost parts, and also for defense
in many manner beasts, and kind has wisely ordained in all beasts some what
wherewith there may defend them against noiaunces and griefs and hurtings. And
therefore Hearts have horns, and Bores have tuskes, and Lions use claws in
steed of swords, and so in beasts is no default nor superfluity. And small
beasts that lack sharp teeth, and claws, and horns, are defended with
ableness of members, and swiftness of fligh, as it faceth in Hares, in
Fawnes, and other such. Also every beast ye gendreth another beast, has eyes
except the Mole, yt has eyes closed within a web, and that web is given to the
Moale, for feebleness of sight: and every beast that has ears, moves the
ears except man: and every beast breaths, but some by ways which are
known, as by the mouth, or else by the nose: and some by preuye ways, as by
preuy holes and poores, as Bees, and Flies, and beasts which glide on the
ground. And every four footed beast which has blood has marrow, and namely
man has much marrow in comparison to his body, and that is needful to man,
for many and diverse works, and doings. And every beast yt has horns, is
cloue footed with horns without, except one beast, that is, an Unicorne, that
has but one horn in the forehead, and one hoof in the foot, as an horse.

( Addition.
The Unicorne is cloue footed, as the Stagge, called in Gesner Monocerote,
Folio. 781.)

And every horned beast has hollow horns, except the Heart and the Unicorne:
and every horned beast is four footed, with material and hard horn, except a
manner Serpent, which is in the region of Egypt, which is found horned, and
many call that serpent Serastes. And here I speak of beasts which have horns
of kind of bone: for Snayles have certain horns soft and gleymie, but they
are not properly horns, but things given to Snayles for help and succor. For
Snailes be feeble of sight, and grope and seek their ways, with those horns.
And if the Snayle meets with any hard thing, anon he draws in his horns:
( Addition.
At the end of which horns, there appears a black like the sight of an eye,
wherewithal it seems they have some sight,) and then he closes himself
within his shelles: For he uses his shelles in steed of houses and Castles.

Also some beasts have teeth in either iaw, and some have only in the nether
iaw, and those which have no teeth in the over iaw, be horned, for that matter
passes and turns into horns.

And no Beast which has crooked feeth or tuskes, as ye Bore, has horns, for
that matter passes and turns into turks: for tuskes and horns accord not
in the same beast: Beasts of pray have teeth departed and sharp, that they
may the better enter and come to the pray, and bite thereof gobbets and
pieces, as Wolves and Lions. And tame beasts, as the Cow, and beasts that be
made tame, as the Elephant and Camel, have teeth like high and nigh togethers,
as if were one bone, that they may the better eat grass and herbs, and bite
them the more even nigh the ground, and no beast: has more rows of teethe in
his mouth than twain, except certain fish, that have great teeth in their
jaws set far asunder, as the teeth of of a Saw, and have also teeth set
within, and with those inner, they gather and hold the meat, least the water
should wash it soon out of their mouths, as it fares in water Wolves, that
are Luties, and in many other, as Aristotle says:

But it is said, that in Inde is a beast wonderfully shapen, and is like to the
Bear in body and in the hair, The beast is called Hanthi. Look in the letter
H. following, for this beast his description.
and to a man in face, and has a right red head, and a full great mouth and an
horrible, and in either iawe three rows of teeth distinguished asunder. The
utter limbs thereof, be as it were the utter syins of a Lion, and his tail is
like to a with scorpion with a sting, and smites with hard bristle pricks as
a wild Swine, and has an horrible voice, as the voies of a trumpe, and he
runs full swiftly and eats men; and among all beasts of the earth, is none
found more cruel nor more wonderfully shapen, as Auicen says, and this beast
is called Baricus in Greek, as he says. Also libro. 8. cap. 22. Plinius
says, that (...) writes and fares, that among the Medes is a beast, that is
most wicked and evil, which he tastes (...), and has three rows of teeth
set a row, and togethers (...) and is like to a (...) in ^ares, and in face
and has ye^ (...) and (...) like to a Lion, with a Scorpions tail, and
stingeth with bristle pricks, and has a voice, like to the voice of a man.
And if a marrsingeth to a pipe and to a trumpe, it seems that this beasts
voice accords with the trumpe and tune melody. And so this is the same
beast, that Auicen and Plinius speak of. Also every beast that gendreth and
gets a beast, has two reins and a bladder, but beasts that lay eggs, have
neither bladders, neither reins: for in birds and souls superfluity of
moisture passes into feathers and claws, and in fish, into the shelles and
scales; and therefore them needs no instrument to receive superfluity of
moisture.

Also every beast that has horns and to teeth above, cheweth his cudde, and
has many wombes, and full great, and another less, one long and another wide,
and many manner digestions be the cause, whereof such a Beast, has so many
wombes: for his meat is dry, and is not right well chewed in the beginning
when the beast feeds, and that is for have of eating, and for this cause this
meat so swallowed, needs to be chewed again, and then the meat is drawn
out of ye more womb to ye mouth, and so the beast does chewe it again. And
when the meat is chewed, it is sent to the second womb, that it may be there
digested; and so to chew is called Ruminate, as Auicen says, and Ruminate is
to chew the cud.

Also libro. a. cap. 1. Auicen says in this manner, I say that each Beast
with tallowe has fat brain, and that the beast that has no tallowe, has
no unctuous marrough: and every beast that bretheth has lungs, as fishes have
branches, whereby they draw in, and put out water and air: and every beast
that has blood, has heart and liver, and beasts that be without blood, have no
heart, but have somewhat else in seed of heart, that is fear and Well of life.

Also all beasts that gender, have gall, some preuely and hid, as the Heart,
Horse, and Mule, and some openly known and seen. Only the Dolphin wants
gall, though he gendreth and bretheth.

And other beasts that lay eggs, have gall great or small, as fishes and
Serpents. Also he says, that every Beast that has blood has semen: and
every beast without blood that gendreth another, has five wits, except the
mouse with eyes healed and covered, and has the black of the eye under a
skin: and in some beasts the ways of wit and of feelyng, be preuye and be
hid, as ears and nosethrills in fish, which hear as it is well known: for
they fly and void flushing and noise: and they smell well also, else would they
not come to the net, for milk, nor for flesh roasted. For flesh roasted, crabs
come into willowes and pitches. Therefore Aristotle says, as Auicen means,
that the Dolphin, and other manner of fish, fall to the bottom suddenly, as it
were in Epilencia, when they hear sudden thundering, or great moving and
noise, and be taken as they were drunk. And fish flies and voydeth the place
of washing and slaughter of other fish, and the blood of other fish, and fly
and void also hoarie and unclean nets, and come glably into new. And beasts
with crimping bodies have sharp wit and feeling, though it be privy and hid,
as Bees and Antes, that hear and smell a far, and have liking in certain
odor and smell, and dye in some odor of Brimstone, and of burnt leather, and
of burnt Harfes horns: and so Bees abide not in places of evil smell, but
they rest in places with good smell and sweetness, as he says.

Also he says, that beasts are diverse in manner of voice of crieng: for some
have strong voice and sharp, and some feeble and low and some with little
voice or none, and only beasts that have the wosen of voice, and lungs, and
breath, have voice. But some breaths not, and makes sometime noise and
sometime an hissing. And beasts that have voice make tunes and melody, and
some cry, chitter and sing, namely in time of gendering and of love, and they
know each other by their own voice, and call and pray each other to love.
Also he says, that each beast, that has blood and goes, waketh and
sleeps, and every beast that has eye lyddes, closes them when he sleeps:
and every beast that lays eggs, makes small sleep.

Also every beast needs meat and norishing according to his complexion, and
that is right needful and necessary for sustenaunce and wexing of the beast,
or for the restoring of that thing, which is lost by kindly heat.

But in receiving and taking of meat and drink there is great difference: for
some going beasts with complete and even lyppes, drinks sucking, as man,
horse, cow and mule, and other such: and beasts with uneven lyppes, in the
which the nether lip is shorter then that over, drink lapping, as an hound,
and cat, and other such: and so by the disposition of eyennesse and unevenness
of lips, some beasts in drinking suck, and some lap: and therefore kind
ordayneth wisely in hounds, and in other lapping beasts, tender tongue, long
and plyaunt, and the tongue is the more able to lick and to hold the water,
and bring it to the mouth. But many four footed beasts, drink not but
seldom, as Lonyes, and Hares and other such: for meat of such beasts is right
moist, and that moisture suffices to them in steed of drink, and to bring
their meat into the members, and to cool kind heat. And other beasts that
be full hot and dry, either of complexion, or by accidental heat and
dryness, and use dry meat or hot, need therefore drink to the foresaid
things and doings: and this is the cause why Culuers and other birds that be
not rauenners drink: for they eat corn and grains and other such and their
meat is fat, hot and dry.

And fowls and birds of prane, use moist meat indeed, and drink therefore
but seldom, and when they drink, it is token of sickness and that unkind heat
has passing, masterie in them, as Auicen and Aristotle mean. And Auicen
means, that beasts with little bodies, be more slye and hardy, and witty,
than other beasts with great bodies: is it fares in Spiders, Bees, and Antes,
their works be so slighe and subtle, that man's wit may not comprise to do
such works, for in them kind rewards in slight and in wit, that that
seems to be withdrawn from them in might and in strength, as he says.

Also in li. de mirabilibus mundi, circa finem, Solinus says: that every
beasts with crooked teeth as a saw, is a Glutton, and fights: as it fares
of hounds, Panthers, Lions, and Bears. And the females of such beasts bring
forth young, imperfect and vncomplete, as the Bitche brings forth blind
whelps, and the female Bears brings forth a lump of flesh not divided by
shape of members: and she keeps that lump hot, under her arms pits, as the
Den sits on her eggs: and the female Bear, licketh that lump of flesh,
and shapeth it some and some, until it receive perfect figure and shape of a
Bear. Also the Panther and the Lions brings forth whelps, but not complete
nor perfectly shapen, and every beast that brings forth many young, loves
best the first, and accounts it most kindly her own, and therefore some
beasts eat and devour their own brood, except the first, as some Swine do
oftentimes.

Also he says, that in all beasts that bring young forth, vncomplete and
imperfect, the cause is gluttony, for if kind would abide until they were
complete and perfect, the whelps would slaye the damme with sucking, for
immoderate and over passing appetite: and therefore in such beasts, kind is
swift to bring them forth soon, or to make them soon dye, least they should
grieve the damme too sore, and such beasts, brought forth in that manner,
fight for meat and food, as Auicen says, and hate each other. Therefore kind
has ordained remedy to sane the kind of those beasts, and ordains that
such beasts may bring forth many young at once, so that if it happen that
many of them be dead and lost in sighting, the kind of them may be saved in
few and not too many. Therefore the female Wolf, whelpeth many whelps, as
the Bitche does. And the Idder that is called Vipera has twenty young at
once, as he says: and so for the increase of this Vipera bet many alive at
once in the womb, for desire of nourishing they suck much, and draw of the
humor so much, that the damme suffices not to sustain so many in her womb:
therefore she sayleth and dies ere she may bring forth her kind at full.
Also Aristotle and Auicen say, that beasts with teeth joined togethers and
blunt, have few increase, and beasts with teeth departed far a sunder and
sharp, and set with many chinnes, have many young, and much semen, and beasts
with little bodies, gender more than beasts with great bodies. And beasts that
gender little and have few of their kind, have few teates and diversely, and
set in diverse places. And therefore the Bitch has many teates, and the Sow
also, and be beasts that have many young. Also beasts that use superfluity and
continuance of the service of Venus, have much shorter life than those beasts
that serve Venus temperately and seldem: and therefore gelded men live longer
than other for in them the sinews are cut, by the which semen should come
downward to effect and working of generation.

Also in libro de spermate Galen and also Constantine tell the cause and reason
thereof. And Auicen libro de Animalibus affirms the same and says, that
Sperma is gendered and comes of good blood and full digested, the which blood
is ready to turn and to pass into nourishing of membes, and therefore when a
man sheddeth that humor seminall, the man is greatly discolored, and the body
more feebled than though he bled forty times so much: for sperma is a thing
able and made ready to pass into nourishing of members: and therefore when
Sperma passes out of the body, kind feeding and nourishing of the members,
is taken and withdrawn, and thereof is great loss of spirits and of virtue
in the body of the Beast. And so immoderate and often gendering is cause of
spoiling and undoing of the body, and so the life is shortened.

And therefore the Elephant lives longest f:sor he loves chastity, and
uses lechery but seldom. Huc vsque Aristoteles.

Auicen, and Solinus, and Isaac in dietis vniuersalibus, treats of beasts,
in that they be feeding and norishing for man's body: for some beasts accord
to man's complexion, as Lamb, Kidde, Sheep and Swine among tame beasts: Heart
and Hindes, Backs and Roes among wild beasts. And some be all contrary to
man's complexion, and that for great heat, as the Adder Tyrus, and other
Serpents: or else for too great cold, as Spiders and Scorpions. And some are
unlike to man's kind, but they be not all contrary, neither poison: as Irthins,
Hares, and Fores, and other beasts with flesh of heavy smell, for of such
beasts, comes worst nourishing of man's body. And wild beasts be more hot
and dry, and lean, than tame beasts, and that for continual moving, and for
heat of the air that they be in, and also for dryness of their meat and
nourishing, and therefore their flesh is more hard, and harder to digest, and
that is known, for when they be slain, their flesh rotteth not so soon as
the flesh of tame beasts.

Therefore all flesh of wild beasts, is less sauoury and norisheth less,
than flesh of tame beasts, except the flesh of wild Roes, that is much more
sauorie than other, and better, and more nourishing. Their bodies be made soft
by moving, and humors be made small and thin, and the pores be opened, and
humors that be cause of heavy smell, be dissolved and amended, and so because
of moving and of travail, they be accidentally made more sauourie, for by
such running and moving about, their kind coldness is tempered: and
therefore in wild beasts that run and travail much, the heavy smell and
savor is taken away, and their flesh is made the more sender, for their pores
be opened, and the humors are tempered, that their flesh may be the better and
sooner dissolved, and corporate into members, and because of kind dryness,
their flesh is the later dissolved in the members.

Also some beasts are fed and nourished in moist places and watery, and their
flesh nourishes soon, and is soon digested, but it is soon dissolved of the
members. And some are fed in mountains and in dry places, and their flesh is
better in keeping and governing of health, and more according in comforting,
and more perfect in during in the members.

And other beasts that he made tame and fed in houses, have more gleymie and
great flesh, because of great eating, and of corrupt meat, and therefore their
flesh is hard nourishing, and dissolueth slowly both in the stomach, and in
the liver: for as Hippocrates says, To know goodness of kind of beasts, as
touching nourishing and feeding of the body, it helps to know place and
pasture where they be fed, and air moist or dry where they dwell, and
quantity of moving and of rest, and how they are disposed accidentally or
kindlye in idleness or in travail. And beasts that are kindly tame, be less
hot and more moist than wild beasts, and therefore ye flesh is more soft, and
the sooner digested, for by great rest and ease the pores be closed, and the
thick humors be tempered by heat that is closed within, and so the flesh
softeneth and tendereth. And for they eat and drink much, their superfluity
of humors increases soon, and fatness is increased, and therefore the
bodies of such beasts, are much nourishing and sauoury, and passes soon into
the members and into the veins.

And for multitude of gleaminesse and of moisture, such flesh rotteth soon,
and gendereth superfluity of humors. And though it feed kindly and much, yet
for passing moisture it is soon dissolved, and passes out of the members. And
so accidentally it nourishes the body less then flesh of wild beasts. For
though ye flesh of wild beasts nourishes but little: yet for it is hard to
dissolve and slow, it abides longer in the members, in which it is
incorporate. Therefore men in old time said that it norisheth the members
accidentally.

Also in all manner kind of beasts, the male is more hot and less moist than
the female, and therefore flesh of male beasts is more subtle and better
feeding than the flesh of females, except Goats flesh, that is better in the
female than in the male, for in the female moisture te^pereth the dryness of
complexion, and in the male, heat kindeleth or tempereth not ye kind drines
of the male: and therefore in this manner kind of beasts, the flesh of the
female is better than the flesh of the male, for it is more temperate, and not
passing dry, and that though it be fresh or old, and namely when it passes
not from age of sucking, for then the goodness of milk of the female
tempereth kind dryness thereof. And gelded beasts be mean between
complexion of male and of female: for flesh of gelded beasts heateth less,
than does flesh of males, and more than flesh of females: and is digested
flower than male flesh, and sooner than female flesh: and are therefore less
nourishing, and worse than be males, and better than females. And it is a
general rule, that among beasts that be kindly moist, the male is better than
the female, and better in perfect age, than in imperfect age: and among beasts
that be kindly dry, the female is much better than the male, and more in
imperfect age, than in perfect age, as be says.

Also goodness of beasts, varieth by diversity of age, for beasts that be
nigh the age of seeking, be of great moisture and gleyminesse, and also of
sledernesse, and therefore their flesh gendreth superfluity and fleame: but if
it be beasts that are kindly dry, as Rotherne, and Goats. And flesh of such
beasts, as Calves, is good in such an age, and namely if they be nourished
with good milk, and best if they be weaned, for it is less moist and gleymie,
and of more temperate sadness. And in young age, when beasts be full-waxen,
then their flesh is more hard and dry, and namely if the beasts be of dry
complexion, and therefore their flesh is more hard to digest: and is better in
comfort of the members, and in during more than in ruling of health, as he
says.

And in the fourth age when they be full old, their flesh is more unprofitable
to meat, and that for double cause: For than kind heat is nigh quenched, and
substaunciall moisture is full nigh wasted, and therefore their flesh is full
hard and not good to digest, and namely if the beasts be of dry complexion.
And it is general among all beasts and fowls, that while they grow and wexe:
their flesh is better to meat, and better feeding, than it is when it passes
into feebleness for age, as he says.

Also in pasture and feeding is diversity, for beasts that be fed in
mountains, have better blood, and more subtle and sharp, for scarcity of
meat.

And those that be fed in marreys, have more great blood and more fatness, and
less heat, and less stopping. And beasts that eat grass and herbs, as
meat, are more boyde in Winter, than in Springing time or in Summer, for in
Winter their meat fails, and therefore they wexe fat, after the middle of
Springing time or before, and wexeth much, and their flesh is more sauourye and
better because of plenty of couenable meat.

And beasts that eat small grass and herbs, are more fat from the beginning
of springing time to the middle of Summer, and their flesh is then best, for
then they find couenable meat and good and tender, for then they have
couenable meat and food. And other beasts that eat crops, boughs, twigs, and
also branches, are good from the beginning of Summer unto Winter: For then
boughs and branches, are both full moist and tender. And so beasts, that
eat full small grass and dry, are better than those that eat moist grass
and herbs: and those that eat tender boughs and branches are much better
than those that be fed at home with fruit. And those that eat and drink
little, are better than those that eat and drink much: for beasts that are
fed in fields and in mountains, have great travail and moving, and are
therefore better than those that are fed at home.

For those that be in mountains and in fields, have and draw more subtle air
and dry, because of running about.

And so superfluity of humors is foredried, and their complexion is made
temperate. And againward, beasts that are fed at home, be found less good and
profitable in co^plection, for scarcity of pure air, and for default of
moving, and for plenty of meat and of drink.

Also beasts are diverse, for some are fat, and some are lean, and some are
mean: for the flesh of them that are fat, is worst to meat, for it grieueth
and lets digestion, for it fleeteth about the meat, and makes the meat to
swell, and softeneth the roughness of the stomach, and causes the stomach
to be sudder and gleymie: and therefore too great fatnes dissolueth a moist
stomach by reason of failing of the virtue contentiue, comfortatiue, and
expulsive: and it kindles and heateth too soon an hot stomach, as fire is
often kindeled without by fatness: and therefore men in old time bad and
commanded, that of most fat beasts only the red flesh should be eaten, and the
fatness done away. And most lean beast are sinewie and tough, and have
little blood and little moisture, and gives therefore little norishing to
manns body. But beasts that are mean between sat and lean are most
profitable, for they have not so much fatness to kindle the heat of the
stomach, nor to make the roughness of the stomach slider: nor so much
leanness to cool the stomach, and to spoil it of blood.

Also beasts are diverse in changing of time, for some beasts have scarsitie of
marrow and of blood in one time, and are full thereof in the contrary time, as
it is openly known in shell fish of the sea, and in man's brain, and percase
in every beasts brain, as Aristotle says, openly in libro de proprietatibus
Elementorum. And therefore many wex sick in one part of the month or of the
year, ye another time be known whole and sound, and clean of all sickness
in contrary time, as it fares in Lunaticke men and in mad men, and in Caduc
men that have the falling evil. Hereof seek more before cap. de Luna. And so
Auicen speaks of the Ape and says, that the Ape is glad or sorry by
changing of times, and namely by the course of the Moon: and also in some
season, beasts wex lean, though they have never so much meat, and wexe fat in
sleeping in the contrary time, as Auicen says: and he says, that Glyres a
manner kind of mice, that moves not in Winter, but lie as they were dead, and
eats not, wexe fat in sleeping, and wake in Summer time, and move themselves
against the heat of the Sun: and he tells wonderfully of the Swallows and
of other fowls, that be found as it were dead in hollow trees in winter time,
and quickens and waketh after, as it were sleeping they are made strong, and
show themselves strong and swifte in Summer time: and so the female Bear,
after that she has conceived, hides her self long time in privy places, and
takes no meat that time, as Auicen says, and Aristotle and Solinus means.
Look within cap. de Viso. Also fish in one month wexeth fat, and soon
afterward wexe lean: and some wexeth fat in the Northern wind, as fish with
long bodies, and some in Southern wind, as fish with broad bodies: and some in
rain time, as Aristotle says. Rain water accords to all manner shell
fish, except the Fish that is called Roytera, that dies in the same day, if
he tastes rain water: and too much rain water grieueth some fish: for it
blyndeth them. And some beasts sometime change and renew themselves, and cast
of and change their superfluity, as Crabbes change their shells, and Hearts
their horns, and Goshaukes their feathers. And Isaac means and says, flesh
of beasts in which dryness and heat has mastry, is not full good, as Camel
flesh, and is not full good in Summer, but Camells flesh is according in
winter: and flesh of beasts that be hot and moist, as sheep flesh, is good in
springing time: and competent in harvest. Flesh that is cold and dry, is not
full good, as Goats flesh cold and moist.

And Swines flesh is best from ye middle of Summer to the end, and worst in
Winter, and mean in Springing time and in harvest. And so Hippocrates says,
that Swines flesh is good in Springing time, and less worth in harvest, and
less worth in Winter. And Goats flesh is good in Summer, and Sheep flesh in
Springing time: and in the beginning of Summer, flesh of beasts, as it is
ordained to man's meat, is diversely dressed and ordained to man's meat. For as
Isaac says, flesh of beasts is sometime roasted, and sometime fried, and
sometime sod in water with salt. Flesh roasted and fried is great and dry in
feeding and nourishing, and hard to digest, for the moisture thereof is
wasted, and then the flesh takes dryness of the fire: and right fat flesh
should not be eaten but roasted, so that the moisture thereof may be drawn out
of the substance thereof. Sodde flesh is more moist and more easy to digest,
for the water tempereth and makes it moist: and sometime in the water in the
which flesh is sodden, is spicerie put, and thereof is made diverse sauce, and
keeps and saves the flesh in his kind goodness, and amendeth it both in
smell and in savor, and makes it virtuous to destroy and put out diverse
sicknesses and evils. And it is necessary to sees flesh of dry beasts, and to
roast flesh of moist beasts and fat, and to dress flesh of mean beasts
between these twain, with diverse manner of sauce, and this dressing is done
in many manner of wise: for some flesh of beasts is wholesome, and accords to
rosting, and is not full good sod. And Rothen flesh and Goats flesh is better
sod than roasted, and Swines flesh and Sheep flesh is better roasted than sod:
for by seething dry flesh is made moist, and by rosting moist flesh is dried,
and therefore for the moisture thereof, it is good to roast swines flesh, and
for passing drines thereof, it is good to sees Goats flesh and Ox flesh.

Also flesh of those beasts varieth and is diverse, by such accident and
dressing, for swines flesh roasted, is amended and made better by rosting, and
appaired by seething, and Goats flesh is better sodde, and worse roasted: and
so it is to know of other. Huc vsque Isaac in Dietis.

Also beasts are ordained, not only for meat of the body, but also for
remedy of evils, and also for many manner of medicines. All kind of beasts,
wild and tame, going and creeping, is made and ordained for the best use of
mankind, as Plinius and John Damascenus means. But some beasts are ordained
for man's meat, as Sheep, Hearts, and other such: and some serve for the
service of mankind, as Horses, Asses, Oxen and Camells, and other such: and
some for man's mirshe, as Apes, Marmusets, and Popiniayes: and some be made for
exercitation of man, for man should know his own infirmity, and the might of
God, and therefore are made flies and lice: and Lions and Tigers, and Bears be
made, that man may by the first know his own infirmity, and be afeard of the
second and have succor by calling of Gods name. Also some beasts are made to
relieve and help the need of many manner infirmityes of mankind, as ye flesh
of ye adder Vipera to make Triacle, and the gall of a Bull and of other beasts
and fowls, to do away dimnesse of eyes: and an Adders skin sod in Oil,
abateth ache of the ears, and that in wonderful manner, as Dioscorides says
in libro Aesculapij, De occultis membrorum virtutibus.

It is said, that if he that has the Emoroides sits on Lions skins, the
Emoroydes shall pass away from him, and Wolves fly from him, that is
anointed with Lions dirte: also there he says, yt if the tail of an old
Woolfe be hanged at the Cowes stall, ye wolves will not come there nigh: also
Dioscorides says, that Bears eyes taken out of the head, and bound together
under the right arm of a man, abateth his fever quartains. Also the long
teeth of a Woolfe heals Lunaticke men, as he says, and so says Pythagoras
and Plinius also, and tells, that tame four footed beasts dread and fly, if
they see a Wolves eye taken out of the head. In libro Viatico Constantine
says, that the hair of a white hound without any black speck, helps them
that have the falling evil, and keeps them from falling if that hair be
hanged about their neck: and such a thing says Phythagoras in lib. Romanorum,
and says. If a ring be made of the hoof of a white Ass, that has no black
speckes, and he that has the falling evil bear and wear that ring, that
ring keeps him from falling. And also he says, that the gall of a Bull
anointed under the navel, laxeth and softeneth the womb.

Also he says, that the teeth of a Serpent, which ought to be taken out of the
head while the Serpent is a live, and hanged after about him that has the
fever quartane, that tooth destroys his quartane. And if thou besmoakest the
house with the lungs of an Ass, thou cleansest the house of serpents and other
creeping worms. Plin. says, that these virtues and properties, and many other
wonderful, be hid in lims and members of beasts, as it shall be said more
hereafter in the kind and properties of particular beasts: for nothing is in
the body of a beast, without medicine, open, or hid: for the skin, hair,
horn, nail, claws, flesh and blood, be not without remedy, nor the only
dirte.

De Animalibus in spciali. cap. 2
FOR because the kinds and properties of beasts is showed in general, now by
the help and grace that is sent from above, following to our purpose, we shall
entreat of the virtues and propertyes of some Beasts and creeping worms in
singular and in special, and that by the order of A B C.

Of Ariete. chap. 3.
THe Ram is a Beast that bears wool, pleasing in heart, and mild by kind,
as Isidore says lib. 12. cap. 1. Aries Dur est Oui^um. In Hebrew Ail, and tell.
Cald^eus. Dikerin, Arabie, Rabsa, and Rabsali.
And is Duke, leader, and Prince of sheep.

Therefore kind gives him great strength passing other sheep. It is seemly
that the Ram that is Duke and defender of other sheep, be more strong and
mighty, than other sheep: and therefore. Isi. says, that the Ram is called
Veruex, and has that name of Vires, strength, and as it were a man, for he is
male and master of sheep, and is more virtuous and stronger than other.

Or, as Isidore says, this Nowne Veruex comes of Vermis, a worm: for the
Ram has a Worm in his head, and for fretting of that Worm and itching, the
Ram is excited, and pusheth full strongly, and smites full hard, all that
it meets: and therefore the Ram is called Aries also, and has that name of
Ares, that is Greek, and is to our understanding, virtue: for in flocks, the
males are called Arietes, for they be virtuous and mighty, to get and gender
Lambs, for they pass other sheep in greatness of body and of might, and
strength and virtue.

Also this name Aries comes of Aris, Altars, for as Isidore says, This beast
was first offered on Altars among Nations, and so the Ram is called Aries, for
he was slain by Aaron at the Altar, and so by Moses law the Ram was
principally a clean beast both to Sacrifice and to meat: For he was offered
couenably for sin of the People, and is cloue footed, and cheweth his cud,
and was eaten indifferently of the people. And as Isidore says libro. 12.
Sheep were called sometime Bidentes: for among eight teethe that they commonly
have, two teeth be higher than any of the other, and therefore. Natious offered
them principally in sacrifice to the Gods, as he says libro. 8. capitulo. 47.

Plinius speaks singularlye of the Ram, and says, that it is the kind of
the Ram in the Iustines of his youth for to noye the Lambs, and to follow
the Eawes that come against him. For he is far more tractiue and more
profitable in age: and nevertheless he is more ceuell in heart then the Ewes,
and his cruelnesse abateth, if his horns be pierced ^igh to the ear. If his
right gendring staue be bound, he gendreth females: and if the less be
bound, he gendreth males: and he gendreth males in the Northern wind, and
females in the Southern wind. And such Rams as have black veins under their
tou^gs, such Lambs they gender in color: for if his veins be black under the
tou^ge, his Lamb shall be black: and if they be white, the Lambs ere white:
and if they be speckeled the Lambs are so. And Arist. and Auicen means the
same. Look within De Oue.

The Ram has a full hard forhead nigh as a horn, and feeble temples, and
somewhat gristly, and therefore for the defense and keeping of the feeble
part, kind gives him great horns and right hard about the feeble place of
the temples, and be crooked and bended as a round shell, but they be somewhat
sharp in the ends, insomuch, that they may defend the head with sharpness
and hardness of horns, and withstand enemies, and fights with them, with
sharpness of horns, as he says. For it is not seemly that kind should leave
the defendour of the flock without weapon and defense. And therefore kind
gives him two horns bent, as it were circles, to defend and succor his own
head, which is feeble of it self, and is the more bold and hardy against
adversaries and enimyes by trust of weapon, by the which he is strengthened
and defended. And therefore he goes the more boldly before the slocke, and
bears by the head, and pitcheth down the foot, and treads strongly on the
ground, and is cloue footed.

His ^lees be thick with long hair in the locks, and defends himself
against the miuries of hot air or cold, with strong and thick fell and
skin, and therefore one side of the Rams skin, by reason of the strength
thereof, suffers and sustaineth the violent crafts of Curriers of parchment
makers, passing other fells and skins of other sheep, and be more able to
receive and to hold printing and painting of diverse colors, as he says.

And in time of love, the Ram fights for his Eawes, and reeseth with his
horns on his adversaries. And for to push his enemy the harder, he draws
backwarde, and reeseth and leapeth upward, and smites with his fierceness,
and busheth with a kind of violence.

And li. 8. Auicen speaks of Rams and says, that Rams, Goats and Bucks,
go much in rains, and hide not themselves in Winter for cold, but they go
sometime out of hot places into cold, and when it raineth, they fly not the
rain until they be dead. And Rams by kind follow Goat bucks, and rest all,
till the Heard take one of them, and make him go, before, and then other
follow soon. And they dread kindly the thunder, as sheep do. And if a sheep
be with lamb, and hears the thunder, she casts her Lamb for dread, and
stands for fear. And sleep with the sheep before midnight, and after part,
and change and turn, from side to side in sleeping. For from Springing time
to Harvest they sleep on the one side, and then unto springing time they
sleep on the other side, and hold up their heads while they sleep, except
they be sick, and they chew their cud sleeping as they do waking, and if it
happen that they stray and go away, they come not again, but if the Heard
brings them again.

And Isaac in dietis says, that Rams in youth be less moist and gleymie then
sucking Lambs, and that is because of the age that has mastery over their
complexion, and therefore their flesh is better than flesh of Lambs and of
Eawes, and gendereth better blood, and namely if they be gelded, for their
heat is tempered with accidental moisture, and so the flesh is of good
savor. But when they pass in age and be full old, then for age they fail in
heat, but if they be gelded: and if they be gelded and pass in great age,
then their heat fails by double cause, for lack of gendring stones, and
also for age. And therefore their bodies be cold and dry as it were a stick,
and be more hard and unsavory, in comparison to Goat, Oxen, and other such,
that be worst in age.

And the bodies of rams, that be kindly hot and moist, be more better then
bodies of other beasts, that are kindly cold and dry in great age. Huc vsque
Isaac in Dietis.

Aristotle and Auicen lib. 6. mean, that Rams and Goat buckes, like as other
Beasts, have a certain proper voice, by the which they cry and call to them
the females in time of gendering and love. And Rams that drink salt water,
gender before other, and be sooner moved to love: and when ye old Rams be
sooner moved to gendring and to love, than the young in due time, that is token
of goodness of that time in ye year: and if in that time the young Rams be
sooner moved than the old Rams, it is token of a pestilence of sheep in that
year as he says.

Of Agno. chap. 4.
Agnus. Rebes.
THe Lamb is called Agnus, and has that name of a name of Greek, as it were
mild as Isidore says. For among all the beasts of the earth, the Lamb is
most innocent, soft and mild, for he nothing grieueth nor hurts, neither
with teeth, nor with horn, nor with claws: and all thing that is in the Lamb
is good and profitable, for the flesh is good to meat, and skin to diverse use,
and woo^ to clothing, and the dirte to land, and claws and horns to
medicine, as Isidore says lib. 7.

Latins suppose, that this nown Agnus comes of Agnoscendo, knowing: for
passing all other beasts, the Lamb knows his own dam, insomuch, that if
she bleate among many sheep in a flock, anon by bleating he knows the
voice of his own dam. Auicen and Aristotle mean, that some Lambs be yened in
springing time, and some in harvest time, and some in winter: but those that be
yened in springing time, be more huge and great of body, and more strongger of
body, then those which be yened in harvest and in winter. But in some
countries and lands many men set winter Lambs, before Lambs of springing time,
and mean, that only these beasts be profitably yened in winter time, as Plin.
says li. 8. ca. 47. and there it is said, that Lambs which be conceived in the
Northern wind, be better than those that be conceived in the southern wind,
for then males be gendered and conceived. And Lambs have such color in flesh
and in wool, as the Ram and the Eaw have color in veins of ye tongue, for
if the veins be white, the Lambs be white: and if the veins be black, the
Lambs be black; and if they be speckeled, the Lambs be speckeled. In
sucking time the Lamb bends his knees, and for the dam should give the more
milk, he thrnsteth and pusheth at the ^dder of his dam, and beseeches the dam
with bleating, and sawneth with his tail when he has found his dam, and
bears up the head, and sucketh never but first it areareth up the head, and
has small wool and crispe, and many manner wise folded in it self. Cold
grieueth Lambs, and namely in rain wether, and be glad and joyful of the
company of folk, and he cleing and forie, and dreadeth full sore, when they be
alone. The Lamb hoppeth and leapeth before the flock, and plaieth, and dreadeth
full sore when he sees the Woolfe, and flies sodainlye away: but anon he is
astonished for dread and stinteth suddenly, and dare fly no farther, and prays
to be spared, not with bleating, but with a simple cheer when he is taken of
his enemy. Also when Butchers bind him fast, he defends him not with teeth,
neither with horn, and if he be spoiled either of his fell or of his skin,
he is still an innocent and an harmless beast, and whether he be lead to
Pasture or to death, he grudgeth not, nor prauncheth not, but is obedient and
meek, as Plinius says. It is peril to leave Lambs alone, for they die
soon if there fall any strong thunder. For the Lamb has kindly a feeble head,
and therefore the remedy is to bring them together, and leite them go
together, that they may be the bolder because of company, and the more hardy.

Of Agno anniculo. ca. 5.
AGnus anniculus is a Lamb of full age of one year, and is within the space
of one year, the better it is ye farther it is from sucking, for his moisture
of complexion increases by weaning and departing from milk, and superfluity
of moisture is tempered, namely if it be not yet gelded, as it is said openly
in Dietis. And lambs of twelve months old that be found in body, and clean
in flesh, be able to sacrifice and to meat, though they be speckled in flesh
and in wool. For speckles in flesh reproves not the lamb, nor puts him
from sacrifice, but if there be stinch and corruption in flesh or in skin
within, as the Gloss says super Exodus 7. and super Malac. Hierome says super
Leuiti. that specks and diversity of speckled flesh, lets not sacrifice if
the body be whole and sound, and without scabs in the skin. Then as Plinius
says, libro. 8. cap. 48. a lamb of a year old was able and according to the
Alters of Gods, and be in use of the flesh, and in use of the flesh the lamb,
is needful to mankind, and therefore as bodies of neat be kept for profit of
mankind, so it needs to have business of keeping of lambs and of sheep.
And Diosco. says, that the lamb has black dirt, which shall be dissolved
and tempered with vinegar, and made in a plaster: and then he cleanses away
black speckes and red of the body, and helps the evil that men call the
fire, and helps and saves burning and scalding if it be meddeled with Wax
and Oil.

Of Agna. chap. 6.
A Female lamb is called Agna, and is the Rams daughter, and is less in
body, and more moist then the male lamb, because of the female complexion,
as it is said in Dietis. And the flesh thereof while it sucketh is more glemy,
because of supersluitie of moystnre. And that comes both of age and of
complexion, and has mastrye in the body. Therefore that that is gendered of
the flesh thereof is fleamatike, and gleamie, and hard to defy, and uneath
passing out of the members when it is dested, and that is because of glewie and
gleamie humor, which is gendered thereof, but it passes soon down of the
stomach, for slippernesse of the humor, as Isaac says. And the flesh thereof
is better roasted then sod, for the superfluity thereof and moisture is
consumed and wasted by the strength and virtue of great fire. And the female
lambs be more simple and more fearful then the male. For the female has
lesser kind heat then the male, and be for that cause without horns. For
horns were superfluity to the female lambs, for defalt of boldness and of
the hardynesse they know not what to do therewith, as Auicen says. Also
libro. 3. Aristotle says, that Lambs have an evil, that is when they be
too fat about the reins, for if the Tallowe covers the reins, then they
dye, and the Tallowe increases in good pasture: and therefore Lambs be put
out of the pasture, lest they wax too fat. Look within de Oue.

( Addition.
Sheep and Lambs have also the disease of the ret, which happens if they
change a dry laire, and be brought into fennie or marsh grounds: they are
subject to the Tikes, which come for want of pasture, to the cough, and
Maggets.)

Of Alce.
A Kind of Dear, called (the Ethiopian Bull) some report that the Alce has
no joints in his legs, Addition
and therefore does never lie, but lean to a tree. I find no such report in
Gesner for truth, he is in conlour like the fallow Dear, short and broad
horned: This beast is the right Elcke, of whose hide the most best Buffe is
made, for doublet and breeches. Those which translated the Bible into English,
as it appears in the.14. chapter of Deu. among clean beasts: this Elcke is
named there Chaimois, and Camois in Hebrew is called Zamer: the Muscouites call
him Lozzos, and some have used one name and some another, because they had no
farther knowledge. Gesner in folio. 2 these breed in Hircania, a country in
Asia.

Of Apro. chap. 7.
The bore Chasit in ye Hebrew
THe Boar is called Aper, and is a Swine that lives in woods or in flelds,
and is most cruel and not mild, as Isidore says, and is called Aper, as it
were Affer, for by fierceness of his body, he is fierce and cruel, and so
among ye Greeks the Boar is commonly called Fiagres, that is to understand,
fierce and cruel, and is called among Latins Vetres, for he has great might
and strength, as it is said there. And Plinius and Auicen mean, that the Boar
is a fierce beast and a cruel, for uneath he is tamed and made mild though
he be gelded, though other beasts be more mild what time they be gelded. Also
the Bore is so fierce a beast and also so cruel, that for his fierceness and
his cruelnesse, he despises and sets naught by death, and he reeseth full
pitcously against the point of yt Spear of a hunter. And though it be so that
he be smitten or sticked with a Spear through the body, yet for the great ire
and cruelnesse in heart that he has, he reeseth on his enemy, and takes
comfort and heart and strength for to work himself on his aduersarye with his
tuskes, and puts himself in peril of death, with a wondrous fierceness
against the weapon of his enemy, and has in his mouth two crooked tuskes right
strong and sharp, and breaks and renteth cruellye with them those which he
withstandeth: and uses tuskes in steed of a Sword. And has an hard sheld
broad and thick on the right side, and puts that always against his weapon
that pursues him, and uses that brawne in steed of a sheeld to defend
himself. And when he spieth peril that should befall, he whetteth his
tusks, and froteth them against Trees, and assaieth in that while froting
against trees, if the points of his tuskes be all blont. And if he feel that
they be blont, he seeks an herb which is called Origanum, and gnaweth it and
cheweth it, and cleanses and comfort the roots of his teeth therewith by
virtue thereof, as Auicen says. And li. 28. ca. 10. Plinius says, that the
urine of the Boar is medicine for evils of ye ears, if it be meddeled with
Oil of Roses. Also his Gall helps against the stone, as it is said libro.
38. cap. 40. And his urine is heavy to himself, so that he may not arise,
but if he piss, but is holden down as though he were dead. For it is said,
that his urine burns him.

Also he says, that the Gall of the Boar exciteth to gendring. Also he says
lib. 5. That the field Swine lencth well roots, and wroteth and diggeth the
earth, and wroteth up roots and cutteth them with his tusks, and waxes fat
when he has rested seven days, and namely if he drink but little. And the
Boar fights with the Woulfe, and hates him by kind. For ye woulfe lies in
wait for his pigs, and steals them full often. Therefore as he says, lib.
decimo quarto, Kind gives to the Boar tuskes to desende the females and the
pigges. For the females be more feeble in themselves then the males, and worse
of complexion. For the males be more bold and more mighty then the females,
but the female is fierce when she is wroth, and grieueth and hurts, digging,
froting, and biting, and renting with teeth and tuskes. And the Boar hurts
with his tusks striking upward. And yt is the cause why that he may not hurt
him that lies on the ground. And the female grieueth but little them that
stand. And when the Boar is wroth, he fretteth and soameth at the mouth: and
so he does when he gendereth with the female. Plinius rehearses all these
foresaid things, and says more thereto, lib. 8. cap. 2. and says there, that
Egedius says, that Boares and other Swine be farrowed toothed. Also Boares
be sharp and most fierce when they be in love. For then they bite cruellye for
their Sowes, and dig and cratch the earth with their claws, and set up the
bristles, and whet the tuskes, and smite therewith, and show them the woodnesse
of their breasts, with horrible groaning and grunting: and eat but little then,
but they go and run about females, and be therefore right lean. And Boares
go to valleys that be dark, and dwell in woods, and keep there their
children; and live there by roots and fruit of wild trees. And when they epsy
the sautes of the hunters, and reeses, and Wolves, they go before their young.
And when they may not fly, they put them in peril for their young, and
harden their sheeldes with froating against trees when they shall fight, and
wrap them in dirt, and dry themselves in the Sun, and make the dirt hard and
fast among the hair, that they may the more surely bear and sustain the
strokes of their enemies in their fighting.

Libro. 6. Aristotle says, that the females and Sowes of Boares, when they
have farrowed, be full sharp and cruel, to rent them that come nigh their
young with cruel biting. Huc vsque Plinius.

And as Isaac says, Boares flesh is more hard and dry, and more cold then
tame Porke, and that is for his continual moving, and for dry meat and for
dry air, and for hot air that is always within them. For his grease or fat
is more hard, and his flesh more lyking in eating, and therefore tame Bores be
strongly chased and tied, and also beaten before they be slain, that their
flesh may be the more tender and sauoury because of strong moving.

And Dioscorides speaks more of the Boar and says, that his dirt dronk with
Wine and water, is a singular remedy for them that cast blood, and helps
sore sides if it be meddled with vinegar, and souoreth and strengthens broken
bones. Look within de Porco.

Of Asino. chap. 3.
THE Ass is called Asinus, and has that name of Sedendo, sitting, as it were
a beast to sit upon. For men sat and rode upon Asses before that they used
horse to ride upon, as Isidore says, libro 17. And is a simple beast and a
slow, and therefore soon overcome and subject to man's service. Or else this
name Asinus comes of A, that is not having, and Synos, yt is wit, as it were
a beast without wit. And of Asinus comes Asellus, that is a little young
Ass, that is fair of shape and of disposition while he is young and tender,
before he pass into age. For the elder the Ass is, the fouler he waxes from
day to day, and hairie and rough, and is a melancholyke beast that is cold and
dry, and is therefore kindlye heavy and slow, and unlusty, dull and
witless, and forgetful: Nevertheless he bears burdens, and may away with
travail and thraldom, and uses vile meat and little, and gathers his meat
among Briers and thorns, and thistles. And therefore Auicen says, libro. 8.
and Aristotle says also, small birds that nestleth them in bushes, thorns,
and briers, hate the ass. And therefore small Sparrowes fights with the
Ass, for the Ass eats the thorns, in the which ye Sparowes make their
neasts. And also the Ass rubbeth and froieth his flesh against the thorns, and
so the birds or the eggs of the Sparowes falls out of ye neast down to the
ground. And when that the Ass reareth and heaueth up her head, then by a
strong blast the thorns moves and shakes, and of the great noise the birds
he afearde full sore, and falls out of the neast. And therefore the breed
birds suffers them to leap on the face of the Ass, and bite and smite and
reese to his eyes with their bills. And if the Ass have a wouude or a scab in
the ridge or in the side, of pricking of thorns, or in any other wise, the
Sparows leapeth on the Ass and pecketh with their bills in the wounds or in
the sores, for the Ass should pass from their neasts. And though such a
Sparow be full little, yet uneath may the Ass defend himself against his
reese, pricking, and biting. Aristotle says, and so does Auicen also, that
she ranen hates full much the ass, therefore the raven flies above the ass,
and labors with his bill to peck out his eyes: but the deepnes of eien
helps the^ ass, and thicknes and hardness of the skin, for therewith the ass
closes her eyes, and heals her sight, and defends against the reesing and
pricking of Fowls: also his long ears and moving thereof helps, for
therewith he fearesh small birds, that reese to peck out his eyes: also libro.
8. Aristotle says, that the Bear fights with the ass and with the Bull,
because he eats raw flesh, and this is the cause why he fights with them,
for he desires to eat of their flesh. Libro. 18. cap. vit. Plinius speaks
of the Ass and says, that the smoke of the Asses hoof helps the birth of a
child, insomuch that it brings out a dead child, and shall not otherwise be
laid to, for it slays a quick child if it be often laid to, and lies too
long time. And new dirt of the same beast stauncheth blood wonderfullye. And
his liver holpeth against the falling evil of children.

Libro. 28. cap. 10. Plinius says, that the Asses milk and Asses blood
helps against the biting of a Scorpion. And men say, yt if a man looks in
an Asses ear when he is smit with a Scorpion, anon the malice passes. Also
all venomous things flies smoke of the Asses liver. Also in eodem cap. 9. it
is said, that the Asses milk helps against venomous plaster, and against the
malice of Seruse or of quick silver.

Also li. 9. Assess bones bruised and stamped, and sad, helps against venimme,
if the broth thereof be dronken: and urine of the Male ass with Nardus keeps
and saves and makes much hair. Libro 8. cap. 44. Plinius says, that the
Ass is a beast that may worst away with cold, and breeds not therefore in
cold Countries and lands, and so he breeds not in Pontus: and therefore Ari.
says, though the ass be full cold and dry, yet he is full lecherous, but he
is not moved to gendring ere he be.30. months old: and though be due then the
work of gendering, yet he gendereth no brood ere he be full three year
old: and so Plinius says there, that the birth of the ass is most in
idleness after 30. months, and is lawful and profitable after three year.
Also Aristotle says the same, li. 5. and Plinius says thereto, that the ass
foaleth selde two coltes. When the female shall foale, she flies light, and
seeks a dark place that she be not seen, and loves her foale so much, that
she passes through a fire to come to her foale: and ye ass breadeth full sore
to pass over water, and scrapeth therein: and when she is compelled, and must
needs pass over a water or river, and wadeth therein, then she pisseth
therein: and the ass passes not gladlye, where he may see the water through
the plankes, for he has a feeble brain, and is soon grudged, and dreadeth
therefore and falls through the chinnes of the bridge into the water, that he
sees running there under: and the ass drinks not gladly but of small wells
that he is used to, and those that he may come dry footed to: and wonder it is
to tell, yt though an ass be sore a thirst, if his water be changed, uneath
he drinks thereof, but if it be like the water that he is wont to drink of.

Plinius. li. 28. cap. 7. says, that if the female ass eats Barlye wet in
menstruall blood, as many grains as she eats, so wet, so many years
afterward shall she not conceive. The Mule is gendered between an ass and a
Mare: but to such gendering are Mares chosen, that pass in age four year,
and not ten year, and gender not always either with other: Of this beast is
two manner of kind: the one is gendered between an horse and an ass, and that
other between an ass and a Mare. But the one kind withdraws him from ye
other, but if they be fed together in youth with one manner milk. Therefore it
is said, that heardes that desire to have Mules and burdones gendered of diverse
kinds of beasts, use this craft, to bring forth young coltes of Mares, and
set them in darkness to teates of asses, and to feed them with asses milk,
and such horse colts when they be of age, be moved in time of gendering to
gender with asses: also likewise asses coltes be set to suck teates of Mares,
and be fed with Mares milk, and such colts gender with Mares when they be of
age: and so of such gendering between an ass and a Mare comes a beast that
was called Ninnulus in old time, but we tall a beast so gendered Burdus, and
call such beasts gendered between an ass and a Mare, a Mule: and libro. 15.
Aristotle says, that if an ass gendereth with a Mare that is full fat, the
conception of the Mare is corrupted, for coldness of the semen of the ass.
For the Semen of the Ass is most cold by kind, and the matter of them, and
the matter of the Mare is hot, and therefore when the hot is meddeled with the
cold, then the meddeling is tempered, then thereof may come conception, and the
colt may be saved yt is gendered between an horse and a female ass: and also
likewise the colt yt is gendered between an horse, and a Mare: but the he of
the Ass and of the Mare, that is the Mule, gendereth not, because of cold and
natural complexion of both horse and Ass, that has mastrye in the Mule. And
therefore the mule gendereth not another beast, as he says. Also there he
says, yt if an ass gendereth with the same ass afterward, he makes her
cast her colt, and the cause thereof is, as Auicen says, for coldness of the
semen of the ass comes, and corrupts and destroys temperatnesse of the
first Semen, for the Semen of the ass is cold in complexion, and brought to
temperatnesse, by kind heat of ye male horse: and so when the semen of the
female ass yt is cold by kind, or by complexion, with coldness of ye kind
with female by strength thereof,the first temperatnesse comes of ye hot semen
of the horse, and of the cold semen of the ass, and this is the cause why
every female mule is barren, as Auicen says: for the male ass yt is the
father of the Mule, is passing cold of complexion, and in the Mare that is
mother, yt is hot, because of the heat of the horses kind. And therefore though
the heat of the semen of the mother, that is the Mare, tempereth the cold semen
of the ass, so that a beast may be gendered, yet in the beast yt is gendered,
the coldness of the father and mother abides and has mastry therein, and
disposes kindly to barrenness. And there is a manner. Ass, that is called
Indicus Asinus, Onager. This is ye unicorn, as ^^me writers assume.
and has an horn in the middle of ye forehead, and is whole footed on all
four. For every beast that has two horns is cloue footed: and therefore
this ass Indicus has but an horn, for he is not cloue footed, as Aristotle
says, lib. 2. But not every cloaue footed beast has horns, but againeward,
if he be horned, he is cloue footed, as it fares in the Bull, and in the
sheep. Heart, and other such, as Aristotle says there. Libro. 7. Aristotle
says, that the Ass, Mule, and horse, eats fruit, herbs, and grass, and
be fatted with water, and love more thick water then clear. And the cow again
loves better clear water then thick.

Also lib. codem, Aristotle says, that for the more part Asses wax sick in
one manner of sickness that is called Milide, and this sickness is first in
the head, and then hot fleame runs out at the nose:and if it falls to the
lungs, the ass dies, and this beast flies more cold then all other beasts,
and is not found in the Countries of the North. And joints of the ridge boane
be more strong of the Ass, and stronger bound with sinews behind about the
reins then before. And therefore the Asses bear more heavy burdens behind
about the reins then before about the shoulders. After evenness of the day
and night in springing time, the Ass is moved to lethery, and then he roreth
and exciteth the female to love with dreadful roaring and stron ^, and draws
in breath and wind, and brings odor and smell of the female to his nose,
and by drawing thereof his desire of lerherye burns, as Plinius says. And
the Ass has another wretched condition known nigh to all men. For he is put
to travail over night, and is beaten with staves, and sticked and pricked with
pricks, and his mouth is wrong with a Bernacle, and is lead hither and
thither, and withdrawn from leese and pasture, that is in his way often by
refraining of the Bernacle, and dies at last after vain travails, and has
no reward after his death for the service and travail that he had living, not
so much that his own skin is left with him, but it is taken away, and the
carren is thrown out without sepulture or burialls: But it be so much of the
carren that by eating and devouring is sometime buried in the wombes of hounds
and wolves.

Of Angue. chap. 9.
ALL kind of Serpents and Adders that by kind may wrappe and fold his own
body, is called Anguis, and has that name, for he has many corners and angles
in such folding, and goes never straight. For as Isidore says, libro. 12.
Anguis is called Serpens, for he creeps with privy paces, but he creeps with
small paces yt he hid with folding and sliding, and withdrawing of scales, and
is accounted among creeping worms, ( Addition.
whereof came this proverb. Anguis latit in herba. The Snake under leaves, and
wrath in ye heart.) For he creeps on the breast and womb, as Isi. says, li.
12. and is called also Colluber, either for he dwells in shadow, or for be
glideth with slipper bendings, wrinklings, and draughts: for an Adder slideth
while he is held. And of Adders is many manner kind: and how many kind, so many
manner venim: and how many speces, so many manner malice, and so many manner
sores and aches, as there are colors, as Isid. says, li. 12. And as Adders be
diverse in quantity, so they be diverse in malice of venim. And some Adders be
great and huge, as Plin. says, li. 8. cap. 16. Magellenes writes, that in
Inde be so great adders, yt they swallow up both Hearts and Bulls all whole. A
dragon
And so in Punico Bello, the battle that was besides the river Bragada,
Bragada, a river near to Vtica in Afirike. Regulus was co^sul and not Emperor.
Regulus ye Emperor slew an Adder with Arbalastes and Torments, yt which Adder
was an hundred and twenty foot long, and the skin and the cheek bones thereof
hang before the temple at Rome, and dured until the battle Numantinum. Also
in Claudeus Caesar's time in Italy was a Serpent slain, and in his womb a
whole child was found. And such an adder grieueth most now with biting, now
with blowing, now with smiting with ye tail, and now with stinging, now with
looking and sight. And there are other Adders, small in body, but they be most
great in might of grieuing. For the Serpent Dipsas, as Isidore says, is so
little, that he uneath is seen when men tread thereon, and the venim thereof
slaieth before it be felt, and he that dies by that venim, feels no sore:
and so the Poet Lucan says.

Signiferum iuuenem Tureni sanguinis album.
Torta caput retro Dipsas calcata remordit.
Vix dolor aut sensus dentis fuit, etc.
That is, Dispas, that Serpent wrast his own white head backward, and bit the
young Baneret of Turenis blood, and uneath he felt biting or sore. So says
Isidore. Also Tirus is the least of adders, and yet as Aristotle says, lib. 7.
uneath is remedy found against his biting. Also Serpents and adders be
diverse in disposition, figure, and shape, for some have two heads, as the
adder Amphisibena.

Of him Isidore speaks in libro. 12. and says, that Amphisibena has that
name, for he has two heads, one in the one end, and another in the other
end, and runs and glideth and wrigleth with wrinkles, corcels, and draughts
of the body after either head: and among Serpents, only this Serpent puts
out himself in cold, and puts himself and goes before all other.

Also lib. 8. cap. 14. Plinius says the same, and says, that Amphisibena has
a double head, as though one mouth were too little to cast venimme. Also some
Serpents have many heads: for some be doubled, and some trebled, and some
quatrebled, as Isidore says. And Idra is a Serpent with many heads, and such a
one was seen in a marreys in the Province of Archadia. And it is said, that
if one head be smit off, three grow again:but this is a fable. For it is
perfectly known, that Idra is a place that casted up the water, that wasted
and destroyed a city that was there nigh: and in this Idra if the head of ye
stream were stopped, many head streams break out: and Hercules seeing that,
burned ye place, and stopped the ways of the water: and therefore it is said,
that Hercules did kill Idra the Serpent with five heads, as Isidore says,
libro. 12. Also Serpents vary and be diverse in colors, for some be black,
and some be read: as the serpent Tyrus, and those be worst, and some be
speckled, as the Serpent Scytale shines with diversity of speckles, that all
that looks thereon for wonder of the speckles has lyking to look thereon:
and for he is most slow in creeping by a wonder of his diversity of his
speckles, he catches them yt he may not follow in going and in creeping, and
the more diverse he is in colors and speckles, the worse he is in venime, for
his venime is accounted most sharp and hot. For the same Serpent is so hot and
fervent, that in winter time the skins that he has changed, be fervent and
hot, that be of the body. Hereof Lucanus speaks and says.

Et Scytale sparsis etiam nunc sola pruinis.
Exuujas positura suas.
When frost is nigh, this Serpent changes his skin, as Isid. says, etc.
Also Ophites is a Serpent painted with diverse speckles, and has as many manner
of wise to noy and to green, as he has diverse colors and distinct. Hereof
speaks Lucanus, and says, that that manner of Serpent Ophites, has as many
manner of burnings and greeuings, as he has speckles and colors, and is
painted with burning speckles. Also Serpents be diverse by diversity of steed
and of place, for some lurk in dens of the earth, and sicketh powder or dust,
and sucketh humor of the ground, as Plinius says. And some be water Adders,
and dwell in brimmes of waters, as the Serpent Enidris, that is a water adder,
and who so is smitten at that Adder, he swells into dropsy. And many men
call it Boua, for the dirt of an Ore is remedy therefore, as Isido. says, lib.
8. Also Natrix is an adder, and has that name, for he infecteth with venim
each well that he comes nigh, as Lucanus says, and says Natrix insecteth
waters, as Isidore says libro. 7. Some serpents dwell in woods, in dens, and
in shadowye plates, and hunt small Birds and beasts, and suck the moisture
thereof, as Aristotle says, libro. 14.

And such Serpents and adders lie in awaite for them that sleep: And if they
find the mouth open of them, or of other beasts, then they creep in, for they
love heat and humor that they find there, but against such Adders, a little
Beast fights that is called Saura, as it were a little Euete. And some men
mean, that it is a Lyzard, for when this beast Saura is ware that this Serpent
is present, then he leapeth upon his face ye sleeps, and cratcheth with his
feet to wake him, and to warn him of the Serpent, as Auicen says. And this
little beast Saura, as Isidore says, libr. 12. is as it were an Eute, and when
he waxes old, his eien waxes blind, and then he goes into an hole of a
wall against the East, and opens his eyes afterward when the Sun is risen,
and then his eien heateth and takes light.

And some manner serpents dwell in the fire, as it fares of the Salamandra, yt
Isidore and Plinius account among venomous beasts. The Salamandra has that
name, as Isidore says, libro. 12. for he is strong and mighty against
burning: and among all venomous beasts, his might is the most of venime. For
other venomous beasts n^yeth one and one, and this noyeth and slays many at
once. For if he creep on a tree, he infecteth all ye apples, and slays them
that eat thereof, and if he falls into a pit, he slays all that drink of
the water. By this venim this beast is contrary to burning, and among beasts,
only this beast quenches fire, and lies in the burning fire without
consumption and wasting, and also with smarting and ach, and burns not in
fire, but abateth and swageth the burning thereof, as Isidore says there.

And Plinius accords therewith at all points, libro. 10. cap. 47. and says,
that Salamandra is like to an Ewte in shape, and is never more seen but in
much rain, for he falls in fair wether. His touch is so cold that it
quenches fire, as Ise does: and casts out of his mouth white matter, with
touching whereof man's body leeseth hair, and what is touched therewith,
changes and tourneth into most foulest color. Also they be diverse in
manner of going and passing, for some creep and glide away wiggeling and
crookedly, and some always stretch and go forth right, as Isidore says, libro.
17. And be says, that Cenchris is a Serpent, that bends not neither
wiggeleth, but holds always right forth, as Lucanus says.

A Serpent eats gladlye flesh, and sucketh gladly the moisture thereof, as the
Spinner sucketh flies, and the Serpent swalloweth eggs of birds, and their
birds on live. And when they have swallowed them, they bring them to the hinder
end, and puts them out, and suffers them not abide in the womb. Also
libro 2. Aristotle says, that the guts of the Serpents be like to the guts of
four footed beasts that lay eggs, and have no gendering stones, but they
have ways as fish, and have mothers, long and divided, and their bowelles and
guts be long by the length of their bodies. And the tongues of Serpents be
black, long, and thin, and cloven in twain, and sharp before, and move out
far therefore, and move easily. And the womb of the serpent is long and
straight, and is like to a large gut. And that gut is lykened to an hoands gut,
and has after the womb a little gut, and stretches unto the out passing of
superfluity, and has a little heart nigh unto the neck like to the kidney in
sight. And after the heart is that lung, and there after be subtle parts
sinewie and krindled, and hangs downward from the heart. After the long is
the liver, long and straight, and thereupon is the gall, as the flesh is less
and more, the gall is upon the guts in Serpents, the spleen is little and
round, and their teeth be some deal sharp and crooked, and joined together,
but they be departed as the teeth of a Saw.

And a Serpent has thirty ribs by the number of the days of the month.
And it is said, yt Serpents fare as swallows birds, for if their eyes be put
out, yet their sight comes again: and the tail of a Serpent grows again
if it be cut off, as the tail of an ewt. Also Serpents have eggs first
within, and lays them afterward, not all at once, but one and one. And of
those Eggs beasts be gendered, except the Serpents that be called Tyrus and
Vipera.

Also Arist. says, li. 3. Tyrus the Serpent gendereth beasts within, but she
has first eggs within, and of the eggs beasts be bred within: therefore it
is said, yt the mother of the other Serpents is long, after the making of the
body. And their mother begins in ye nether part, and passes up in either
side of the ridge boane, and is divided in two parts, and has as it were a
wall or interclose between the two parts, and therefore the two Eggs be set
arowe in the mother. And a Serpent lays not all her eggs at once, but some
and some. Also lib. 5. Aristotle says, yt in tune of gendering Serpents
wrappeth and clippeth themselves together, that they seem one body with two
heads, as it is known to them that have seen the doing. Also libr. 7
Aristotle says, that a Serpent, and namelye Tyrus, when he swalloweth a Bird
or ought else, first he areareth himself, and afterward restrayneth himself
until the thing that he swalloweth pass inward, and that is for his stomach
is little and small. And Serpents may live long without meat, as it is known
by Serpents that are kept to sell.

Also Aristotle lib. 8. tells, that the weesell sighteth against Serpents,
and armeth himself with eating of Rewe, and fights namely against Serpents
yt eat Mice. A snake.
For the Weesell hunteth and eats Mice. Also li. 7. he says, No difference
is here betvveene Snakes etc Adders.
ye Serpents lone well Wine, and be therefore hunted with wine. And also a
serpent loves passing well milk, and follows the savor thereof, and
therefore if a serpent be crept into a man's womb, he may be drawn out with
the odor and smell of milk, as he says, and Dioscorides also, Libro. 14.
Aristotle says, that Serpents have that propertye, that they may move the head
backwarde, resting the body. And the cause thereof is, for the joints of the
ridge boane be of gristles, therefore they be full plyaunt. And it is needful
to Serpents, that they may bend their heads backward to see their long bodies
and small, or else they might not rule their bodies, but they were help by
rearing of the head to rule wisely all the body. Also serpents swim in water
by wiggeling and folding of the body, as they creep on the ground. For kind
gives not to Serpents for to go upon feet, nor on sins to swim with,
and the cause thereof is the great length of the (...) body, for if they had
many feet they should move full evil: and so they should with few feet. Also if
they had many finnes set nigh together, they should move heuily, and if they were
set far a sunder, they were not sufficient to sustain and to bear up ye other
deal of the body, yt is long and pliant: and therefore what fishes do that
have fins with drawing and clitching of fins, and fowls and birds with
clitching and spreading of wings, that do serpents with bending and weigling
and pliantnes of body. And some fishes be like to serpents in length, which for
the same cause have few or no fins, and swimmeth euenly with pliantnesse of ye
body, as Lampraies, Congers, and Eles, and other such. For such mannee of
fishes be like to Serpents in making, and have only two fins before, and use
only pliantnesse of the body in steed of fins and of wings. And creep
therefore upon the ground, and lives long time without water, as Serpents do
without meat. Also idem in eodem. Serpents have ways and guts, by the which
sometime superfluity passes out of the body, as other beasts have ye gender,
but they have no way of urine, for they be without bladder. Item in eodem,
Serpents be found wrapped together, when they come together and to love. For
they have not a yard nor gendering stones, for they be without a yard, for if
they had gendring stones, the Semen should cool for tarrieng of out passing:
and so the seed were not according to generation. Item idem 18. In generation
of Serpents falls not error nor wonderful shape of ye kind, but seld, and
that is for the shape of the mother, that is long, strict, and strait. And so
Eggs of Serpents be disposed and set arow, because of length of the mother.

These properties of Adders and Serpents, and many other properties and kinds,
Ariristotle rehearses, which were too long to rehearse and make process of
them all arow. But in general these be sufficient as for this time. Of the
common properties of them that be known nigh to all men, it shall be treated
and spoken off here following in this present chapter in littera A.

Of Aspide. cap. 10.
ASpis is an Adder worst and most wicked in venime and in biting, and has that
name Aspis, of Aspergendo, springing: for he casts out slaieng venime, and
spitteth and springs out venime by bitings. For the Greeks call venim Yos,
as Isidore says, libro. 12. capit. 4. And it follows there: Of adders that
be called Aspis be diverse manner kind, and have diverse effects and doings,
to noy and to grieve, that is to wit, Dipsas that is called Scytula in Latin.
For when he biteth, he slays with thirst. Ipalis is a manner adder, that
slays with sleep. These manner adders Cleopatra laid by her, and passed out
of the life by death, as it were a sleep. Also Nemorrhois is a manner adder,
and has that name, for he sucketh the blood of him that he smites, and his
veins that is smitten of the adder opens and breaks, and he bleedeth to
death. For blood is ralled Emath in Greek. Also Prester is an horrible adder,
always with open mouth, and casting and shedding venim, as he goes. Lucanus
speaks of him and says.

Oraque distendens auidus spumantia Prester.
This adder is a glutton, and sheddeth smoking venim with open mouth. He yt is
smitten of him, is rented and slain with horrible infection of the body, as he
says there. Also Ceps is an adder that slays and makes a man mad, and
when he has bitten a man, anon he destroys and wastes him: so that by the
Serpents mouth, the man melts altogether: and this Serpent destroieth and
renteth not only the body, but also he destroys with venim and wastes both
bones and sinews of him, the Poet shows in this manner.

Ossaque dissoluens cum corpore tabificus Seps.
Ceps slaieth, undoes, and destroys both body and bones: and there be many
other adders, and the venim of them is so strong, yt they slay with their venim
him yt touches them with a spear, as Auicen says de venenis. Also Isidor.
li. 12. speaks of this manner adder, Psa. 53. 740.
yt is called Aspis in general, and says, that it is said, that ye adder
Aspis, when she is charmed by ye inchaunter, to come out of her den by
charms and comurations, for she has no will to come out, lays her one ear
to ye ground, and stops ye other with her tail, and so she hears not the
voice of the charming, nor comes out to him ye charmeth, nor is obedient to
his saying. Huc vsque Isidorus. Plinius libro. 8. capitulo 24. speaks of the
adder Aspis, and says, that the members that be smit of this Adder do swell,
and uneath is any remedy found to heal such biting, without cutting of the
parts that be touched. This flyeng Adder and venomous has wit to love and
affection and loves his make as it were by love of wedlock, and lives not
well without company. Therefore if the one is slain, the other pursues him
that flewe that other with so busy wreake and vengeance, that passes
thinking: and knows the slaier, and reefeth on him, be he in never so great
company of men and of people; and busieth to slay him, and passes all
difficulties and spaces of ways, and with wreake of the said death of his
make. And is not let nor put of, but it be by swift flight, or by waters or
rivers: but against his malice kind gives remedy and medicine: For kind
gives him right dim sight, for his eyes are set in the sides of his head,
and be not set in the forehead: and therefore be may not see his aduersarye
forth right, but aside. Therefore he may not follow his enemy by sight, but
he follows more by hearing and smell: for in this two wits he is strong and
mighty, as he says.

Also Marcianus says, that this Adder Aspis grieueth not men of Africa and
Moors: for they take their children yt they have suspect, and put them to
these Adders: And if the children be of their kind, this adder Aspis grieueth
the^ not: and if they be of other kind, anon he dies by venim of the Adder.
And this Plinius says expressly, lib. 6. cap. vltimo, and says, that sometime
this beast grieueth no men of the land, and slaieth strangers and men of other
lands. And these Serpents spare wonderfully men yt be borne in the same land.
So the Serpent Anguis about the river Euphrates, greeueth not, nor hurts men
of the land, nor noyeth them that sleep, if they be of that land, and pain
and slay busily other men, that be of other nations, what nation so every it
be. Also there Plinius says, that Aristotle says, that in a certain
mountain Scorpions grieve no strangers: but they sting and slay men of the
country.

( Addition.
Aspis, is a little Serpent in Affrike, whose sting is not curable, but only
with the water of a stone washed, which they take out of the sepulcher of an
ancient king, etc. D. Cooper.)

Of Aranea. chap. 11.
THe venomous spinner is called Aranea, and is a worm that has that name of
feeding and nourishing of the air, as Isidore says, li. 12. and spinneth long
thrids in short time, and is always busy about weauing, and cease never of
travail. For he has often harm in his work for often his web and his work is
broken with blasts of wind, or else with dropping of tame: and then he loses
all his travail.

And Auicen says, that the Spinner is a little creeping beast with many feet,
and has six feet or eight, and has always feet even, and not odd. And
that is very needful, that his going and possing be always even, as the charge
is and burden. And this is general in all that have two feet or more, and
have some feet longer, and some shorter, for diverse works that they make.
For with some feet they make the thridde small, and draw it a long, and with
some they knit thrids together, and right and amend the thrids with some, and
hooue on the web when they will. And among beasts of round bodies, the Spinner
has best feeling of touch. For hoouing in the middle of the web, he feels
suddenly a Fly that is in the farthest part thereof. And reeseth sodeinly on
the fly, as it were on an enimye: and if he have the mastrye of the Fly, he
win, beth and wrappeth him flily, among the threads of the web, for he should
not escape, and falls first on the head, and sucketh the moisture thereof,
and lives by such hunting of Flies: for such humor of Flies is most lyking to
his taste, as honnie is most lyking to the taste of Baes, as he says, and
Aristotle also.

Also in kind of spinners is diversity of male and female, as Aristotle
says, lib. 5. And the female is more of body than the male, and has longer
feet, and more plyant, and more able so moving and weauing. In time of
gendring and of love, the female draws to her the male by threads of the web,
and thereafter the male draws the female, and such drawing cease not until
they be joined togethers, and then the male is set upon the womb of the
female: and this manner is needful to them for roundnesse of the womb: and
this joining togethers is most in the end of springing time and in the
beginning of summer, and sometime in harvest, and in the beginning of winter,
and spinners are then most grievous, and their biting most venomous.

Also libro. 8. Aristotle says, That of Spinners be many kinds, for some be
small and of diverse colors, and be sharp and swifte of moaing: and some are
more, and black in color, and their hinder legs be most long, and are slow
of moving, but only when they go to work of generation. And often black
spinners inhabit by the ground among holes and dens, and they abide in the
web until some little beast fall therein, as a fly, that he takes, and
sucketh the moisture thereof if he be an hungered, and puts then the fly in
a certain place and keeps it until he be an hungered again: and when he
has sucked all the moisture, he throws away the other deal, and surneth
again to hunting, and hunteth not ere he have amended the breath of the web:
and if one break the web, he begins for to to amend it about the going
down of the Sun, or in the rising of the Sun, and then he trauaileth most,
for then many little worms fall into the web.

And the female brings forth her brood, and the male hunteth and helps her,
and she hides her self under the web, that she be not seen of small worms,
and namely when she is great, for because of her greatness she works not
easily: and the female lays first eggs, and thereof afterward are shapen small
spinners, and the mother sets them to weane anon as they be hatched, and
they move anon, and dispese themselves thereto weaue as they have learned for to
weaue, and hunt in their mothers womb, and so the young spinner arayeth anon
nets, that are according to his pray. And a manner kind of spinners hunteth a
little Ewte, and when they^ find him, they begin to weane upon him, and all
about for to bind strongly his mouth, and leap then upon him, and sting him
till he dies.

Item in eodem he says, that some Spinners are found i. Be hiues, and those
spinners corrupt the honey, and suck the lycour, and they make webbes about
the honnie combs, and corrupt them. And Auicen says and Plinius also, De
generatione Araneae. libro. 11. capit. 25. Arane.
That the kind of Spinners is worthy of chief wondering, and of them there
are many manner of kinds, among whom a certain manner of kind is called
Spalangio. Phalangium.
The body thereof is little, speckeled, and of diverse colors, with a sting,
and is swifte in leaping, and most grievous in biting.

Another Spinner there is, that is more of body, Atocius.
black of color, with long legs, that weaueth in dens by the ground.

The third kind there is, which by cunning working weaueth full subtle
webbes. A great wonder it is how the matter of thriddes that come of the
womb of the Spinner, may endure so great a work, and weauing of so great a
web. And that is drawn, as men think, some and some out of the Spinners
womb, and yet uneath it is found void. And it seems not to be true, that
Democritus said, that so much corruption is in the Womb of the Spinner, that
of his dirte so much matter of thread might be had. Therefore Arist. reproves
Democritus lib. 8. and says, that he said not true in this point, and his
reason is as it seems, for spinners and other such round beasts be little of
meats for default of blood and of beat, and so he says, that a spinner
takes not so much meat: but more without comparison comes of him to weaue
the web, and then should the superfluity and dirte, be more than the meat and
food that he takes, and the superfluity of dirte, is more than needful
digestion, to due keeping and saving of the beast, as Aristotle says.

Also Plinius says the same, and says, that they spin threads round and long,
with moderate feet and claws, and they stretch the warpe with wonderful
craft from the nether side to the over, and draw and bring out again the
thread thwart over from point to point, and all the straight draughtes with
small space between ye threads, they couple and knit the threads in the middle
like far from the middle point, when the work is drawn and laid, and then
he begins from the middle point, and goes round about with the Ofe, and
makes knottes and holes, as it were like far asunder, and the holes and
spaces that be between, be by a wonderful craft between ye knots made now
four cornerd, now euenlong, and now round: and the nearer they be to the
middle, the more narrow they be and straight, and the farther from the middle
they be, the more large and wide they be. The sight sees not, and uneath the
judgment of reason perceives, whereby the spinner reyneth thread to thread, and
knitteth so fast knot to knot, and reareth himself with a wonderful lyghtnes
by his own threads that be so small, and uneath seen with man's eyes, and yet
he passes in the web swiftlye, as though he flew hither and thither, and from
place to place.

Also he says, that as long as the utter threads of the web dure, if it hap
that the web be broken in any manner wise, the spinner begins at the middle
to amend that which is broken, as though he would hold nothing whole and sound
in the web, while the middle is not sure.

Also he says, in spinners be tokens of divination, and of knowing what wether
shall fall, for often by weathers that shall fall, some spin and weue higher or
lower. Also he says, ye multitude of spinners is token of much rain. Also li.
14. cap. 3. de lesione ficuum, he says that sometime spinners weaue and make
webs about burgening and buds of vines, and also about flowers and blossoms
of Trees, and by such compassing of such Cobwebs, both trees and vines he lost,
when they burgen and bloome. The biting of the spinner that is called
Spalangio, is venomous and slaieth, except there be remedy and succor the
sooner: but the virtue of Plantaine slays the venyme thereof, if it be laid
thereto in due manner, and therefore other worms, as Eutes and Frogs, that
dread the stinging of Spinners, defend themselves with juice of Plantaine, as
Plinius says. Dioscorides and Auicen in capitulo De venenis, etc. And Macer
says the same.

Aristotle and Plinius mean, that webs of spinners come of their guts, by a
manner cratte of kind: and the web is wouen by most subtle working, and is
wonderfully knit in a net wise, and made with most smallest threads, and that
for it should not be seen of flies and of other worms, for the which it is
laid, and it should be seen of them, if the threads were great: and cob-webs
are made with travail and business: but it is wonderfully soon destroyed and
undone, for it may not sustain fire: and spinners dread wind, for by a blaste
of wind the cob-web is soon broken and unknit.

And though the spinner be venomous, Spiders do care of their own kind, for
I have seen one Spider fight, and kill another.
yet the web that comes out of ye guts thereof, is not venomous, but is
accounted full good and profitable to the use of medicine. And as Dioscorides
says, the cob-web that is white and clean, and is not defiled with filth nor
with powder, has virtue to constrain, join, and to restrain, and therefore
it stauncheth blood that runs out of a wound, and keeps it from matter and
rotting: and heals a new wound, if it he laid thereto, and withstandeth
swelling ye tarieth the heting of a wound: and a manner spinner is called
Spalana, as Pli. says li. 29. cap. 4. and of this spinner is like to an Ant,
but he is much more of body, and has a red head, and the other deal of the
body is black sprung with white specks: and his smiting is more bitter and more
sore, than the biting of the serpent Vipera, and this spinner lives most nigh
furnaces, ouens and milles: and the remedy against his biting or smiting, is
to show to him that is bitten or smitten another spinner of the same kind,
and are therefore kept, when they are found dead. The skin thereof stamped
and drunk, is medicine against biting of the Wesell.

Also another spinner is rough with a great head, and the soreness and ache of
his stinging, is as it were the ache and soreness of a Scorpion: and by his
biting the knees shake and fails, and also of the biting, comes blyndnes
and spewing. And another manner spinner is called Mirmicaleon, or Mirmiceon,
which is called by another name, Formicaleon, and is like to an Ante, with a
white head, and has a black body, with white speckes. His biting paineth and
aketh as stinging of Waspes, and is called Formicaleon, for he hunteth Ants,
and sucketh the moisture of them, but sparrowes and other fowls devour him,
as they do ants. Against all biting of spinners, the remedy is the brain of a
Capon drunk in sweet wine with a little pepper: Note.
and the congealing of a Lamb with Wine, heals biting of spinners: and the
same does ashes of a Rams cloe with honey: also flies stamped, and laid to the
biting, draws out the venimme, and abateth the ache and sore: and there be
other remedies which he reckons, but these are sufficient for this time.

And libro eodem. capitulo. 6. he says: That a long Spinner and white, with
small feet, being stamped in old ^ple, does away the white pearl of the
eye, as it is there said.

( Addition.
Besides this large discourse of spiders, it has been reported, that in Ireland
be many spiders, and some very great, and that being eaten of the Irishmen,
have not performed any show of venime: it may be that the greater poison
subduath the loss.)

Of Ape. chap. 12.
THe Be is called Apis, and is a little short Incecti with many feet, and
among all flies with round bodies, and so shapen, he bears the price in many
things, as Plinius says libro. 11. cap. 6. Hugeness of wit rewards him in
littleness of body, and though he might be accounted among flyeng Flies, yet
for he uses feet, and goes upon them, he may rightfully be accounted among
beasts that go on ground: and over the properties that are sit before libro.
12. in litera A. other properties shall be set here; the which properties
Plinius rehearses li. 10. cap. 6. and says in this manner: Among all wonders,
the wit and sleight of Bees is wonderful, by the which wit they gather honnie,
and make honnie combs of most sweetest juice and subtle, and most wholesome:
and work and make Wax, that is full good and profitable to the use of life of
mankind, and lurk and be hidden in Winter: for they have no might and
strength to withstand the frost and snow, and blasts of Northen wind: and in
springing time they go out to blooming beans to work and to travail, and
none of them have leave to be idle in yt time: and first they ordeine honey
combs, and make wax houses and cells, and then breed young and make honey
thereafter, and bring it together. And they perget the roof of their hiues with
woose and gum all about, and with juice of trees that have virtue of Gum, and
strength their hiues as well as they may against the greedines and reeses of
other small Birds, and if there be any durte, they break it off and casts
it ef^ and far away, and they wash the Hiues with the foresaid woose and
juice.

And first for foundation of their work, they lay and set a certain piece of
bitter savor: and many men call that Comosim: and make then another piece
more sweet, and that is the beginning of ware, and many men call that Dulices:
and the third time they set more greater matter and thick, that is the
stablishment and fastening of the honey combs, and many men call that matter
Propolim: and in these three manner wises, they strengthen, and succor, and
defend their honey combs, against cold and other wrongs.

And Bees sit not on fruit, but on flowers, not withered, but fresh and new,
and gather matter, of the which they make both honey and wexe: and when the
flowers that are nigh unto them are wasted and spent, then they send spies,
for to epsy meat in farther places, and if the night falls upon them in
their journey, then they lie upright to defend their wings from rain and from
deaw, that they may in the morrow tide fly the more swifter to their work
with their dry wings and able to fly. And they ordain watches after the
manner of Castles, and rest all night until it be day, till one Be wake the^
all with twice buzzing or thrice, or with some manner trumping: then they fly
all, if the day be fair on the morrow: and they divine and are ware before
of rain and of wind, and then they hold them in their house, and when they
know and be ware before hand of fair weather, then they pass forth to their
work with a swarm and company: and then, some gather flowers with their
feet, and some water with their mouths, and bear drops together with all
roughnes of their bodies. The younger goes out to work, and begins such
things, and the elder works at home, with flowers that they bring.

First, they charge the fore feet, and afterward the hinder feet, until they
turn home again, with the mouth full and fully charged.

And they receive them that be charged in this manner: three or four
discharges them, as they be ordained at home, for their offices are diverse:
For some make houses, and some cleanse and make fair the Hiue, and some dress
meat of that that is brought home, and they eat not asunder, least
uncleanness of meat or of work should be among them: and they make the
combs ordinately and by line, and hang them above, with certain things, that
them holds, and vndersetteth them that they shall not fall, and puts a
little honnye in the first row, and often fills the last most full.

And the Bees that brings and bears what is needful, dread blastes of
wind, and flies therefore low by the ground when they are charged, least
they be let with some manner of blasts, and charge themselves sometime with
gravel or with small stones, that they may be the more steadfast against
blastes of wind, by heaviness of the stones. Among them is wonderful
obseruaunce of discipline and of lore, for one marketh and takes heed of them
that work not, and chastises them anon, and slaieth them that will not
work. Among them is wonderful great cleanness, for they suffer no filthe
among their works.

And some Bees gather into one place the dirte of the Bees that work, because
they should not go far from their works, and throw out their dirt at even,
and goes into their houses and bide still until the same Be that has
watched, fly about and call them to rest, and then they hold all their peace
and be still sodeinlye. Item in eodem cap. 13. Bees do most equity and right,
and smite all that distroubleth their peace, and all that desire to destroy
their honnie. And Bees have a King, that is not armed with a sting, but with
Lordshippe and magestie, as he says, cap. 18. Or if he have a string, kind
denies him the use thereof. For kind will not yt he should be cruel, to the
intent he should not be hasty to take wreake, and therefore takes away from
him his Spear, and leaves him unarmed. And so it is truth, that ye Emperor
uses not his sting. The obedience of Bees is wonderful about the King: for
when he passes forth, all the swarm in one cluster passes with him, and he
is compassed about with ye swarm, as it were with an host of knights, and is
then uneath seen that time, for multitude that follows and serves him: and
when the swarm of Bees be in travel, he is within, and as it were governor,
and goes about to comfort other for to work, and only he is not bound to
travail, and all about him are certain Bees with stings, as it were champions,
and continual wardens of the kings body: and he passes seldom out, but when
all the swarm shall go out. His out going is known certain days before by
voice of the host, as it were araieng it self to pass out with ye King; and
so if it should chance that ye king of the Bees: wing were cat at that time,
then the swarm should not pass out of the hiue; and when he passes out of
the hiue, all the Bees profereth them to the Kings service, and labor to be
next him, and bears the King on their sholders, if he be weary and overcome
with travail, and if any Be be weary and fails, or erreth, and goes out
of the host, then they follow by smell after the King, and where ever the King
commands, there the boast pitcheth their tents. And all the host is
comforted, and hearted when they see the King: and if they loose the king, then
all the swarm breaks, and comes unto, another King: For they may not be
without a King.

To the Be hiues comes certain false Bees that are called Fuci in ye
plural number, Drones.
and have a great womb, and eat and devour honey, and true Bees slays these
false Bees when they take them therewith. When springing time is wet and moist,
then the brood of Bees is multiplied, and if meat fails in the Be hiues,
then they reese and assail their neighbors, to take from them their honey, and
to spoil them: and the other lead an host against them if they have a king,
and if any Be in the other side, favors them ye rise and assaileth them,
then the Bees that assail them, spares them that favor them, and smite not
at them, but take them in company, and defends them. For many other causes
hoasts that be contrary, ordain them two Emperors with great strife: and the
fighting and battle is all destroyed and disperpled, with throwing of powder
and of dirt.

Item in eod. ca. 19. Some Bees, are fled Bees, and some be wood Bees and
foul to sight, and more wrathful than other, but they trauayld better, and
may better away therewith: and some be tame Bees, and some of them be short,
diverse and round. And some be long as waspes, and those are worse than other,
but they travail better, and may better away therewith and be rough: and some
of these Bees are white, and gender honey, and make their neostes among corn:
and in the wood, Bees gender honye among trees, and sometime in dens in the
earth. And so these kind gives a sting, yt sticks there he smites at one
stroke: and some for great wrath and desire of wreake stingeth so deep, that
the gutte follows suddenly the spear and such dye soon: and some loose the
spear, and live afterward, and may not make honey, for their virtue is taken
away from them, and live to do profit, or to noye. Bees hate stinking and
other evil smells, and namely smoke, and fly there from, and be glad and merry
in things with good smell: and be comforted with smell of crabs, if they be sod
nigh them. And when their King is dead, then they be woe for sorrow, and do
for him, as it were service for the dead, and all the swarm of them makes
great sorrow and dole: if the King be dead in pestilence, then they bear meat
togethers, and pass not out, but with sorrowful moan they be gathered on a
heap about his body, and abate not their sorrow and woe, but they dye for
hunger and woe, except the body be taken away. Health of Bees is known in their
mirth and cleernesse.

Also he says, that Bees fall into many sicknesses: for as it is said cap.
20. they were sick when their brood fails, and also sound that reboundeth of
noise is enemy to them, for it makes them full sore afraid with sudden noise.

Also corrupt mist, that corrupts flowers that they eat is enemy to them.

Also spinners be enemies to them, when they come in the hiue, and make webs,
that grieve them. Also a fly that is like to a Butter fly, that Flies into
candles, The long taper gnat
is enemy to them: for that butter fly eats wexe, and leaves there dirt,
of the which dirt comes Caterpillars, worms that love well war passing other
things. Also the great desire of meat grieueth them, when they eat too much
of flowers; and that happens namely in springing time, and they dye all with
oil, as such round beasts do, and namely if the head be noynted: and such
beasts set in the Sun, quickneth again if they be besprong with vinegar.
Also sometime they take sickness, and cause of sickness, when they ever
greedelye eating, feel that their honnie is withdrawn and taken away. Huc
vsque Plinius.

Auicen lib. 8. cap. 3. rehearses noble properties and worthy of Bees, and
says that Bees are fed with honey, and little they eat thereof, but they eat
honey when they be sick, and go not out of their house. And when they find
clean hiues, they make therein houses and chambers of wax, with sire manner
castes: and when ye mouth of ye hiue is too large, they make it less with some
manner glewie matter, that is black with sharp odor and smell: and first they
build the kings house, and that house is like an hoale vauted, and afterward
they buyld other houses, by diversity of the more masters or less.

And only the males build their houses, and afterward is no working, but to
eat and make honey: and first Bees dwell in their honey combs, and pass out
when it is time, and fly upward top wise, and come again and eat honnie.
And the King passes never out without an host: and the males have no stings,
except a few, and then they desire to sting, but they may not: and Bees have
two manner Kings, the one is red, and that other as black as a coal, and is
twice so much as a Be that makes honnie: and the male Bees, are more than the
females: and the less Bees and round, with diverse colors be best: and Bees
that are fed in mountains, gardens and meades, are small and good, and make
honnie, like in parts light.

Bees that be not good, makes not honnie even, nor like in parts, but the Be
that cleaves always to the hole of the honey, makes best honey, and else yt
honnie should be soon corrupt, and spinners should gender therein, and
destroy the honey. And Bees that make the honey, use a sting for double cause:
for the defense, for there is fiery virtue in the sting, and therefore it
works greatly to wast superfluity of moisture, and to amend and keep, and
to save the honey.

Also often into hiues come certain evil flies, and breed there other small
flies, that are grievous, and he called Gusanes, that pearceth the wings of
other: but the very Bees pursue those flies, and fight with them, and will not
suffer them to fall upon their house, and Bees that make honey slays the males
that grieve them, and evil kings, that rule them not a right, but only eat
too much honey, and that they do, namelye when honye is scarf: and small Bees
fight with long Bees, when they work not nor travel, and are busy to put them
out of the hiues: and by such out putting the honey is the better, and the more
in quantity.

There is a manner kind of Bees, that are called Labion, and these slaye Bees
that make honey, and destroy their houses: and that is, for they are wakefull.
And when they come into their hiues, they pitche themselves into the honey
because of eating, and stick so fast therein, that they may not escape, and
then the very Bees slays them anon. And two days before that the King
passes out, the other Bees are skilfullye warned, and have knowledge what the
king shall do, that they may be obedient and ready to the king. And when ye
kings be made, each has one company, and that company will have none other,
but him that they first choose: and if any other king will be king of that
company, they slay him.

And if young Bees that come forth be fow, they abide the company of another
swarm, and passes so forth the more surely: and after that the young Bees
begin to fly, if they be even and like, then they have their work, and help
the old to work. And no creature is more wreakful, nor more fervent to take
wreak than is the Be when he is wrath therefore a multitude of the host of
Bees, throw down great hedges, when they are compelled to withstand them that
destroy their honny, passing all other things.

Bees hate dirte and smoke, and labor to deliver them of their own dirt when
they fly, for their dirte stinketh full foul, and cleanse therefore their
houses of their own dirt: and young virgin Bees work better, and make better
honey than old, and smite not so much, nor their smiting grieueth not so sore,
as does the smiting of the old. And Bees drink, and that is only clear
water, whether it be far or nigh, and drinks not, but they purge them first
of their own dirte.

And Bees makes most honnie in Harvest, and in springing time is best, because
of new flowers of great pureness. And Bees be pleased with harmony and melody
of sound of song, and with flapping of hands, and beating of basins: and
therefore with beating of basins, tinging and tinckling of timbrells, they be
comforted and called to the hiues. When much honey is left in their hiues, they
wexe slow and work the less, therefore it needs to leave in the hiue,
honnye meanly, not too much, nor too little. Huc vsque Auicen. li. 7. And he
writes many other properties, in the which he accords with Aristotle libro.
8. and also with Plin. libro. 11: Look before lib. 12. in litera A, there ye
may find many properties that Aristotle, Seneca, and other Authors write:
but this suffices for this time.

Of Boue. cap. 13.
THe Ox is called Bos, and is called Boetes in Greek, and sometime Tero in
Latin, for he treads the earth, and the dew lap or fresh lap that hangs
down under his throat, and stretches to the legs, is called Palliaria, and
has that name of Pelle the skin, as it were Pelliaria, a hanging skin or a
dagge, and is a token of gentleness and nobilytie in an Ox, as Isidore says
li. 14. And he says, that Oxen be full mild among their fellows, for one of
them seeks another, with whom he is used to draw at neck at the plough. And
often lowing proves affection and love, when he may not soon find his fellow.
Lib. 8. cap. 45. Plinius speaks of Oxen, and says. That he finds written
of Oxen of Inde, that are as high as Camelles, with horns of four foot long.
And there it follows: among beasts that go backward only Oxen be fed with
foder and with other food, and it is said, that they were fat by washing with
hot water. And Oxen may better travail when they be yoaked by the horns, then
when they be yoked by the neck. In Syria are Oxen that have not dew laps nor
tresh laps under the throat, but bunches on the backs: and Oxen with straight
horns, be accounted excellent in work: and black Oxen with little horns be
accounted less profitable to working.

Oxens horns are more thicker than Bulls horns: and after the gelding, the
Ox increseth in body and in horns, in might, virtue, and strength: but he is
not so bold and hardy as before hand, but he is more tame, soft, and mild,
and may better away with travail and is more slow and heavy of going.

Also Plin. speaks of the kind of Oxen and says: that after three years, an
Ox is less fierce than within 3. years: and a young Cow and an Ox may be
well coupled together. And we have the Ox fellow in travel of tillyng of land:
and this beast was so worthy accounted in old time, that men would not heart
the Ox, and who that slew an Ox without cause, should be as sore punished,
as though he had slain his fellow in earth tillyng, as he says.

The Ox is a mild beast and clean, not only to the use of man, but also to
offer in Altars of Gods: for of Oxen be best offerings and sacrifices made, and
with offering of them and Sacrifice, the Gods be best pleased. The Ox opens
the land, and carueth with culture and with share, and tilleth fields, and
makes them able and good to bear good corn and fruit. The Ox feeds with
his flesh, and nourishes: the skin and hide accords to many manner use, and
his dirte fatteth the land: his horns heated or sotten, were soft, and be
stretched out and made right and even, and of them be made diverse vessels,
tools, and instruments. Of Ox horns be made tapping and nockes to bows, to
arbalasters, and arrows to shoot against Enemies, and breast plates, and
other armor, by the which, vnstrong places of man's body, be warded and
defended against shot and smiting of enemies. And of Ox horns be lanternes
made: to put off darkness, and combs to right and to cleause heads of filth.
Also Hunters use Ox horns to fear wild keasts, and to comfort hounes to
pursue beasts that takes the flight. Also writers and painters use the horns,
and keep in them diverse colors at best. Also warriors life horns and blow
therewith, and comforts their fellows, both such as fight, and then: that
fly, and call them to the boast with blowing of horns. Also keepers and
wardens of beasts and of Castles and waits, uses horns, and comfort each
other to wake with blowing of horns. And the Ox horns be needful to all
manner of use. Also that that is in the Ox is needful to diverse use, and also
his dirt is good and profitable, as Plinius says, libro. 28. cap. 11. And
says, that Ox dirt helps against ach of the joints, and is a singular
remedy against the dropsy, if the patient be therewith anointed in the Sun.
For it consumes and wastes humors between the skin and the flesh: and
swageth and abateth holning and swelling of the dropsy.

Also li. 30. ca. 3. Plinius says, yt there is a little beast like to
Ecarabeus, and is called Bupestris, and this Bupestris beguileth and betrayeth
the Ox in the grass, and that is (as it is said) for the Ox treads on
him. Bupestris, a fly like a black betle, but having longer legs, it lies in
the grass, and kills a beast if he eat him.
For this Bupestris lies among herbs and grass that the Ox loves, and
hides him therein: and the Ox gathers his meat, and swalloweth this beast
Bupestris, and when this beast Bupestris is swallowed, he chafeth sodeinely
the lieur of the Ox, and makes him break with great pain and sorrow. Heerof
Papias speaks and says, that the neck of the Ox is wrong and grieved with
charge of the yoke, and the Ox is grieved with the ache of the prick, with
the which he is so pricked. And the Ox dies with woe and sorrow that
comes of the venimme of that beast Bupestris, when he comes into the Ox
womb amongst his meat.

Of Bubulco. cap. 14.
AN Oex heard is called Bubulcus, and is ordained by office to keep Oxen: He
feeds and nourishes Oxen, and brings the^ to leese and home again, and
binds their feet with a langhalds and spanells, and neigheth and cloggeth
them while they be in pasture and leese, and yoaketh and makes them draw at
the plough, and pricketh the flow with a gad, and makes them draw even. And
pleases them with whistling and with song, to make them bear the yoke with
the better will for lyking of melodye of the voice. Oxen and hearts love melody
by kind, as Auicen says. And this herb drives and rules them to draw even,
and leatheth them to make even sorrows, and compels them not only to ear,
but also to tread and to thresh. And they lead them about upon corn to break
the straw, in threshing and treading the flower. And when the travail is done,
then they unyoke them and bring them to the statl; and tie them of the stall,
and feeds them thereat.

Of Bubalo. cap. 15.
THe Bugle is called Bubalus, and that nound But^^^us is diminitiue of Bos,
Bouis. And the Bugle is called Bubalus for he is like to an Ox, and is a
fierce beast, and is not gladly tamed, nor takes gladly the yoke on his
neck. In Africa be Bugles: and in Germania be wild Oxen with so long horns,
that ye Kings board is served with drink thereof: for he holds so much, as
Isi. says. And is a beast of great strength, and may not be tained but with an
iron ring put through his nosethrill, by the which ring he is led about: and is
black or red, and is thin haired, with horns: and his forhead is beclypped
with full strong horns, and his flesh is good, not only to meat, but also to
medicine.

For as Plin. says lib. 28. cap. 10. Bugle flesh sod or roasted, heals man's
biting: his marrow taken out of the right legdoth away hair of the eye lyds,
and is medicine for evils of eyes: his blood taken with vinegar, heals
wonderfully them that cast blood: his hoof with Mirra fastneth wagging teeth:
and Bugle milk helps against fretting and gnawing of the guts, for it
softeneth them, and eases with his fatness, and helps against the bloudye
flure: and is full good against smiting of serpents and of Scorpions, and
against venimme of the Creket, and of the Worm that is called Cicada, A worm
like a grashoper
and heleth new wounds: and Bugle dirt heated, heals hard postumes, and
softneneth the malice there of: his gall helps against dimnesse of eyes.
Also some wild Oxen be wonfull great, and nevertheless most quiver and
swifte, insomuch that the dirte that they shite in turning about falls on
their horns, or ever it may come to the ground.

( Addition.
There are no wild Oxen, but either Bulls, Buffells, or females of that kind:
this is a tame error, the Author meant the furious Buffell of the greater
kind, called Vro or Tarando, who vyolently runs upon any man, to spoil or
destroy him. In the wood Hercynia these Beasts are bredde, not much less
than the Elephant, proportioned like a Bull, the flesh good to eat, with
diverse other propertyes. Read Gesner lib. 1. folio. 157.)

( Addition.
Hyreynia, is a great Wood in Germany, the which is in breadth nine days
journey, and in length forty days journey, as Caesar writes. Pomponeus Mela
affirms it to be forty days journey in length also.)

These Bulls hate all thing that is read: and therefore hunters cloth them in
read, to make these Bulls pursue them, and when the hunter sees yt this
beast is nigh him, then he starteth behind a strong tree, and the Bull in his
wrath reeseth with the horns strongly, and pitcheth his horns into the tree,
and is so held in the tree by his horns, and destroyed and thrown down by
hunters darts.

Also another beast is like a wild Bull, and is not so great, but he has
full great horns and sharp, with whom he throws down bushes and trees, and
throws strong Dakes down to the ground, and at the last, to gather meat, he
puts his head among shrubs, and long rods, small and tough, that compass
and wind about the horns of the beast, and so the beast is tied and held: and
then he strives and praunceth long therewith, and strives against the winding
and fastening of the rods, and is faster and faster bound and holden, and
when he has long striuen, yet he may not deliver himself out of the bonds,
but is always faster and faster bound, then for indignation he loweth full loud,
and the hunter hears his great voice, and knows that the beast is snarled,
and fast held: and then he comes upon the beast boldly, that is most sharp
and mighty, and slaieth him with his tool, and weapon, and durst not adventure
upon him in great woods nor in fields, but now he dare stay him when he is
held among small rods.

Phisiologus calls this beast Aptaleon: If his words may be believed, The
later Writers report no such name.
it seems a wonder, why so strong and so fierce a beast draws not his
horns out of shrubbes and rods that are small: with the which horns, he so
mightelye breaks great trees and strong, and throws them down flat to
the ground.

Also there is a manner wild Ox, that Aristotle libro. 8. cirea finem calls
Bonboricus, and says, it is a great Beast, asia, great Bull, and is like a
Bull, and has hair shad on either side on the neck, as it fares on the
hair of an horse: and his hair is ^ro^re softer than horse hair, and more
shorter, and is haired continually unto the eyes, and is some deal read or
citrine, and his voice is like to the voice of a Bull, and his horns are some
deal read or citrine, and be some deal crooked: and in to either of his
horns, may half the measure that is called Bos, and has no teeth above, but
is toothlesse above, as a Bull: and his legs be not full hairy, but they be
like to a spear, and is cloven footed, with two clees in one foot: and his
tail is short in comparison to his body: and he diggeth the earth, and
teareth him in digging, as a Bull does, and has an hard skin, and suffers
well strokes, and his flesh is full sweet, and is therefore hunted and beaten,
and flies, and rests when he is hunted, and throws dirte four paces from
him, and does so for dread, and hounds that run after him, smell to the dirte:
and while the hounds be occupied about such smelling, the beast dies and
runs, and passes far away.

Also libro. 10. Aristotle speaks of the wild cow and says, That when her
time of Caluing comes, many of them come about her, and make of dirte as it
were a wall, and this manner beast has much dirte, as Aristotle says, and
Auicen also.

Of Basilisco. cap. 16.
THe Cockatrice is called Basiliscus in Greek, and Regulus in Latin, and has
that name Regulus of a little king, for he is King of serpents, and they are
afeard and fly when they see him, for he slays them with his smell and with
his breathe: and slays also all thing that has life, with breathe and with
sight.

In his sight, no foul, nor bird passes harmless, and though he be far
from the foul, yet it is burnt and devoured by his mouth. But he is overcome
of the Wesel: and men bring the Wesell to the Cockatrice den, wherein he
lurketh and is hid, for the Father and maker of all thing, left nothing
without remedy: and so the Cockatrice flies when he sees the Wesell, and the
Wesell pursues and slays him: and the Cockatrice is half a foot long, and
has white speckes: and the Cockatrice slays that that he comes nigh, as
the Scorpion, and that water that he touches, makes the Dropsy, and it is
venomous and deadly. And some men call the Coackatrice Sibilus, for with
hissing he slays, ere he biteth or stingeth. Huc vsque Isidorus. lib. 12,
capitulo. 4.

Plinius also says, libro. 8. capitulo. 22. Among the Hisperies and Aethyopes
is a well, that many men suppose is the head of Nylus, and there beside is a
wild beast that is called Catobletas, and has a little body, and nice in all
members, and a great head hanging always, toward the earth, and else it were
great noyeng to mankind: for all that see his eyes, should dye anon, and the
same kind has the Cockatrice, and the Serpent that is bred in the Province of
Syrena, and has a body in length and breadth as the Cockatrice, and a tail
of twelve inches long, and has a specke in his head as a precious stone, and
fears away all Serpents with hissing, and he presses not his body with much
bowing, but his course of way is forth right, and goes in mean: he dries and
burns leaves and herbs, not only with touch, but also by hissing and
blast, he rotteth and corrupts all thing about him. And he is of so great
venime and perilous, that he slays and wastes him yt comes nigh him by
the length of a spear, without tarrieng. And yet the Wesell takes and
overcomes him: for it pleases God, that no kindly thing should be without
peer, for the biting of the Wesell is death to ye Cockatrice: and
nevertheless the biting of the Cockatrice is death to the wesell, and yt is
sure, except ye wesel eat rue before. And against such venime, as Aristotle
says and Auicen, first the Wesell eats the herb of Row, though it be
bitter, and by virtue of the juice of that herb, be goes boldly and obey
comes his enemy. And though the Cockatrice be venomous without remedy, while
he is always, yet he leeseth all the mall^ce, when he is burnt to ashes: his
ashes are accounted good and profitable in workeing of Alkamie, and namely in
turning and changing of metal.

( Addition.
The Basiliske as Cockatrice, among creeping worms is the most pestilent. And
among men, the most pestilent minded, are the spoilers of the Clergy with such
unconscionable are rages, that many Ministers have been forced to leave their
lyuings, and go a begging. If the tituled clemency of the Gospel, he become
oppression, God will bring shortly all to confusion. There were no such
Basiliskes in Plinies time: My self have been so plagued, that I speak by
experience, and have to show by proof, etc.)

Of Botrace. cap. 17.
BOtrax is called Rubeta also, and is a manner venomous frogge, and dwells
both in water and in land, as Plinius says lib. 18. cap. 32. And it is said,
that he changes his skin in age, and eats always certain herbs, and
keeps and holds always venime, and sighteth against the common spinner, and
against the spinner that is called Spalangio, and overcomes their venime and
biting by benefise of Plantaine, and his venime is accounted most cold, and
stonieth, therefore each member that he touches; it makes less feeling, as
it were froze, and is a venomous beast, and comfort therefore himself, at
each touching: and the more he is touched, the more he swells, and as many
speekes as he has under the womb, so many manner wise, his venimme is
accounted grievous.

And he has eyes, as though they were site shining, and the worse he is, the
more burning is his sight, and though he has clear eyes, yet he haleth ye
light of the Sun, and seeks dark places, and flies to dens, when the
Sun rises, and his beams shines upon the earth.

This Froggs loves sweet herbs, and eats the roots of them, but in
eating, he infecteth and corrupts both roots and hearbes^ Therefore often in
gardene in: Rue set, that is venime and enemy to Eoades, and to other venomous
worms: for by virtue of Rue, then be chased away, and may not come to other
herbs and roots that grow therein. The Toade loves stinking places and
dir^ie^ and hates places with good smell and odor: and so it is said, that he
flies out of the vineyard, when the vines begin to bloome, for he may not
suffer nor sustain their good odor and smell. And libro. tricesimo capitulo.
4. Plinius speaks of the Toad, and says in this manner.

There be right venomous Frogs, that are called Rubetae, and live among
b^iers and bushes, and the more great they be, the worse they be. And some be
brown, and some are reddish, and some pale, and soon yeelow, or citrine. And
they mean that these worms Rubetae have double liver, that one is most
venomous, and that other is remedy, and is given in steed of Triacle against
poison and venime: and for to assay and know which is good and which is evil,
the liver is thrown into an Ant hill, then the Antes fly and void the
venomous part, and desire and choose that other part, and shall be taken and
kept to the use of medicine.

And Authors tell wonders of these manner of Frogs as Plinius says, and
tell, that in the right side of such a Frogge, is a preuie boane, that cools
same deal seething water, if it be thrown therein: and the vessel may not
heat afterward, but if the bone be first taken out: and Witches use that
boane to love and hate: and they mean also, that the fever quarlane is healed
thereby. And be that worm noiser so venomous, yet by burning he leeseth the
mallyce of venymme, and takes most virtue of medicine: and ashes thereof help
wonderfullye to recover flesh and skin that is happelye soft, and to make
sadness and sinnewes, and to healyng and preservation of wounds, if the ashes
be used in over dra^ner. Look within De Rana, in litera. R.

( Addition.
Bofo the Toade; whereof are diners kinds: some Toads that breed in Italy and
about Naples; have in their hea^s, a stone called a Cr^po, of hignes like a big
peach, but flat; of color gray, with a brown spot in the midst, said to be of
virtue. In times past; they were much Morlie, and used in ringes, as the
forewarning against venime.)

Of Bombace. cap. 18.
BOmbax is a worm that breeds in twigges and branches of Cipresse, of Ash,
of Malberrie trees, and of Terebintus, as Plin. says lib. 11. cap. 24. And
Isid. says in this manner, Bombax is a Worm of two twigges and branches: of
his weauing is clothing made, and is called Bombacinium. And is called Bombax,
for he is made void and clean while the thread passes out of him, and in him
abides ^ut air only as he says. And this Worm has wonderful changing:
for first he comes forth as a worm like a Malshra^g, that gnaweth caul
leaves and vine leaves, this worm may not away with cold, and weaueth webs,
as spinners do: and first he maketh^ him a place or a house to dwell in, and
to defond himself against the cold, winter, and makes his web with his
feet, and draws his small threads, and kem^eth them with his feet, and
ordayneth them so, and makes thereof a web.

( Addition.
Bumbix, a silk worm, the original spinner, whereof all sorts of silks,
dressed and died into colors, serve man's use.)

Of Camelo. cap. 19.
CAmells are called Cameli, and have that name of a nowne of Greek, as Isidore
says libro. 12. for when they be charged they bow and lie down, and are
meek to them that charge them. For meek and short is called Caine in Greek.

Or else they have that name of Camur in Greek, that is crooked, for when they
take charge upon them, they b^nde and crook the knees. Also Camelles be
beasts that bear charges and burdens, and are mild and soft, and ordained
to bear charge and cartage of men, and be found in many countries and lands,
and namely in Arabia, and Camells of Arabia be diverse from Camels of other
lands, for a Camel of Arabia has two bounches in the back, and a Camel of
another Land, has but one bounche in the back, as Isidore says in eodem.

And libro. 8. capitulo 19. Plinius says in this manner: The Cast feeds
Camells among tame beasts, of which Camells is two manner kinds: For some are
of Bactria, and some are of Arabia: the Camel of Arabia has two bounches on
the back, and the Camel of Bactria has but one in the back, on the which he
bears his burden: and another in the breast, and leans thereon. Camells be
soothlesse above as Oxen are, and chew their cudde, as Oxen and Sheep, as
Isidore says libro. 12. and is cloue footed, as it shall be said hereafter,
and is full swifte, as Plinius says, and is therefore good in battle and
war, and to bear charge and carriage.

And the Camel goes no more a day, than he is wont to do, nor takes no
more burden than he is wont to bear. And the Camel hates the Horse by
kind, and suffers thirst, four days, and stirs the water with his feet
when he drinks, or else the drinks does him no good. And the Camel lives
fifty year, and some an hundred year, and wereth mad sometime. Camells be
gelded that are ordained to battle and to war: for they be the stronger, if
they be put from the work of generation. Huc vsque Plinius.

Auicen speaks of the Camel in this manner, the Camel he says moves first ye
right soote as the Lion does, and only the Camel has a hunch on his back,
and is choi^^ footed, and has fells in the clifts as it fares in a Goose
foot, and those clefts be fleshly as ye rielies of a Bear^e foot: and
therefore men makes the^ shoes, least their feet be hurt that be tender
beneath. And sometime in the Camelles heart is a bone found, as there is in the
heart of an Heart. And the Camel has four teates in the two vaders, as ye row
has, and the female Camel boweth her self and goes on her knees, when she
wilt be coupled with the male. And her talent and desire is strong and fervent
in time of love, and she eats then but little, and desires always to be
assailed of the male, nigh to the place in which she was first assailed. And
as Arist. says, li. 5. it is one property of Camells to be solitary and alone
in mountains in time of love, and no man may come nigh to them yt time, but the
heard alone, and the Camells yard is sinewy and full hard. Therefore men make
bow strings of such yardes. Item ibidem in eodem, Camells have certain times
ordained to the work of generation: the female nourishes the colt in the
womb 12. months, and they engender not before they be three year old, and
rest a year after loving. Also he says, libro. 8. that certain manner of
Camells be gelded, to be the more able to fly: and says, that such Camells
be more swifter then horses, and that is because of large pase and wide, but
hereof look within de Dromedatio. Aristotle says, lib. 9. cap. 17. that the
Camel does not the work of generation with his own mother. For in a
certain city a Camel was heeled with a mantell, and her own son leap on
her, and by falling of the cloth that she was covered with, he knew it was his
own mother, and though he did the deed, he leaped down and slew the man,
that him had beguiled. Aristotle sets this ensample, and other like of a
horse of a certain king.

Also libr. 11. cap. 37. Plinius speaks of Camells, and says, that among
four footed beasts camells ware bald as men do, and as the Estridge and
certain beasts among fowls. Also he says, that among beasts without horns,
the Camelles be toothlesse in the over iawe, and accord therefore in teeth with
beasts yt chew the cud, and in disposition of the womb, but not in horns. And
Ari. li. 14. says, yt a beast that eats thorny matter, has not yt womb as
the camel, and an hard horned beast has us teeth in either iaw, and therefore
the Camel has no teeth in either iaw, but only beneath, though he be
hornelesse. Then it needs that the Camels womb be of such disposition, and
is like to the womb of beasts that be toothlesse in the over iawe. And the
making of his teeth is like to the making of the teeth of horned beasts. And
it follows there, and for the Camells meat is thorny and hard, it needs
that his tongue be fleshie for the hardness of the palate. Therefore kind vset
the palate as the earthy part of teeth: and therefore the camel cheweth his cud
as horned beasts do, for his wound is like to the womb of horned beasts, and
he takes his meat in his first womb, and all vndigest, and in the second
womb the meat begins to defy, and is better defied in the third womb, and
in the fourth womb is full digestion and complete, and this diversity of
wombes is needful for hardness of his meat, for he grindeth and cheweth his
meat little with his teeth.

And li. 13. Aristotle says, yt the camel has no gall distinguished upon yt
liver, no more then the Elephant has, for the matter of this liver is full
whole and sound, and his blood is kindlye sweet: and in such beasts is no
gall found, but if it be found in full small veins, and therefore old men
said, that Anaxagoras says, that Camells be beasts of long life, for they be
gallesse, and beasts with little galls live longer then beasts with much Gall.
And therefore Anaxagoras said, that gall is cause of all sharp sicknesses,
when gall is multiplied unto the lungs, and shed to other parts of the
body. But Aristotle says, that this is false, for many beasts in whom no gall
is found, have right sharp sickness sometime and evils that slaye them, as
it fares in Camelles that have the Podagre and frenzy, and by the Podagree
their feet be strained, and this evil slaieth them sometime, and be
nevertheless without gall, vt dicit ibidem. Huc vsque Aristoti. Also in Dietis
vniuersalibus. Constant: speaks of the Camel, and says, yt the camel is
most hottest beast of kind, and is therefore lean by kind, for the heat
draws of all fatness of the blood, and therefore the Camel is lean. And
Camells milk is more thin then milk of other beasts, and less unctuous, and
less nourishing, and more heating and opening and departing. And milk is
naught else but blood, often sodde, and therefore Camelles milk is fall in
savor and sharp, and tempereth therefore those humors and makes them thin.
And cow milk is contrary thereto, and is thick and unctuous, and nourishes
much. Look other properties within de Dro^nedatio.

Of Cameleoperdo. cap. 20.
CAmeleoperdus is called Cameleoperdalis also, and is a beast of Aethiopia, as
Isidore says, libro. 12. and Plinius libro. 8. cap. 30. And has the head of a
camel, and the neck of a horse, and legs and feet of a Bull, and specks of
the Perde, and is a beast befprong with white speckes distinguished with bright
color and clear, and is called Cameleoperdalis, for he has the head of a
Camel, and speckes of the Perde. And Plinius says, that this beast is more
worth in sight then in fierceness, and is so mild and soft, that he had
almost the name of a sheep. As he says, this beast was clean to meat by Moses
law, but not to sacrifice, for he is cloue footed as a Bull, and cheweth his
cudde as a Camel, and therefore it was lawful to eat thereof, as it is
written Deuteronomy. 14. etc.

( Addition.
The Aethiopians call this Beast Nabis, his neck like a Horse, his feet like
an Ox, and his head like a Camel, spotted read, very lofty before, and low
behind.)

Of Camelion. cap. 21.
CAmelion is a little beast with diverse colors, and his body changes full
soon to diverse colors, as he says. Also another beast there is found,
that takes also changing of contrary colors, as Isidore says there. And
Auicen means, that Camelion and Stellio the Lusard, is all one: for he
shines as a star, and changes colors. For it is a fearful beast, with
little blood, and changes therefore colors. And is four manner diverse: he
has the face of the ewte, and sharp claws and crooked, and the body sharp,
and an hard skin, as the Crocodile. And libro secundo Aristotle says, that
the Camelion is a beast like to the Ewte in body, and his sides be euenlong to
the nether parts of his womb, as it were a Fish: and his ridge boanes bounch
upward, as it were a Fish: his face is as it were a beast compowned of a Swine
and of an Ape: and his tail is full long and small at the end: and his feet
be crooked, as it were a little Ewte: and each of his feet is departed a
twain, and the comparison of one foot to another, is as in comparison of the
thombe of a man to the other deal of the hand: and each of those two parts is
divided in fingers: And his claws be like to the claws of a bird: and all his
body is rough and sharp as the body of a Bardan: His eyes be deep, great,
and round, and contained with a skin, like to the skin of the body, and
that skin covers the eyes. And he turns and casts often his eien hither
and thither. And changes his color when his skin is blown, and his
color is somewhat black with black speckles therein: and this diversity is in all his body, and namely in the eyes, and also in the tail, and is full heavy
in moving and foul of color in his death, and what is in his body is but of
little flesh, and has but little blood, but in the head and in the end of the
tail where he has little blood, and also in the heart, and in the veins that
come therefrom: and also has blood about the eien, though it be right little.
And the brain is nighe the eyes, and if the body be departed in two, it
abides in his working by spirit thereof: and a little moving abides about
the body, and is splenenesse, and dwells in dens, as an Ewte. Huc vsque
Aristotle.

And libro vicesimo octauo. Plinius says, that Camelion is a beast like to the
Crocodile, and varyeth therefrom only in crookedness of the back; and in
longnesse of the tail. And no beast is accounted so fearful, as the
Camelion, and changes therefore his color. His most might and strength is
against the kind of Goshaukes: for he draws them, and they fly to him, and
he takes them wilfully to other beasts to be devoured. And Democritus says,
that if his head and his throat be set a fire with Oaken wood, it makes both
rain and thunder: but Plinius scorneth this saying. But what beast so ever it
be, it is accounted among clean beasts, Super Leui. 11. Isichius says, that in
sickness he feyneth himself soft and mild though he be cruel. And it is
said, that the Camelion lives only by air, and the Mole by earth, and the
Hearring by water, and the Cricket by fire, as these vearses mean.

Quatuor ex puris vitam ducunt elementis.
Camelion, Talpa, maris Halec, and Salamandra.
Terra cibat Talpam, flammae pascunt Salamandram,
Vnda fit Halecis cibus, aer Cameleonti.
( Addition.
The Chamelion feeds on Flies, and takes them with the sudden slipping forth
of his tongue, which is long and round, and may not be kept above fourteen
days without putting forth in the air.)

Of Caprea. cap. 22.
THE wild Goat is called Caprea, and has that name of Carpendo, gathering.
Thereof Isidore speaks; libro. 12. and says, that they be called Capri and
Capree, for they gather branches and twigs: And some men mean that they have
ye name, for they climb upon hard crags: and some mean, that they have that
name of noise that they make with their legs: and so wild Goats be called
Caprie, for they see most sharplye. The Greeks call them Dorko^ and they dwell
in high mountains, and see hunters come a far. And those same be called
Ibices, for they come upward into high places, as it were Birds, so high that
uneath they be seen with man's eien, as Isidore says, libro. 12. And he
says, that those beasts dwell in high Rocks and cragges. And if they
perceive sometime, that they be pursued of men or of wild beasts, they fall
down headlong out of the high cragges, and save themselves harmless on their
own horns. And be called also Dame or Damule, as Papias says: Look within
in litrea D, de Damula.

Also this beast Caprea, the wild Goat, is most swifte in running, most light
in leaping, most sharp in sight, most sweet in taste, most tender and wholesome
to meat, and most busy to gather his own meat: for the Goat knows diversity
of herbs, of trees, of twigs, of branches, and of spraies, which they eat
and feed themselves of by sight, taste, and smell. Also Plin. says, that the
Leopard drinks milk of the wild Goat, and voideth sorrow and woe.

Of Capriolo. cap. 23.
CApriolus, as Auicen says, is like to Hynnulus an Hind calfe, and this beast
changes not his teeth, and when one may perceive that he has great teeth,
then it is token of long life, and also of long continuance. And this beast
Capriolus has right fair and pleasant eyes, and also sharp. Also libro. 8.
Aristotle affirms and says, that these beasts Caprioli have wit when they be
wounded, and seek the herb Pulegium Cerinum, Penny royal.
and ease thereof to draw out arrows out of their body if they stick
therein. By business of running and swiftness of moving his flesh is
discharged of superfluity of moisture, and his flesh is so made the more
tender, and the better to defy, and the better of savor and smell. For the
heuie savor thereof is taken away, as Constant. says. To get meat, this
Capriolus climbeth up from high places, to more high places, and knows by
smell between wholesome herbs and unwholesome. And be cheweth his cud, and is
cloue footed, and defends himself in woods and lands from hunters and their
hounds, not with his claws, horns, and teeth, but only with swiftness of
flight. And so when he is pursued in valleys and in fields, he takes his
course and flies: into high places and mountains. In the mountains of Jude
be some Caprioli, that cateth herbs with good smell and savor, and in their
feet be certain hollownesse, in the which certain humors be gathered, and
breeds postumes, the which postumes first be riped, and then broken with
moving and with froting, and throw out of the body with small hairye leaves.
And the substauite that is contained within the skin, is best of smelling,
and most precious among spicerye, and most profitable and virtuous in medicine,
as Dioscorides says, and Platearius also, and that we call commonly Moricum.

Of Capra. cap. 24.
THE Goat is called Capra, and has that name of Carpendo, gathering, as
Caprea, has the name of the same, for he gathers the ouermost ends of
branches and of leaves, and eats them, as Isidore says And Plinius li. 8.
ca. 1. speaket of the Goat, and says: That a Goat eyneth many Kids at once,
and but selde four, and goes with kid five months, as an Ewe does. Also
Goats ware barren by fatness before three year, and gender less profitably,
and in age after four year: and conceiueth in November, and eyneth in March
or in April, when trees and branches spring, and have not all horns, but
some have, and in them the growing of knots is token of years. Ar^l^claus
means, that the Goats breath at the ears, and not at the nose, and be seld
without fever, and therefore both in Goats and sheep is the more fervent and
hot working of generation, as he says. And we mean not, that Goats see less
by night then by day, and the Goat has under the chin a beard that is called
Armitum, and if a man draw one out of the flock by the beard, the other be
astonished and behold. And also the same happens when one of them biteth a
certain herb. Their hiting is most destruction of Olive, for with lyking
they make the Olive baren, and for this cause they were not offered to the
Goddess Minerua. When the Sun draws to glade, Goats eat not in pasture
together; but turn away their faces each from other and lie down: and in
other times those yt turned each from other eat together in pasture, and turn
the face each to other. Huc vsque Plinius.

And Aristotle lib. 3. says, that in many lands Goats have milk without
conceiving: but they take Nettles and froat the vdders therewith, and then
comes first out blood, and then as it were matter, and good milk at the
last, not worse then the milk of them that eineth. Also libro. 6. Goats live
ten year or a xi. and use work of gendering until their last age. And sometime
the Goat has two kiddes at once, if they have couenable meat, and namely if
the Goat bucke be well fed. And if she conceive before the Northen wind,
she eyneth males, and if she conceive before the Southern wind, she eyneth
females. And he tells, that they turn ye face Northward, when they shall
gender. Also li. 7. there he says, that Goats and sheep eat herbs, but
sheep bite herbs unto the root, and be steadfast in pasture: And Goats pass
soon from place to place, and take only the ouermost ends of herbs and
grass, and conceive better after that they drink salt water. And when goats
be moved after ye under time they drink the more water, and when they eat
Salt before that they drink, then shall much milk drop out of their teates.

Also libro. 8. cap. 3. In Goats and sheep is little wit, insomuch that
uneath they can go to a field to leese, or come again, but they be lead and
brought again. And if a man take a Goat, and rear him up sodeinelye, then
the other rear them also, and behold him sadlye. And the use of Goat and of
sheep is needful to mankind, for they feed the hungry with milk and with
flesh, and cloth the naked with fell and with Wool, and amend the land with
urine and with dirt. And nothing is in the Goats body, but it is good and
profitable to use of meat or clothing, or else to needful use of medicine.
For as Plinius says, libro. 33. cap. 10. Serpents be chosed and driven away
with ashes of Goats horns, and with their Wool burnt. And by remedy of
Goats horns diverse manner kind of venim is overcome, and superfluity of
dead flesh is fretted, and fresh flesh and new is gendered, and passing
running humors be staunched, and by help of them rotted wounds fretting and
gnawing have remedy, though they be cankered or festered. With new Goats
skins wounds be help and healed. Goats blood meddled with merry and sod
excludes poison and venimme, biting of creeping worms, and smiting of
scorpions be saved and healed. The hot lung of a Goat laid to a venomous biting
draws out the venimme, and abateth the ach and soreness. His gal puts
away dimnesse of eyes, and fresteth webbes and pearls, and sharpneth their
sight, and cleereth the eyes. A Goats liver roasted; helps against Lepra, if
it be often taken in meatrand his dirt helps many sicknesses and evils: For as
he says, Goats dirt helps them that have the Podagre, if tallow of the goat
buck be meddled with ye juice of Iute. And Goats urine heated and dropped luke
warm into the ears, heals ears that ache. He sets these properties and
many other medicinable properties: and so Plinius sets a thousand remedies.
And hereby may be showed a meaning that one said in this manner. Each wonder,
that it is not said, that it heals the feauers. And heereto Aristotle says,
that a certain beast sucketh Goats milk of the vdder and feats, and then the
milk is destroyed and wasted, and the Goat wareth blind thereby. Of the
Goat look more within in litte(...) Hiron.

( Addition.
(...)de is commended to be a nonrishing meat, and here is to be noted, that of
all beasts, the younger from a quarter of no year of age, until a year and
a half, the flesh is most nourishing, only Pi^ge and Ueale, the one at three
weeks ^^other at a month or six weeks old before which time not wholesome.)

Of Cane. cap. 25.
A Hounde is called Canis, and took that name of Greek, as Isido. says. For
an hound is called Cenos in Greek, and some men mean that he has yt name
Canis, of loud barking, as he says: Nothing is more busier and wittier then
an hound, for he has more wit then other beasts. And hounds know their own
names, and love their masters, and defend the houses of their masters, and put
themselves wilfully in peril of death for their masters, and run to take
prays for their masters, and forsake not the dead bodies of their masters: and
hounds pursue ye foot of pray by smell of blood, and love company of men, and
may not be without men, as Isi. says. And there it is said, that often hounds
gender with wolves, and of that gendering comes cruel hounds, which some men
call Licisci. Also often the Indians teach bitches, and lenne them in woods by
night, because Tygres should line them and gender with them, and of them come
most sharp hounds and swift, and be so strong, that they throw down cruel
beasts, as Lions, Huc vsque Isid. li. 12. cap. secundo.

Libro. 8. cap. 40. Plinius speaks of the hound, and says, that among
beasts that dwell with us, hounds and horses be most gracious. We have
known when yt hounds fought for their Lords against theenes, and were sore
wounded, and that they kept away beasts and fowls from their masters bodies
dead. And ye an hound compelled the slaier of his master, with barking and
biting to knowledge his trespass and fault. Also we read that Garamantus the
king came out of exiling, and brought with him two hundred hounds, and fought
against his enemies with wonderful hardynesse. Also Iasons hounde of Cilicie
would take no meat when his Lord was slain, and so he dyed with great
hunger and sorrow.

Also we read ye Celius the Senator of Placencia, was defended by an hound yt
was ouerset of men of arms, and was (...) wounded till the hound was slain.
So Sabinus hound forsook him not neither in prison nor in death, but abode
with the dead body with doleful and sorrowful noise, and howling, and a man
gave the hound meat, and the hounde took the meat, and he would have put it
in his mouth that was dead, and when the dead body was thrown into Tyber, the
hounde leaped and swam in the river to hold up the dead body, and there came
much people to see and behold the kindness of the true beast. Hounds have
mind of full long ways, and if they leese their masters, they go by far space
of lands and Countries to their masters houses. The cruelnesse of an hound
abateth to a meek man. In hounds is great wit and business in hunting, for by
wind and by smelling, and also by water, they pursue and follow beasts that
run and fly, and finds their sorrows and dens, and warns thereof by suit
and by barking: Of Tygres and hounds comes so strong hounds, that they
overcome Lions and Elephauntes: as great Alexander made a proof by the Hounde
that the king of Alania did send to him, first in his presence he overcame a
Lion, and then an Elephaunt was brought to him, and when the hounde saw the
cruel beast, his hair stood up in all the body, and barked fiercely first,
and then reesed craftily, and fought so long with the Elephant, that he drew
him down to the ground. After the age of a year a hounde gendereth, and the
Bitche goes with whelpe in her womb four score days, and whelpeth blind
Whelps. And the more plentye they have of milk, the later they take their
light.

Also they never take their sight after the.xxi. day, nor before ye seventh
day: Some say that when one is whelped alone, the ninth day he sees, and
when they be twain, the tenth day, and when they be three, the thirteenth day,
and so as they be mo whelped in number, the more days is their sight tarryed.
And that whelpe is best that has last his sight, or that that the mother
bears first to the couch. Huc vsque Plinius, libro 8. cap. 41. there be
reckons many other things.

Aristotle libro secundo says, that Hounds change no teeth, but it be by
chance two, and the less they be, the whiter teeth they have and the more
sharp. And thereby men have knowledge between the young hound and the old,
for old hounds have black teeth and blunt, and young hounds the contrary.
Also there, libro. 5. he says, the male hounds be rather moved to the work
of generation then females. And gray hounds gender rather then other hounds,
as he says, li. 6. And this female goes sometime with whelps in the womb
the sixth part of the year: that is.40. days, and her whelps be blind.12.
days, and then the male comes not at her, but in the sixth month after her
whelping. And some gray Bitches go with whelps in their womb.73. days, and
that is nigh the sixth part of the year, and her whelps be blind 17. days:
and so the sooner the whelps be made perfect in the mothers womb, the sooner
they have their sight, when they be whelped and come into the world. And the
males are sooner moved to the work of generation. For when they begin to
heave up the leg for to piss, and that is after 6. or 7. months, when they
ware strong. And greye hounds have this property, yt they may gender more
when they be in travail, then when they be in rest. And the female may live
ten year, and the male lives shorter time then the female, and that is for
the travail of the male, and so it fares not in other. For the male lives
longer then the female, as he says there. And other hou^ds, as wardens of
houses and of cities, live longer, for they live sometime.14. years, and
sometime 20. as Homerus says. Also li. 8. When hounds be sick, they eat the
root of a certain herb, and casts and takes medicine in that wise. Also
lib. 8. Plinius says, that an hounde that has filled him of evil meat, eats
an herb, and by perbraking and casting he purges him.

( Addition.
The wonderful operation of nature among brute beasts, declares as rare
effects in their kind, especially when they sort themselves by contraries. The
Mastiue Bitch to the Dog Woulfe. the Bitch, to the Bear, and such like, not
many years past (at the place of all good roole) Parrisse Garden, was a Bitch,
yt being lind with a male Bear, brought forth a mixed kind, betwixt both, of
so fierce a stomach, and with all so strong, that until he was cut off from
the game by piece meal, he could not be made to vnfasten his biting. Of old
time there was in the stable of Gereon, a notable dog called Cerberus, that
kept his cattle: also in the Temple of Aescolapius was a dog, that bowrayed
the Thief which robbed the said temple, called Caparus, there are many dogs of
ye like kind, and in a manner common: the trial whereof is among tied by dogs
in warehouses, back sides, or gardens, that in yt day are very quiet, and in
the night fierce: and among all the rest, the mungrell curres, which serve to
keep the bottles and bags, with vittell, of ditchers and hedgers; will be
sooner killed of a stranger then beaten off from their masters apparel and
victuals.)

Of Canicula. chap. 26.
THE Bitch is called Canicula, and is called mother of Hounds, and in her the
mother is euenlong set in the length of the womb, and has many beats set it
in two rows, either before other, eudlong the womb. Which teates wax great
in time of conception. And the Bitch whelpeth many whelps at once, but always
blind: But she loves them most tenderly, and defends them with barking and
biting: and if the Whelps go out of the couch often, the Bitch fetches them
again, and hears them in her mouth between her teeth, without any biting ^
grieuing ^ and hears: first home the best and the fairest, for him she
loves best, and gives him first suck, and stretches to him the teate; ^^
Aristotle says, libro. 5. In time of generation and conception seven days the
Bitch del^ue^eth her of vncleare matter, and then waxes sick, and the mother
in her appayreth and has no will to work in generation, but flies and
^ayda^h, but after purgation she kindeleth the better, and whelpeth the more
liuelye. And after the whelping she casts out much fleamatik humor and
thick, and therefore then her body is clean, an he says. Also in Bitches,
milk is found many days before the whelping, and sooner in greye Bitches
then in other: and first she milk is thick, and thin afterward, and is good
and convenient after whelping, and commonly Bitches live little time for great
travail and running about. And when the Bitch desires for to piss, she
reareth not up the leg as the male does, but bends her downewarde behind,
as it were sitting. And the Bitch is lesser in body then the male, and more
smaller and more feeble in might and strength: and most best to nourish and
bring up the whelps, and more soft and mild in heart, except it be when
she nourishes her whelps, and is more able to be taught then the male, and
more nimble in body for plyauntnesse of members, and more swifte. But for
feebleness of sinews she dureth less in course and in running. Gentleness
and nobilytie of hounds and of Bitches is known by length of face and of the
snoute, and by breadth of the breast, and by smalnesse of the womb and
flarike. And a gentle hounde is small about the reins and flank, and also in
the womb, and is broad before about the breast, and has long ears and
plyaunt, and long legs and small, and that is needful, to be the more
swifte in course and in running and his tail is more long and crooked then the
tails of other hounds, and has less flesh then a dog and shorter hair,
and more thin and smooth. For if he were too roughe and hairie, he should
be too hot in course and in running: If he were too fleshie, he should be
ouerset with flesh and run the worse: And if the tails were long down between
the legs, it should let greatly the course and running. And also by hanging
down of the tail he is accounted fearful and not hardye. Also gentle
hounds be cruel and fierce in pursuing and in taking of wild beasts, The
gray hound. The blud hound. The beacle.
and be full mild and soft to men and to tame beasts.

And if it happen sometime that he reeseth against strange men, anon he
cease, and withdraws the reese. Also gentle hounds when they take an Heart
or an Hare, they devour not anon the beast that they take, but keep the pray
to their Lord, and hold them content with the bowelles and other vile parts,
as blood and other such, for their portion and part, and though they have no
part of the pray of one beast: yet for all that they spare not to pursue and
take another.

De alijs proprietatibus canum, Chap. 27.
GOundes have other propertyes that be not full good, for hounds have
continual Bolisme, that is immederate appetite, and be sometime punished with
hunger, that they wax rabbish and mad: for hounds have sickness and euilles,
baldness, squinatye, and madness, as Astotle says, libro. 7. And all beasts
that be bitten of a mad hound, wax mad, except men alone, that escape
sometime by help of medicine. And Constan. says in Viatico. li. viti. that an
hound is kindly cold and dry, and black. Cholera has mastrie in him. And if
Cholera be much rotted and corrupt, it makes the hound mad. And this falls
most in harvest and in springing time. And other hounds fly and void the
mad hound; as pestilence and venim: and he is always exi^led; as it were an
outlawe, and goes alone wagging and rolling as a dronken beast, and runs
yaning, and his tongue hangs out, and his mouth driueleth and foameth, and
his eyes us euertourned and reared, and his ears lie backward, and his fail
is wrickled by the legs and thighs: and though his eyes be open, yet he
stumbleth and spurneth against all thing, and barketh at his own shadow. Other
hounds dread him and fly and bark against him. And no hounds come nigh the
bread that is wet in the blood of the wound of his biting. And those that be
bitten of him, dream in their sleep dreadful dreams, and be afearde in
sleeping, and that comes of rottenness of corruption, and be wroth and
astonished without cause, and look and behold aboute^, though nothing grieueth
them: and if this eulil increase, then they begin to dread and have
abomination of all drink, and then they dread water, and bark as hounds,
and dread so water, that they fall for dread, and such die, but they be the
sooner helped with medicine. Cures and remedies look before libro de Morbis,
cap. de Veneno. Libro 29. Plinius says, that under the hounds tongue lies a
Worm that makes the hounde mad, and if this worm be taken out of the
tongue, then the evil cease. Also he says, that the violence and biting of
a mad hound is so much, that his urine grieueth a man if he treads thereon,
and namely if he have a Botch or a wound. Also who that throws his own
urine upon the urine of a mad hound, he shall anon feel sore ach of the
nether guts and of the lends.

Also an hound is wrathful and malicious, so that for is awreak himself, he
biteth often the stone that is thrown to him: and biteth the stone with great
madness, that he breaks his own teeth, and grieueth not the stone, but his
own teeth full sore. Also he is guidefull and deceicable, and so often he
sickleth and fawneth with his tail on men that passes by the way; as though
he were a friends; and biteth them sore, if they take no heed backewarde. And
the Hounde hates stones and rods, and is bold and hardye among them that he
knows, and busieth to bite and to fear all other, and is not bold when he
passes among strangers. Also he is covetous and gluttonous, and eats
therefore di^^^rde^: so greedely, yt he perbraketh and tastes it up, but
afterward when he is ^n hungered, he takes again that yt he cast up in foul
manner. Also the hounds ^^^^tous, and therefore Auicen says, yt he gathers
herbs privily, by whom he purges himself with perbraking and casting, and
has anuye, and is right forrys if any man knows the virtue of those herbs:
and is also evil apaide, if any strange hounds and unknown come into the
place there he dwells, and breadeth least he should face the worse for the
other hounds presence, and fights with him therefore. Also he is covetous
and scarce, and busy to lay up and to hide the relief that he leaves. And
therefore he communeth not, nor gives flesh and marrow boanes, that he may
not devour to other hounds, but lays them up busily and hides them until
he hungreth again. Also he is unclean and lecherous. And so, li. 6. Aristot.
says, that hounds both male and female use lechery as long as they be alive,
and give them to uncleanness of lechery, yt they take no diversity between
mother and sister, and other bitches touching the deed of lechery: and
therefore offering of the price of an hounde or of a Bitch was accounted as
unclean by the law of Moses, as offering of ye price of a common woman: for
such wretched persons serve in all lechery as hounds do.

Also an old hound is often slow and heavy. And so libr. 7. Aristotle says,
that hounds in age have ye podagre, and few of them escape that evil, and
therefore they sleep in daytime upon dunghills among flies and other worms,
and be then fore grieved with Flies, that be about their bleared eyes, and
about their scabbed eien. And though they bite and pearce sometime the hounds
ears, yet for sloth he takes no comfort and strength to chase and drive them
away: but uneath when they fly against his face, he snatcheth at them with
his mouth, and busieth to bite them with his teeth. And at the last the scabbed
hound is violentlye drawn out of the dunghill with a roape or with a whippe
bound about his neck, and is drowned in the river, or in some other Water,
and so he ends his wretched life. And his skin is not taken of, nor his
flesh is not eaten nor buried, but left finallye to Flies and to other diverse
worms.

Of Catulis. cap. 28.
Whelps be called Catuli, and be the children of hounds. And Catulus is a
nowne diminitiue, and so is Catellus also. And by a manner miss use the young
of other beasts are called Catuli, as Isi. says, li. 12. And generally these
whelps be whelped blind touching perfect doing of sight: for hounds whelps
be whelped with sawing teeth though they be full small. And all beasts that
have teeth like a saw and departed, be gluttons, and fight, as the Hound, the
Woulfe, the Lion, yt Panther, and such other. And all such beasts gender
imperfect broodes, as it is said before hand, in codem li. de Animalibus in
generali. And in all beasts that brings forth imperfect young, the cause is
gluttony, for if she should abide until ye whelps were complete and perfect,
they should slay the mother with strong sucking: and therefore it needs that
kind be hasty and speedfull in such beasts. Look before in eod. lib. For as
Solinus says, whelps of hounds were in most worship among men in old time.
As Plin. says, li. 29. ca. 9 sucking whelps were accounted so pure and so good
to meat among men in old time, yt they offered such whelps to please their Gods
in steed of other beasts. And nothing was accounted better and more
profitable against poison and venim. And yet to this day Authors command to
take such whelps wholsomely against venomous bitings: for such whelps opened
and laid hot to the biting of Serpents, draw out venim, and abate the age, and
makes ye sore members whole with remedies laid thereto, as he tells. And as
he says, such whelps the sooner they be whelped, the later they have their
sight, and the nobler milk they be nourished with, the more slower they
receive perfect sight, and yet while they be blind, they love their mother,
and know her with voice and with odor, and seeks her and her teates: and if
it happen that the mother withholdeth the milk, they bite her teates with the
sharpest teeth, and compel the mother to give more largelye milk. And when
they be an hungered they cry and whine, and seek their dammes teates. Also it
is said, that they suck in the same manner of order, as they lay in the Bitch.
And the whelpe that is best and strongest the mother takes first to sucking,
and loves him best, and comfort him. And meat shall be with-drawne
warilye and wisely from hunting hounds, least they wax too fat by too much
meat, for by too great fatness they take sloth, and be the slower to their
pray and to running. And though they be melancholyke beasts of quality and of
complexion, yet they be nimble and swifte by disposition of members, and be
glad and merry, and play much, and that is because of their age. And when they
be weaned from milk, they be able to be taught to hunting, and also to
playeng, and to keeping of beasts, and to defend them from Wolves. And hounds
that be ordained to keeping of houses should be closed and bound in a dark
place by day, and so they be the stronger by night, and the more cruel
against Thieves, for the office of such Hounds is to rest, and to sleep by
day, and to wake by night, and to go about courts and closes against
Thieves. For the hound is to be blamed, that waketh and barketh and goes about
by day, and sleeps and hides himself, and barketh not by night. Also that
hounde is an evil hound, whether he be young or old, that keeps and
wardeth sheep, and defends them from Wolves by day in pasture, and
strangleth and biteth them by night in the fold.

Of Castore. cap. 29.
A beauer
CAstor is a wondrous beast, and lives and goes in land among four footed
beasts, and swimmeth under water, and dwells with Fish that swim therein,
and has that name Castor, of Castrando, gelding, as Isidore says, libro 12.
for their gendering stones accord to medicine, and because of the same stones
they geld themselves when they be ware of the hunter, and bite off their
gendering stones, as he says. Cicero speaks of him and says, that they
ransom themselves with that part of the body, for the which they be most
pursued. And Iuuenal says, that they geld themselves and loose their stones,
for they desire to escape. And the Castor is called Fiber also, and is called a
sea hound of Pontus. Huc vsque Isidor. Of Castoris Plinius speaks, libro. 11.
capitulo. 3. In Pontus he says, is a manner kind of beasts, that dwells
now in land and now in water, and makes houses and dens arrayed with
wonderful craft in the brinkes of rivers and of waters. For these beasts live
together in flocks, and love beasts of the same kind, and comes together
and cutteth rods and sticks with their teeth, and brings them hoame to their
dens in a wonderful wise, for they lay one of them on the ground vpryght in
steed of a slead or of a dray, with his legs and feet reared upward, and lay
and load the sticks and wood between his legs and thighs, and draws him
home to their dens, and unlade and discarge him then, and make them dwelling
places right strong by great subtiltye of craft. In their houses be two
chambers or three distinguished, as it were three cellers, and they dwell in
the over place when the water arises, and in the nether when the water is
away, and each of them has a certain hole properly made in the celler, by the
which hole he puts out his tail in the water, for the tail is of fishy
kind, he may not without water be long kept without corruption. And the beast
is wonderful and wonderfully shaped, for his tail only is fish, and all the
other deal of his body has the kind of a four footed beast, and is shaped
as a little hounde, and his hinder feet be as it were the feet of an hound,
and therewith he goes principallye in the land, and his two fore feet be as
it were Goose feet, and therewith he swimmeth principallye in water. His skin
is full precious and has teeth longer and shorter as a hound, and is not swift
of moving, for his legs be full short. And Castor has two gendering stones
that be great in comparison to his little body, and we call these stones
Castorea. And of these stones Plinius speaks li. 32. ca. 3. and says, That
the Castor biteth off his gendring stones that we call Castoria, and that least
he be taken of hunters. And Sextinus, a most diligent sercher of medicine,
denies this: For he says, that those gendring stones cleave so nigh and so
fast to the ridge bone, yt they may not take them from the beast, but his life
is taken also. Also Plat. says the same, and Dioscorides also: that that beast
is not so wary nor so witty, that he could help himself in yt manner. And
that is known all day in Castoris that be found in diverse places. And so this
that Isidore and Phisiologus tell of their gelding, shall not so be understood
of the common Castoris: But of some other beast yt be like Castores in
gendering stones. And very Castorium and not feined, helps against the
greatest evil of the body, as Plinius says there, and namely if ye stones be
of a Castor that is not too young nor too old. And Castoria these stones be
chosen in this manner: For they be double, and hang by one string, and coupled
by one sinew, for such may not soon be feined. And many men take ye bladder of
a beast, and fill it full of Castoris blood, and put thereto a little of ye
Castor to have smell, and a little pepper for to have sharp savor: and binds
the neck of the bladder, for it should seem a sinew, but it is impossible yt
two bladders should hang by one neck: and therefore ye Castorium is best, yt
is double, and hangs by one sinew. And ye Castorium is best that is meanly
sharp in savor. For if it be too sharp, and as it were earthie, then it is
feined, and namely if it have not sinews meddled, as Diosc. says. And so good
Castorium is meanly sharp of savor and glewie, without strong or salt savor:
for with Sal aromaticum often Castorium is feined, as Pli. says there: The more
feesh and new Castorium is, the better it is, and the more virtuous in
medicine. And it is a token that it is not feined, when the stones have
certain skins yt cleave essentially thereto full of unctuous fatness, and may
be kept seven years in great virtue, and shall be put in medicine without the
utter skin, and shall he weighed in due manner: and has virtue to dissolve and
temper, to consume and to wast, and to abate evil humors, and namely to
comfort sinewy members: and so Castorium helps against many sicknesses and
evils, for it accords to them yt have the falling evil, and helps against
cold evils of the head, and does away sodeine palsy of the tongue, and
restores ye speech, if it be only tempered in moisture under the tongue, and
helps against universal and general palsy of the body, if it be sod in
wine with Rue and with Sage. And often in meat and in drink, exciteth, moves,
and comfort the brain, and makes to sneese: and therefore the Litargike man,
yt has the sleeping evil, is awaked therewith, and provoke and causes
sleep, if the head be anointed therewith, and Oleum Rosaceum, and helps
against strong venim, and against the venim of scorpions, and of the serpent
Cerastes, and of the Serpent Prester, as Plinius says, libr. 8. cap. 3. Also
his urine helps in all the foresaid things, as he says, and exciteth
menstruall blood, and helps conception, and many other doings, and his
grease is most effectual and virtuous in Ointments.

( Addition.
The Beuer is a great deuourer of fish; as is the Otter.)

Of Ceruo. cap. 30.
THe Heart is called Ceruus, and has ye name of Cereston in Greek, yt is an
horn, as Isi. says, li. 12. And he says there, that hearts be enemies to
serpents, which when they feel themselves grieved with sickness, they draw
them with breath of their nosethrills out of their dens and the malice of ye
venim overcome, they are repaired with feeding of them. And they taught first
the virtue of the herb Diptannum, for they eat thereof, and cast out arrows
and arrow heads, Diptanie or Dipta^.
when they be wounded of hunters: and they wonder of noise of pipes, and have
liking in accord of melodye, and they hear well when they areare up the ears,
and bear down the ears when they swim and pass rivers and great waters: and
then in swimming the stronger swim before, and the feebles lay their heads upon
the loins of the stronger, and swim each after other, and may the better
endure with travail. Huc vsque Isid. And Plinius says the same words lib. 8.
cap. 34. And there he says moreover, that ye heart is a most pleasing beast,
and tunneth wilfully and flies to a man when he is over set with hounds: and
when the hind shall calue, she shunneth the less ways and paths, which be
trodden with wild beasts, whether they be common or privy ways. After the
rising of the star Arturus, the hind conceiueth, and goes with calfe eight
months, and calueth sometime two at once. And from the time of conception the
females depart and go away from the males, but the males leave not raging of
lechery, but wax cruel, and dig up clots and stones with their feet, and
then their snouts be black until they be washed with rain. An before caluing
the females are purged, and they use certain herbs, by the which ye calfe is
the better held within the womb and she is the easilier delivered when she
calueth: and after the caluing ye female eats two manner herbs; Camum and
Sisolis, He means Camamell and Spearwort, the names are barbarous.
and comes again to her calfe: and so when she has taken of ye juice of ye
herb, she gives her calfe suck, and makes her calfe use to run and to make
him ready to fly, and leads him into an high place, and teaches him for to
leap, and then the male is delivered of the desire of lechery, and eats
busilye: also vvild commin.
and when he feels himself too fat, then he seeks dens and lurking
places, for he dreadeth damage and harm by heaviness of body: and when hearts
run and fly, they continue not their course, but look anon backward: and
when men come nigh to them, they seek succor again of running and of flight.
And they hear the cry of hounds, when their ears be reared up, and then they
fly fast, and perceive no peril when the ears hang downward, and be so
simple that they wonder of all thing, and be astonished of new sightes. And so
if an horse or a Bugle come to themward, they behold him so earnestly, that
they take no heed of a man that comes to shoot at them: and when they swim
over the sea in herds, they pass forth in even order and help each other,
and come to the land, not by sight, but by smell. And because the Heart is an
horned beast, among beasts the Heart has this property, that he changes
his horns every year in springing time, and then he is armourlesse. He
seeks him by day a privy place, and hides him until his new horns grow
again, and until he has horns and armor: And when he casts his right
horn, for envy he hides it, and is sorrye if any man have medicine
thereof. The age of Hearts is known by auntlers and tines of his horns, for
every year it increases by a tine until seven year, and from that tines
it grows all alike: And so the age may not be known thereby, but the age is
known only by the teeth. And the Heart has few teeth or none; and has no
tines in the neathermost part of the horns, but before the forehead stand
out the less tines. Called ye brovve Antlets.
And if they be gelded before they have horns, afterward grows on them no
horns, and if they be gelded after that the horns be grown, then they loose
never their horns. And while he is hornelesse, he goes to meat by night
and not by day: and he puts his horns in the heat of the Sun to make them
sad and hard, and froateth them afterward against Trees softly, to assay
the strength of them: and does away the itching that he feels therein, by
hardness of the rind, and when he feels his horns strong, then he goes
openly to meat and to leese, and sometime he froateth them against a tree
that is compassed with Iuie, or with Weathwinde, and their horns be snarled
and fastened in it, and be sometime so taken. The heart is contrary to
Serpents, insomuch that Serpents fly and void the odor and smell of burning
of an Hearts horn. His ruenning is good against all biting of Serpents, and
the Heart lives right long time, passing an hundred years, as it was known
by Hearts that lived in Alexanders time, and that were taken an hundred years
after his death, on the which Alexander had in his time marked with cheines of
gold: The heart feels not the evil of the feauers, for he is succored with
medicine against the evil. Huc vsque Plinius libro. 8. capitulo. 38.

Aristotle and Auicen mean, that the Heart is a beast without gall, but only
in the guts, and has therefore bitter guts and stinking, and therefore
hounds eat not his guts, but if they be passing sore an hungered. Also
libro. 2. Aristotle says, that some men think that the Hearts gall is in the
loungs, but that is false, as Auicen says, but he has a manner moisture like
to the moisture of the gall. Also he says, that the Hearts blood, and Hares
blood coniealeth never, but it is always thin and fleeting against kind of all
other beasts, and no beast changes horns, but Ceruus alone. And here it
seems, that he calls Ceruus both Heart and Bucke. And Hearts horns be sound
within, and be therefore heavy, but he changes them not for heaviness, and
has four great teeth in the one side, and four in the other, and he grindeth
therewith his meat: and two other great teeth, as it were tuskes, and the male
has greater than the female, and bends downward, as Auicen says.

Also libro octauo Aristo. says, that some men suppose of the Heart, that he
is among all four footed beasts, using the wood, most ready and wise, and the
Hind calueth nigh a way, that other beasts spares for coming of men, and
flies the light of the Sun with her Calfe, and seeks thick places and
dark, as dens and caves of stones, that have but one entering: for there they
may fight with other beasts, for as he says, Hearts fight each with other
with strong fighting, and he that is overcome, is right obedient to the victor,
and they dread most the voice of a Fox and of a Hound, and sometime the Heart
hides himself, least hunters find him, and slay him for his fatness. And he
says there, that the Heart is hunted in this manner: a hunter whisteleth and
sings, and the Heart has liking therein, and another hunter tolleth him
inward, and shoots at him, and slays him: and when the Heart is areared, he
flies to a river or to a pond and if he may swim over the water, then he
takes comfort and strength, of the coldness of the water, and scapeth the
hunters. And the Heart roareth, cries, and weepeth when he is taken. Also when
the hounds follow him, if he finds double ways, he runs not foorthright,
but now hither and now thither, and leapeth thwart over ways, and aside half,
and then he purposes to take a mighty large pace, and starteth with contrary
leapings and startings, that it be the harder for the hounds, to find and to
follow his chase by odor and smell. Also as he says, ye hind has great
travail and pain when she calueth, and that is known by bending and crooking
of the body, and by ruthful crieng, and therefore she eats of the herb
Dragantea to be delivered of her. Calfe the more easily: Tarrago^.
and when she has calued, she eats suddenly. Secundina, the bag that the
Calfe is in, in ye mother, ere it fall to the ground, and the Secundina is
accounted venime, as he says: Aristotle libro. 8: rehearses other properties
of the Heart, which Plinius rehearses also. And li. 28. Pli. says, That when
the Hind feels heaviness, she swalloweth a stone, and is holp by virtue of
that stone: and the same stone is sometime found in her entrayles when she is
dead, and it is accounted, that this stone helps wonderfully women that go
with child, and so does the boane found in her heart, as he says: and that
bone that is fonnde in the heart of an Heart, is passing profitable against many
evils of the body, and is meddled in all noble confections, as Dioscorides
says, and Constantine also.

( Addition.
The pisell of the Heart dried into powder and drunk, is good against the
Collicke and stopping of water. Give the boane of a Hearts heart, ground, to a
barren woman in drink, and thou shall see the glory of God. Gesner forth of
Galen. There is a stone of great value against poison, called the Beswar stone,
which as Gesner writes, when the Heart is sick, and has eaten many Serpents
for his recovery, is brought into so great a heat, that he hastes to water,
and there covers his body, unto the very ears and eyes, at which time,
distilleth many tears, from the which, the said stone is gendred, etc.)

Of Ceraste. cap. 31.
CErastes is an horned Serpent, as Isidore tells li. 10. and has horns in
either side of the head, crooked and wrinkled as the horns of a Ram: and he
hydeth all his body in gravel and sand, and only leaves his horns
uncovered: and fowls see them, and think that they be worms, and light upon
them, and intend to feed themselves therewith, and then the false and
guylefull serpent, takes suddenly the fowls ere they be ware.

Also this Serpent lies in a weight, in ways and in privy places, and sueth
both men and horses, that pass unawarely by the ways, and slays them with
privy biting. And the Gloss super pen. cap. Gines. says, as it seems, that
Cerostes is a manner kind of Serpent, so malicious and venomous, that if only
his venime touches an horses hoose, it slays both horse and man. And
therefore where we have, Fiat Dan sicut Colubet in via, Cerastes in semita: ye
other lether has, Fiat sicut Coluber in via, and sicut Regulus in locato.
Other men mean, that Cerastes is a manner Serpent, most venomous, and most
malytious. Look before in litera A. De Aspide, for there is mention made of
Cerastes.

( Addition.
Cerastes, a Serpent with a very little body, and horns crooked like a
Ramine.)

Of Cornu. cap. 32.
COrnu an horn, as Arist. says. lib. 3. is of the kind of a bone, and is more
softer than a boane, and is more hard than gristells, as hooues and claws of
beasts: and all such may be bathed and made soft with fire, as he says
there, that the color of horns, and of soles of beasts, is after the color
of the hair of the body of the beast. And so if that the skin be black and
the hair also, the horns be black, and so of other color. And horns are
given to beasts to defend them with, in steed of armor and weapon, and are
therefore set in ye ouermost part of the head, that they may always be ready to
withstand wrongs and enemies.

And all horns be void and hollow within, except Hearts horns, that be hard
and sound within, and have many tyndes and auntiers: and no beast changes his
horns but the Heart alone, and so it seems that Ceruus is the name of the
Heart, and of the Bucke, and of the Roe bucke: and the Heart changes his horns
each year once, and hides that one, so that vimeth it may be found. Therefore
it is said 3. Prouer. Go there as ye Heart casts his horn. Libro. 8. it is
said, that the horns be faster joined to the skin than to the boane, and
therefore Arist. says, that some beasts move the horns as well as the ears,
in ye country that is called Aufrage, and Auicen says the same, and Aristotle
says so of this land that is so called, and the same matter is matter of
horns and of hooues: for smoke that passes by vapors, and is resolved by
heat of the heart, is matter of hooues and of horns, as Constable. says.

And therefore beasts having much abundance of smoke, that is resolved and
departed by the right strong and seruent heat of the heart, and conuayed, and
brought out unto the uttermost parts of the body, by virtue of heat: such
beasts have great horns and strong, and namelye if this smoakie matter be not
to subtle, and tourneth not to hair: or if it be not too thick and earthy,
and tourneth not into teeth and tuskes. And therefore Aristotle says at best,
libro tercio, capitulo de dentibus, that beasts with teeth and tuskes in either
iawe, have no horns, as it fares of Elephants and Bores.

Also all four footed beasts with teeth in either iawe alone, and be cloue
fooled have horns, and chewe their cudde, and have two wombes, and some have
more wombes, as it is said before hand, and so plurality of horns follow the
clefte of the foot. Therefore the Ass of Inde, that is called Asinus Indicus,
has an horn alone, and is four footed, as Ari. says and Auicen also. And
there is so great affinity between houes, clees, and horns, that Aristotle
commands to annoint with Oil and other medicines between the horns, a Cow
that has sore ache in the clees of the feet. Of profit and goodness of
horns it is treated before in litera. B. de Boue.

( Addition.
In the old time was made of horns (beaten flat) armor for men, of diverse
strange fashions, shields and targets, and the ends of many weapons armed
therewith. Horn is applied to many good uses.)

Of Cunneyes in general, newly added.
AS for those small beasts, breeding in warrens, Parkes, or closures among us,
according to the soil where they breed, so are they of goodness in flesh.

The skins are a good furre, especially the black, mixed with white hairs,
called silver hairs. There is brought forth of Turkey, Cunnies called Porcello
Indico, because their hair is short as a Pigges hair, and reddish: more like
the Rats of Indie, than Connyes. Peter Martyr in his description of the new
Islands, writes of three sorts of Cunnyes, whereof I suppose ours are the
best.

Of Crocodilo. ca. 33.
CRocodilus has that name of yelow color, Crocodilus.
as Isido. says, and is a four footed beast, as Isidore says, libro. 12.
capit. de Piscibus, and dwells both in water and in land, and is nigh
twentye cubits long, and is armed with great teeth and claws, and his skin
is so hard, ye he regards not though he be strongly beaten on the back with
stones, and rests in water by night, and by day in land, and lays eggs in
the land, that are greater that Goose eggs, and the male and female keeps
times and hours: and a certain fish having a creast like to a saw, renteth
his tender womb, and slays him: and it is said, that among beasts only the
Crocodile moves the over iawe, all this Isidore says. And Plinius libro. 8.
ca. 16. says, in this manner, The Crocodile is a beast, and dwells in the
river Nilus, and among beasts of the land he is tonguelesse, and only his
over iawe moves, and his biting is venomous: his teeth be horrible, and
strongly shapen as a comb or a saw, and as a Bores tuske, and no beast that
comes of so little beginning, wexeth so great as the Crocodile, and is a
beast nourished in great gluttenie, and cateth right much, and so when he is
full, he lies by the brinke or by the cliffe, and blows for fullness, and
then there comes a little bird, which is called Cuschillus among them, and is
called king of fowls among the Italians, and this bird flies before his
mouth, and sometime he puts the bird off, and at the last, he opens his
mouth to the bird, and suffers him to enter. And this bird claweth him first
with claws softly, and makes him have a manner lyking in clawing, and falls
anon asleep, and when this bird Cuschillos knows and perceives that this
Beast sleeps, anon he descends into his womb, and forthwith sticks
him as it were with a dart, and biteth him full grieuouslye and full sore.

The Crocodile is right soft and full tender in the womb, and for that cause
he is soon ouerco^e of such fishes, which have sharp pricks and creastes
growing on their backs on high. And for this cause Plinius says, that this
grim and most horrible beast follows and pursues them that fly, and is
dreadful to them, and be flies Serpents, and has dim eyes while he is in
water, and sees too sharply when he is out of water: and be hides him in
winter, namely four months, and comes out in Springing time, and grows
still, all the time that he is alive, as it is said. Huc vsque Plin. lib. 8.
cap. 26. Phisiologus says, that if the Crocodile finds a man by the brim of
the water or by the cliffe, he slays him if he may, and then he weepeth upon
him, and swalloweth him at the last. And Plinius says, that of his dirte is
made an ointment, and with that Ointment, women annoint their own faces, and
so old women and riueled, seem young wenches for a time: and the Crocodile
eats gladlye good herbs and grass, Enhydris a water Snake, or Adder.
among whom lurketh a little serpent, that is called Enidros, and is enemy to
the Crocodile, and hides him privily in the grass, and wrappeth himself
therein, and so while the Crocodile eats grass, he swalloweth this serpent,
and this serpent enters into his womb, and all to renteth his guts, and
slays him, and comes out harmles. Also Isidore says the same libro. 12.
and says, that the same worm lies in awayte on the Crocodile when he
sleeps, and then wrappeth himself in fen, and enters in between his teeth,
and comes into his body. And heereto Solinus says, that the Crocodile lies
in awayte on certain small birds, yt breed among the grass of the river
Nilus, the which birds fly into the womb of the Crocodile, for heat of the
Sun, and eats the worms of his womb: and so that fierce beast is cleansed
and purified of worms, and his skin is so hard, that uneath it may be pierced
with a sword, and so dwells in land by day, and in water by night: for the
water is hotter by night than by day, for the water holds the Sun beams,
and be moved, and so the water is hot, and this Beast has no tongue,
stretching outward to make voice therewith, but he has a little tongue within
as fish have for taste of savor, as Solinus says, and Aristotle, and Auicen
also.

( Addition.
The Crocodill, an ill beast bred in Egypt, living partly in water, and on
land, in fashion like a Dragon, but with very small eyes, long teeth and
sharp: he moves only the upper iawe, and has great and strong nails or
claws, his skin is vnpearceable, scalye and brown colored: he deuoureth
man and beast coming by Nilus. There has been seen of them twenty foot
long, or after some 22. cubits. Of late years, there has been brought into
England, the cases or skins of such Crocodiles to be seen, and much money
given for the sight thereof, the policy of strangers, laugh at our folly,
either that we are too wealthy, or else that we know not how to bestow our
money.)

Of Colubro. cap. 34.
AN Adder is called Coluber, as it were Colens vmbras, dwelling in shadows. Or
else he has ye name Coluber, for he slydeth and wiggeleth in slipperye draughts
and wrinckles, and in slimie passing: for all that slydeth while it is held,
is called Lubricum, as Papias says. The Adder Coluber flies ye Hind, and
slays the Lion, as Isidore says, and he eats Rue, and changes his skin,
and loves hollownesse of wood and of trees, and drinks milk busely: and he
hurts and grieueth with the teeeth, and with the tail, and sheddeth ven;m,
and lies in the Sun under hedges, and sucketh bitches, eats flies, and
lycketh powder. Look before De Angue. And Plinius lib. 30. ca. 4. says, that
the grease of the water Adder Coluber, helps against the biting of the
Crocodile. And if a man have with him the gall of this Adder, the Crocodil shall
not grieve him nor noy him: and that most ieoperdous and fearful beast dare
not, nor may do against him in no manner of wise, dommage nor grief, which
bears the gall of the said Adder.

( Addition.
The Adder is not much unlike the water Snake, only the head flatter like a
Newte, the skin more brown, and at the tail a hard tippe, like a spur of a
young Cock, and is very venomous.)

Of Damula. cap. 35.
DAmula and Dama also is a wild Goat, as Papias says. And libro. 12. Isid.
says, that the wild Goat is called Damula, and is a fearful beast, and dare
not fight, and so cannot defend him but by flight, and in steed of armor and
wepon, this wild Goat has ableness and lightness to run and to fly. And
Marcianus says.

Dente tuetur Aper, defendunt cornua Ceruum.
Imbelles Damae, quid nisi praeda sumus?
The Bore defends him with tuskes, and the Heart with horns, and we wild
Goats fight not, what be we but pray? The wild Goat loves mountains and
woods, and eats medicinal herbs and grass, with good smell, and
gathers and biteth crops and stalks of twigs, and of and of branches, and
when he is wounded, he eats Dragantea, and takes so the arrow out of the
body. Taragon.
The blood thereof is medicinal, as Plin. says libr. 28. for it softneth
sinews that be shronk, and does away ache of the joints, and smites and
puts out venime. Serpents hate and fly the wild Goat, and may not suffer
the breath of him, as he says. This Goat is most sharp of sight, and swifte
of course and of running. Look before in eodem, De Caprea agrosti.

Of Dromedario. cap. 36.
DRomedarin: is an heard and keeper of Dromedes; and Dromedus is a manner kind
of a Camel, as Isid. says lib. 12. And he says that Dromedus is a manner
kind of Camel, and less in stature than a Camel, and is much swifter of
course and running: and has therefore the name Dromedus, of swift running,
which is called Drombs in Greek, and the Dromedus goes an hundred miles and
twenty and more in ane day, and the same beast cheweth his (...) an Ox and a
Camel, and so Dromedarri be masters of Dromedis, properly so speak, as Papias
says. But the Gloss super f^^. 60. says, that both Dromedarius and Dromis is
accounted a beast less than a Camel, and much more swifte. And Mudian and
Epha be countries beyond Arabia, and therein be many Dromedaries, and be ge^^th
in youth and be the more (...) to run as Auicen says, lest they be let of
their running, by desire and liking of females: and are so swifle by reason of
long pa^^ (...) for they have most large p^ce, as Aristotle says, and Auicen
and Plinith (...) and also for great heat: for it is the most hottest beast of
kind complexion, and so strong heat consumes land wastreth in him all
ventositie and fastness, and suffers him not to (...) ouercharged with much
flesh and fatness. Also for ableness of members, for his legs be long and
small, and full of sinnewes, and is therefore light and able to moving, and
strong to continue course and running, and is a light beast for scarcity of
meat, for it is not a beast of much meat, but is sufficed with little meat,
and scarcely eats heye, and rindes, and loves well the stoanes of dates, and
is content with them at even after right long iourneyes. As Plinius says, his
blood is full hot, sharp, and thin: therefore milk of Dromedaries is full
thin, and fleeting, more than milk of other beasts, as Constantine says, and
less nourishing, and more heating, and more departing thick humors. Look
before De Camelo, that has nigh the very same propertyes that this Beast has.

Of Dipsade. cap. 37.
DIpsas and Dipsades is the feminine gender, and is a Serpent that is called
Situla in Latin, and has that name Sytula for it that he biteth dies for
thirst, as Isidore says libro. 12. And such Adders are subtle and small, and
uneath they be seen when men tread on them. The venim of them slays or it be
felt, so that uneath he feels soreness and shall dye, and is a manner kind
of Serpents, as it is said before De Aspide, Look there.

Of Dracone. cap. 38.
THe Dragon is called Draco, and is most greatest of all Serpents, as Isidore
says lib. 12. The Greeks call him Draconia, and often he is drawn out of his
den, and reeseth up into the air, and the air is moved by him, and also the
Sea swells against his venime, and he has A creast with a little mouth, and
draws breath at small pipes and straight, and reareth his tongue, and has
teeth like a saw, and has strength, and not only in teeth, but also in his
tail, and grieueth both with biting and with stinging, and has not so (...)
as other serpents: for to the end to slay any thing, to him venime: is; not
needful: for whom he finds he slays, and the Elephant is not ^^re from
him, for all his greatness of body, for he lurketh in the way, where the
Elephant goes, and binds and spanneth his legs and strangleth and slateth
him. The Dragon breeds in I^de and in Aethiopia, there as is great burning of
continual heat, as Isidore says li. 12.

Plin. li. 8. ca. 13. speaks of the dragon and says, that the Dragon is xx.
cubits great, and breeds among the Aethiopes. Often four or five of them,
fasten their tails togethers, and teareth up the heads, and sail over sea,
and over rivers, to get good meat. Also cap. 12. besayeth. Between Elephants
and Dragons is everlasting fighting, for the Dragon with his tail binds and
spanneth the Elaphaunt, and the Elephaunt with his foot, and with his nose
throws down the Dragon, and the Dragon with his tail, binds and spanneth
the Elephants legs and makes him fall: but the Dragon buyeth it full sore,
for while he slays the Elephant, the Elephant falls upon him, and slays
him?

Irem ca. 14. The Elephant seeing the Dragon upon a tree, busieth him to break
the tree to suite the dragon, and the dragon leapeth upon the Elephant, and
busieth to bite him between the nosethrile, and assayleth the Elephants eyes,
and makes him blind some time, and leapeth upon him some time behind, and
byteth him, and sucketh his blood, and at the last, after long fighting, the
Elephant wexeth feeble for great blindness insomuch, that he falls upon the
Dragon, and slays in his dieng, the Dragon that him slays.

The cause why the Dragon desires his blood, is coldness of the Elephants blood
by the which the Dragon desires to cool himself, as Isi. says super illum
locum Leuitic. 14. Attraxerunt ventum sicut Dracones, They drew wind as
Dragons.

There Jerome says, that the Dragon is a full thirsty beast, insomuch, that
vnueth he may have water enough to quench his great thirst: and opens his
mouth therefore against the wind, to quench the burning of his thirste in that
wise. Therefore when he sees ships sail in the sea in great wind, he flies
against the sail, to take there cold wind, and overthrows the ship sometime
for greatness of body and by strong reese against the sail, and when the
shipmen see the Dragon come nigh, and know his coming by water that swells
against him, they strike the sail anon, and escape in that wise.

Also Solinus says, that Aethiopians use Dragons blood, against burning
heat, and eat the flesh against diverse evils, for they can depart the
venimme from his flesh: and he has venim only in his tongue and in his gall,
and therefore they cut off the tongue, and throw away the gall, in which the
venime is received: and so when the venim is taken away, they use the other
deal of the body, both in meat and in medicine. And it seems, that David
touches this, where he says: Dedisti eum efcam populis Aethiopium, Thou
gave him for meat to the people of Aethiopia.

Also Plin. says, that for might of the venime, his tongue is always areared,
and sometime he sets the air on fire, by heat of his venime, so that it
seems that he blows and casts fire out of his mouth: and sometime he
blows out outrageous blastes, and thereby the air is corrupted and infected,
and thereof comes pestilent euilles, and they dwell sometime in the sea, and
sometime swine in rivers, and lurk sometime in caves and in dens, and sleep
but seldom, but wake nigh always. And they devour beasts and sowles, and have
right sharp sight, and see therefore their pray a far out of mountains, and
fight with biting strokes and stinging, and sets him most on the eyes and
nose of the beast that he fights with.

Therefore Plin. says li. 8. That he grieueth most the Elephant in the eyes
and in the mouth, and makes him often blind, so that sometime the Elaphaunt
may not eat and dies therefore in that wise.

Also of the Dragon Arist. speaks lib. 7. and says, that the Dragons biting,
that cateth venomous beasts is perilous, as the Dragons biting that eats
Scorpions, for against his biting uneath is any remedy or medicine found. Also
lib. 28. Plinius says, that all venomous beasts fly and void the grease and
fatness of the dragon: and his grease meddled with honnie, cures and heals
dimnesse of eyes. Also libr. 7. Aristot. says, those Fishes dye; that are
bitten of the Dragon.

( Addition.
Of the wonderful greatness of Dragons and how many sorts has been, and of
the mischiefs they have done, read the Chronicle of the Doom.)

Of Equo. chap. 39.
HOrses are called Equi, and have that name for they are joined and coupled in
carts or in Chariots, even, and and not odd, and they be also coupled in
shape and in course. Also the horse is called Caballus, and has that name of
his hollow feet: for he makes therewith a cave or a pit in the ground there
he goes, and other beasts have no such feet, as Isidore says lib. 12. And
among many men the horse is called Sonipes, for he foundeth with his feet. And
horses are joyful in fields, and smell Battayles, and be comforted with noise
of trumpets, to battle and to fighting: and be excited to run with noise
that they know, and are sorry when they be overcome, and glad when they have
the masterie, and so feels and knows their enemies in battle, so far
forth, that they arise on their enemies with biting and smiting: and also some
know their own Lords, and forgets mildness, if their Lords be overcome:
and some horse suffers no man to ride on his back, but only his own Lord.
and many horses weep when their Lords be dead: and it is said that horses
weep for sorrow, right as a man does, and so ye kind of horse and of man, is
meddled in Centaures, such beasts. Also often men that ^all sight, take evidence
and divine guess that shall befall by sorrow, or by the joy that the Horse
makes. Horses of Persia, or of Cicilia, live long time, fifty year and more:
and horses of Gallia, of Inde, and of Spain line less time. And heereto
Isidore says, that old men mean, that in gentle horses, noble men take heed
of four things: of shape and of fairness, of wilfulness and of color. Of
shape, that he be strong and sad of body, and according to strength and might
and height, and length, and breadth, that the side be long, and some deal
small, that the loins be great, and the thighs round and large, and broad
breasted, and all the body full sad, and full of brawne, and the foot dry,
and hoof hollow and sad. Fairness is known by little head, and the skin
cleaving nigh to ye bone, if the ears be little and sharp, if the eyes be
great and the nosethrills large, if he bears up the head, if the maane be
thick, and the tail long, and if the hoof be well pight and round. The
wilfulness is known, if he be bold of heart, and swifte of feet, if ye
members quake: it is token of strength, and if he be soon areared, and rises
soon from great rest: or else, if he be soon stinted in swifte course and
running. The color is known, for the color in them, is now red, now
black, now white, and now graye, and now diverse, and now speckeled. The
diverse color beautifieth much or disfigureth an horse, and is a token to know
strength and will of a horse: but to pursue by order, and to make process
orderly, it were long. Huc vsque Isidorus. libro. 12. Libro. 7. capitulo. 43.
Plinius speaks of the Horse, and says: That the Horses of Scythia fight for
their Lords, and eschew to engender with their own damme, for in them is a
manner knowledge of kindred. And Aristotle speaks hereof libro. 8. and says,
that a King of the North had a very fair Mare, that foaled him a very fair
horse: and the king would have had some Colte gotten of the same horse of his
own damme, and covered her face: when the Mares head was uncovered, anon the
horse knew her, and fled, and fell down from an high place, and dyed for
sorrow.

Also in company of Mares, the horse goes more gladly with the mare colts,
than with his damme, and be glad with the noise of Simphonie and of a trumpet,
and starteth and reeseth on his enemies, and bodeth war and fighting, and
weepeth. for their friends and Lords: and these horses are accounted best, in
war and in battle, that thrust the head deepest into the water when they
drink, for he means, that such horses be not let in running with heaviness
of urine. Also libr. 28. cap. 9. he says, that the gall of an horse is
accounted among venim, and therefore it was not lawful for Idolatrous Priests
to touch the horse: his fresh blood and raw is venomous, as the blood of a
Bull: the Horse foame drunk with Asses milk slays venomous worms. Also
Aristotle and Auicen mean, that ye horse casts his teeth, and the elder he
is, the whiter are his teeth. Also libro. 5. Aristotle says, that the male
horse lives xxv. year, and gendereth from three year to xxv. And the Mare
lives longer, and gendereth to xl. year: and when the horse begins to
gender, then his voice is greater, and so fares the Mares also, and they love
the work of generation more than other beasts, as he says libro 5. Also lib.
7. he says, that sometime horses have the podagre, and loose the soales of
their feet, and then grows new: and the sign hereof is quaking of the
right gendring stone, and horses that be fed in houses, have an evil that is
called Illiaca passio, and the token thereof is, that the hinder members
crimpleth togethers, and be constrained, and this horse is tied from his meat,
and if he be let blood he shall be help. And also an horse has shrinking of
sinews, and the token thereof is, that all the veins be straight upon the
head and the neck, and it grieueth him for to go. Also horses gather venimme,
and have another evil in the mouth that is called Forem, and the token of this
evil is, that that matter falls to the roof of the mouth, and his breath is
hot, and this evil is without remedy, except it heal by himself. And sometime
an horse is mad, and the token token thereof is, that his ears bend toward the
neck, and this evil has no medicine. And the horse has sickness in the
bladder, and the token thereof is, that he may not piss, and also he draws
his loins and soles. Also an horse is bitten grievously with a fly that is
called Mugelis. The biting of that Fly, Asilus, the horse fly.
grieueth full sore both Horses and Mules: for he makes to rise thereon both
blains, and whelkes, Hirudo, ye brent fly or leache.
and oftentimes horses dye by venime thereof. And the horse knows his
neighing, that will fight with him, and has lyking to stand in medes and to
swim in water, and to drink troublous and thick water, and if the water be
clear, the horse stampeth and stirs it with his foot, to make it thick. Huc
vsque Arist. lib. 6.

Of Equa. cap. 40.
THe Mare is called Equa, and that name comes of the name Equus. And li. 7.
Arist. says, that if a Mare being with foale smells the snuff of a candle,
she casts her foale. Item, Idem Mares go in leese together, and if one of
them dye, and leave her Colte alive, another Mare feeds and nourishes him,
for the kind of Mares loves beasts of ye same kind. Also libro. 8. cap. 42.
Plin. says, That a Mare foaleth standing, and loves her Coltes passing other
beasts: and if a Colte leeseth his damme, another Mare feeds and nourishes
him, and loves him as it were her own. Also he says that in the forehead of
the Colte breeddeth a black skin, of the quantity of a Sedge, and the Mare
lycketh it with her tongue, and takes it away, and receives never the Colt to
suck her teats, except it be first taken away. And Plyn. calls that skin
Veneficium amoris, for women that be witches, use that skin in their
charmings, when they will excite a man to love. Also Aristotle says, that the
Mare is proud, and has joy of her mane, and is sorry when it is shorn: and
when her maane is short, her lyking of lechery is quenched: as though the
virtue of love, were in the maane.

Also lib. 8. Arist. says, that a Bird that is called Ibis, fights with the
horse, because the horse drives her out of her pasture and leese, for Ibis is
feeble of sight, and has a voice as an horse, and when he flies above an
horse, he stonieth him, and makes him fly, and slays him sometime.

( Addition.
That is a Fable, for the bird is but of the bigness of a Snype, and a very
filthy and stinking bird.)

Of Poledro. ca. 41.
A Colte is called Poledrus, and Pullus equinus, also: and is a Mares son,
and has that name while he sucketh. And li. 7. Arist. says, that in his
forhead when he is foaled, is found Iconemor, that is called also, Amoris
veneficium, and the Mare licketh it off with her tongue, and takes it away,
and hydeth or eats it: and women Witches have proverbs thereof as he says.
Also li. 13. he says, that the hinder part of the Colte is more than the
former part, and when the Colte wexeth, the former part wexeth upward, and
therefore in many horses, the former part is higher than the hinder: and
therefore while he is a colte he may touch his head with his hinder foot, and
may not so when he is of age: and all the while he is a Colte, he loves his
damme with wonderful great affection, and follows her, whereeuer she goes,
and if it happens that he leeseth her, he presently neigheth.

The Colte is not lyttered with straw, nor curried with an horse comb, nor
arrayed with trapping, and gaye harness, nor smitten with spurs, nor sadled
with a saddell, nor tamed with bridle: but he follows his dam freely, and
eats grass, and his feet be not pearred with nails, but he is suffered to
run hither and thither freely, but at the last he is set to work and to
travail, and is held and tied, and lead with halters and with raynes, and
taken from his damme, and may not suck his dammes teates, but he is taught in
many manner wise to go easily and soft, and as Isi. says li. 18. he is set
to carts, charyots, and chaires, and to travel and bearing of horsemen in
chiualry.

The silly horse colte is foaled to diverse happes of fortune: for Isi. says in
eod. libro, that horses were sometime hallowed in diverse usage of the Gods: for
chariot horse were ordained and hallowed to the Sun, for four chaunges of
the Sun in one year. In Springing time, in Summer, in Harvest, and in
Winter, the which times changes by virtue of the Sun. And carte horses were
hallowed to ye Moon, that is seen in double time by night and by day.

Therefore they that worship ye Moon, couple always two horses, a white and a
black: and three horses that drew in one carte, they hallowed to the Gods of
hell, for fiends draw to them men in three ages, in childhood, in youth, and in
age.

And these men coupled togethers horses of diverse colors, and durst not well
couple togethers past seven horses at once, and lykened that number to the
seven stars, by the moving of the which seven stars they supposed
generally that the world is ruled: or else to the number of seven days, for by
the passing about of the seven Circles, they say, that this life passes and
ends: and describes therefore wonderfully the colors of horses, as Isid.
says there. For they hallowed red horses to the Fire, Red. White. Brown or
baye. Pale or mouse dunne.
or to the Sun: and white to the Air: and brown to the earth: and blew to
the Water and to the Sea. And they rode red horses in Summer, for then all
thing heateth: and white horses in winter, for then all thing whiteth by cold
and by frost: and graye in springing time, for then all thing wexeth green:
and brown and black in Harvest, for then all thing dries, and fails as it
were, of the first fairness. And also there he says, ye they hallowed red
horses to Mars, that is named God of battle and of war, or for the banners
of the Romans were dressed with read silk, or for Mars had joy and lyking in
blood. And they hallowed white horses to the West country, or to the fair
weather: and green to the flowers of the earth: and blewe to the sea and to
the water, for water is bluish of color: and they hallowed yeolow horses,
and horses of diverse colors and purpured, to the Rain-bowe, that they call
Arcum, for the Rainbow has many colors: and this cursed doing men used
sometime by procuring and enticing of fiends, about the Elements of the world,
as Isidore says. Therefore this world is to be despised, for many has
fulfilled the likeness of Sathanas. Huc vsque Isidorus libro. 8. And now at
the last, take heed of the horse colte: for the going and pace, hard or soft,
easy or uneasy, that he uses in youth, uneath he may leave it in age.

( Addition.
The Irish Hobbie, and the Genet of Naples, the Coursers of Tartaria, and the
Englysh stoned horses, are the four principal and best kinds of horses in
the world: the Flemish Mare for the breeding.)

Of Elephante. cap. 42.
THe Elephant is called Elephas, and Elephantus also, and has that name of
Elphio in Greek, that is to say, an hill, and that for great quantity of his
body: but the Indies call him Barro, and therefore his voice is called
Barritus, and his teeth are called Ehur, and his snowte and wroote is called
Promuscis, or Proboscis, for therewith he brings his meat to his mouth, as
Isido. says, libro. 12. and says, that this Beast is sharp in wrath and in
battle. Upon these beasts the Medes and Perses used to fight in towers of
tree, and threw and shot out darts, as it were out of towers and Castles.
These beasts have wit and mind passing other beasts, and go in fear in
their manner going, and void and fly the mouse, and do the deed of
generation backward: and the female foleth in water or in wood, and leaves her
foale where she foaleth, because of dragons that be enemies to them, and
spanneth them and slaieth them: she goes with foale two years, and gendereth
not but once, and he lives three hundred year, as Isid. says li. 12. And
lib. 8. ca. 1. Pli. says, that among beasts ye Elephant is most of virtue: so
ye uneath among men is so great redines sound. For as he tells, in ye new
Moon they come together in great companies, and bath and wash them in a river,
and come so together in the new of ye Moon, and lot each to other, and turn
so again to their own places, and they make the young go before in the
turning again, and keeps them busily, and teach them to do in the same wise:
and when they be sick, they gather good herbs, and ere they use the herds,
(...)
they heave up the head and look up toward heaven, and pray for help of God
in a certain Religion: and they be good of wit, and learn well, and are easy
to teach, insomuch yt they be taught to know ye king, and to worship him, and
busieth to do him reverence, and to bend ye knees in worship of him. Also ca.
5. it is said, that if Elephants see a man coming against them that is out of
the way in wilderness, for that they would not afray him, they will draw
themselves somewhat out of the way, and then they stint, and pass little and
little before him, and teach him the way, and if a dragon come against him,
they fight with ye dragon, and defend ye man, and put them forth to defend the
man strongly and mightily, and do so namely when they have young foales: for
they dred yt the man seeks their foales, and therefore they purpose first to
deliver them of ye man, yt they may more safely feed their young, and keep them
ye more warely. Also li. 8. ca. 6. Always they go together, and the eldest
leads ye company, and the next in age helps in the doing. When they shall
pass over a river or a water, they send ye young before, lest ye foord were
let by coming of ye more Elephants, and so they might not pass conveniently.
Also among them is a strange shamefastnes: for if one of the^ be overcome, he
ye is overcome, flies the voice of ye victor, and they do ye deeds of
generation in privy places, when ye male is five years old, and the females x.
year, and that but in two year, as he tells: and in these two year, but
only five days, and seldom the sixth day, as he says: and be full perilous
in time of generation, and namely the wild Elephants, for they throw down
houses and stables of the Indians, and therefore the Indians hide that season
their tame female Elepha^ts.

And Elephants be best in chivalry when they be tame: for they bear towers
of tree, and throw down scaffolds, and ouerturne men of arms, and that is
wonderful, for they dread not men of arms ranged in battle, and dread and
fly the voice of the least sound of a Swine. Also cap. 40. with forhead and
snowte he throws down high palms, and eats the fruit thereof. Also
between Elephants and Dragons is perpetual wrath and strife: For that one
has envy at that other, for great might and strength, and for quantity of
body, and the Dragon loves to drink the Elephauntes blood, to cool his
burning heat, for that blood is most cold, as it is said before in the same
Book, where he entreats of the Dragon. Look there.

De naso Elephantis. Chap. 43.
ARistotle lib. 1. and Auicen mean, that the Elephants nose is long, and
strong with bolning, and hard as an horn: and he uses his nose in steed of
an hand, and thereby he takes meat and drink, and puts it in his mouth,
and so the Elephant has two pappes in the breast, and strong tuskes in the
mouth, and his tongue is full little in comparison to his body, and is seen
within: and is but seldom seen without, but when he lycketh his lyppes after
meat and drink, and in him is found but one gut folden and wrapped in many
manner wise: and that gut is in him in steed of stomach, and thereafter is but
one other by the which his dirte passes out, and has a great liver, four
times so great as the liver of an Ox, and has a little mylte and spleen in
comparison to his body, and that is as Auicen says, for in him Melancholia
that humor passes in to nourishing. Also li. 7. Arist. says, that when he is
gendred, teeth be gendered in him. With his snowte and nose he wrooteth up
trees, and breaths therewith when he swimmeth, and casts out water: and
that hard snowte Calceus is made of hard gristles. And when the Elephant
sits, he bends his feet: and may not bend four at once, for heuinesse and
weight of the body: but he leans to the right side or to the left side, and
sleeps standing, and he bends the hinder legs right as a man. Also libro.
5. the male gendereth at the fifthe year, and the female at the tenth, and
unto forty years, and rests after that she has foaled three years, and
after that she has conceived, she touches not the male, and gorth with fool
in her womb, two years: and when the foale is foaled, it is like to a Calfe
of two or three months old. Also lib. 6. the Elephaunt has sickness that
comes of ventositie and of wind, and by that sickness, he may not piss nor
shite. And if he eats earth he dies, but if he be used thereto, but sometime
he swalloweth stones: and has also ache in the joints, and there-against
helps drink of cold water, and grass and herbs plunged in honey, for these
two things lets flux of the womb: and when the ache is so sore, that he may
not sleep, his sholders must be balmed with oil and hot water, and thereby he
is help: and the same does Swines flesh roasted, laid and bound to the
shoulders that aketh. And if he has iron in his body, Oil is given him to
drink, and the iron is drawn out by drinking of Oil: and if he may not
drink Oil, medicines are sodden in Oil, and given him to eat. Also libro.
8. he says, that the male is more of body and more bold and hardy then the
female, but the male is tamed by beating, and when he is beaten he is obedient
while the hunter sits upon him, and when the hunter lights down, his fore
feet be bound until he be tame. And in the same book in littera F. it
follows, that he is more able to be tamed, and more obedient then all other
wild beasts, and has more wit, and feels cold in winter, and cold wind,
and is a beast that uses much waters and rivers, and dwells beside rivers,
and wadeth in water unto the chinne, and swimmeth: but he may not dure long in
swimming for heuinesse of the body. And Elephauntes be without Gall, as
Aristotle says libro. 14. but they be accidentallye cruel and fierce. When
they be too soon angered, or if they be wine dronken, to make them sharp to
fight in battle. Also li. 18. Aristo. says, that no beast lives so long as
the Elephant, and that his complexion is like to the air that he dwells in:
and so it needs that she go with foale two years, for greatness of the
foale, that may not be perfectly, and complete shapen in less time.

( Addition.
The Elephant, of all four footed beasts, and next unto man, is most of
perseueraunce. When the Indians bring them to the wars, they put great
pack-saddles on their backs, such as in Italy they use for the great Mules.
These they girde with two chains of iron in steed of girts. Upon these
saddles, they place little Turrets or Cages made of wood: every Turret
contains three men, between the Turrets sits an Indian on the back of
the beast, and speaks to him in his language, which the Elephant
understands and obayeth. Seven men are placed upon one Elephant when they
go to wars, and all armed with coats of fence, and targets, bows, lances,
darts, and slyngs: and to the snowte or trunk of the Elephant is fastened a
sharp sword, of two cubits in length and of a handful broad, wherewith he
fights also. The Elephants are of great strength, the females more fierce
than the males. The two great teeth, are growing forth of the upper iawe, in
height fourteen and sixteen handfulls high, two yards, and two yards quarter,
and sometime seven foot and six inches of height.

Jews Vertomannus 3. lib. of Persia, chap. 6. etc.)

De Elephantibus. chap. 44.
OF Elephants Solinus speaks and says, that he keeps the course and order
of the stars: and Elephants in wexing of the Moon go to Rivers, and when
they are besprong with lycour, they salute and welcome the rising of the Sun
with certain mouings, as they may, and then they turn again into woods and
lands. Their youth is known by whiteness of teethe, of the which teeth,
that one is always working, and that other is spared, least he should wexe
dull with continual smiting and rubbing: but when they are pursued with
hunters, then they smite both togethers, and break them, that they be no
longer pursued, when ye teeth be appayred and defiled: for they know, that
their teethe, are the cause of their peril.

They gender seldom, and then they wash themselves often in running water, and
turn not again to the flock, before the washing and bathing. They fight
never for females, nor know not spouse breach: and if they fight in any case,
they be sull busy to help them that are hurt and wounded in the middle among
them, and defend them more than themselves. And when they be taken, they are
made tame and mild with Barley: and a cave or ditche is made under the earth,
as it were a pitfall in the Elephaunts way, and unawares he falls therein,
and then one of the hunters comes to him, and beats and smites him, and
pricketh him full sore: and then another hunter comes and smites the first
hunter, and does him away, and defends the Elephaunt, and gives him Barley
to eat: and when he has eaten thrice or four times, then he loves him that
defended him, and is afterward mild and obedient to him.

And if it happens, that he swalloweth a Worm that is called Camelion, he
takes and eats of wild Olyue Tree, and is so help against the venimme. His
womb is soft, and his ridge is hard: and therefore when he fights with the
Unicorne, he puts forth the back against him, least he stick him with his
horn in the soft bellye. He has little hair, and no bristelles, and large
ears, long and thin, and hanging downewarde.

And he reeseth and smites therewith full sore, when he is wrath against the
Dragon that he hates full sore: and no wonder.

For the Dragon desires to drink his blood when he may. And the dragon
assaileth him never, but when the Elephant is full of drink, that he may take
the more plenty of the weary Elephants blood, when he is full of moisture
within, Huc vsque Soli. that sets many other propertyes, the which Plinius
rehearses before.

Of eodem. cap. 45.
I Have read yt in Phisiologus book, that the Elephant is a beast that passes
all other four footed beasts, in quantity, in wit, and in mind. For among
other doings, Elephants lie never down in sleeping: But when they be wearye,
they lean to a tree, and so rest somewhat. And men lie in a wait to aspy
their resting places privily, for to cut the tree in the other side: and the
Elephaunt comes, and is not ware of the fraud, and leans to the tree and
breaks it with weight of his body, and falls down with the breaking, and
lies there: and when he sees he may not help himself in falling, he cries
and roareth in a wonderful manner, and by his noise and crieng comes sodeinly
many young Elephants, and rear up the old, little and little, with all their
strength and might: and while they areare him with wonderful affection and
love, they bend themselves with all their might and strength. Elephaunts hate
the work of lechery, but only to gender of springing. And so it is said,
that when virtue of love pricketh the Elephants of Inde, the female goes
before Eastward, and the male follows her until they come to a privy place,
and there the female in some wise gotteth Mandragora, and eats first the
fruit thereof, and then her male eats often the same, and gendereth with her,
and she conceiueth, as it is said. But for greatness of the foale, the female
bears long time the foale in the womb, but in time of foaling she feeds
and nourishes her foale in waters, and in Islands, for dread of the Dragon,
least he should swallow the tender foale, or lead him away: and while the dam
trauaileth in foaling, the male defends her with all his strength and might.
Also there it is said, that the Elephauntes bones burnt, chase and drive away
Serpents and all venomous beasts. Also there is another thing said, that is
full wonderful: for he says, that among the Aethiopians in some countries
Elephantes be hunted in this wise: There go in the desert two maidens all naked
and bare, with open hair of the head, and one of them bears a vessel, and
the other a swoorde: and these maidens begin to sing alone, and the beast
has liking when he hears their song, and comes to them, and licketh their
breasts, and falls a sleep anon for liking of the song, and then the one
maid sticks him in the throat or in the side with a sword, and the other
takes his blood in a vessel, and with that blood people of the same country
dye cloth, and do color it therewith.

( Addition.
Iuorie comfort the heart, and helps conception. Syluius says, we must
take heed that it be not counterfeit, with the bones of other beasts. Iuorie
is cold and dry in the first degree.

The shauings of Iuorye with pure honnie, takes away the spots in the face.
The powder of Iuory burnt, and drunk with Goats blood, breaks the stone in
the kidneyes and bledder, without all peril. Gesner in fol. 436.)

For the better understanding of Elephantes, in what coast they most abound, I
have forth of Ortelius (set unto a common view) the Empire of the Abissines, or
of Presbiter John, as follows.
THE Empire of the Abissines or of Presbiter John, This is added.
whom the inhabitants of Europe do call Presbiter John, is surnamed of the
Moors Aticlabassi, of his own people, that is of the Abissines, he is termed
Acegue and Neguz, yt is Emperor and king for the proper name (as among us is
given by the parents.) They seem also even as the manner is, among ye Roman
Bishops, to alter their proper name in coming to the Empire, for he which in
our age entered into the league of friendship with the king of Portugale, was
called Antoni Tingil, which name when he came to the Empire, he changed into
David: This Presbiter John, is without doubt to be reckoned among the
greatest Monarchies of our age, as he, whose dominions stretches between the
Tropikes, from the red sea, almost to the Aethiopike Occean, and to describe
somewhat more dilygently, the limits of his Empire: on the North side he has
Egypt to neighbor, which is under the Turks: on ye East side it stretches
out to the red sea, and in parts to the gulf of Barbary: on the South it is
fenced, by nature with the mountains of the Moon, but on ye West it is limited
with the kingdom of Manegogue, with the kingdom of Nubea, with the river of
Nilus. By these written limits it seems to comprehend, the Aethiop of the
ancients, surnamed under Egypt: The Countries Trogloditica, and
Cinamoniphera, and a part of the innermost Africa: These regions at this day
are distinguished with many diverse names, as the Table does show, all the
inhabitauntes call themselves Abissmi, they are of a brown color, and
Christians, as it appears by the letters of the foresaid David, written to
Clement the seventh, of whose manners, kind of life, and religion, I have
gathered these few lines out of the iourneye book of Fraunces Aluaretius,
imprinted in the Italian tongue.

There is in this Country a great number of Monestaryes of both kinds, and
in the Monestaryes of men there enters no woman, nor living creature of the
feminine kind. The Monks for the most part, do fast bread and water fiftye
days, for among them is great scarcity of fish, namelye in the innermost
parts of the land, for although the rivers be full of fish, yet they give not
themselves to fishing: Some of them at that time of their fast, do scarcelye
taste bread, but only live by herbs. There are among them, which during the
time of their fast sleep not, but sitting in the water up to the chin. They
say Mass, they go in procession, with Crosses and Sencers (as the Romish
Apostates do) the Monks wear long hair, the Priests not so, none of them
wear shoes, not any of them with shoes, no not the lay men can go with
shoes into the Church: They keep Saturn day, and Sol day, holy days: all
be circumcised, yea, the very women, they are likewise baptized. In the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, but not until they be
forty days old, they which live not so long, dye without Baptism: All that
are baptized, do receive at that present the holy Eucarist, having much cold
water cast upon their mouths, that the children may the easilyer swallow it
down, and the names which are given them are significant: They say that they
were turned to the christian religion by Queen Candace, of whom mention is
made in the Acts of the Apostles, assembled together at Jerusalem, all the
contents whereof they do most studeouslye observe: The commen people do
commonly keep two or three Wives, without breach of law, according to the
wealth they have to keep them, but such the Church men drive out of their
temples: it is also lawefull for them to make divorce. The Gentlemen do make
great dainty of raw Cowes flesh, dipped in blood, as it were in any broth
or Potage.

In all the kingdom of Presbiter John, there is no use of Copper coin, but in
steed thereof they way pure and unwrought gold. Moreover Salt (but this is in
use, not only in those Countries, but also almost through out all Africa,)
serves in the way of bartering or exchange: The same Presbiter John in some
places does pullishe iron in form of Pellettes. But Pepper is in so great
price among them, whatsoever a man will buy, he may easilye redeem for it:
These Countries have well near all kind of Beasts and Birds, as Elephants,
Lions, Tygres, Lynxes, Badgers, Apes, Parrets, and Hearts, and this is contrary
to the opinion of the auncyents, who denies that in Africa breeds this
beast namely the Elephaunt: (...)
but for the space of six years, in yt which Aluaretius made abode in these
quarters; he writes, that he saw neither Bear, Connie, Godlefinche, nor
Cuckoe.

Locustes are a peculyar mischievous plague in these quarters, whose number
sometimes grows so great, that they seem to darken the Sky, spoiling now
this, now that province, in a manner of Enimyes, that they devout all their
corn in harvest, they feed upon leaves, and barks of trees, and they so
spoil the fields, that oftentimes the inhabitants are compelled to leave
their old dwelling, and for want of food, to go to other places.

There is in this Country a City called Gassumo, sometimes the seat (as it
is specified in the Cronicles, of queen Saba, which they say was called
Maqueda) and they say moreover, that she had a son by king Solomon, named
Meilech, they are persuaded, that this City was after inhabited by Queen
Candaca, but it is best for the Reader, desirous of these things, to read
Fraunces Alueretius, who has diligently set forth those things which he:
observed in his Embassage. Let him read also a little book of Damian A-goes
touching matters of Aethiopia.

Of Hedo. cap. 46.
A Kidde is called Hedus, and has that name of Edendo, eating, and is little
and fat, and his flesh is of good sauoure, as Isidore says, libro. 12. his
kindlye dryness is tempered, by moisture of the age, as Isaac says in
Dietis. And so the Kidde is better and more according to digestion, and namelye
the male, for his flesh nourishes well, and breeds good blood, and has
strong heat by benefit of the age, and therefore Kid flesh for temperatnesse
thereof is good and wholesome to them that recouereth out of sickness, and is
according to man's kind, and namelye to them that live delicately in case and
rest.

And his Wool is more long and rough then is Lambs Wool, and his flesh is
better and more obedient to digestion for temperatenesse thereof in moisture
and in heat. And the Kidde has full sharp sight and simple looking, and
looks aside, and knows and seeks his damme with bleating, as Plinius
says, libro. 8. capitulo primo. And it is said, that his lycour eaten
helps and heals dimnesse of eyes in them that he called Noctilupi.

Also libro. 28. cap. 10. he says, That skins of Kiddes heals venomous
bilings, if they be laid thereto all hot, and Kidde Wool burnt, drives
away Serpents with the smell thereof: and the skins of Kiddes be used to
heal wounds, his blood helps against venunme, and his ruenning helps
against venomous glue drunk or eaten, and also against blood of a Bull it
helps, if it be drunk. Huc vsque Plinius. And is a mild beast, and myeth
not nor fights, he cheweth his cudde, and is clean, and was ordained to
sacrifice in old time, he skippeth and leapeth, and is full swift, and fat
within and fleshie, and tough and lean without, and eats and gnaweth
stalks, twigges, and branches, and loves specially leaves of Iuie and of
such shrubs.

( Addition.
They are not to be pastured in Orchards and gardens, nor to be fed among
coppises and frith, for they will spoil the young springes, and kill the
stocks: void and barren soyles are best.)

( Addition.
To make Pomatum, mix Goats fat with the soft of five apples, striped in rose
or sweet water, and cloves sticked in the apples, put thereto Camfiri, and make
these in an Ointment, and anoint thy face, it makes the face fair, smooth,
and without spots. Also to cure the stopping of blood, ye comes out of the
stomach, drink Goats blood, Ges. in fol. 317.

Of Eruca. cap. 47.
ERuca, the Malshrag is a worm with many feet, Caterpiller sometime taken for
the canker worm, which has also many feet.
and breeds in cole leaves and in vine leaves, and fretteth and gnaweth
twigges, branches, fruit, and flowers, and has that name Eruca of Erodendo,
gnawing, for he gnaweth leaves of trees and of herbs, Called also a Palmer.
as Isidore says, libro. 12. Thereof Plautus makes mention and says, that
this evil beast and wicked is enimye to the vine leaf, and wrappeth himself
in the vine leaf and cleaves thereto, and flies not away hither and thither,
and as a fly does that is half fed, and leaves the leaves, but this
Malshragge abides upon twigges and leaves, and wastes them all with gnawing
and biting, and is slow in creeping. Huc vsque Isidorus li. 12. Libro. 8.
Plinius says, that the Malshragge is rough, as it were hairie. For in crops
of trees, when he has gnawen the branch, and destroyed the greines thereof, he
weaueth certain webs of his own guts, as the Spinner does, and wrappeth
himself in those webbes, and keeps his shrewd Semen all the winter long. And
he lays certain eggs, of the which comes other brood of that kind in
springing time when trees bourgen, and by multitude of them, trees be grieved
and lose their fruit, and so does Iuie and tender herbs. And the Malshrag is
a soft worm and full of matter, distinguished with diverse colors, shining
as a Star by night. And has many colors and foul shaped by day. And is
not without some pestilentiall venime, for when he creeps upon an hot
member of a man, he scaldeth the skin, and makes whelkes arise, and
changes his shape, The silk worm.
as Bombax does that makes silk, and this Eruca loves the shape of a flyeng
Worm, for he takes thin wings and broad, and flies up hither and thither
freely in the air, and as many colors as he had first in the body, so many
diversities he shows in privy wings, and such a flieng worm is called
Papilio. And Isidore says, libro 12. Butterflyes.
Papiliones be called small Fowls, and be most in fruit, as apples, and
breeds therein Worms that come of their stinking filth, as Isidore says.
For of Malshrags comes and breeds Butterflyes, and of the dirt of
Butterflyes left upon leaves breeds and comes again Malshrgges, and does
less harm in gnawing and fretting when he flies, then when he creeps. And
Papias says, that Butterflyes be small flyeng Flies, that come by night when
light is kindeled in Candles, The Fly called a millers thombe, and gnats,
whereof are diverse sorts
and labor to quench the light of the Candles, and so they be burnt in the
fire of the candles, and sometime when they labor to destroy light of other
beasts, they are punished and hurt in their own bodies.

De Faunis and Satiris. ca. 48.
Certain beasts be called Fauni and Satiri also, and be meruaylous beasts
wonderouslye shapen, having the likeness and also shape of mankind, but they
be not full perfect of reason of mankind, nor endued perfectly with natural
wit. And so they be not taught to speak by craft nor by kind, but they have
beastiall wit, and be stubburne and cruel with beastiall appetite, and such
beasts be full lecherous, insomuch that they slay women in the deed of
lechery, if they take them walking in woods, and be called Satiri, for they
may not have enough of lechery, as Isid. says, and though such beasts use not
reason of mankind, yet they be like to mankind in voice and in many deeds,
as Isi. says, li. 11. de Protentis. And there he says, that Satiri be
somewhat like men, and have crooked noses, and horns in the forehead, and like
to Goats in their feet. Saint Anthony saw such a one in the wilderness, as it
is said, and he of ked what he was, and he answered Anthony, and said, I am
deadly, and one of them that dwells in wilderness: and misbeleeued nations
deceived by diverse errors worship such beasts that be called Fauni, Satiri,
and Incubi. Satyri be called Fauni and Fatui also, and some think, that they
be wild men, as Isidore says in eodem cap. and these wonderful beasts be
diverse, for some of them be called Cenophali, for they have heads as hounds,
and seem by the working beasts rather then men, and some be called Ciclopes,
and have that name, for one of them has but one eye, and that in the middle of
the forehead, and some be all headless and noselesse, and their eien be in the
shoulders, and some have plain faces without nosethrilles, and the nether
lips of them stretch so, that they heel therewith their faces when they be
in the heat of the Sun, and some of them have closed mouths in their breasts
only one hole, and breath and suck as it were with pipes and veins, and
these be accounted tonguelesse, and use signs and becks in steed of speaking.
Also in Scithia be some with so great and large ears, that they spread their
ears and cover all their bodies with them. And these be called Panchios, Pan
is Greek, and is to understand all. And an ear is called Ochi in greek, and
some be in Aethiopia, and go stouping looking to the ground - ward as beasts,
and may not rear themselves upright, and these be called Arabice, and other be
in Aethiopia, and each of them have only one foot so great and large, yt they
shadow themselves with the foot when they lie gaping on ye ground in strong
heat of the Sun, and yet they be so swift yt they be likned to hounds in
swiftness of running, and therefore among the Greeks they be called Synodopes.
Also some have the soles of their feet turned backward behind the legs, and
in each foot 8. toes, and such go about and stare in the deserts of Libia.
Also; in Scithia be beasts with shape of men and feet of horses, and such
wonderful beasts be called Lamine among many men, as Paschasius says super
Trenos. Isidore reckons many other such beasts wonderfully shapen, lib. 11.
and he gathers and takes all of Plinius libro. 6. and. 7. and also of
Solinus.

( Addition.
Fauni were named of the Poets, Rusticall Gods, and monstrous beasts, like unto
men, and Fanesij, people in the North part of the world, whose ears be so
great, that with them they cover all their bodies.)

Of Femina. cap. 49.
THe female is called Femina, and has that same name of Femur, that is to
understand, the thighs. For in these parts between the thighs is distinction
and great diversity between the male and also the female. And also this name
comes of Fos, that is fiery, for the female has firye virtue, whereby she is
vehemently moved to love: In all kind of beasts, the female is more fervently
desirous of love then the male, as Isidore says, libro. 6. And Aristotle
tells general propertyes of the same female, libro. 8. and says, that the
females be more feeble then the males, except the Bear and the Leoparde, for
their females be more hardy and strong then the males, and females be more
light to learn, and to be taught then ye males be, and more busy about their
brood and young, and more mild. Look before more hereof libr. 6. cap. 1. de
puella, for there thou shall find much of this matter. And generally the
female is more wrathful then the male, and fights therefore soon against the
male. And li. 8. Aristotle sets an ensample of Foca, for that beast dwells
and bideth always in one place, and the male strives with the female, until
the one of them slaieth that other, and the female is less steadfast with
less true to her own male, then otherwise. And Aristotle sets ensample of
Sepia, for when the female is smitten, the male helps and succoureth her. But
when the male is smitten, the female chaseth him. Also libro. 5. Aristotle
says, that in gendering of brood the female is as it were matter, and the
male is form and shape, and of both comes Semen, and of meddling thereof
comes the creature: and therefore I say, that male and female be as it were
principal of generation. And the male is a form and a shape, and the female
is matter. Therefore it is given and granted to ye male to get and gender
another, and the female gendereth and conceiueth of another then her self.
Also generally ye female is more unsteadfast in kind, and more changeable then
the male, and that comes of feeble heat and of strong cold humor that is
more plenty in the female then in the male, and therefore in women, and also in
some four footed beasts is menstrual superfluity, as he says, but in one
kind of beasts the female has that evil, so much and so often as the woman. Of
these conditions and other of females good and evil, look before li. 6.

(*Women be weak, yet iracundeus: cold, yet more lecherous: men are more
strong, no less vicious, more hot, near to frenzy, betwixt both, no greater
amitye, and in both wants not superfluity. Vesper in the defense of nature
and generation.)

Of Fetante. cap. 50.
IN all kind of beasts those that gender or go with brood, is called Fetans or
Parents, and so Fetans, fetantis, and pecus, dis, have one manner meaning, and
so it is said in holy writ, De post fetantes accipit cum. And so this Fetans
has a proper member, in the which he conceiueth and nourishes, and bears
the brood yt is called Fetus, and brings it forth into this world and to
dispose and bring forth ye brood, reuolutions and going about of ye over
circles of heaven, influence of stars works and helps, as Arist. says,
lib. 18. in fine. Kindly, he says, the term and time of generation complete
shall be by reuolutions and passing about of stars. Of this process and matter,
look before libro. 6. cap. de Muliere parente, etc.

Of Fetu. cap. 51.
FRuit, brood, and birth of the womb of the woman, and of each other female
beast is called Fetus, and declined Fetus, tus, tui, and is properlye called
Fetus while he is in the womb, in the which it is sustained and nourished, and
brought to perfect shape of lims and to life. And so Isidore says, libro. 12.
that it is called Fetus, for it is yet nourished and succored in the womb and
in the bag, in the which the child is in in the mother, and comes out with
the child, when it is borne, and conteyneth him. And is called Secundina, and
has that name as it were the second mother, for that is in the mother, and the
child is therein, and follows the child when it is borne, and the mother
dies, if it it happen in any wise, that this bag Secundina abides within,
and comes not out with the child. And of Fetus, females that conceive and use
to boar children and brood, have the name, and be called Fetose, as it were
often full of Fetus, going with child, or with brood, as Isid. says. Of the same
womb Fetus be diverse, and namelye in Sexus, that is by diversity of male and
female, but in those in the which kind goes out of kind, as in
Hermophroditus, for in such a one is found both Sexus, Both kinds in one male
and female of any sex.
male and female, but always imperfect, as Isidore says, li. 12. Of Fetus and
brood, look before, lib. 16. There is treated de homnibus generatione.

Of Ficario. cap. 52.
IN one signification Ficarius is he that gathers and sells figs, and in
another signification, Ficarius is taken for a wild man yt lives by figs.
And so it is taken in Ier. where it is said in this manner, Dragons shall dwell
with nice Ficarijs. There the Gloss says, yt it is to be understood with mad
men. And yet in another signification Fatui ficarij be called Fauni and Satiri,
that dwell between wild fig trees and other trees, and be hairy men, and
such be called Onocentauri, and other beasts wonderfully shapen, of whom Isaac
speaks, li. 14. And Isidore speaks of them, li. 9. cap. de Protentis. look
before in the same book de faunis. And they be called so nice fig gatherers
and beastly mad men, for though they be wonderfully shapen, yet they accord
in some things in shape with mankind, and in other things with other beasts,
and pass out of the shape of mankind. Such beasts be called Fatui Ficarij, as
it fares in Apis, Lamijs, and Sirenis, and Meremaidens, and other such be
Ficarij, for they have living by fruit, as the wild men has, and nevertheless
they be fools, for they lack use of reason, and therefore the letter of the old
book is allowed, yt says in this manner, Cum satuis sicarijs, for Sicarij be
certain guilfull thieves, that slew men unware with short Swoords, as Aioth
that slew Eglon the king, which that was most fat, with a short Swoorde that
hung in the right side, and such a Swoorde is called Sica, as it is said
Iudicum. 3. Such thieves be not now in Babylon that is destroyed, and is no
place for men to dwell in, but for beasts wonderfully shapen, as Hierome says
super Esaias.

But it might be said, that Ficarij be Sicarij, for a fig is called Sica in
Greek, and Ficus in Latin, and hereby the first exposition should abide: but
by the meaning and understanding of Latins such men wonderfully shapen be more
verily called Ficarij, then Sicarij, as it is said before, where it is spoken
and showed de Faunis and Satiris.

( Addition.
A Chapter of small substance.)

De Formica. cap. 53.
THE Ant is called Formica, and has that name, as it were bearing crumbs and
grains of corn. Here Ovid speaks and says.

Grande opus exiguo formicas ore gerentes.

It is a great work to see the Antes bear great grains in little mouths. Or
else it has ye name Formica, as it were bearing crumbs or grains of corn that
they gather, and biteth of the end of the grains for they should not grow,
slight and business of them is much, for they make provision and gather store
against time that comes: for in Summer they gather store, by the which they
may live in Winter, as Isidore says, libro. 12. and they gather wheat, and way
not of Barley, and when the Wheat is wet, that they gather to a heap: then the
Ants do all the wheat out into the Sun, that it may be dried again. And it is
said, that in Aethiopia be Ants of the greatness of a big Dog, but not in
shape as dogs: and diggeth up golden gravel with their feet, and keep it
that it be not taken away. And pursues anon to the death them that take it
away, as Isidor, says, li. 12. cap. 1. de Minimis animalibus. Also Solinus
speaks of Ants and says: that Antes be full little, and be nevertheless
more sly and busy then many great beasts: For they make purueyaunce wisely
for themselves, whereby they may live in time to come afterward. And they live
in company, and make heaps and hills, in whom they inhabit themselves in: and
gather greenes busily and properly, and put them in their inner closets full
waxilye, that they be not taken away with fowls, nor spilt and shed with wind
nor with weather, and makes them privy ways even and straight to the houses
that they dwell in, and the more wiser Ants stand in those ways, for the
vnwiser should not go out of the way, and when they be ouerset in their
houses to be taken, then shed they venomous water upon men: they have stings
as ye Be, but very small wherewith they sting.
And therefore it is commonly said, yt he pisieth. And that water burns his
hand that it touches, and breeds therein itching and smarting: For they have
that water in steed of weapon and armor. Huc vsque Solinus, libr. 11.
capitulo. 31. Plinius says, that Antes communeth their travail each to
other, and seek and gather their own meat: But Bees be better then Antes,
for Bees make good meat and profitable, and gather and do it together. The
Ants gather great burdens, which be more greater then their own bodies. And
so they recover reward of littleness of body, in the greatness of virtue,
and bear their charge and burden with biting. And if it be so great, that he
may not bear it in his mouth, then he tourneth him and busieth him to draw it
forth with his hinder feet: They take great charge of their common profit,
and have therefore season and wind. And they shale the grains, that they do
togethers, because they should not grow again and wax green corn: And
gather busily grains that be shed, that they be not lost: and in entering
they break the greater grains, that they may the more easilye bring them into
their place of purueyaunce. And they work by night in the full of the Moon,
and cease of work in the change of the Moon. And because they bring and
fetch their meat out of diverse places, they have certain time given to the^
to knowledge each to other, and then is most gathering of them and meeting. And
among them when they meet, is as it were a manner treating and talking and
busy as king and spyeng. And they come again by ways that they tread, and
choose such ways yt be among stones. And Antes be small and straight about
the womb, as though they were girde in the middle: and grow and have Wings
at last as it were Flies, and change so and turn into small Volatiles, dy^ng
wonnes. Also capitulo. 32. It is said, that in Indie be right great Antes
with horns, that keep gold and precious stones with wonderful covetousness
and desire, but the Indians stele them in Summer time, when the Antes be hid
in hills for strong burning heat, but the Antes fly after them busilye,
which take away the gold: and wound them after, though they fly the Antes
riding on swift Camells, in them is so wicked fierceness for love in gold.
Aristotle libro. 8. speaks of Antes, and says, That in Antes is wit of
smelling right as in Bees. And the Ant hates all stinking things. And so if a
man besmoketh the house of the Ant with brimstone, or with wild Origanum, or
with an Hearts horn burnt, the Antes will forsake and leave their houses: and
though the Antes live in company, and be attendaunt each to other, yet have
they no king, as Aristotle says, libro. 1. and Solomon says the same,
Proverb. 6. The Ant has no Duke nor commander. There the Gloss says, of
such a little beast without Prince, and by reasonable leading of kind, makes
purueyaunce for time that is coming: much more thou that art made to the Image
of God, and called for to see his bliss, and art helped with so great mystery,
and have our Lord Duke and leader. Therefore thou should here gather
fruit, by the which thou might live afterward in bliss. Look the Gloss of
the wit and business of Antes. That Authors praise here before, Aristotle
allows it, libro. 8. where he says, that the working of Antes is known to
them that take heed: For Antes go always by one way, and lay down their
meat, and travail also by night in the full of the Moon: But Ants have some
properties yt be not full good, for they hurt and grieve roots of trees, by
whom they make their neastes: and defile their hands that touch them, and stye
up to the tops of trees, and gnawe and defile burgenings, flowers, twigges,
and branches thereof. And bite and eat the fruit, and make hoales therein.
And noy and grieve men, but they help Bears. For Plinius says, libro. 8.
That when Bears be sick, they seek Antes and denour them and heal
themselves in that wise. But in some cause Ants eggs be medicinable. Look in
the last book de Ouis.

( Addition.
Formica, an Emmet, Ampt, and Pismere, whereof some be red, and other black,
and also in some soiles are bigger found, then in low places.)

De Formicaleone. cap. 54.
FOrmicaleon, that beast has ye name of Formica, and of Leo, for as Isidore
says, libro. 12. It is a beast with the likeness of an Ant, and of a Lion,
and is a little beast, and enemy to Ants: for he comes thee uishly into their
place of purueiance, and eats their corn, and so by wasting of their meat
he is cause why the simple Antes dye needs at last: and this Formicaleon is
eaten of other beasts, as Antes be, and may not defend himself by his own
strength, and is a manner kind of Spider. Look before de Aranea in littera A.

De Fuco. cap. 55.
FVcus, ci, is the name of a Drane, A Drane or Door.
that is more then a common Be, and less then an Hornet, and has that name
Fucus, for he eats the travail of other, as it were Fagus that comes of
Fagin, that is, eat, for he eats that yt he trauaileth not for, for he
makes no honny, but he eats the honnie of other Bees. Hereof speaks
Virgil and says.

Ignauum fucus pecus a presepibus arcet.
That is, the Drane drives toward beasts, and chaseth them from cribs. So
says Isi. li. 12. ca. 12. Of these dranes or bees Plinius speaks li. 11.
ca. 12. and says, that in Be hiues is the more plenty of honey because of
company of such Dranes: and such Dranes be without sting, as it were imperfect
Bees, and be servants to the very Bees: and very Bees commands them to
work, and stingeth, and punishes without pity the Dranes that be slow in
working, and also in breding. For it is certain yt the more multitude is of
such Dranes, the more swarms be bred, and when honnie begins to be ripe,
they drive the^ away from the honey, and punishes them and chaseth: and be
not seen but in springing time. And such Dranes make roial habitations and
large, and disseuered to the masters and commanders of Bees, and h^^leth them,
and makes them seemly passing other, and such dwelling places and cells be
all sire cornered. And though the Dranes sustain so many travails, yet uneath
they be suffered to eat of the honey, but as much as they eat, they eat it by
stelth, vt dicit Plini.

De Grife. cap. 56.
GRifes the Gripe, is a beast with wings, and is four footed, and breeds in
the mountains Yperboreis, and is like to the Lion in all the parts of the
body, and to the Eagle only in the head and wings, and is strong enemy to the
horse: as Hugution says, he takes up the horse and the man armed, as the
Gloss says super Deuteronomy. 14. And Gripes keep the mountains, in the which he
Gemmis and precious stones, as Smaragdus and Iaspis, and suffer them not to be
taken from thence, as Isi. says, li. 14. ca. 3. And in some countries in
Scithia is plenty of gold and of precious stones: but for great gripes men dare
not come thither openly, but seld for fierceness of Gripes: There is best
Smaragdus and Crystal: and the Gripe has so great claws and so large, that
of them be made cups that be set upon boordes of kings.

( Addition.
There are common Gripers in England, that devour more men by usury, then all the Gripes in India, the fetchers of gold.)

De Glire. cap. 57.
GLires be little beasts, as it were great Mice and have that name Glires,
for sleep make them fat. And Gliscefe is for ^^ ware, as Isidore says, and
he sleeps all the Winter immovable, and tells as though he were dead, and
quickneth again in Summer time, as he says, libro. 8. cap. 57. Plinius
speaks of these Glires, and says, that they dwell gladly in woods, and love
their fellows that they know, and strive and fight against other, and they
love their sires with great mildness and pity, and feed and serve them in
their age.

( Addition.
It is reported by Andrew Theued, that in the Indies are Battes very great: and
by L. Vertomannus, that he saw Bats bigger then Eagles, fierce and venomous.)

De Grillu. cap. 58.
GRillos is a little beast, as Cirogrillus is, feeble and mightlesse and
theeuish, and venomous with pricks and pikes, and is lesser then an Irchin, as
the Gloss says, super Leuiticum. 40. And has that name of the sound of his
voice, as Isidore says, libro. 12. This beast goes backewarde, and saweth
and diggeth the Earth, and works by night, and is hunted with an Ampt ryed
with an hair, and thrown into his den: and the powder is first blown a way,
least the Ampt hide her self therein, and so he is drawn to love of the Ampt,
as Isisidore says.

De Hinnulo. ca. 59.
THE Heart Calfe is called Hinnulus, and has name Hinnulus, of Innuendo,
becking, and nodding, for he is hid by beckes and signs of the Hind, as Idore
says, libro. 12. and is a feeble beast and loath to fight, as D^mula is, and
he is most sharp of sight, and swifte of course and of running, and the Hind
hides him in caves and dens, and in places that be shadowye, and teaches him
to start and to leap over briers, thorns, and bushes, as Plinius says,
libro. 8. cap. de Ceruis. Look before in littera C. His flesh is tender and
good to defy, for he is often moving and stirring about, as Constantine
says, and Isaac in Dietis. And if he be gelded ere his horns grow, his flesh
is the better and the more temperate in dryness and in heat, as he says, And
if he be gelded while he has horns, then he changes never his Horns, as
Aristotle says libro. 8. and Plinius. Also the Heart Calfe is contrary to the
serpents in a wonderful wise, for he yt is anointed with his sewet or with his
blood, shall not be touched of any Serpent that day, as Plinius says, lib. 38.
And his ruening is chief medicine in venims, as he says.

De Hirco. cap. 60.
THE Goat bucke is called Hircus, and is a lecherous beast, always seruent to
the deed of lechery, as Isid. says libr. 12. And his eyes look thwart over
to lechery ward, and has that name therefore: for Hirci be the corners of the
eien, as he says: his kind is most hot, insomuch that his hot blood
softeneth and carueth the hard Adamant stone, that neither fire nor iron may
overcome, as it is said there. This Goat bucke is called also Caper, and has
that name of Capio, to take, for be labors to take croppes of trees: And
the Goat bucke begins to be moved to gender after one year, as Aristotle
says, li. 6. and the male that is first gendered, is more great and more fat
then those that be gendered afterward. Also libro. 7. he says, that some
Goat Bucks have notable hugeness in ears, as some Rams have in their
tails. For some have in breadth more the^ the breadth of the hound. And the
Goat bucke has a long beard and a small tail, and long down to the earth,
and many and strong and great horns, and rough Wool and hard, with stinking
smell, and has much fatness, and namelye within about the reins, and then he
dies lightly, except the fatness be with-drawen. And the more fat he is,
the less Semen he has, and gendereth the less, a^ he says, lib. 8. And
then he does the deed of generation but seldom. And therefore wise heardes
slays them, ere they do the deed of generation, or else suffer them to be
lean, and makes them be lean, and though he seem lean without, yet
sometime he is full fat within, and it often happens that the Goat bucke is
wonderfullye shapen, as Aristotle says, libro. 8. for sometime it happened
that a Goat Bucke was seen with horns in the legs, and that was wonderful
to see. And among all flesh of beasts, flesh of Goat Buckes is worst, hardest,
and worst to defy, as Isaac says in Dietis, and namely when the Goat buck is
right old. The skin of the old Goat bucke is better and more stronger then
the young: but the odor and the smell is more, and the flesh is worst, and if
he be gelded, his flesh is the more moist and tender, and less hard to
defy, and less evil to be eaten. Also libro. 28. Plinius says, that
Democritus says, that the Goat Bucke is never without the Feauers. And the
blood of a Goat buck, that is sedde with Iuie, breaks wonderfully the stone
both in the bledder and in the reins; as he says: and his horn burnt,
fears and chaseth away Serpents, and heals feauers and cankers, and
fretteth away and cleanses Polipus, superfluitye of flesh in the nose. The
liver of the Goat bucke helps against biting of the mad hounds. His gall
cleereth the sight, and fretteth away the webbes of the cyen: His urine
meddeled with his gal helps leprous men, and does away seals and scabs.

( Addition.
Diverse authors affirm, that the hot blood of a Goat bucke, dissolueth a
flintstone into softness.)

De Hiena. cap. 61.
HIena is a cruel beast like to the Woulfe in devouring and gluttony, and
reeseth on dead men, and takes their sarcasse out of the earth and deuoureth
the^. And therefore has ye name Hiena, of Niando, for desire he reeseth to his
pray with open mouth and voice. It is his kind to change Sexus, for he is
now found male and now female, and is therefore an unclean beast, as Isidore
says, and comes to houses by night, and seineth man's voice as he may,
for men should think that it is a man. Libro. 8. cap. 30. Plinius speaks of
this Beast, and says, that in Hiena is either kind, for it is said, he is one
year mal^^e another year female. And she brings furthher brood without
male, as the common people suppose. And Aristotle denies that. And has the
neck of the adder Vipera, and the ridge of an Elephaunt, and may not bend but
if he bear all the body about. And herds tell that among stables be seyneth
speech of mankind, and calls some man by his own name, and renteth him when
he has him without, and he feineth often the name of some man, for to make
bounds run out, that he may take and eat them: And this beast has endless
many manners and diverse colors in the eyes, and full moveable eyes and
unsteadfast, and his shadow makes hounds leave backing and be still, if he
come near them: and if this beast Hiena goes thrice about any beast, that
beast shall stint within his steps. And this beast gendereth with a Lioness of
Aethiopia, and gendereth on her a beast that is most cruel, and follows the
voice of men and of tame beasts, and has many rows of teeth in every side of
the mouth. In Africa be many Hienas, and many wild Asses and Fibers, and
many other beasts wonderfully shapen. As Plinius says, this beast Hiena
breeds a stone that is called Hiena: and what man that bears it under his
tongue, he shall by virtue of that stone divine and tell what shall befall, as
Solynus says. When he can get ye stone.
Also libr. 28. Plinius says, that Hiena hates the Pantera. And it is said,
that if both their skins be hanged togethers, the hair of the Pantheres
skin shall fall away. This beast Hyena flies the hunter, and draws
toward the right side, to occupy the trace of the man that goes before: and
if he comes not after, he tells that he goes out of his wit, or else the
man falls down of his horse: and if he turn against the Hiena, ye beast is
soon taken, as Magitians tell. Also as he says, this beasts gall is full
medicinal, and helps most against dimnesse of eien: and also witches use the
heart of this beast and the licour in many witchcrafts, as it is said there.
And Aristo. li. 7. says, that the quantity of Hiena is as the quantity of a
Wolf, and in his neck is hair, as in the neck of an horse, and has hair
upon all the length of the ridge, and bequileth and deceives men, and
rauisheth and steals them, and takes hounds and deuoureth them, as gladly
as men, and diggeth burialls and graves, and eats the flesh of dead bodies
that be in them.

( Addition.
Of this Hyena Pliny makes mention in his 8. book. chap. 30. A beast like a
Woulfe, with a mane like an Horse, which coming in the night unto shepherds
houses, will counterfeit man's voice, and by harkning learn ones name, and
call him forth to the end to devour him. Gesner is doubtful whether there be
any such beast, yet has he set down, from other Authors.)

Of Hiricio. cap. 62. Echino.

THe Irchin is called Hiricus, Hedghoy
and is a beast covered with pricks, hard and sharp, and his skin is cloased
about with pikes and pricks, and he cloaseth himself therewith, and defends
himself therewith all about, for anon as he knows and feels that any
thing comes after him, he areareth up the pricks and wrappeth him therein as
a clew, as it were within his armor: and is a beast of purueyaunce: For he
climbeth upon a vine or on an apple tree, and shakes down grapes and Apples.
And when they be feld, he walloweth on them, and sticks his pricks in the^,
and so bears meat to his young in that manner wise, as Isi. says, li. 12.
And for roughness and sharpness of the pricks and pikes, he is called
Hirenacius or Hiricius, and has as Aristotle says, li. 1. pikes in steed of
hair: and pi^s heeleth him as the hair of other beasts, and be his weapon and
armor: for with them he stingeth and pricketh and hurts him that takes or
touches him. Also li. 3. Aristotle says, yt some Irchins dwell in woods, and
some in other places in land, and some in water, and lay many eggs that be not
eaten. And Irchins have but little flesh, and this is the propertye of him, he
has beneath head and mouth, and outpassing of superfluitye above, for he
takes his meat beaneth, and has therefore an hoale in the other side, and
the superfluity^ is in the ridge above, and the Irchin has five teeth within
the mouth, and has among the teeth fleshy parts in steed of the tongue: and
his womb is departed in five parts, and therein is much superfluity. And there
is a manner kind of Irchins with a white shell and white pikes, and lays many
eggs. Also the Irchin has feeble hearing, more feeble then other beasts with
hard shells, and that go on four feet. Also libro. 5. wild Irchins gender
standing, with back turned to back: For in that part, in yt which superfluity
passes out, there they touch themselves in generation. Also there li. 8. it is
said, yt often it seems, that in Irchins is wit and knowing of coming of
winds, North or South: for he makes a den in the ground, when he is ware that
such winds come. And so sometime was one in Constantinople, yt had an Irchin,
and knew and warned thereby, that winds should come, and of what side, and
none of his neighbors wist whereby he had such knowledge and warning. Also li.
12. he says, that the Irchin has also as many wombes as teeth, and in these
wombes breeds five eggs better then other, and the eggs of some be much
and great, and some be less: for some be better to seething and defieng then
other. Also li. 19. Irchins have a little body and many pikes, that, occupye
more place then the body, and the cause of many great pricks, and the
littleness of the body is, for feeding of the body passes into nourishing
and growing of pikes, because of scarcity of heat, and for the meat is not well
defied, and therefore in his body breeds much superfluity, and that
superfluity passes into nourishing and feeding of pricks. Huc vsque Arist.

( Addition.
Histrix, is the Porcapine, like unto the Hedghog, but more stronger armed with
pricks, and bigger bodyed.)

Of Herinacio. cap. 63.
The common Hedghog
HErinacius is that same Cirogrillus, and is a little beast with pricks, and
dwells in dens, and is like to the Irchin, but he is accounted more then he.
Lib. 8. cap. 38. Plinius speaks of him and says, that he walloweth upon
apples, as the Irchin does, which stick thereon his pricks, and he bears
them into hallownesse of trees. And beside the Apples that he bears on his
back, always he bears one in his mouth: and when he is hunted, he cloaseth
him round as a hall, for nothing should him touch for his pikes and pricks,
and when he trusts not to escape, then he casts from him pissing most
venomous, and that piss grieueth himself first, if it comes in any wise on
his back, or on his pricks, for by such moisture of that piss, his back
smarteth and grieueth, and also the pricks of his back fall away. Therefore he
knows not, yt he is thereby the sooner taken, by the which he casts for to
grieve other: Therefore there is a craft to hunt such a little beast, when his
urine is all spent and wasted, for then his back is hurt or broken, and his
pricks and pikes be loose and fall, and he may not fly, for be knows by the
smell kindlye, in his urine is strength of venim hid, and spares therefore his
urine. For he does not away nor sheddeth his venim, ere the last need of
taking compel him thereto. And though this beast be little, yet when he
dreadeth he constrains himself so fast, that uneath he may be opened and
streighted, saving the skin. Therofore he is put in hot water, and so he
opens himself, as it were sodeinly, when he seeleth the heat: And he is
bounte and hanged up by the hinder feet, and is so hanged and slain with
hunger, otherwise he may not be slain in good manner, to have good and
profit of his feeble skin, and though the little body of the beast be not
full necessary to use of mankind, yet his skin yt is so picked is needful to
men, that if there were no pikes and pricks, softness of flesh in beasts were
idle to mankind. For with such a beasts skins, clothes be cleansed and
picked. And it is said, that this beast Herinacius has this property, that
after yt he is charged with Grapes or with apples, if any apple or grape fall
out of his pikes in any manner wise, then for indignation he throws away of
his back all the other deal, and often turns again to the tree to charge him
again with new charge.

Of Iuuenca. cap. 64.
IVuenca or Iuuencus, is a young Steer or Bullock that is able to be yoaked
to draw at plough, as Isido. says: or else it has that name Iuuencus, for in
old time such a young Steer was offered to Jupiter, and not a Bull, as he
says: and is a lecherous Beast, because of youth, and is therefore ouerset
with a strong yoke to make him easy and tame, and is pricked with a prick,
and compelled to follow even and foreright, the steps and fores of Dren.
Iuuenca, such a young Steer, is often able to the coupling and joining of
Bulls, for in that age such a Steer is joined to the Bull to draw. The young
Cow is made fat in leese and in pasture, to be slain of a Batcher, for
diverse use of mankind. Her flesh is more dry and more sad, than ye flesh of
sucking calves, for she is longer without feeding of milk, and is more tender,
and more hot and moist than the flesh of an old Ox, or of an old Cow: for
yet she is nearer the age of sucking, than those that are of more age, as it
said in Dietis.

Of Leone. cap. 65.
LEon in Greek, is called Leo in Latin, a King in English, and is called Leo,
king, for he is king and Prince of all beasts, as Isid. says li. 12. And some
Lions are short with crispe hair and maane, and these Lions fight not: and
some Lions have simple hair of mane, and those Lions have sharp and fierce
hearts, and by their forheads and tails their virtue is known in the best, and
their stedfastnes in ye head. And when they be beset with hunters, then they
behold the earth, for to dread the less the hunters, and their gins, that do
beset them about, and he dredeth noise and rushing of wheels, but he dreadeth
fire much more: and when they sleep, their eyes be open, and when they go
forth or about, they heal and bide their fores and steps, for hunters should
not find them. And it is supposed, that the Lions whelpe, when he is whelped,
sleeps three days and three nights: and it is said that the place of ye
couch trembles and shakes by roaring of the Father, that waketh the whelpe
that sleeps. It is the kind of Lions, not to be wroth with man, but if they
be grieved or hurt. Also their mercy is known by many and often ensamples: for
they spare them that lie on the ground, and suffer them to pass homeward that
be prisoners, and come out of thraldom, and eat not a man, nor slaye him, but
in great hunger, Huc vsque Isid. li. 12. Li. 8. ca. 17. Plin. speaks of the
Lion and says, that the Lion is in most gentleness and nobilite, when his
neck and shoulders be healed with hair and maane, and he that is gendered of
the Parde, lacks that nobility. The Lion knows by smell, if the Parde
gendreth with the Lioness, and reeseth against the Lioness that breaks
spousehood, and punishes her full sore, except she wash her in a river, and
then it is not known to the Lion. And when the Lioness whelpeth, her womb
is rent with the claws of her whelps, and whelpeth therefore not often. And
Arist. says as Plin. says, that the Lioness whelpeth first five whelps, and
afterward four, and so each year less by one, and mereth barren when she
whelpeth one at last: and she whelpeth whelps evil shapen and small in
quantity of a wesell in ye beginning. And he says also, ye whelps of vi.
months may uneath be whelped, and whelps of 2 mo^ths, may uneath move: and the
Lion heaueth by his leg when he pisseth, as an hou^d does, and the urine that
he pisseth, stinketh right foul, and when he ea^eth once enough, afterward he
is meatlesse, 2. days or 3. And if he needs to fly when he is full, he
casts up his meat into his mouth, and draws it out with his claws, to be
in that wise the more light to run and to fly. The Lion lives most long,
and that is known by working or wasting of his teeth: and then in age he
reeseth on a man, for his virtue and might fails to pursue great beasts and
wild: and then he besieges Cities, to ransack and to take men: but when the
Lions be taken, then they be hanged, for other Lions should dread such manner
pain. The old Lion reeseth woodly on men, and only grunteth on women, and
reeseth seldom on children but in great hunger. By the tail the boldness and
heart of the Lion is known, as the Horse is known by the ears: for when the
Lion is wroth, first he beats the Carthe with his tail, and afterward, as
the wrath increases, he smites and beats his own back: and out of each
wound, that the Lion makes, with clawe or with teeth, runs sharp and sower
blood, as Isido. says. Also in perrill the Lion is most gentle and noble, for
when he is pursued with hounds and with hunters, the Lion lurketh not nor
hides himself, but sits in fields where he may be seen, and arayeth
himself to defense, and runs out of wood and covert, with swifte running
and course, as though he would account vile shame to lurk and to hide
himself. And he hides himself not for dread that he has, but he dreadeth
himself sometime, only for he would not be dread: and when he pursues man or
beast in lands, then he leapeth when he reeseth on him: and so when he pursues
man or beast, he uses to leap, and so does he not when he voydeth and
flies. When he is wounded, he takes wonderful heed, and knows them that
smites him first, and reeseth on the smiter, though he be in never so great a
multitude: and if a man shoot at him, the Lion chaseth him, and throws him
down, and wounds him not, nor burieth him. When the Lion dies, he biteth
the earth, and tears fall out of his eyes: and when he is sick, he is healed
and help with the blood of an Ape, and he dreadeth greatly the crowing and
the comb of a Cock: and he is a right kind beast, and knows, and loves
him that does him good, as it said in ensamples, that Plinius sets there.
Huc vsque Plin. li. 8. ca. 12. And li. 2. Arist. speaks of the Lion and
says, and Auicen, says also, that ye Lion has a neck as it were immovable,
and is full grimme, and has entrails and bowels as an hound, and moves
always first with the right foot, and afterward with the left foot, as the
Camel does: and has little marrow in his bones, and his bones be so hard,
that by smiting of them togethers, sire springs out thereof. Also li. 16. the
Lion has many cleftes in his feet, and gendereth therefore blind whelps, as
the Hound does, and the woolfe also: for he has sawie teeth, and gendereth
therefore imperfect whelps, as he says, and Solinus also, that says. That
the Lion dredeth, when he sees or hears a whelpe beaten. His whelps are
borne blind, as ye whelps of all beasts, that have the feet departed, be
whelped imperfect because of gluttony. He hides himself in high mountains,
and espieth from thence his pray, and when he sees his pray, he roareth full
loud, and at the voice of him other beasts dred and stint suddenly, and (...)
makes a circle all about them with his tail, and all the beasts dread to
pass out over the line of the Circle, and the beasts stand astonyed and
afeard, as it were abiding ye hest and commandment of their King. When the
Lion passes rough places and hard, he clyncheth in his claws, and draws
them toward the foot, for them he uses in steed of a sword, and hides them
therefore within soft places and fleshie, that they be not hurt, nor made
blunt: and he is ashamed to eat alone the pray that he takes: therefore of
his grace of free heart, he leaves some of his pray, to other beasts that
follow him a far, as he says: and is so hot of his complexion, that he has
always the fever quartane, and has kindly this evil to abate his fierceness,
and his flesh passes in heat, and is therefore grievous to eating, as he
says, and Plin. libro. 28. And his flesh is good in medicines, in many manner
wise, and his grease is contrary to venimme, so that who so be anointed
therewith, shall not dread that time biting of Serpents, nor creeping worms.
Also his grease meddled with Oleo rosaceo, keeps and saves ye skin of the
face from wennes and vices, and keeps whitenes, and heals burnings, and
swageth swellyng of eyes. His gall meddled with water, sharpeneth and cleereth
the sight, and helps against infecting evils, and against falling evils:
his heart taken in meat, destroys the Fever quartane, Huc vsque Plin. li.
28. cap. 8. And the Lion is hunted in this wise: one double cave is made one
fast by that other, and in the second cave is set a Whitche, that cloaseth
full soon, when it is touched: and in the first den and cave is a Lamb set,
and the Lion leapeth therein when he is an hungered. for to take the Lamb. And
when he seeeth, that he may not break out of ye den, he is ashamed, that he is
beguiled, and would enter into the second den to lurk there, and falls into
it, and it cloaseth anon, as he is in, and lets him not pass out thereof,
but keeps him fast therein until he be taken out and bound with chains till
he be tame. This touches Ier. super Ezech. cap. 19. super illum locum,
Miserunt cum in Caueam, etc.

( Addition.
The Lion among the Hebrews, as says David Kimht, has diverse names,
according to the degrees of his age. The first name is Gur, the second Kephir,
the third Arieth, in the fourth Labi, in the last Laisch. Gur, signifies the
whelp of every beast, yet most commonly for excellencies sake, he is put for
the Lions whelpe, as Stymnos is among ye Greeks. Kephir, a little elder.
Arieth, in the second chapter of Naum the Prophet a Lion. Labi a Lioness,
Cepharim young Lions, and Gur a Lions whelpe, are all contained in one Period.
The Lion drinks seldom and little: the Lion is said of some in watching to
shut his eyes, which sleeping he opens: here upon the Ancients did paint
upon their Temple gates a Lion, for a badge or sign. If one sit upon a Lions
skin, the Emeroydes will go from him.)

De Leena. cap. 66.
THe Lioness is called Leena, and is a right lecherous beast, and loves
always the deed of lechery, and is therefore more cruel than the Lion and
namely when she has whelps: for she puts her self in peril of death for
her whelps, and for defense of them, she dredeth not nor spares the shot of
hunters. And she whelpeth more whelps in the first whelping, then she does
afterward, for by sharpness of the claws of her whelps, her mother is
grieved, and hurt, and so from year to year, she wexeth barren, as Aristotle
says. And Plinius says in this wise, as Isidore says lib. 12. Beasts with
sharp claws, may not often whelpe, for in them ye mother is grieved and hurt
within by moving of the whelps, and therefore the Lioness may not abide
whelping, until the perfect complishment of her young, but she delyuereth her
of her whelps, and whelpeth ere her young be perfect and complete, and is
compelled thereto by great ache and soreness, and fervent lechery. The
Lioness meddeleth in lechery with the Parde, but after the deed of lechery
with ye Parde, she dredeth the Lion, for ye Lion knows such a foul medlyng
by odor and smell, but if the Lioness be washed of the spouse breaking in a
river ere she come to the Lion, as Plinius says. When he knows that she is
guilty, he punishes her anon, and therefore she flies anon, and comes
not to her make, but if she be first washed. There is a little beast that the
Lion and the Lioness dreadeth wonderfully, and that beast is called
Leonzeufones, for that beast bears a certain venime which slaieth the Lion
and the Lioness. Therefore this said beast is taken, and afterward burnt, and
the flesh is sprung with the ashes, and laid and set in meeting of ways, shall
slay and destroy the Lions which eat thereof, as Isid, says lib. 12. cap. 1.
Auicen says, that the Lion is a beast of great gluttony, and coueteth and
desires much meat, and is a deuourer of meat therefore without chewing, and
casts up therefore the meat that he eats, and eats it afterward, and he
eats right much, so that he is heavy by meat, and fasteth afterward by the
space of two days and two nights, and voydeth not his dirte but once in two
days or in three, and his dirte is dry without moisture, and stinketh right
foul, and so does his urine.

And also out of his womb issues and comes an evil smell, when it is cut
and opened: and his breath stinketh, and is right infectious and contagious,
and infecteth other things, and his biting is deadly and venomous, and namely
when he is wood: for the Lion wexeth wood as the Hound does, as Arist. says
and Auicen also. And is cruel and wood when he is wroth, and biteth and
grieueth him self for indignation, when he is wroth, and gnasheth with his
teeth, and namely when he hungreth, and spieth and lies in awayle, to take
beasts, which pass by the way. He hides himself in preuie caves, and
reeseth on beasts unware, and slays them with his teeth and claws, and
breaks all their members, and eats them piece meal: and if he see any come
against him to take away his pray, then he beclippeth the pray, and grunteth
and smites the earth with his tail, and if he comes nigh him, he lepeth on
him, and overcomes him, and turns to the pray. First he drinks and
licketh the blood of the beast that he slaieth and renteth and haleth the other
deal lim meal, and deuoureth and swaloweth it.

De Leopardo. ca. 67.
LEopardus is a beast most cruel, and is gendered of a Perde and of a
Lioness, as Isi. says li. 12. For as Plin. says, the Lion gendreth with the
Perdus, or the Perde with the Lioness, and of such gendering comes unkind
Perdes, as of an Horse and of a she Ass, or of a Mare and a male Ass is
gendered and Mule. As Isi. says, the Leopardis a full reesing beast and head
strong, and thirsts blood: and the female is more cruel than the male, as
Arist. says, and has diverse colors, as the Parde has, and pursues his pray
starting and leaping, and not running: and if he takes not his pray in the
third leap or in the fourth, then he stinteth for indignation, and goes
backward, as though he were over come, and is like to a Lion in body, tail and
feet, but in shape of the head, he is like to the Parde. And he is less in
body than the Lion, and therefore he dreadeth the Lion, and makes a cave under
the earth with double entering, one by which he goes in, and another, by which
he goes out: and that cave is full wide and large in either entering, and more
narrow and straight in the middle, and so when the Lion comes, he flies and
falls sodainlye into the cave, and the Lion pursues him with a great reese,
and enters also into the cave, and thinks there to have the masterie of the
Leopard, but for greatness of his body, he may not pass freely by the middle
of the den, which is full straight: and when the Leopard knows that ye Lion
is so let and held in ye straight place, he goes out of the den forward, and
comes again into the den in the other side behind the Lion, and reeseth
on him behind with biting and with claws: and so the Leopard has often in ye
wise, the masterie of the Lion by craft, and not by strength, and so the less
beast has often the masterie of the strong beast, by deceit and guyle in the
den, and dare not reese on him openly in the field, as Homer says, in
libro. De pugms and Astucijs bestiarum. Lib. 8. Arist. speaks of a beast that
is called Ferculio, and Auicen calls that beast Leopardus. A beast says Ari.
that is called Ferculio, eats sometime venomous things, and lecketh then man's
dirte, and eats it: and therefore Hunters hangs such dirte in some
Uessell, on a tree, and when the Leoparde comes to that Tree, and leapeth up
to take the dirte, then the hunters slaye him in the mean time while he is
thereabout: and the Panther does the same, and the Perdus also, as it is said
there. Also Plinius speaks of the Leopard and says, that sometime the Leopard
is sick, and drinks wild Goats blood, and scapeth from the sickness in
that wise.

De Lepore. ca. 68.
THe Hare is called Lepus, as it were Leuipes, light foot, for he runs
swiftly, and is called Lago^ in Greek, for swiftness in running. And li. 12.
Isidore says, that every swifte beast is fearful and fights not, and has
no manner kind of armor nor of wepon, but only lightness of members and of
lims, and is feeble of sight as other beasts be, that close not the eye lids in
sleeping, and is better of hearing than of sight, namely when he reareth up the
ears. His ears be full long and pliant, and that is needful for to defend
the eyes, that be open, and not defended with covering, nor with heling to keep
them from gnats and flies great and small, for against noyfull things, kind
gives remedy to creatures, as Auicen says. And therefore kind gives to the
Hare lightness and pliantnesse of limbs, and swiftness of course and of
running, to keep him from hounds and other beasts that pursue him: and kind
gives him long ears, against gnats and flies, that grieve often and busiy his
feeble eyes, as he says: and kind gives much hair under his feet, that the
hair of the feet may defend the flesh thereof from hurting in running, and
for he should by lyghtnesse thereof in no wise let the feet in running: and
therefore Arist. says li. 3. that the Hares feet be hairie beneath, and that
is seldom seen in other beasts. His hinder legs be longer than the former,
and that is needful to rear the body when he flies: and when he runs
against an hill, he is harder to take, than when he runs downward toward the
valley, and that is for shortness of the fore legs, for because of lowness of
the fore part of the body, he falls soon when he runs down the hill,
and may not continue euenly his course and running, and for he sees, that he
shall fall when he runs and flies down a hill, he runs therefore aside
and aslont by the hill side, and reareth the former legs as he may, toward the
highness of the hills side, and often beguileth the hounds that him pursues,
and scapeth in that wise. And li. 8. ca. 55. Plini. speaks of Hares and
says, that many kinds be of Hares, for some are more in quantity, with more
great hair and rough, and more swifte of course and of running, than those
that be called Cuniculi, and so here this name Lepus, is the name of Hares and
of Conies: for Conies be called Parui Lepores, small Hares and feeble, and they
dig the earth with their claws, and make them bowers and dens under the earth,
and dwell therein, and bring forth many Rabets and multiply right much. And in
some Woods of Spain, be so many Conics, that sometime they wast and destroy
corn in the field, by the which they cause hunger in the Country and land:
and Rabets are so loved in the Island Balearitis, yt those Rabets be taken and
eaten of men of the country, though the guts be uneath cleansed. And it
follows there, ye Archelaus the Author says, that as many dens as be in the
increasing of the Conies, so many years they have of age. In the body are so
many hoales, as the Conies have years. Not so.
Therefore it is said that they gender without males, and have both sexes, male
and female: therefore many men suppose, that the Conie gendereth and is
gendered without male, as he says: and such Conies be so plenteous, and bring
forth so much breed, that when they bring forth one Rabet or more, anon she
has another in her womb, and is a profitable beast both to meat and to
clothing, and to many manner medicines, for his ruenning helps against venime,
and stancheth the flixe of the womb, his blood abateth ache and smarting of
eyes, as Plinius says, and Dioscorides also: and in no beast with teeth in
either iawe, is ruenning found, but in the Hare, as Arist. says: and the elder
the ruenning is, the better it is, as Plinius says.

( Addition.
Hare and Conie makes gross blood, it dries and stops. Conie makes better,
and more pure nourishing, and is sooner digested than Hare. It is well proved,
that there is no meat more wholesome, or that more clean, firmelye, and
temperatelye nourishes, than Rabets.)

De Lince. cap. 69.
LInx, lincis, is a beast, and has that name, for he is accounted among the
kind of Wolves, that is a beast like to the woolfe, and his back is diversely
spekled as the Parde, and his urine changes and tourneth into a precious
stone, that is called Ligurius, and that precious stone is also called Linx,
lincis. And this beast Linx has envy, and is sorry that it should turn to
the use of mankind, and hides his urine under ground when he pisseth, but
there it is the sooner hard, and turns into stone, as Plin. says li. 8. ca.
39. and Isid. 12.

De Limace. cap. 70.
LImax is a worm of slyme, and has that name Limax, for he breeds slime, or
of slime, and is therefore always foul and unclean, as Isid. says lib. 11.
And it is a very slow worm in moving, and bears an hard shell on his
back, and closes him therein, and is an horned worm, and has two small
horns before the mouth, and when he feels any grievous thing, he draws the
horns anon into his shell, and closes himself in the shell, as it were
within an house. And such worms are gendered principally in corrupt air and
rain: and he creeps, though it be with slow pace, and comes up to the
tops of trees, and biteth and gnaweth the buds and fruit thereof, and where
ever he creeps or slydeth, he leueth after him a glemy froth and struck of
uncleanness.

( Addition.
In Italy they use to eat Snailes, which custom is used in England (because as
the Physicians have made many believe) being well cleansed in salt and vinegar,
they be in Sallets restoratiue: Snakes be as good, for from whence they had the
one, is the custom of the other to be eaten.)

De Lupo. cap. 71.
THe Woolfe is called Lupus, and has that name as Isid. says, as it were
Leopos, for he has virtue in the feet, as the Lion has, and so what he
treads with his feet, lives not: and is a ravenous beast, and desires and
coueteth blood, and slays him that he may find in woods of rauine.
Husbandmen speak of him and say, that a man leeseth his voice, if the Woolfe
sees him first: therefore to a man that is suddenly still and leaves to
speak, it is said, Lupus est in fabula, the Woolfe is in the tale: and
certainly if he know, that he is seen first, he leeseth his boldness,
hardiness, and fierceness. In all the year, Wolves do not the deed of
generation but xii. days, and he may not dure with hunger long time, and
deuoureth much after long fasting. In Aethiopia are Wolves with hair and
maanes in the neck, and are so speckeled, and have so many diverse colors,
that they lack no manner color, as he tells. Huc vsque Isid. li. 13. cap.
23. Plin. says the same, and says also that Wolves of Africa be slender and
little: and those that are bred in cold countries and lands be less of
bodies than other, and more sharp and fierce. Libro secundo. Arist. says,
that in Indie is a Woolfe that has three rows of teeth above, and has feet
like a Lion, and face as a man, and tail as a Scorpion, and his voice is as it
were a man's voice, and dreadful, as a trumpe: and the beast is swifte as an
Heart, and is right fierce and cruel, and eats men. Also libr. 6. Aristo.
says, that in time of generation, Wolves are full cruel and fierce, and be
worse when they have whelps, as the females of hounds. Also lib. 7. Wolves
have sawie teeth, and eat flesh, and not grass, but when they are sick, for
then they eat some grass or herb for medicine: for when the woolfe feels
himself too full, he seeks a certain herb and eats it, that he may
cast up that that he has eaten. Also li. 8. when they fly, they bear with
them their whelps, and eat Origanum, the herb Margeru^.
and chew it when they go out of their dens to whet and sharp their teeth
therewith. Also he says, that the Woolfe is a full evil beast when he eats,
and rests much when he has no hunger: he is full hardy, and loves well to
play with a child, if he may take him, and slays him afterward, and eats
him at ye last. And Homer says, that the Wolf is a full wakefull beast, and
flies from the sight of the fire. And it is said, that if the Woolfe be
stoned, he takes heed of him that throws the first stone, and if that stone
grieueth him, he will pursue him that hurt him: and if it grieueth him not, and
if he may take him that throws that stone, he does him not much harm, but
some harm he does him, as it were in wrath, and leueth him at last: and the
elder the Wolves be, the worse they be, and grieve men, for they may not hunt
beasts because they be old, and by reason that their vange teeth be weked, and
they live long time, and the age of the Woolfe is perceived in the teeth, for
they are constrained in age. And there he says, that there is double manner
kind of wolves: for some be as it were round, and some long, and those be more
rough of hair and thick and more bold and hardy of heart, and the entrails
of wolves be right feeble, and take soon corruption when they be wounded, and
the other deal of the body suffers many strokes, and has great strength
in the neck and in the head. Also wounds of their biting are evil, for
venimme comes of them, and these wounds be heled, as the biting of a mad
hound, as Aristo. says, Also lib. 13. he says, yt the woolfes mouth opens
most wide, and has most strength in his mouth, and that Beast is a great
glutton and deuoureth much. Also li. 7. Auicen speaks of the woolfe, and
says: that the woolfe desires kindlye to eat fish, and eats the fish that
fishers throw out of their nets: and when he finds nothing to eat that the
Fishers leave, then he goes to their nets, and breaks and renteth them.
Phisiologus speaks of wolves and says, that their virtue and strength is in
the breast, and in the claws, and in the mouth, and lest in the hinder parts.
And the woolfe may not bend his neck backward in no month of the year but in
May alone, when it thundereth: and has a cruel wariness, so that he takes
no pray of meat nigh to ye place where he nourishes his whelps, but he
hunteth in places that be far thence: and when he goes by night to a Fold for
to take his pray, he goes against the wind, for hounds should not smell him.
And if it happens in any wise, that his foot makes noise, treading upon any
thing, then he chasteth that foot with hard biting. His eyes shine by night,
as lanternes, and as Solinus says, he bears in his tail, a lock of hair
that exciteth love, and does it away with his teeth, when he dreadeth to be
taken. The woolfe dreadeth greatly stones, so that if a man take two stones,
and smite them togethers, the woolfe loses boldness and hardiness, and flies
away, if the noise of the stones comes to his hearing. The Woolfe whelpeth
blind whelps, and loves and nourishes them full tenderly, and eats earth
when he is sore an hungered and finds none other pray, and hides him in
grass, bushes, and shrubs, and in leaves, to ravish and take Goats, that
gather leaves and crops of Trees, and deceives sheep more with guile and
wrenches, than with might and strength, but when he has the mastery, if he be
suffered, he biteth and slays all the flock, and the part that he may not
devour, he burieth and hides under the earth, and diggeth and takes up a
part when he is again an hungered. He infecteth the wool of the sheep that he
slaieth, and makes the cloth lousy that is made of that wool, as Isidore
says. Also Arist. says, that all the kind of wolves is contrary and
adversary to all the kind of sheep: and so I have read in a book, that a
string made of Wolves gut, Proved, and is a rare and wonderful secret.
put among harp strings made of the guts of sheep, destroys and corrupts
them: as the Eagles feathers, put among Culuers, pilleth and gnaweth them, if
they be there left together long in one place, as he says. Look before De
Aquila.

De Mulo. cap. 72.
A Mule is called Mulus, and has that name of Molendo, grinding, for he is
under the yoke of Bakers, and draws about milstones, as Isid. says libro.
15. And the Jews tell, that Ana Esaus nephew, made first Asses and Mares, for
to have first against kind, the kind of mules bred and gendred as he says:
and therefore the Mule follows the kind of the Mare, and is more than an
Ass, and fairer, and swifter: but he is more slow, fouler, and less than an
Horse, and so the mule is a barren beast, and nevertheless a noble beast to
travail, as Plinius says lib. 8. ca. 44. And these beasts, the Mare and the
Ass desire never to gender together, except they be together in youth, and
suck togethers while they be coltes: therefore Herds put and set their coltes
to suck Asses, and Ass colts to suck Mares, when they will have such beasts
gendered between beasts of diverse kind as he says. Also he says: that wine
drinking is forbidden ye Mule. Of wild Asses and Mares, are swifte Mules
gendred, with hard feet and able to run, and have great riuells in the body,
and are wild in heart, and nevertheless gentle: and those that be gendered
between a wild Ass and a Mare, pass all other. Libro septimo Aristotle
speaks of the Mule and says, that the more water that the mule drinks,
the more good his meat does him. Also li. 14. the Mule has no gall openly
seen upon his liver. Also lib. 21. he says, for the mule is gendered between
the Ass and the Mare, he gendereth not, for the kind of either of them, of
the Ass and of the Mare is cold, and so the coldness of the sire and of the
dam has masterie in the mule that is gendered, and therefore the mule is
barren, and nothing is gendred of his seed, by reason of passing cold that
has mastrie on him. Also, there it is said, that it happens, that bodies of
Mules be great and huge, for menstruall superfluity passes into nourishing
and feeding of the body, and the blood that needs not to kind, passes out
with urine, and therefore ye male mules smell not to the vrin of ye female
mules, as other beasts do that have houes: and the other deal of superfluity
passes into increasing and greatness of the body. Therefore the female mule
conceiueth but by hap and full selde, and the male Mule for he is the more hot,
because of the male kind, gendreth sometime in some countries and lands, and
that but by hap, but what he gendereth is strange and occasion, as he yt is
gendred between an horse and an Ass, and is worthy that such a one be
barren, for he is gendered against kind. Huc vsque Arist. li. 16.

Isaac in Dietis says, that mules flesh is worse to nourishing and defieng
than Asses flesh his dirt stamped and burnt: stauncheth blood, if it be
tempered with vinegar, as Dioscorides says, and the same dirte helps against
stinging of of Scorpions, as he says.

( Addition.
Musmoue, a kind of great sheep very white, the which sometime bred in the
North Isles of Scotland, as Hector Boethius affirms, of the bigness of a
Bucke, horned round and bending: of form between a Sheep and a Goat, strong
and swifte. Read Gesner in his additions, fol. 10.)

De Mure. cap. 73.
THe Mouse is called Mus, and is a little beast, as Isido. says, and has
that name of Humus earth: for he breadeth and is gendered of humors of the
earth, for earth is called Mus and Humus. Also the the liver of this beast
wexeth in the full of the Moon, like as a certain fish of the sea increases
then, and waneth again in the waning of the Moon: and Mice are called Sorices
also, for they fret and gnaw things as it were a saw. Huc vsque Isid. lib. 12.
And libro septimo Arist. says, that the mouse drinks not, and if he drinks
he dies: and is a gluttonous beast, and is therefore beguiled with a little
meat when he smells it, and will taste thereof. His urine stinketh, and his
biting is venemons: and his urine is contagious, and also his tail is venomous
accounted. Also lib. 8. cap. 38. Plinius speaks of Mice and says, that some
Mice are witty, and gather meat into their dens, and hide themselves in
dens in winter time, and their palate is perfect in taste, and also their
nose in smell. In harvest the male and female gather corn, and charge either
other upon the womb, and the male draws the female so charged, by the tail
to her den, and discharges her, and lays up that stuff in a place in the
den: and then they go again to travail, and gather ears of corn, and the
male lays himself on his own back, and his female charge him, and takes
his tail in her mouth, and draws him so home to the den, and so they bear
their burdens and charge, and change course, and ste^^s, and times. Also he
says, of Mice is diverse manner kinds, for some mice lives in houses, and some
in fields, and some in banks and brims of waters, and some depart the year
atwaine in sleeping, for they sleep half the year, as Glires do, which be a
certain manner of Mice, as Plin. says. And though Mice be full grievous and
noyfull beasts, yet they are in many things good and profitable in medicines:
for as Plin. says lib. 29. cap. 7. Ashes of Mice, with honye and with oil
dropped into the ears, does away ache and grief: and if any worm enters and
comes into the ^are, the chief remedy is the gall of Mice tempered with wine,
dropped warm into the ears. Dioscorides says, that Mice dirt bruised with
vinegar, cleanses that evil Allopicia, and keeps and sa(...) from falling
of hair. Also that dirt stamped with wine, and taken in drink, softneth the
womb wonderfully (...) skin laid all about the heel, heleth and saves
kybes and wounds therefrom.

( Addition.
Many be the kinds of Mice, as in Gesnes is depressed, the field Mouse: the
Farie with a long snoute: the sleeper, that is of a ^un color, and will run
on the edge of a sword, and sleep upon the pain.

De Mustela. cap. 74.
THe Wesell is called Mustela, and is so called, as it were a long mouse, as
Isi. says li. 12. for long is called Telon in Greek, this beast has a
guileful wit, and nourishes her Kittons in houses, and bears them from place
to place, and changes place and dwelling, for her neast should not be found.
The Wesell pursues and chaseth Serpents, and hates and eats mice. And of
Wesels is double manner kind, one dwells in woods, and is more than other.
And the Greeks call it Lo^das, and the other goes about in houses. And their
opinion is false, that means, that Wesells conceine at the mouth, and kitneth
at the ear. as Isid. says li. 12. The wesell is enemy to Sparowes, and lies
in awaite for them and other small birds, and swalloweth up their eggs: and
if the Wesels kittens fall by any hap in chins or in pits, and be hurt or dead,
the Wesell heleth them with a certain herb, and reareth them from death to
life, as Pli. says, and eats Rewe, and bawmeth her self with juice
thereof, and reeseth then on the Cockatrice, and assaileth and slaieth him
without any dred boldly, as Pli. says li. 8. ca. 22. There it is said, that
the virtue of wesells is death to the Cockatrice, for God and kind will, that
nothing be without a help: the wesell knows soon of the Cockatrice, and
goes into his den, and slaieth him there, and is a beast that sleeps much,
and wexeth fat with sleep, as the mice do, that are called Glires, as he
says. Also li. 29. ca. 1. he says, that ye wesell is of double kind, fame and
wild, and either has gall yt helps much against Adders: for their preuie
chose stinketh right foul, and stinking things is contrary to adders and
serpents, and we mean, that their flesh helps against venim. A wesel burnt
to ashes, is helthfully done in medicine, and helps against Litargie, ye
sleeping evil, and so if a man fall into Litargy the sleeping evil, by
venimme of an Adder, the ashes of a wesel tempered with drops of water,
dissolueth and destroys ye strength and might of ye sleep, as he says: and
there it is said, ye powder helps against festers, for kind yt is mother of
all, gendreth nothing without great cause, as it is said. Li. 8. Arist. says,
yt the wesell fights against serpents, for either eat mice, and is a swift
beast of moving, and pliant of body, and full slipper and unstable, and wise in
smell, and has a red and a white womb, and changes color: for in some
countries sometime of ye year all his skin is white, except the tail. His
biting is malicious and venomous, and his urine stinketh as the urine of the
mouse.

( Addition.
The Wesell Ictis and Mustela, a marvelous stinking beast if he be pursued.
Furunculus a little thief, also a Wesell.)

De Migali. cap. 75.
A Firet is called Migale, and is a little beast, Victerram in Hebrew Oach.
as it were a wesell, and is a glutton and guilefull, and a rauener: for with
guile he rauisheth what he will eat afterward, as the Gloss says, sup. Leu.
11. For dred he saineth himself mild, when a man comes nigh him, but he
biteth anon. and sheddeth venimme, as it is said there Arist. speaks of this
beast Migale and faith, that he hates horses and mules, and grieueth them, and
lies specially in await on a mare that is with foale, and fights against
Serpents, and armeth him with rewe, as he says.

( Addition.
The Ferret is a common enemy to Conics, and is used of the evil disposed to
rob warrens in the night, with pursnets and hayes.)

De Murilego. ca. 76.
THe Cat is called Murilegus, and Musio, and also Cattus, and has that name
Murilegus, A Cat.
for he is enemy to mice and to rats, and is commonly called Cattus, and has
that name of ravening, for he rauisheth mice and rats. Or else he has that name
Cattus of Cata, that is to see, for he sees so sharply, that he overcomes
darkness of the night by shining of the light of his eyes, and the name Cattus
comes of Greek, and is to understand slye and witty, as Isi. says li. 12.
And is a beast of uncertain hair and color: for some Cat is white, some red,
some black, some skewed and speckled in the feet, and in the face, and in the
ears, and is most like to the Leopard, and has a great mouth, and sawie teeth
and sharp, and long tongue and pliant, thin and subtle, and lappeth there with
when he drinks, as other beasts do that have the nether lip shorter than the
over, for because of unevenness of lips, such beasts suck not in drinking,
but lap and lick as Ari. says and Plin. also: and he is a full lecherous beast
in youth, swift, pliant and merry, and leapeth and reeseth on al thing yt is
before him, and is led by a straw, and plaieth therewith: and is a right heuie
beast in age and full sleepy, and lies slily in wait for mice, and is ware
where they be, more by smell than by sight, and hunteth and reeseth on them in
privy places: and when he takes a mouse, he plaieth therewith, and eats him
after the play, and is as it were wild, and goes about in time of generation,
among eats. In time of kind is hard fighting for females, and one scratcheth
and renteth ye other grievously with biting and with claws, and they make a
ruthful noise and gastful, Called catervvauling.
when one prosereth to fight with another: and is a cruel beast when he is
wild, and dwells in woods, and hunteth then small wild beasts, as Conies and
Hares: and falls on his own feet when he falls out of high places, and
uneath is hurt, when he is thrown down off an high place. His durte does
stink^ful foul, and therefore he hides it under earth, and gathreth thereupon
covering with feet and claws: and when he has a fair skin he is as it were
proud thereof, and goes fast about, and when his skin is burnt, then he bideth
at home, and is often for his fair skin, taken of the skinner and slain.

( Addition.
The property of cats is to climb trees for birds, as also to kill mice; and
being near warrens, for sake the house and become wild, praieng on rabits and
birds.

De Noctiluca. cap. 77.
NOctiluca is a little beast, The Glovvorme.
with feet and with wings, and is therefore sometime accounted among Volatiles,
and he shines in darkness as a candle, and namely about ye hinder parts, and is
foul and dark in full light, and infecteth and smites his hand that him
touches: and though he be unseen in light, yet he flies light, and hates
it, and goes by night, and is contrary to another little one that is called
Lucipeta, that rises gladly often light, as Isid. says, lib. 12. cap. de
minutis volatilibus etc.

Of Odonta.
IN the years of the world.3640. or near therabout, Alexander ye great entering
India with a great army, among diverse strange assalts among wild beasts and
serpents, a beast of a strange kind appeared greater then an Elephant, armed
with three horns, in his forehead, and having a head of a black color, like
a horse, the Indians term ye said beast Odonta, and when he had drunk, he
beholding the tents, sodeinelye settle upon the Soldiers, with great
vyolence, neither was he driven back with the heat of the fire that was before
him, At the overthrow of the said strange and fierce beast, 36. soldiers were
slain, and 53. sauchenets or swords of that time were quite marred, and with
much ado, at length, the beast being deadly wounded dyed. Lucostenes de
Prodigijs in fo. 99 in the Cro. of the Dome. fol. 66. Bat.)

De Onagro. cap. 78.
ONaget is a wild Ass, as Isid. says, and such Asses be great and wild in
Africa, and untamed, and goes about in desert place: and each of them leads
a company of females, and they have envy to the males when they be foaled, and
bite off their gendering stones, and the females be ware thereof, and hide
their male foales in privy places. And Plini. says, li. 8. Between wild
Asses and tame asses li 2 gendered most swift Asses. And is a free beast at
large, and not tamed, and lecherous: and hunteth often mountains and woods, and
though he be of himself a beast that fights not nor greeueth, yet by
benefice of running and of lyghtnesse he overcomes in desert both the Lion
and the Wolf: and is a beast that may well away with thirst, and suffers
it long, and abides until he may drink that is couenable for him. And of him
Phisiologus speaks and says, that in the 25. day of March, this beast
roareth twelve times in that day, and as often in the night: and by his roaring
the evenness of the day and night is known among the Affrikes, and he says,
that always he roareth as many times in the day, as there be hours in the
day, and also in the night. And so wood men in mountains of Africa, in the
which be many wild Asses by the number of their roarings they account the
diuersitye of the day and of the night. This Beast is wise and witty, and
envious in smelling, and so when he is fervent in love, and wolteth not where
his female is, he goes about and styeth upon an high rock, and opens his
nosethrillrs, and draws in air and wind, and knows and perceives by the
wind and air where his female is. And often in mountains he fetches good
herbs and grass, and he loves them well, and seeks them with business
in high mountains, with travail, and roareth for joy when he finds therein
green grass and herbs, but when he knows that he is hunted by men or by
beasts, he flies: and hates greatly the company of men, and loves well
desert places and wilderness.

De Onocentauro. cap. 79.
ONocentaurus, as the Gloss says super Esaias. 9. is a beast of a strange
form, and is gendered between a Bull and an Ass. For an Ass is called Onos
in Greek: and so it is a beast lecherous as an Ass, and strong necked and
nowled as a Bull. But Phisiologus ^^^meth otherwise, and says. That
Onecentaurus is compounded of the shape of a man and of an ass: for he has
shape of a beast from the navel downwarde. It seems that Plinius accords
heereto libro. 7. cap. 3. where he says, that wise and witty kind makes to
us gameful things and wonderful, to show his might. And in the same chapter
he sets example of many wonderful shapen beasts, which be in Indie, as of
Faunie and Satiris and Onocentauris, and of other such, which he calls
beasts, and feineth somewhat the shape of man's kind. And other mean, that
Centauri were called Horse men of the Country of Thesalon, which pricked up
and down on horses, and therefore some of them seemed that horse and man were
one body, and so they accounted, that Centauri were then feyned, as he says,
lib. 11. where he speaks of beasts wonderfullye shapen: and Centaurus in
Greek, is Homo in Latin, in English, a man, and this name Centaurus is
compounded with Onos and Centaurus, and so Onocentaurus has that name, for the
half thereof has the shape of a man, and half of an Ass, as Ipocentaurus is
a beast wonderfullye shapen, in whom is accounted the kind of man and of an
horse, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
As ancient men spent their time in writing of follyes, to make the common
people wonder at that they knew not themselves: so in the last discovered
Indies, the barbarous people seeing a far of the Spaniards on horseback,
having never seen such a sight before, supposed they had been monstrous
deuourers, as in very deed they so proved, but in another form, then the
simple and naked people, at the first took them.)

De Orice. cap. 80.
ORix, as the Gloss says super Esaias. is an unclean beast, and not according
to sacrifice: and the seventy translated and made this translation, Quasi Beta
seminocta: and all ye other translated in this wise, Sicut Onix illaqueatus, as
Orix is snarled: and Orix is called Tho in Hebrew, Theo. Orix.
and is accounted in the law among unclean beasts, and is a beast like to a
water mouse, or to certain mice yt are called Glires, and have ye name, for
sleeping makes them fat, and they sleep all, the winter long, and lay eggs
immovable as they were dead, and quicken again in Summer, and so Orix is a
beast like to such mice: and it seems that the letter of Isa. touches the
same, and accords with Plini. that says in this manner: In Egypt they call
a beast Orix, that stands against the star Canicula and the rising thereof,
the seventh day before, in the beginning of Summer, and beholds on the
star as he would worship it, and that he does when he is awaked after long
sleeping. And this nowne Orix is deelyned Orix, cis, after that it is said
Sorex, cis, and Orix, cis, and such other. But Iuuenall meneth, that Orix is a
certain bird, that is most fat, and he blunteth and dulleth the knife with his
fatness, as he says lib. 3. there he says, that old Orix blunteth iron, and
there by the meaning of this place the Expositors mean, that Orix is like to
an hen of Africa, or such an Hen, and so it is said after Briton, Orix, gis.
And after the rule of Grecismus, the nowne that ends in ix, shall give the
Genetiue ease in cis, or in gis, as Fex, cis, Lex, gis, except Nox, Nix, Senex,
and Suppellex, and therefore it is said, that Orix is that beast, that is
accounted in law clean to eating. Deuteronomeum. 14. there it is said in this
manner: Thou shall eat Orix and Cameleopardalus, but it is accounted unclean
to sacrifice. And libro. 8. capit. 3. de Animalibus somniferis, Plinius says
in this manner: Wild Goats be shapen in many manner likenesses and shapes,
for among them are some called Ilices, and be wonderful light, and leap down
of high rocks and cragges, and fall upon their own horns. They are great and
mighty, with the horn their heads be charged: and some be Origes, and their
hair grows and stretches toward the head, against the kind of other
beasts: and some be called Dame, and some Pigrasti, and many other such, and
come of mountains, and from beyond the sea, and so for to speak, Orix is a
wild Goat, and in this signification it is not taken in Esa. there he
speaks of beasts that men do dream off in evil sleep and dreams, for it
accords not to the proportion and comparison: For Aristotle says, that
every wild Goat is wakefull by kind, and sleeps but little, and is soon
awaked, for it is a fearful beast: and so Orix is taken for a beast in
Deuterono, and for another in likeness in Esa. as many men mean.

( Addition.
Orix a certain wild beast in Afrike. The latter writers are in doubt, what
this Beast should be, some suppose a kind of wild Goat, some the Unicorne,
some the Rinoceros, etc.)

De Oue. cap. 81.
A Seepe is called Ouis, and is a soft Beast, and bears Woll, and is unarmed
in body, and pleasing in heart: and has that name Ouis, of Oblacio, offering:
for men in old time offered sheep in sacrifice, and not Bulls, as Isidore
says libro. 12.

And some of these beasts are called Bidentes, as it were with two teeth, for
among eight teeth two pass the other. And Nations used them most in sacrifice,
as Isidore says. Or else they be called Bidentes, as the age meneth Quasi
biennes, as they were of two years old: For of that age they were, when they
were chosen to sacrifice: but most verily they have the name of two strouting
teeth, with the which they be yaned. And li. 5. Aristotle speaks of sheep,
and says, that they conceive and yane until 8. year. And li. 7. if sheep
conceive toward the Northen wind, they conceive males. And if they conceive
toward ye Southern wind, then they conceive females. And such as the veins
be under the sheep tongue, of such color is the lamb when he is yaned.
Look before de Agnis and Ariete. And when old sheep be moved to generation in
certain time ordained, the shepherds say, that it is a good sign in them:
And if young sheep be moved so, they tell yt it betokens pestilence among
sheep in that year.

Also libro. 8. Aristotle says, that sheep conceive in drinking water, and
therefore heardes give them Salt to eat, to make them drink the more, and to
conceive the more faster, and to keep them the more safe and whole without all
kind of sickness. And also in Harvest they give to them Cucurbitas, Gourdes.
such herbs, and salt them to make much milk in their teates. And sheep
conceive with Tilles and salt: and if sheep fast three days and cate
afterward, then they ware soon fat. And cold water of the North is good to
them in Summer, and warm water of ye South is good to the^ in harvest: and
meat helps them in the end of the day and of the night: For by far ways
and long travail they wax lean, and herds know which of them may dure in
Winter, for upon some is found Ise, and upon some no Ise is found, and some
of them be seeble and may not shake off the Ise. And sheep flesh yt is
nourished in watery places is evil, as flesh of other four footed beasts is,
that be nourished in places that be right moist and watery, and those that have
long tails may worse away with winter, then those that have broad tails,
and those that have litte Wool and crispe, may worst away with Winter. And
Wool of sheep that a Wolf eats, is infected, and the cloth that is made
thereof is lousie. Also libro. 8. he says, that in sheep is less wit and
understanding the^ in another four footed beast. And Thunder greeueth them,
and if one abide alone, and if it be in the euentide, it may happen that she
shall cast her lamb for dread. Also li. 8. ca. 67. Plinius says, that
thundering makes solitary sheep to cast their lambs. The remedy and help
thereof is, to gather and bring them together into one flock. Look before in
this same book, in littera A. where he treats de Ariete and Agno.

( Addition.
Of sheep, their Wool is a singular benefit in a common wealth, especially the
Cotsell wool for finenesse. And in Bartholmes time, the Staple for Wool, was
not so well husbanded as it has been since. The increase of pasture for
sheep, has so much decreased the tillage of corn, that until it be restored
again, there will grow a poor common wealth: the more sheep, the deerer the
wool, the flesh, and the fell: the more sheep the deerer corn and grain,
beside, Beef, Butter, Eggs, and Cheese: Pastures consumes tillage, the want
of tillage breeds beggars, decays villages, hamlets, and vpland towns. It is
better to want Wool then corn, sheep then men, but excess and prodigality,
which cannot away with measure, has brought this England to great penury: it
is espied where it wants, but not wanting where it is espied, much less
regarded.)

De Panthera. cap. 82.
PAnthera, as Isidore says, libro. 12. has that name because he is friend
to all beasts save the Dragon, for him he hates full sore: Or because he
has joy and lyking of beasts of his own kind, and makes all that he
takes of one likeness. And Panthera is Greek, and is to understand, all.
And is a Beast painted with small round speckles, so that all the skin
without seems full of eyes by diversity of speckles black and white, and
red, as he says. And as Isidore says, this beast whelpeth but once, and the
cause thereof is openly known: for when the whelps wax strong in the dammes
womb, and be strong to come into the world, they hate the damme and rent her
womb with claws, as it were ye womb let their whelping and coming into the
world: and therefore the damme lets pass and whelpeth them, constrained
and compelled by sore greeuance of the womb. Therefore Plinius says, that
beasts with sharp claws may not often whelpe, for the whelps move within
and hurt the damme. Huc vsque Isidore, libro. 12. Phisiologus speaks of the
Panther, and says, that he hates the Dragon, and the Dragon flies him: And
when he has eaten enough at full, he hides him in his den, and sleeps
continuallye nigh three days, and rises after three days and cries, and out
of his mouth comes right good air and savor, and is passing measure sweet:
and for the sweetness all beasts follow him. And only the Dragon is a feared
when he hears his voice, and flies into a den, and may not suffer the smell
thereof, and fails in himself, and loses his comfort. For he thinks that
his smell is very venime. And libro. 8. cap. 18. Plinius speaks of the
Panthera, and says: that the Panthera and the Tigre be most dressed with
diverse speckles and diverse colors: and some beasts joy of their own
colors, as Lions in Siria, that be black with white specks, and be like to
Panthers. And all four footed beasts have liking to behold the diverse
colors of the Panthera and Tygres, but they be a fearde of the horriblenesse
of their heads, and therefore they hide their heads, and toll the beasts to
them with fayrenesse of the other deal of the body, and take them when they
come so tolled and eat them: and though he be a right cruel beast, yet he is
not unkind to them that help and succor him in any wise, as Plinius sets
an ensample of one, that delivered and help up a Panthers whelps, that were
fallen into a ditch, and the Panther lead him out of the wilderness with glad
assemblance, and fawned on him, and thanked him right busily, as it seemed.

De Perdo. cap. 83.
THE Perde is called Perdus, as Isidore says, and is the most swift beast,
with many diverse colors and round speckes, as the Panther, and reeseth to
blend, and dies in leaping, and varyeth not from the Panther, but the Panther
has more white speckes, so says Plinius libro. 8. Also libro. 5. Aristotle
says, the Perde when he is sick eats man's dirt, because of medicine.
Hunters hang that dirt on a tree, and goes up to it: and the hunters slay him,
and is lecherous, and gendereth with the Lioness: Of that bastard generation
comes Leopardus. Look before de Leena. The Perde is cruel when his whelps
be stolen, as the Gloss says super Ose. 13.

De Pilosis. cap. 84.
PIlosi, as the Gloss means super Esaias. 13. be beasts wonderfully shapen to
the likeness of men, and be called wild men. And lib. 8. cap. 5. Isidore
says: that Pilosi is called Pauide in Greek, and Incubi in latin or Inuij,
of Ineundo, man's going in sometime with beasts: and have that name Incubi, of
Incumbendo, doing the deed of generation, and often they covet women over
measure, and do with them the deed of lecherye, and men call them Deniones
Galliducij such manner fiends, for often they do such uncleanness. And one of
them is called Iucubouis, and the Romans call such an one Faunum Ficarium.
Also Papias says, that Pilosi be called Panites in Greek, and Incubi in
latin. And their shape begins with men's likeness, and ends in the
likeness of beasts in the utter part. And the Gloss says super Esaias. 34.
the same. But another Gloss says, that Pilosus is an Ape, and is a beast
wonderfully shapen, rough and hairie, shapen as a man, in many points. Look
hereafter de Simia.

De Pigargo. cap. 85.
Pygargus The Roe bucke.
PIgargus is a clean beast to meat, as it is said Deutro. 14. and is an horned
beast, as a Goat bucke, and is less then an Heart, and greater then a goat
bucke: and is like to the beast yt is called Hircoceruus, but is much less
then he. Look wtin de Tragelapho. Hircum siluestre^.
And he cheweth his cud, as the Goat buck, and is cloue footed as an Heart, and
is a wild beast, and of great sweetness, and dwells in woods and in desert.
And Hugution says, that Pigargus is a little low bird, and that name comes
of Pige, that is lownes. But in Deuteronomy. it is taken for a four footed beast, yt
is like to the beast that is called Hircocemus, as the Gloss means there. And
this name Pigargus has no aspiratio^ in the first silable, and so it shall not
be written with H^but some men write Phigargus, and do amiss, as it is known
by books that be dilligently corrected.

De Pigmeis. cap. 86.
PIgmei be little men of a cubite long, and the Greeks call them Pigmeos, and
they dwell in mountains of Inde, and the sea of occean is nigh to them, as
Papias says. And Austen says in this wise, The cubits were in those days at
yt least two foot.
that Pigmei be uneath a cuibite long, and be perfect of age in the third
year, and wax old in the seventh year, and it is said, that they fight with
Cranes. Lib. 7. ca. 3. Plinius speaks of Pigmeis, and says, that Pigmei be
armed in iron, and overcome Cranes, and pass not their bounds, and dwell in
temperate land under a merrye part of heaven, in mountains in the North side.
And ye fame is, that Cranes pursue them, and Pigmei armed, ride on goat bucks
with arowes in springing time, and gather an host, and come to the sea and
destroy their eggs and birds with all their might and strength, and do such
voyages in three months, and except they did so, Cranes should increase, and
be so many, that Pigmei should not withstand them, and they make them houses to
dwell in of feathers, and with the pens of Cranes, and of shells of their
eggs, as he says, and says also, that Aristotle means, that Pigmei live in
dens.

( Addition.
All the later writers affirm this to be true, they are in the uttermost
mountains of Indie.)

De Porco. cap. 87.
THE Swine is called Porcus, as it were Spurcus, vile and defiled, as Isid.
says, li. 12. for he sroteth and walloweth in dirt and in fen, and diueth in
slime, and fouleth himself therewith, and rests in a stinking place.
Horatius says, that a Sow is friend to fen and to myrye places: and therefore
Swine be accounted foul and uncleanly, and we call the bristice of Swine Setas
in latin, and Shoomakers call them Bristles, and sow therewith, as he says:
and some swine be tame, and some wild. And among the tame, the males be called
Boares and Barowes: and be called Verres in latin: for they have great might
and strength, and the females be called Sowes, and Sues in Latin: for they
dig and wrote and seek meat under earth. And the wild male Swine be called
Bores, Apri in latin, as it were fierce, as Isidor. says, lib. 8. cap. 51.
Plinius speaks of Swine and says, that they be farrowed toothed, and the
males gender not passing three year, a Swine dies, if he leeseth an eye: and
a swine may live.15. years, or 20. years. And Swine have many sicknesses, and
hold their heads aside: and when they be sick, they wallowe in fenne and in
puddles, and lie more on the right side then on the left side, and wax fat in
fortye days, and fat sooner if they suffer hunger three days in the beginning
of the feeding. Swine love each other, and know each others voice: and
therefore if any cry, they cry all, and labor to help each other with all
their might. Tame Swine know their own houses and home, and learn to come
thereto without guide and loadsman, as he says, and grunt in going and in
lieng and in sleeping, and namely if they be right fat. And Swine sleep faster
in May then in othertimes of the year, and that comes of fumosity that
stops their brain that time: And in Summer though there be great resolution
of humors, there is great wasting thereof and drieng by passing heat of the
Summer: and there is no great generation of fumositie yt is cause of sleep:
and therefore they sleep not in Summer, as they do in springing time, as
Auicen says. In Harvest and in Winter humors be sad and fastened togethers by
coldness of the air, and compasseeth them without. And therefore few
fumosities be resolved in that time for passing cold that fastneth the humors
in the body, as he says libro secundo, Aristotle says of Swine, that Swine
change not their teeth, and the male has more teeth then the female. Also
libro. 3. Aristotle says, that the Boar leapeth on a Sow after eight months,
and the Sow farroweth after one year, and what the Boar gendereth within the
first year, it is full feeble. Also the Boar has no usage, that if he
gendereth first with one Sow, then his pigges of the second Sow be fewer in
number, and less of body: when a young Sow farroweth first, her pigs shall
have but small bodies: and if the Sow be right fat, her milk is the more
scarce after the farrowing: and pigges that be farrowed in Winter be best, and
they that be farrowed in Summer be worst: and those that be gendered in youth,
be better then those that be gendered in age. And the Boar when he is fat,
may gender in every time of the day, and of the night, and namelye early in
the morrow tide. And libro. 6. When a Sow farroweth, she gives her first pigge
the first teate: and when she desires the deed of lechery, she suffers not
the male to leap upon her, until her ears hang downward. And Barley is full
good meat for Swine, when they shall gender, and namely if it be sodden. Also
lib. 6. Swine have three manner evils, The dizei The me^ill.
one is called Brancos, and is a postume in the ear and in the iawe, and often
in the feet, The lousie. The mad
and the flesh about that place is corrupt, and the corruption passes some and
some into the flesh that is nigh thereto until it come to the lungs, and
stuffeth then the spirit, and the Swine dies, and this evil increases
sodeinly. And Swine herds, when they know first this evil, cutteth off his
member, in yt which this evil is in: and may not be healed without cutting.
And swine have another evil, that is ach and heaviness of head, and of this
evil the most part of Swine die. Another disease that they have, is flux of
the womb, and has uneath any remedy, for it slaieth in three days. And when
Swine be great, it does them good to eat Beryes: and also bathing in hot water
delights them. And they be let blood in the vein under the tongue. Also
diverse meat fatteth Swine, and some meat makes them to swell, and some
gendereth flesh, and some grease and fatness. And hogs both male and female
have liking to eat akornes: for it tempereth their flesh, but and Sowes eat
much thereof, it makes them cast their pigges, as it makes sheep cast their
lambs. And many other things Aristotle tells of them. Look before de Apro,
and look after de Sue.

( Addition.
The flesh of wild Swine is much better and wholsomer, because of their
stirring too and fro, then is the flesh of the tame Swine.)

De Pediculo. cap. 88.
A Lowee is called Pediculus, and is a worm of the skin, and has that name
of Pedibus, the feet, as Isido. says lib. 12. And grieueth more in the skin
with the feet and with creeping, then he does with biting, and is gendered of
right corrupt air and vaporous, that sweat out between the skin and the
flesh by pores, as Constantine says in Viatico. Often as he says, lice and
nits gender in the head or in the skin, and come of purgations, which kind
casts out, and makes them fast between the flesh and skin upon that
place. And expositours say, that some lice gender of sanguine humor, and be
red and great, and some of fleumatike humors, and they be soft and white, and
some of cholarike humors, and be citrine, long, swifte, and sharp: some of
melancholic humor, and they be colored as ashes, and be lean and slow in
moving. And where great multitude of Lice is in a body that is right full and
corrupt, it is often token of general corruption, as of Morphea, or of Lepra, as
he says. Against the grieuing of lice, often washing, ^combing, and medicinal
cleansing of the head helps, For as Constantine says, quick Silver with
ashes of willowes, slays them, and namely if they be gendred of hot humor,
and so does Lead burnt with oil and vinegar, and if they be gendred of cold
humor, then helps Staphisagra and Auripigmentum, with oil and vinegar, and
so does sea water, and water of salt Wells. And as there be diverse kind of
beasts, so in the^ be diverse manner of lice, as it fares in hogs, his lonce
is called Vsia, and has that name because he burns, for where he biteth,
the place burns so, ye blaines arise there, as Isidore says, lib. 12. And
the leaner that a louce is, the sharper the biteth and greeueth.

( Addition.
A louce is a loathsome vermin, yet was he king over Pharao and Herod, to the
great terror of the enemies of God: there be many that have the lousie evil,
and cannot be cured, which comes of the flux of the reins and flegma.)

De Pulice. cap. 89.
THe flea is a little worm, and greeueth men most, and is called Pulex, and
has that name of Puluis, powder, for it is namely fed with powder, as Isidore
says, libro. 12. And is a little Worm of wonderful lightness, and scapeth
and voydeth peril with leaping, and not with running, and waxes slow, and
fails in cold time, and in Summer time it wereth nimble and swift. And
though it be not accounted among beasts that be gendred, and known among
beasts by meddling of male and female, yet he multiplyeth his own kind by
breeding of Neetes: For they breed certain neets in themselves, and of that
commixion or coming of Neets, many Fleas do come of one Flea. And the Flea is
bred white, and changes as it were sodeinelye into black color, and
desires blood, and biteth and pearceth therefore, and stingeth the flesh that
he sits on, and sucketh the thinnest part of humors that be between the
skin and the flesh, and makes in that part of the body, in the which he
sucketh, a bloody token, and does let them that would sleep with sharp biting,
and spares not kings, but a little Flea greeueth them, if he touch their
flesh. And to Fleaes Warmewood is venim, and so be leaves of the wild Fig
tree, as Constantine says. And Coloquintida, a weed that is like to a wild
Nep, helps against Fleas, if it be stamped and meddled with water, and sprung
in the place there as many Fleas be: and so does Wormewoode leaves, for as it
is said, they die by smell and savor of wormwood: and by swiftness of
leaping, they be the worse to take, and they bite full sore against rain.

( Addition.
A sluttish kept house breeds fleas, and lodging next to stables of horses:
also the horse urine breeds fleas, his dung falling upon his tail, bredeth
Snakes, his flesh, Waspes.)

De Rinocerote. ca. 90.
RInoceron in Greek, is to meaning, an horn in the nose, and Monoceron is an
Unicorne, and is a fierce or cruel beast, and has that name, because he has
in the middle of the forehead an horn of four foot long, and that horn is
so sharp and so strong, that he throws down all or pearceth all that he
reeseth on, as Isidore says, libro. 12. And this beast fights often with the
Elephaunt, and wounds and sticks him in the womb, and throws him down
to the ground. And the Unicorne is so strong, that he is not taken with might
of Hunters. But men that write of the kind of things, suppose that a maid is
set there as he shall come, and she opens her lap, and the Unicorne
lays thereon his head, and leaves all his fierceness, and sleeps in that
wise: and is taken as a beast without weapon, and slain with darts of hunters.
Huc vsque Isidorus, libro. 12. The Rinocerot is one, and the Unicorn an other


Gregory super Job in Moralibus says heereto, that Rinocero the Unicorne is a
wild beast by kind, and may not be tamed in no wise: and if it happen that
he be taken in any wise, he may not be kept in any manner: for he is so
impatient and so angry, that he dies anon. Li. 8. ca. 21. Plinius speaks of
the unicorn and says, that he has an horn in ye middle of the forehead
above the nose, and is enimye to the Elephaunts, and froateth and fileth his
horn against stones, and sharpeth it, and makes it ready to fight in that
wise. And in the fighting he assaileth the Elephant on the womb, for he
knows that that is the soft place of the Elephants body. His length is as it
were the length of an horse: but his legs be much more shorter, and his
color is bay. And as he means, libro. 8. cap. 22. There be many kinds of
unicorns, for some be Rinoceron, and some Monoceron and Egloceron. And as he
says, Monoceron is a wild beast shapen like to the horse in body, and to the
Heart in head, and in the feet to the Elephant, and in the tail to the Boar,
and has heavy lowing, and an borne strouting in the middle of the forehead of
two cubits long. And they deny that this beast may be taken alive. And
Egloceron is a manner of Unicorne, that is called Capricornus in latin, and
has that name of Egla, that is a Goat, and Ceros that is an horn: And is
little a beast like to a Kid, with an horn that is full sharp in the middle
of the forehead. Also Plinius says there, that in Indie be one horned Oxen,
with white speckes and bones, and with thick hoofes as horses have. And in
Indie be some one horned Asses, as Aristotle, Auicen, and Plinius say. And be
called one horned Asses, because they have one horn in the forehead, between
the ears, and be called Asini Indici, Asses of Indie, and the other part of
their bodies be like to the bodies of wild Asses, and such an Ass is called
Monoceros, and is less bold and fierce then other unicorns, and has this
name Monoceros, of Monos, that is one, and Ceros, that is an horn. And this
nowne Rinoceron is declined, hic Rinoceron, ge. hu^us Rinocerontis. Also
Monoceron is declined, Monoceron, it is. Also we find Rinoceros, and Monoceros,
and is then declined Rinoceros, Rinocerotis, in the Genitive case, and so of
other.

( Addition.
The Rhinoceros in Aethiopia, a perpetual enemy to the Elephant, he is not so
high as the Elephant, armed over with shells in steed of hair, so yt nothing
can easily pearce the same: even so is the little beast, called of the
Affricans Tatton, of Gesner Zibeti, in fo. 20. at the end of his book of
birds, etc. Which armed case I have to show.)

De Rana. cap. 91.
THE Frogge is called Rana, and has that name of noise and crieng of his
voice, for he cries greedely, and makes much noise in the marreys where he is
bred, as Isidore says, libro. 12. cap. tercio, de Piscibus. And some Frogs be
water Frogs, and some be of moors and of marreys, and some be called
Rubete, of whom it is spoken before in littera Bide Buphone: and some be called
Calamite, for they dwell among reeds that be called Calami, and other among
shrubs and in reedie places, and be but little and green, and dumb without
voice. And some be called Agredule, and be small Frogs, and dwell both in land
and in water, and have therefore that name Agredule.

And there is a manner Frog that makes an hound still and dombe, if he comes
in his mouth: But many men deny this, as Isidore says, libro. 12. And libro
quarto, Aristotle says, that the Frogge has his own tongue, and the further
part of the tongue joins to his mouth, as though it were bound thereto, as
the utter part of the tongue of a fish, though the hinder part and inner of the
tongue be loose and slack toward the wosen: and therefore the Frog has his
own voice, and that voice is called Coax, and makes not that voice but only
in water: And properly the male in time of love, when he cries for the female.
For every beast that has voice cries in time of love, and the Frogge
multiplyeth his voice when he does his nether iawe some deal in the water,
and strikes the upper iawe, for by the strength of stretching of the two
jaws, his eyes shines as a Candle, and namelye by night: for he gendereth
more by night then by day, and all fish nourishes and feeds his brood,
except the Frogge, as he says li. 7. when he is first shapen in water, the
frogge seems all head, with a manner string, hanging as it were a tail, and
afterward is spread abroad in the manner of a womb, and then the tail is away,
and then grows feet: and he is shapen and turned into a four footed beast.
Al frogs, except the Toad, and Rubeta, move more, and pass by leaping more
then by going, for the old Rubeta leapeth but seld. Then the Frogge is watery
and moorish, crieng, and slimie, with a great womb, and speckled there under,
and is venomous, and abominable therefore to men, and most hated, and both in
water and in land he lives.

De Salamandra. ca. 92.
SAlamandra, as Isidore says, libr. 10. cap. 67. is like to the Ewt in shape,
and in never seen but in great rain, and fails in fair wether, and his
song is crieng: and he quenches the fire that he touches, as Ise does, and
water frore: and out of his mouth comes white matter, and if that matter
touch a man's body, the hair shall fall, and what it touches, is corrupt and
infected, and tourneth into foul color. Also Salamandra is a manner kind of
an Ewt or of a Lisard, and is a pestilent beast, most venomous. For as Plinius
says, libro. 29. cap. 4. Salamandra infecteth fruit of Trees, and corrupts
water, so that he that eats or drinks thereof, is slain anon. And if his
spittle touch the foot, it infecteth and corrupts all the man's body, and
though he be so venomous, yet some beasts eat him in steed of meat. Of all
beasts, only the Salamandra lives in fire, as he says, and quenches the
fire. And a certain kind of Salamandra has rough skin and hairy, as the skin
of the sea Sele, of the which skin be sometime girdles made to the use of
kings: The which girdles when they be full old be thrown into the fire
harmless and without went purged, and as it were renewed: and of that skin
be tongues and bonds made in lamps and in Lanternes, that be never corrupt
with burning of fire. Look before in A. de Anguium diuersitate, and there thou
shall find of this worm.

( Addition.
Salamander, a beast in figure like a Lisard, full of spots: being in fire it
quenches it, and is not burned.)

De Sanguisuga. ca. 93.
A Water leeche is called Sanguisuga, and is a water worm, and has that name
for he loves and sucketh blood, and lies in a wait upon them that drink, and
when he falls to the iaws, or cleaves to any place, he sucketh and drinks
blood, and when he has drunk overmuch, he casts it out again, and sucketh
new blood yet again, as Isidore says, lib. 12. and is a worm with some part
brown color, distinguished with some deal red strakes, and is soft of body
euenlong, and plyaunt, and his mouth is three cornered, and in his mouth is a
pipe, with the which he sucketh blood: and he sits upon venomous things,
and therefore when he shall be set to a member because of medicine, first he
shall be wrapped in nettles and in Salt, and is thereby compelled to cast out of
his body, if he have tasted any venomous thing in warm water. And in hot time
he applies and sets himself soon to a member for to suck. A horse leech.

De Stellione. cap. 94.
THE Lisard is called Stellio, and has ye name of his own color, for it is a
little beast painted on the back with shining specks, as it were stars. Ovid
speaks of him, and says, yt he has a name according to his color, for he
has diverse shining specks in the body, and shine as stars, as Isidore says,
lib. 12. And he says, that the Lisard is so contrary to Scorpions, that the
Scorpions dread and leese comfort when they see the Lisarde. Li. 8. Plin.
says, that the Lisarde lives most by dew: And though he be a fair beast, and
fair painted, yet he is right venomous. For as Plinius says, lib. 29. cap. 2.
the worst medicine is made of the Lisard: for when he is dead in Wine, he
covers their faces yt drink thereof, with vile scabs. Therefore they eschew
to put him in medicine, and Ointment, yt have envy to fairness of strumpets.
Note
His remedy is, the yolk of an egg, honey and glass: and the gall of a Lisarde
stamped in water, assembleth together weesels, as it is said. And the Lisarde
is a manner kind of Ewts, and creeps, and is four footed, and cloue footed,
with fingers departed as it were in manner of an hound, and therewith he creeps
and climbeth up to tops of houses, and in the chinnes of Wells there he makes
his dens, and changes their skins in age, as the Serpent does, as he says,
and lurketh in winter in dens and chinnes, and his sight dimmeth, and in
springing time he comes out of his den, and feels that his sight fails,
and changes his place, and seeks him a place toward the East, and opens
continually his eien toward the rising of the Sun, until the humor in the eye
be full dried, and the mist wasted, that is cause of dimnesse in the eye. And
super Prou. cap. 30. the Gloss means, that the Lisard is the most swift
beast, and is not feathered neither penned, but only by ableness and
swiftness of feet he creeps and climbeth upon the top of the house and the
wall.

( Addition.
Stellio, is not the Lisard, but like in body, and has spots in his back,
like stars, and is venomous. Lacertus is the Lisard or green worm, and not
hurtful.)

De Serpente. cap. 95.
THe Serpent has that name Serpens of Serpere, to creep, for he creeps with
privy pares and glidings, and goes not nor steppeth openly, but creeps with
privy puttings forth of teates, as Isido. says, lib. 12. Here I make no
process of this kind, for before in littera A, cap. de Angue, all his
properties be declared and showed at full, but it noyeth not to set here
shortly some of his properties that be known. Io. de sancto Egedio speaks of
the Serpent, and says, that he dreadeth a naked man, and leapeth on a man
that is clothed. Spettle is venim to ye serpent, for spettle of a fasting man
is venim to him, the Serpent fights for his head, for therein is accounted
the place of the heart. His flesh is accounted cold, for he is of cold kind,
he glydeth on ye breast and on the womb, and that is said for he goes not
forth right, but creeps, and renueth himself every year, and likes moistie
places, and loves filthy places and shadowye, and he looks aside, and not
forthright, and stingeth also aside, and the teeth be dented inward, and
crooked, and so be bends when he smites. The serpent hides Lepra, and is
eaten for to heal that evil yt it be not known: and uses not to turn and
wind te tongue, for he moves it always, and that by strength of venim. The
serpent fasteth and suffers hunger long time, and stops his ears, because
he will not hear the inchanters coniurations. And is hunted with wine, and he
hisseth before he bileth, and slaieth all that he biteth, and is enemy to
birds, for he slaieth them with his blowing: and takes again that thing that
he casted up, for he takes again the venim that he casts.

De Simea. cap. 96.
THe Ape is called Simea in Greek, and has that name of a flat nose. And so
we call Apes Simie, for they be flat in the nose, and foul and riueled in the
face. Or we call them Simeas, and give them that name for likeness of reason.
For that he in many things counterfeiteth the deeds of men, but this is false,
as Isi. says, li. 12. And there he says, that Apes have knowledge of
elements, and be sorry in the full of the Moon, and be merry and glad in the
new of the Moon. And when ye Ape has two whelps, she bears yt that she
loves best in her arms, and that other on her shoulder, and when she is
beset, then she must needs fly, and may not bear both the whelps: then she is
compelled to throw away yt that she bare in her arms, and is charged with that
other that sits on her shoulder, and is the more slow to run and to fly,
and is therefore ye sooner taken with ye hunter. Of Apes be 5. manner kinds, as
he says, of whom some have tails: and there is an Ape with a tail, A Munky A
Babicu A Marme se^.
and that Ape is called Cluna among some men: and some be called Cenophe, and
be like to an hound in the face, and in the body like to an Ape. Also some be
called Spinge, and be rough and hairie, with strouting paps and teats, and
forgets soon wildness: and some be Sati^^, pleasing in face, and merrye
mouings and playengs, and rests but little. And some be called Calatrices,
and be unlike to ye other, nigh in all manner points, for in the face is a long
beard, and have a broad tail, as Isidore says. And Plin. says the same, li.
8. cap. 54. There he says, yt kind of Apes is next to man's shape, and be
diverse, and distinguished by tails, and labor wanderfully and busily to do
all thing that they see: and so often they she themselves with shoes that
hunters leave in certain places slily, and be so taken the sooner: for while
they would fasten the thong of the shoe, and would put ye shoe on their feet,
as they see ye hunters do, they be often taken with hunters ere they may
unloose the shoes, and be delivered of them. Also Plinius says there, that the
kind of Apes love well their whelps, for tame Apes that be in an house, shows
her whelps that she whelpeth, to all men that he therein, and have liking to
be stroked, and knows them that comfort and pleases him, and makes them
good cheer, Huc vsque Plinius. But eod. li. cap. 22. he says, that in Indie
be Apes white in all ye body and those Apes be hunted and taken with Bears of
Inde. And li. 2. Auicen says, that the Ape accords in shape with a man, and
in hair with a wolfes and some apes have evil manners, and tatches, and their
teeth be as it were hounds teeth, and have malicious biting, and namely those
that have tails, and some be rough and all hairie before, except the face, and
such have teeth as a man, and have other things as a man, and reddish eyes and
sharp, and paps and teats, in the breast, and hands, feet, and fingers, and
toes, and may go and step on two feet, for they have soles in their feet as
a man has, and so has few beasts except a man, and namelye four footed
beasts, as Aristotle says. And ye female Ape is like to a woman in the priuye
chose, and the males yard is like to an hounds yard, and his entrails be
like to a man's entrails Huc vsque Auicenne. And Aristotle says, yt some four
footed beasts comes to man's kind, as the Ape. There he rehearses all ye
foresaid likeness. The Ape is a beast wonderfully shapen, but he has some
likeness of mankind, and is learned and taught, and so he is taught to leap and
play in diverse manner wise, and is an untamed beast, and malicious by kind,
and is tamed and chastised by violence with beating, and with cheines, and is
refrained with a clogge, so that he may not run about freely at his own
will, to abate his fierceness and outrage. And the Ape safeth all manner of
meats and unclean things, and therefore he seeks and looks worms in men's
heads, and throws them into his mouth, and eats the^. The Lion loves Apes
flesh, for by eating thereof he recouereth, as it is said when he is sore sick,
as Isido. and Plinius means. Look before de Leone in littera L.

De Sirena. cap. 97.
THe Mermaid^ is called Sirena, and hec Siren, Sirenis, is a sea beast
wonderfully shapen, and draws shipmen to peril by sweetness of song, and so
this noune Sirena comes of ^^iren, yt is to understand, draught or drawing,
as Hugue^o says. The Gloss says super Esa. 13. G. that Sirene be Serpents
with creasts. Sirene, in the swift course of water, yt whatsoever comes
within ye violence of it, is carried away.
And some men say, that they are fishes of the sea in likeness of women.
Papias says, that Sirene be great Dragons flieng with creasts as some men
suppose. And Isidore says li. 20. where he breateth of wonders, in this wise,
some men feine yt there are three Sirenes sou^^de ^^^ maidens, and some deal
Fowls with claws and wings, and one of them ^^^geth with voy^^, and another
(...) Pipe, Those are Harpie, and both feyned.
and the third with an Harp; and they please to shipmen with (...) of song,
that they draw them to peril and to shipwreck, but the truth is, that they
were strong whoores, ye drew men that passed by them, to poverty and
mischief. And it is feined, that they brought them to shipwreck. And Isidore
lib. 12. says, that in Arabia be serpents with wings, that be called Sirene
and run more swiftly then horses, and do fly, and also it is said, that they
fly with wings, and their venimme is so strong, that death is self sooner then
ach or sore. And Phisiologus speaks of Sirena, and says, it is a beast of
the sea wonderfully shapen as as maid from the navel upward, and a fish from
the navel downward, and this wonderful beast is glad and merry in tempest,
and sad and heavy in fair weather. With sweetness of song this beast
makes shipmen to sleep, and when ^^see sees that they be a sleep, she goes
into the ship, and ratisheth which she may take with her, and brings him into
a dry place, and makes him first lie by her, and do the deed of lechery,
and if he will not or may not, then she slaieth him and eats his flesh. Of
such wonderful beasts it is written in the great Alexanders story.

( Addition.
The nature of diverse fishes is to pray upon man, as the Conger, the Mackrell,
and the Crab or Lopster: my self in the year. 63. saw the experience, and as
for the Mermaide that is the sea fish, shapes appear after diverse forms, that
some groose-head imagine to be like a maid, as the Monk fish, the Friar, and
Hippotamus wherein is a kind of resemblaunce, but fa^^e from proportion.)

De. Scorpione cap. 98.
A Scorpion, as Isidore says, libro. ^^. (...) land Wo^ ^^, with a crooked
things in the tail, and has that name Scorpio in Greek, for it stingeth with
^^^ tail, and sheddeth venimme in the (...) wound. And it is his property,
that he (...) ever nor her ^o^h never the palm of the hand, as he says: And
this manner scorpion comes of Sco^te the (...) is sweet, and of (...), that is
to feine, for before he feineth pleasance. By likeness of the worm Scorpion a
bush of thorns, and of briers, and knotted branches of rods be called
stinging. Also a sign in heaven is called Scorpio. For when the Sun is in
that sign, we feel first stinging of cold. Therefore Horace says.

Maturina parum tunc cautos frigora ledunt.

The morrow cold grieueth but little. Also an arow that is venimed is called
Scorpio, for when it comes out of the bow unto a man, and hitteth him, if
sheddeth venim, and for that cause it has that name Scorpio. And of al these
it is said in this vearse following.

Scorpius est signum, vemu^sque, sagitta, flagellum.

The effect of this vearse is says before. And Plin. li. 11. ca. 26. speaks
of Scorpions, and says, that they bring forth small worms, shapen as eggs,
and breeds fervent and right pestelentiall venim, as serpents do. And the
venim of Scorpions noieth and greeueth three days full sore, and afterward
flaseth with soft death, but it be helped and succored the sooner. And ye
Scorpion smites maidens with deaths stroke, when he smites and stingeth them,
and women also: But he smites not men so soon, and grieueth most and noieth
in the morrow tide, those yt they find in their ways, when they co^eout of
their dens, or if it happens yt they shed venim by any smiting. The Scorpions
tail is always ready to smite and sting, and cease in no moment of greeuing or
noieng, if he have any occassion or cause: and he stingeth and smites a
slon^, and sheddeth in the smiting white venim. Apoderus is author, and
describes many manner of grievous scorpio^s by double color, some have stings,
and among these scorpions the males be most grievous, and namely in time of
love, and these scorpions be smaller and longer then other. And of them all the
venim is most grievous a little after the midst of the day, in the great and
fervent heat of the Sun, and also when they thirst, and have certain knots or
riuells in the tail, and the mo such they have, the venim is the worse, and
they have sometime such knots six or seven. Apolodius means, yt in Africa
some Scorpions have feathers, and those be full grievous: and because of
winning, Inchanters gathers venime of diverse lands, and labor for to bear
these winged Scorpions into Italy, but they may not live under heaven within the
country of Italy. But such Scorpions be sometime seen in Italy, but they be
not grievous. And in Scithia they smite black Swine, so that they die soon,
but they bath the^ in water afterward. To a man smitten of ye scorpion, ashes
of scorpions burnt, drunk in wine, is remedy. Also scorpions drowned in oil,
helps and succoureth beasts that be strong with scorpions. The Scorpion
hurts no Beast that has any blood, and some Scorpions breed and bring forth
a leaven young scorpions. And it is said, that the Scorpions eats them
sometime, but one of them that is most fly leapeth on the thigh of the
Scorpionesse, and sits there safe and sure from the stinging of the tail,
and from the biting of the mouth, and this slaieth the he, and works the
death of his young, and kind ordeineth this provision, for such a
pestilentiall kind should not multiply too much. Huc vsque Plinius. libro. 11.
And Aristotle lib. 7. says, that some Scorpions do eat some venomous
things, and have the worse venime, and so Dragons do eat Scorpions, and
those be worst. Against stinging of Scorpions be many remedies, as it is
said before in libro de Venenis, where it is perfectly treated.

( Addition.
In Italy are many Scorpions, they are much like a Cricket, but more browner,
venomous, and hanteth in clifts of posts, and beds, and be quick in running.)

De Sue. cap. 99.
A Sow is called Sus, and has ye name of Subigendo, under wroting and digging,
for she routeth, and diggeth the earth to get her meat and food, and
ouerturneth and wrouteth, that she may come with the teeth to moors and
roots. And Plinius says li. 8. cap. 51. that the young Sow conceiueth against
the evenness of the day and night in springing time, and sarroweth sometime
20. pigs at once, but she may not rear them nor bring them up, and eats all
sometime, except the first. For she loves him best that comes out first of
her womb, for he is most kindlye to her. And she gives him always the first
seat, as Plinius says. Solinus and Aristotle li. 6. mean, that the sow is an
unclean beast, and a right great glutton, and she eats and deuoureth
gluttonously all manner stinking things and unclean, and covers and desires
baths, fennes, and puddles, and re^^eth her self therein, and waxes fat. And
Aristotle says lib. 7. she waxes fat, and namely in resting. And the seventh
part of her meat turns into hair and blood, and into other such. And the Sow
waxes lean after yt she has farrowed, for the meat that she eats turns
into milk, by the which her pigs be nourished and fed, and the Sow waxes
fierce and cruel, when she has Pigges, and fights and puts her self in
peril for her Pigges against the Woulfe. Look the other properties of this
said beast in littera P. before, de Porco, and in this same book in littera
A. de Apro, where they be more largely treated and spoken of in diverse things.

De Tauro. cap. 100.
THe Bull is called Taurus, and is neither roother nor gelded, as Isid. says.
And Taurus is a nowne of Greek, and so is Bos also. And as he says, libro.
12. Bulls of Indie be red, and swifte, and cruel, and their hair is turned
in contrariwise, and such a Bull bends his neck at his own will, and
puts off darts and shot with hardness of the back, and is fierce, and is
not overcome, and when he is tied under a Fig tree, he loses and leaves
all his fierceness, and is sodeinelye sober and soft, as Isidore says libro.
17. Look before de Ficu, in littera F. and is a proud beast and headstrong,
and his most strength is in the neck, in the horns, and in the powle. Plinius
speaks of the Bull, libro. 8. cap. 45. and says, that the gentleness of the
Bull is known by sight, and by stern face, and full ears, and in horns, and
in shape disposed to fighting: al his manace stands in his fore-feet, with
the which he diggeth the earth, and throws it up among beasts. He uses
specially such casting and throwing of earth, and comfort him therewith, as
he says. And Aristotle lib. 2. says, that the Bull has a round liver, like
to a man's liver: and eats alone before time of generation and of love, but
then he comes into company of kine, as he says, lib. 7. And fights then
strongly against other. Also in codem, Bulls be fatted with grass, herbs,
and corn, which breeds ventositie, and also they be fatted with Pesen and
Beans, and other such, and if thou do cut and slit his skin, That is, when
he is hide-bound, or cloung.
so that it areare somewhat from his flesh with blowing with a pipe, and give
him afterward to eat, then he fatteth, and is made fat with sweet meats, as
with Figs and Grapes, and Reysons. Also lib. septimo, Bulls be in contrary
manner and doing to horses: for they covet not to drink water but it be cold
and clear. Also libr. 7. it is said, that Bulls do fight for their Kine,
and he that has ye mastry, and is victor, leapeth on the female: and when he
is faint and feeble by much doing the deeds of generation, then he yt was
overcome, comes and fights with him, and he that has the mastry leapeth on
the female, as it were making joy of the mastrie. And Bulls use the work of
generation after one year, and perchance after 8. months, as kine do. Look
within following in this same book, de Vacca, in littera V. Bulls before that
they be gelded, be fierce and proud, but when they have lost their gendring
stones, they be soft as females and mild, and fight not, and wax in body, and
fatten, Then called Oxen
and be made mild and soft with yokes of ploughs. Look within in littera V, de
vitulo castrato. Also lib. 11. in fine it is said. That Bulls have stronger
sinews and strings, or brawnes, then Oxen: for in the gelding all the members
of the body soften, and therefore in the heart of ye Bull oftentimes a bone is
found: as in the heart of an Heart. Also Pli. li. 8. cap. 22. says, that some
Bulls be wild, fierce, and stern, and be more in quantity and greatness
then other Bulls, and more swifter, and those Bulls be red in color, and
bleew in the eyes, having their hair ouerturned, and grows toward their
eyes: and they have mouable horns and moves them one after another in
fighting. And have ridges and backs as hard as flint, so that they may not be
wounded. And he hunteth all wild beasts, and may not be taken but in deep pits
and caves, and be always fierce when they be taken, and destroy themselves, and
die for indignation.

De Tragelapho. cap. 101.
TRagelaphus is called Hircoceruus also, and has that name Tragelaphus of
Tragos, yt is a goat bucke, and Elephos, that is an heart, as Isid. says, lib.
12. And be called Tragelaphi among ye Greeks: and some be of the kind of an
Heart, and have rough ears as Goat buckes, and rough chins with beards.
Aristotle li. 2. speaks of them and says, that some wild beasts have crooked
horns, as Hircoceruus, yt is called Tragelaphus also, and has soles in the
feet: and his body waxes to the quantity of an heart: and this beast bears
downward his face, and has horns like unto an Heart Calfe.

( Addition.
Tragelaphus, whose name is not common, is like a Goat, but he is not bearded,
his horns are bending more compass then the Goat, headed as a Ram, both in
forehead and ears, white as a sheep, saving his breast is blackish, bending
neck, as the Dear. The learned have named this beast Tragelaphum, this beast
is wholesome to eat, ye hide and horns for sundry purposes. Gesner, who
supposes it a kind of dear, in folio Appendix. Addition or remnant of
collections. 20.)

De Talpa. cap. 102.
A Mole is called Talpa, and is a little beast, somewhat like unto a Mouse. Of
this beast Isidore speaks libr. 12. and says, that he is damned in
everlasting blindness and darkness, and is without eyes, and has a snowte as
a swine, and diggeth therewith the earth, and casts up that he diggeth and
gnaweth, and eats mores and roots under the earth, and hates the Sun, and
flies light, and may not live above the earth, and has a black skin,
hairie, soft and smooth, and most short legs, and broad footed, divided or
parted with toes, as it were an hound. And Arist. speaks of the Mole in this
wise: every beast that gendereth a beast like to himself, has eyes, except
the Mole, that has no eyes seen without, and who that slitteth the skin
subtly and warely, shall find within the fores of eyes hidden: and some men
suppose, that that skin breaks for anguish and for sorrow when he begins
to dye, and begins then to open the eyes in dieng, that were cloased living.
Heereto Plin. says lib. 10. cap. 49. that the Mole hears better when he is
healed with earth that is a thick Element and deaf of kind, and if he hear
a man speak, he voydeth and flies far away.

( Addition.
The Mole or Want has eyes, but they are very small, wherewith he sees. In the
end of May he leaves open his earthing, and will sometime come so far thence,
that he is taken or he can recover the same.)

De Taxo. cap. 103.
Badger or Graye.
THe Brocke is called Taxus and Melus also, and is a beast of the quantity of a
Fox, and his skin is full hairie and rough, and is called also Melota.

And the Gloss says upon that word, Circuerunt in melotis, etc. Ebre. 12. Of
this beast that is called Taxus and Melota also, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 39. says.
In such beasts is wit and slight, and holds in the breath and blowing,
stretches the skin so holding their brethings, when they be hunted and
chased with hunters dogs, and so they find slight and manner by such
strouting out of the skin to eschew and put off the biting of those hounds that
so do pursue and follow to noye them, and also for to slay them: and in like
wise put they of the smiting of ye hunters: these beasts know when tempest
shall fall, and makes the^ therefore dens under earth, with diverse entrings, and
when the Northern wind blows, he stops the North entering with his rough
tail, and lets stand open the South entering, changing his hoales, as the
wind alters. In the same dens they make provisions, and gather them store of
meat against winter: and sometime if they lack meat, they take sleep in
steed of meat, as he says: for they be of those kind of beasts, that hide
themselves in winter, and live most part by sleep, as it is said before of
the Mouse. And as Phisiologus says, there is a manner kind of Brockes, that
gather meat with the female against winter, and lays it up in his den, and
when cold winter comes, the male dreadeth least store of meat should fail,
and refraineth ye female, and withdraws her meal, and suffers her not to
eat her fill, and she faineth peace, as it were following the males will, and
comes in on that other side of the den, and opens her jaws, and eats and
deuoureth and wastes the meat that is gathered, unwitting to the male. Also
he says yt these beasts hate the Fox, and fight often times with him, but when
the Fox sees, yt he may not for roughnes and hardness of the skin grieve him,
he faineth him as though he were sick and overcome, and flies away, and while
the Brocke goes out to get his pray, the Fox comes into his den, and
defiles his chamber with vrin and other uncleanness: and the Brocke is squemous
of such foul things, and forsakes his house that is so defiled, and gets
needfully another dwelling place.

De Tigride. cap. 104.
TIgris is the most swiftest beast in flight, as it were an arrow, for ye
Persians call an arrow Tigris and is a beast spotted with diverse specks, and is
wonderful strong and swifte: and the River Tigris has the name of this beast,
for it is the most swiftest of all floudes.

And in the more Hircania breeds many beasts of this kind. Huc vsque Isid.
And Haec Tigris, dis, is the name of the river. Look before De fluminibus. And
Plinius speaks of the Tigers and says: that beasts of that kind come out
of Hircania, and are beasts of dreadful swiftness, and is namely known when
he is taken, for the whelpe is all glemie and sinewie: and the Hunter lies in
awaite and takes away the whelps, and flies soon away, on the most swifte
horse that he may have: and when the wild beast comes, and finds the den
bayd, and the whelps away, then he rises headlong, and takes the sore of
footing of him that bears the whelps away, and follows him by smell: and
when the hunter hears the grutching of that beast that runs after him, he
throws down one of the whelps, and the Tiger bitch takes the whelpe in her
mouth, and bears him into her den, and lays him therein, and runs again
after the hunter: but in the mean time the hunter takes a ship, and has with
him the other whelps, and scapeth in that wise: and so she is beguiled, and
her fierceness stands in no steed. For as Plinius says lib. 6. cap. 19.
the male cares not for the whelps. And he that will bears away the whelps,
leaves in the way great mirrours, ^^^ the damme follows and finds the
mirrours in the way, and looks on them, and sees her own shaddowe and
image therein, and thinks that she sees her young therein, and is long
occupied therefore to deliver her whelps out of the glass, and so the Hunter
has time and space for to escape: and so she is beguiled with her own shadow,
and she follows no farther after the Hunter to deliver her young.

De Tinea. cap. 105.
A Moth is called Tinea, and is a worm of clothes, as Isid. says, and has
that name, for he holds the cloth that he is in, until he be within, and
eats and gnaweth it, and is gendered of corruption of cloth, when the cloth
is too long in press and thick air, and is not blown with wind, neither
unfolded in pure air. And this worm eats ye utter part of the cloth, and
wastes it so slily, that it is not known ere it be harmed, and though he be a
sensible beast, yet he hides himself within the cloth, that uneath he is
seen. Mothes hate and fly bitter things and bitter smells, and come not
lightly in the cloth yt is sprung with such things, and therefore leaves of the
Laurel tree, of Ceders and of Cipres, and other such, put among clothes in
hutches, saves clothes and also books from corruption and eating of mothes, as
Constantine says. Also a manner scab of the head is called Tinea, That is ye
severe o^ scall.
for it holds and cleaves fast to the skin. Thereof look before libr. 5.
De capitis infirmitate.

De Teredine. cap. 106.
MAny worms are called Teredines in Greek, for they pearce and eat trees, as
Isi. says li. 12. and are gendered of corrupt humors, that abide in trees
under the rind and in the sap and pith, and be gendred namely in trees that
are felled or planted in undue time, as he says: and that namely in the full
of the Moon, when the moisture is much in bodies by virtue of the Moon, and
is not defied for superfluity thereof, nor ruled by kind, and therefore such
superfluity must needs turn into worms and corruption. Look before De
effectu Lunae libr. 6. The worm Teredo is a little worm of a tree, and is
most soft in substance, and fretleth, gnaweth, and wastes most hard Trees,
and makes thereof smaller powder than any fyle might make. Look hereafter
De vermiculo.

De Testudine. cap. 107.
A Snayle is called Testudo, and is a worm, and has that name, for he is
healed in is house, as in a chamber, as Isid. says li. 12. And there are four
manner of snailes, land snailes, and sea stronde snailes, and fennie snailes
that lie in mareyes, and river snailes, and some men suppose though it be not
to be believed, that the ship goes flower, if he bears the right foot of
the snaile, as Isi. says lib. 12. De Testudine autem quaere supra, in litera
L. de Limace.

( Addition.
The Snaile has no feet at all, but he means the sea Tortuce, because he
carries his shell upon his back.)

De Tortuca. cap. 108.
THe Tortuse is accounted among snailes, for he is closed between most hard
shells, in the which he closes him when any thing grieueth him: and of Tortuca
is double kind, that one dwells in rivers, and that other in land. And
Tortuca of rivers slaieth and is venomous: and the land Tortuse dwells in
houses and in woods, and is clean and good to eating, but it is horrible and
foul in sight, and lays eggs as an Hen, but they be more pale and less in
quantity, and is a four footed Beast, with four small feet, as a frogge,
with a little head as a serpent, and has hard shells, and many foul specke.
And their flesh that dwells in woods be medicinable, and has virtue to
restore, and helps therefore for Tisikes and Etikes, and for them that be
consumpt. Arist. lib. 8. speaks of the sea. Tortuse and says, that he eats
all thing, and his mouth, is stronger tha^ any other waste mouth, for if he
take a stone in his mouth, he breaks it, It must be a soft sto^e. The Author
mistoke this Tortuse, It is Lupus marinus, commonly called of the fisherme^, a
Crack stone, for he has in his mouth.3. rovves of teeth, and before tuskes,
with the which he breaks a sunder that be biteth.
and he comes out of the water to the brinke, and eats the grass and
herbs, and when he tourneth again to the water, he goes up and swimmeth, so
that his back is dry with the Sun, for it is not easy to him to be deep
in water. Also lib. 13. a beast that has stales, feathers, and shells, has no
bladder for scarcity of drink, for superfluity of drink passes into the
feathers and into other things, except ye Tortuse: for his loung is most fleshie
and bloody like to the l^^ng of a Cow: and the lung of the wild Tortuse is
more than he should be, for his body is contained in a thick shell, and is
not only dissolved therefore but in flesh, and therefore in the Tortuse is a
bladder to receive superfluity, but the bladder is full little: and in all
beasts that have bloody lungs, is a bladder, and therefore only the Tortuse
among all beasts with hard shells, has bladder and raines.

De Vacca. cap. 109.
THe Cow is called Vacca, and has that name, as it were Boacta, as Isidore
says libro. 12. And is an incresing beast: for Aristotle says libro. 6. The
Cow is moved to the deed of kind after one year, and perchance after eight
months, and the Cow goes with calfe nine months, and calueth in the tenthe
month. If they range without a Heard, they wexe wild, so that Heardes may not
tame them: and the desire of Kine is known, by swellyng of the twists, and by
their continual lowing: for Kine low when they be a Bulling, and leap on
Bulls and follow them, and stand with them. Also in codem he says in ye end:
Men mean, that a Cow goes ten months, and if the calueth before that time,
the Calfe lives not, nor his clees be not full complete, and commonly she
calueth one Calfe, and perchance twain: and the female lives commonly xv.
years, and the males also: and when they be gelded they be the more strong,
and may live xx. year. And the Cow has good milk after the caluing, and no
milk before, and if they have any milk it is little worth, or nothing of value:
and when a Cowes milk is first crudded, it is made as it were tough, and that
falls, when it is meddled with waters and a yeareling Cow comes seldom with
a Bull: and when the Kine toe often calue and have many Calves, it is a token
as men mean, that in winter shall be much rain: and Kine live in company,
and be often lost, if they go out of company, for then wild beasts eat them.
Also among all beasts, the males have more stronger and greater voice, except
Kine, that have more greater voice than Bulls.

Also he says, that ye Cow has more stronger horns, and more knottie than
the male, but they are not so great: But and they be heated, they may be bowed
toward each side, and when they have sore feet, it is medicine therefore to
annoint them between the horns with oil and pitch, and other medicines. Also
he says, that Kine love to drink clear water, and drink uneath or never,
troubly water and thick: and have the Podagre, and die of that evil, and the
token thereof is, when they bear down their ears and eat not, as he says.

The fat Cow shunneth the yoke, that she was used to beat last, or she was
fat: she lies in her own dirte, and wexeth fat, and the more she is forborne
and spared of travail, the more slow she is: and when she is stong with a
great fly, The bre^t or sloute flies.
then she reeseth up her tail in a wonderful wise, and stertleth, as she were
mad, about fields and plains.

( Addition.
The Cow hide is not so good for shoe soale leather, as is the Ox.)

De Vacca agresti. cap. 110.
SOmetime a Cow is wild. Of such a Cow Auicen speaks and Arist. also and
say: that in the land of Parthia is a Cow, that has hair in her neck as an
Horse, and is of the quantity of an Heart, therefore many men call that Cow,
Equiceruus and such a cow is without horns, and dwells in mountains and in
woods, and has fair eyes and is sharp of sight. And sometime such a Cow has
horns, but they be little, as the horns of an Heart calfe, and bend backward,
as the horns of a Goat bucke: and in her heart is a bone found as in the heart
of an Heart, and that bone, when the blood warmeth, tickeling moves the sinews
and substance of the heart, and is the cause of moving a beast to joy and to
lyking: and so by such tickeling areareth suddenly the head, and leapeth
swiftly, and startleth about.

Also li. 8. Arist. says, that beasts yt may not have help of horns, have
other manner help and succor of kind, and kind gives sweetness to Hearts and
to wild Kine that have crooked horns, and may not for greatness defend all
the body, and therefore kind gives another help to the wild Cow that helps
her greatly, casting of dirte, with the which she noyeth hounds that come nigh
her. Also other hounds that find such dirte, occupy them about the smell
thereof, until the beast that may not fight, is fled and escaped peril.
Hereof look before in littera B. de Boue and Bubalo, yt is a wild beast.

De Vitulo. cap. 111.
A Calfe is called Vitulus, and has that name of Virore aetatis, springing of
age, as Isi. says lib. 12. For when he is calued, anon he rises by his own
virtue, and seeks the Cowes vdder, and sucketh anon, and he is licked with
the Cowes tongue, and cleansed of all manner filth that comes with him out of
her womb. And the Calfe when he is calued has a certain black specke in the
forhead, and Witches mean, that that specke or whelke exciteth love, but the
Cow biteth away this specke out of the Calves forhead, and receives him not
to her teates, ere the foresaid venime be taken off and done away. And Ari.
says the same of the Mare, and of her colte, and Auicen also. Look before in
litera E. de Equa. The Calfe loves his dam, and knows her lowing, and
follows her, and busheth with his forhead ye vdder that he sucketh, and
gets so the more milk of his dam. And when he is full, and has well sucked,
then he is merry and glad, and leapeth and startleth leaping about: and goes
not out of his dams foores. Also lib. 8. Arist. says, that Calves be gelded
after one year, and if they be not gelded, then they shall be little of body:
and a Calfe is gelded in this manner. He is thrown down to the ground, and
the skin is cut and slit, and the gendring stones be cut out, and the strings
thereof be areared upward, and the sinews also, and the caruing is bound
until that the blood pass out: and sometime there gendereth a postume in that
place, and then they burn that one gendring stone that is cut off, and put the
powder thereof upon the postume, and so the place is saved. Also in the sea is
a beast like to the Calfe, and is therefore called the Sea calfe: A Seal.
and this beast calueth on the land, and gendreth as an Hound, and calueth
never more than twain, and he feeds his whelps with teates, and brings
them not to the sea until the eleventh day, and then he teaches them to swim,
and they are evil to slaye, except they be hit in the heads, and they low as
a Calfe, They snarle as a dog, and do not low.
and be therefore called Calves, and beck and make signs to men with voice
and with semblaunce with most discipline. No beast sleeps faster than these,
and with the fins that they use in the sea, they creep on the land, in steed
of feet, and have rough skins and hairie as calves have, and when the skins
be falue off, they hold the kind of the Sea, for the hair thereof arises
when the sea flows, his right fin has a mild virtue, for it gendereth
sleep, if it be laid under the head. Huc vsque Plin. li. 8. ca. 7.

( Addition.
Uery simply did the old Authors write of the nature of things, the cause was,
they lacked variety of words, to express their minds.)

De Vrso. cap. 112.
THe Bear is called Vrsus, and has that name, for with his mouth he shapeth
his whelpe, and so he is called, Vrsus, as it were Orsus. She whelpeth before
her time, as Isido. says li. 12. For Auicen says, that the Bear brings
forth a piece of flesh imperfect and evil shapen, and the dam licketh the
lump, and shapeth the members with licking: and thereof is written.

The yo^g Bear has al his feet only that he lies round as an hedge hog for
certain days.
Hic format lingua soctum, quem protulit vrsa.

The Bear shapeth with her tongue, the brood that she breeds and brings
forth. And this unripe whelping makes, and then he gendereth the thirty day,
and thereof comes hasty whelping and evil shaps. The Bears head is feeble,
and his most strength is in his arms and in the loins, and therefore he may
stand three days, as Isi. says li. 12. cap. de bestijs. Or else this name
Vrsus comes of Vrgendo, to thrust and constrain that thing that he takes.
Lib. 8. cap. 37. Plin. speaks of Bears, and says, that their gendring is in
the beginning of winter, and gender not as other four footed beasts do, but
they gender both lieng, and then they depart a sunder each from other, and go
in dens and either by themselves, and whelpeth therein the xxx. day, and the
whelps be not more, than five, and be white and evil shapen, for the whelpe is
a piece of flesh little more than a Mouse, having neither eyes nor hair, That
is not so.
and having claws some deal bourging, and so this lump she licketh, and
shapeth a whelpe with licking: and so men shall see no where beasts more
seldom gender nor whelp than Bears, and therefore the males hide them and
lurk forty days, and the females array their houses four months with boughs
fruit and branches, and covers it, for to keep out the rain with soft
twigs and branches. The first fortye days of these days, they sleep so
fast, that they may not be awaked with wound, and that time they fast mightily:
and the grease of a Bear, helps against the falling of the hair. And after
these days she sits up, and lives by sucking of her feet, and imbraceth
the cold whelps, and holds them close to her breast, and heateth and
comfort them, and lies groueling upon them, as birds do. And it is wonder
to tell a thing, that Theophrastus says, and tells, that Bears flesh sod
that time, vanishes if it be laid up, and is no token of meat found in the
Almerie, but a little quantity of humor: and has that time small drops of
blood about the heart, and no manner of blood in the other deal of the body.
And in springing time the males go forth and be fat, and the cause thereof is
unknown, namely, for that time they be not fatted with meat neither with
sleep, but only seven days.

And when she goes out of her den, she seeks an herb, and eats it to make
soft her womb, that is then hard and bound, than her eyes be dimmed, and
therefore namely they labor to get them honnie combs, for the mouth should not
be wounded with stinging of Bees and bleed, and so relieve the heaviness and
sore ache of their eyes: his head is full feeble, that is most strong in the
Lion, and therefore sometime he falls down headlong upon the rocks, and
falls upon gravel, and dies soon: and as men say, the Bears brain is
venomous, and therefore when they be slain, their heads be burnt in open
places, for men should not taste of the brain, and fall into madness of Bears.
And they fight against Bulls, and take them cruelly with the mouth, and hangs
on them by their feet and horns, and draws them with weight down to the
ground, and renteth and slaieth them with biting: and no beast has so great
slight to do evil deeds, as the Bear. Huc vsque Plin. libr. 8. cap. 37.
And Arist. speaks of the Bear lib. 7. and says that the Bear eats all
things, for he eats fruit of trees, when he climeth upon them, and breaks
Be hiues, and eats honey, and Bees grieueth his eyes, and stingeth his
tongue, and drives and chaseth him away sometime. And eats Crabs and Antes
for medicine, and eats flesh for great strength, and fights with Hearts and
with wild Swine, and with hounds, and with Bulls, and throws them down to ye
ground, and goes upright against the Bull, and often holds the horns in his
fore feet, and overcomes him, and is an impatient beast and wrathful, and
will be aduenged on all those yt touches him. If another touch him, anon he
leaves the first, and reeseth on the second, and reeseth on the third: and
when he is taken, he is made blind with a bright basin, and bound with
chains, and compelled to play, and tamed with beting, and is an unsteadfast
beast and unstable, and uneasy, and goes therefore all day about the stake,
to the which he is strongly tied: he lycketh and sucketh his own feet, and
has liking in the juice thereof: he can wonderfullye climb upon trees, unto
the highest tops of them. And often Bees gather honey in hollow trees, and the
Bear finds honey by smell, and goes up to the place that the honnye is in,
and makes a way into the Tree with his claws, and draws out the honey and
eats it, and comes often by custom unto such a place, when he is an
hungered: and the Hunter takes heed thereof, and pitcheth full sharp hooks
and stakes about the foot of the tree, and hangs craftily a right heavy
hammer or wedge, before ye open way to ye honey, then the Bear comes, and is
an hungered, and the logge that hangs there on high lets him, and he puts
away the wedge with violence, but after the removing, the wedge falls again
and hitteth him on the ear, and he has indignation thereof, and puts away
the wedge fiercely, and then the wedge falls and smites him harder than it
did before: and be strives so long with the wedge, until his feeble head does
fail, by often smiting of the wedge, and then he falls down upon the pricks
and stakes, and slays himself in that wise. Theophrastus tells of this
manner Hunting of Bears, and learned it of the Hunters in the Country of
Germany.

De Vrsa. cap. 113.
THe female Bear is called Vrsa, and is a Beast most cruel, when her whelps
be stolen, for she is right busy to save her whelps, and therefore she
licketh them busilye, and gives them suck, and nourishes them, and puts
her self often forth with all her might, against them that would take away her
whelps. And she departs from the male when she has conceived, and comes
not in his company, till ye whelps be perfectly shapen, as he says. And she
hides her self in time of lechery, and is ashamed to be seen in the time of
love: also then the male spares the female, and comes not to her, till she
has whelped, as Ari. Plin. and Auicen mean. Also lib. 73. Bears licketh not
drink: as beasts do with sawie teeth, and sucketh not, neither swalloweth, as
beasts do that have continual teeth, as sheep and me^: but biteth ye water,
and swaloweth it.

De Vulpe. cap. 114.
A Fox is called Vulpes, and has that name, as it were wallowing feet aside,
and goes never forthright, but always in by ways, and with fraud, and is a
false beast and deceiuable: for when he lacks meat, he faineth himself
dead, and then fowls come to him, as it were to a carren, and anon he
catches one and deuoureth him, as Isi. says lib. 12. The Fox halteth always,
for ye right legs be shorter than the left legs: his skin is very hairy,
rough, and hot, his tail is great and rough, and when an hound weneth to take
him by the tail, he takes his mouth full of hair, and stops it. The Fox
does fight with the Brocke for dens, and defiles the Brockes den with his
urine and with his dirte, and has so the mastrie over him, with fraud and
deceit, and not by strength. The Fox inhabiteth himself in holes and dens
under the earth, and steals and deuoureth more tame beasts than wild. Arist.
says li. 8. The Heart is friend to a Fox, and fights therefore with the
Brock and helps the Fox. Between the Fox and the Brocke, is kindelye
wrath:and often the Fox overcomes the Brock, more by guile, than by might
and strength: and is a right gluttonous beast, and deuoureth much: and he
gendreth blind whelps, as does the Lion and the Woolfe, as Arist. says
libro. 16. For as Solinus says, in all beasts that gender brood incomplete, ye
cause is gluttony: for if kind suffered them to abide until they were
complete, they should slay the dam with sucking: and therefore kind makes
them not to be full complete, least they should slay their own kind by
gluttony and great desire of meat. The Fox is a stinking beast and corrupt,
and does corrupt often the places that they dwell in continually, and makes
them to be barren: his womb is white, and the neck under the throat, and his
tail is read and his back: his breath stinketh, and his biting is some deal
venomous, as Plin. says. And when hounds do pursue him, he draws in his
tail between his legs, and when he sees he may not escape, he pisseth in his
tail that is full hairie and rough, and swappeth his tail full of piss in
the hounds faces yt pursue him, and the stench of the piss is full grievous to
the hounds, and therefore the hounds spare him somewhat. The Fox faineth
himself tame in time of need: but by night he waits his time, and does
shrewd deeds. And though he be right gu^^efull and malicious, yet he is good
and profitable in use of medicine, as Plin. says lib. 28. cap. 8. For his
grea^e and marow helps much against shrinking of sinews, as it is said: his
blond is accounted tempering and dissoluing, and departing hard things, and is
good therefore to break the stone in the blader and in the reins, as it is
supposed. Plinius sets there other opinions of great men, of properties of
Foxes, of whom I force not to make mention: but he says, that if a man have
upon him a Fox tongue in a ring or in a bracelet, he shall not be blind, as
witches mean.

( Addition.
The liver of the Fox is said to be good to restore the liver in man or woman:
his smell is a great help against the Palsy, therefore he is tied near the
lodgings of the diseased.)

De Verme. cap. 115.
A Worm is called Vermis, and is a beast that often gendereth of flesh and of
herbs: and gendereth often of Caul, and sometime of corruption of humors, and
sometime of meddling of male and female, and sometime of eggs, as it well
appears of Scorpions and of Tortuses and Ewies, as Isidore says lib. 12. And
the Worm is called Vermis, as it were Vertens, turning and winding: for the
worm turns and windeth toward many sides, for the worm neither creeps nor
glideth as serpents do, but the worm draws and haleth his body in diverse
places of the body, with many diverse draughts, as Isidore says: and worms
come out of their dens in springing time, which is called Ver, as he says.

Of Worms be many manner diverse kinds, for some be water worms, and some
be land Worms, and of those, some be in herbs and in Wortes, Caterpillars,
Cankers. and Moaths
as Malshragges: and other such, and some in Trees, as Teredines, tree Worms,
and some in clothes, as Moathes, and some in flesh, as Maggots, that breed of
corrupt and rotted moisture in flesh, and some in beasts within and without, as
long worms in childrens wombes, and those long worms be called Lumbrici, and
those other that be not long be called Ascarides, Mavvel^ worms.
and Chirones, hounde worms, and lice and neetes in heads, Gut worms and
bots.
and all such worms breed and gender of corrupt humors in bodies of beasts
within or without. And there be other worms of the earth which be long and
round, soft and smooth, as Anglitwitches, and males do hunt them under earth,
Ease worms used for bait to take fish.
and with Anglitwitches fish is taken in waters, when fish hooks be baited
with such worms in steed of bait.

And Constantine says, such worms help against the Crampe, and against
shrinking of sinews, and also against biting of Serpents, and against smiting
of Scorpions: And among Worms some be footlesse, as Adders and Serpents, and
some have six feet, and some be full evil and malicious, and enemies to
mankind, as Serpents, and other venomous worms: and some worms be round of
body, and has no sinews nor bones great nor small, neither gristles, neither
blood, and all such dies if they be anointed with Oil, and do quicken again
in vinegar, as Aristotle says. And some worms gender and be gendered, and
some be gendered and gender not, as the Salamandra, and in such Worms is Sex
of male and female. And in these diverse manners and in many other Worms be
diverse, both less and more.

De Vermiculo. cap. 116.
VErmiculus is a right little Worm, and this Nowne Vermiculus is a Nowne
diminutiue and comes of this Nowne Vermis, and often such small worms be found
in trees and in fruit, as it is said, Secundo Regum. 24. David was lykened to
the tender Tree worm, which is called Teredo, or Terebucca, and is soft in
kind, and yet it pearceth and gnaweth very hard trees, and nothing is more
harder then he when he touches, and there is nothing more softer then he when
he is groped, as the Gloss says there. Then specially land-wormes do breed
of Earth, of leaves, of fruit, and of trees, and do come out of the earth, when
winter is passed away, in springing time. The Worm does hate and also does
void salt things, and touches not those things which be anointed with some
bitter things, and with strong smelling, and do eat linen clothes, and the
Moath does eat and gnaw, and is the occasion of destroyeng and wasting of
woollen clothes, and destroy that cloth, namely that is made of the Wool of
such sheep which were bitten with Wolves, for the Wool of that sheep that is
bitten of a Woulfe, gendereth Lice and Moaths, as Aristotle says, libro. 8.

( Addition.
Lice comes also of that cloth that is trained in the wool, with the fat or
grease of an horse or of a swine, and therefore ye Northen clothes worn of a
sweting body, do breed lice in.12. hours. And Plin. li. 10. says, yt the
little worm is foul and soft, and round, and his utter parts be small, and
the middle great, and biteth a tree privily, and wastes it, and passes
drawing himself more with the mouth then with the feet, and is vile, pliant,
and soft. In all worms is a kind of touch and of taste, as Pli. says li. 11. ca.
71. And therefore they hide themselves when they perceive noise, and have
knowledge between savors: and worms forsake bitter and salt, and loves and
sucketh that thing that is sweet, and so some takes what them needs, with
teeth, and some with claws and s^outs, and some pearceth with a sting, and
some sucketh, licketh, and swalloweth, and casts up and eats, and no less
diversity is in the service of the feet, to take, to divide, and rent, to bear
downwarde, and to wey, and he cease not to dig the earth, as Plinius says.
lib. 10. cap. 71.

De Vipera. cap. 117.
VIpera is a manner kind of serpents that is full venomous. Of this serpent
Isid. speaks lib. 12. and says, that Vipera has that name, for she brings
forth brood by strength: for when her womb draws to the time of whelping,
the whelps abides not couenable time nor kind passing, but gnaweth and
fretteth the sides of their dam, and they come so into this world with
strength, and with the death of the breeder. It is said, that the male does
his mouth into the mouth of the female, and spetreth the semen, and she wexeth
wood in lyking of increase, biteth off the head of ye male, and so both male
and female are slain, for the male dies in gendring, and the female dies in
whelping. Of this serpent Vipera be made pastees which are called, Trocisci
Tiriaci, of the which is made Triacle, that is remedy against venim. Li. 8.
ca. 40. Plin. speaks of this Adder Vipera and says, that he hides himself
only in chins and deus of the earth, and other Adders and Serpents hide
themselves in hollow stones and trees: and this Adder Vipera sustaineth and may
bear hunger long time in a strong winter, and comes to the den under earth,
and casts first away his venime, and does sleep there until Springing time
come again. And when the pores of the earth open, then by heat of the Sun,
this Serpent Vipera awaketh and comes out of his den, and for his sight is
apppaired by the long abiding under the earth, he seeks the root of fenell,
or the herb of it, and washes his dim eyes with the juice thereof, and
takes of the herb to recover his sight which he has lost. And Tyrus is a
manner serpent that is called Vipera also. Of him Aristotle speaks lib. 8. and
says, That Tirus right as the Crocodile, hides him in winter, and does
afterward off his skin that is between his eyes, and they that know not the
doing, ween that he is blind, and then he does off the skin of his head all
in one day: and his flaieng and passing out of his skin, is as the passing out
of a child of the mothers womb, and he is by that manner renewed, and puts
away, and is so delivered of his age. Moreover, in the same book, in the end
thereof it is found, that it is said in this wise: Great Serpents fly this
serpent Tirus though he be little, and all his body is rough, and when he
biteth any thing, all that is about the thing, rotteth anon. And one little
serpent called Tirus is found in Inde, and his biting is so strong, that
against it no medicine can be found. Ambrose in Exameron says, that among all
Serpents, the kind of Vipera is worst, and when he would gender, he wooeth a
Lampray that is called Murena, and comes to the brinke of the water that he
thinks Murena is in, and calls her to him with hissing, and exciteth and
wooeth her to be clipping, and this Lampray comes anon: and anon as the
Adder Vipera sees that she is ready, he casts away all his venime, and
goes then and beclippeth the Lamprya: and when the deed is done, then he
drinks and takes again the venim which he had cast away, and so tourneth
again to his den with his venim. Also lib. 39 cap. 1. Plin. says, that this
Adder Vipera swaloweth a certain stone, and some men knows that, and opens
slyly the serpent, and takes out that stone, and uses it against venim. Also
if the Dragon or the Adder, which is called Aspis, biteth a man or a beast, the
head of the Adder Vipera heals him and saves him if it be laid to the
wound. And againeward, the flesh of the Adder Aspis often times heleth and
saves him, that ye Adder Vipera stingeth, and draws out the venim, which the
Adder Vipera did shed in the wounds.

Addition.
THe Uiper is spoken of in the 28. of the Acts of the Apostles. Addition
Of al kind of Serpents most dangerous, as appeared by the men in the I Will of
Miletum, now called Malta. When they saw the Uiper hang on Paul's finger after
the shipwreck, they said: Surely this man is a murderer, whom (although he
have escaped the danger of the Sea,) vengeance will not suffer to live. But
when they saw him to have no harm, the Uiper shaken off, they altered their
minds, and said, he was a God. Also in the third of the Evangelist Mathewe,
Christ called the Pharisees and Sadduces the generation of Uipers. There are in
England, as venomous serpents, called Timiopolae, Ingrossers and Regraters of
Markets, that buy much corn and victual together, to make a dearth to the
great hurt and hindraunce of the poorer sort, I pray God to send a Paul to
lessen some of these, not only to burn or hang them, but to banish them for
ever, that they poison no more so fertile a soil.

FINIS LIBRI XVIII.
INCIPIT LIBER DECIMVS NONVS.
DE COLORIBVS.
FOrasmuch, as the properties be expressed of spiritual things and bodily,
both of simple and compowned, as is said before, now at ye last of some
accidents that follow the substance of bodily things, by the help and grace
of our Lord, here we shall treat of, and first of Color, Color.
secondly of Odor, Odor.
and thirdlye of Savor, Savor.
and lastly of Licour. Licuor.


Color is called in Latin Color, and has that name, as Isi. says in li. 18.
for it is made perfect by heat of the fire, or by cleernes of ye Sun: or else
it has that name Color of Colendo, drieng and cleansing, for colors be dried
and cleansed to make them full subtle and clear, and also clean: and colors
comes of kind, or are made by craft, but hereof look hereafter De
coloribus. Aristotle in li. Meth. says, that color is the uttermost part of a
clear thing in a body that is determined, for the utter part of a bodily
thing, that sight shows is the diversity of colors, that it takes by kind
of meddling and mastrie of Elements in a body that is compouned: For when a
clear thing and bright, meddled by actual joining of light, shines upon the
utter part of a clear body and bright, then color shows and presents
that utter part to the sight. And therefore Secundo de Anima, Arist. says, that
color changes in sight, and gives thereto a likeness by working of light:
for light is the perfection of clear things and bright, for it brings the
kind of color that is meddled in a body kindly by mastrie of some elements,
to changing and deed of perfection of the sight: For though color be
essentially and kindly a meddled body, yet has color no might to show
himself, but by light that shines actually thereupon, and so always to show
himself color needs light, but light to show it self needs no color, as
color needs light that shines in deed, to print thereby the qualytie of
the color, in the line of the sight.

Therefore some men mean, that the reason of things seen, is rooted and
shapen in light, that is, expresses their beauty by the light: for if light
lacks and faulteth, the qualytie of color is not seen.

But in deed color is in darkness, as the Commentour says De Anima.

There he treats and shows of changing and likeness of color and of the
sight. And light makes not the color, for the color is indeed by masterie
of some element in a body that is meddled: As light makes not the color: so
the color being of himself, is nothing without light.
but light shines without open color, and in the same space and the place
that the color is in, and disposes the place, and gives his shape, by the
which it may receive the likeness of color: and so light disposes likeness
in the space, by the which diversity of color comes to the eye, where the
judgment is of color. Therefore in deed colors abide in darkness, They
abide the same that they be, but not discerned what they be.
as the Commentour says openly. Therefore the Author Perspectiue says li. 1.
ca. vltimo. That light needs not to sight of colors, but in one of two
causes: for without light the shape and likeness of color spreads not in
the air, or though it be in darkness spredde in the air, yet it works not
in the sight: and so light needs not to the being of color, but only to the
showing thereof. And though color be not seen nor perceived in darknesses,
yet nevertheless color is not idle in darkness, for continually the matter is
perfect, which he is within: and though color be not seen nor perceived in
darkness, ye shall understand, that that is not for the default of color:
but the default is in that thing, that should receive and take it: for
disposition lacks, that needs in such receiving and taking. Then if Authors
tell, that in any place color is not in deed without light, it shall be
understood and known, of the deed of sight, and not of being: then light
arayeth colors and makes them first seen and known in their own kind, and
makes them not first in being, and thou I understand of light that shines
without upon things: for ye virtue of the light of heaven comes unseen into
the inner parts of things, and gendreth colors by help of four qualities of
elements. When they be gendred and be in kind, then comes light that we for,
and makes them clear and noble, and shows them to the sight and to the eyes.

De Materia coloris. cap. 2.
A Clear thing well termined, is the matter of color, and that only or
namely thing that is moist: for dry and earthie is not clear, insomuch as it
is dry: and fiery drought comes not down from his sphere and place of the
fire, nor is found here beneath among us: for only form of fire, is gendered
of might of some element, of the which a meddled body shall be made, as it it
said in li. de generatione. Then such a cleerenesse has three material
diversities, for the matter is thin, or thick, or mean: If it be mean, then
there is much more moisture of water than drines of earth, and passing ye
moisture of air failing from ye airie moisture. Or else it is airy much
changed by the thing that is dry and earthie, yet so that it passes grosenes.
And if it be thin and small, then it is moist and changes to the matter of
air, or else it is moist and airie, and changes to thickness and drines of
earth, so that it passes not and goes not beyond meannesse of earth.

De generatione coloris. chap. 3.
THen in the matter of clear color, dryness has the masterie, or moisture
has the masterie, or the matter is meanly dry and moist: and if dryness has
masterie in the matter, then ye working of heat has the mastrie, then is
white color gendered, for heat makes the matter thin, and spredeth and
departs the parts thereof, and makes them subtle, and gendreth cleernesse
and brightness. And in this wise Arist. speaks in li. de Animalibus 19. and
says, That white color is gendred of scarsitie of humor in dry matter by
mastrie of heat that works and makes the matter subtle or small, as it
fares in members and in bones burnt; and in other such. And if cold has
masterie, and works in dry matter, then is black color gendered, for cold
gathers and constrains the parts of dry matter and fasteneth them
togethers, and makes them sad and dim. And dimnesse is not only privation
of light, but also of color: for cleernesse is diversity both of light and of
color: for cleerenesse, is a certain condition of things that are seen, and
then the matter is determined dry, that needs to the generation of white
color, and right so black color is gendred. Then if the matter be moist,
then the heat which has mastrie gendreth black color: for heat burns
and also wastes the moist parts, and alters and tourneth the moisture,
which passes out, into black smoke, as it fares in wood, which is green and
moist: for out of the ends thereof, comes black humor when it is burned.
Heerof Aristo. speaks in libro. Meth. and says, that in poores of things
that burns, is feeble humor that may not withstand the heat of the fire,
nor is suddenly stuffed, but it rather nourishes and feeds the fire: and so
it is sooth, that fire works principally in moist things, and that moist
things is cause of black color. By working of heat, it makes subtle humor,
and moisture of water and of air pass out of the matter, and then thus
leaves earthy matter and thick, therefore it needs that black color be
gendered. Quarto li. Metheo. Arist. says, that subtle kind of earth and
cleernesse of water, and kind of air makes whiteness in quick silver, the
contrary hereof gendreth blackness in the dry matter that leaves by working
of heat in moist matter. And so lib. 19. Arist. says, that blacknes gendreth
in the eye because of multitude of moisture, for heat works kindlye in moist
matter, and makes therein digestion, and fastneth and dries it, and leueth
there black at last.

De generatione coloris albi. ca. 4.
ANd if cold has the mastry in moist matter, then is white color gendered, as
it fares in snow, in hoare frost, and in hoarnes of the hairs, and of other
things, and also in fleumaticke humors: for though cold gathers moist matter
togethers, yet it is not as dryness gathers moist matter togethers, for
moist matter when it is clear, is ye more able to take noble color. Therefore
moist matter pressed, is arrayed and made to spreading and separation of parts:
and dry matter fares not so, therefore moist matter is more ready and pressed to
take cleerenesse than dry matter, although it be by wringing and pressing and
openings therefore cold may better engender white color in moist matter, than
dry. And so Aristotle is to be understood in libro 19. there he says, that
white color is gendered of air, in the which is some watrie moisture, and
that because of working of cold. But the Commentour says, that whitenes is
gendred of clear fire, meddeled with a full clear element, and sightie, that
is to understand, of cleerenes, that Aristotle calls whitenes, by a passing
manner of speech, and in that manner speech it is said. That whitenes is
gendered in the clouds, by shining of beams in them, if the clouds be clear
and thin, and so the flame of the fire seems white sometime, when the air is
clear and subtle, in the which the burning of the fire shines: and such
whitenes, is not properly whitenes, but it is so called in a passing manner of
speech. But we may amplify of ye Commentors word yt says, yt of fire,
because of clear matter, that is proper matter of whitenes, and not because of
working thereof, and the word that he says, shall be understood of fire, that
is the matter of color and not of working. And in that wise it is to
understand, as the matter, and not the working, nor the making thereof, nor
the end wherefore it is made.

De color mediorum generatione. cap. 5.
Between whitenes and blacknes are many mean degrees following the mastrie of
qualyties that be active and passive, working and suffering, as they be more
strong or feeble, and that in many degrees: for the more mastrie drines has,
with the more difficulty it is made subtle, thin and bright, and the harder
it is to make it clear, and to take white color: for a dry thing is sad and
thick. The less mastrye dryness has, and the more mastry ye heat has, ye
better it takes white color and the sooner. Also the more dryness there is,
and the stronger heat, ye more black color is bred. And comes of fatness
of the parts, and of great dimnesse, and of privation of cleernesse, and of
superfluity of fatness of ye clear matter, and so it fares of moist matter:
for the more mastry of moist matter yt is proportional to burning, so that
heat has the mastry, the more smoke there is and dimnesse and blackness:
and the more the mastry of moisture is, so yt the mastry of cold increase
proportionallye, so whiteness increases: and if moisture has great mastrye,
and heat but little mastry, then black color shall abate. Also if moisture
has great mastry, and dryness and heat little mastrye ^ then whiteness
shall abate. And if moisture has some mastry, and heat has more mastry, then
may great blackness be gendered. But sometime heat gendreth whiteness in
moist matter, as it fares in the white of an egg, yt is sod: and sometime
heat works in green wood and moist, and leaves white ashes after all ye
burning, but ye color is not very whiteness: For always there is a token of
evil termined matter, as it were the ouermost of a clear crystal, and that
is known, if the ashes be separate and departed, though this cleernesse
stretch not into all ye body in actual cleernesse and complete, and so it is
not very whiteness. And so ye whiteness leaves therefore feebleness of heat
yt does work, so that kind cold has mastry within. Also some white egg is
sod, and is not touched with fire, but a shell or a vessel is between, for if
no vessel be between, then should blacknes be gendered in the matter. Also
heat working in moist matter, gendereth first blackness, and smoke. Also
mastry of moisture gendereth dryness in matter yt it works in. And so drines
that it gendreth therein, makes a new changing, and gendreth a new color in
making the dry matter subtle and thin. And heat gathers together things of
one name and one kind, and makes therefore thick and sad, and dim: yet dry
matter has some propertye, by the which he may make some matter stretch and
spread, though it gather and draw togethers in the beginning because of
mastry, yet after ye gathering it makes the matter yt is gendered subtle and
thin, if the matter be dry or stable pight, and that is seen: For sometime
dryness works in moist matter, and puts or draws out the moisture. But
cold is not ordained to make matter that is subtle and thin, for cold
stands in deed of making thick, as in principal working and deed, for
cold gathers both things of one name and kind, and also things of diverse
names and kind.

Of hot and cold. cap. 6.
IF heat works meanelye with other qualyties in dry matter, then is needely
mean color gendered, for heat makes subtle and thin to gender
whiteness: and cold does the contrary, and gathers the matter, and makes
it fast and thick to gender blackness. Then when they work both like in
every place and point, is gendered both whitenes and blacknes. Then of them
two, needs must one color be compouned, that is neither white nor black,
and this color has more of black then of white, for dry matter is less
disposed to white color then to black, and that for privation of cleerenes,
and for kind dimnes, and is more disposed to thicknes then to thinnes, and
more to abide and to be thick then thin. Also if they work, namelye
together in moist matter, then they gender color yt has more of white then
of black, for matter in yt which moisture has mastrye, is more disposed to
white color then black, and yt because of cleernes: and is more disposed to
receive ye working of cold then of heat: For his working in moist matter
puts out and wastes ye moisture, but cold working therein keeps only and
saves it in his own kind, by way of fastening of parts together. And always
if ye matter be mean, ye color is always mean: and if ye working in heat in
such matter has the mastry, then is gendered a color that has more of
black then of white: For moist matter changes sooner into black, then dry
matter into white: as it fares by moist matter and dry, that is departed a
sunder, then heat gendereth sooner black color in wet wood and green,
then whiteness in lime stones: and so of other such. And if cold works by
mastry in mean matter, then the color must be mean compounded more of white
then of black: For moist matter is more disposed to whiteness then dry to
blackness, or to any other color, for in moisture is the matter of
cleerenesse, that is proper matter of color, and not in dry matter, insomuch
as it is dry. And in some working, namely in one wise moist matter is more
obedient to the quality yt works. For it may well be for privation, if kind
fastneth and hardneth that is in dry matter. And though dry matter be
disposed of it self to be fast and hard, yet it is not so well disposed to be
fastened and hardened, as matter yt is moist, as it fares in stones, though the
matter be fast and hard, yet they take not anon more fastness and hardness
of cause that works in them. We see in many things yt cold breeds soon
white color, as in Snow, and that is not so well seen in ensample when
cold works in dry matter, and if he works meanly together in mean matter,
then must the color needlessely be mean, and even the middle color between
the uttermost colors that be white and black, and if the mastrie be only
in one quality, that works only in the matter, then the color is
compounded, and has more of the one, and less of the other. And if the
qualytyes that works, be even, and the qualyties that suffers also, then
the color has the air like much, as it is known by the foresaid meaning.
And so there be two uttermost colors, which be white and black, and five
mean colors: and it seems that the colors may not be distinguished in
more diverse kinds, as it is declared by this difinition, yt is made of
contrary members without defaulte, and without superfluity. And also Aristotle
bears witness, that there be only five mean colors, and the member
thereof and suffisaunce may be taken in the foresaid matter, and also by
combination of white and black in their generations of colors. For if white
and black be even like much in the composition of a mean color, then the
color is even the middle color between white and black, and even like
far from the extremityes, as is read color. And between white and read
may not be but two colors, one near the red, and the other near to the
white. Also between read and black be two colors, one according with the red, and the other with black. And so no mean colors may be between
white and black. For between white and red may be no firm color, but a
chaungeable, as a Carnation color, a flesh color, and a shadow to either of
these, for even farnesse has always respect to the uttermost parts: but if
there were such a color, it should have three quarters of white, and one of
black. For half the red color is of the one quarter of white, and of one
quarter of black. In the same wise between black and red, may none be of eue^
quantity, for it must have three quarters of black, and one of white, and so
were the equal only by somewhat and by seeming, and not very even farnesse.

( Addition.
He means, that every simple color mixed, does in the more, or the less,
make light or darken, his proper ground.)

Of colors in general, what they be. chap. 7.
ARistotle rehearses these five mean colors by name, The shadows of
colors from the fiery action, which who so understands not, shall be a
simple painter, and a vvorie limner.
and calls the first Yeolow, and the second Citrine, and the third Read, the
fourth Purple, and the fifth Green, so that between white and red, the yeolow
is toward the white, and the citrine toward the red, between black and
read, purple is toward the red, and the green toward the black. These names
be otherwise called in Greek, for Purple is called Kyanos in Greek, and
yeolowe is called Karapos, but of names of Greek is no charge, but we take
heed to Latin names. And the cause of the foresaid colors may be known,
for yeolowe has more of white then of black and read. And such colors is
in leaves when they fall in Winter or in harvest. Citrine and Purple compasses
the red color, for either of them has more of read then of white or of
black, but Citrine is farther from black then is Purple, as Aristotle meneth,
in secundo de Sompno and Vigilia, where he speaks of corruption of these
colors, and turning into black. And he says, that Citrine passes by
Purple into black. And therefore Purple must be between read and black, and
Citrine between white and black, and of all this it follows, ye green must
be set toward the black, and so the cause is known of the ordinance of these
five mean colors, as Aristotle means.

Of the opinion of them which would have light, to be of the substance of
color. cap. 8.
Colors are made apparent by light, therefore is light called ye mother of
colors.
SOme men deem or suppose, that light is of the substance of color, and they
say, that color is in clean and clear matter, and cleerenesse has these
diuersityes, for clear matter is clean and pure, and not earthie, or vnpure
and earthie. And light is divided in four manners: for light is clear, or
dim, little, or much: but I call not light great nor much, though it shine in
a great place and much, but vertuall light gathered in a little place, or in a
point, is called much light, and great light, as when an hollow mirror is set
in the Sun beam, and the light falls on all the mirror, and reboundeth into
the middle thereof, and gathering and rebounding of ye light in ye mirror
betwixt cleerenesse of Glass, and brightness of the Sun, a fire is
kindeled, and burns full soon, or speedely. And so if Flax or dry matter
be put therein, it burns sodeinly, and is set on fire then, if there be much
light and clean in pure matter and clear, as Albumasar says. And if the
light be little and dim in clear matter, and not full clear, but somedeale
and dim, then blackness must needs be gendered, and this expounds the word
of Aristotle, and of Auetrois, that means, that blackness is privation of
cleernesse, and for to speak in this wise, he follows, that there be seven
colors that stretch from white, toward black. Of seven colors.
And this is known, and three things makes whiteness, brightness of light,
and plentye thereof, and pureness of clear matter. And while mean color
may abate then in this wise is generation of three colors, if one abides
alone, the other two abate: and so of white comes 7. colors, and stretch
from the white toward black: also from black to white stretches 7. And by
this consideration colors be 16. two principal, Of 16. colors mixed and
co^pou^d
black and white, and 14. mean, for 7. stretch from white toward black, and
7. from black toward white, and in the stretching, the first 7. abate in
whitnes, and the other 7. abate in blacknes, and meets in the middle. In
every mean color, be as it were endless mean degrees of deep color and of
light, as they be far from white or black or nigh thereto. Then know thou
hereof, that color is a propertye or a qualitye left in the uttermost part
of a clear body, and comes of kind of meddling of qualities of elements
meddled together in a meddeled body, the which is by light presented to the eye
and to the sight. For without mean light, color changes not the eye, nor
makes therein likensse nor shape, but yet color may be seen by it self, as
Aristot. says 2. de Anima, for the default is not in the color, but the
default and vnmight is in the eye, which color is not seen in deed without
light. Therefore Pithagorici, that held Pythagoras teaching, called color
Ephiphania, that is ouerseeming, or imagined. For it is the utter part of a
clear body that is teemyned. Or else color is in the utter part thereof, and
is there most properly a sighty body, that takes color and hiewe, and
lets passage there through of light, and of sight is here called a clear
body termined, Perspicuum terminatum, but some such lets all passage of
sight, so that nothing is seen there through: as boystrousnesse, stones,
trees, and metal, and thick leather, and other such, and some lets some
deal passage of sight, and not fully all, as Wine and other lycour of diverse
color that is seen within and without. But the same kind of color in some
things is within, that is without, as it fares in the white of an Egg, and in
the broken Glass that is colored, as it is said in libro de Sensu and
Sensato. cap. 7. But many things be of one color without, and of another
color within, as it fares in black Pepper, and in Apple grains. And many
things dies and colors things without, and not within, as it fares in
painting. Also read cloth dies the utter part of water, if it be laid
therevnder: And so it is known, that color is the uttermost part of sight
where clear things be, as it is said in libro de Sensu and Sensato. Also as
in a clear body, not termined, as in air, the presence of light makes white
color, and his absence makes black color and dim, so that somewhat of
light shines therein, so that it be not as lyghtlesse, as it is said, libro
de Sensu and Sensato. capit. 8. And so in a clear body that is termined is
very color, and in a body that is not termined, is not very color, but as
it were color, as it is said in the same book. Also mean colors be
gendered in their own diversity, and by diverse proportions. Also if one is in
proportion that conteyneth all, and the third part or all, and the half
deal, or by other proportions: And if they be by porportion, then they be
again proportional by steadfastnesse of abiding in the matter, and also by
cleerenesse of the matter, as it fares in Consonancijs, as it is said there,
capitulo octauo. B. Also they be gendered by proportion and consonancie, and
accord of color, when the colors be fair and lyking. And the more
proportional they be, the more liking they be, as it is said there. And
other men mean, that mean colors be gendered by under setting and laieng of
the uttermost colors, that be white and black, when the more sightlye
color is laid above the less sightlye, or the less sightly above the more
sightlye, as it fares in painting: as the Sun seems white when it is seen
by himself, and of another color when he is seen through a Cloud, as it is
said there, cap. 8. Also colors be not seen by passing out of beams that
come out of eyes, but by continual multiplication of color, in the space and
place between the thing that is seen and the eye, and by spreading thereof to
the eyes: For feeling is made by touch, as it is said there, capitulo octauo.
Also colors that be like far a sunder, may seem mean colors to them
that be far therefrom, though they be not mean colors: For no part of a
thing may be seen under the uttermost color, as it fares in cloth of
diverse colors, as it is said there, capitulo. 8. D. Also mean colors be
gendered by likeness of gendering of meddeled bodies, meddeled with simple
bodies: that for meddeling of couloues, follows the meddeling of Elements by
changing and tourning into the form and shape of a meddeled body: as a mean
body is gendered of the uttermost bodies, so is mean color gendred of the
uttermost colors, as it is said there capitulo octauo: Also every mean
color is gendered by white and black, that seems more privation of white
then color, as darkness is privation of light, as it said, libro. 10.
Methe. cap. 3. B. Also it needs not that unity of kind follows unity of
likeness of color, as Albumasar says in Differentia. G.

Also furthermore, the deed of color is to print likeness in the sight by
working in deed of light. For by light might of color is brought to work in
deed, and to print likeness in the eye, that the eye may take that likeness
and deem of that thing that is seen. Also mean color well proportioned
pleseth and comfort the sight: but the uttermost color feebleth and
grieueth the sight, as Aristotle says. For great whiteness often sheddeth the
spirit of sight, and dissolueth the eye, and makes it water: And to great
blackness gathering the spirit, and making thick, and rebounding the sight,
makes it dim, as it fares in them that be long closed in dark places, that
see little or right naught, when they be sodeinely brought into the light.

Also the color of that thing that is colored, shows the complexion
thereof and kind: For whiteness and white colors in bodies that be frore, be
not but in cold substance, and black colors againeward: For cold makes moist
things white, and dry black, and heat makes wet things black, and dry
white, As Snow and Coals.
as Aristotle and Auicen mean. And therefore whiteness, that is the daughter
of cold, is token of mastry of fleame and of cold, and of moisting and
fleeting humor: and blackness is token of melancholic disposition and of dry
humor, that has mastry in the body: and is sometime token of great burning of
humors, and of changing and turning to kind melancholy, as it shall be said
hereafter. Also by the utter color the inner qualities of things be known.
For as Auicen says, color is quality that is made perfect by light, for
color is in might in a dark body, and passes into working and deed by light
that comes thereupon from without, and that is known in this wise: for every
meddled body has somewhat of fire and might, and has of fire somewhat of
light, for the fire has light by kind, but that light is hid in dark parts,
and is so only in might, as heat of Brimstone and of Pepper: and the
potenciall heat of them passes not into working and actual heat in deed: But
in utter quality yt is like to the inner quality. Potentiall light that is in
a meddled body and dark, passes not to work in deed by the coming of
outward light.

Also color seen within, declares the might and feebleness of the fire
that is hid in might in a meddeled body, and thereby the virtue and working
thereof is known proporcionally. Diversity of color exciteth kindlye the
sight of the lookers, to look and wonder thereon, as Plinius says, libro
octauo, and Auicen also. And so he says, that every beast, be he never so
fierce, wondereth of the duersitie and fairness of color in the Panther.
Also every man's face is made most beautiful or vnbeautifull with color. For
ordinate color and fair, is complexion of fairness, when it miswexeth
duly to the making and composition of members and limbs, as Auicen says. And
Austen says, that fairness is seemly shape of body, with pleasing color, and
againward. For vile color and unseemly is right foul in a body. Also
color is token of Accidents and of passions of ye soul, for sodeine palenesse
and discoulour is a token of dread: for ye heat being drawn inward to the
parts of the body, in the face is scarcity of blood, and so the face is
discouloured. Also sodeine redness in the face, is token of shame or of wrath.
And that is because heat comes outward, and blood makes the skin red without: and busieth to put off shame and wrong. Also color termineth and
arayeth the body that it is in, for except couloure be in the body, the
substance thereof is not known to the sight. Also couloure makes fair the
matter without, and hides defaultes that be there within, and so compounded
color, mean between white and black, laid in order by kind, as Auicen
says, without upon a body, hides and covers infirmity that is in the
matter accidentally, either by kind, as Auicen says.

Also color accords or agrees to the light, as the Daughter to the Mother,
and follows light in deed: For with great light color increases, and
with little light color abateth.

Addition.
Lightness or brightness is the cause of cleerenesse, which is a separation
from darkness or blacknes, whereof proceeds ye original action, established by
Iehoua, in ye first dividing of the day and night. The cause of brightness is
fire, (an incomprehensible substance) yet because it takes part, with Earth,
Water, and flowers, stones, shells, horns, flies, mettalls, and whatsoever (so
miraculouslye spread;) to express such a variety of color, as man's reason
had been far to seek, had not the only benefit of the grace giver
bestowed the same: in the vital bodies, by blood, in flowers, seeds, roots,
and beryes, by joyce, as by this division of four times three which makes
twelve, appears, Fire, yeolowe: Air, bliewe: Water, green: Earth, black.
To the first Or, which is gold, Orcment, which is Earth: Masticot, which is
ashes.2. Laake, Uarmilion, red Lead, 3. purple, Uiolet, Murry, 4. Smalt, Bise
and Indian, all colors increasing, from blackness to brightness, is the
spirit of fire: the rest that decrease from brightness to blackness, in the
spirit of the earth, wherein also consists a miraculous ordinance, teaching
earthly Philosophers to discern the Animal, Uegitall, and Mineral, the life,
the flesh, the death, of every substance gendered: simply growing, and
multiplied by vapor, as air, dew, or waters: flesh to death: trees to
withering: stones, to wearing, dissoluing, or consuming: To grow from the
spirit of death, singular, and plural, from the Adjective to the Substantive:
Few Philosophers have studied how, being contented by the singular part, to
speak plural things, but not by the plural part to speak singular things,
which is the cause that men be so prudent in earthie matters, that there is
little left for spiritual understandings, in studieng for colors to please
the eye, they forget those colors that beautify the soul, which are, for
fire, love: for air, faith: for water, hope: for earth, charity: for voice,
truth: for person, chastity.

De Colorum mutatione. Cap. 10.
Colors do change in bodies for many manner causes, as it does in fruit,
grass, herbs, and other things that grow in earth: For first fruit is
green when it grows, as it fares in beryes and grapes, then they wax red,
and pale, or black at last: and this changing of color comes of diversity
of kind heat, or of heat of the Sun, that does sees the substance of
fruit in diverse manner of wise. For first the working of heat is feeble and
soft, and insufficient to dissolve and depart ye earthie matter to make it
spread, and therefore in the fruit without, is green color, and vndigest,
and earthy, but kind heat waxes stronger by heat of the Sun, and works
therefore the more strongly, and so the heat for strength thereof leaves red
color in the fruit without, and at the last when the fruit is complete and
ripe, and the sour humor and earthy defied, then of burning comes black
color in the fruit without. For the heat has mastry, and dissolueth and does
sees, and defieth the earthynesse, and takes as much as needs, and turns
it into substance of fruit, and wastes the other deal, or puts and
brings it to the utter part of the fruit, and such fumositie cast out, for
it is earthy, infecteth and makes the fruit black or yeolow without, as it is
said super li. Vegitabilium commento. For such color betokens of themselves
working and kind of cold, and be often gendered in things that be full hot, and
comes of the same cause, that is heat, that has mastry within, and does put
out earthy and watery fumosities, as Alphredus says super Aristot. de
Vegitabilis and Plantis. Also in beasts is changing of color, now in the
skin, now in the eyes, now in the ear, and now in the nails. For color of
ye skin is gendred in two manners, as it is said in Ioannico, for it is
gendred and comes sometime of humors inward, and sometime of passions of
the soul. Also changing of color in the skin comes of inner things:
sometime by hot humors, and sometime by cold, for it happens, that hot
humors both compowned and simple, cools and be cold, and also cold
humors or cooled heateth, and according thereunto the color in the skin is
wont to vary, for when the cold humors wax hot, white color turns
into citrine or into red. And when hot humors does cool, then red color
does change to white or pale, and so of other it is to be understood. Also
changing in the skin comes of passions of the soul. The red waxes pale for
anguish or for dread, for in dread the heart closes, and heat that is in
the utter parts draws inward, and therefore the utter parts wax pale. Also
the pale waxes red for wrath, for in wrath the heart opens and desires
wreake, and the heat passes sodeinly from the inner parts to the utter parts,
and so the blood heateth, and is between the skin and the flesh, and so red
color is sodeinly gendered. Also in men of the nation of Maures, the black
color comes of the inner parts, and whitish color in Almains and Dutchmen.
For ye country Mauritania is the most hottest country in Aethiopia, in ye
which Country for great heat the blood is burnt between the skin and the
flesh, and makes all the members black. And so he that first dwelled in
Aethiopia, was made black. But afterward by continual heat of the Sun such
blacknes sprang into all his offspring. And of black father and black mother
comes black children. But in that place only the father and mother be
continually burnt with heat of the Sun, and therefore in temperate countries
and lands yt be somewhat cold, swart colored men gets children temperate in
color, as Macrobius, Aristotle, and Auicen mean. And contrariwise the
Almaynes and Scots, that dwell in cold countries, for in them cold stops
the hoales and poores without, and the heat is drawn inward, and therefore
the skin is white without. The Co^mentour tells all this super Ioh. and
Aristot. touches the same. Also color of skin changes, and namely of the
man's skin, by many occasions, sometime for evil complexion, as it fares in
melancholic men, Special tokens to know the complections.
and for too great passing heat, as it fares in cholarike men that be citrine
of color, and for heat of the Sun and dryness of air, as it fares in
wayfaring men and in shipme^, and for spreading of corrupt humors between ye
skin and flesh, as it fares in Morphea and in Lepr^, and for stopping of the
liver, or for distemperate quality of the gall, as it fares in the Ianders,
that is changed of kind color into foul color and unseemly, as Constantine
says. And for continuance of solution of the skin, as if fares of the
Mesells, Pocks, wounds, botches, and burning. Also in hair is diverse color,
for by quality of fumositie, that is resolved of the body, color of hair is
diverse, for of fleame comes white hair, of blood red, and of kind melancholy
yeolowe, and of Cholera adusta, black, and of the defalt of kind heat comes
hoare hair, as it fares in old men. And when horenesse begins in the root
of the hair, then it comes of much fleme, and when it begins in the utter
end, then it is a token that it comes of default of kind heat. Look before
in Tractatu de Capillis.

Of color in the eyes. ca. 10.
Hereafter take heed of color in the eyes, for as Iohannicius says, colors
of eien be (four) Black, Whitish, changeable and yeolow. The diversity of
these comes of cleernesse of the spirit of the sight, or of dimnes thereof, or
of scarsite of ye christalline humor, or of deepnesse thereof, or of
superfluity of whitish humor, or disturbance thereof, or of scarsity, or of
superfluitye of humor of the Curtell yt is called Vua. For if the humor
christaline be scarce in quantity, or hid within, and the whitish humor that
is called Albugines falls, or is disturbed, or if there be much black humor
in the skin and Curtell that is called Vua. If all these or some of them come
together, then is black color gendered in the eye. And whitenes comes of
contrary cause, but yeolow color and diverse color comes of things that
makes white and black, but in yeolowe is somewhat more black then white, and
in diverse is somewhat more white then black. But hereof seek before in
Tractatu oculorum. In the nails color is known, for the color thereof
shall be white and clear, as a mirror, when this color changes into wan or
pale color, then it is a token of diverse passions, as it is said in Tractatu
de Vnguibus.

Of colors particular. chap. 14.
NOw it follows to speak of particular colors, and first of white, that is
the chief fundament and ground of mean colors. Whitenes is a color gendered
of much clear light, and pure matter and clear, as Algasel says. And so the
more pure the clear matter is, and the more clear ye light is, the more white
the color is, and the less meddled with black, then ye material cause of
white color is clear and pure, without meddling of earthy drafts, now dry and
now moist. The cause of working and making white color is cold or heat, for
if dryness has the mastry in working therein, the^ white color is gendered,
for thinning and subtilling of parts of the matter, and for clearing by virtue
of might and heat, as it fares in Lime and in burnt bones. And if the matter
be moist in substance, and cold has mastrye in working therein, then white
color is gendered, as it fares in snow and in dew. Therefore white is gendred
of air that is some deal watery, as Aristotle says, lib. 19. de Animalibus,
and that by working of cold, for cold makes moist matter white, and dry
matter black. Also white matter is gendered of chinning and spreading of air,
as it fares in skumme: and therefore hot water gendereth white hair, and a hot
brain is cause of baldness, for white comes not but of vapourable air and
watery that is in the members. And for white comes of hot air and vapourable,
therefore beasts be white under the womb, as Ari. says, li. 19. de Animalibus.
White has virtue to shed the sight, and to shed ye visible spirit if it be too
white, and makes the eye watery and to drop, and is the ground of all colors,
and the mean colors be grounded in no other color better then in white.
And the more white the ground is, the faster the color cleaves and abides,
that is laid therevppon, whether it be white or black and to whiteness
belongs and apperteineth Candor, Albor, Palior, Liuor, or Flauor. In one
meaning Flauum and Liuidum is all one, as Aristotle says in cap. de. Sapore.
And he says, ye Liuidum is Flauum, for he follows the kind of white.
Physicians do assign many other manner colors about white, as watrie color,
and milkie color, and Karapos, that is whitish or palish, and be diverse as the
matter is diverse, in which they be rotted, thick or thin, as it is said in
libro de Isaac, Theophile, Constantine, Egid. de vrinis, Candor, is passing
whiteness, and has in it self much light in form, and much pureness and
cleerenesse in matter, for blasing of brightness, ye dresseth matter that is
without, that is clear and pure and printeth likeness in the sight, without
greening of the eye, and comfort the sight to behold thereon with a manner
liking: such whitenes is called Candor, yt is first seen of witness, by
doing of light, without corruption of the sight, and is called Candor, for the
uttermost whiteness is not seen with eye, for it voideth ye dome of sight,
for nothing may be seen under the uttermost color: For the uttermost colors
be unseen by themselves, for cleerenesse thereof, as it is said in li. de
Sensu and Sensato. cap. octauo. Then that that is first seen of whiteness is
termed Candor.

De color glauco sieve flauo. cap. 12.
S^Alowe is gendred of whitenes, Salovve,
drawing some deal toward red, and is gendered, as Aui. meneth, in matter yt
is somdeale temperate in comparison to green color. For (as he says) green
color in trees changes into yeolow in harvest time, when in leaves is much
matter more moisted then the matter yeolow, and the thick parts wasted some
and some by working of heat, and not all destroyed, though cold has the
mastry. And cold yt has mastry in mean matter, gendreth needely mean color:
And because cold may better change moisture then dryness, it gendereth mean
color, that has much of white, as yeolow color, as the Commentour says
super Arist. de Plantis in fine. Therefore he says, yt some trees be green in
Summer, and pale in winter, as Box, for Box has gleaming humor, and much
thin moisture in the root, and the leaves thereof fall not, but when heat
comes, the humor is drawn outward, and heat works and makes green
color, and when cold comes, the humor is smitten inward, and leaves much
dryness of earth, and then the color is yeolow, and so in comparison to green
color, in yt which is more moist matter, he says, that yeolow has more
temperate matter.

De Pallido color. cap. 13.
Pale.
PAle color is gendered of the same causes, but the cold is less strong, and
the whiteness draws more toward blackness, and is gendred in more thick
matter. Then polence is a mean color: and begins from white, and passes
out of kind toward black. Also pale color is happily gendred, and comes of
dread of right great business, and of great travail, and of other causes, by
the which blood is drawn inward, and then the body is pale and discouloured
without, for scarsitie and lacking of blood, as it fares in: them which do
sleep too much, and in slumberous men, and in men which do travel for love,
which burn in great love, and the heart is thereupon, and the spirits pass
and thereof and for to feed and restore them, kind brings in heat of the
utter parts, and so by withdrawing hot blood, the skin is discolored without,
as he says. Palleat omnis amans, hic est color aptus amanti.

This vearse means, that every lover is pale, and pale color is couenable
to the lover. For the same cause, they that be pained with hunger, or with
great business and travail, be pale, for spending and wasting of hot blood.

( Addition.
And Also that in gilding of Plate, through the force of quick silver, the
vapor whereof cools the blood, and dries the body.)

De Rubeo color. cap. 14.
RED color is even the middle color between white and black even like
far from other, and is in the part of a clear body by incorporation of
clear firye light and pure to the generation of this color. Colors do come
togethers of cleernesse of matter, and fiery light, and according means
between white and black, but fiery light dui keth the clean parts yt be
meddled, and makes then thin and subtle. The color accords more in blasing
with white then black and therefore deep red sheddeth the sight, as clear light
does, and gathers not the sight as black does. Therefore Drapers yt sell
cloth hang red cloth before the light, No policy but plain subtilty.
for ye redness should dazell the spirit of sight, and that men that see other
clothes of other colors, should know the worse the very colors. Red color is
a general token of mastry of heat in a meddled body, though he be sometime
found without in a body that is kindly cold, as it fares in the red rose that
is kindly cold and dry: but for the rose is full of subtle substance, the
kind color that he has of composition slaieth the mastry of cold, and comes
outward, and finds the utter parts subtle and moist to receive changing,
and changes them without into red color, and that doing is namelye lykened
to working of fire.

De Color croceo. cap. 15.
Between Saffron color and Punice and Citrine, is little diversity, as by
abating of whiteness, and some deal meddling of increasing of blackness, and
by some what of strength of heat, and feeblenes of cold. And the more such a
color in subtle matter and clear is radicate, the more it shines and
appears, and the more gross and earthy the matter is, the less bright it is.
And such a color betokens might and temperate heat, and not passing,
insomuch yt it belongs to the betokening of color: but by diverse
dispositions of substance, it betokens diverse dispositions of sickness or
of health, and diverse complections and states of the body, as it is said in li.
Isa. de Vrinis. For Citrine color in thin substance in the urine of a child
of cholarike complexion, betokens yt he is whole and in good point. In a
stematike body or melancholic, it may token diverse sicknesses and evils, as
Egidius says in his vearses, in Tractatu de Vrinis. cap. 13. in this wise.

Est multis tenuis citrina referta figuris.

Flumaticum iuuenem vel quem niger afficit humor.

Condempnat tricham duplici, etc.

And such color betokens diverse things and contrary by diversity of the
substance that it is in.

De Color croceo. ca. 16.
SAffron color dies and colors humors and licours more then citrine, and
betokens passing heat and distemperaunce of blood in the licour by meddling
of cholera, as it fares in them that have the Iaunders, their urine has
yeolowe spume, and they have yeolow eyes, and their skin is foul and
citrine. Most hottest birds of complexion and cholarike, as birds of pray have
their utter parts yeolow of color, as their feet and bills. And that comes
of right much cholarike and hot fumositie which kind calls into the utter
parts, and they have therefore such color. Look before de morbis. cap. de
Ictaricia, there it is treated more largely.

De Color minio. ca. 17.
YEolow color that is called Minios, is called also Coecinus and Vermioulus,
and draws much toward red, and belongs thereto, and shinesh blasing as fire,
and has in himself much brightness of fire, and much cleernesse of matter,
therefore the color is right bright and blasing. The matter of this color is
earthy, and he dug in the cliffes of ye red sea, yt dies and couloureth,
and makes red all the sea, that it flows into, so that the sea of yt over
Aegipt takes rednes thereof, and is called the red sea. In these veins of ye
earth be red precious stones found. This earth is first dried and pured at the
best, and then ground small between stones, and tempered with the white of an
egg: and by this painters and writers do get and win much good, for therewith
they limne, adorn, array, and make, beginning and ending of sentences, and of
vearses and capital letters. And is sometime sharped with a certain herab yt is
called Coccus, and then ye color is bright and blaseth as fire, and has the
name of that juice, and is called Coccus. And diers of cloth use this color
much more then writers do. Crista gal linacea, Yeolovve Rattel.
Also in old time men used to sharp this color with ye blood of a certain
worm, as purple is sharped with blood of a shel fish. And for such sharping
with the blood of a worm, ye color was called Vermiculus in old time, as
Isid. says, in Tractatu de coloribus. And is a color that cleueth fast and
abides, when he is laid to the matter, so that if a man purpose to shave or
to wash it out of the Parchment, uneath shall he shave or wash so fast, but
some what thereof abides after all the shauing and washing.

De Color Puniceo. cap. 18.
CItrine color is next to the red in the one tree, as purple is next thereto
in the other side. And citrine has more of the red then of the white, or of
the black, and is nearer to the white then to the black, and the purple again
ward, that is next to the red, and nearer to the black then to the white, as
Aristotle says, Secundo de sompuo et Vigiliars. There he says, that citrine
passes by Purpole into black, and Purple is nearer then red to the black,
and in the sea is citrine shell fish found, that is small and little, and is
cut at the end, and then comes thereof read drops, which be kept, and with
these droppers is Purple dyed and read colors mastred, and so blood is
gathered in great quantity, and kept in vessels of Dyers; and done with
colors, and therewith is purple (...)e dyed, of the whi^h^wath is, wouen, and
thereby is showed wealth and joy of Kings, as Gregory says super Cant. cap. 7.

De Color viridi. cap. 19.
Green color is gendered and bred by working of heat in mean matter, in
the which moisture has somewhat the mastrie, as it fares in leaves and in
herbs, and in fruit, and also in grass, therefore the color is gendered,
and has much of black, and is not fully black of meddling of light white, as
yeolow is; and of much black in a moist body without, green color is
gendered, when the heat which works in the matter, may not burn the
moisture, neither sees it at the full, to turn all and fully into black. And
so green colors, in grass, herbs, and fruit, is a sign and token of raw
humor and undigested, which is known, for the green color in herbs and
trees turns into yeolow in harvest time. For in leaves and herbs is much
moist matter and thick, which is wasted some and some by the working of heat:
and is not all without heat in the matter borne up, though that cold has the
mastry. Therefore some trees be green in springing time and in Summer, and be
pale in harvest, and in Winter. For heat of springing time comes, and
bears the humors outward, and then the humor takes heat and is made
green, but when cold comes, it smites the humor inward, and there is
much dryness, and the color is yeolow, as the commentor says super li. de
Plantis, in fine. Also green is a mean color gendered between red and
black, and that is known by passing of red Cholera into unkind melancholy,
yt is black, by mean of unkind Cholera yt is rusty and greenish, and is found
green: Green color is most liking to ye sight, for coming togethers of fiery
parts and of earth. For brightness of fire yt is in green is temperate, and
pleases ye sight, and dimnes of earth and blackness, for it is nigh most
black, gathers meanly the sight, and comfort ye visible spirit. Therefore
no color is so liking to ye sight as green color as it is known in the
Smaragdus, a stone that most comfort their eyes ye grave in metal and in
precious stones, as Isidore says in Lapidibus preciosis. Leaves, trees,
grass, and herbs, and other that grow and spring of the ground, be green
by mastry of earthy parts in the which they be grounded, as in matter, and by
fiery virtue, as by cause yt works and dissolueth earthy matter, and makes it
subtle and thin, and draws outward the fumositie thereof, and dies the
herbs with such color without, and not with black or with red, but with
green. For black tempereth the shedding blasenesse of red, and cleerenesse
incorporated in ye black makes it mean and temperate. The green is gendered
by mastry of earthye parts and fiery. And though fruit, herbs, and grass be
green, yet green blossoms or flowers, be seld or never found, and that is
for subtlety of ye matter of flowers, in the which if the mastrye parts be
watery and airie, the color shall be white, and if the watrye and fiery parts
has the mastry, ye color is red, and if watery parts and earthy have the
mastry, the color is bliew or bliewish and if fiery parts and airie have
even much mastrye, then might the color be green or black, but ye matter of
flowers is so thin and subtle, that it takes no such meddeling, and therefore
flowrs be not green generally nor black. Then green color is mean between
red and black, and comfort the cien to look thereon, and restores and
comfort the sight. Therefore Hearts and other wild beasts love green
places, not only for meat, but for liking of sight: therefore hunters cloth
themselves in green, for the beast loneth kindlye green colors, and
dreadeth the less perils of hunters, when they look upon green, as Gregory
says.

De Color liuido. cap.20.
WAnne color is gendered in watrie and earthy parts, that have mastry, for
such color is gendered in things that have cold humor and thick, as it
fares in Lead and in certain stones, but Lead is white by kind, though it be
wan without, and of lead is white color made that is called Cerusa, as the
Commentor says. 4. Meth. Wan color is token of mastry of cold, and therefore
wan color in urine is token of quenching of kind heat and of death of beasts,
as Egidius says and says, that wan urine betokens dead members and humor,
and many other evils, and it follows the evil Paruusenut^itheus and Medn^s,
and the falling evil also Ashites, Sinochus, breaking of veins, the pose,
evil of ye ribs, of lungs, and Tisicke, that quenches heat because of wan
colors.

De Color liuido malo. cap. 21.
WAn color is evil in men and in beasts, Mixed.
for it betokens mastrie of cold, which quenches kindly heat, and begins
for to slay kindly beat: or else it betokens superfluitye of melancholye
blood, which defiles all the skin without: or else it betokens anguish and
passion of the heart, which draws inward the heat of blood, as it fares in
those persons, that be envious or wrathful: Or else it betokens sore
falling or smiting, which corrupts and increases the blood between the
skin and the flesh, That is black and blievv.
as it appears by the^ yt be all to bobbed and beaten, in whom the humor
between the skin and the flesh is corrupt by malice, and corrupts and
infecteth the skin, as the Expositor says before, super. 1. ca. li. de. Isa.
Vulnus liuore, etc. It betokens failing of spirits and of kind heat, and
scarsitie thereof, as it fares in those persons, which have the dropsy and
Etike, and in those which do consume and wast, as Egidius says. And
betokens also Gowtes in the joints: For the Gowte is full sore for
tenderness of sinews, in the which it is in. For spirits and humore do
gather to that place, and be the less hot, and the place is the worse
colored. It is not expedient and needful in this work to rehearse all the
causes of wan color, but only to make mention of those things that our fore
fathers have treated at full, and most largely. And seld I remember, that wan
color betokens good: but green or black tourneth into wan by working of
kind, and then out of wanness into red or citrine, then it betokens that
kind has the mastrye of the infirmity and evil, as Egidius means. If it be
first wan, and afterward red, the kind of the brain rises, and the strength
is recovered.

De Color Indica. ca. 22.
THE color Indicus and Venenus is bliew color, Indiae, a deep blievv
and passes wan color in fairness and brightness, and has more of water
and of air meddled and joined with earthy parts, then has wan color, and
such is the color of heaven, for mastry of air in a clear body without, as
it fares in Sapphires of ye East lands and in Iacincts: also such color is
in Azure, but hereof looks before in ye treatise of gemmes and precious
stones, and of the stone Lasurus.

( Addition.
The Indiae, if it be not too much counterfeit, is the especial ground of
greenes.)

De nigro color. ca. 23.
Black is privation of white in clear matter, Black of 3. sons, Sable, Semy,
mixed.
as bitter is privation of sweet in moist matter, and so it seems that white
is the first well of colors, as sweet is the first well of savors, as
Aristotle says in li. de Sensu and Sensato. Black color is not but
privation of cleernes. Blackness is gendered of scarce light, and incorporate
in clear matter that is dim and darkish and vnpure: therefore blackness
gendereth ye spirit visible, and smites it again, and greeueth therefore the
sight and makes it dim, when the black is too black, as it fares in them yt
be long in prison, which see little or naught when they come out of prison.
Black is sometime grounded in moist substance and hot, for heat yt has mastry
blows a moist body, as it fares in wet wood that burns sometime in dry
substance and cold. For cold has the mastry, and blacketh dry substance, and
whiteth the moist substance, as Aui. says. Also sometime black comes of
cold, and that is a token of death, and sometime of heat, and that is a token
of burning. And therefore black urine may be taken of diverse dispositions and
contrary, as Egidius says: and betokens sometime solution of the quartane,
and betokens health, and betokens sometime burning and death, as it fares
in the Fever Acot. And Egidius says, that black urine betokens evil and
solution of the quartane, death and burning: and scarce humor black and fat,
and stinking betokens death and some colors accords to ye work of
painters: and some thereof breeds in veins of the earth as Sinopis Rubrica,
Melium, Auripigmentum, and other such, and some be made by craft.

De Sinopi. cap. 24.
Sinape, Laakes.
SInopis is a red color, and was first found in the Island Pontus, besides
the City Sinopis, and has therefore that name, as Isid. says lib. 44. Hereof
is three manner of kinds, red, less red, and mean between them twain, as
he says, and is called Rubrica, for it is next to red sanguine, as he says,
and breeds in many places, but the best comes ^ut of Pontus, and is
therefore called Pontica.

De Sirico Pigmento. cap. 25.
A golden color to paint with.
SIricum is Pigmentum, and thereof is made the color that is called Pheniceus,
therewith the chief and principal letters of books be written, and is found
in the cliffes of the red sea in ye country called Phenicus: and this color
is accounted among fained colors, for it is sometime made of Cinopis and of
Sandix, The gold yeolovv.
meddled and wrought craftily togethers, as Isidore says.

De Minio color. cap. 26.
Vermilio^.
MInium is a red color; and the Greeks found the matter thereof in
Ephesim: in Spain is more such Pigment than in other lands, as Isidore
says.

De Cinobrio. cap. 27.
CInobrium is called Cinabarin among the Greeks, A color made of Dragons
blood.
and has that name of Draco and Barro, the Dragon, and the Elephant. Auicen
says, that it in a Dragons blood, for Dragons windeth and wrappeth their
tails among and about the legs of Elephants, and the ^un densts falls to the
ground, and the Dragons dye and be slain in that wise, and the blood that the
Dragon bleedeth, dies and colors the earth, and all that is dyed is
Pigmentum, and red powder, as Isidore says.

( Addition.
Canereus is also an ash color; after a black.)

De Prassino. cap. 28.
PRassin in Greek is green, and thereof is a color made green as a leeke,
This green grows of the rust of silver that which comes of brass is
Verdigrek
the best grows in Libia Cerenence, as Isidore says. Crisocania is the vein
of Prassm, of green color, and has that name Crisocania, for gold is found
therewith, as it is said, green grows in Armenia, but better grows in
Macedonia, and is dug and mined among metal of brass, and the defending
thereof is token of silver and gold, for the vein thereof, has company of
kind with such metal.

De Sandaracha. cap. 29.
SAndarach grows in Topasion, an I Will of the red sea, and is of red color,
and smells as brimstone, and is found among metal of gold and of silver,
and the better it is, the more read it is, and smells more of brimstone.
Though Cerusa is toasted in an Oven, to turn into Sandarache, the color
thereof is red, and if it be even toasted and meddled with Rubrica, it tourneth
into Sandix.

( Addition.
A bright read color dsed of Painters, and found in Mines of gold and
silver: some call it read Arsenick, there is another kind of it, made of
Ceruse burned.)

De Arcenico. cap. 30.
AResticum, is called Auripigmen^ (...) for the color of gold, and is
gathe(...) Portus among golden master and is most pure, and passes into golden
color, and those that have small vein the most pale, and accounted worst.
Hereof (...) before to tractatu de ven^s, and Auripigmento.

De Occa. cap. 31.
O^^^ ^^^deth in the Islands Topai ^^, there (...)

(...)
(...)

(...)

(...)
(...)

De Melino. cap. 34.
MElinus is a white color, and the matter thereof is sound in the Island
Melos, that is one of the Ciclades, and therefore the color is called Melinus,
as Isid. says and for great fatness often the Painter does not use this
color, as Isidore says.

De Stibio, cap. 35.
STibiuiu is a fained color made of Cerus, and of other things meddeled
therewith. Women paint then faces therewith.

( Addition
(...)

(...)
(...)

(...)
(...)

(...)
(...) ^f all these (...)teth libro. 25. cap. 14. vsque ad 33.

The order of colors to limne with, after the accustomed skill of this latter
time, not unprofitable for Painters and stainers. Being newly added.
(...)
Whereas of late years, two books concerning the reviving of ye Art of
Lymning, has been set forth: and as I judge, more of good wish from the
Authour^ then of approved experience. I (...) therefore take upon me, so far
(...)

(...)
(...)

Secondly, you must have a perseverance of the fire grounds, which are called
the colors of ye twelve Signs, as thus.

The first and the seventh, is of color white: the eleauenth and twelfth,
green: the third and second, yeolow: the fourth and tenth, read: the fifty
and ninth, towney declyning: the first and eight, blacks declined.

Next follows varieties, forth of effects, called the routours of the
seuuen Plannets, and these show how to know the Compoundes from the Simples.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

(...)
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

(...) without bodies.
Which are all sorts of sape, yelow, green, blew and red, of Saffron, of
Berien, of flowers, and of Tornesaine, Lumouse, and Flur^ey, which three
colors very few hawe skill to keep their first heautie, as also the beauty
of Rosset. These three are private colors, which to make hold upon metal,
is the old art of lymning, provided that the Rosset which is of late used in
England, is not to be used in ^^^uing. Also in ftatting of costure, and
sweetening of sheddowes these must be a persenarance between the colors of
elements, of mettalls of earth, of flowers airie, earthy, fierle and watrie.
Also, that no prepares colors s^ande long unoccupied, for (...)too much
moisture beads the colors.

A shure ground to lay on gold, (...) on paper or parishment.
Kind white bow with egg (...) first in water, and being setteled, one day
(...) the same with even water, not too (...), to the proportion for the place:
then with pour pencill dipped in old (...) sorten over your ground, and (...)
on the gold, which being ^rle, you may burnish.

Another (...).
^

Mettalls
Gold leaves or leaf Gold, silver ^^ the same preparing. ^^ell gold and
(...), or lyquid gold to be lay be with the pencill. A(...) in for a (...) is
his shadow, or loose with prepared. Crystal ground with Bo^^^ armoniake is
the strongest ground for any gold upon parchment: use no glue nor juice of
^arlyke, nor spre in (...) wise.

Mixtures.
Black and white makes a russet, white and blew an ash color, red and white
a Carnation, Leake and ^ple a purple. Tornesalue and Leake makes a deep
scarlet, blew and green makes a violet, Uerma^ion and white, (...) a flesh
color. Mixed black and white, red and white, blew and white, whereof are
three principal variables (...) of these three, proceed nine mixtures, proper
to the Art of Limning.

The manner to keep your colors fair.
THey must be refined from their waste if they be scule, by letting them often
settle in fair water, after they be grownd, pouring away the sail, and
refreshing the color, which being done put there to ^uns water of one monethe
restning. All sorts of Byse, if they be not countersait with sand or glass,
may not be grow^d, but blaunched in water until the Byse settle like a pasts
(...) and smooth together, then (...) gave water, ^ane other than of (...)
Arabecks.

Also every several color, especially Byle, must be first laid (...), and
after (...) as (...) of the counter(...).

For enter mising of colors, that the (...) of (...) after the life. (...) the
colors are (...) day (...).

Inkes to write with.
VErmillion only grownds with matter, and after setteled with (...) under
(...) so, of (...) cot, yield (...) of and lovers de lute, gr^^ns: of (...) ^is
we, of (...)all, rudde. (...) Brasill and ^ouchanew, you must add Allome
water, well prepared, but not to any of ye rest of the colors, because ^^
(...) said and (...).

I (...) to make particular colors that serve to common painting. (...) the
difference is great bet wirte the well. bearing of them Anderein is neither
Oil nor (...). Duly this is (...) is (...) the shell, if it be well
considered, which tells what must be (...), and (...) it most be d^e^.
^re^^ie must teach the ignorant the variety of of colors, and thy por^^e the
price, then had (...) diligence (...), which once attamed (...) fair books,
and good export, which is the best end of the cople in this present life.

The end of the Addition.
THey that dye woll and cloth be called Dyars, as Isid. says: and he that
pictureth Images and likeness of things is called a Paynter. A picture is called
Pictura, as it were Pictura, seyning.

The Image is sayued, and is not soothness, and to called Focata, and has that
mean of a certain (...) color that is laid thereon. And some pictures pass
in color, an quantity and in shape, very doors: and sometime (...) to (...)
hey bring forth leasings as he does that painteth C^^mera with three (...),
such a (...)

The (...) found first Paynting ^ans ^^^dow was purtrayad and ^^^^ed, and
dra^^on with braughes and with lines and often painted with simple colors, and
after (...) with diverse colors, so that ^ra^^ increased and found ^^ght, and
(...) colors: and labour^^^ the manner of paynting of shadows of men

And now Payof as a draw ^^^ likeness and lines of the Image that shall
colors, and holds the order of (...), as Isi^^^^ says lib. ^^. cap. ^ (...)

(...)
^st many be painted, as (...) on ^^tted (...) is set is gaye colors: so like
(...) upon (...) gorgeous clothing. But if mann eye first saw ^un^^^^ be sees
others, he would be ashamed of that so (...) which he reproneth in others.)

De Odoribus. cap. ^^.
AFter Colors, it follows in treats of odours and of Smells. Odor is a
(...) vapor resolved of the substance of a thing: and is drawn and passes by
the air to the brame, and changes the sense of smelling: For (...) changes
the sense of (...), and printeth the likeness therein, as color changes the
fight, and sound the hearing, and savor the taste. For it is proper to the wit
and feeling to receive printing of things that they feel, and to ^^mo tyking
therein, and comfort if they be mean. and is be despised thereby are
destroyed if they be the uttermost, as if is said in libro de senss(...) and
lensato

Then Doour is the property of a thing that is perceived and felt by sum^^^^
To make odor perfect and known in the li^u^ of smelling, four things reads
at the least. ^rate resolving and departing subtle matter obedine to the heat
that dissolueth and departs: and the quality of the sumo^tis that is
resolved. Printeth his likeness in avi^ that bears it forth: and the air
with the lyghtnesse and qualytie of fumo^^^^ comes suddenly is the knew of
smellyng and presents thereto the likeness of the vapor of the sumositie,
that is printed in that air and if it be like to the complution, it pleases
and comfort the (...) wonderfully, and inforteth and displeases it, if it
be not a^^^oing.

Therefore smelling things that be proportionate is kind, helps it and
comfort, and for the contrary cause stin^ing things anoyeth and grieved it.
Also heat there res^teesh, makes odor (...) that constrains and binds and
sets odor and fordoeth t^^ for cold moves toward the middle, and ^^^ieth
not (...) ^^ vapors to pass and spread in the air, and therefore the ^oungs
hull stinketh not in Winter as in couintuer. Also subtle matter and obedient
to the made that resolves is cause of odor, and the contrary is of thick
matter. Nor thick matter withstandeth and lets shedding and spreading of
odor, as it foreth in a stone; for cold is cause of ^uner falsnesse and
hardness thereof, for the stone smells ^^ot (...) nor stinking, as A^^^n
says. ^. be there disposition of me, urspeth most to (...)ll and odor, for
if air be subtle and thin, it receives some the matter of (...), that
passes forth in vapor: but for it is subtle and thin, that sumositie may
not lan^ time abide therein. The contrary is of thick air, that receives not
to some such fumosity and vapors, god and evil; but when they be re^cyued,
they (...) not so sone pass (...) of thick ^^re, as they may out of (...)
nice and thin, as he says.

( (...)
The cause of infection is, when the subtle air peneceth and cannot ^e
speedely ^acke again, because of a grater airs which stops)

The fourth disposition of the lun of smelling works principally to daeine of
odor, for if the sinewe of feeling in the which the smelling is, be ^^^ll
desposed or of evil completion or heart in any wise, or stopped with corrupt
humors, then the sense of smelling is amisle, or all lost. The first is seen
in Melancholic. like man, and in other evil complexion that loves slinking
places, and voideth them that smell sweet and pleasant. The second is showed
in them that are marmed, that bout the sinews hurt of smellyng, and smell nut
therefore. The third is showed in them that have superfluite of flesh growing
in the ^ole, and in leprous men, that have the nose stopped with evil humors
and smell not well, nor know uneath between sweet and thinking. Then fumositie
that comes of the substance of a thing is the matter of odor, and so by
diversity of lumo^^^ odor is be diturs.

(...) One manner sumo^^^ is still in the (...), and (...) of a stone, that
declares not the comple^^ on of positive, and by poesence of odor: but
primitive nearby absence of odor if shows, that a stone has thick
substance and (...)

Another fumostitie modest needs sweetelye at the air, and that comes of
heats that tempereth the substance and ^o^oweth and if the substance be put
and clear, the odor is still good and (...), as it safeth ^a^ Myrre, in
Musk, and in Amber: and if the subst(...) about is evil and horet^le so
kind, and this odor is (...) and departed in twain, (...) and stinking.
(...) odor comes of hea^d that is (...) in a thing, that begins to appear
and in take corruption, as it fares in fish that is long kept wit^ou^ salt.

The third furmositye is nature, any resolves and trespareth him by mean, and
that of the one substance and part, or of vncleene or vnpure: If it comes of
clean substance and pure, then the odor is meanly good, as it fares in
Apples, Uraieis, and (...): and if it romaneth of vncleene substance and
vnpure, then the odor is some deal stin^ing, as it fares of Al^^s, Wormwood,
and Brimstone.

Also good odor comes by working, and resolves the more subtle parts and
pure, and air bears the (...) thereof to the bra^ee, and stinking odor and
ra^ee comes by working and heat that dissolueth therke parts and corruptions,
and for this default that comes of working of heat, all thing with small and
odor is accounted but (...) Authors. For many things be soide in substance,
as it fares of vinegar, Cam^hore and Rosa, and that is for pureness of
substance (...)

And thereby the thing that is toasted, may be perfectly know, but is the line
of smelling one braueth comes alone, and thereby comes but little spirit,
that may so perfectly know the kind of a thing. Also for the thing yt is
smelled comes not but a certain subtle fumositie meddled with air, that is
drawn therewith to the lim of smelling, and so by that fumositie the spirit
knows not so well the kind of things, but all the thing that is tasted
within and with out is laid to the lim of tasting: therefore a thing is more
verelyer known, by savor than by odor. Then consider hereby, that odor is
the property or quality of a thing, the which quality is perceived and known
by smelling, as Isaac says: for of the thing that is smelled by working of
heal comes a certain fumositie, and is meddled with the air, as it were a
certain spiritual meddling, and changes the air, and printeth his likeness
therein between the nosethrills in small pieces of flesh, hanging as heads of
breasts, as the spirit of felyng, and takes the print and likeness of the
fumositie, and comes to the brain, and presents the print and likeness to
the soul. Also odor makes the body known, in the which it is in, and the
air with the which it is meddeled, and printeth his lykened in the spirit of
feeling, and sheddeth it self abroad in the air, and pearceth inward, and
comes to the brain by blast or by drowing of air, and wastes humors by
heat thereof, and stancheth noyfull running, and releeueth the spirits by
pureness thereof, and comfort by virtue the fablenes of the heart, and
changes the air into his own likeness, and puts off stench and roised
things, and makes it unknown, and comfort the wit of smellyng as well in
beasts as in men: for fish loves good odor, and hate those things that
stink, and so do Bees.

Aristotle says, that Ants fly and void odor of brimstone, and only venomous
worms and beasts haseth good odor, and those things that smell well. And so
the odor of rewe, is noyous to serpents.

And Botraces suffers not the odor of uines when they (...) nemous frogs.

De Fetore cap. 4^.
STinking is vapor resolved, and comes of corrupt things, and infecteth the
air, and displeases and corrupts the spirits of smelling: for as good
odor feeds and comfort the spirit of smellyng, is clenche displeases
the spirit: for as Isaac says, fumositie that comes of a thing of man
complexion, is not according to the spirit of feeling, for in a body with
evil odor be corrupted humors, for the kind quality thereof be out passed:
Therefore, such odor is contrary to the complexion of man's body. And so
horrible odor ^^tnesseth corruption of the substance, and comes either of
unkind heat, or of corrupt moisture, for when unkind heat makes the
humors boil then it is cause of rotting and stench: and the nourishing of
them, breeds in the stomach corruption, and full evil rottenness, of the
which comes most evil fumositie that grieueth the head. When only corrupt
moisture to the cause, then is not gendered stench but heavy odor, and for
heavy odor, all such hot things is unwholesome food: but it grieueth lests
then stinking things and rotted, as Galen says. And this is seen in fresh
fish, and smells heauely white kind heat is therein, and stinketh when kind
heat is away, and when fish is sodden, by wasting the superfluite of corrupt
moisture, heavy odor is taken away by heat: and so by sorthing, flesh is
commended, not only in odor, but in savor. And so then stench witnesses
corruption, and shows default of kind heat, and infecteth the air, and
corrupts the spirit of feeling, and exciteth spewing and wambling, and
breeds head ache, and distempereth all the complexion, and is horrible and
displeasing is the wit of feelyng. Therefore fish flies and voydeth old
stinking wits and wells, and comes into fresh and new, as Aristotle says:
also stink is grievous to Bees, as be says.

And the Foxes dirt stinketh foul, for be comes into the Brockes den, and
defiles it with dirte, and drives the Broke out of his den in that wise, as
Plinius says, and overcomes him so with stench, which he may not overcome
with might and strength. Also stenche infected the spirits and sinews, and
changes them out of kind disposition into unkind disposition, as it fares
in Liprous men: their stinking breath, both infecteth and corrupts whole men.
Also stench slays the brood of beasts in the dams womb: therefore Aristo.
says, that a Mare shall cast her colts, if she smell the snuff of a Canols.
Also, stench may be so strong, that it may because of sudden death, for some
serpents stink so foul, that they stay sodainlye with stench, those that do
smell them, as the Cockatrice slays with the sight both men and beasts that
he sees, as Auicen says. But sometime it happens, that stench helps: for
some stinking things be put in medicine, as Aloe, Gallianum, Brimstone, All^
lo^^^ds, and other such, which accord to medicines in many causes, for because
of lykenes by heavy odor, they draw together rotted humors, that be disposed
to stink, and puts them out of the body. By lykenes stench is horrible to
kind, therefore in presence of stinking medicine, they gather themselves
whollye there against, to overcome their enemy. Also stinking medicine is
occasion of out putting of stinking things, for when one stinking thing is
taken, another stinking thing to put out therewith. Also stench of well burnt,
or felt burnt, or of a Goats horn went, is wholsomly done to the nosethrills
to awake him yt has the Litargie, the sleeping evil, as Constable. says, for the
spirits hate stench, and flees therefrom into the inner parts of the brain,
and by gathering and coming of them, kind is help against the evil, and
defieth therefore the sooner the matter of the postume, that is cause of ye
false sleep, as be says. And in the same wise, in causes of the mother, when
it is areared too high, and presses the spiritual members, then be stinking
things wholsomly done to the nosethrils, and well smelling to the nether
parts: for kind flies stench, and comes to the Mother, and feels good
odor beneath, and draws thetherward, and brings so with him the Mother
downward in due place. And though no good odor be contrary to the other, yet
some stench is contrary to another stench, for stench of garlike is contrary to
the stench of a dounge hill. Also where they do all stink, the stenche of one
is not felt, for one stench swalloweth another. Of things with good smell and
odor look before in Tract. 17. De herbarum speciebus and plantis.

De Sapore. cap. 4^.
Savor is perceived and known by taste, for as color is known by sight, so
savor is known by taste: and is the property of a thing, and profereth it
self to the name of the soul, by the way of taste, for it is a property that
is perceived only by the taste. This I toll at the beginning, ye Philosophers
deem otherwise of the principles of savors, then Physicians do: but of that
strife I force not at this time: for we search only Diversity, Cause and
Working of savor, as it belongs to Holy Writ to seek some dark meaning of
properties of savors, and therefore of the other, we force not at this time.

De Saporibus cap. 42.
THen savor is properly perceived by the taste, and by the presence thereof in
the line of taste, the w^^ of taste is pleased or displeased. And Isa. says in
Die. of savors be eight (...): sweet, vn^^ous first, bitter, sharp, sower,
less sower, and yet less sower, and four reckon (...) with, worish savor,
and to account in thee wise, savors be ^^ne: but werish is improperly called
savor, for it is sauorles I we hereof pertain to heat and do hot
complexion, sweet, ^^tnous, ^utts, bitter, and sharp. The other belong to
cold, and to cold complexion: sower, and less sower, and mean sower and
werishnes. Two things make sower complexion, and substance, and substance is
treble, thick, thin and mean. Also hot complexion: moist to the second
degree, with thick substance, makes sweet savor, and hot complexion, and
moist in the end of the second degree, with subtle substance, makes unctuous
savor, and is accounted subtle in passing, for it passes soon this
fumositie, and has thickness in deed, and stops therefore, and has
potentiall subtlety in substance, and passes swiftly therefore. And hot and
dry complexion in the end of the second degree, with mean substance,
makes salt Savor: and hot and dry in the third degree, with thick su^^^ance
makes bitter: but complexion hot and dry in the fourth degree, with thus
substauner, makes sharp Savor, and so five Sauors be grounded in heat. But
cold complexion and dry in the second degree, with mean substance, makes
biting Savor, such as is in roses. And cold and dry in the second degree
with subtle substance, makes sweet Savor: and complexion cold and moist
in the first degrees, with mean substance, makes werish Savor, such as is in
the white of an egg: and so three Savors be whitish of subtle substance,
sharp, unctuous and Sower: and three be of thick substance, Sourish, Bitter
and Sweet: and three he whitish of mean substance, biting Savor, Salt and
Wearish.

De dulcedine and eius effectu. ca. 43.
Sweet, Savor is gendred and comes of temparate heat, and of thick
substance and sweetness laid to ye tongue, Svveete savor.
opened moderately, and bears moderately and moysteth moderately, and the
thick substance enters moderately and opens the poores, and abides in
long seen. The soul both liking in temperatenes, and so kind unto more
liking in sweetness than in other Sauors. Also nothing is so temperate and so
such according to the even complexion of ma^kinde, as sweetness of Savor, and
therefore the complexion of mankind, that is nigh to the even temperatenes,
has lyking in Sweetness that is like thereto.

De Sapore dulci. ca. 44.
TO make sweet Savor, sour Elements come together, but not all alyke much,
for the fire and air posse^h the other, and so of fire comes heat, and of
air comes moisture. The which two, heat and moisture be needful to all
generation of things: for temperate heat working in moisture, heateth and
tempereth the moisture and humor, and cleanses the earthy humor, and makes
the substance soft: and so the fiery and earthie parts increase, and the
moist weteth thick, and so thick substance is gendered, in the which sweet
Savor to grounded, and so sweet Savor without wem of biting and sharpnes,
passes all other Savors as Isaac says. For the kind thereof is nigh to
blood, and gladdeth therefore and cleanses and moysteth the lion of last
temperately, without travel of kind. Sweetness is sometims clean and pure,
and contains meanly sour qualyties, as it fares in Sugar: and is sometime
meddled with gleimie things and thick, as it fares in Days: and is sometime
meddled with biting Savor, as it fares in Honey. The first Sweetness is most
according to kind: but it happens sometime that it noyeth kind, when kind
taken more then it may defy, for often in ye wise Sweetness is cause of some
stopping, for superfluity of sweet things is gleimed in the poores, fille
sweet things softeneth the members, and washes, dries and cleanses and
nourishes little by kind, but happelye it softeneth, for moisture makes
matter soft, and heat dissolueth and tempreth, for the matter that was
thick, is now made soft, and draws out and cleanses sweet things, and
nourishes little by kind, for they be thick in substance and may not for
thicknes come into the poores: and also it stops the mouth of the veins,
and saileth appetite full s^^e: but it happens that they nourish much, for
they be like to the complexion of mankind, and ^^endo thereto, and be
therefore taken in great quantity: and for that they be thick in substance,
heat working therein, gendereth much blood. And sweetness meddled with glemie
matter, nourishes much: but it happens that it breeds many greuings in
the body, as Isaac says. For sweetness breeds and dra(...) to rotting, and
breeds swellyng, and hurlyng and ^^^^ling in the womb, and (...) soon and
moves discontinual fever, or else increases cholaricke swelling. Then clean
sweetness and pure, and not infected by medlyng of another thing, is among all
sauoure, most pleasing to the taste, and friend to kind, and most like thereto,
and restores in the body the thing that is lost, and most comfort f^^ble
virtues and spirits, and nourishes specially all the members: For Isaac
says, that sweetness is the proper savor of nourishing, if it be steadfast
and abiding in the members, and passes not soon out of the members: and
nothing norisheth, that is not meddled with sweetness, and so sauoures, that be
contrary to sweetness, be contrary to the complexion of mankind, and
norisheth therefore little or right naught. Of medlyng of contrary sauoures,
comes a mean savor, in the which is some sweetness hid, and because
thereof, that mean savor is according to kind, and nouris^eth the body, as
it fares in diverse sauces, and also in Pigmentes, in (...) be contrary
things: and so sweetness is head and well of all lyking savors, as w^ite is
head and well of all (...), as it is said in lib. de sensu and (...). And
thereto is said, that black^^^^^ is privation of white and clear (...) as
bitterness is privation of sweetness (...) sweetness is friend to the (...)
members, for it eases them, and (...) all roughness thereof, and clee^^^^ the
voice, and cleanses the wosen (...) and opens the pipes and (...) of the
lunges and of the breast, and (...) all (...)esse of ye wo^^ and of the throat,
and destroys the (...) souperfluitie of humors about (...)uall members and
brings all (...) of the spirit and of life in due (...) and abateth all the
(...) and wastes stuffing moisture in the members. By occasion, some sweet
things was many evils in the body, for they be unctuous, and breed swellyng:
for when the sweet resolution, by heat is more than to the (...) of the
moisture resolved, or at the beast the w^^s^ing, of re^(...) there must be much
(...) and vapor gendereth, and so the place most (...) stretch by the vapor,
and thereof comes swellyng, ache, and ^^^riyng: and for the seem c^^^se,
sword things (...) appetite, for (...) of thick substance they still mean
the ^eyde stomach, and stop the wa^^s, and also they increase red Cholera: for
because, they be hot, they (...) humors, and gr^e^e therefore them that evils
that come of shall (...). Also, it breeds (...)

De Sapore vnctuoso. 45.
(...)
Unctuous savor is gendered and comes of heat and of moisture in subtle
substance, and therefore vnctuo^^ie ^^y do so the tongue, opens and
dissolueth, and subtle substance enters full some, and for the (...)
thereof is but little intemperate, the soul may take ye sweetness thereof, and
has most lyking thereto. In the gendering of unctuous sauo^^, is more of fire
then of other elements, and after ^rs is most of air. Then the more working of
heat of moist matter dissolteth the more, and cleanses and puts: and so the
watrie parts and earthes abate, andstrie parts and m^^^ increase, and so the
real comes between savor.

Uctuou^^ gets (...) appetite, and breeds (...), for when this taken in the
stomach it is ^^^^ture and departed into fumositie, and comes upward, for it
is all (...) substaunces, and fills and stops the mouth of the stomach,
and abateth appetite and bredeth wombling. Also unctuous meet (...) above, for
the lightness thereof warreth upward, for it is full of fumositie, and
lets also dipretion, and it stops the roughnes of the stomach, and
(...)teth with (...) and so the ^^dde that is taken, passes narrow without
digestion, for it may and be felt: such meat with vnctuous^^ as sweet,
smooth, and slidder, and passes out therefore without digestion. Also such
(...) nourishes but little. for it stops soon ye mouth of the (...) and
little is taken thereof, and what is taken thereof, is soon wasted, for his
subtle (...) also of heat, for (...) nourishes not, but by means of air, and
unctuous things pass soon into substance of air: and so unctuous things that
have more water, pertain less to ye matter of air, and if appears by Swi^es
grease, that feeds less and fire, than does sheep grease of ^allow, for the
Swi^es grease has less of air, and more of water, then sheep grease. Also
unctuous meet norisheth ^^^er heat, and therefore flesh is forbidden in fever
Ac^. for dred of fatnes yt is meddled therewith, yt feeds and exciteth ye
seuerous heat. It stops also ye spleen and the liver for actual thicknes
thereof, for such meat in soon drawn because of sweetness thereof, and thicknes
thereof stops soon the pores. Also such meat is cause of head ach, for much
fumosutie siteth of head, and stretches the tender (...) of ye brain. Also
unctuous meat eases the spiritual members, as it fares of butter, but soon
unctuous things grieve ye breast for drines and is therein, as it fares of oil
of note, for such have not pere (...). All such things lesseth and eases sor^^
without the body, and (...), and ripeth Postumes and hetches, and gendreth
matter by moisture thereof, for it dissolueth and tempreth more then it wastes.

De Sapore salso. cap. 46.
SAlt savor comes of heat and drines in mean substance, for passing heat
and drines opens many pores and holes: for drines with heat laxeth (...) and
vnsendeth and constrains and bends with cold, and therefore much substance
thereof enters unto ye pores, and for ye parts be greatly departed, and much
substance enters and comes therein: therefore ye soul has not liking in ye
presence of it, has dislyking thereof. In Salt savor ^^ 4. elements in certain
proportion, and not even like much of all, for fire and earth have ye mast^e
but moderately, and of moderate fire comes moderate heat, and of moderate
drives and moderate heat, comes moderate boiling and seething of moisture and
so ye watery places and (...) be dissolved, and turned into mean fiery parts
and by moderate (...) ye substance moderately dries, and so therefore lives
hot substance by heat. Salt things cleanses and tempereth and departs
moisture, if they be taken into the body, and biteth ye stomach: and the gate
being so bitten, be moved to put out moisture yt is dissolved. And salt things,
cleanses and softeneth hardness of flesh: for by heat and drines thereof, they
depart the fast superfluity of moisture, and so they mo^^fie. Also (...)
things harden substance For with heat and dryness thereof, (...)

De Sapore amaro. ca. 47.
BItter savor comes of heat in the third degree, and dryness in the second
and thick substance, and so heat with dryness makes great departing, and so
the instrument of taste is grieved, and the savor is bitter, grievous, and
contrary to taste In the (...) of this Savor, but four elements in a certain
proportion (...) fire and earth have ye mastry (...) earth (...) of great
mastry of heat comes (...), and so the mastry parts (...) be the more
dissolved and made (...) earthy thick, but for the dryness does (...) mastry,
the substance ^^^deth thick and not made then. And by working of dryness and
of heat, bitterness is grounded therein, and all bitter things (...) to the
taste more then any other things with simple savor, for it makes more the
parting are dealing, and though other things have less heat then sharp
things of savor yet it makes more dissolution and departing in the tongue,
and gr^oweth more by pressing and thros^ing. Also bitter things purges
Cholera, for they be like thereto in complexion: or for in Cholera be many
pores that take the bitter things that makes the Cholera fleeting and things
and w^^ing, and brings it out in that wise. Also bitter things exciteth
appetite, for it puts out Cholera, that is also gathered, as a thing that is
light above the mouth of the stomach, and feedleth the appetite. And also
thicknes of bitter things helps thereto, for they hold down the meat in the
gr(...) of the stomach, and to the over parts be hold, and of k^^h meat. Also
better things vnstoppeth the (...) and the savor, for with heat it opens the
p^^res, and dissolueth and bears down the (...) that be dissolved with
thicknes, and puts them out Also bitter things be contrary to worms, and
slaieth long worms in the womb and no wonder: for such worms come of corrupt
fleume, and live also by fleame. And it greeueth ye spiritual members, and
nevertheless both by sharp substance, and by great drynes they be made made
(...)ting and f(...)ting. Also bitter things saves the utter things, for if
they be tempered with some licour, they have those three, that needs to
conseruations and saving, they (...) as much as dessolue, and enter deep in
the thing, and lies in thick substance, and hardens the thing, and makes
it the less passible. Also it helps cold ^ouls and the palsy, dissoluing
and wasting the matter, and dries cold scabbes, and opens also the ways of
the bledder and of the reins, and breaks the stone, and comfort the
mother, and exciteth and brings out menstruall superfluity. And though it
green the taste, yet it is more needful to many other things then is sw^^^
things.

De Sapore acuto. ca. 48.
Sharp savor comes of heat and of dryness, that is in the fourth degree in
subtle substance, and thereof comes right great opening of poores and
departing of parts, and enters for the substance thereof is subtle, and
comes and heateth the lim of taste with sharpness thereof: In this savor be
four Elements, but not all alike, for there is more of fire and of earth then
of other Elements, and is therefore sharp and hot because of mastry of fire,
and full dry because of earth, of great mastrye of heat comes great
boiling, and turns these parts of earth and of water into firye parts: And
the dry parts be sharped, and great dryness makes the substance dry, subtle,
and thin, and so sharp savor comes of great mastry of heat and of dryness
in subtle matter. And thin things with sharp savor biteth, and be full hot
and dry, and makes dissolution and departing, for subtle substance comes
into the parts and departs them a sunder, and therefore there is biting and
fretting. Al such things fret and dissolve, for by qualitye and by substance it
dissolueth and departs parts from parts, and enters deep within, and it
comfort the virtue of appetite, for it wastes superfluity in the members:
And so when the poores be void and cleansed, because of the voydance the
appetite is the stronger. Also with sharpness it pricketh and biteth the
sinews of feeling, and exciteth appetite in that wise. Also such biting things
norish but little, for of great heat and dryness comes sooner burning then
digestion, and therefore it nourishes little. And be also by their complexion
contrary to kind, and be therefore abhominnable. And so kind desires them
not, but puts them of.

De Sapore ^^^so. cap. 49.
(...) be four Elements in certain proportion, but not all alike (...): There
is mean (...), and of mean mastrye: Of earth comes mean (...): Cow bears
down the heat, therefore the heat makes but little boiling, and resolves
s^^^, and wastes the parts of fire and air, as the more (...) parts, and
dissolueth the parts of earth and of water, and may not wast and consume them
at full, for the fire is little. And so thick parts be made subtle and not
wasted and consumed. And so cold and dryness have the mastry in subtle
substance, and thereof comes sour savor. Sour things make good appetite,
for because of cold and dryness it moves toward the middle, and so it
bears down the meat to the ground of the stomach. And so the mouth of the
stomach is void, and feels the voydnesse, and desires meat. For desire is
working compowned of virtue of kind appetite, and the virtue of feeling. Also
sour things la^eth the full (...), But if the stomach ^^ void, it finds
but little moisture. And sour things dries it with dryness, and binds it
with cold. All such things opens stoppings of the spleen, and of the liver,
for it opens and carueth and departs humors in the poores, not by
quality, but by subtle substance. Also such things greeueth the spiritual
members, and makes them stretch with coldness, and roughe with dryness. And
if they be put in the body without, they smite again hot humors, and so it
does in legs swollen, for with holding of menstrual blood or Emoroides,
swageth and abateth soon, if they be washed in hot vinegar. Look of this
matter before in Tractatu de Aceto. li. 17. in the treatise of vines and of
wine.

De Sapore Pontico. cap. 50.
Sapor Ponticus is sowrish savor, and is ingendered and comes of cold and
dryness in the third degree in the substance that is thick, and such things
laid unto the tongue, constrains and binds, and the substance enters and
fastneth the parts, and that savor is called Ponticus. In this savor that is
called Ponticus be four Elements in great unevenness, for water and earth
have the mastry, and fire and air be there under of great mastry. Of water
comes strong cold, and of earth comes great dryness. Therefore there may
not be transmutation and changing, for there to default of heat and of
humor: And so for cold and dryness have there the mastrye, the substance
must needs her boystous and thick, of mastrye of cold and of dryness: this
savor Ponticus has this property, as Isa. says: for sourines with liking
savor is the more liking, and with vnliking savor the more vnlyking: and the
cause is, for if sowrenesse wath sweet things and unctuous comes into ye
pores, it makes the sweetness abide there the longer time, and the lyking to
the faster therein, and abides there long time: and so it faceth of vnliking
savor, and therefore it is, yt ever the nearer the bone, ye sweeter is the
flesh, for the bones be melancholic cold and dry, and flesh in his kind is
sanguine and sweet, and so there is sowrenes and sweetness meddled, and that for
the more liking. Also therefore Hearts flesh is liking, and Rothers also, for
sowrenesse of complexion of the beast meddled with sweetness of the flesh. And
the contrary is of wormewoode and of Fumitori, for of bitterness be meddled with
them, as (...) and other then they be, the more bitter they be, and greeueth
the taste ye more, and sowrish things exciteth appetite, and lareth after meat,
and the cause is, for they bear down the meat, as it were a presser or a
wrencher, and stops and binds before, for they constrain and kind the
sinews, and stop the ways with thick substance, and with cold and dryness,
and so meat that is taken is held and may not pass with their thickness, and
stops the spleen and the liver, and bredeth passions, Colica passio, and
Illiaca passio, and stops the guts with their thickness, and lets out
passing of dirt and of fumositie, and greeueth also the spiritual members, for
they make them rough and dry, and stauncheth tasting and sp^^ng, if they be
laid to duly without, and abateth hot swelling, and stauncheth bleeding, and
smites the sinews, and makes the teeth on edge.

De Sapore Stiptico. cap. 51.
SApor stipticus is also a sowrish savor, and comes of cold and of drines in
mean substance. In this savor be 4 elements in a certain proportion, but
not all like: for water and earth have mastrye therein, but not so much as in
other sowrish savor that is called Ponticus. Of water comes cold, and of
earth comes dryness, and cold abateth the heat, and therefore the heat
makes but little boiling, and the substance is some deals resolved, but not
wasted, but some deal fastened by dryness, and for drynes may not all forbi^
it, nor wast all, there leueth mean substance, and is diverse, and other savor
then Ponticus yt comes of the same causes, though it be more strong in thick
matter. Therefore this sourishnes that is called Ponticus, as Isi. says, yt
sets only seven diverse sauors, accounted Stipticus, under Ponticus. And he
means, that Ponticus is more sour then Stipticus, and so they be not diverse
of diverse kind, but only that one is more sour, and the other less sour,
and therefore either acordeth with other in working, but the one works less,
and the other more.

De Sapore insipido. ca. 52.
THe ninth savor is called wearishnesse or vnsauourinesse, and that may be
said in two ways. Privative and Positive: Privative is called unsavory, if
the savor thereof may not be known by the taste of the savor, as the savor
of water is not known by the taste, for great vnlykenesse thereof to the lim of
taste, for water is simple in comparison to the tongue, and takes four things
in his composition: Positive savor is called unsavory, that is not known by
the wit of taste, passing the first-degree toward a stronger savor, as the
white of an Egg, of the which the substance is mean, and heat and coldness
passes not distemperately the first degree: Such wearish things be Courds,
Citrone, Meldnes, and other such, that be more used in medicine the^ in other
meat, and nourishes but little, for they have no lyking savor, but their
substance is fleeting, and abateth thirst with moisture and cold, and
quenches Cholera, and heat, and increases Fluma, and breeds Feauers
Colidiane, and festureth or exciteth all other fleamatike cold and moist
passions. Wearish savor comes of cold and moisture in mean substance.
Therein as in other be four Elements, but not in even proportion, for water and
air have the principal mastry, and earth the secondary mastrye: Then for
strong cold and mean dryness, the dry parts and ayry be changed into watery
parts and earthy, but for mastrye of moisture withstandeth, that the substance
may not come to the dryness of earth, ye substance leaves mean with
mastrye of cold and of moisture, that is because of this savor, that is by a
miss use called unsavory. Of simple savor and of diversity and kind
thereof, this shall suffice for this time. All this is taken of Isaac, of
Galen, and of Constantine, authors of medicine. And some savors be
compounded, as colors be meddeled and odours also. And these savors work
diversity by diverse composition, for it works one wise in standing things,
and other wise in fleeting things: other wise in herbs and trees, and other
wise in men and in other beasts. Hereof it is treated before in books of
kinds and properties of things, and of bodies with soul and without soul:
but of licours, in the which savors be grounded. I hold it good to fulfill
that that lacks in the other books.

De Liquore. cap. 53.
LIcour is fleeting and is gendered by digestion in herbs, trees, and grass,
and also in bodies of beasts, and is wrong and thrusted out of meddled bodies by
violence and also by strength, and not that every humor is called licour, but
only ye humor, yt which comes by craft or else by kind out of herbs, out
of trees, and out of bodies of men, and of other beasts. In likewise as milk
and urine issues and comes out of beasts, and wine and Oil comes of
trees, and honnie comes of flowers, and Sider of fruit, Ale of Corn, and
some woose comes of wood, Crabs, and of Carrudes. And among these licours,
some be simple, and some compowned: Compowned be those that be confect and made
of diverse things meddled together. And those be simple that live and abide
without any meddeling, right as they come first out of the substance. But no
lycour is so simple as water, for it abides in pureness of Element. All other
licours and humors be made of the four Elements, but those that be not
meddeled with other be called simple, in the which simple qualities of
Elements have the mastry by the first composition and making, and be first
purged and cleansed of drafts of earth, by kind or by craft. And by diverse
meddeling of licours and of qualities of Elements, that have the mastry,
licours have diverse complections, odours, and savors. For licours, in the
which heat and moisture have the mastry, be most sweet: And these, in the
which heat and dryness have the mastrie, be most sweet: in which is heat
with dryness, and most sharp: in the which cold and dryness, be most sour
and sowrish: but in the which cold and moisture have the mastry, be werish and
unsavory, as it fares of Ptisane, and other such. And same licours by drawing
of heat of the Sun, comes when ye rind be slit, (...)
as Balsamus and Terebintina, and Lacrimis, that is first cleansed by heat of
the Sun, and fastened and turned into the substance of Mirre And some licour
is pressed and wrong out of fruit of trees, as wine, oil, and other such: and
some by great craft and burning in certain moisture, yt comes at ends of
certain wood, while it burns, as does Colophonia, and Nash, Pitch, and
some Oil of the tree Iuniperus, and other such. And some comes of juice of
herbs, as Apium and Aloe, and other such that be dried with heat of the Sun
or of fire. And some comes of the dew of heaven, and falls on flowers, and
be fastened there about, and made by craft of Bees, as honnie. And some
comes of veins of the earth, as water of Salt wells, and water Nitrum and
Allome, and other such. These differences, properties, and causes of licours be
sufficiently treated and showed before, lib. 17. de herbis and Arboribus, and
earum Succis. And lib. 16. de Venis terre, and li. 8. de passionibus aeris,
where it is treated of the kind of Manna and of honnie, that be accounted and
gendered of the air: nevertheless of honnie somewhat shall be said, and also
of Milk and of Whey and of Butter, that be bulked of voders and scales of
beasts, of the which it is not much spoken of before.

De Melle cap. 54.
HOnnie is called Melle, and has that name (as Isidore says, lib. 20. of
Mellisle in Greek, as much to say in English, as Bees. For the Greeks call
Mellisle, Bees, for by wonderful craft of kind, Bees arayeth bunnye, that is
first made of dew of the air, and is found in leaves of Reed. Therefore
Virgil says.

Prutinus aer mellis coelestia dona.

The heaven gives Honnie to the air. And so yet in Inde and in Arabia honnie
is found in boughs and in leaves hanging as it were Salt, as he says. And
generallye all honnye is sweet. But in Sardini, honny is bitter, for therein
is full much Woormewoode, and Bees lives thereby. Physicians tell, that treat
of kind of things, and namely Galen, ye horn is unprofitable meat, and
grievous to children and to young men, in the which to much heat, and
according to full old men and cold, with wine and with hot meats. Huc vsque
Isidorus, libro. 20. capitulo. 1.

Also honnie is most sweet lycour, by medicinal craft gendred of most pure
matter, but by heat of the Bees that gendereth the honey, by meddling of some
hot thing with honnie, therein is sharpness meddeled with sweetness. The
sweetness of honnie is more hot and less moist then other sweetness, as
Isaac says. Then honnie has much heat and air, and less of earth, and of
water, and much dryness both of fire and sharpnes also, and less cold humor.
Therefore honnie is deemed hot and dry in the end of the second degree: But
for the substance thereof is nigh mean and temperate, honny cleanses much, and
washes, and makes subtle and thin, and carueth with heat thereof, and
departs thick humors in the body. And for honny is hot, it is nigh sharp,
and pricketh therefore the guts, and moves them to put out drafts and dirt.
Also such sweetness is the sweetness of honey, with much sharpness and heat,
and stops not the way of the spleen and of the liver so much, as does
sweetness that is clean and pure, and without meddling of other savor, as
Isaac says in cap. of four diversities of sweetness and savor. Also for
honny is even and temperate, honny is much according and friend to kind, and
likeneth it self much to the members and stancheth with thickness grievous
runnings, and straineth pores and holes that be too wide, and keeps and laueth
well temperate kind, and lets humors that be ready and disposed to ye
flure. Nevertheless, yet honey laxeth grievous humore. For honny has contrary
dispositions of matter in the which it works, for it hardneth matter that is
soft, and losineth and departs matter that is hard. As Isaac says, Honnie
keeps and saves and cleanses and tempereth bitterness, and is therefore put
in conseruatiues, and cleanses medicines to temper bitterness of Spicery, as
it is said in Antido. N. But raw honnie not well clarified, is right
venteous, and breeds curling and swelling in the womb, and turns soon
into evil humors, and stops by his gleaming the liver and the spleen, and
kindles Cholera, and breeds the Fever that is called Diuina, and stretches
and haleth the body under the small ribs. And greeueth them yt have the
evils Collica passio, and Illiaca passio. Then as Constantine says and Isaac
in Dietis, honnie has diverse working, for some honnie is wholesome and keeps
and saves health, and laxeth in some disposition, and breeds evil humors
and venime. And the more red it is, the more hot it is and sharp, and
departs the more, and thirleth and cleanses. And the more white it is, the
less hot it is and sharp, and the more sweet it is, and more pure, and with
good smell, the better it is.

( Addition.
Pliny, although in his 11. book of his natural history. Chap. 8. he
writes yt honnie is gathered of the flowers of all Trees, and Sets or Plants,
except Sorrel, and the herb called Chenepode, (which some call Goosefoote)
yet he affirms that it descends from the air: for in ye 12. chap. of the
same book he writes thus: This comes from ye air at ye rising of certain
stars, and especially at ye rising of Sirius, and not before the rising of
Vergiliar, which are ye seven stars, called Pleades, in ye Spring of ye day,
for then on ye leaves are found a fat dew yt tastes sweet, and is clammie,
which after is become corrupt, etc. This is ye mill dew, which Bees take least
of, and is gone by ye heat of ye Sun, or ever the Bees fly abroad, Pliny
herein knew much but not all things, and they are not wise yt will lean so
much upon Pliny, as it there were no better knowledge found sithence his time.

Of the Elementall air proceeds the original of honnie, and is gathered by
ye Bees from flowers and herbs, and from the Trunk of ye Bees is distilled
ye moist and then licour (and not vomited) ye clamie substance gathered upon ye
smallest legs, and so brought to ye hiue, and there wrought by such art, as
passes every dreaming skill to surmise.)

Of Hunnie.
HUnny is of great quantity in north regions, Ad(...)
as Pliny writes in ye.11. book of natural Historyes, and 13. chap. as in
some places of Germany, honnye is found in such quantitye, yt there have been
serve honnie combs of eight foot long, and black in the hollow part, etc.
Honnie as well in meat as in drunk, is of incomperable efficacy, for it not
only cleanses, alters, and (...), but also it long time preserves ye
uncorrupted, which is put into it, insomuch as Pliny says: Such is the nature
of Honnie, yt if suffers not the bodies to puinsie. And he affirms, yt he
old see an Hippocentaure (which is a beast, half man, and half horse) brought
in honnye to Claudius ye Emperor, out of Aegipt to Rome: and he tells also
of one Pollio Romulus, who was above a hundred years old, of whom Augustus ye
Emperor demanded, by what means he lived so long, and returned still ye
vigor or liuelynesse of body and mind, Pollio annswered, yt he did it
inward with Mead, (which is drink made with honey and water) and outward with
Oil. Democritus was also of ye same opinion, a great Philosopher, and being
100. years old, and.9. prolonged his life certain days with the euapouration
of honey. Arestoxeneus writes of this excellent matter, most wonderfully
wrought, and gathered by the little Be, as well of ye pure dew of heaven, as
of the most subtle humor of sweet and virtuous herbs, and flowers, be made
licours commodious to mankind, as Mead, Matheglyn, and Oximell, Mead, is made
of part of honnie, and four times so much of pure water, and boiled until no
skimme do remain, is much commended of Galen, drink in Summer for preserving
of health. It cleanses the breast and lungs. Matheglin, which is most used in
Wales, by reason of hot herb boiled with honey, is better then Mead, and more
comfort a cold stomach, if it be perfectly made, and neither too new nor
too stale. Oximell, 11 where the one parts of Usneges is pu(...)ouble so much
of honnye, four times so much of water, and that being boiled to a third
part, and clean skimmed, is good to cleanse the stomach of fleame, or matter
undigested, so that it be not red cholar, etc. Sir Tho. Eliot. chap. 22. to,
15. to his book, The Castle of ^^^ith.

De Fauo. cap. 55.
THE honnie comb is called Fatius, and has that name of Fauendo, nourishing
and succouring, for honnye meddled with wax is called Fauus. For in Cells made
of Wax by a wonderful craft or skill Bees gather honnye, and keep and
succor the lycour therewith. And so the honnie comb is called Fauus as it
were Fouus or Fouens nourishing, comforting, and succouring, for ye honnie
comb comfort and succoureth ye honey therwithin Or else it has this name
F^uus, of Fauus, for it is full sauourable and lyking to the taste, and to eat.
Therefore Isidore says, that Fauus comes of this word of Greek Fagui, for
honnie is more eaten then drunk, Fagiu in Greek, is to understand. (...): But
some men do cast Fauus, honny wrong out of ye wax, and purged at best, in the
which the taste ^in^eth much sweetness. A certain beast is called Melota, and
has that name for it loves and desires honnye: and so this name Melus and
Melota also, comes of this name. Mel. honnie, as Hugution says. Also the
Bear loves honnie most of any thing. And he breaks trees, and climbeth on
trees for love of honnie combs, and not without peril, as Aristotle says,
libro. 18. For sometime among honnie deep in the hiue. breeds certain small
Worms, as it were Spiders, and do spin and weaue and make webbes, and have
the mastry of all the Hiue, and therefore the honnye rotteth and is corrupt.
Also their honnye is good when it is taken out of new wax, for honnie that
long abides in old wax, waxes read, and the corruption of honnie is like
to the corruption of wine in flakets, and shall therefore be taken in time. And
honnye is good when it so like gold, as he says. Also he says, that Bees
do sit on the hiue and suck the superfluity that is in the honnie combs.
And if they did not so, the honnye should be corrupt that is in the combs,
and Spiders should be gendered. They sit on the combs, and do keep bustly
that s^o^s Spiders have no mastry, and eat them if they find them, and should
else all die.

De Mulso. cap. 56.
MVlsum is drink made of Water or of Wine, and honnye meddeled together: And
the Greeks call that drink Mellicratum, as Idiomel, that is made of the juice
of Maces, and of honnye meddeled: And Rodomell, that is made of the juice of
Roses, and honey meddled.

De Medone. cap. 57.
MEth is called Medo or Medus, as it were Melus, and is drink made of honnie
and of water well sown after the best manner. And breeds swelling and
curling in the womb, and hard gnawing, if it be raw, and the honey not well
puted, and forasmuch as it comes see^^ into fumositye, it comes up to the
head, and grieueth it with diverse evils. And if it be well sod and stale, it
is liking to the taste, and clerreth the voice, and cleanses the woden and the
throat, and the pipes of the lungs, and gladdeth and comfort the heart, and
nourishes and fatneth the body, but to them that have sore lyuers and
splenes, and the stone, it is less according, Mirrus, knee nolent of ^uichers
b^oo n^
for it stretches and stops the ways, and it is ordered with Mirtus or
Ruscum, and with other herbs of good smell and odor, to be more wholesome
some and the better smelling, and to endure and last the longer.

De Clareto. cap. 58.
CLaret is made of wine and of honnie and sweet spicerie: For good spicerye is
ground to small powder, and put in a linen bag that is fair and clean, with
honey or with Sugar, and the best wine is put upon the spicery, as who makes
lie. And the Wine shall be often put theroft, until the virtue of the Spicerye
be incorporate unto the Wine, and be clarified. And so Claret draws of Wine
might and sharpness, and holds of the Spicery good smell and odor, and
borrows of the honnye's wirrinesse and savor.

( Addition.
The old kind of Apoctasse.)

De Pigmento. cap. 59.
PIe(...), as (...) says, has shall ^^ame as it were Pili^ meant(...), quod
(...) in pila est (...)ll^^. that in beaten in a ^^orter ^ of the which Spicery
by Pigmentane craft, is made lyking or lake and Ela^^^^pes and so they that
sell and grind Spicerye. And make confectious thereof be called Pigmenta^^.

( Addition.
A blauncher of drugges, whereof are made special fulle^ (...) powder, perfumes
and Wines.)

De Oximel. cap. 60.
Look in the chapter of home for these like copounds
OXimell is called sour honny, for the matter thereof is confect of honnye and
of vinegar: For first vinegar is food with necessary herb and ^a^ing root:
and then the Uineger is strained and cleansed, and then is put thereto pure
honey and clens clarified at best. And is sod again on easy fire and soft,
until it be thick: and is pured with the white of an egg tempered with
vinegar, and put in the Oximell, when it a little sod, Garblers, o^ pe^ye
^ulne^s which cou^terfeit physic.
for the egg draws to it self all the alth of honey, and makes it fleet
above: then the Pigmentaries or the Lech skimmeth away the filth waryly with a
feather, and then the Oximel is put in a clean bore. And Oximel is given in
hot water to de^^eng and softning of hard matter, and to open pores, and so
temper stopping. In medicine might hightly breed peril, but it were prepared
to bring out the dra^ter some, andif digestion be before taking of Oximell. To
shed doings by right shed craft of water and of Sugar with diners spicery is
made a strop. Now fr^tting and larative, now rosens and stopping, now
compouned, and now simple.

De Cera. cap. 61.
WAre is the draste or dregs of hour, and within the substance thereof Bees
gather the licours of honey spedled with the drast^ of wa^e. as Aristotle says
li. 8. Therefore who that will keep honey in dip pureness, that depen^ if by
time from the substance of War^. And (...) has this propertye, that among
^^^rustes of (...), it fla^s^th above, and fleiketh not to the bossome when it
is ^^f, but comes upward and storeth above, and that makes the parth of fire
and of air. that hard the ma^^^y therein. And to ^^le^e molten in spa^e^
bra^^th down ye water and o^teth above, for that in so much lightness of air,
and ^^^^leth upward because thereof, and the more new wax is ye better it
smells, and to the more pure and ye better to work, and the more able to take
impression and printing of diverse ^gened ye shapes: and both figures printed
and letters written therein doieth and lesseth the longer time, and such Wax
is called Uirgins wax. Also Wax is good and needful to many doings, for it
is good in medicinen and in diverse ointmentes and confections: For it heateth
and resoldeth, tempereth, opens, ripeth, and draws and wastes vapors: And
is also good to feeding of light, and therefore wax serves on temples and on
Altars of Gods, and on tables of Lord or and certain doings and vsages be
called Ceremony, and have ye name of Cera, wax, It was in times past before
mamels and Idols.
or of Cereis, wax tapers, for in ye Ceremonies of ye temples, wax tapers
were offered, and yet be, as Hugutlon says. And so they yt serve in churches
of wax candles be called Ceroserarij, as they yt serves in halls of kings and
of Bishops be called Primicerij, (...)
as be says. Also letters be sealed with wax cloased and patent: And priuitie
is hid under Wax, and privileges be confirmed with Wax. Tables be filled
and dressed with wax, simple or colored, and therein be letters and diverse
figures or shapes written or planed by the office of p^^ntlls. And for diverse
use linen clothes be waxed: And wax keeps and saves books from rain and
from water, for wax is some ^eale unctuous, and sucketh in moisture, and
suffers it not to perish, and fell by the ^o^ses of s^ared chord. Wax
melts and ^ayleth in heat, and days ended in cold yt seems not to wet
things and tough And therefore seals the wet, for ye wax should not (...) to
the waters and priuies thereof.

De (...) cap. 62.
A Wax taper is called Cereus, and has that name of Cera, for it is made of
wax, as (...) says li.(...)of speaks (...)and ^^^th in this manner ^. As he
says, the meaning follows, for use of Tapers serves to see by that light of
her things that be in darkness. For in the Taper be three things, the matter,
and use, and desposition and shape, and the matter is treble, as Isi. says,
the wax, wike, and fire. The wike is made of hemp third, and the ground and
fundament of the ^^per, and the wax compasses the wike, and finds and
nourishes the fire yt is light, and is end and complement of either, for it
works in the wax and in the wike, and turns them into his own likeness:
and things of diverse kind have with themselves wonderful and most couenable
unity: The shape and disposition thereof is round and long, and great at the
end. The use thereof is to stand on a Chandeler and to be hold and borne
before Lords.

( Addition
A Chandeler was long spites of wood whereon ye taper stood, whereof some were
made of brass, hanging on cheins in the hals of magistrates, and some with
sockets for less Tapers.)

De Lacte. cap. 63.
Milk is where licour and sweet, gendered of blood by working of heat in
teats and paps of beasts. Or as Ari. says li. 18. Milk is blood sod and
defied, and not corrupt: For when the child may not for greatness be fed by
the navel, then kind ordains him milk of menstruall blood, that comes of
the paps and teates and is there digested and sod: and (...) white color of
the whiteness of the ke^nels of ye teats and paps, as Const^^^^^^ says.
lib.^^^^. For milk and menstrual blood be all one kind: therefore (...) so sad
the child without ye (...) ^erson shall not milk be (...) nor (...) thereafter,
but it (...) against kind for in ye time (...) milk is complete us beast.
(...) or (...) bring forth there (...) men ^o diversity. (...) must (...) her
good often a (...) milk to (...) when it so well diuissed, and that is
needful for (...) of beasts yt is sweet, for all beast (...) and well
digested, as he says. li ^^ (...) li ^ Ari says, that no beast ye lateth
eggs has milk, nor (...) and paps, and in every milk is a th^^ part and
watery: and a thick part so called (...) and the more thick milk is, the wor^e
ch^^^^ is therein. And milk of beasts yt be toothlesse above, re^u^eth, and
milk of beasts with teeth in either saw, reneath not, nor tallow of such
beasts: And milk of such beasts is sweet and thin as Camells milk, and
Mares milk, and Asses milk. Also he says there, yt in some countries the
people abode not conception of Goats, but frote their tears and doders with
nettles, and then first comes out blood, and after as it were matter, and at
last comes good milk, The Sovv Thirtle. and ye Spurge, whereof are seven
sundry kinds, having milky juice and biting.
not much worse then the milk is when they have yened. No milk is in the
tears of men generally, though it seems yt it happens otherwise: some
herb have white humors, as Titimallus, and some trees also. The fig tree has
humor white as milk, as Ari. says there. Milk of beasts renneth, and among
all beasts, the Batch has thickest milk, except hares and sows, and is most
thick in farrowing time, and waxes thin afterward, as Ari. says, li. 6. in
fine. The Cow has no milk before coluing, and has good milk after. But
when it is first tongeuled, it is as it were a stone, and that happens when
it is meddled with water, as he says. Also li. 9. he says, that when a child
is norished with hot milk, his teeth springs the sooner: and after
cleansing, woman's milk multiplieth and increases: Some women have milk only
in the head of the teate, and some in other places of the teate. And when the
milk has not good digestion, then it congealeth, and the breasts hardneth,
for all the breasts be right soft. And if any hair comes therein there
falls a great sickness yt is called Pilosa, Growing of hair in ye nipples
of the breast.
and the ach cease not ere ye hair comes with ye milk, or rotteth, and
comes out in that wise. And while the milk comes and renneth, menstruall
blood is not generallye found. And some melch woman bleedeth menstrual blood,
when her blood is right moist, and much when children sucketh, and be fed with
much thick blood that have the cramp. If the nurse have much multitude of
milk, often it noyeth and greeueth. And a black woman has much better milk,
and more nourishing then a white woman. And Isaac in Dietis rehearses such
properties of milk, and many other, and says in this wise.

Milk is generally divided in three manners, for some milk is sweet and new
milked, and other is sour and old milked, or mean between both. The sweet
is most sauoury, and friend to blood, and nigh thereto, and tourneth soon into
blood, and is therefore good nourishing of blood. And is compowned of three
substaunces, that be diverse in virtue and in working. One makes thin and
cleanses, the second is thick and stops, the third makes soft and
thin. Farthermore the substance of whey is watrye, and makes throne the
Cheese, the Cheese is cold and thick and stops, therefore cream is
virtuous and soft: And so milk with watery substance thereof is sharp, and
tempereth and softeneth thick humors, and washes and biteth the womb and
the guts, and laxeth and puts out, and thirleth ye veins. And opens the
stoppings of the liver and of the spleen, and namely of the milk of Camells.
And such milk helps them yt have the dropse, as he says. And there it
follows also: Good milk and temperate in his three substances, cleanses the
members with his watrynes, and withstandeth venim, and moisteth ye members as
butter, and bears meat with his cheese from the mouth of the stomach to ye
ground thereof. Also milk is commended, for it nourishes well the body, and
turns into likeness of blood, if it be taken temperatly and in due time
after cleansing of ye body: and if it be taken into a body yt is not cleansed,
or in undue time, is turned into evil humors that it finds, and increases
them, and is resolved and turned into but fumostlye, and is so cause of head
ach, and if it and matter of leauer, he kindles the seners heat, if it find
the kind heat feeble, then it sowreth seen, and is sour in that stomach,
for when there is much humor and little heat, then is bredde sowrenesse or
rotting of fleme: therefore milk shall not be often taken, but the body be
temperate, and the stomach void: for if the body be clean of rotted humore
and Cholera, and the milk is well digested, it nourishes well the body, and
makes good blood, and much flesh. And moyst^^th the body without, and makes
the skin fair and tender, as he says. Also he says, it accords to them ye
drink milk to be fasting, and eat the milk hot and new milked, and they
should not eat ere the milk be defied. Also it needs to beware of too great
travail and moving, until the milk come down into the place of digestion,
and be defied. For of inordinate moving and travel, comes too much heat
sodeinelye gendered. And by such heat the vnctuositye is resolved and turned
into evil fumositie and grievous, and the thick part leaves undigested, and
breeds many manner corruption, as be says. And chosen milk (as he says)
shall have four qualities, color, odor, smell, and savor. The color most be
white and clear, without any yeolow, red, or wan. Good odor without heavy
smell: The humor mean between thick and thin. And a drop thereof put on the
nail, abides continual, and droppeth not away. And such a drop is shapen
broad beneath and sharp above. The savor is good, if it be not meddled with
bitterness nor with saltness. And among these diversities of milk, woman's
milk is accounted kindly most temperate, for all milk follows kindly the
complexion and kind of the beast yt is comes of. And for the complexion of
mankind is most temperate and more nourishing: therefore it eases most
smarting in the corners of the eien. And all that is said before of goodness
of milk is found in the same discourse.

De Lacte Cameli. cap. 64.
CAmells milk, by hot complexion of the beast, is more hot then other milk,
and more than and less fattie or creamy, and less nourishing and is
tempering, and opens stoppings, and helps them therefore that have the
droysse, that comes of stopping. The Camel is most hot of kind, therefore
heat by w^sting of blood, draws out the vnctuositie: for milk is not else
but blood often sod: And Camells blood is salt and sharp, and therefore is
departs humors, and makes thick humors thin. Look before de Camelo, in
Tractiru de Ammalibus.

De Lactu vaccino. cap. 65.
COwes milk is contrary to Camells milk, for the Cow has not so much heat
to draw the fatness out of the blood, and therefore her milk is full vncteous
and most nourishing. For cold milk nourishes more then sheep milk, though
sheeps milk be more hot then cow milk. And the cause is (as he says) for
though the Cow milk be not so hot as sheeps milk, a little fatness
suffreeth to Cow milk, and that fatness abides in the milk, and passes in
the substance of Cheese, and the milk nourishes therefore the more, for fat
substance nourishes more then the substance of the Cheese, for it is more hot
and more moist, and near to the heat of blood, and turns sooner unto blood.
And as men of old time tell, things ye turns soonest into blood, nourishes
soonest, as it is said there. But yet fat milk nourishes better then fatness
yt is more hot, for milk has thin watery moisture, that softneth and eatereth
into the inner parts of the body, but fatness by it self ^^eeteth above for
ye air that to therein, and makes running, and hardneth by thickness of his
substantial moisture, and therefore cowes milk perceth and thir^eth by
watrinesse thereof, and comes into the inner parts, and makes kind heat by
softness thereof, and greeueth not much kind by scarsitie of chase, but
helps and susteineth, as he says. Milk be used in one manner of nourishing,
for then it is used with his three substances together. And otherwise to
cleansing and to abate heat, for the whey is separated from the creme, and
otherwise to moist, and then ye fatness of Butter is used. And the use of
milk is taken by thinness, thicknes, and mean between, as he says there.
Milk is known in substance and in working: in substance, for ye milk is best
yt is next to the complexion of mankind, as woman's milk, and ye nearer it is
milked, the better it is, and the more effectual against venim, and against the
euille of the bledder and of the reins, and against greeuaunce of the lungs,
if air comes not that to, or changes ye virtue thereof, after it is milked.
Then milk in working is known, when the creme and the Butter is parted therfro^
and the Cheese also. Then ye whey is more watrye and sharp, as it fares in
Camells milk, that is less nourishing, and helps them nevertheless yt have
the dropsy, and that by watery heat and thin licour, Cow milk is most
thickest milk, and less thin and watrye then other, and less sharp, and
more Buttery, and nourishes well therefore, and best agreeing to the stomach,
and comfort and cools the heat of the liver and of the stomach, and
makes the body fat and huge, and heals frettings of the guts and of the
mother, and is the better and most wholesome, if the most deal of watrinesse be
consumpt and wasted by stodes of the rivers that be heat ^^ry hot, and then
quenched therein.

( Addition.
The new milk vnscummed of his cream, is wholesomest.)

De Lacte Caprino. ca. 66
AMong the foresaid differences, Goats milk holds me^^e: For after woman's
milk it is accounted most temperate in three substances, therefore it helps
much against wounds and evils of the lungs, and of the bladder and reins, if
it be taken with Sugar. And whey departed from the cheese and from ye Butter,
is most drieng and cleansing and abating Cholera: and much Goats milk dronk by
it self, runs and curdeth soon in the stomach: and therefore because it
should not grieve the stomach, it is tempered with a little honey and salt, and
then it curdeth never, but vncurdeth if it begin to curd in ye stomach. And for
Goats live by dry meat and by ends and crops of boughs and of branches, their
milk is the loss watery, and more biting, and according to the stomach: For of
diverse pasture comes diverse milk, for beasts that live by fresh grass and
tender, have watery milk and thin, that grieueth the stomach. And those yt eat
laxatiue herbs, have biting milk, and pricketh sinews, and noyeth and laxeth.

De Lacte Ouino. cap. 67.
Sheep milk is more hot and dry then Cow milk, with less Butter, and
more Cheese, and nourishes therefore the less. And is not so according to the
body as Cow milk, and that is known by heavy odor and smell. For as Gal^.
says, Sheep milk has more heavy smell then Cow milk, and is therefore
fleamati^e, and nourishes more then Goats milk, and less then Cow milk
does, and is also temperate then is Goats milk.

De Lacte Asinino. cap. 68.
ASses milk is temperate and nourishing, and restores, but it laxeth the
womb, and softneth and moisteth members that be hardened by dryness and with
heat, and helps the breast, and abateth the cough and straightness of the
breast, and helps the wounds of the bladder and of the rei^^s.

De Lacte Caballino. ca. 69
MAres milk is much like to Camells milk in thinness, in sharpness, and in
color, and helps in Postumes of the mother, and exciteth menstrual flux, if
the cause of the menstrual blood be hot and dry. This milk has that property,
that none other milk has, as Isaac affirms.

De Lacte Porcino. cap. 70.
SOwes milk (as Isaac says) is thin and watery, for by coldness thereof it
abides vnsod and undigested, and helps therefore little or naught, if it be
taken for medicine. And if it be taken for meat and sodde with lupes of Barley,
it breeds and gendereth good nourishing and moist, as he says.

( Addition.
In the former yeereo of old age, for want of better knowledge, many used to
feed of the flesh of unclean beasts, and used their milk, which better
practice since, have omitted.)

Qualiter se habet lac tempore partus. cap. 71.
Milk of beasts that be nigh ye birth, is thin and watrye, for humors be
gathered in beasts in time of birth, for the mouth of the mother is closed, and
the milk is meddled with watery humors, and is therefore grievous yt time, and
cause of spuing and bolding, and softneth roughness, and slippereth ye
roughness of ye stomach, and laxeth the womb, and is herd to defy and so
wrish, and runs and curdeth in the stomach, and breeds full evil
sicknesses and diseases, and smites the brain with fumositie yt comes
thereof, and is cause of head ach and of stench of the teeth and of the breadth,
and so if milk be too much corrupt, or too much taken thereof, or if it be
taken other wise, or in other seasons the^ it should, it breeds many sore
sicknesses and evils: and nourishes evil humors, and flydreth and
corrupts good humors, and helps and rotteth the stone in the bladder and
reins, and kindles and lighteneth unkind heat and feuerous. Also it
infecteth the teeth and the gums, and beedeth full evil pimples and whelkes
and scabs in children, and exciteth stopping of the liver and of the spleen,
and of the reins, and grieueth the stomach, and puts ont meat, by
slippernesse, ere it be dosted, and laxeth so the womb. Corrupt milk breeds
these humors, and many other euilles: but of good milk and evil, this
suffices at this time.

( Addition.
Milk, is compost of three substances, Cream, whereof is made Butter. Wheye,
and Cruddes. The most excellent milk, is of a woman. Cowes milk next, and
Goats milk. Whosoever has any appetite to eat or drink milk, to the intent
that it shall not arise in his stomach, let him put into a vessel, a sow
leaves of Mints, Sugar, or pure honey, and thereto pour the new milk, and so
drink it warm from the Cow. Sir Tho. Eliot. fol. 33. in his Book called,
The Castle of health. cap. 20.)

De Sero. cap. 72.
WHeye is the watery part of milk, departed from the other part by running
and curding, for running ioynese togethers the parts of cheese and of butter,
and departs therefrom ye whey that is thin and watery. The effects and doings
thereof is rehearsed before, and has also virtue to cleanse and to wash away
rottings and matter, for it washes the guts, and cleanses their wounds of
matter, and purges the breast, and quenches thirst, and abateth the
sharpness of red Cholora, and does away wet scabbes and dry, and vnstoppeth
the Liver and the spleen. Look before In primo secundum Isaac, there it is
spoken of.

De Butiro. cap. 73.
BUtter is called Butirum, and has that name of Imbuendo, moysting and
hamming, as Hugution says, for by the fatness thereof and moisture, butter
moysteth those bodies which he touches, for butter is the flower of milk, and
is full hot and moist, with mastry of air, and therefore it is right fat: for
Butter is kindly hot and moist, gleyming and fat, and nigh according to the
complexion of mankind as Isaac says, and so Butter often eaten maysteth the
stomach, and laxeth the womb, and namely if it be fresh and new. Therefore men
in old time, lykned butter to oil meddled with fatness: and said, that who yt
would take it, it would help him to spet, and cleanse the breast and lungs, and
namely if there be a postume therein, for it ripeth and tempereth and cleanses
the superfluities of the breast, and namely if it be eaten with Sugar or with
honey: but then it ripeth the less, and helps the more to recovering, as he
says. And he says there, that Butter is contrary to venimme, and makes the
members moist: and washing thereof softneth the roughness of the eyes, and
purges and cleanses the eyes, and ripeth and breaks the postumes, and
helps wonderfully the wounds of the lunges, and in likewise the throat and
of the breast, and abateth fretting of the guts and of the reins, and
softeneth and slaketh sinnewes that be astonished or shronke, or destroyed with
the Crampe, as he says. And Auicen says, that butter taken into the body, is
a singular help against venime, if he that is poisoned, melts butter in hot
milk, and drinks thereof a great quantity: for the softnes there stops ye
ways, so yt the venims thereof may not suddenly come to the heart. Also Butter
draws all the venimme to it self, and makes it clean togethers, and
brings it out of the body, by perbraking and spewing, as he says.

Butter is made in this wise, ye cream is gathered in a clean vessel, and is
long beaten with an instrument of tree, In a Charne.
that is made therefore, the which instrument is round and broad, with an hole
therein: In some s^^es, they beat ye cream in a payle with the flat of the
hand, and to bring it to butter.
and the cream is beaten and stirred therewith, and by that stirring, kind
heat is excited and comforted in ye substance of milk, and thereby all the
fatness is gathered togethers, and fleeteth above, and the whey that is thin
and watery, with ch^sie part staketh down to the ground, as it were giving the
over place to the butter, as to the more noble part and worthy, and then the
Butter that fleeteth above, and is gathered and kept in a clean vessel, for
diverse uses, and needful: and the more fresh and new the butter is, the better
it is: the more sauery it is, the more lyking it is to the taste. Fresh butter
is fleeting and soft, but kind heat has more masterie over the moist
parts, and wastes them little and little, and makes the butter some deal
hard, and butter feeds well, and nourishes well, and makes potage fattie
and sauourie, and is therefore often put therein in steed of grease and of
oil, and is some deal salted, that it may the better be kept, and that his
potentiall moysturs may be tempered with the dryness of the salt. For it is
more lyking to the taste when it is meanly salt. And when butter is old, the
savor thereof appaireth, and the Odor also, and turns into heavy savor and
smell, and is grievous to the taste, and is not then worthy to make fat and
sauourye, but it is good to diverse medicines and ointments: for often it
happens, that thing which accords not to the throat, accords to some
medicines.

( Addition
Butter is also nourishing, and profits to them, which have humors
superfluous in the breast, or lungs, and lacks riping and cleansing of them,
specially if it be eaten with sugar and honey. If it be well salted, it heateth
and cleanses the more.)

De Caseo. cap. 74.
CHeese is called Caseus, and has that name, as Isidore says, of Carendo,
lacking or being without, for Cheese is wroong and pressed in a cheese fat
until the wheye be pressed out, and departed from the watrie substance of
milk.

And so cheese is called Caseus, as it were Carens, lacking: for sometime cheese
is dry and not having lycour and moisture as he says. But Hogution says,
that this nowne Caseus comes of Cadendo, falling: for it falls and passes
away some, and flydeth out between the fingers of the Dry wife, and cheese is
the drastes of milk, for as Isaac says, the cheese substance of milk is
cold and thick, and hard to defy, and right evil of digestion, and also
passes slowly out of the stomach, and it accords and belongs more to
stopping than to laxing, and is heavy to ye stomach and to the liver, to the
riy^ts and also to ye spleen, and namely if the thick places be disposed to be
stopped. Furthermore cheese breeds and gendreth a stone in ye reine, and so
for because of these three evil accidents, Constantine says, that Cheese
universally and most commonly is evil, but soft is least grievous, therefore
Isa. makes distinction of cheese, and says yt some is fresh and new, and some
is old, and some is mean between the twain. New cheese is fresh, and
ingendereth not evil humors, and has yet therefore some sweetness and
moisture of the milk, and is therefore the more easy to vests, and nourishes
the better, and laxeth the more the womb, and namely if it be not salt, for
saltness takes away both sourenes and sweetness: for too salt cheese dries
too soon, and grieueth the stomach. And saltlesse cheese is most nourishing,
and moysteth the body, and breeds much flesh, but it grieueth the stomach,
and turns some into fumositie, if the stomach be hot: and tourneth into
soreness, if the stomach be cold. Then if it be meanly salt, it is the
better to defy, and grieueth less the stomach, and sowreth soon without
salt, and kindles the blood.

De Caseo veteri. cap. 75.
Old cheese is sharp and dry, and thick to nourishing, and hard to pass out
of the stomach, for if the moisture of the milk be away, sharpness and
dryness of the reuning has mastry therein, and so it is not but thick and
fast: and therefore the superfluity of the body is not made, subtle
therewith, as it is with other things that are subtle in working, and so
grieueth the body in two manner wise: for corruption thereof, and thickness of
working, makes the superfloure thick, and corrupts and grieueth the
stomach, for by the sharpness of the renewing it is contrary to all other
things, that help in other manner, and tourneth them into worse nourishing, for
if it does ^^^de thick humore in the body, it gendereth and breeds the stone
in the bladder and in the reins: for it unites humors hot and thick, and
makes them full hard. Therefore old cheese is to be eschewed and forsaken, for
it helps not, nor feeds, and is obedient to digestion, neither gendereth
nor breeds good blood, nor moysteth ye body, nor exciteth ^^ne: but it
sor^ry^s^ and binds moisture, that it does (...). Also the old cheese is
hard and dry, with many holes and poores, because of dryness, and breaks
soon, and has neither fatness nor moisture, but grieueth the body: but
cheese sad and roasted, is not so evil, as cheese with many eyes and hoales,
for soundness of substance is token of fatness and of moisture: and cheese
with too many eyes and holes, is ill, both new and old. But Dio. says, milkie
cheese mo^^sheth ye womb, and old binds and namely if it be sod, or if it be
taken out of water and toasted, and namely if it be before meat taken, for it
stops with thickness the way of the stomach, and suffers not the meat to
pass into the guts: and cheese eaten after meat thrusts downwards the meat,
as it were a persset, and shoueth it to ye place of out passage. Mean cheese
eaten after meat, thrusts downward the meals: as it were between new and
old, nourishes much, for good savor and thickenesse thereof, for it hardens
swiftelye by kind heat, and the more masterye kind heat in it has, the
more strongly it hardneth, and cleaneth the faster to the members. Huc vsque
Isaac in dietis. Diosc. and Arist. li. 3. F^m^ane, yt when much cheese is in
milk, it is the more meat. And Diosc. says, that cheese is contrary to
venime, for it stops the woyes of the veins with thickness, and moisture,
and suffers not the mallyce of the venime to come to the heart: and fresh
cheese laid hot thereto, draws out the venomous biting, and in token heerof,
if cheese be laid to the biting of a mad dog, or of a serpent, all the
whiteness of the cheese tourneth into won color: and cheese helps also
against the venomous postume that is called Antrax, A ^^lun of v^^^com
and against other venomous postumes, if it be eaten, or laid too without: and
accords to medicine in many causes, as he says.

( Addition.
Antrax is also a swelling, which rises like a byle, and is called of some, an
Alder, very ^king, hot, and corrupt.)

De Coagulo. cap. 76.
REnning milk is made thick in the mawes of certain beasts, A fresh cheese.
and by virtue thereof, milk of oath4r beasts reemeth and curueth, and the
Butter and Cheese gathers togethers, And al other causes that thickneth
and the Wheye is departed therefrom. And li. 3. F. Aristo. says, that the
more thick milk is, the more cheese is therein, and runs the sooner. But
milk of a beast yt is loothlesse above, renneth: and milk of a beast with
teeth in either law, renneth not, nor his grease. Also he says there, that
milk renneth by renning and milk of figs: Of (...).
when the milk of figs is gathered in wool, and the wool then is wiped
with a little milk, and that milk is put in other milk, and so all ye milk
renneth. Also there, renning is not found but in wombes of beasts that sucketh
and cheweth their cuddes: In them which have teeth above and beneath is no
renning found, but in the Hare and in the Con^^^. The elder that the Rennings
is, the better it is, and helps against the flure of the womb, and namely
the renning of the Co^^^e and of the Hare, as Arist. says. Also lib. 16. he
says, that milk runs by renning, for renning is milk in the which is a
special heat. and helps therefore and sustaineth the milk, as the semen of
the male susteineth the menstruall blood of the female in the mother, for the
kind of milk, and of all blood is all one, as he says there, cap. de Caseo.
Isaac speaks of renning and says, that he which renneth by virtue of his
sharpness, and of heat and dryness, which has mastrie therein, and wastes
the moisture thereof: and though that renning be in all cheese, yet ye savor
thereof is less felt in new cheese and green, and that is for much last and
moisture. And renning is found in the mawe of a sucking beast, which does chew
his cud, and is meddled with salt, and afterward dried and ^ardned in smoke
hanging over the fire, and a little thereof is tempered with a little milk,
made luke warm, and meddled with the other milk, and so does run, and
curde^h together, all that may be renned: and to in the substance of renning,
is such a virtue hidden, as is hidden in the Semen of the male, as Aristotle,
Auicen, Isaac, and other do mean. And in showing, and treating of the
properties of ^^cors, this that is laid, shall suffice, of this time.

( Addition.
Cheese by the whole sentence of al Writers, lets digestion, and is enemy
unto the stomach, also it ingendreth all humors, and breeds the stone. The
chesse which does least harm to seek cheese, reasonably filled, which some
men do suppose, nourishes much. S. Thomas ^^o^.)

Of the virtues of diverse things, as humor and licour. Chap. 77.
IN humors, licoures, and other things be certain virtues, of whom some we
shall set here shortly: for by diverse complections and virtues, yt have mastry
in diverse things, diverse manner of working is found, as the virtue of opening,
of ripping, of cleansing, and of other doing The virtue of opening works by
heat, and dries in subtle substance, as it fares of Outons, or of juice of
Lickes, of Allomne, and other such confections thereof, opens the mouth of
the veins, and exciteth the Emoroides, as Co^. says. The virtue of spreading,
works by heat and moisture, for heat thirleth and comes into the
substance of a thing, and dissolueth moisture that is (...)ut thereto, and
makes open and spread, as it fares of Mockes, and of Elderne rindes, and other
such that war stretch and spread, if they be sod in oil, as he says. The
virtue of stopping, works by cold and moisture, with soft substance and
sad, as it fares of Dragantes, of the white of an egg, and of Psillium, for
these of the poores, with cleaning and fast substance, and straineth and
hindeth with cold.

The virtue that makes thick, works by cold and moisture, as it fares by
Mondragora, that makes ye skin thick, if it be laid thereon, as he says: for
by color it (...) the more thin parts of the moystures, and so the moyster^
comes to the middle, and makes ye substance more last, and so the more
thick, and works by heat and by moisture: for heat wastes the thin parts,
and then be the earthy parts the more thick.

The virtues that makes hard worke^^ by cold and drines, for every qualitee
draws toward the middle, and makes all the substance the more hard, and
works sometime by col^e and moisture, and burdeth the moist parts by cold, as
it fares in frost and ^^^ and sometime by heat and dryness, and l^^^ueth the
earthy, arts and makes them hard in that manner wise, as it fares in fr^ or
satie earth, and ^^ borne fyte. The virtue of opening works by heat and
dryness with thick substance: for heat ^^^reth and month the more subtle
parts outward, and the thick parts and dry comes to the middle, and so all
ye substance is made uneven, and that same unevenness is cause of roughness.

Also cold makes roughness in moist water, binding and drawing the v^ter
parts to the middle, and lets the thin parts to spread themselves outward,
and therefore the other parts, in the ^^tich cold has the domination and
mastr^e, he does rough and sharp without, and by diversity of matter, which
receives impression and working of heat and of cold, be diverse conditions
and properties, and meddling of things gendred kindly, either happily, as it is
known, and as Auicen and Constantine does mean, and as it is openly such
virtue in ye tretise of the qualities of Elements, and the virtue of softness
norisheth by heat and by moisture also and that by heat that spreads the
moist parts, and departeh and deuideth parts from other as Dialtea does, which
Dialtea is moist, (...)
and somewhat hot, and opens meanly by the heat thereof, and makes the
humors soft and fleeting by passing moisture of it, and makes soft in yt
wise, other things that be softened by heat that has mastry over the watery
part and earthy, and turns them into earthye parts, as it fares of the
earthy vapors and watery that be drawn by in ye air, and turns into soft
drope of rain, and now of deaw, now of hayle, and now of snow, as the
Commentor says super 4. Metheor. Also it is known, that virtue of heat
softneth such things, so that the parts cleaves scarcely together in great
working of heat, as it fares in wax and in other things that melts, for
virtue of ^^re has mastrie over ye parts of water and air that be therein.
The virtue of reping and the virtue of ^stestion works by virtue of heat and
by moisture, and the virtue of withholding by cold and by dryness; and the
virtue Expulsius, of our putting, by cold and moisture, the virtue of appetite
works principallye by heat and by dryness, and the virtue of drawing,
works by heat and dryness, as it sareth in Dipcamo, Serapino, and Stereory
colum^ino, and other such. The virtue laxatiue works by the same virtues, but
it works more strongly, and so some things that draw laxe also and be
^ordent, as ^camonia, ^^. And works by cold, and thrirsteth downward, and
makes slipper by moisture, as it fares my Prunes. Slone, and Thamari^es, etc.

The virtue of riping works by heat and dryness, and so does the virtue of
drawing, as it fares in Cantharidilius, and in Flammula, and in other such,
that he full hot, and gendereth full soon in the flesh, whelles and blayues.

Of other such virtues it is showed before, in libro quarto, De proprietatibus
Elementarium qualitatum, libro septimo In Trictatu, De Remedijs Mothorum.

De Putredine. cap. 78.
Rottenness is corruption of substantial moisture, and comes of scarsitie
of kind heat by abundance of other heat, for unkind heat in working of
moist matter, that is not ruled by kind, makes it rot, as it is said, super
libro Metheororum. For all that is earthye and cold rotteth later then the
thing that is hot, as Aristotle says. Also the thing yt is hardened by cold,
rotteth slowly, as it fares in I Will and in ye Crystal stone, and that is
fervent and hot, rotteth flowlye, as Aristotle says, for the heat that makes
it fervent is more strong, then the heat of the air, or heat that comes in
the other side, and suffers not therefore it self to be overcome nor
changing made against the thing that is fervent. And all that moves rotteth
more slowly then that thing that moves not, as Arist. ma^^eth: For of moving
comes heat that s^^^th and keeps kind heat. Also all that r^nneth
rotteth more slowly then yt shall runs not, as he says For accidental
heat that comes of air, that contains it, is more feebler then the kind
heat, that is of moving or of running, and suffers not it self soon to rot.
Also a mighty body rotteth less and more slowly then a little body, as he
says, for if the body be hot, therein is more kind heat to withstand the
cause of rotting. Also if the body be cold, kind coldness thereof
withstandeth better the accidental heat that is cause of rotting in a great
body then in a little body, as it fares is the sea, as Aristotle says. For
Sea water when it is departed rotteth soon, and it rotteth ^^uer, wh^^es it is
whole and not divided.

And in like wise it fares of other waters: for water departed from a great
river rotteth anon, and therefore worms dried therein by rotting. The cause is,
for kind heat makes departing therein, and departs the thin from the
thick, and the earthy parts from the parts of water and of air, that is
departed from the thick, the same heat gendereth worms and other beasts, and
yt is it that Ariste. says, for kind heat departing, makes them abide
departed, and tourneth them into k^^de of beasts, and that by rotting, by might
of strong heat that is therein, as the Commentour says (...) things be
grievous to the taste, and abominable to the stomach, and makes wambling, and
be heavy of (...) and of evil savor, and of foul color and defiles the
hands that them ^on^heth, and be contrary to ye complexion of mankind, and
breeds sodaynlye corruption in whole men: but they be meat and nourishing
to Serpents, and to worms. And things that be disposed to rot, they rot ye
sonner if they touch a thing that is rotted, and corrupt and rotted members
corrupts whole members. And though they take no spirits, they deprive and
take away the spirits of members that be nigh thereto: and a member that
begins to rot, may not be healed, but he be cleansed at full of rotting and
of matter, and so rotted members be not profitable, but they cut off or burnt,
or thrown away. There be other virtues, by the which kind works, as the
virtue of nourishing in herbs, and grass, trees, and beasts, and the virtue
of gendering in men, and in other beasts, hoth two footed and four footen,
and the virtue of gendring of eggs in some creeping beasts, and also in birds
and fowls. But of the virtues of gendering and nourishing, and of other
virtues, that serves them, it is treated at full before in li. 4. De
generatione hominis, and in li. 18. De generatione Animalium in generali,
therefore of them we leave to speak at this time. The virtue of gendring of
eggs, is to round beasts and in long and plyaunt, as Serpents, Spiders and
Scorpions, and in other such: and in Fish, ^^ in Crabbes, and Lobsters, and in
other endless many: and in fowls and birds and in other two footed beasts.
Libro. 5. Arist he says. A goodness in ye alteration of nature.
That ^^ two ^ooted beasts, gendereth not beasts, but man alone.

( Addition.
Being two footed, by a wonderful th^^ ception, not Eggs, but y^ same shape
and form of the male and female except those people, which are called
Calinetide, which do travail with eggs, and hatch forth children. Read
Lucosthenes, de prodigijs.)

Of Eggs and their properties. cap. 79.
THen first in the foresaid beasts, the Semen is shed in small parcelles or
drops that be small, soft, and moist, and whit^th, and be softneth, and
turned and changed into little bodies, and are called Oua, Eggs in English,
for because that they be moist, and full of humor within, as Isido. says
libr. 1^. G. Same moist thing has moist humor within, and some without, as he
says. Some men mean, that this Now^^ Cuum, comes of a nowne of Greek, for
they call as Egg Oluan, and put thereto this letter L.

Some Eggs be conceived in any wind, but they be barren, except they be
conceived of treading or by working of the male, and thirled with seminall
spirit, as he says. And some men mean, that eggs have such a virtue, that a
tree that is anointed with them, shall not bur^e, nor cloth that is anointed
with them, as he says, and if they be meddled with live, they glue the parts
together of broken glass Then Eggs are fifth gendered, and take them a shape,
and live by heat of the Mother, as Isidore says lib. 3. And 5. Aristotle
says, That fowls, and fish, and serpents lay eggs, but the eggs be full
diverse in goodness and malice, in quantity, substance and quality in figure
and in shape.

Fowls and birds lay eggs generally in the end of springing time, and in
the beginning of Summer, as Aristotle says. libro 5. except a Sea foul that
is called Al^eon, (...)
for that Foul lays eggs in the beginning of Winter, and sits on breed
fourteen days ere the birds be complete, and vii. days before the beginning
of winter, and vii. days thereafter, as Simonides says. And Isidore libro 12.
speaks of this foul, and says, that in the chest of a ponde of Occean,
Alceon in Winter makes her neast, and lays eggs in seven days, and
fitteth on brood, and while she sits seven days, the seat is easy and
soft and the weather still. seven days the sea is easy and mild: for kind
helps in that wise to bring forth fowls of kind. And Pliny, Basil, and
Amb^^se in Exameron, means the same. But other fowls lay eggs twice or
offer in a year, as Swallows, but the first eggs be corrupt because of the
winter, and the latter be complete: and as Aristo. says there, tame fowls
lay eggs all in summer, as Coluers and Hens, and namely if they be well sed,
and in an hot place. Also Aristotle says libro 6. that some fowls lay eggs
all the year, except two months, July and December, as hens, some of them lay
twice every day, and that that lays much dies soon: and sometime the Culuer
lays ten times a year, and lays but few at one breeding. And some lay
many eggs, as the Hen: and some fowls with crooked claws lay few eggs,
and some lay in the neasts, and some in hollow trees, and some in holes and
dens of the earth, and some in fields, and some in roches and rocks, and some
in gravel or in sand as the Estridge, that fitteth not on brood in neasts
made of bouchs of trees, and some in stones, and some in crags, and some in
marteys, and among reed, as water fowls. Aristotle says lib. 6. that eggs
of fowls breeds hard without: and some be of 2. colors, citrine within, and
white without. And eggs of river fowls be diverse, and other then eggs be of
fowls that be fed in dry land: For citrine therein is more than double to
citrine of eggs of fowls that be fed nigh the bri^^e^ and brims of waters.

Also eggs be diverse in color for Culners eggs be white as hen eggs. And
eggs of marreys fowls be yeolow, and some be as they were painted, as a
Sperhaukes egg: and eggs be diversely shapen, for some be sharp, and some are
broad, and the broad does come out first, and then the sharp. Of the long
eggs with sharp ends does come males, and so of eggs with roundnesse in
steed of sharpness, comes females. And in hot countries and lands eggs be
laid in dounge in heat of the Sun, and of them comes Chickens and birds,
as in Egypt, and in certain places in hot feathers, as in a certain City, a
good drinker laid eggs under his pillow, and said, that he continued drinking,
until the time that Chickens were taken out of the eggs. Also sometime eggs
be put in hot vessels, and chickens are hatchte therein, no he says there,
but the semen of the male is received in the Fother, and meddled with the semen
of the female. First, the eggs seems white, and afterward red as blood, and
then yeolow, and then by working of kind, the yeolow abides in the middle,
and the white is thereabout, and comes out when it is complete, and turns
then out of the soft into hardness: for in ye out going it is fastened and made
perfectly hard, for eggs be yeolow while they are in the womb, and wrapped in a
little skin that is white, and be hard when they be complete and shapen, and
that hardness is the shell. In fastness of an egg, ye shel has the same
office, that the bag that ye child is conceived in, has in the body of the
child, but for great heat he has mastery in the body of the foul: the shell
then has such a bag and that is needful for saving of the soft matter and
moist that is therewithin. And many fowls lay wind eggs, as Hens and Curse
as Ari. says there li. 2. and that comes of superfluity of seminall humors,
that are passing in the body of a female: and winds eggs be little and
unsavory, and more moist than other, and without hard shell, and change not
though it be laid under a Hen, but the yolke and the white abides and
changes not, and such eggs be foonde in Hens, and in Geese, in Pohens, and in
Culuers. The chicken in the egg is sooner complete and shapen in Summer than
in Winter. In summer, hens eggs opens in 18. days, and in Winter in 25.
days: and if it thundereth as ye hen does sit on brood, the eggs be corrupt,
and so they be, if they be often handeled with folks hands. Also old hens lay
in the beginning of springing time, and young hens eggs be smaller, and less
then other old hens eggs: and the Hens egg is full sharp the xi. day after
the treading: and some fowls in treading, keep not sexes of male and female,
but the female treads the female, and the male treads the male, as
Partridges and Culuers, and of such treading comes stinking odor, and the
eggs become barren, as wind eggs, and no chickens shall come of them nor
birds, as Aristotle says. And in the hens egg after three days of sitting
on brood, be tokens seen of the Chicken, and then comes up the yeolow,
toward the small end to the place in the which the egg begins to cleave,
and there is seen, as it were a drop of blood in the white of the egg, and is
the beginning and matter of toe heart, as it is said before in the treatise de
generatione publi^, look there. Also of an egg with two yolks comes 2.
chickens, and these yolks be departed aswain by a little web, as Aristotle
says there. And fowls that eat flesh lay but once a year, except the
swallow, that lays eggs twice a year: and the Eagle lays three eggs, and
throws away the third out of the neast. Huc. vsq. Aristo. li. 6. A. and
sits on brood upon ye eggs, thirty days, Lib. 17. he says that fowls lay
eggs with hard shells, but if there fall occasion of sickness. Also fowls yt
gender much, lay often wind eggs, and so does not fowls with crooked claws, nor
fowls with good flight: for in fowls with many eggs, is much superfluity, and the
superfluity of fowls with crooked claws, passes, into claws, feathers, and
wings, and therefore their own bodies be some deal hard, sharp, and lean,
and lays therefore not many eggs, nor treads much: and for fatness and
heat of the womb, the fowls (...) often. Also birds lay many eggs, and
tread much, as it fares of some hens, the less they be, ye more eggs they lay,
for the meat of them passes into the matter and generation of eggs. Also
wind eggs be not in Fowls of good flight, for in them is but little
superfluity and scarce, and therefore they lay but few eggs: and wind
eggs be more than eggs according to generation of Birds and chickens, and be
less in quantity, for they be vncomplete, either for they be so many, and be
not full lyking to eat, for in all thing what is digest, is more sweet and
far more lyking then what is vndigest. And some fowls be made full of eggs
when they smell the males or bear their voices, for they eat much, and have
much superfluity and heat, and have therefore the more stronger appetite, and
sheddeth sooner the semen of generation, and lays eggs fall soon, for by
virtue of heat, that superfluity passes soon into the kind of eggs. Also
fowls be gendered and come of eggs, when the female sits long on breed,
and heateth the eggs, and for the chicken in the egg may not be complete and
perfectly shapen without meat and ^ourishing, therefore kind sets meat in
the egg within: and for their feebleness, eggs need heating and comfort of
heat, therefore eggs be soon complete in hot time, for hot time helps
digestion and generation. The white is the matter of the chickin, and the yolke
is his food and meat, and therefore the white and the yolke be joined by a
little web for diversity of kind of the white, as it were contrary to the
kind of the yolke, and therefore the yolke is fastened in cold wether, and is
moist afterward when it is made hot, and the white freeseth not in cold, but
it is more moist, and is hardened when it is roasted, and wereth in generation
thick of ye Chicken, for it is the master thereof. And the Chicken takes
meat of the yolke, and that by the navel: and then is much yolke, for it is
moist by heat, and shall be moist, and iourneth soon into nourishing. Huc
vsque Aristoteles libro. 16.

Isaac in Detis speaks of eggs, and says, that eggs of birds that be whole
and temperate, be good meat and nodle: and eggs of fat birds nourish more,
and be more sauoory, and also eggs of them that are trodden of ye male, for
they have more heat than those that be gendered without treading of male, and
also Eggs of small hens, for in them is much heat. Generally the kind of eggs
is temperate and mean, and right according to the complexion of mankind, but
the white is more cold than the yolke, and worse to defy, and namely of the
eggs be of old fowls, or not trodden of males. The yolke is temperate and
soft, according with heat, and is therefore ye better to defy, and
comfort for members and abides long therein. The nourishing of eggs is
diverse, for the Eggs of some fowls be temperate, as eggs of the Partridge
and of the hen, and are good to digest, but they pass soon out of the
members, and be therefore better to ruling of good health, than to comfort the
members: and eggs of great birds be hard to digest, and not full good
norishing, as eggs of Ostriches, of Geese, and Pohennes, that be evil
nourishing, and hard to defy, and heavy of smell, and namely if the beasts be
old, or not trodden with males: but when they be digested, they abide long in
ye members, and are therefore better to comfort the members, then to rulyng of
good health. Eggs of small birds be most light, and of old birds most heavy,
and of mean most temperate, for therein is more temperate heat and less
moisture, and be therefore good to rule good health, and also to comfort the
members: and the more newer eggs be, the better they be, and the more older
they be the less worth they be, and vary and are diverse by craft in four
manner wise: for they be roasted or sod, or burnt in imbers or in hot ashes, or
they be fried.

The roasted be more thick and worse to digest, then those that be sod: for ye
fire wastes their substanciall moisture and makes them dry and ye roasted and
burnt under hot ashes, be u^mise than the roasted. vnh(...) of coals, for heat
of fire in ashes compasses them, and suffers not ye superfluity of
fumositie pass out thereof: and those that are roasted above the coals, sweat
out the fumositie, and be made pure, and clean, and thick: but those that be
sod in water are better than those that be roasted, for moisture of the water is
contrary to the hot fire that works to sordrye ye moisture thereof, and be
therefore the less drieng and coolyng kind heat. And those that be sod whole
in the shells be worse, for the shells without be hard, and hold there in the
superfluity of fumositie, that it may not pass out in vapor, and therefore
they breed ventositie and swelling, and heaviness of the stomach and of all
^he womb: and heat of water comes temperatly into eggs yt be broken: and
sod in water, and tempereth the thickness and the fatnes of them, and takes
from them evil smell and odor, and they be therefore better than other, but
only the yolke is more drieng, and fastening: and the hard yolke is drieng
and hard to pass out of the stomach, and thirleth slowly the veins, and
comfort much when it is digested, and grieueth the stomach and the guts, if
it be undigested, and menge and rere yolks some deal fastened, be less
drieng, and better to defy, and comes soon into the veins, and moysteth
the breast, and comfort the members but little, and are means between soft
and hard in their working and passions. And fried eggs be worse than other,
for if they bide in the stomach, they turn soon into fumositie and
corruption, and corrupts all the meats that they find therein, and breeds
heauiness in the stomach, and worse disliking than other eggs, namely if they be
fried in yolks, and some be mean between roasted eggs, and eggs broken and sod
in water. Huc vsque Iso. Also eggs be good, not only to meat, but they be
needful in many manner medicines: for they moisten and ease and smooth ye
breast and the throat, and comfort ye members, and restore and help ye virtue of
generation, and helps burning and scalding, for of yolks of eggs roasted, is
made ye best oil, for burning and scalding. Also yolks of eggs help the
venomous Postume, that is called Antrax, for a raw yolk of an egg meddled with
salt, heals that postume, as Constable. says. The white of an egg swageth and
abateth heat and swelling, and stauncheth running moisture, and helps ^^ the
hot gout and podagre, and be most grievous, when they be rotted and corrupt,
and corrupts the humors, and breeds with them wamblyng and perbraking,
and be lightlye cause of death.

( Addition.
Eggs of Phesants, Hens, and Partriches, be of all other meats most agreeable
unto nature, specialy if they be new laid. If they be reere, they do cleanse
the throat and breast: if they be hard, they be slow in digestion, but being
once digested, they do nourish much: mean between reere and hard, they
digest conveniently, and nourish quickly. Eggs well potched are better then
roasted.

Eggs fried are ill to digest, and corrupt other meats in the stomach. Eggs
supped warm before any other meat, they do heal the grief of the bladder
and reins (made with gravel) also sorenes of the cheeks and throat, and
spetting of blood: and they be good against Ca^ars, or stilling out of the head
into the stomach. (...)

De (...) Aspidum. cap. (...)
THe eggs of Adders that are called Alpides, be little and round, very
yeolow, slynne, and stinking within, and most venomous, and clustered togethers
with certain sinews and strings. The venime thereof is most slayeng, and
thereagainst is no remedy found, as Plinius says. And as he says, it
happens sometime, that a venomous Frogge that is called Rubeta, finds the
egg of such as Adder, and sits on brood thereon, and of such breeding
comes a worm that slays with blast and with sight, as does the Cockatrice.
The worm that sits so on brood, and brings it forth, feels first all ye
venum of his matter and venime: for when it is first batche, he beholds and
seeeth him that brings him forth, and slays him in that wise, as he says.
If seems that (...) touches this matter and property, where he says, that
who that eats eggs of such an Adder shall dye, and what is confect and
nourished therewith, shall turn into such an Adder. There yt Gloss says, that
of the eggs of Alpidis comes a Cockatrice, and of the venomous Jews shall
come Antichrist: And of the wicked Papist the Devil.

De ouis Aranea. cap. 81.
SPiders eggs are many, and they be small and wan, with small speckes and
departed asunder, and be venomous, soft and gleymie, and if it happens by
any cause, yt they be lost, ye spider seeks them again, and bears them in
her mouth to her web. And of an egg, comes endless and many spiders, and so
little and small, that uneath they be seen, and yet anon as they come out of
the egg that they were in, they begin to weaue subtly, that it is wonder
that so little a Beast has so much wit and virtue of kind. Look before, de
Aranea li. 18.

De ouis Aquil^. cap. 82.
THe Eagles eggs and the Goshauks eggs be few, for they pass but seldom
their eggs and often the Eagle throws the third out of the neast, for she
sits not gladly on brood, as Aristotle says libro. 5. And puts in the
neast a precious stone with her eggs and Witches dums or suppose, that that
stone helps against the thunder, and means that the Eagle puts ye stone
in her neast with her eggs to save them from the thunder, as Plinius says.

De ouis Ancerinis. ca. 83.
GEese eggs be great and hard to defy, and are harder to hatch, and later
complete then be Hens eggs.

De ouis Anatinis. cap. 84.
DUckes eggs are more than Hens eggs: but they be not sauourie, nor nourish
so well as Hens eggs.

De ouis Alaude. cap. 85.
LArkes eggs be little and small and speculed, and are laid under a riot, and be
often there eaten with worms and wesells.

De ouis Bubonis. cap. 86.
Owls eggs be small and speckeled with brotill shells, and be wearish, with
much white and less yolks. Choughs hunteth by day, and eats Owls eggs.
and the Owl eats ye Choughs eggs by night, and fights therefore always
either with other, because of their eggs, as Aristotle says li. 8.

De ouis Corui. cap. 87.
RAuena eggs be many as Ari. says, and only the female sits there on
brood: and the male brings meat all the (...) time, and throws away some
of the eggs, for they be so many: and the Raven lays eggs and sits on
brood in the middle heat of ye summer against the kind of other fowls and
bird^. And so Petronius says, the diar^^ (...) eggs when the fr^^t is ripe.

De ouis Ci^ni. cap. 88.
SWans eggs be many, great, and even long, with hard shells, and not with
right good savor and be heavy of smell, and more hard to defy than Geese
eggs.

De ouis Cocadrilli cap. 89.
(...)
COckadrils eggs be more then Geese eggs, and the male and female sits them
on wo^^e by certain times, now the male, and now the female, as Plin. says
li. 18. And these eggs be venomous, and as it were matter within, and are
grievous both to small and to taste, and poison and venim to eat.

De ouis Columbae. cap. 90.
(...)
CUluers eggs be less then hens eggs, white and round, and somdeals even long,
landry and hot, and wet norishing. The Culuer ^ateth two eggs, and of the one
comes a male, and of the other a female, and the male sits on brood on
them by night, and the female by day, as Ari. says li. 6. and the Culuer
lays often in a year, for she lays ten times in one year, and namely in
hot countries and lands, as in Egypt. Look before li. 12.

De ouis Colubri. cap. 91.
A Doers eggs be round and full many, pale and warm, soft and full of
matter, venomous and slaieng.

De ouis Draconis. cap. 92.
DRagon eggs be greatest, and more longer than Crocodills Eggs or Estridges
Eggs, as Plinius says. The Dragon has Eggs within and not without, for the
eggs be hatched within the mother, therefore the Dragon has not so many Eggs
as other Serpents have, but Dragons eggs be more bloody and great, and full
of matter venomous and slaieng.

De Ouis Herodij. cap. 93.
THe Oe^sanicons eggs be small with diverse color, and euenlong, as the
Doshaukre eggs or sperhaukes eggs, and they be few, for all fouled with
crooked claws be of strong sight, and of scarce moisture and of superfluity,
and therefore they be of few eggs, as Arist. says, li. 17.

De Ouis Iornucarum. cap. 94.
ANtes eggs be full little and small, whitish and round, and tooketh
^iciesing without the body in a hot place, and mouldes, until they be full and
complete, and if in any wise they be removed or shed, the Antes gather them,
and bears them again to their neasts: and they have good smell, and be
medicinable as Plinius says, therefore Bears eats Ants eggs, and heals
and saves themselves, as Plinius says.

De Ouis Gruit. cap. 95.
CRanes eggs be meanly great, pale, hard, and un(...) heavy of smell, with
unkind savor, and they be hard to defy.

De Ouis Griphis. cap. 96.
GRis(...) eggs be greater and harder then Egles eggs, and more heavy of smell,
and of savor, and more hot and dry in quality, and (...) to number and ^als,
for she lays never passing twain, and is of hard (...)ng often brood, as Ari.
says.

De ouis Gallinarum. cap. 97.
HEns eggs be more temperate then other eggs, and more according to the
nourishing of mankind, as it is said before hand: but wind eggs be unsavory
and not full good meat to nourishing. Heerof look before in this same book,
and also. li. 12.

De ouis Hirundinum. ca. 98.
Swallows eggs be many, for as Ar. says, small fowls lay many eggs, and no
foul that eats flesh, lays twice in one year, except the Swalow, which
lays twice and breeds twice some year, and sometime the first eggs be
corrupt by winter, and the latter eggs be complete, and brings forth birds, as
Ari. says li. 6.

De ouis Cantrorum. ca. 99.
CRabs be first gendred between ye shel and the womb within, between the
Tail and the back, then they come out and be gathred under the tail, and there
they swell and were round, and wereth until they be complete, and be lost, but
they be besprong with semen of ye male.

( Addition.
The round spawne of the Crefish, and on the Prawne, grows as does the Crab
and Lobster.)

De ouis Locustarum. ca. 100.
Flies eggs be gathered within, and be many, and right small, and when they be
shed upon herbs, twigs and branches in corrupt air, hot and moist, of them
comes endless many flies.

De ouis Lacertarum. ca. 101.
EW^es eggs be like to serpents eggs: but they be less in quantity, and more
gleymie. And be venomous, but they be less venomous then serpents eggs, as
Plinius says.

De ouis Milui. cap. 102.
KItes eggs be few and small, and yelow and speckled, and more earthy and dry
then eggs of other wild fowls, full unsavory, and worse of smell and of odor.

De ouis Mer^ul^. cap. 103.
COutes eggs be small and many ho^, and speckled, and somewhat white, and much
like to wild Duckes eggs.

De ouis N^si. cap. 104.
SPerhaukes eggs be small, and also speckled, and hot and dry, and sometime
the Sperhauke lays wind eggs, when she is too fat.

De ouis Coturnicis. cap. 105.
CUrlewes eggs be like to ravens eggs, and they be accounted right good against
the falling evil, as Plin. says.

De ouis Onocrocali. ca. 106.
MOrethumbles eggs be like to Geese eggs, The gu, (...) or Allens eggs.
but they be less and more unsavory and worser of smelling, and white, and
more harder to be defied.

De ouis Pauonis. cap. 107.
POhens eggs be great, with hard shells, and the Pohen sits 30. days on
brood upon her eggs, and hatcheth then: and she lays 12. eggs or less, and
hides her eggs from the male, for he breaks them, if he may find them, as
Aristot. says.

De ouis Percidis. cap. 108.
PArtrich eggs be like to Culuers eggs, in temperatnesse, complexion, and in
greatness: and Partridges steal each others eggs, but this fraud has no
froot: for when the birds be hatch^, and hereth ye voice of her own hen, then
they forsake her, that sat on brood upon ye eggs, and comes to the same
hen, that laid the eggs, as Isid. says.

De ouis Passeris. cap. 109.
SParowes eggs be full little and small, and the Sparowes lays and breeds
twice in one part, and namely if ye first eggs be corrupted or lost by some
chance. They be most hot and makes the reins arise, and exciteth the service
of Venus, and so does the brain of Sparowes, as Constable. says.

De ouis Quisquile. cap. 110.
Quails eggs be little and round, and less than Partrichen Eggs, and be
more then Larkes Eggs. And the Quail is a little bird, and is called
Quisquila, and has that name of the voice, and is a fleshly bird with many
feathers, and is less of flight then and Lark, and lies under a clot as the
Lark does, and often the weesell destroieth her eggs, and she leieth in diverse
places, the male sits on some of the eggs, and the female upon soon, and
recketh but little of the birds, when they be hatched.

De Ouis Riuatricis. ca. 111.
RIuatrix is a certain venomous Serpent, that infecteth water, and her eggs
be like to the eggs of an Adder, that is called Colubet, and they be less and
more speckled, and be worse and more venomous. The serpent Riuatrix sits on
her eggs nigh waters and wells, and infecteth them, and corrupts with full
wicked venim. Of this Serpent Iucan speaks and says, that Riuatrix defiles
waters. Look more hereof, lib. 17.

De Ouis Strutonis. ca. 112.
EStridge eggs be greatest, round, and full white, with hard shelles and
wearish savor and heavy smell, when the time comes that she shall lay eggs,
she heaueth her (...) the cluster of the 7. stars: For (...) lays not but
in the rising of that constellation: And so when that stares is seen, about
the month of July, she makes a pit in the sand, and lays eggs therein,
and covers them with Sand, and leaves them there, and forgets ye anon in
what place she laid there, and comes no more there: But the heat of the Sun
in ye sand heateth them, and brings forth birds of those eggs, and when the
shell is broken, the Birds comes out: the mother knows him, and feeds and
nourishes him, which she forsook while that he was in the egg^. Estridges eggs
be hanged in churches for the rareness. For that they be so great and seldom
seen.

( Addition.
Of late used to be set in silver, and curiously guilt and wrought, cops made to
dr^^ke cut of.)

De Ouis Turturis. ca. 113.
TUrtles eggs be like to Culuers Eggs, but they be some deal less, and the
Turtle l^neth two eggs in springing time, and lays no more that year, but if
the first eggs be corrupt, as Arist. says li. 17. and l^^eth and breeds on
sticks, as the Culuer does, and may lay and brood until the fifteenth year,
as Aristotle says expressly.

De Ouis Vpupe. cap. 114.
LApwings eggs be like to Partridges eggs, but they be less, and more hard and
more foul to the sight, and more unsavory to the taste, with worse odor to
the smell. And ye Lapwing lays and sits on brood on dirt thereon, and
unclean things, and he tells, that these eggs be good for Witches and evil
dooers, and helps to their evil deeds, as Plinius says, li. 30.

De Ouis Vulturis. cap. 115.
VUlturis eggs be great as Eagles eggs and few, for it is hard for her to
fit an brood on her own eggs. These eggs be browns and speckled, with hard
shells, and ^^ill smell, and heavy savor, and sometime she casts out some of
her eggs, as the Eagle throws away some of her eggs, for she may not castly
feed her birds, as Isidore says. Of Eggs, and of the manner of eggs, and
of their qualities and diversity, this shall suffice for this time.

Of the number of waights and measures, and first of equal paise and sound.
cap. 116.
TO the foresaid propertyes of things, it seems me good at last to set
somewhat few and light, of the properties and diversities of numbers, of
measures, of weights, and of sound. For as Isi. says, li. 3. The re^on of
numbers is not worthy to be despised, for in many places of holy writ it
shines how much mastry and secrecy ^^ in reason of numbers, for it is not
^^de in idleness, thou have made all in number, weight, and measure Sap. 11.
For the n^yn^er of fire that is perfect, and made of his own parts,
betokens the perfectness of the world. And so it is to understand of other
numbers. And nothing we may know and learn without perseueraunce or skill of
numbers, for thereby we know hours and times, when we dispute of the course
of months. While we know the space of years that comes about by number, be
taught that we be not harmed in accounts. Take away (as he says) number and
tale, and all things be lost. Do away compot and accountes, and all is suil of
lewdness and vnrunning. And no diversity is between other beasts and men,
that knows not the reason of calculing and of accounts, as Isidore says
there. Also in the beginning of Arethuretike it is said, that it is never
known, what is a Triangle, without the number of three, nor a Quadrangle,
without ye number of four: And so it is known that nothing is known by the
Science Mathematica, without number, as he says there. Also (as be says
there) a number is a multitude gathered by often taking of one, for one in the
root and mother of numbers, and (...) is not many, one comes not of another
number, but one is the beginning and well of all members, and thereof all
numbers come and spring. For one is the root of multitude, and of
multiplication, and is most simple and worthy, and most vectuous of all, which
be contained therevnder, as Aristotle says, and Auicen li. 1. cap. 2. For one
is more and root and well of multitude. One contains all under it self, and
al things be therein, as in the taker, as he says Cap. 34. For the property of
one is to take multitude and to give thereto having, and to be in all parts
thereof, and contains Simplicities, as it is said, libro. 4. cap. ^. And for
as much as one is, yt well of al things, the more a thing makes to one and
unity, the more it nigheth to veri^^e and truth, as he be says cap. 2. For
our (...) as it were the fo^^e, and two the matter. And therefore the nearer
the one to to the other, the more be passes from doubleness, and migheth to
simpleness. And the more be nigheth one, the sooner does multiply the number,
For being is not before one, as it is said, li. 2 cap. 9. And one is not
diverse but by the matter, for be susteineth and withholdeth al things, as it is
said li. 5. cap. 31. One and unity is so praised among wise men, yt many
mean, that one and unity is the soul in number, that comes of one and of
unity, and mean, that one is the beginning of all things, that is continual
and discreet, as Auicen says, lib. 3. ca. 1 Also one is praised, for be
comes of none other, and all other numbers come thereof, and be brought
thereto, as to their proper head and well of them, as he says. Also for
simpleness one is not divided nor departed, as he says. capit. 3. Most
truly one is that that is not departed in deed nor in understanding, and
such one is beginning and well of number, as he says. Also be says there,
that in one is no multitude, and that is to understand, of the first unite and
sample, to the which all things be reduct, be they never so diverse, for one
is said in many manner of wise, as it shall be known hereafter. Also for
perfectness, for all particular things, which is perfect each in himself, be
perfect, when they be reduct into one. For all wholenesse and perfectness
belongs to one unity, as it is said 1. de Coelo and Mundo. cap. ^. Also for
singular dignity, for one by it self has a singular being, as it to said in
libro Methe. cap. 5. And therefore Alg. forth super. 3. Meth. cap. 15. That the
cause of one and of unity to one essentially and first noble and passing
wor^^^. One or (...) is taken is many b^se, as Alg. says. Some one is simple,
and some one is by some what that belongs thereto. One (...) is one, that may
not be departed in deed, though he may be departed at waine, as a tree and a
member, in the which the parts be last togethers, and be not departed at
waine. One by somewhat that belongs thereto is said in many manner wise, as
in one gender, as man, and Ox, and Horse. One in special kind, as Sorts and
Plato: One in accident and quality, as Snow and Cerusa, and other white
things. One in likeness of doing, as the Carter and the ship men: One is
subject as sw^^te and where be in one substance and body In principio Phi.
cap. 5. Aristotle says, that someone is one in accident or subject, as when
two accidents be in one substance and subject, as color and savor. And one
by it self is said in many wise, as one in continuance, that joins
togethers, and ends of the middle. And one in special kind and shape, as
Suites and Plato. In mankind one in general kind, as man. And Ore in general
kind of beasts, and one is difinition. And one that may not be departed, as a
point: and one in number, as singular, and one in simplicity, as being, and
one in all wholnesse and perfection, as is a circle. And one in matter, as all
bodyly things. Barnard distinguishes nine manner wise of one and of unity ad
Eugen. For unity is natural and gracious, and is constituted upon either.
Unity natural differs four manner wise One is a unity by assembling of
diverse and distinct things, as many stones makes one heap. And some unity is
bnyting and coupling of diverse parts, of the which is one made, as members be
in one body. Some be joined of male and female in gendering of children, and
so wife and husband be one, when man and woman be twain in one flesh. And
some by joining of diverse kinds in one person of gendering and birth, and in
this unity the body and soul be one man: So the gracious unity has four
diversities. The first is mighty, by the which virtue man is stable in
himself: and not departed in his own soul. The second is assenting, when by
charity many have one soul and one body in our Lord The third is liking, when
ye soul is all according to God almighty, and forsakes not God, but pleases
him with all his might and power, and is one spirit with him. The 4. does make
us ^igne and worthy, for thereby Gods son ^a^eth our earthly kind, to the
unity of the second person in trinity, by that unity God and man is one: The
unity that passes other unities, as the unity of the trim^^s in three persons
and one God, and this unity most be sole and singular with out pere, so that
therein may be stinting, state, quiet, and rest of all unities. Hereby it is
known, that holiness and perfection belongs to one and to unity, as Ar.
says. 5. Phi. And what is not whole and perfect, is not universally called
one, as be says. Those that have one matter, be one in number: and those that
be one in matter, be one in number. And those that be in one form in general
kind, has one general name in kind, as a man is Animal, an horse is
Animal, and of other beasts. But one and unity that is the well of numbers,
is not one in matter but in number, as Aristotle says. and is most simple,
and has the first doing, and all other thereby. In all kinds one is head and
well, that is particular therein, as white in colors, and in Neumatibus
soundes, as it is said, Meth. 10. cap. 3. And therefore the one unity of
number, of the which comes, and to the which are resolved all numbers, is the
figure and likeness of ye unity of our Lord God. For as it is said. 4. Meth.
ca. 3. the first in general kind of substance and vndiuisible is the first
manner everlasting, that is God, clean of all matter, which is not only the
first beginning as M^tor, but as the form and end, and last act, and in him is
no might meddled that may be changed. And so of him yt is one God in substance
comes all creatures effectually, as by ensample, as all numbers comes of
one unity, as of ye head and well, and to him all be referred, as to the chief
end, as all numbers be dealed by ye first unity, ye beginning and end of all
things may be one, that is God, that is blessed for evermore.

Amen.
De Dualitate. cap. 117.
IF one be put to one, then comes twain, and that number is after one first
principal, and well of numbers. And holds the secondarye place, as Isidore
says. And this number is called Binarius, and is called Infamu among some
men, for by the number of twain we be departed from one. And so this number is
taken of division and departing. But Aul. in. 6. Musice says, that if this
number be to blame, for he passes first from one, then he is praising, for he
comes of one, and migheth or is first before the number of three.

De Temano. cap. 118.
THE number of three is called Ternarius, and is gendered of one put to twain,
and is most holy among numbers, for therein is sound the likeness of the holy
Trinity. For as the first unity of the first principal represents one, so
Ternarius presents the Trinity of persons in God. For by generation the
Son comes of the Father, and by procession the holy Ghost comes of the
Father and of the son. Also Aristotle taught to worship the glorious and most
high God in the number of three, as it is said in li. de Caelo and Mundo. cap.
2. For every creature cries and preaches the holy trinity, that is three
persons, and one God, that made all treasures, in number, weight, and measure,
as it is said Sap. 11.

De numero Quaternario. ca. 119.
ONe put to three makes four, and the number of four is called Quaternarius,
and has ye name of Quadrate, figure and square, as Isid. says. Quadrate shape
and square is most steadfast and stable, and betokens therefore most the
stablenesse of all holy Church, and steadfastness of a christen soul in
virtuous science and lore, that he knows with all Saints, what is length and
breadth, highness and deepnesse, etc.

De numero Quinario. cap. 120.
OF one put to four makes the second odd number, that is the number of five,
and is called Quinarius, which among odd numbers in Binario distant from
Ternario in the second, and often betokens those that put somewhat to the
science and sore at the says of the Trinity. And nevertheless though they
be taught by the says and by the (...) they be held with the ^uc me maidens
and the (...) pol^e of Oren going amiss, for they be yet tangled with the
voluytuousnesse and liking of the fleshlye wills.

De Senario. cap. 121.
ONe put to five makes the number of six, the which is called Senarius, and
is the first perfect number, of the even parts thereof taken all together,
they make the same number and sum, that is not found in a number beneath ten,
but in the number of six, nor in the number above ten beneath eight and
twenty. Therefore cap. 18. Boethius says, that the number of six is a number
that follows virtue, for he passes not in superfluity, nor fails in lack
of default, but holds the mean between even parts, and has no superfluity
nor default: For in the number of six, half deal is three, and the third
twain, and the firt is one, and six times one makes six, and twice three
makes six, and thrice twain makes the same number: And therefore in holy
writ this number betokens perfection of grace and of virtue.

De Septenario. cap. 122,
ONe put to six makes seven, and this number is called Septenarius, and is
the third among odle numbers. And betokens increasing of seven manner graces
that always increases and profits in them, that hold the says of the most
holy Trinity.

De Octonario. cap. 123.
ONe put to seven makes the number of eight, that is called Octonarius. And
comes of two even parts, or of two numbers of four: Or of two uneven parts,
or of two even parts and add, of five and three, and betokens the passing
joy and bliss in heaven, that they shall have that have here the seven
manner gifts of grace. Their evenness of mind shall answer to the good
deeds, and unevenness of joy and particular comfort, to the evenness of
torments and woe. For joy of Martires shall pass the joy of consectoure, to
that they be like other things. And the joy of vnctinnes the joy of wedded
solke, as one ^arre passes in cleernesse. (...) li. 15. And for even and
uneven deeds that herre be done, and for uneven joys it is said, that diverse
manstone and dwellings be in the fathers house of heaven. Ioh. 13.

De Noncario. cap. 124.
ONE added or put to eight makes the number of nine, and is called Nonnanus,
and is compowned of thrice three, and is next to ten, and but one between
the^, and betokens the bless of the three Ieratchies of Angels, of the
which each has accord and likeness of the holy trinity, and be nearer to God
then be other cietured.

De Denatio. cap. 125.
THE number of ten passes hereby one, and is end, bound, and meare of all
simple members, and first of all the compowned. And is worthy of present our
Lord Christ God, that is Alpha and Omega, beginning and ending, and not only
beginning and ending of al simple creatures, but the joy and bliss of Angels
and of man. Also the number of ten is the first meat of numbers, and no number
passes ten, but ten be put thereto. And ten times ten makes a perfect number,
that is an hundred, and passes from the left side to ye right, as Bede says,
thereof it follows yt some number is Digitus, and some Arti(...)la^is, and
same Co^positus: each simple number beneath ten, is Digitus, and ten is the
first Articulus, and the next is twenty, and then thertie, forty, and so
forth. Compositus is compowned of Digitus, and of Articulus, as eleven, twelve,
and thirteen, and so forth unto twenty, that is the second (...), and so
forth, thirty, and fortye, until an hundred, and ten hundred makes a
thousand, and therein is the dignity of the number of ten known and noted.
For without often taking of ten comes not a thousand. slumber takes
greatness and quantities, and many divisions be of numbers, for some number is
even and some odder: the even number may be departed even in two, and two,
four, six, and eight: Some number is odd, that may not be departed into
even parts, for the one is more and the other is less, as in three, five, and
seven, and other such. As Isidore says, the even number is divided in this
wise: Some is Par, and some is Impar: That number is Par, yt is departed in
even nubers, always unto one, that is vndiuisible. In this wise the half part
of four and sixty, is two and thirty, and the half thereof is fifteen, and
half thereof is eight: and half thereof is four: and half thereof is two,
and the half of that is one, and is vndivisible, and singular. Impar to the
member yt may be divided even in twain. But either half does rename odd,
as five, ten, fourteen, eighteen, two and twenty, thertie, fifty, until
as such numbers be divided, even in two comes a number, yt may not be
divided even in two, Impar is the number that may be dealed or divided even a
sunder, and either half thereof also may be dealed even a sunder, but such
even dealing comes not fully to one, as it fares of four and twenty: The
half thereof is twelve, another half thereof is six, and the other half
thereof is three, which may not be divided even a sunder, and so ye even
dividing comes not fully to one. Impar is an odd number, which comes of
multiplication of odd numbers, as five and twenty, and nine and forty, which
be odd numbers, and compowned of even numbers and odd, and comes of
multiplication of the numbers that be odd, or seven times seven amounts to
the number of nine and forty, and five times five makes 25. Also some even
number is superfluous, and some Diminurus. Superfluous is the number, yt has
parts, that make a greater number then it self, as it fares of ye number of
twelve that has five parts, the t^^^lish pa^^ is one, six is twain, the
fourth is three, the third four, and half part is six. And one, two, three,
four, and six, makes sixteen, that passes by four, and so of such number.

De Numero diminuto. cap. 126.
THE parts of a number Diminutins being accounted, makes a less number then
it self, as it fares of the number of ten, yt has three parts, the tenth
part is one, the fifth is twain, and the half is five: And one, two, and
five, makes eight, that is much less than ten. And the number of eight is
such a number, and so be many other that comes not fully of their own parts,
as the number of six has three parts: the sixth part thereof is one, the third
is two, the half is three, and five, one, and three, makes even six: These
numbers be perfect, six, eight, and twenty beneath an hundred, four score
and sixteen beneath a thousand, and six score, and eight and twentye beneath
ten thousand: and those perfect numbers end always is six or in eight, and that
always the one ends in six, and the other in eight, as Boethius says. Thou
shall seld find perfect numbers, and they are soon accounted, for they be
scarce and compounded in a full steadfast order. And superfluous numbers and
diminutiue be vnordinatly disposed and compowned of no certain end of numbers.
Uneuen numbers be divided in this wise. Some be simple, and some compowned, and
some be mean. The simple have no even part, but only one other unity, as ye
number of three has only the third part, and due only the fifth, and seven
only the seventh. Such a number has but only one part. But here be speaks
of ye even mesuring part, which is so often taken, yt it makes even the same
number Compowned numbers be not only by one, but they be also compowned of
other numbers, and comes multiplication of other numbers: Nine, fifteen, one
and twenty, and five and twenty, for we say, thrice three, and seven times
three, and thrice five, and five times five. The mean numbers seems some
deal both simple and compowned in some wise, as nine, and five, and twenty.
For in comparison to some number of nine, is the first vnco^powned, for th^^^n
is no common number, but only one, and ^^ the second and compowned in
comparison to fifteen. For in nine and in fifteen is another common number
then one, as the number of three, for thrice three makes full nine, and thrice
five makes full fifteen.

De secunda, diuisione totius Numeri. cap. 127.
AND numbers be departed and dealed in another manner wise: for every each
number is taken by himself, and with comparion, as one, five, three, four,
five, six, and such other. A number is taken with comparison in this manner
wise: the number of four is double to the number of two, and contains often
two, and six is double to three, and eight to four, and ten to five: and
three to treble to one, and six to two, and nine to three. And yt like great
numbers be those that conteins like many, as two to two, and three to three,
and ten to ten, an hundred to an hundred Uneuen numbers be ye more and the
less, as three and two, and four and three. And generally the more and the
less in comparison be uneven either to other, and the more member contains
the less, and somewhat more: as four contains three, and somewhat over. For
in four is one and three, and so of other. The less number is contained in
the more, and is taken in comparison thereto, with some part of it, as three to
four, and is contained in four with two parts thereof. A number yt is called
Multiplex contains the less number twice or thrice, or four times, as two
contains twice one, and is double thereto, and three is treble to one, and
four is quatreble to one, and so of other. The number Submultiplex is often
contained in ye more number, as one is twice contained in two, and thrice in
three, and four times in four, five times in five, and so of other. The
Superticularis number contains in comparison all ye less number, and
somewhat over, as three contains two, and one more that is the half part of
two. Also four contains three, and one over, that is the third part of
three, and five contains four and one over, that is the fourth part of
four, and so of other. The number that is called Subsuperparciens, contains
the less number, and two parts, three, four, or mo parts of the less number,
as five contains three, and two parts over, that be two: and seven contains
four, and three parts over thrice one, and nine contains five, and his
other parts, four times one. The number Subsuperparcient is contained in the
more number with some parts thereof, five, or three, or more, as three is
contained in five, and two parts thereof, and five is contained in nine with
four parts thereof, and so of other Subsuperparticularis number is contained in
the more number with the half part, or the third part, or the fourth, or the
fifth, as two to three, three to four, four to five, and so of other. The
number Multiplex Subsuperparticularis contains ye less number often, and some
part thereof, as five contains twice two, yt makes four, and one part
thereof, as nine contains twice four and one over. The number Multiplex
Superparticularis contains often the less, and some parts thereof. Also
fourteen contains twice six, and some parts thereof, as eight contains
twice three, and some parts thereof, and sixteen contains twice seven, and
some part of it: and two and twenty contains twice nine and some three
parts. The number Submultiplex Superparciens is often contained in the more
number, with some parts thereof, as three is twice contained in eight, with
two parts thereof, and four in twice contained in eleven, and three parts
thereof, as Isidore says.

De tertia diuisione totius Numeri. cap. 128.
NUmbers be divided in the third manner, in this wise. Some discreet and some
contained. A discreet number is contained in discreet unities, as three,
four, five, six, and so of other. A number co^teining is be, which joined
with unities is contained, as three is understood in greatness and in
quantity, and this number is divided in Lineall, Superficial, and in Solid
The number Lineal begins at one, and is written lineally unto endless. And
to Alpha is written for designation of lines. For among Greeks this letter
betokens one. The number superficial is written not only in length, but also
in breadth, and to contained in length and in breadth. A three cornered number,
and four cornered, and five cornered, and round, and other such, be always
written and contained in length and in wedth: Therefore here be figures set for
ensample. For the cornered number is ordained in this wise, ^ and the Quadrant
in this wise And five cornered in this wise, The circle number is made thus,
The number Sphericus and Circularis comes of a number that is multiplied by
it self, and often by the number that comes thereof, and turns into it self
in a circle wise, and makes a spear all round, as five times five times. For
this circle multiplied by it self all about, makes a spear al round: for five
times five and twenty makes generally an hundred and five and twenty. The
number Solidus, ( (...)
Solidus, it was among ye Romans diversely taken, sometime for a coin of
Brass containing 12. small pieces. A shilling, sometime it was taken for Dragma
in silver, as Pri. Esdrae. 8. and secundi erusdem. 7. Solidus aureus, in the
time of Alexander, was two drams of gold. After in ye time of Justinian. 6. of
them made an ounce, they being of the weight of our old noble:) is contained in
length and breadth and deepnesse to them that be simple, proposed simple to
kind, and many manner divisions and numbers to be understood and known, as I
find in the worse of Isid. for his words I follow at full. Hereof it
follows, and is openly known hereby, yt under diversity of numbers be
diversely his diverse understandings and meanings of holy writ, the which is
inspired by the holy Ghost. Therefore, as Boethius says, libro quinto, capitu.
primo.

Among the science Mathematike, wise men shall most take heed of the science
of numbers. For the lore of Arethmetik passes all other to help to know all
things of kind, of the which Philosophy must treat: For without number is
not a letter joined to a letter, nor silable to silable in right order, neither
Subiectum known from the Predicatum, nor the conclusion in Silogisinus is
distinguished from the premises, nor the first mean and less, nor of the
third and fourth. Therefore (as Boethius says) the science of numbers passes
all other sciences. For without three is no Triangle, nor Quadrangle without
four, and so of other. And so it fares in Music, for accords Music has
names of numbers, as Boethius says. As it fares in Diatesseron, in Diapente,
and in Diapason, and in other Consonants and accords of Music, yt have no
name without number yt comes before. And the course of stars is not known,
and rising nor passing, nor diversity of time ruled, but by help of number.
Also all yt is made is shaped by reason of numbers, as he says. Also the
ensample in the wit and thought of the maker, was reason of number: And by
certain number thrice three orders of Angell^ be distinguished. By three and
seven, virtues and might of all reasonable things and of spiritual wits be
distinguished. And the Elements be fastened by virtue and science of numbers.
And so for to speak, all thing used conjunction of numbers both spiritual and
corporal, both of heaven and earth. And numbers have composition among
themselves, as Boethius says. For in ye substance of numbers is found even and
odd, that makes all number by certain might of God, for they be diverse and
contrary, and comes nevertheless of one gendering and well, that is one, and
be joined in one composition without mean, and in likeness of proportion.
And so it appears well that every number is odd or even. The even number may
be dealed even a twain, and leaves not one, but the odd number is it which
may not be dealed even a two, without one odd. Or else by Pithagoras lore, the
even number may be dealed under the same dimension, and in least and in most.
In least division and most greatest number, as if thou dealed ^n hundred in
fifty, and fifty is ye most part, and fifty is the least division, for it is
divided but once, and there may be no less division then in two parts. For
the more an even number is divided in many parts, so much the greatness is
diminished. As it fares of a tree yt is hewn in many parts: but the number of
divisions is always more. And the cause is (as he says) for a great quantity
may be diminished, divided in^^tly. But a number increases and waxes
endless. Therefore ye division of an eue^ number is most in continual
quantity, and less in number and discreet quantity. The odd number is kindly
divided in two parts, more and less. The even number is sometime dealed in
two even parts, and sometimes in uneven more and less. And when the number is
dealed even in two, of the one part be odd, the other is odd also, and if
the one part be even, the other is even, as when eight be dealed in four and
four, and twelve in six and six, and so of other. And if one of even
division be odd, the other is odd also, as when was dealed in three and
three, and ten in five and five, and fourteen in seven and seven. And so in
even division is not evenness meddeled with oddenesse, nor oddenesse with
evenness, but only in the number of two, that is prince of evenness, and
takes not even division For it is compow^^d of twice one, and of the first
evenness of two. And if ye eue^ number be dealed in two parts, more and less,
if the one part be even, the other is even, and if ten be dealed in eight and
two or in six and four. Also if six be divided in four and two, and eight
in six and two, and so of other. But if the one part be odd, need the other
is odd. And if ten be dealed in seven and three, and eight in three and five,
and so of other And it may never be that one part of such a division to odd,
and the other even, nor one even and the other odd.

And always where the odd number is divided in two parts, more and less. ye
one part is even, and the other odd, as if thou deniest seven in three and
four, the one part is even, and the other is odd, and that is generally
found in all odd numbers. And one is mother of plurality, and cause of even
and odd, for if thou put one to an odd number, ^^^de then make an even
number: And if thou take one out of an even number, even thou make an odd
number. Also of all numbers set in kind disposition about one, and joined
togethers, and is the middle: As if thou say, one, two, three, one put to
one makes two in the middle between one and three. Also if thou say, two,
three, four, one put to twain makes three, the middle between three and
four. Also if thou say, three, four, five, one put to three makes four,
the middle between three and five. And of other passing upward of parts, and
special kinds of even number and odd, it is treated before. To make process
of all the genderinges and proportions, accord and diversity of these
numbers, it were right long. Therefore of properties of numbers is (...) for
this time. Only we shall wit, yt in numbers it is hard to find the middle, as
Isid. says. For it is most certain, yt numbers be endless (...), for tell
thou never so long til thou think to make an end, yet one put to the number
makes the number more, and odd or even. The reason and property of ye (...)
th^^ (...) know in this wise: First put togethers the less number and the
more, and depart even in (...), and thou shall find the middle ^n this wise:
Take six for the less, and twelve for the more, and put them together, and
six and twelve makes eight (...). Deal them even in two that is nine, and so
it is general in Arethmetike, that by as many as the middle passes the least,
by so many yt most passes the middle. (...) passes six by three, and twelve
passes nine by three, as Isidore says, libro. 2. Hereof exception is set
before.

Of measures and weights. Chap. 12^
OFten measures and weights have place in holy writ. The reason and properties
thereof springs of the skill of Geometry, for as Isi. says, li. 2. Geometry
to a science of measuring and meating, and contains in it self lines and
length, shape and figured, and space in length and breadth and fairness, and
distance, greatness and h^gnesse, and figures, dimsions, and numbers, as it
fares in circles, triangles, and quadrangles, and in five cornered figures,
and in other mo^^sse many, of whom it pertains not to this treatise to make
(...)tions of all, but to ^ou^h so^ what because of ye s^^ple, of who^ Isi.
makes mention and says in this wise. Of Geometry is four minor divisions,
plain, and greatness of (...), and greatness of reason, and solidate figures,
plain figures he contri^^d in length and in breadth: and be five in number, as
Plato means. Greatness of number may be dealed by numbers yt be known in
Arithmetike, the measure of fraction ^e, greatness and hugeness is not known.
And (...) figures be contained in length, breadth, and deepnesse, and such a
figure to ^a^ted Cubus, and is all (...) long, br^^d, and deep: of plain
figures is many special shapes, as he says. The first is the circle in plain
(...), and is also called Circumducta, and in the middle thereof is a point, in
who^ all the times yt come from the roundnesse thereof meet together: and in
Geometry that point is called Centrum, and the circle is in plain set thus
symbol for circle. The Quadrangle is in plain, and lies within four straight
lines in this wise. symbol for quadrangle Diategramon is a plain figure in
this wise. Ortogonium that is recti angulum, is a plain figure in this wise.
symbol for right triangle Hisopleros is a plain figure and straight, ordained
under the Solid in this wise. The sphere is a figure shapen al round, and is
pere to Solitude in all parts in this wise. symbol for sphere The Cubus is
properly the Solid (...) long, broad and deep in this wise. symbol for cube
Chilindros is a square figure, with half a circle about in this wise. symbol
for cylinder Conon is a figure broad in the end, and sharp at the other, in
this wise. symbol for cone Piramis is a figure shapen in this wise, symbol for
pyramid wide beneath and straight above. Thus science uses first the point
that has no part: For among all that be measured, it is least in quantitye,
and most in might ^ is to beginning of all lines, and therefrom all lines
begins and stretches and cudeth thereas. Secondly, this Science uses the
line that is straight length without breadth, and stretches from point to
point. For he begins at a point and ends at a point. Superficies is
breadth and length. Spi^utudo has thickness, breadth, length, and deepnesse.
And each body has these three dimensions, length, breadth, and thickness: And
by those three al corpulent substance has measure, number, and weight. And by
art of telling and numbers thou may find the middle in Geometry. For the
least and the most multiplied makes as much as the mean makes multiplied, as
6. and twelve multiplied, makes two and seventy, as Isidore says, lib.
sicundo. The circle is a line drawn all round about from a certain point to
the same point. And each part of that line is like far from the middle point.
And the circle is a most simple figure, and most takes, and is most clean,
without corners and hollow within. And the roundnesse thereof is most far from
the middle point, and is most perfect among all figures, and conteyneth in it
self, and is contained of it self, and of none that is without it self, as
it fares of the circle of ^ea^en, yt compasses all and is not (...), and
contains all, and is contained of none that is without, as Isid. says as
within ten is each number, so within the circle is closed all manner shape of
figure, in this wise. And shortly to speak of the perfection and reasons
circula^e, circles wonderfullye, by a certain manner kind (...)ulation,
following all things. For heaven is round^ in shape, and (...) Planets move all
round about, and so do all the stars, and so we see that the course of
years, of months, and of diverse times begins and ends, and always passes
rounds about^. So the Elements suffers each other, and works each in other.
And those that seem disturbed by corruption, comes yet again by generation:
So continual ebbing and slowing of the Sea comes and goes, and falls and
comes yet again; So herbs and grass, trees, and seed, and fruit, comes
each of other, and turns into themselves again. So the spirits of (...)
comes of God by creation and making, and moves to God in and by love and
affection: They come of God by working, and turn to God by deeds of thinking.
So Aristotle lykeneth the reasonable soul is a circle because of perfection
hereof, and of disposition to receive. Of all the figure of the same length,
the circle is the most, therefore all the whole world has round shape and is
made thereto, because the soul should take it by understanding and in wit. God
is creator and maker of all, and is designed in a circle. For as Trimegistius
says, one gendereth one, and bends his love unto him. For the Father
generated, and has without beginning ingendered the son, and inspireth the
holy Ghost by the son, and the holy Ghost is the knot and love of either, of
the Father and Son. For the father understands him perfectly (...)
beginning, and loves understanding perfectlye himself, which love stretches
to none other passing himself, but to himself that understands, and is
understood, to the Father and son, of the which proceeds that love, and
bends in himself in a circle wise. And so the some in God and (...) the
father understanding, and understanding gendereth the son, and the son
gendered of the Father and understood, and the love by the son comes of the
father, and berdeth and reboundeth to either, and is the (...) Ghost. And so it
may be known yt perfection is in the persons of God, and that the plurality
of them passes not ye (...) of the (...). Therefore the Philosopher yt was
called Secu^dus, answered, (...) it was apposed what is God, he (...): God is
intellectual circle, of yt which ye middle point is every where, and the
roundnes no where, and so the reason of the circle shines in every creature.

De Triangulo. cap. 128.
A Triangle is a figure with the corners that be even as much as two even
corners. That is an eue^ corner, it is determined in another place: the soul
of life yt has three virtues in it self, of gendering, of nourishing, and of
waxing is likened to ye Triangle, yt is the first of figures of Geometry. For
ye soul of life is the first of all souls, and has in it self three manner
virtues. Among cornered figures, the triangle is the first for he is Solidus,
long, and broad. Therefore each figure with corners, as the Quadrangle, and ye
five cornered figure, contains as many Triangles, as there be lines drawn
from corner to corner, as it fares in ye quadrangle, yt contains two
Triangles, if one line be drawn from one corner to the contrary corner in this
wise And contains 4 triangles: if another line be drawn from another corner
to ye contrary corner in this wise. And so in all other figures, for he
contains as many triagles, as they have corners, as the quadrangle conteyneth
four Triangles, if two lines be drawn, and stretches from two corners to
the contrary corners. And by lines drawn, ye five cornered figure contains
the triangles, and the sixth cornered figure are, and the seven cornered figure
seven, and so of other as Boethius says li. 1. Arsmetrice. cap. 6. But the
triangle may not be so dealed in other figures the^ Triangles in this wise,
this figure is so printed of breadth, yt other figures be resolved and deled in
triangles: and for this figure is bosid to no principles, nor takes thereof
figures beginning of breadth: therefore this figure to dealed in it self, as he
says there. And none other figure may be thought, that has not beginning and
principal of the Triangle: For the Triangle is the beginning and Element of
other figures and shapes, and that is known in numbers. For the number of
four is compowned of three, yt is a triangle in numbers, and of one, that
makes four and out to three: For one has this dignity. That he contains
in it self all the virtue of numbers, yt (...) thereof not in deed but in
might and virtue, as Boethius says, libro. ^. cap. 14. And so the number of
five is compowned of four and one in sted of a Triangle: And so it may be
showed of all other Numeral figures. For always each number is meresed of a
triangle figure, as Boethius determines then in terms openly, and leiteth
ensa^ples in figures of four, of five, of six, and of seven, and of many
other. Also ye triangle figure has another singular property: for of such
other figure (...) may be the chief side of a triangle: and so upon each other
figure may be re^red a triangle: for each other figure Piramidale, yt has in
it self ye shape of a triangle, ^btaineth in it self as many triangles, as ye
chief side contains corners. And if a quadrangle is set for the chief
ground and flo^, there may arise a figure Piramidales, yt contains in it
self as many triangles, as the quadrangle has corners in it self in this
wise. Also if ye chief side of (...) be five cornered, the Triangle Piramis,
yt (...) may present five triangles upon that Basis, as it fares in a
Piramidale figure yt may be Basis of the figure Piramis, as he says. And in
the Piramidale triangle, 3. manner triangles may be found, as ye corners thereof
be three, in this wise. And so the disposition of God seems wonderful in all
things, and namely in numbers and in figures: Of other figures, both of numbers
and of Geometry, it is requisite now to cease for difficultye and diversity of
endless many figures, though ye consideration of al be full profitable to ye
lore of divinity, as in the quadrangle, that is much solid and steadfast among
figures and numbers, and is square, and presents the lore of the Gospel,
that has steadfastness in ye four parts of the world, as Beda says super
Genesis. A corner is called in Augulus, as touching of two lines yt touches
either other, and is the common subject of many figures. For all the foresaid
figures be determined under diversity of angles. And of diverse touching of
lines comes diverse angles. For some angle is called Rectus angulus and so^e
Obl. quus or Reflexus, and some Acutus, and some Ob^usus. And most virtue is in
the Angle that is called Rectus, for therein all the virtue is strengthened, yt
is in the lines that come from the Bests to the angle and ye virtue is
strengthened by concourse and meeting and touching of lines, as it fares in the
eye that conteyneth all thing under an angle: For the highness that comes
from the thing, yt is seen straight to the eye makes Pirame:
of the which the point is in the black of the eye, and the broad end in the
thing that is seen: and those beams be angled in the middle of the black of
the eye, and by the angle of that Pirame, the sight is shapen, as the Author of
Perspectiue says. Look before li. 3. de natura Visus. lib. 5. de materio
oculorum. The parts contrary set and divided among themselves, come togethers
in angles, and be joined there.

Of the kind of angles and of figures little is here said, because of
ensample, that we may know that the reason thereof is needful to know diverse
priuities of holy writ, that be diversely lapped in likeness of numbers and
of figures: For as the circle betokens the soul Rational, so the triangle
betokens the soul of feeling. For as the Quadrangle contains two
triangles, if a line be drawn from ye one angle thereof to the contrary angle,
so the soul of feeling conteyneth in itself two triangles of might and of
virtue. For ye soul of feelling has three virtues of the soul of life, and
there over the virtue of conceiving, and concupiscible and irassible. For the
soul of feeling is soul of life, and not again ward. And so of other figures
be diverse priuye reasons, and spiritually taken, and spiritual things with
corporal be accorded. Under these figures be comprehended reasons of measures
and of weights.

Of measures of bodies. ca. 131.
MEasure, as Isid. says, li. 16. cap. pe. is some thing in his manner meet, or
his during by time. And measure is of body, or of time, or of space and of
place. The mesure of body is as of me^, of trees, and of other bodily things in
length and in breadth: For each body has his own dimension and measure, and
that properly is called measure, by whom fruit and corn and licuor, and other
things moist and dry be meten, as Modius, Vrna, Amphora, and Sextarius. And
the least measure is Coclearium, and is half a Dragme, and weighs nine
Huoles, and such: three makes a Concula. For Concul, contains a Dragme and
an half. And the weight Ciatus contains 10. Dragmes, and five put thereto
makes Orifasus. Acetabulus is the fourth part of Emina, and contains 12.
Dragmes. Cotula is Emina, and contains 6. Ciatus, and is called therefore
Cotula, and has that name of the Greek word Cote, that is to say, earuing or
dealing, and Emina is a part of Sextarius dealed even in twain, and is called
Cotula. And Emina weighs a pound, and such two makes Sextarius, and is the
mesure of two pound, and is called Bilibris ever. And 4. times is Cenix in
Greek, and five such makes Quinarius, yt is called Gomor. Also put thereto
the sixth, and it makes Congius, for Congies contains 6. Sextarius, and
thereof Sextarius has that name. Congius has ye name of Congregando,
gathering, or of Crescendo, waxing. And so it means, it is ye is given for
some benefit is called Congiarium. And every Emperor to win favor of the
people, put somewhat to the measure for to be held the more large of gifts.
And Congiarium is specially a measure of fleeting things, and the Romans
ordained the name thereof.

Metreta is a measure of fleeting things, and has that name of this Greek
name, Metron, and is a common name of al measures, that contain fleeting
things. The measure Modius has that name, for it is perfect of his manner, and
is the measure of 44. li. that makes 22. Sextaris, and is therefore figure and
token of perfect works of six days. God did make 22. works within six
days, for in the first day God made seven manner things, matter and form,
light or fire, the over heavens, water, earth, and air: And the second day he
made only the instrument. And the third day he made four things, ye seas,
seeds, herbs, and trees. The fourth day he made three things, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars. And ye fifth day three, fish, creeping beasts of water, and
souls. The sixth day he made four, tame beasts, wild beasts, and creeping
Worms of the land, and man. And so. 21. manner things were made in six
days. And 22. Generations were from Adam to Jacob, of whose seed came all the
people of Israel. And there be 22. books of the old Testament unto Hester,
and 22. letters of A.B.C. by whom all the lore of Gods law is written. Then by
these ensamples, the measure Modius contains 22. Sextarius, by Moses lore:
and Modius has that name of Modus, for it is a moderate mesure, as Isid. says.

Satum is a manner measure used in the Province of Palesuna, and contains one
Modius and an half, and the name thereof is taken of Hebrew: for amo^ng them
Satum is called taking or rering: for he that meateth, shall take and rear by
same measure. But sometime Satum is taken for Modius, measure of 12. Sextarius,
as Isid. says.

Addition.
( Satum, Genus mensurae Palestinae, an Hebreu measure, containing of wine 33.
pound.4. ounces, of Oil 30. pound, of (...) 50. pound. It is of our measure
standard, two gallons and a quart. Being a measure of dry things, it is our
pecke, and the fourth part of a pecke.)

Bacus is a measure that holds 5^. Sextarius, and Batus is in fleeting
things, as Chorus and Ephi in dry things.

Addition.
( Batus, a measure containing 72. Sextarios, which after the Roman Sextarius
reseth to 13. gallons and a pottle of our measure. Some affirm it to be but
36. pintes of Paris, which is the same measure that Amphora is. Batus is also,
a kind of fish.)

Amhpora has that name of Ansis, an handle, by the which he is heaued hither
and thither: and holds of wheat or wine, three Modius of Italy.

Cadus is an Amphora, that holds thrice Vrna, Vrna is a measure, yt some call
Quartenum, and properly to speak, Vrna is ordained to do therein ashes of dead
bodies. Thereof the Poet Lucan says. He is healed with the (...), yt has not
Vrna.

Artabo is a measure among the Egyptians, and boldeth ^2. Sextatis, and has
that name, of 72. languages of ^anons that occupied the world.

Gomer is a measure of 4^. Modius, as Isi. says. Or it is a mesure of 4.
Modius, as the Gloss says sup. Exe. ca. 16

Addition.
( Gomer, Alter, Budey and Glarian ye x. part of Ephi: and Ephi is the same
measure that Amphora is 9. gallons: so yt Gomer, is a gallon and almost a pint.
After Gregorius Agricula, it holds.7. Sextarios and one fifth part.)

Chorus is a measure of 30. Modius, and has ye name of coaceruation, heaps:
for 30. Modius or one heap, seems a little hell, and is the charge of a
Camel. Huc vsque Isid. 1.16. Also there are many other m^ner measures, of whom
the names be set in holy writ, and not without great cause of preuie and
mystical meaning: for every vessel in which things be kept that be measen,
is contained under the name of measure, as it is showed in diverse ensamples.

Acetabulum was a vessel, in which wine that should be offered to God, was
assayed and proved, whether it were sower or corrupt, and was called
Acetabulum: and the vessel in the which was sower wine and corrupt was called
Acetabulum, as Isid. says lib. 10.

Ampuila is a little measure of licor and has that name, as it were Ampibulla,
a large bull, and is like in roundnesse to a boll that comes of ye some of
water by entering of wind, and be ^^^:ted, and blown, and be full subtle.

Alabastrum is a vessel for ointment and has that name of the kind of ye
stone that it is made of, and saves without corruption by his property
longest, all centment that is put therein, as it is said in Trac. de lapididus.

Archa is a vessel and mesure, only in the which things be put and kept out
of sight, yt they be not seen of all men. Of this name comes this word
Archanum priuitie, that is warely kept unknown to multitude of men.

Amphora is a certain measure, and has ye name of Ansis, a handle, as it is
sure before. Batus is a measure of fleeting things, ordained by ye law. Bachia
is a mesure, ordained generaly to ye use of wine. Calix is a certain porsion
and measure of drink, and has ye name of Calo, yt is a tree, for such vessels
were first made of tree and of wickers, as pamer^ and baskets.

Cathinum is an earthen vessel ordained for meat and for drink, and is
better said in the neuter gender, than in the Masculine, as Salinum, a saler,
as Isidore says.

Cacabus a candron, is a vessel of the kitchen, ordained for diverse uses, and
to sees flesh in, and also the same vessel is called Valcotula.

Cadus is a barrel, and contains three Modius, as it is said there.

Calathus is a basket made of splintes to bear fish therein.

Cribrum is a ^^oe, round with many holes, and has that name, as it were
Curriferum, bering things that runs, for wheat and other corn runs there
in, for in a sieve corn is cleansed of stones and of small chafe.

Cista is a little hutch, and of that name comes the diminutiue Cistella, and
has the names of rindes or splints, of canes or of willowes, of whom it is
wouen and wrought.

Cophinus is a vessel wouen of rods to bear dirt therein, as it is said in
Psa. Manus eius in Cophino seruierunt.

Celata be vessels of gold or of silver marked with evident signs, within or
without, and have that name of Celum, that is an instrument of iron that is
commonly called Cilicon, as Isidore says.

Cimlia be vessels for drink, and are euenlong and narrow in the ends, and
broad in the middle, as it were a boat.

Coclear a spoone, is a little instrument of the measure of the mouth, and
proportionate thereto: and therewith the hand serves the mouth of diverse
meats, and namely of fleeting meats. Therefore Martialis says.

Sum cocleis habilis, and nec minus vtilis ouis.
Nunquid scis potius, cur coclearo dicor.
Discus is a Dish broad and round, and has that name of Do and Eseo, and is
the same that Scutello is. And Discus is said, as it were Dans Eseas, giving
meat, and men sitting at meat, be called Discumbentes, and have that name of
Discus.

Dolium a Tun, is an hollow vessel, and has that name of Dolando, hewing or
thw^tring, for it is made of many boordes and Tun slaves, craftily bound
togethers.

Emicadium is another vessel, and contains half a Cadus.

Enoforum is a vessel, and holds wine, for Eno is wine, therefore it is said.
Vertitur Enolon fundut sententia nobis, as Isidore says.

Emissis is a certain drink, or a vessel that is drunk of one drought, as
Isidore says.

Fiola has the name of Glass, for glass is called Filin in Greek, and is a
little vessel with a br^^d bottom, and a small neck, and therein wine is
known, namely by color.

Philacterium is a little vessel of glass or of crystal in which holy
Relykes be kept. Also the punishment, in which the Jews wrote the Law for to
be held holy, is called Philacterium, as it is said: Dilatant enim Philacteria
sua.

Fiscus is a common sack or a bag in which the Escheker and rent gatherers put
the common debts and Custom that is paid to Kings, as it is said, Quod non
accepit Christus, capit Fiscus.

Fiscella is a little even long scribbe or a panter woue with small rods of
willow or of wickers, and glewed or pitched, as was the vessel, that Moses was
in, when he was put in the river.

Gauata is a great header boll, below and deep, and is called Gauata, as it
were Couata hollow: there G. is set for C. as Isidore says.

Gazofilatium is an hutch, in the which is put what is offered in the temple,
to help and succor of needy men, and has that name, as it were Archa
gazarum, the Cofee of riches, and keeping thereof, for keeping is Filax in
Greek, as Isid. says, and so Gazofilatium was a hutch or a house keeping the
common offering, as Musac keeps the common offering of Kings, and Corban of
Priests.

Idria is a water vessel, for water is called Idor in Greek.

Canistrum is a basket, or a frail made of white rushes or of reed, and
serves to put in fr^^te:

Cordilum is a like vessel, craftelye made and wouen of white rods.

Lamp^^ is a (...), thin, and (...), upon was rounds above, narrow and straigth
beneath, and (...) long, and (...) to (...) and light, and has the name of
Lambo. to (...) for it (...)h it (...)th the oil, and is ever (...) that
gives (...) ^oorth (...) may be called Lampas, as Ho(...) says. Look before
lib. 15. de metallis cap. de Vitro.

L^^rarsa has that name, for light is reason therein, and to name of glass,
as of (...) of some ashe^ ^^^ce thing, and light is closed therein, for the wind
sh^ld not blow out the light: and it gives light all about, and is often
borne about with light therein, as Isid. says.

Lacetus has the name of Lucino, and to the first (...) Lu, is short: thereof
Persius says.

Disposite pinguem nebulam cuomuere lacernae.
If Lucerna had the name of Lux, the (...) false, as Isid. says. And the
candle of the lantern is called Licnus, and Luscinus, as he says.

Also Lagena is a wide vessel, and has that name of the Greek word Lagenis,
as Isidor. says. And commonly we call Lagena a (...) barrel or a cestrell,
and the diminutiue thereof is Lagungula, and by the kind of Lagena or of a
barell, the savor of the wine changes, and the best Lageres or bar^^all^ be
made of the tree that is called Tham^^stus, thereof ye wine takes (...) and
virtue to(...) stopping of the spl^^^, as Constable. says.

(...) or (...), is a vessel of (...) of br^sse, that comes water by a (...)
and pipes, for washing of hands, and as called (...), not only for it is made
for washing, but has this name Labrum of Labium the lip, for often the wine
thereof is broad and bending as a (...) such vessels be called Luderes, 3.
Reg. cap. ^. in the which priests wash the sat^^ce of the temple.

L^^^icula is a little oil vessel of brass or of silver, and has that name
of Liniendo, ^y^^ing, for in such a vessel, the oil was kept, to anoint Kings
and Priests, as Isid. says.

Lebis is a vessel of brass, to seethe flesh in, and takes blackness of often
burning and uncleanness, and needs therefore often scouring and wiping. C^^i
metal of leads and candernes, infecteth often meat that is long kept therein.

Loculus is a purse in which m^^ery is put, as it were in a pre^^^ place, and
is called also Marsupium, as Isi. says.

Marsupium is a bag to put money in, and that need comes of ye Greek word,
Marsippa.

Mulgariu^ is a ^^lk vessel, as Isid. says.

Mola is a great bell deep and round, and was so called, for all round things
are called Mola among the Greeks.

Nola is a little bell, and has that name of a city of Campania that is
called Nola, where such a bell was first sou^ded, and is little, and sounds,
and is called Tinunnabulum, and the bell that is often hanged about the neck
of hounde. and feet of fowls and birds, as Hugu^on says.

A crack is called Olla, for water boyleth therein, when fire is there under, and
vapor passes upward, and the ball that rises on ye water, and dureth by
substance of the wind and air is called Bulla.

Parupsis is a square vessel with four sides alike. Patena is made of
Dispe^lis and Patentibus lancis oris, as Isi. says.

Patera is a manner vyoll, and has that name, for by drink out thereof, for
the (...) even and a twain, as Isid. says.

Poculam has that name of Potando, drinking: and every vessel yt men vsesh
to drink of, is called Poculum.

Patella is a pan, as it were an open crocke, for a (...) mouth, is more open
than a crecke, for the mouth is as broad as the bottom, and is a vessel of
brass or lead needful to diverse uses.

A (...) is called Peluis, and has that name of Pellis, the skin, for in it
is often washed the skin of feet and hand.

A box is called Pixus, and has that name of Buxes, Box tree, for of it ofts
boxes be made: for the tree that we call Buxus. Greeks call Pixis, and a box
is made now of metal and now of tree, and serves to many diverse uses, and
namely to keep and save, and to bear lettere, electuaries, licours, powders,
and ointments.

Quisquiliarium is a vessel or any thing, in which coddes, husks, or small
chafe is put and saved.

Sartago, the frieng pan, has yt name of noise that is therein, when oil
burns therein, and is a manner pan, in the which things be fried with cheese,
with butter, or with oil.

S^phan is vessel that has yt name, for blowing he casts out water: for
when houses be a fire, men of the East lands runs with vessels full of
water, and quenches and cleanses the same, and throws upward the water, as
Isi. says.

Rapatorium is a vessel, in ye which Rapes be kept or sodden, as he says.

Ciphus is a cup or a vessel of tree, of silver, of gold, or of glass, of
the which we drink or wash our hands.

A basket is called Citula, for it accords to those that be a thirst to drink
thereof, or for it thrusts water, for now it receives water, and now
sheddeth, for while one bucket is emptied, matter is filled.

Cithrasia is a bag or purse, in the which wayfaring men carry bread, and
other things that they need in the way.

A basket is called Sporta, so called, because therein is bread borne and other
things, which needs to household. Or has yt name, for it is often made of rods
of a shrub, that is called Spartus.

Scottella is an oil vessel, and has that name, for it is made of leather.

Scutella is the diminutiue of Scutu^, a shield; for it is like to a little
round shield, as Isidore says.

Scrinium is a little hutch covered with leather and with nails, in which
money is kept and other preuy things. Salinum is a saler, as Isidore says.

And every vessel with three feet is called Trisilis, as Isid. says: for a
vessel with four feet, is miscalled Trisilis.

A censour is called Thurabulam, and is a vessel of brass, of silver, or of
gold, and is double, close beneath and open above, with many hoales, by the
which the smoke of the incense passes out, and upward into the air, and
serves for to cense therewith, the two parts of it are cheyned together.

The farm is called Vencilabrum, and is an instrument is fan wish, and has
this property, that the light thing and vile passes out, and the heavy and
clean abides therein.

A bottle is called Vter, and is by craft made of leather, and has therefore
this name Vter, of Vterus, the wonder, as Isidore says.

Vrna is Amphora, of which it is said before in this same book.

Vrceolus is a dimunutiue of Vrna, and serves now for wine and now for water,
but properly it is a vessel that serves to put water in, with the which water
wine is alayed at the table and feasts of Lords, and thereof Onon has that
name, for he gives water to ye (...) of Gods in spousatles of Phiolagia, as
tables but feign, as it said in Mac. and in Marc.

Of many other manner measures is mention made in holy writ for ^^er^ mystical
meaning, but for ensample these be let here. There Is be also other measures of
spare and of place, of the which Isido. speaks on this with (...).

Of measures for dividing of Countries and places. Cap. 13^.
MEasure he says, is all thing which has (...) in w^ight, capacity in
length, in breadth, in highness, in (...) and also in mind, and to our
(...)fathers mesured all the world, and (...) Parties into Provinces, and
Provinces into Regions, and Regions into Places, and Places into Territories,
and Territories into Fields, and Fields into Centurias, and Centurias into
Days earings, and Days earings unto Climata, and Climata into A^ns, and A^ns
into Perches, and Perches, into Paces, Cubits, and feet, spans, and hand
breads, ounces, and inches, and so by their wit and slight, they less nothing
unmeasured, from the most to the least. An inche is the least part of measures
of ^^cius, and Vncia contains three inches in measure, and the hand breadth
four inches, and the foot sixteen. And the pace contains five foots, and
the Perch eleauen pace and ten feet. The Perch is called Pertica, and has
that name of Portando, bearing, for all the said small measures be in the
body, as the span, feet, and pace, and only the Perch is borne, and is ten
foot long, as Ezechiels cane made and measures mystically the temple: hereof
is mention made Ezec. 40. C.D.

Actu^ is a measure of four feet in breadth, and six score feet in length.

The Clima is a square space, and is sixty foot long in every side. Actus
quadrate every way, finisheth with 180. foot, and so two Actus make Iugerum,
and has that name because of joining, Iugerum is 140. feet in length, and
six score feet in breadth. There be many other manner measures, of the which
we do not speak at this time.

But it is to understand, yt the Sta^iall field contains six score pace and
five, that is 615 foot. And eight such makes a mile, yt contains 20000.
whole feet, as Isi. says there.

Centuria is a field of two hundred Iugerea, and had that name of an hunderes
Iugerea, and was so called in old time, and was afterward doubled, and holds
always the first name, as Isid. says, lib. 15. cap. vit. de mensuris.

Measure of ways have diverse names among men of diverse tongues: for the
Latins call Miliria, the Greeks Stadia, and the Frenchmen Leucas, the
Aegyptions Signs, and the Persians, Perasangas. And no wonder, for every space
is contained with his own bonds and measures, as he says.

( (...)
Stadium, a mesure of ground, where of were three sorts: One of Italy,
containing 625. feet, that is 125. paces.

The second Olympicum, of 600. feet, that is 120 paces. The third Pithicum
containing ^^^. feet, that is two hundred paces: whereof happily may rise the
difference between Pliny and Diodorus Siculus, in describing Sicily. Of these
Stadia, eight do make an Italian mile, containing a thousand paces, every pace
being five foot. We may call it 8. furlongs.)

For the mile contains a thousand paces, that is five thousand foot: the
Leuca contains a thousand paces and five hundred.

The Stadium is the eight part of a mile, and contains six score paces and
five. He tells that Hercules ordained that name Stadtom for such a space, for
he ran so far of (...) breath, and stinted then, and so gave that name
Staduim as Isid. says.

A way is a space, in the which carriage may go, and has that name Vra, of
Vehiculum, a thing which bears, for therein comes and meets cariages, and
contains the breadth of two Actus, for going and coming, and meeting of
carriage.

And every way is common or private: The common way is in common ground, and is
common to the people, and leads to the Sea, and to other diverse towns: and
this way is called Strata, as it were trodden with the feet of the Comminaltie.
Lucanus speaks thereof and says.

Strataque iam vulgi pedibus detrita viarum.
Strata is a way trodden with feet of the people.

This way without obstacle is clean and sad, paued and couched with hard
stones even and peaceable, common to all manner of people, and free without
stopping, impediment or grieuing, as he says.

The Private way, belongs to some nigh Town, and is short and nigh, and
often grown with grass, for seldom going, and is beset with trees, on either
side.

Agger is an heap of stones, or a token in the high way. And historyes call
such a way, Knights way. Thereof it is said.

Qualis sepe vie deprensus in Aggere serpens.
Iter, iteneris, is a way, by the which a man may go whetherwarde that he
will: and Iter is another than Itiner, for Iter is easy to pass, and Itiner
is long and hard to pass.

Semita is the middle of the way, and has that name of Semis, half: and
Semita is the path of men, and Callis is the path of beasts, wild and tame:
and Callis is the pathe of beasts between mountains, and is straight and
hard, trodden with beasts, and has therefore that name of Callo.

Tramites are by paths in fields, and has that name, for they lead to ye even
way.

Diuersum is a bending of ways, and leads to diverse places: And Diuerticulum
is a benching besides the way.

Bruium is a beginning of 2. ways, of the which one lies on ye right hand,
and the other on the left hand, and is often a perilous place and suspicious:
for in such places often thieves lie in a wait, and the Cominaltie be often
robbed in such places: and is a doubtful place, for men doubt often, which of
those ways they shall take. Therefore in times past, crosses were set in such
ways, that the men passing thereby, might know, which of those ways they
should take.

Compita is a place where many ways meet, as three or four, and is a
perilous place and doubtful, as Bruium is.

Ambitus is a space between place and house of neighbors, of two foot broad
and an half, ordained for a way about neighbors places, and has that name
of Ambiendo, 1. Circumeundo, going about.

Orbita is the forrowe of a wheel, that makes a deep furrow in the winding,
and trendlyng about.

Actus is a place where beasts are often driven, and is slipper and sickle.

Vestigium is the fore that is left in the ground, after going and trendling,
and has that name of Inuestigare.

Beasts leave in their own sores, some token, by the which they be often taken
of hounds and of other wild beasts.

The Lion knows that, and both away therefore his fores, that they be not
known of them that is follows him.

Of properties and diversity of measure, this is sufficient for this time. And
what is said before, is taken forth of Isid. li. 15. cap. vltimo.

Of Weights. cap. 133.
IT is needful to know the manner of weights, as the manner of measures, as
Isidore says, for the might of kind gives to all bodily things their own
weight, and weight rules all.

Therefore weight has the name Pondus of Ponendo, setting, for weight sets
all things in their own place, for weight is not else, but receiving a thing
toward his own place. Two things makes weight, lightness and heaviness, and
so lightness in subtle matter makes upward, and rests not ere it come to his
own place: therefore fire moves upward, and rests not, ere it come to his
own place and sphere. The contrary is of heaviness, for heaviness that has
the mastrie in corpulent and earthy matter, moves downward, and rests not
ere it find the middle, to the which is moves toward the middle by his own
weight, and so all thin matter and subtle, has double cause of lightness,
for the parts of such matter is shire and subtle, and moves toward the middle
toward the roundnesse, and rests not ere it come thereto. Also for shir(...)
of parts in such are many parts, in which be many poores, and virtue of fire
comes therein, and dissolueth and wastes the earthy parts, and makes so all
the body light, and bears it upward: and so heat is chief cause of
lightness, as cold that moves from the roundnesse toward the middle, is cause
of ^ning and fastness of parts, and (...) of heaviness: and so the more sad a
body is, the more heavy it is, and the more shire and thin, the more light it
is found. And though both light and heavy is called weight, because of the
inclination of either toward his own place, that is ordained thereto by kind,
yet by the common speking, weight and heaviness is all one: for things that
move down ward be called weighty, for their heaviness, and things that move
upward, are called light things: and so light and weight be divided as
contraries. Therefore li. 15. Isidor. says, that a weight is called Pensum,
hanging: for it hangs in the ballaunce, when it is commonly weyed, and in
this wise for to speak commonly, the thing in ye which a thing as wayed, is
called a weight: and sometime the thing that is weyed, and sometime ma^^ie things
and heavy, by the which the heuines is assaied, is called a weight.

Also instruments in the which things be weighed, have diverse names: For
Trutina is of double weight, and Lanx is the hanging for to wey great weights,
as humorous, and talents, and small balances, for to weye small things and
little money.

The balance is called Statera, and has that name of Stando, standing, for
he stands even weyed by a thing yt bears it up in the middle.

Lances be the thin brazen bolles, of the which in the one is the weight, and
the thing that is weighed is in the other, and the weight to rightful, when
both ye bols hang eue^ with their weights and alyke high.

The tongue that follows the more heavy boll, is called Momentum statere,
and the h(...)gles by the which ye balance hangs, and the heuinesse of bols
be ^^^ayed, is called Filum as he says: and every weight has a certain
manner, and proper name, as Isi. says.

The least part of weight is called Calculus, and the fourth part of weight
Obolus and weieth two greins of Tilles and is called Calculus, for it is so
lettil that it may not be trodden and (...).

(...) is the twentieth part of Solid, and has this name of a fruits of a
(...).

Obolus weieth three Huoles, and was (...) of brass, shapen as an arrow, (...)
ye name thereof, for an arrow is called Obolus in Greek, as he says.

Scrupulus weyeth six Huoles, and is called Dragma in Greek, and this name
Scrupus is a diminitiue of (...), that is a little stone.

Dragma is the eight part of Vncia and weyeth three pence of silver.

Scrupulus, that is the eighteenth Huolus, is called Denarius, and is accounted
for ten pence, as he says.

( (...)
Dram the 3. part of an ounce, a dram: also a coin signed with a
Bullock, counterpesing and old sterling groase, of eight to the ounce. Dram
au^^. 12 silver drams that is, an ounce and half of silver)

Solid has that name, for it seems that he lacks nothing: and therefore
men in old time called a thing that was whole and unbroken, Solidum and Totu^.
Also a shilling contains 12. pence.

Numisma is a penie, and is called so, and is marked with the print fo ye name
of a Prince: for first Numilida was a penie of silver, as Isid. says.

Solidus is called Sextula, and has that name for it weyeth 16. ounces: ye
common people calls the third deal thereof Trimisus, for such three makes
Solid, and two Sextules makes Dulco, and three makes Stater, as Isid. says.

Stater is half an ounce, and wayeth three golden Solid, yt is called Stater,
for it stands in the Solid, and is called also Semiuncia, for it has ye
half of an ounce, and is called Semisus also, for it weyeth Semisus, as it is
Semisus, half Assis as he says also Assis is ye left among weights as one is
least among numbers, as the Gloss says there. Nonne duo, etc.

^obta^er a certain coin, in value four dr^m^, or four groats, 8. to an
ounce of these were and old silver Romans coins.

Five Quadrans; weyeth the fourth deal of an ounce, and is called Quadrans in
Hebrew.

( (...)
Quadrant the fourth part of As, that is three ounces, also the fourth part of
any number, as measure. In coin it is a brazen part, called Frienx in value
the tenth part of sestertius. The accord in rec^^ning where the receipt and
allowance be equal. Quadrans vino (...), 6. ounces of Wine, after ^udey. After
Physicians, four ounces and a half.)

Ciclis in Latin, is called Sicca in Hebrew, and weyeth an ounce among them,
and among the Greeks, right as among Latins.

Ciclus is the fourth part of an ounce and half a Stater, and weyeth two
Dragures. In holy Writ Ciclus is an ounce, and the first part of an ounce
among Nations.

Vncia has that name, for it oneth and binds all number of weights, and
weyeth eight Drams, that is 24. Scrupled, that is taken for lawful weight: for
by the number of Scruples thereof, the number of the hours of the day and
night be accounted, for twelve ounces makes Libra, and is therefore accounted a
perfect weight, for therein be as many ounces, as months in the year.

( Addition.
Siclus, Josephus: called also Tetradrachmen, and Stater argenteus. It is as
well a coin as a wayght, being half an ounce in peyse, and in value about 4.
greates, when eight went to an ounce: Some write that it is but two Drachiues.)

( Addition.
Sicilicum, a weight of two drams the fourth part of an ounce ^ also a mesure
of ground 20. foot broad, and 30. foot long, that is a plat containing 620.
foot.)

Libra is said, as it were Libere, for it contains in it self, all the
foresaid weights, as Isi. says. A pound weight.

Bilibras, weyeth two Libras, and is double Libra.

^^ma weyeth an hundred drams, and is a name of Greek.

( Addition.
In Latin Coina signifies a bush or hair, the voughs and leaves of trees.)

Talentum is accounted the greatest weight among the Greeks for nothing is
less than Calculus or As^^: For as One is in numbers, so Calculus is in
weights, and no weight is more than Talentum. But this weight is diverse among
Nations: for among ye Romans Talentum wayeth threescore pound and twelve, as
Plinius says: and two Tolents weyeth two houdred pound, fourscore and forty.

The Talent is treble, less, mean, and most. The less is of fifty pound:
the mean of seauentie pound, and twenty: and the most of seven score pound
and that was Talentum of Seyntwary.

Centenarium is the name of a number, for it contains an hundred pound: and
for the number of an hundred is perfect: ye Romancs ordained a weight of that
name. Huc vsque Isidor. libro 15. cap. 3. De Ponderibus and Mensutis.

( Addition.
Talentum are of two sorts: Talentum Acticum maius, containing 80. Minas,
every Mina valewed one hundred Drachmas or Denarios, and every Dram being a
groat sterling, when eight groates went to an ounce, and by that rate does rise
to one hundred thirty three pounds and odd money. Talentum Acticum minus,
which is most spoken of in Authors, contains sixtye Minas, every as before is
written, being in value an hundred Denarios, and in that rate amounts to an
hundred pounds. But he may seem as Tonstall writes 120. pounds, after x.
groates to an ounce: for the ^^^enesse or v^^^nesse of English money, makes
Talentum more or less, as Tale^tu^ Hebraicu^ Sa^ctuary containing an 100.
Minas Mebraicas, whereof every one was 60. Sicli, and every Siclus 4. Donarij of
sterling groats of 8. to an ounce, which rate amounts to 400. pounds.
Talentum Hebraecum minus, was half so much.)

De Musica. cap. 134.
AS Act of numbers and measures, serves to Divinity, so does the Art of
melody: for Music by the which concord and melody is known in sound and in
song, it is needful to know ye secret meaning of holy writ, for it is said,
that the world is compounded and made in a certain proportion of har(...), as
Isi. says li. 3. And it is said, that hea(...) goes about, with cousonance
and accord of melody: for music moves (...)tions and (...)teth the wits of
diverse dispositions. Also in battle the noise of the trumpet comfort
warriors: and the more strong and (...)gious that the ^ounding is, the more
strong and wild men be to fight: and comfort shipmen to suffer all the
diseased and trauayles.

And comfort of voice, pleseth and comfort the heart and inwits in all
disease and travail of works and weariness. And music abateth masterie of
evil spirits in mankind: as we read of David, that delivered S^^le of an
unclean spirit by craft of melody. And music exciteth and comfort beasts
and serpents, souls and Dolphins to take heed thereto: and so veins and
sinews of the body and pulse thereof, and all the l^ns of the body be sec^^^
together, by virtue of harmony, as Isi. says.

Harmony
Of Music be three parts, Armonica, Rithmica, and Metrica, Armonica, divides
the great and small in sounds, and high and low, and proportional changing of
voice and sound. And Armonia is sweet accord of song, and comes of due
proportion in diverse voices or blasts, touching and s^^^^ting sound: for as
Isido. says, Sound comes of voice, as of mouth and jaws: or of blast, as of
trumpes and pipes: or of touching and smiting of cymbale and harp, and other
such, and sounds with smiting and strokes. Uoyce comes to one accord, as
Hugution says, for in all melody needs many voices or sounds, and that
according: for whereas is but one voice only, it pleases not the cares, as the
voice and sound of the Cucko^: and if ^anie discord, the voice pleases not,
for of such discord comes not song, but howling, tarring, or yelling: but in
many voices according in one, is proportion of harmony, and melody, or sweet
Simphonia. And so Isid. says, that Simphonia is a temperate modulation and
according in sounds high and low, Simphonia is a co^^e^^ in tune, called
harmony.
and by this harmony, high voice accords: so that if one discordeth the
hearing. And such according of voice is called Euphonie, that is sweetness of
voice, and is called also Melodia, and has that name of sweetness and of
Mel, that is honey: and the contrary is Diophobia, soul voice and discording.

To make melody of harmony, needs Diosc^lina, Diesis, Tonu^, Iperludius,
P(...), Arsis, Thesis, and sweet ^ (...)rate sound. D^acesmo is a couena(...)
of two voices, or of mo according. Diesis is the space of doing melody, and
changing out of one sound into another. Tonus is the sharpness of voice, and
is difference and quantity of harmony, and stands in accent and Tenor of
voice: and Positions make thereof fifteen parts. Iperludius is the last
thereof and most sharpest. And Todorius is most heavy of all, as Isi. says
Arsis is rearing of voice, and is the beginning of song. Thesis is setting, and
is the end, as Isid. says: and so Song is the bending of the voice, for some
passes straight as he says, and is before song. And every voice is sound,
and not againward, for sound is the object of hering: for all that is perceived
by hearing, is called sound, as breking of trees, smiting together of stones,
hurting and rushing of waves and of wind, chitterring of birds, lowing of
beasts, voice and groaning of men, and touching of organs. And a voice is
properly the sound that comes out of the mouth of a beast and sound comes
of air smit against an hard body, and the smiting is sooner seen than the
sound is heard, and the lightening is sooner seen, than thunder is heard. A
voice is most thin air, smitte with the wrest of the tongue: and some voice
signifies and betokens by kind, as chirping of birds, and gr^ning of sick
men: and some betokens at will, as the voice of a man that is ordained and
shaped by beast of reason to tell out certain words. The voice bears for the
the word, and the worce that is in the thought may not come out but by help of
voice yt brings it out: and so first ye inwit gendereth a word in the
thought, and puts it afterward out at the mooth by the voice, and so ye
word that is gendered and conseined by inwit, comes out by the voice, as it
were by an Instrument, and is known. The voice that is disposed to song and to
melody, has these properties, as Isidore says. Uoices he says be small,
subtle, thick, clear, sharp, and thrill. In subtle voice the spirit is
not strong, as in children and in women, and in other that have not great
sinews, strong and thick.

For of small strings comes small voice and subtle. The voices be fat and
thick, when much spirit comes out as the voice of man. The voice is clear
that sounds well, and ringeth without any hollownesse: sharp voices be full
high: shrill voices be loud, and draws a long and fills soon all the
place, as ye noise of trumpets. The hard voice, hoarce, grim and grisly, is
when the sound thereof is vyolent, as the sound of thunder, and of an anueloc
beaten with sledges: the rough voice is hoarce and sparpled by small and diverse
breathing: the blind voice stinteth soon, and is stuffed, and dureth not long,
as the sound of an earthen vessel. The voice Vinolenta is soft and plyant:
that name Vinolenta, comes of Vino, that is a little bell softly bent. The
perfect voice is high, sweet, and strong, and clear: high to be well heard,
clear to fill the ears, sweet to please and not to fear the hearing, and to
comfort the heart to take heed thereto: if ought heerof saileth, the voice is
not perfect, as Isi. says. The first harmony is of organs, that comes of
blast, when certain instruments be cunningly made and duly blown, and gives
by quantity of the blast, and diverse qualyties, aptly diverse sounds, as it
fares of organs, trumpets and pipes, and other such that gives diverse sounds,
and noise.

Organum is a general name of all instruments of music, and is nevertheless
specially appropriate to the instrument that is made of many pipes, and blown
with bellows, and used only in Churches, in Proses, Sequences, and Himnes.

( Addition.
Or is for his loudness, nearest agreeing to the voice of man.)

De Tuba. cap. 135.
THe Turent sound first the trumpet: Virgil speaks of them and says.

Turenusque tubae mugire per aethera clangor.
The voice of the trumpet of Turene loweth in the air. Men in old time used
trumpets in battle, to fear and to astray their enemies, and to comfort
their own knights and fighting men, and to comfort horses of war to fight,
and to reese and smite in the battle: and betokens worship with victory in
ye fighting, and to call them again that fly: and used also trumpets in
feasts, to call the people together: and for business in praising, and for
crieng of wealth of joy the Hebrews were commanded to blow trumpets in battle
in the beginning of the new Moon, Consider by this year of grace which was
used in ye time of superstitio, that those were the popes friends which
brought him most money, besides, the charge^ that was spent in going thither.
and to cry and warn the coming of the Iubile the year of grace, with noise
of trumpets, and to cry joy and rest to all men, as Isi. says. li. 18. A
trumpet is property an instrument ordained for men that fight in battle, to
cry and to warn of the signs of battle: and where the cryers voice may not
be heard for noise, the noise of the trumpet should be heard and known. And
Tuba has that name as it were Ton^, that is holow within, and full smooth for
to take the more breath: and is round without and straight at the trumpettes
mouth, and broad and large at the other end, and the trumpeter with his hand,
puts it to his mouth, and the trumpet is ruled upward and downward, The
onse^ the ala^u^ the (...) Some used the great ^ilke shell in steed of a
trumpet, some ho^^^s of beasts and some the thighe bones of a man, as do the
Indiana.
and held forth right, and is diverse of noise, as Isi. says: for it is
sometime blown to prepare battayles, and sometime for that battle should join
together, and sometime for the chase, and to take men into the host.

De Buccina. cap. 136.
BVccina has that name, as it were, Vocina pa^ua, and is a trumpet of horn,
of tree, or of brass, and was blown against enemies in old time: for as Isi.
says, li. 18. The wild Panims were sometime gathered to all manner doing with
the blowing of such a manner trumpet: and so Buccina was properly a took of
wild men. Propertius speaks heerof, In civil discords, the Flute the First,
and the Cornet, made vvinding like the Rams horn. Iosu. 6. Iud. 7. 1. Reg.
6. ^. Reg. 1.
and sees.

Buccina cogebat priscos, ad Arma Quirites.
Buccina made the old Quirites array themselves, namelye in armor. The voice of
such a trumpet, is called Buccinum, as he says. And the Hebrews used Trumpes
of horn, namely in Kalendis, in remembrance of the deliverance of Isaac, what
time an horned Wether was offered, and made oblation of in his steed, as the
Gloss says super Genesis

De Tibia. cap. 137.
TIbia is a pipe, and has that name, for it was first made of legs of Hearts,
young and old as ma^^ suppose, and the noise of pipes was called Tibicen. Or
else as Hugution says, this name Tibia comes of Tibin, yt is a rush or a
reed, for of certain reeds, such an instrument was made in old time: and
thereof is said hic Tibice^, on, he yt plaieth on such pipes And was sometime an
instrument of sorrow and lamentation, which men did use in office and sepultures
of dead men, as the Gloss says super Mat. 9. Cum audislet tibicines, A shalme
or flute.
that is the fingers of dole and of lamentation.

De Calamo. cap. 138.
CAlamus has yt name of this word Calando, sounding, and is the general name
of pipes. A pipe is called Fistula, for voice comes thereof: for voice is
called Fos in Greek, and send, is Stolia in Greek, and so the pipe is called
Fistula, as it were sending out voice or sound. Hunters use this instrument, for
Hearts love the noise thereof: But while the Heart takes hard and liking in the
piping of an hunter, another hunter which he has no knowledge of, comes and
shoots at the Heart, and ^^eieth him. Piping be^^yleth birds and fowls,
therefore it is said.

Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit Auceps.
The pipe sings sweetly, while the fowler beguyleth the bird. And sheep
love piping, therefore shepherds use pipes, when they walk with their sharp.
Therefore one which was called Pan, was called God of Herds, for he joined
diverse reeds, and arrayed them to song slily and craftily. Virgil speaks
thereof, and says.

Pan primos calamos cera coniungere plures
Instituit, Pan curat oues, ouiumque magistros.
The common blesing music, is ye Drone,^obu^^, and Cur^^^.
Pan, ordained first to join with war many Pipes in one, Pan has cure of
sheep and of shepherds. And the same instrument of pipes is called Pandorium,
for Pan was (...) thereof, as Isid. says. And with pipes, watching men
pleases such men, as rest in beds, and makes them sleep the sooner and more
sweetly by melody of pipes.

( Addition.
Pan called the God of shepherds: he is thought to be Demogorgons son, and is
thus described: in his for head he has horns like the Sun beams, a long
beard, his face red, like ye clear air, in his breast the star Nebris, the
nether part of his body rough, his feet like a Goat, and always is imagined
to laugh. He was worshipped especially in Arcadia. When there grew betwixt
Phoebus and Pan ^ con^^^tro^, whether of them two should be judged the best
Musition. Midas preferring the ^^^pipe, not respecting better skill, was given
for his reward, a pair of Ass ears.)

De Sambuca. ca 139.
SAmbuca is an Elder tree brittle, and the voughs thereof be hollow and void and
so^^eth, and of those same voughs be pipes made, and also some manner
Sunphonie, as Isido. says.

De Symphonia. ca. 140.
THe Simphonye is an instrument of Music, and is made of an hollow tree
closed in leather on either side, and menstralls beats it with sticks, and
by accord of high and low, thereof comes full sweet ^o^ts, as Isi. says:
nevertheless ye accord of all soundes be called Simphonia in like wise, as ye
accord of diverse voices is called Chorus, as the Gloss says sup. Luc. 15.

De Armonia. cap. 141.
ARmonia Rithmica, is a sounding melody, and comes of smiting of strings, and
of ru^k^ing or ringing of metal, and diverse instruments serve to this manner
harmony, as Taber and Timbrel, Harp and Psalterie, and Nakyres, and also
Sistr^^.

De Timpano. cap. 142.
TImpanum is laid straight to ye tree in the one side: and is half a Taber,
or half a Simphonie, and shapen as a s^^e, and braten with a stick, right as
a Taber, as Isido. says, and makes the b^tter melody if there be a pipe
therewith.

De Cithera. cap. 143.
THe Harp is called Cithera, and was first found of Apollo, as the Greek,
(...). And the harp is like to a man's breast for likewise, as the voice comes
of the breast, so the notes come of ye harp, and has therefore that name
Cithara, for the breast is called Cithara, in Dorica lingua, and afterward some
and some came forth many manner instruments thereof, and had yt name Cithara, as
ye harp and psalterie, and other such and some be four cornered, and some
three cornered: the strings be many, and special manner thereof is diverse. Men
in old time called ye harp Tidicula, and also Fidicen, for ye strings thereof
accord, as well as some men accords in says. And the harp had seven
strings, and so Virgil says.

Septem sunt soni septem discrimina vocum.
There be vii. soundes, and vii. differences of voices: and are therefore
called D^s^rimina, for one string next to another, makes like sound: and
strings be seven, either for they fill all the note, or for because heaven
sounds in vii. mouings. A string is called Corda, and has that name of
Cord, the heart: for as the pulse of the heart, is in the breast, so the pulse
of the strings is in the harp. Mercurius found out first such strings: for
he strained first strings, and made them to sound, as Isid. says. The more dry
the strings be, and the more strained, the more they sound: and the wrest is
called Plectrum.

De Psalterio. ca. 144.
THe Psalterie is called Psalterium, and has that name of Psailendo, singing:
for the consonant answers to the note thereof in singing. The harp is like to
the Psalterie in sound, but this is the diversity and discord between ye
harp and the psaltery, in yt psaltery is an holow tree, and of that same tree
the sound comes upward: and the strings be smit downward, and sounds
upward: and in the harp, the hollownesse of the tree is veneath. The Hebrews
calls the Psalterie Decacordes, an instrument having ten strings, by number
of the ten Commandments. Strings for the Psaltery be best made of lat^n, or
else those are good that be made of silver.

De Lira. cap. 145.
Lira has that name for diuersitye of sound: Addition
for Lira gives diverse sou^^s, as Isid. says. And some people suppose, that
Mercurius first found out this instrument Lira in this wise. The river Nilus
was flowen and arisen, and afterward was auailed and withdrawn again into his
proper channel, and left in the field many diverse beasts, and also a snayle,
and when the snaile was roasted, the sinnewes l^^t^ and were strained in the
snailes house, and Mercurius smote the sinews, and of them came a sound: and
Mercurius made a Lira to ye likeness of the Snailes house, and gave ye same
Lyra to one yt was named Orpheus, which was most buste about such things. And
so it was said, yt by ye same craft not only wild beasts drew to song and
melody, but moreover stones and also woods. As fables do mean, this foresaid
instrument Lyra is set among stars, for love of study, and praising of song, as
Isi. says.

De Cymbalis. ca. 146.
CImbales be instruments of music, and be smit together, and sou^deth and
ringeth.

( Addition.
Compassed like a hoope, on the upper composse under a certain holownes, hangs
half bells, five or seven.)

De Systro. cap. 147.
SIstrum is an instrument of music and has the name of a Lady that first
brought it up. For it is proved that Isis Queen of Egypt, was the first finder
of Systrum, and Iuuenal speaks thereof, and says.

Isis and irato feriat mea lumina sistro
And women use this instrument, for a woman was the first finder thereof.

Therefore among the Amazons, the beast of women is called to battle with the
instrument Systrum.

( Addition.
An instrument like a horn, used in battle in steed of a trumpet. Also a
brazen Timbrell.)

De Tintinabulo. cap. 148.
TIntinabulum is a ball or a C^mparnole, and has the name of Tiniendo
tinckeling or ringing. Look before De vasis, in lytera V. A bell has this
property, that while he profits to other in sounding, he is wasted often by
smiting. These instruments and many other serves to music, which science
treats of voice and of sounds: and knows nevertheless disposition of kindly
things and proportion of numbers, as Boctius says, and sets ensample of
the number of 1^. in comparison to.6. and to other numbers yt be between, and
says in this wise: Here we find all ye accord of music, for ^ to.6.
and.9. to ^^ make the proportion, and make together the consonancy Diatesseron.
But.6. to.9 and.8. to 1^. make ye proportion Se^qu^altera, and make together
the consona^^e Diapente. And 12. to 6. make double proportion. and sings the
accord Diapason. Then 8. to.9. in co^partion be mean, and make Epogdonus which
is called Tonus in melody of Music, and is a common measure of all the sounds,
and so it is to understand, (...) music (...)
yt between Diatesseron and Diapente, Tonus is diversity of accordes, as
between the proportions, Sesquitertia and Sesquialtera, only Epogdolis is
diversity. Huc vsque Boctius, in secundo Arimet^ice ca. vlt. G. And in the
Prologue of the first book Boctius says, yt the rather is there virtue of
numbers, thereby it may be proved, that those things which do stand by
themselves, be rather in kind, then those things which be in comparison to some
other things. And the melody of Music is taken and called by names of the
numbers: Diatesseron, Diapente, and Diapason, have names of ye numbers, which
precedeth and goes before in the beginning of those said names. And the
proportion of their sounds is found and had in those same numbers, and is not
found nor had in any other numbers. For ye shall understand that the sound and
the accord in Diapason, of proportion is of the same double number, and the
melody of Diatessero^ does come of Epitrite collatione, that is, Sesquitertia
proportio. And he calls the accord Diapente. He^nolia is joined in number
Epogdou^^, Hemich^^s (...)
there be numbers that be above.8. and is called Tonus in Music, as he
says. Sesquitertia proportio in Arimetrike, is called Diatesseron in Music,
and Hemiolia, yt is, Sesquialtera proportio in Arimetrike, is Diapente in
Music, and Diapente and Diapason is consonante, the more voice contemeth the
less, and the half deal thereof. The number of ^^^quitertius contains the
less number and the third part thereof, and if he conteyneth all the fourth
part, then he is Sesquiquartus. And Sesquiquintus contains the less, and
the fifth part in thus wise. Four contains three, and the third part, that
in one and And right contains six and the third part, that is t(...). And
twelve contains nine and the third part, that is three, and so eighteen to
twelve, and twenty to (...): a new (...) of other always (...) shall find.

^^merus (...) cap. 149.
(...) compared to the less, contains the whole number, the half, ^ the
half part thereof, as ^ contains. ^. and the (...) part of two, that is one:
so 9. contains 6. and the half of 6. that is ^ and so ^. to 8. and.15. to
^^. and so of other. (...) word be in themselves day and secret, and very
dark to understanding But to them that be wise and cunning in Arethmetike and
in Music, they be more dare and light, and be dark and all unknown to them
which be uncunning, and have no usage in Arethmetike, Geometrye, and Music.
Therefore he that will know the foresaid wortes and proportions of numbers,
of voice, and soundes, shall not despise to ask counsel, and to desire to
have knowledge by those which be wiser, and that have more cunning in
Arethmetike, in Geometrye, and in Music. And libro secundo Isidore says,
that there is so great virtue in figures and accordes of Music, that the
self man stands not perfect there without: For perfect Music comprehended
all things. And so then reuolue and consider hereof in thy mind, that Music
and harmonye joins and accords diverse things that s^^^e contrary, and
makes the high sound to accord with the low, and the low with the high, and
accords contrary wills and desires, and retrayneth and abateth intentions
and thoughts, and amendeth and comfort feeble wits of feeling. And ^^^eth
namely and werneth us of the unity of the exempler of Codie contrary workings:
and diversely manifests and shows, ye earthly things may be joined in accord
to heavenly things: and causes and makes glad and joyful hearts more glad and
joyful, and sorry hearts and heavy, more sorry and disquiet. For as Austen
says, yt by a privy and secret likeness of property of the soul and of
harmony, melody comfort it self to ye affections and desires of the soul.
And therefore Authors mean, yt Instruments of Music make the glad more glad,
and the sorry more sorry. Look other properties of harmony before in the same
book, where as other word of Isidore be rehearsed and spoken of.

Addition.
s
COncerning the strange opinions in the world of Music, and the three fold
conceits of variable minds, I have thought good (so far as the eternal
license shall permit or suffer) somewhat to speak thereof: The occasion is, yt
whereas many cannot away at all with Music, as if it were some odious skill
ranged from hell, rather stirred up by Devils, then revealed by Angels: some
are indifferent, and can abide it better in the chamber of Venus, then in the
temple of Minerua, and some do so far dote in music, without the which they
think there is no religion, that between these vnindifferent judgments, I am
in doubt to speak, or so to frame a speech that might qualify so foul a
discord, concluding yt if Music be the ordinance of God, as at other gifts of
nature are, then how comes it to pass, that.7. arts, termed liberal, are
allowed, whereof Music has been account of ye number one, except the late 8.
art of Adulation, being placed in Musicks room, be allowed for ye seventh,
which if Curiosity, being made judge, have recorded ye same in self-wils
book. I leave to these three their own, and yet proceed with those opinions,
that may stand with discreation, concerning the same.

In the first book of Cronicles, called in Latin Verba Dierum, or after the
Greeks Paralipomenon, which the Hebrews call Dibre Haiamim, historical, ca. 15.
when the Prophet David had prepared a house for the Ark of the Lord, he called
all Israel together to Jerusalem, to fetch the Arc of ye Lord unto his place,
which he had ordained for it, etc. And David spoke to the thief head of ye
Levites, yt they should appoint certain of their brethren, to sing with
instruments of Music, Psalteries, Harps, and Cymbales, yt they might make a
sound, and to sing on high with ioyfulnes, etc. And David and the elders of
Israel, and the Captains over thousands, went to fetch the Arc of the
appointment of the Lord, out of ye house of Obed Edom with gladness. The Arc
is brought forth of the house of Abinadob, yt was in Gibeon, which was a high
place of ye city of Baale, unto the city of David, called Zion, lieng on the
North side of Jerusalem. Samuel, 2. book. cap. 6. Cro. 1. boo. ca. 15. 2. Cro.
cap. 5. ver. 13. These instruments and other ceremonies which they observed,
were instructions of their infancy, which continued to ye coming of Christ:
(ye note of the later Church) of then there should have been a final end of
Music, why is it not absolutely forbidden, or if it be tolerable why is not
the abuse taken away (and not Music it self) because of abuse, if Music be
but a sound, no more is the voice, it is better to hear good and godly
Music, then ^^baude and filthye talk, or a christian Psalm then a wreked
sonet. Seeing ye Music has so behaved her self, yt she is not allowed by
the old Testament, as many affirm, because as they say, she had her
continuance but until ye coming of Christ: yet from the time of Samuel, until
the time of Jesus Christ, it largely appears she was in estimation, and
although the superstitious pagans and Idolatrous Gentiles, having the same
instruments yt the godly had (with the which they committed their
abominations) this notwithstanding was no ^e^l^^ng nor disabling of ye Music
which ye Prophet David used, the Prophet Esaias, cap. 22. commended. Daniel. 3.
1. Mac. cap. 9. Apo. 18. have expressed. Let us see farther concerning music,
what the new Testament either likes or allows: Wherefore be ye not unwise,
but understand what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with wine, wherein
is excess but he filled with the spirit, speaking unto your selves in Psalms
and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in
your hearts, etc. Ephesians. 5. verse. 17. 18. 19. Give thanks always for all
things unto God, even the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Submitting your selves one to another, in the fear of God. Collossians. 3.
verse. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing your selves in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
songs. Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. James. 5. verse. 13. Is
any among you afflicted (or grieved in mind) let him pray: is any merry: let
him sing. Heerby the godly are allowed to sing, whos^ instruments are their
bodies, and whose ^toppes or strings are good intents. Unto the bodies belong
ye four Elements, the four complections, and the five senses, if any of these
abound or dimminishe, the concord of the boydes is altered. Also the mind is
turned to discord, no less by a crabbed imagination: But what can we say
for Instruments, that our former discourse may appear uniform, that is to
say, as well the instrument as the voice, and both together. 1. Epistle.
Corinth. cap. 14. verse. 7.8. Moreover, things without life which give a
sound, whether it be a Pipe or an Harp, except they make a distinction in
the soundes, how shall it be known what is piped or harped. And if the
Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to battle. In
the Reuc^lation, S. John says. Chap. 14. verse. 2. And I heard the voice of
Harpers, harping with their Harpes. And they sung as it were a new song before
the Throne, etc. Seeing then that the holy Scriptures in the new Testament
condempns not Music, (but only the abusers thereof,) what reason, or what
authority is there left why Music should not be used with song in any
place convenient, is so be it be not hurtful, in the Kings presence,
Chapel, or Or^sorye, in Cathedral Churches some where, or what offense, else
where. It may be that some will answer unto me, and say, that Music in
those places is Poperye. But I demand again, where was the knowledge of
Poperye when David praised the Lord with it, when the Ar^stle Paul know of
it, and when Saint John from heaven heard it. If it be so (that Music, as it
has been in very deed too much abused in these our later times, shall it
therefore for that abuse be utterly banished and put aside, which will stand
with as good a reason, as when a man has stolen a horse, the Law shall hang
his soul: yet who is so ignorant, the fact being committed, but that both
body and soul is present. Now follows the opinion of Saint Augustine, of
Cornelius Agrippa, of Peter Martyr, and of Lodowicke Lioide, Gentleman.

First Saint Augustine in his ninth Book of Confessions, as Peter Martyr
notes in the fifth Chapter upon the Book of Judges, folio. 103. testifies,
that it happened in ye time of Ambrose (Bishippe of Milloine, about the year
of Christ.377.) For when that holy man together with the people, watched even
in the Church, least he should have been betrayed unto the Arrians, he
brought in singing to auoyd^ tediousness, and to drive away the time: It
seems that by means of sharp persecutions, the godly were scattered
abroad, so that they had no leisure, scarcelye to pray, much less to sing,
the tyranny of their persecutors was so monstrous, from the time of Nero the
son of Domitius, being about.66. year after Christ, until the time of
Constantine the great, which was about ye year of Christ.333. the said godly
Emperor Constantine gave great and large gifts, and yeerelye revenues to
the maintenance of ye Clergy and Preachers of the Gospel. Whereupon the
Bishops of Rome fathereth their foundation and head of Constantine, (a good
pollycye to claim antiquity, if that verylye which is eternity, could not
discern the truth) thus, what with strange opinions, and what with
persecutions, the space of 241. years, or near there abouts, music was laid
a side, and although that S. Augustine repented him, and that he was sorry,
because he had sometime fallen, by giving more attentive heed unto ye measures
and cords of music, then the words which were under them spoken, which thing
hereby he proves to be st^^e, because measure and singing were brought in for
the words sake, and not words for Music. All this condempneth no music, but
the abuse, for in allowing the Church of Alexandria, wherein was a little
singing, etc for this cause I say, he consented ye Music should be retained
in the Church, but yet in such manner, yt he said, that he was ready to change
his sentence, if a better reason could be assigned, and he added, that those
do sin deadly, as they were wont to speak, which give greater heed to
music, then unto the word of God. It seems to me, yt there is none so
senseless, that will be, or have been, in such sort ravished with ye only
melody of the instrument, that they have so excepted of the same, forgetting
their principal virtue of ye true worshipping of God: those that have been
such, are in the same dampnation, that the common Drunkards, Adulterers,
Idolaters, false speakers, viurers, with all those and such wicked, that
thinking to drink, mind not on God, so according to the desire the soul is
poisoned, and the gifts of God abused.

But why Music seems so to ray men in a manner wholye, the reason is
plain, for there are certain pleasures, which only fill the outward senses,
and there are others also which perteine only to the mind or reason. But
music is a delectation so put in the midst, that both by the sweetness of
the sounds, it moves the senses, and by the artificialnesse of the number and
proportions, it delights reason it self. And it happens then chiefly when
such words are added unto it, whose sense is both excellent and learned, etc.
Peter Martyr in that discourse, whether singing may be received in the Church,
says. In the East parts the holy assemblies even from the beginning used
singing. Read in his Commentary folio. 103. Corneli^a Agrippa in his sixth
book of the vanity of Sciences. cap. 63. sets forth the abuse of Music
and the discord (from ye which some supposed the rest condemned) verse
curiouslye under terms or parts of Music, as Enharmonica, Chromatica,
Diatonica, and others, with a nomination of names, as among the Lacedaemonians,
the ^^itting to arms, and Cretensians, which repetition of words seem a great
collections, and little matter, as the fable of the Musition, that by the only
virtue of the Dorian tune, the chastity of Clitemnestia, wife unto king
Agamemnon was preserved, from the assault of Egis^us, who to be revenged slew
the Musition. Horace dislyked the common ^odeiers and stage pipers, calling
them wonderers, and Cornelius terms them the servant of Baudery, but
whereas he says (which no grave man, modest, honest, and valiant, ever
professed. ^eerin he showed his sole conceil: and forgot that which was done
and used in holy writ, altogether flourishing among the Poets, giving an open
contempt of that the Poets secretly scorned, declaring only the abuse, as when
he says, that the Egyptians did forbid their young men to learn Music, I
suppose it was, when Music was so common, as it is now in England in every
Alehouse and baudy corner, but not the principal Music. Anaxilas says,
Music is even like Affrike, it yearly brings forth some strange beast.
Athanasius for the vanity thereof, did forbid it in the Churches, thus be
concludes with the abuse, and not the thing it self.

Lo, Lioide, Pilgrimaga of Princes, folio. 133. sets forth properly Music,
and says, by a Methodical gathering together of authorities, that there is
great controversy for the antiquity of Music, beginning with Orpheus,
Amphion, and Dionisius of Greece. Polibius says, that Music was found first
in Archadia, Tubal among the Herbrues, and Apollo finding a confused Cha^s,
sets down learners of Music, to be Socrates, Aelianus, Agesilaus,
Atchitas, and the mighty Hercules, etc. And though some contemn Music with
Diogenes, and say, that it were more profitable to mend manners, then to learn
music: what is manners, but a concord of honest intentes, which only, is
adorned with nothing but virtue. Alexander the great loved Music, so did the
tyrannt Nero. Hereby may be perceived concord and discord, Music is not the
cause of disorder, but disordered minds abuses Music. Dircedus Captain
over the Spartanes, is said first to invent the trumpet, and taught the
Lacedaemonians to sound against the Messena, in the ^^etd, therwithall to
terrify the courage of his enemies: for as Music to doleful and pleasant,
full of harmony and melody: so is Music terrible and fearful of life and
courage, for we read in the old age, both autenticall and profane, that they
used Instruments of sound of sundry sorts, as among the M^lesio^, pipes
among ye Cretensians instruments with strings, a kind of Gi^^ornes: among the
Parthians ringing of Bells: among the Aethiopians loud songs: among the
Assirians, a kind of skipping: among the Cambrians little drums made of
leather stretched about a whoope, broad, and narrow, having a kind of
hollownesse, All the which they put dry Beans and Pease, to make ye instrument
cattle, with many other unaccustomed manners. But the absurdest thing of all,
which passes the abuse of Music, is, that as the Gentiles and Pagans called
upon Priapus, Pan, Ceres, Juno, Hercules, Ianus, Bellephoton, Dagon, Rempham,
Astaroth, and such like, to be their supporters at arms in the field: so at
this day, those which wuld be loath to be called otherwise these christians, are
not ashamed so call Saint George, to borrowe, for the English, Saint Denis for
France, S. Andrew for Scotland, Saint James for Spain, and so forth in the
Christian Kingdoms, they tell as first upon their Saints, as the Pagan
Gentiles called on their termed Gods, when in very deed this foul abuse
ought to be reformed, which is a discord worse in ye mind then is the dombe
instrument, that can sound none otherwise then the Musition either can, or
will. To conclude, let all be done to the edifieng one of another, and both in
the Lord, and as for those that cannot away with Music in the best part. I
leave them to the aforement maker, which is blessed for ever.

A conclusion of this work by the first translator hereof out of Latin into
English, cap. 149.
THis that we have shortly placed here of accidents of kindly things, as of
Colors, Sauoure, and Odours, of Weights, Licours, and Measures, of Uoice and
of Sound, it may be sufficient for this time. For as I suppose, to the bull and
so the small or simple, that be like to me in Christ Those things of
properties of kindly things that be fully conceived in mind, and treated
in.19. parcells or books, shall suffies to find some reason of the likeness
of things, for which holy writ uses so ready likeness and figures of kind,
not in all things, and of the properties thereof. I make protestation in the end
of this work, as I did in beginning: That in all that is in diverse matters
conteines in this work, right little or naught have I set of mine own, but I
have followed verity and truth, and also followed the words, meaning, and
senses, and comments of holy Saints, and of Philosophers, that the st^^ple
that may not for endless many books seek and find all the properties of
things, of the which holy writ makes mention and mind, may here find soon
what that he desires, and that I have taken is simple and rude^ but I think
them good and profitable is to that ^^ rude in old English terms, and to
other such as I am. Therefore I counsel the simple, that they despise not nor
scorn this simple and rude work, when that they have perfect understanding
and knowledge of this, and plainly at the full, then to understand and to have
knowledge of greater, higher, and more subtle things. I counsel, that they
leave not to seek and search ye learning and doctrine of greater authors and
Doctors: and that I do, and leave on their own aduisement and wit, if they
will correct and amend that that is insufficiently said, and then expediently
to add and put more thereto, that they so in like manner as God gives them
grace and science. That which is by me rude and simple began, may be by their
wits and great wisdoms made complete and perfect, to his magnifieng, laud,
honor, praising, worship, and bliss, that is Alpha and Omega, beginning and
ending of all good. That is the high God, gloriously living and reigning
evermore without end. Amen.

Barthelmew Glantuyle descended of the noble familye of the Earls of Suffolk,
he was a Franciscan Friar, and wrote this work in Edward the thirds time,
about the year of our Lord.1366. In the year.1397. 37. years after, was this
said work translated into English, and so remained by written Coppie, until
Anno Domini. 1471. at which time printing began first in England, the.37. year
of the reign of king Henry the ^. sithence which time this learned and
profitable work was printed by Thomas Berthelet, the.27. year of the reign
of king Henry the.8. which was the year of our Lord God.1535. And last of all
augmented and enlarged, as appears, for the commodity of the learned and
well disposed Christian, by me Stephen Batman, professor in Divinity, and
printed by Thomas East, Anno.1582. the.24 year of the reign of our most
happy and prosperous Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth, whom God fortify in the
numbers of his mercies for ever.

FINIS.
MIEVLX.VAVLT.MOVRIR.EN.VERTV.QVE.VIVRE.EN.HONCTE.


Imprinted at London by Thomas East.


