The Answer that the Preachers of the Gospel at Basile, made, for the defense
of the true administration, and use of the holy Supper of our Lord* Against the
abhominatio^, of the Pa^yshe Mass Translated out of Latin into English by
Geo^ge Ba^crafte. 1548

Imprinted at London by Ihon Day and William Seres, dwelling in Sepul^hres
Parish at the sign^ of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Conduite.

Cum gratia and priuilegio adimprimendum solum.



To the right worshipful and his singular good Master Siluester, Butler,
George Bancrafte, Wishethe prosperitye and health, boeth of body and soul.
WHen I considered with my self the great and dangerous, abuses in the
administracion of such sacraments as our savior Jesus Christ left to his
mystical body, the church of the fayethfull, to be externe signs, and
tokens of such gifts as God has, and does daily work in us, to his own
glory, and salvation of our souls I can find, perceive, and prove none to
be somuche abused, as the holy and sacred supper of our Lord. For where as he
ordined, that holy sacrament of his body, and blood to he eaten and dronken in
remembrance of his passion whose fruit they taste therein, which have there
steadfast faith in him. And thereby show forth the Lords death until he
come, and as bread is made, of many grains, and wine of many grapes, so the
members of the congregation of Christ's church, Haueinge one God, one fayeth,
and one Baptism, are put in reme^brau^^e in eateinge and drinkinge y^ t^^y are
one body, whereof Christ is y^ head. The beally bishopes of Babylon y^ Romish
Antichrist, have anullyd extripate, and clean abolished y^ ordinance of
Christ and use of thappostelles, in the administracion thereof. And have of
their own brain excogitated, devised and brought in to the church a new,
and straynge ordinance for the same, which is as contrary to christ's will,
and purpose, touching that blessed supper as heaven to earth, light to darkness,
life to death, and they call it the blessed Mass but it may be truly called
a diluesh Masking, for menes eyes, are masked there with y^ they cannot se the
truth, but through that detestable abominacion, have been, brought to most
miserable perdicio^, for they apply it to souldyoures in war, for fair
weather and rain, for the plage, pockes, a^^ such other diseases, for beasts
sick of yt morren for preseruacion of health, and for remission of sins,
boeth for the quick and dead. I will not speak how God is mocked therein and
Christ had in derision, they pley booe pepe, with seste me, or seste me not.
My pene abhoreth to write what duckinge knellenge lickinge kissing, or Crossing
and breathing, these diuilles apes have devised in this whorishe Mass there
desguisinge In apparel at Mass, has picked many a pore man's puts, and
has robbid their souls of the true fruits of the spirit, for all such somes
of money that men should have bestowed on their pour parents, children and
nedie neighbors, was to little for their vestime^res, albes, stoles, chalices,
corporaces, altar clothes, Massbockes, and such other, wherein Christ has
no delight, for Christ and the Appostelles vsede none such disguisynge in the
admininistracion of this blessid Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, but
were conten^^d with such ramente as they were accustomed daily to were, and so
these shameless Idolaters, showing them selves of what generation they are, dare
so bouldlye face out such manifest lies against gods glory y^ plain truth,
and ordinance of christ* What shall I speak of these holy mumers (I would have
said holy Mass mongers) that when they here of any rich manes death, they
stock together like rauennes to a dead Carre^. Not to conforte them that
mourn for the dead, with hope of y^ resurrection of the flesh, not to give
thanks to God for them that are departed in the fayeth of Christ nor to pray
that we, departinge in the same fayeth, may with them receive like reward,
but to get money with Requiem eternal, and pro quorum memoria corpus Christi
simuter, with censinge, dashing of holy water, and such other like Iuglinges,
so that the right use of it is clean altered, as though^ christ had never
ordained it in remembrance of his death, and passion, and for as much as in
this treatise folowinge, the true use of the Lords supper and al^o the
deuelishe patchinge of the popish Mass is in few words lively declared, I
have thought it good to translate the same into the english tongue, to the
edifinge of my dear brethren in Christ, praiinge God, the father of our
savior Jesus Christ, that these things may shortly be reformed, that the
pore stock of Christ be no more deceyuede with such craftye conueiaunce, to
keep them in co^tenual blindedes for lucres sake, to y^ great danger of their
souls, and pernicious derogacio^ of gods glory, to whom be honor and glory
for ever AMEN

FOr as much as God has commanded us by his Appostle i. Pet. iii.
Peter (Oh ye fathers of our country) in wisdom gravity and godliness to be
ready at all times to give an answer to every man, that as^eth us a reason of
our faith it is met^ yt we should more gladly answer to a question proponed
being requirede of you our most Sovereign Magistrates to whom we know
also what is our duty in other things. We have affirmed and upon sure
ground, and reason proved, in our public sermons, that the popish Mass, is
not an offering for ye quick and dead but a most detestable abominatio^
before god And therefore a man will not belyue how glad we are, which love the
truth, that you our most prudent senators require of us an answer to this
question for we conceive great hope that God which moves you to desire to
atteine the knowledge of the light and truth, will of his infinite mercy
encrese his grace in you that after the example of the godly kings, Ezechias
and Iolias when the truth diligently serched out and truly known, you will
take away, abolishe and utterly distroye all such tradicions of man as are
repugnante to the word of God. And al such things as are taught and set
fourth contrary to the ordinance of god and wholesome doctrine of Christ,
which things stire up the anger and griuouse displeasure for God against us
miserable creatures for in so doing, you shall norishe confirm and establishe
peace unity and concord in this noble city of Basell, and bring your
subjects to a sincere and godly form of lyuinge, that at y^ day of
Judgment the blood and condempnacion of most detestable sinners shall not be
required at your hands being our Magistrates and gouerners but rather you
shall be rewarded of God and receive in this world praise and glory boeth of
your subjects and of straingers for nothing can rather win the favor of
subjects to their Maiestrates and rulers and bring them to obedience then the
word of God, and his commandments frelye preachede and without danger of
ponishement, as you may evidently perceive by Iosue Ios. ^.
and the people of God committed to his governance. And strayngers are moved
with nothing so much as when the^se the truth, the glory of god and an
honest order of lyuinge magnified and had in reverence, for God does keep the
city that seeks his glory.

First of all we proteste that in our puklyke sermones and in this writynge we
nothere speak nor write against the most holy ordinance of Christ or the
Apostles in the administracio^ of ye Lords supper, but we both speak and
write against ye abuses ye be crept into the church, and are obstinatli
defended, by co^tinuau^ce of time without ye hollie scriptures, to ye great
hinderau^ce of the fruits of christ's passion and craftle deceiueinge of ye
unlearned people contrary to Christ's ordinance and administracio^ of ye
apostles ye common rumor is through ye mali clouse envy, and faulse forgid
lies of some popish preachers and of some other ye are even against us which
know y^ truth, ye we goo about to let abolishe, and bring to naught all good
works, they feign this on there own head, as they do al other things for
nethynge, can be more greauouse to us then, to here that men do not live after
ye commandments of God. And we know through the grace of God. What
ceremonies, and what part of ye ceremonies is profitable and mete for christen
me^ and our purpose, maintained with a good conscience, is to use well, sincerly,
and without any fau^sly devised traditi^s, so much of this sacrament of our
Lords sit per, as was most perfectly begone, and ordiened of Christ our master
and there can no man prove that our intent was other wise at any time and this
by ye assistaunce of gods grace, we will affirm by the only scriptures of God.
Now we will in gods name declar, and show forth our reasones, for this questi
on proponed. Vndoubtely al such as do not regard and care for ye only glory of
god, teach nothing that is godly, true, or in aniwise profitable. Math. i^
For god says by Malachi. ye prophet. And now, Oh ye priests this
commandment touches you if you will not hear it nor regard it my name,
says the Lord, of hosts ^ wyil send accuisse upon you, and will Curss^
your blessing yea ^ursse them will I if ye do not take heed It is therefore
manifest that God being griuousely displeased cursseth the^ that regard not
his name and glory, for God is gellouse and a consuming f^er. He will have his
name magnified ^eut. v.
and pray^sid the Iues and gentiles did fall into lewd minds Rom, i.
and corrupt Judgments because they knew God, and did not glorifi him as
God. The lord ^sa. i. 42
him self says, I will g^ue my glory to none other. Finallye ^ath, 12.
he that seeks not gods glory does another desire to increase it nor does
speak, live, nor is of God out is abomination before God. For whosoever is not
with 1. Cor. ^.
Christ as who says ye God may be glorified, he is a^ominacio^ before God and
is his enemy, when the ^a^. ^3.
natural man perceyueth not the things that pertayne to the To. ^^.
spirit of God. And his thought is ^s fare in sunder, from the will of God, as
y^ earth from heaven for in deed man touching his own knowledge, does know
nothing less the^ y^ will of God. Who therefore Luc. xvi.
can tell what is the will of God and his true glory Christ says, that
which is highly estimede, among men is abominacion before God, for men are
ever prone and ready to fall, and forsake the truth, to folo^e and cleave to
there own profit, and inuencions whereof Idolatry and othere abominacions,
come up and have Prove. ^^^
there begynynge wherefore the wise man says, trust in the lord Deuteronomy. xi^.
with all thine heart, and not in thine own, wisdom. And Moses says, you
shall not do after al things that we do here this day eueri man what seems
hy^n good in his own eyes, it is therefore folishely spoken to say, what
thing soever that a man does for gods sake is a good work, and worthey to be
rewarded, for then eueri man might have knoledge sufficientli without any
teaching or doctrine of the word of God. But how should a man be then of an
vndoubting conscience or with what hope, might a man live to please God. Where
the knoledge of ye will of God wantethe, there most also hope and fayeth want*
namely in trouble and affliction what so ever truly is not of fayeth is sin
where Syne is there is abominaon before God. Therefore god has declared his
will and mind, by thapostles. And Christ him self (that our knowledge may be
sure, and our oppinion undoubtful) how god ought to be truly worshipped.
Moreover he has given us astrayght command me^t to keep his law, that we
shall turn another to the right nor yet to the Deuteronomy. xvii
l^ste hand that we shall another add nor take away any thing from it, he
that will not harken to the prophet that I will raise up says the Lord, I will
require it of him, after the law was given and the truth was known, God
would be worshipped, as his word teaches and the offense was the^ much more
greuouse. Albeit king Saull did kill and offer fat Oxen, i. R. xv.
to the true living God which was a good work in apparau^ce: yet because the
scripture of God did not teach him so to do, God therefore was griuoslye
displeased with him. For although he offered his sacrifice to God, yet that
accounted he to him for Idolatry. ii. Re. ^^
Oza died suddenly because he tuched, the arc against the Lords
commandment, yet h^^ hought it had been agood deed. Did not the earth swallowe
up Corah and his adhere^tes because they would ^ume. xvi.
take upon them the office of the priests. The Israhelites, did think it a
godly and goodlye thing to ^eut. xvi.
have pleasant groves night unto the altar of God, but him did it not please.
They though it agoodly ^acte at Tophet in Jerusalem, ^ome. vii.
to kyl and offer there own sounes but the more they did so y^ greater was there
abominacion before god For god says he never commanded them nether came it
ever into his Iose. ^.
thought. God commanded Iosue to be strong and bold, that he might observe,
and do according to all the law, which Moses commaundyd him, and that he
should turn there from, nither to the right nor to the left hand y^ he might
do wisely in all things Esa. xxx.
he took in hand, god by his prophet Esaias says, alas for the disobedient
children, that will take counsel without me and will take, asecerete advise,
and not out of my spirit, therefore add they Math. ^
sin unto sin, and Christ says in vain do they serve me, teachinge the
doctrines and precepts of men, the proud herted Jews did stand so well in
there own conceit for their tradicions and inventions, that for love they had
to them, they despised hated, and at last killide our master Christ John. xxi
our aduersaris dare say yt Christ and the apostles taught many things,
which are not written in the scripture, and that Christ said his Disciples
could not bear away all that he had taught this cauil repungnau^t to the true
understanding of the scripture may be an occasion, and cause of great
errors for there with all lies and herisies may be confirmed they will say
albeit it is not written, yet the appostles taught it by word of mouth, and
also the scriptures of God, should be an imperfect doctrine, which thing to
offirme, is blasphemy against the holy ghost considering that the^ all ye
doctrine of our faith should be put in question. Therefore surely so much is
contained in holy scripture as is necessary unto salvation to eueri one that
believes They say could the church err so long time as it has? If your
doctrnie be true, the* true church has not errede, which has the word of
god only. The church verily must be tried by the word of God, and not the
word of god by the church, whether the church that believes be of many or
of few, for the church is known by the fruits, and not because, it
consists of many, and has her begynynge of the word of God, and her fruits,
are tried by the word, whether the tr^e christan church brought them forth or
no if it be the true christen church John. ^.
she hears no another voice but Christ's her shepherde and bryde gro^e, which
the appostles preached to the church, and if an angel came out of heaven
teaching any other doctrine then this, let him Gala. ^.
be accurssed, if we love and follow the doctrine that Christ taught and being
his disciples, we shall not be excluded, from the true church so long as we
keep with us the word of God. But he is puffed up with pride and does i.
Timo. ^
know nothing at all that will not obey the word of God, he therefore which does
know nothing, can not teach us religion, and y^ true worshippinge of god, if
the Mass be vsede as it has been hitherto, it can in no wise agree with, the
word of God, but is so much repugnaunt as what thing is most. The Mass
therefore is a diuilishe Idolatry, and detestable abominacion, against God, and
y^ maynteners thereof, shall incur, his displeasure* for ever this thing we will
prove two ways first because the popish Mass, is used in nothing like the
supper that Christ orde^ned, and differs nolesse from it then black to white
they sin therefore so grinouslye as did Achas y^ made an altar at Jerusalem
eg^^. ^vi.
like that which was at Damasco^, and cast the aultare of god out of the
temple so they have, left the true use of our Lords supper, And instead of
it have instituted and ordeinede the Mass of their own folishe devise, and
oppinion which is a great and blasphemouse abominacio^ before god. Moreover we
will prove by there erroures and abusinge of y^ mass, which they call an
offeringe for the quick and dead, that it is an horible abominacion, for if
the Mass were ordained of Christ, which is faulse, yet by there abusinge of
it they would make it a blasphemouse, and hemous abominacion before god,
undoubtedly we ought to follow truly, and sencelye, that thing which is
absolutely Deuteronomy. vi.
sufficient of it self alredie.

First let us consider and expende the manner and order that Christ used at
the institucion of this holly and sacrede supper, and then we will confer the
abuse with the truth. But we ought to learn all these things of the
Evangelists, and of Saint Paul, and of none other. Verily the true Mass,
which is worthy al kinds of praieses, is the Mass which Christ ordained, at
his last supper before he should suffere, Luke ^^
for when the hour was come, he sat down and the twelve appostles with him,
and he said unto the^, I have inward ly desired to eat this passover with
you, before that I suffer, for I say unto you hence forth I will not eat of it
any more until it be fulfilled in y^ kingdom of God and he took the cup and
gave thanks and said, take this and deuid it among you, for I say unto you,
^ will not drink of the frut of the vine, until the kingdom of god come, and
he took bread and when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave it unto
the^ saying, this is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance
of me. Like wise also when he had supped he took the cup saying, this cupe is
the new, testament, in my blood which is shed for you.

These words Saint Luke ^^^it. ^h. xxvi.
writes, the other euangelestes writ the same, but they differ in some
words, as Math said, Drink all of this, for this is my blood, which is the
new testamente that is shed for many, for Mar. ^
the remission of sins, and saint Mark says, they al drank of it meaning
the cup. Saint Paul does expound Christ's words saying this do as often as
you drink it in remembrance of me for as often times, as you shall eat this
bread and drink this cup ye shall show forth the Lords death tell he come,
but let a man examyne himself, and so let him eat of the bread and drink of
the cup, Saint John does not declare the ordinance of this sacrament.

^. But he teaches, from the.xiii. John, ^^ ^v. xvii. x
Cap. to the* xviii. how Christ did use his supper and what he did at it, he
washed his disciples, fete, he preached to the^ and commanded them to be in
charity he exhorted them to patience, he strengthend confirmed, and
establyshed their faith toward god and prayed for them to his father, but
especially he rebuked Judas the traitor.

S. Paul says we being many are one bread, and one body in so much we all
are partetakers, of one bread and y^ Evangelists, report that Christ did
finishe his holy supper with thanks geueyng. The some and ground of the hole
matter proponed, consists in the sentences of scripture now rehearsed, but
because Christ says, search the scripture we therefore will are counsel, of the
word of God in other plases and debate how the Lords supper ought to be vsede
let us first divide these questions into four parts, first some things are
common, both to the ministre, and receiuour of the Sacrament, moreover some
things belong only to the ministers thyrdly some things perteyne to the
receyuer only, and finally some things must be observed in the sacrament
alone. First let us expende and consider what is the dutes of y^ ministers and
laity together at this holly supper. Christ was the minister and the.xii.
aposteles, were the receyuers and laity Luke. xx
for S, Luke says when the hour was come Christ and the. ru. apostles i. ^o.
xiii^
sat down to be an example to us to do all things in the congregation with
comlynes and order. For we se, y^ Christ, observed boeth time and place but yet
those ought not to be understood that we shall leave the true meaning, and
follow the bare letter, yt time and place was most myte, for him to go about
that godly work, and thanks giuinge, boeth because the easter lamb ought to
be eaten in y^ evening, and y^ night of Christ's passion was at hand but it is
most mete, to us to minister that sacrament, before dinner that the laity
shall receive it standing and not sittyng, and also that it be broken in two
pieces, before the administracio^ to y^ laity and not when it is ministered,
for the evangelists, commanded and decrered nothing in these externe thing,
but an honest order, for it is impossible that we should do and observe, the
self same order of receyueinge the sacrament that the apostles did for the^
no mo then. xii. should receive it at once And that of one minister it should
also be recyued in the evening. Moreover Christ did eat the easter lamb with
his disciples, and refused that bodily meat and drink saying be would eat
no more, of that, until it were ^, xx^^.
fulfilled, in the kingdom of God, nor drink of the fruit of the vine,
until the kingedome of God come, that we after his example should neythere
seek, for a carnal supper to fill the belly, nor be addicte and given to the
obseruau^ce o^ the Iuishe ceremonies and shadows of the truth, but that with
an unfeigned faith we should with thanks giving receive the spiritual fode in
the word and promises of God. Also both the minestres and receivers ought to
come to the Lords table, in charity, and proteste true mutual love, one to
an other, for Saint John says Christ did ernestly preach, charity John.
(...) xiiii. x^. x^ xvii.
to his disciples and loved the^ to the end, for we being one congregation
are members of one body and brethren in deed, by Christ. For as saint Paul
says though 1. Cor. ^.
we be many, yet are we one body when we are partakeres, of one bread,
finally it is mete that one, tarry for anothere, except some matter of great
importance let us, and that we continue in prayer to the end Judas alone,
departied away before the other to his own destruction. Saint Paul says,
brethren when you come together ^or^^,
to eat, let one tarry for annother and if any man be hu^grie let him ^th.
xxvi. ^^e. xiii^.
eat at home. Say^te Mathewe and Saint Mark say that after they had said
grace, they went up into the hill of Olives Now let us learn what is the
function and office of the minister, and stua^d of the mi^^eries of God this we
are ta^ght of Christ himself in ye admini^tracion of ye sacrament to his
disciples wherein diverse and su^drt things are to be diligently noted and
observed. First how he did give him self to al his disciples and ministers
and in especially to the preachers, being an example in washinge of their
fete, that they should do the same and be prompte and ready at all times to
minister, and do service to eueriman. Moreover here is to be noted that Christ
did willingelye and of purpose shone and abhor al externe and outward pompes
and solemn sightes, that he might printe in our hertes things of greater
importance, also when he had washed their feet* he went again to the table
and put on John. xi^
his accustomed rament teaching his disciples by this example to go about such
things as ought to be most chifflye regarded, for he then ernestly preached
the Gospel admonished and rebuked Judas the teaytoure, and taught his
disciples, to be in charity patience, and hope of things to come, so John. xv
plainly and manifestly, y^ they said you speak not now in parables.

Note also that Christ gave Math. x^
thanks to God the father, before he gave the sacrament to his disciples,
exhorting them to remember i. Cor xii.
and show forth thereby his passion until he come. Finally he called upon his
father with a fervent John. ^^
desire, and prayed for all the^ that beliue. Now touching the ^. xvii.
receyuers, of our Lords supper, they gave great attendaunce, to the word
and doctrine of Christ, and with obedience receyned the sacrament of the body
and blood, of Christ, Saint Mark says they al did drink, by his saying
no man is excepted. Finally let us ^^. x^ii^.
expende and consider of what thing the sacrament is made, undoubtedly it is
made of bread wine, and the word, for there cannot be the sacrament of our
Lords supper where any of these lacks, Christ verily t^ke material bread
and wine, chosinge them for the use of the sacrament, we read not that he took
water grapes or any such other thing, and he sayede these words. This is my
body which ^e. xxi^.
shall be given for you, and this cup is the new testamente, in my blould which
shall be shed for you by these words the bread, and wine are made the sacrament,
and holly tokens of Christ's body and blood, these words offer to us y^
promesses of the Joyful Gospel, which if we receive, with a true faith, we eat
spiritually in spirit y^ flesh, and blood of christ and thereby obtainlife
eternal.

The sacrament is like a written Testament, that promises great gifts and is
sealed with two seals, that ought to be kept hole and vnbroke^ if all these
things before rehearsed, were observed and kept then the Lords supper should
be truly used, the Mass (as they call it) should perfectly be holy, for god
praised therein, would regard it, and we should receive of it, great fruits and
goodness, for therebye we are enstructed to believe in god, and love our
neighbor excludinge all-sedicion, and disobedience that peace patience and
concord, may take place and rule, against this doctrine, nothing can be
proved, and debated by the holy scripture for it is grounded on most sure
principles, and fundacion, referringe, all things to fayeth and ^i. i. John.
i. ^. iiii. v.
charity, by the which two al things ought to be tried, paraduenture they
will answer, that noman can find fault with our sayeinge, but yet it is,
expediente to Join other ceremonies with the approved use in the
administracion of this sacrament, of our Lords supper as have been, used
hitherto, and so the hollye thing shall be worthei the greater prais^. We
answer that it is nomattex though these ceremonies, were omited and left
which were exco^itate, and found out by man's reason and a true christian man
will not be offended there with, as lightyng of candeles singing, ringing of
belles, deckinge of ault^rs gyltynge of Images, velvet and enbrodered
ornaments, relics of saints, Organs pricksonge descant and such other,
which do not edify the congregation that they may increase in godliness fayeth
and charity, for as Saint Paul Art. xv.
says bodily exercise, is litel profitable, but rather when these externe
things, are highly esteemed and defended with touth and nail, as we have
seen, by experience: these percepts of god, says, humility charity and
preachinge of the word are little regarded, when these true good things that
please God, and are taught us of the scripture do wonderfully work in us
godliness, and Justice. If this multitude of ceremoneis had pleased God and ben
thought profitable to bring men to godliness and virtuous living. No doubt
but Christ would have taught the^, The apostles would have observed and kept
them, and S Paul would have greatly magnified and praised the^ and if god
would yt his noble works should have been had in reuer^ce, setfurth and
extolled, with sumptuouse ceremonies, he would have thaught our fathers of the
private church to use them after a most gorgiouse facion, as they did, in
Jerusalem when Solomon's temple was dedicated ^egst. viii.
where many fat Oren, were slain, and much monye spente also when Aaron the
high priest was consecrated, and when the arc of couenaunte was made if god
would that we should do so, this multitude of ceremonies had been laufully
instituted in the primative church but christ wuld that we should be occupied
with weightier matters, and less regard ths ^rtern^ pomp, then heavenly and,
celestial for ceremonies, are nothing but figurs, to shadow and hyde the
truth from the unlearned. A man therefore ca^ use no better, order in the
administracion of our Lords supper, then that which Christ him self used,
but we are not pleased with Christ when we are not pleased with the order and
way, that he takes. Naama^ when he dispiced that plain way to wash
himself in Iorda^ remained always a leper, and when he did wash him i. Cor.
iii.
self as the prophet commanded him he was healped. Verily me^nes wisdom in
matters of god, is folishnes we cannot set forth, and minister the Lords
supper, more purely then when we follow there in Christ, and his disciples for
that which men put to of there own brain, without authority of s^riture is
merlie faulce, albe it they ascribe the same to the holly goo^t. What fool
hardines is this to adioyne their dremes to the spirit of God, does it of
necessity fol^we that when two or three Bishops are assembled together, that
the holly gooste does decre and make laws by them? we must examine and try
there constitucions, and decres, whethere they agree with Christ's doctrine,
and do extolle teach and establishe fayeth, and charity or no, for in so do
ynge a man may easlye perceive that the hollie ghost is not the author of such
dirtie tradicions and lousy laws, but rather yt it is blasphemy, to think
that the office of the hollye gooste is to institute and ordain such
supersticious, and unprofitable ceremonies.

They y^ know the nature of the holy ghost, by the word of God are assured
that he commanded not such trifles and superfluouse things, to be done, as
have been constituted, and decreed, in mani general cou^sailes for he does not
renew, y^ shadows, of the imperfect old law nor laith on christian men's
shoulders, the yoke, that another the apostles nor fathers of the old Math. ix.
testamente could bear, for noman does put new wine into old botteles,
nothere sows apiece of new cloth into an old garment but our aduersaris most
blasphemously affirm that although they constitute and ordain many
ceremonies contrary to the liberty of the Gospel and repugnaunte to Christ's
ordinances yet they are made and ordained by the holly ghost.

Now we have declared the true doctrine of Christ, touching the
administracion of the sacrament of our Lords supper we will also consider the
popish Mass with it. Let us first show and declare the abuse boeth in the
function and office of the minister, and of the receyuer for this is the chief
error of y^ papisties, not because they do not observe time and place but
forasmuch they regard not the liberty of a christen man who^ Christ set at
liberty with sheddynge of his own blood. And lay snares for men's co^sience
with precepts in exte^ne things as in ornaments oyleing a supersticiouse
auriculare confession, and in other like things innumerable, for both the
ministers and receivers of the sacrament think it a capital offense if they
omite and leave any of these beggarly tradicions of me^ behind and undone
desending them under pretense of good order, when there can be nothing more
confuce and out of order then to make the Lords supper subject to men's
co^stitutions and precepts in extrene things from which Christ our master
made it free.

They Judge it a much more h^inouse offense, to omyte any of the vain
tradicions of man undone, then if a man should be a fornicator, a dicer a
dronckeard a blasphemer of god, or in any other such vices, an abominable
sinnercondeminge of heresy all such as neglecte these ceremonies and ungodly
constitucions of theirs, and Christ's ordinance being nothing wourth or
without there cererimonies invented of their own brain, it must therefore be
a detestable abominacion, to trouble christian men's liberty after this sort,
for if it might co^tinew still free, men might let orname^tes pass and such
other externe things, for the holy ghost does not teach, them which set
things out of order, after this sort. The true honor and service, of God is
subject nothere to time place nor person charity in edefiynge thy
neighbor, in these things, ought to rule all congregacions. For all christian
congregacions use not one kind, and order in their ceremonies. Themperoure
Charles first of yt name did labor to bring al churches to agree in one
kind and order of ceremonies but he could never bring it to pass, for it was
against god, and therefore it could never be brought to effect. If we should
be compelled to observe and keep such precepts of men being profitable another
to faith nor charity, me^ may Judge that we have not yet eaten the easter
lamb, that is to say. That greater burdens, are leyde on our necks, the^
ever was on the Iues which thing is abominacio^ before God, and that they have
done so to us, the deuersitie of ornaments, and many other folishe
cerremonies, which they have borrowed of the Iues, do manifestly declare and
testify as it shall appear hereafter. Also they contemn their neighbors
which beliue in Christ, and desire to be incorporate, to him by charity and
excommunicate, curse, and suspende them for not obseruyng some of their vain
ceremonies wherein they break charity which ought chifely to remain among
them that, are pertakers of the Lords supper. There is no true christen
church, where charity is not, all that church therefore with the Mass, is
obominable before god.

The praires of that congregation, are not hard of God which fereth not to
come to y^ communion of Esal. ^.
Christ's body and blood, with hertes full of envy malice and hatered, and
with hands full of blood finally if any thing be abominable before god it is ye
mass, for it oppresses y^ christian liberte, it has brough in a great
multitude of Iueshe Gala. iiii. ^
cereimonies, and has no regard to christen charity. s Paul speak ing of
the conscience exhorts us to persiste, in liberty, and suffer not our selves
to be lead under the yoke of bondage. Also he teaches us, that our works
are unprofitable without charity. Now let us declare and open the abuses of
the ministers We freely knoledg and confess that al though many ministers of
the sacrament be unmeet and reprouide of god, through their abominable and
vicious living, yet the sacraments remain sacraments, through the
ministracion of the word, but this we affirm, that the virtue and efficacy
of the sacraments is not like, neither y^ holy ghost works like effect when a
man receives the sacraments of an ungodly, and impudente sinner, and when he
receives them of agodlye, and true christen man, for albeit the sacrament is
present, yet there is in it neither grace nor virtue for both y^ sinner and he
y^ co^se^tth are equally punished as both the byeres, and sellers of Doves
were driven out of the temple: so both the minister of the sacrament, and the
receyuer shall be gyltie of Christ's Luke. xv^
body and blood. These minister is giltye because he does minister
vnwortheylye for truly i. Co. ii.
his service is abominable before god for if there were, no worse things then
the living of the ministers to make the Mass and an bominacion before God,
yet their impuritie of life, is inoughe to make it vnpure and filthy before
the face of God. By what place of scripture can they prove, that the Mass is
holy, accepted of god, and a profitable work for the quick and dead of what
ministry so ever it be said? In deed by non for how can the dead help the
dead, eithere a sinner make a sinner rightouse, every man knowing that sin
pleases not god, may perceive what theye can do with God, for what so ever is
not of fayeth is sin. Their Mass therefore ^^. x^ii^
is sin and abominable before God.

Now let us consider what fu^ction and office Christ through his own
example committed to the ministres ^ stewardes of the sacrament when he washed
his disciples fete, it was done to teach the ministers of gods word that
they should not exauite them selves as Lords and masters over the laytye,
for Saint Peter says, the^ders, ought to be an example and mirror to y^
stock of Christ for pride is a great abominacion before God Christ iruly can
not be pleased with servants that are puffed up with pride. But where is
there any humility among them? none at all. I will not speak of there shaue^
crowns, miters, silver staves, by shoppes ringes, or other such costlye, and
rich robes, and ornaments, In deed they are much more precious, then
Christ's pour simple garments but truly: the remembrance of Christ's
passion, cannot be showed forth after the right way in such more the^
princely aparell. For another goulde nor silver was seen at Christ's death
albeit they by this rich raiment have inverted and devised, a glisteringe
pretense, of mystical understanding, Saint. i. P^. ^^.
Peter could not, suffer excess of apparrile in gentylwomen, much less in
the administracion of our Lorddes Supper, and in them that should be an example
to al othere in Godly conversation and living, their prydde can not be hyd,
for they believe, and labor to perswadde other that by the Bishops
anoynetynge a mark is printed in their souls, whereby they are made of
greater authority, the^ angels or s. Marye y^ virgin. yea, and this mark the^
say they, can by no means be put away They extole therefore, them silues,
above al men and set them selves at liberty, from all burdenes, and bondage,
that other me^ are charged with all their will is to be Lords over all me^ and
all service due to the^. They magnifi and extolle, there prayers in there holly
Mass and set the popes name before the, kings in their canon, if a man yea a
good, and godly man touch the Chalice nor the sacrament by chance, it is a
Capital offense, they judge it an heinouse abominacion, to ministre the
sacrament to the laity under boeth kinds. And why because they are not
anointede, and made popish priests. Their pride also is opened and showed
forth nothing more then in their offering and sacrifice for they are fully
persuaded that they offer to god, his son Jesus Christ, for remission of
sins, boeth for quick and dead.

This presu^ptuouse arogancie, must needs be an abomination before god, ama^
cannot find in these proud papists, neither liberality in doing of good
deeds, or service to other where unto they are chiffelie chosine. But it is
their property to serve dame Aueris, and their own bealis. If reward be
promised, they are redye to sing Mass, but if no reward come the^ will they
another sing nor say. For no penny, no pater noster. Undoubtedly Ephesians. vi.
every couetouse man is an Idolater. For where couetousenes reigns, as
Saint Paul says, there is Idolatry, which is abominacion before god These
couetuouse popish priests are therefore, abominable before god. And another
sort of these papists will sing Mass, not for money, but for fear of
losing their fate promocions But what great sin is this to do these things
against their conscience? For they do it fearinge least other wise they
should want a living. Oh what mistrust have they in God who fedeth and
clotheth birds, and other living creatures, and thus have they made a banquet
of the most holly supper of our lord, for fylthy lucre and gaynes. If aman
should desire one of the laytie, which is a good and godly man, to receive the
sacrament, and he should have for his labor a couple of grotes or a testarne,
he would not only refuse it, but grievously taking y^ matter, yt any man should
have such an opinion in him.

Notwithsta^dinge these Mass mongers think it great honesty to receive
money for their Masskinge, when it is to their great shame and rebuke. This
saing of Saint Paul, he that serves the altar must live also thereof: does
not make for them for S. Paulle i. Cor. ix.
does teach nothing elses by this sainge, but that the preachers of the Gospel
may without groudge of conscience provide of the gods of the church, for
such things as they lack. And this argument, is taken of the preistes of
tholde law. That as they had there living, for offringe of sacrifices, so the
ministres, of the gospel should have their living, for preaching of the same.
For Saint Paul did no more mean by this text, that priests should sing
Mass for the quick and dead then he purposed, to teach men, how to war
Their intent, is not to serve Christ our true altar, but the god there ^eb.
iii.
own bealies woe be to them, that maintain, this patched popish Mass, either
with rewards counsel or any other way, for in so doing they give no less
occasion to these papists to commite most heinouse offenses then the
Pharesies and rulars of the people, did to Judas the traytoure. Here we omyte
and passover their filthye, whoredom, continual hate maliciouse, envy
unfruitful Idelnes, and such othere abominacions which make the^ reprouable,
both before god and man, and through this their ungodly conuersacio^, all men
for the most part, are driven from the true service of God a man therefore
cannot think how much god aborreth the^ and theirdedes. If these proud
impudent papists, had never so little remorsse of conscience, they would
abhor, and be ashamed of them selves. Feign these Mass mongers the popes
creatures, to be godly liberal, and that they are not proud in their
ornaments and ceremonies, but walk in christen liberty notwythstandinge the
contrary is plainly seen in them, yet they would men, should have such
oppinion in the^. And let us come to there function and office wherein they can
do nothing well and truly, nether with good will, nor in knowledge. Our lords
Supper ought never to be ministered with out the remembrance of Christ's death,
nor without a sermon, or exhortacio^, and that in a language that the
congregation may perfictly understand, to their edificacion, ^. Co^. xii^
as Christ also taught, his disciples. In the mass is nothing but mockes, and
they make Idolatry of the Gospel and Epistiles which the holy ghost gave us
for our consolacio^ correction and exhortacion But these popish, priests have
made of the^ an externe pomp, extollynge them selves above the Iues and
Gentiles, with there glistringe shows, of vain ceremonies the Ieues and
Genttiles therefore laughed the^ to scorn vsinge them as foles and madmen. The
Enangelestes require an other kind of working, and exercise, then sensinge
wastinge of candles, singing of pricksong and kissinge of golden books. It were
more mete to preach the grace of our lord Jesus Christ, but Christ is not
spoken of at al, among the^ and the light y^ should be set upon the
candelsticke, is hide under ye bushel. Now where the word of God, is kept
under and hyd away there is nothing, but darkness and error we have therefore
plainly declared and proved that this hinderaunce of Gods word is an heinouse
abominacio^ in the sight of God. And this is out of question that every Mass
where in the word of god is not preached and that in a language that the
congregation may understand it, is a most pyuyshe Idolatrye. But as they
follow not Christ in there sermons and preachinge, so do they not observe his
order and manner, of thanks giueinge, and prayer. For they have such a rabble
of vain ceremonies, yt devout prayer, can have no place they have also many
collectes, that true christen me^ ought not to say. Many read, that which
they understand not. When they Mass for monye and other causes before rehearsed,
how can it be possible, that they being whore mo^gers and al together carnally
minded, should pray and give thanks with a devout and pure conscience.
Though they also seem to them selves, to be devout Math. ^
men yet in prayinge, they make much lip labor and their Mal. ii.
hertes are far of. They are therefore abominable before god. For as he says,
by Malachias, there blessinge shall be accursed. When they come to the
distrubucion of the sacrament, they break it, in there pieces one prece for
the quick, another for them that are in heaven and the third for the dead
being in purgato^ie, and at last eat all them selves but it were more mete
to feed others, and be without the^ selves. They ordeine a feast, and call no
gestes to it, nor will eat of one lofe, and one cupe among them selves: but
every man will have his own aultare his own lof and cup. Wherein do these
things agree with our Lords supper.

Neither Iwe nor gentile, can mock and delude Christ's ordinances, more then
these ungodly wretches, it is marvel that the eareth opens not to swalowe
the^ quick in to hell. Now touch ynge the laytye it were against reasone, to
rebuke the^ but rather to be sorye, and bear with their weakness, and
ignorance. Whosoever comes to our Lords table, ought to hear the word of
God, as ye apostles did. But how ca^ they here, when no man preaches They
ought to make an answer, and say Amen to their prayer. But they another know
nor under stand, what they say and so they extol and magnify noughtie and
vain tri^eles for frutfull and god li matters, and for the lively word of God
they believe in fond folish fables. It is necessary ye we pray to God that
his people may be delivered, from the hunger of gods word, that they may
know how miserabli, they have been deceived by these faulse preachers. What
shall the unlearned people do, when lies and erroures so much prevail, and
they being captives, and prisoners under Antichrist, gods enemy. They receive
y^ sacrament but once in the year, and in one kind contrary to Christ's,
ordinance. It must therefore be unthankful, and abominable before God when
his church is spoiled and distroyed after such sort. Finally there are some
erroures and abominacions found in the very sacrament. For the material
substance of it ought to be bread and wine, as it is in deed, as S. Paul Cor.
xi.
so calls it both before ye co^secrati on and after. But the papists, teach
ye, not her bread nor wine remain after ye co^secracion but accidents only ye
is, color savor taste ruddines and such other. And wc such manifest lies
they blind men's eyes to believe that, ye thing is in the sacrament which is not
there, and that, that is not in the sacrament which his there in deed.

Allexander first pope of ye name decred and ordiened. That water should be
menglide, with wine, which thing is repungnaunie to Christ's ordinance. For
he commanded no such thing to be done. If we will expend, and consider, the
words of Christ our Master, touching this sacrament we may easly perceive
what Satan goes about. The papists mu^ble in latin, and the belles make
such ringinge that the hears, can not understand what is said, or song. They
have put to also, in the consecracio^ words that are not in the Gospel as Enim
truly, and Eleuatis oculis in celsi lifting up his eyes to heaven. And Eternt
Of the everlasting. Also Misteriu^ Fidel. The mystery of ye fayeth. But these
are matters of small weight, they leave unsaid words of grater importau^ce which
is Quod prouobis tradetur aut frangitur That shall be delivered or broken for
yon. And men's ears are stopped with plaing one the organs, and descante songs.
When these words are spoken least, they should doubt in any thing that is
said. If the people remember christ's passion at ye time the priests are not
thanks worthy, for they should boeth remember the words of the passion, and
also give thanks to God for the same, but they shall not do so, if the
priests can let the^. It is therefore, manifest that the papists follow not
Christ's example in the supper at their popish Mass yet they say there Mass
is holy when there is nothing more vnhollye. They brag that saint James
did use this Mass at Jerusalem Saint Mark at Alexandria, and Saint Peter at
Antioche: but they have no history toucheinge this matter worthy credit.
Though they used our lords supper, as Christ our master did and as S Paul
also at Corinth: yet they did not use it as the pyuishe papists do now the
Mass. That Ignatius, Policarpe and Ireneus make mention of, is not like this
popish mass. They confess yt Basilius Magnus Thero^e and Ambros vsede
another order, in the administracio^ of our Lords supper, then is now used
and that diverse have used, diverse facio^s therein, by there own words.
Therefore it is manifest, that this kind of massinge is not the ordinance of
Christ, but invented by man's wit, and policy without ye word of God. And
now I will declare by the testimony of aunciente histories what popes, and
when they patchilde together this beggerlye Mass of theires.

Halowing of aultaces and temples.
Felix, first pope, of that name, commanded temples and aultars to be hallowed
in the year of our Lord God. cclxix.

Aulters
Sextus, first of that name, ordained aulters and Saints, in the year of our
Lord. Cxxiiii.

Altar clothes.
Boniface commanded aultares to be covered wc fine linen cloth, in the year
of our Lord. cccx

Chalices.
Urban and Seuerine ordained challices of goulde and silver, in the year of our
Lord. ccxv.

Albes and corporasses
Siluester did ordain, albes and corporasses in the year of our Lord. cccxiii.

Candeles and ornaments,
Gregory did ordain, light at mass, and certain Ornaments in ye year of our
Lord. ccccclxxxxii.

Procession
Agabecus did ordain procession on Sondayes, about the church in the year of
our Lord. cccccxxxii.

Holly water.
Alexander did ordeine water to be mingled with wine unleavened bread and holly
water in the year of our Lord. cxii.

Confiteor and the office
Pontianus ordained Co^fiteor before mass in the year of our Lord. ccxxv. And
Selestinus ye office in y^ year of our lord. ccccxxiiii

Kyrie eleison.
Gregori did ordain, Kyrie eleson at Mass in the year of our Lord.
ccccclxxxxii.

Gloria in excelsis
Telesphorus, made Gloria inexcelsis, in y^ year of our lord. cxxix

Collectes and grayle
Gelasius made the Collectes Preface, and graile, in the year of our Lord.
CCCC. lxxxx.

Anastasius ordained that we should stand, when the Gospel is read in the
year of our Lord. CCCCix.

Martine made the Creed in the year of our Lord cccxxxiiii.

The canon is patched together of many, and therefore one sentence is
repugnau^t with an other many superstouse words are in it they call upon
certain peculiare Saints in it.

And offer for souls, in purgatory they bless and cross as if great virtue
and powere were therein, and read nothing so reverently as this their clouted
canon.

Gregory made the Offertorye and Damasus gloria patri. They ca^ not therefore
say, that they minister, the sacraments of our Lords supper as ye apostles
did when their doctrine is repugnau^te and contrary, one to another. This is
sufficient to prove that the Mass should be abhorred because it does lay for
men's cons^ence, snares of men's traditions. They will have the priests to be as
y^ priests of y^ old law and bring, shadows in time of light, stretching out
the arms, deuidinge the hosts, and such other Ieuish customs It was
therefore, the dyueles devise (...) bring into the church, such lewd laws
for the true living word of God. If circumcision, hurts as S. Paul,
witnesses, who can deny that the priesthod of Aro^, variety of ornaments,
and anoyntynge, do nothing avail and profit in this time of the new law.
Much less profit is therefore received of man's inventions and vain dreams,
that keep men occupied from the exercise of true godliness, and humility of
mind. And excite men's hertes with singynge and organplayng to acertayne
carnal delight and pleasure, rather the^ to y^ true glory of god as did y^
grove which was by the temple of Jerusalem albeit therefore these ceremonies
are glisterynge in men's eis yet they are vile, and of no reputacion before
Christ, who requires not the visour and shadow of a thing, but y^ very thing
it self ye mass therefore which was ordiened and constituted of Antichrist,
and maintained of his most best assured adherentes is an abominacion before
God, through this externe pomp and such other things, before rehearsed
Finally they fere not to say, that Christ's bodies is offered in ye mass I
will not contend, and strive with them if they take, this word offer to
signify remember, according to the sense and meaning of Christ's words,
albeit the ministers alone pronounce and speak their words. Yet such thanks
giving, and remembrance belongs not only to them alone, but also to the
whole congregation. We deny not that the Doctoures called the Mass an
offeringe, which is the remembrance of an offering once made as Saint
Augustine does plainly, declare sayeinge in this offering is thanks giving
and remembrance of Christ's body, and blood which he offered and shede for
us. But the papists are not pleased with this offering for they will have, a
greater offering which is an offering represe^tatiue when Christ dyed once for
ever, and ca^ die no more. They say that these words (do this in my
remembrance) signify the consecracion, offering and remembrance, but this is
a faulsely devised and forgide interpretation. For Christ at his holly and
Sacrete supper, Took bread and gave thanks, brake it and gave it to his
disciples.

Commaundynge them to eat, and in like wise the wine. The^ he preached to them
his death and passion that they should do after his example, with a sincere
and true faith, and there is not one Iotte, that can prove y^ administracio^ of
this most blessed sacrament to be an offering represe^tatiue of Christ his
own offering, and although Christ would have had, his body present, bodily
in this bread, yet in nowise his words signify yt he offered him self in
this holy supper for he would have given his body to the^ reallie, and not
in the sacrament. It is not inoughe, for these piuishe papists to offer
christ's body to God except they offer it also for remission of sin, for
health of ye body and for hope of eternal life. For other wise it should not be
so highly esteemed. If they continewe still in these errors, against the plain
truth, they will The belefe of a true christian. To. iiii.
deny Christ. For he that knows Christ, is certainly assured that he is
god, and man the savior of the world, that in him, as in the true sede of
David, al nations are blessed and that no man can come to the father but by
him. For the father G^. iii. John. vi.
does so love him, that for his sake, his anger toward us is pacified for he is
our righteousness, holiness Lor. i.
and redemption that noma^ is saved, but by his name only that he alone
fulfilled, the work of our Act. iiii
redemption with out any helper. And finally, ye he did sufficiently satisfy
Esa c. h
for our sins on the cross if we beliue truly on him. This is y^ Heb. x.
ground, of our christen faith, where on christ's church is builded. And Math. i
he that denies Christ to be his perfect, and sufficient redemer by once
sufferinge death on the cross makes him an insufficient priest and unable,
redemer. And therefore they deny Christ in that they deni his full power and
virtue in our redemption. These Maskinge Mass priests, in their often
offeringe of Christ deny that we are Justified by faith only ascribinge part
of our iustificacion to good works contrary to y^ plain scriptures of Ephesians.
(...)
God for we are saved by grace, and not of works. And they magnify and
extolle the Mass above all other good works, makeinge them se^lues fellow
priests, with Christ wherein they show, of what ^eneracion, they be even as
they spring of Lucifer, the father of pride, now let us expende and consider,
whether Christ commanded his disciples, to make an offeringe of the
sacrament, of his holy supper or whether he offered, him self therein or no.
Undoubtedly, Christ's words, diligently observed and noted we may perceive
easlye ye Christ offered no sacrifice, therein. To take and break bread does
not signifye to offer. To give thanks is not to do sacrifice, for else he
had done sacrifice in fedynge, five thousand with the few barlye loves, to
give his disciples to eat. And to say do this in remembrance of me, in
showing fuxth the Lords death, until he come, is not an offering. To belyue
that Christ was given us yt he gave his body to death for us, yt he shed his
blood, not at y^ supper, but on the cross to redeem us from syn, is not an
offering. Finally to prove ye testament and ye believe on yt which was
commanded in the testament, does not signify to offer. How will you now prove
your, offering in the Mass. We come to the Lords table we take and eat,
trusteinge in Christ's promesses, how do we the^, give to him again. If a
king should give a ringe to a pore man for a gage, not that he should be
heir of his lands and goods, but that it should help him, and that he
thereby should remember his liberalitye, and mercy, and y^ people might
commend, and praise him for that fact, the poor man receives it to give it
again, to y^ king thynkinge to do him a great pleasure, to make him rich with
his own gift, were not this a madma^. So may alsuch be Judged, as offere to
Christ again, yt which he gave us for our own use and profit, and that
thereby we should keep in remembrance his love, and mercy toward us. Christ
did not lift up the sacrament over his head as these proud papists do. They
obiecte and say that God ca^ give some things, and receive them again, as
the sacrifices of tholde law. Though they were the gifts Esal. x,
of God, Yet they were given to him again, and though a co^trite heart is the
gift of god, yet it is a sacrifice to God. If we were commanded, to offer
sacrifice as they were, then their objection should be of some strength and
efficacy. But we have no such commandment neither the scriptures make
mention of these popish sacrifices. For Christ is of greater power and
reputacio^ then that these proud popish prelates, other can or ought to offer
him to his father. Christ sits on the fathers right hand, and once
satisfied for the sins of the Atc. vil.
true Christen church, with a most sufficient and perfect sacrifice.

Dare we then most miserable wretches enterprise, to do this thing again. He
that does offer up sacrifice is better the^ the sacrifice. They therefore are
better the^ Christ their sacrifice, he offered us a sacrifice to God, and do we
goo about to offer hyme He that offerreth up sacrifice, ought to be as pure as
ye sacrifice. Oh how pure they make Christ now. He as a testament maker, gave
his disciples the sacrament in his supper, none other wise the^ as a written
testament, wherein by faith in Christ, we receive Christ's body and blood, the
virtue and fruits of the same. If we give him his testamente again as if he
required it of us, should not we have the testament maker in a contempt? And
should Aba. ^
not the promise in the testamente, be of effect? Who ahboreth not this kind
of blasphemy, when we consider the hyghnes of Christ's priesthod and what this
word sacrifice contains in it, we may easlye perceive what Injury we do to
think that we offer Christ's body as the papists do S. Paul declares unto
us y^ pristhod of christ saiing it is mete ye we ^. v^^ ^
have such a godly and undefiled bishop, made higher then heaues which needs
not, to offer daily. First for his own sins, and the^ for the sins of the
people as the bishop of the old law for Christ did this once in offeringe up
his own body, and in an other place he says Christ being the high priest,
of the good things to come came by a greater, and more perfect Tabernacle,
which was not made with hands that is to say was not of this kind of
bulding. Neither came he by y^ blood of gotes and calves but by his own
blood, he entered once into this holly place, and found eternal: edempcion,
for we are made hollie, by gods fre mercy, through the offering of christ's
body done once for all. For Christ verily being one sacrifice, offered up for
our sins, sits on his fathers right hand, lokeing for the thing that
remayneh until his enemise bemade his fotestole, for with one offering he made
perfect, those that are sa^tified. Saint Paul teaches us by Melchisedech.
That Christ is king of peace and righteousness. By these places of scripture it
is Manifest that Christ, ought to be offered no more. For Christ's death is so
perfect a sacrifice, ye by ye one offering we are made clean from sin for
ever. And touching his body he is no more in this world. There is to be noted
that Saint Paul says that Christ is once offered The papists, say often.
He says all things are co^summate and, made perfect by one sacrifice. The
papists will have moneie masses. Note also that Christ offered him self and
so did not the church bysho^es nor priests, and this word co^summate or made
perfect does blanke them, that they have nothing to answer, for the holy
ghost confuteth their sophistry and cauilacions, with so manifest and plain
arguments as can not be denied.

Note also this word everlasting. Christ is an everlasting priest, for he
made satisfaction, for all the sin of the whole world, and this sacrifice
has a continual efficacitie, and virtue in all the^ that believe in it, and
show it forth with thanks giuinge for the same It is truly agreat
unthankfulness to say it is necessary to offer christ again, an other way for
y^ sins of the world. They seek many euations to defend their often
offering. One is this they say Christ of freth him self Sacramentally, and they
are but ministres. But they declare not this word sacrament what thing it is,
lest they should utter the truth. The sacrament is no another thing then a
token, for us to remember, that Christ being an only sacrifice, took away our
sins once on the cross. If they would declare it after this sort, we
should sone agree. But when no man does resist them herein they may do with
there Mass what so ever pleases them. They rule fortune at their own
pleasure. Victory in battle is optained by their Mass, satisfaction for
sin, and what thing is it that the Mass cannot do. And they make their
bostes, that they deserve by this holy work what thing so ever is needful. But
when they are put to there answer the^ they fly to this euacio^ before reherssed
Christ offe^e^h him self therein, and we are not^ynge else but ministers
their cannon which they magnify and e^toll above the gospel, does
manifestly open and detecte their un godliness, and blasphemi, for before they
come to the consecracion they say I offer present and give to God an holy
and undefiled sacrifice, for the peace of the whole congregation of holly
church, when as it is nothing but bread and wine. And it is named the
sacrament And albeit they beliue, that it is not then our Lords body, yet
they offer it fore all the world. This must needs be plain Idolatry to give
to bread and wine, the honor and glory of Christ who gave himself for the
church to reconsile and make his father, atone with us. How can Christ offer
himself in the sacrament before he is there? I think men may now easlye
perceive how much their lies, and answer differ fro^e their deeds and
masses. What an heinouse offense is this to offer, a piece of bread, and a
little wine, for the only Sacrifice of Christ the high priest. And shall y^
bread and wine be of like efficacitye, and power to redeem sin with y^ blood
of Jesus Christ? But they are much more blasphemouse after y^ consecracion
sayng, that the bread and wine are turned into the natural body, and blood
of Christ for they say, we offer to thy holly majesty, an holly offeringe,
holy bread of life everlasting, and cup of everlasting health, which we
pray the vochsafe to regard and look upon, with thy most merciful eyes, and
cherful countenance, and let them be as acceptable to the as y^ reward of
rightuouse Able and sacrifice of our father Abraham Make the^ an hollye and
clean sacrifice that they may be brought to thin altar by y^ hands of y^
angel. These are the words of the ca^non If they speak of Christ, as they
commonly understand it, how ca^ their Imaginacion take place, where they say,
that Christ offered himself in the sacrament. For they pray for Christ, and
desire of god that he may be in such favor with God as Abel and Abraham and
that the Angel may bring him to the altar of god. For they ca^ not take
bread of eternal life to signify the people, although christ were in the
bread bodily, yet he should not be offered to God for that were great,
derogacio^, to the honor of his priesthod. Great in conuenience does follow
to say that the Mass is a sacrifice for sins. For saint Paul says,
forgiveness of sins is not without sheddinge of blood. How is Christ then
offered in the Mass when there is no offeringe without blood, for if there be
any sacrifice, that suffers not and is without blood. Saint Paul's
Arguments are folishe, and of no strength or virtue, saying. Christ offreth
himself no more or else he must necessarily dye once again, and must have
died often times sens the begininge of the world. But undoubtedly, S Paul does
know the true sense and meaneinge of holly scripture better the^ any of all the
papists. For a sacrifice for sin is never offered without blood. This saying
therefore, that some thing was offered in the old law, as bread without
blood, makes nothing for there purpose. For when the bodies of lyuinge
creatures are slain, and sacrifice is offered for sins, blood must be shed.
They cannot therefore prove, by scripture that Christ's blood is offered in
the Mass, otherwise then in remembrance, and thanks giving. And this is done
both of the ministers and receiuours. For as prayer, so thanks giving also
belongs, to al men. He that gives thanks, says not I offer any thing more
than a thanfull heart and praise to God. If the people were taught this
doctrine. They would not bestow so much money on masses and upon the
fou^dacions of chauntries, and fraternities as they have done, through
persuacion, that remission of sins, is obtained in the Mass, not by grace
promised to them that believe, but by offering of Christ the son of God and
by prayeinge for him. Phie, I am ashamed, to rehersse this abominable
balasphemie of theirs in matters of God. The papists in as much as in them
lies, kill and crucify Christ again in there sacrifice of the Mass, doing
no other wise then if Christ as yet were not ascended into heaven, to his
father he that does this, makes Christ subject to death and crucifieth him
again. For Christ entered not nor enters in to the hollye place of heaven,
but by his blood. Let us labor, that Christ may dwell in our hertes They
obeicte, y^ if it be derogacion to Christ's honor, and dignity, and that the
merit of his passion be not perfect because we offer Christ again: fayeth,
Baptism and kepinge of gods commandments may diminishe the dignity of
Christ, and full merits of his passion, and therefore it should not need to
do any good works. This is a folish and an unmeet: comparisio^. The offeringe
verily of Christ again, is contrary to fayeth and good works. For they
glorifye y^ merittes of Christ's passion, when the offeringe of him again is
great derogacion to the same. They do as a man that lyghteth a candle, in a
bright sunnye Day, saying all though the sun gives a light clear inoughe
it of self: yet it is necessary, and profitable that more light be put
thereto. But a man may answer sayeing why do you mock your self?

You have the bryghte day in derision, as if the sun were not sufficient
with out your light. So although y^ merits of Christ's passion, are sufficient
to forgive sin as the son is to make a light day yet, the popish
massmo^gers will offer him up, again The sacrifice of the Mass, for remission
of sins (though there be none such) is like a candel lighted in a bright
sunny day, and so slander the true sacrifice, to be imperfect. But as we se,
by y^ brightness of the day, so by y^ knowledge of Christ's merits we perceive
the goodness of God toward us and fayeth is profitable to us as a gift of
God, and through faith we do good works, wyilinglie as obediente childerne,
but no other good works. then such as are commanded by God.

We have now declared the sacrifice of the Mass, to be against gods
commandment, the words of God and his glory. And now we will prove these
arguments and assertions to be dreams of scriptur preposterously understood
and plain lies, which not only cannot prove and affirm the Mass to be a
sacrifice but also whollye make against it It is therefore evidently perceived
that this popish Mass is an horrible abominacion, before God. That they ought
to dispute prove and affirm, by Christ's ordinances with sure demonstracions,
and plain textes, of scripture, that the Mass is a sacrifice. But there is
not one word or example, that makes for them, as I have before declared. They
would wrast and turn this saying (Do this in my remembrance) to maintain
there lies as who say God would these words, should signify to offer, or do
sacrifice. When they must be this understood, what so ever you have seen
heard or done, do it in remembrance of me but they cannot find, in all the
supper. That Christ did offer up sacrifice. They obiecte, that every bishop
chosen of men and appointed for men* touching these things, that belong to
god: does offer gifts and sacrifices first for himself and then for the
people. This assercion is of no virtue or strength, for here Saint Paul
speaks of the priests of the old law, which were a figure only of Christ
as ye may easly perceive by these words following the same text saying. No man
must take upon him, the dignitye of priesthode cxcepte he be called of God as
Aaron, and they which were of the lymage of Aaron. But what is be come, of
these priests? Al they were deposed, and abolished by Christ's death, and
Christ become a priest in their sted, not of the order of Aaron but of
Melchisedeche a man therefore, may know that this place, of Paul makes
nothing, for their Maskinge sacrifice. And if they will have it to a gree,
both to the priests, of the old law and new Testamente: they most prove
whether they be, priests or no. As the name of priest makes not a priest,
but his deeds, like as a beggar, named prince, heringe princes to be rulers of
people, and countries. If he cleime a people, and country which he may rule,
and govern shall he therefore have a people, and country to rule? So the
popish priests that are priests in name only, hearing that the priests of
the old law did offer sacrifice for sins after gods co^maundeme^te, if
they cleime the same authorite shall they therefore have it? But this is a hard
saying, to say there are no priests now in the new law. Let no man be
offended there with, for undoubtedly, there be no priests now appointed of
God to offer for sins, but every christian man is ordained of Christ, to be
a priest to pray, to give thanks and praise to god and to of^re up them
selves in sacrifice Saint Peter says you are a chose^ generation, a royal
priesthode and a holly people meaning therbye al christen people, as by all
christian men. The holy ghost teaches the priests of the new testamente, that
is to say al christen people are of much more honor and dignitye then wear
the priests of the old law, but none of these priests, can offer for
sins, Yet they obiecte, how can the church continewe, if we shall have no
priests to teach correct rebuke, and exhort the people. We answer that God
will ever raise up some in the congregation, to do these things. And Christ
has ordained in a^ congregacions a shepherde, and preachers, but no
massmongers which have brought in to the church many errous, by their vain
ceremonies and maskynge. Also where Saint Paul says, if we sin wyllinglye,
after we know the truth there is no sacrifice left to purchese us remission
of sins these papists gather of this saing yt there is no sacrifice to help
them, that sin, wylfullye, but that there is a sacrifice yet remayninge for
the fayethful, which is their mass. They ^au^sely understand the text. For
S. Paul says a little before, y^ there is no more sacrifice remaining for them
whose sins are forgyuen al ready, and therefore one place expounds
another, and plainly declares, y^ there is left no more sacrifice for them,
that sin of set purpose or for the that have obtained remission of sins
alredie, for Christ offered himself for y^ syn of those y^ believe in him, and
will not offer him self again, for the^ y^ believe not, but wilfully remain in
their sins. They obiecte y^ we have an altar, whereof it is not leaful for
the^ to eat which minister in y^ tabrenacle, meaning by this altar a heap
of stones joined together, which they call an altar, but Christ him self is
our altar where on we lay our prayers which are our spiritual sacrifices,
for no prayers are accepted of God the father, but by Christ. For he says if
you ask my father any thing in my name, he will give it you. And saint Paulle
expounds, his own sainge. Let us offer says he at al times by him a
sacrifice of praise which is the fruits of our lips confessing his name. We
lie therefore, when we call the mass our Lords altar for Christ is our only
altar and S Paul, in all his Epistle to the Hebrews, does knoweledge none
other sacrifice for sins, but Christ once offered on y^ cross. The papists
have no place of the new testament to make with the^ and therefore, they seek
help of the old testamente. And first of the book of Genesis they say
Melchisedech. Was the Genes. ^
figure of Christ, for he was the priest of the hygheste. And as David says
Christ is an eternal priest after the order of Melchisedech And therefore he
offered bread and wine undoubtedly Melchsedech was y^ figure of Christ but
Saint Paul manifestly declares in what things, he was the figure of Christ.
In the rehersinge of the honors and dignitye of Melchisedech which is that he
was an eternal priest, and king of peace, and ryghtuousnes. There is not one
word, of the offeringe of bread and wine. They cannot find in the book of
Genesis that Melchisedech did sacrifice to God, but that he offered bread and
wine to Abrahame, for sustenau^ce of his people, as Christ offered to us his
word. Melchisedeche brought bread and wine and Abrahame paid him tithes
Christ after the same sort gave us the sacrament of his body and blood, but
he did not offer it to God. The scripture shewith forth Melechisedech under the
figure of an eternal an only priest. But the papists appointe othere priests
to be Christ's viccars after his asce^cio^ in to heaven. If a man should agree
with them y^ Christ offered to God bread and wine, yet they cannot prove,
that he killed him self in sacrifice under bread, and wine. Also if Christ
offered nothing but bread and wine: the priests of the old law did much
better in kyllinge of living creatures, to offer them in sacrifice The papists
cannot, tell what to say, and when they bring authority of scripture it
makes against them and are confuted with there own sayings as one that is
slain with his own weapon. Moreover they bring such places of scripture as
speak of mele and unleavened bread, as of the bread, that was ever sta^dinge
one the table of y^ unleavened bread and two loves of y^ first fruits Also
where they are judged holy, because they offer to y^ Lord, an host of bread,
and chiefeli they make great bragges of the saying of Malachias a clean host
is offered to my name in all places, for my name is magnified, among the
gentiles. And in what place so ever they find the offering of bread and wine,
they apply it to signify, the bodily offeringe of Christ in the Mass. They
believe that they cannot er, and that these dreams, are* confirmed by the law,
prophesiyng thereby as they did of purgatory, that where soever they found this
word fiere written in the bible, they applied it to signify purgatory, as they
do in this matter when they can bring no probable reason, that Christ's body
ought to be offered in the Mass. And when, they find any mention of blood and
other sacrifices they wraste the^ to Christ's body taking witness of the
old doctors when they no better understand them, then they do the bible.
Now we will briefly make answer to their allegations and declare the true
maintenau^ce of such places as they allege to make for their purpose. And
first we will declare, the saying of Malachia^ whereby it may be perceived,
what the other places signify. He rebuked the Iwishe priests who gave them
selves all together to couetuousnes, when they should have occupied them
selves to offer a pure people to the Lord, and to fassion there manners after
gods commandments as the Chap^ter folowinge does testifye. They ought to
have taught the people godliness, and all kinds of virtue but they fed the
people with foleshe, and vain tradicons of men and offered to y^ Lord an ungodly
people and folishe herted Here is named the filthye bread, the blind, lame,
and broken sacrifice. They may perceive that the unclean bread can not
signify, y^ pure body of Christ that bread and sacrifice therefore does
signify, the people as saint Paul says we are one bread and one body, and
that he does service to God in preachinge the Gospel, to make the Gentiles an
acceptable sacrifice to God. When the priests therefore made an un godly and
sinful people by there doctrine and evil example, God rebuked them and
thretneth, that he would ordeyne other priests, in their stead that should
offer a pure Sacrifice, not only among the Jews, but also a monges the
gentiles, that is to say, they should enstructe, the people with true godliness
and with true honor and worship of god. He there fore* did prophesy of the
priests which should come to offer sacrifice of justice, that is to say, the
holy apostles and all other faithful ministers of gods word. And therefore the
people of God which is Christ's spiritual body, is brough and offered by
their doctrine to God as S. Paul says I have spoused the Corinthi, to
Christ, meaning no other thing by these words, but that by his preaching and
miracles, he has brought and offered in sacrifice to god the Gentiles which
were before carnal and fleshly minded. And therefore To. xi^.
he exorteth the Romans through the mercy of God to give their bodies to be
aliuely facrifice John. iiii.
holly and acceptable to God. The people of God is spirituallye the meat which
Christ desired most and are the twelve loves of sweet bread, which being
converted by the preachinge of the twelve apostles does continually appear
before the face of God. These are the true preistes. And y^ they may bring to
effect there enterprice, it is mete, that they be holly that is. That they
abstain srome all things, that pluckethe them from the true worshipping of
god. This bread is called sometime undefiled. For christian me^ ought to walk
in the truth without Hypocrisy and feigned lies, and to be anointed with oil,
that is to say with the grace of the hollye ghost, true charity, and mercy
this is y^ true sense and meaning of this text of scripture, declared and
proved by other plases of scripture. But the papists though they allege the
doctors yet they can prove the meaning and understanding of this text by no
place of all the scripture Beade in the scripture betokneth the word of God. For
Christ says, man does not live only by bread but every word y^ proceeds,
from y^ mouth of god The priests ought sincerly to minister this bread to the
people, and in this significacion the spiritual bread is not a sacrifice, but
y^ administracion of the word, and of y^ ministres of god. This is the true
manna and angels fode which was given to men, from heaven to be their
sustenau^ce. By these things a man may easly perceive what offeringe the
Apostles and true priests made. Undoubtly a faithful people who^ they brought
to god with wholesome doctrine, but they offered not the natural body of Christ
after the opinion of these fleshly minded papists, for yt were done to crucify
christ again. They believe Daniel his saying makes much for there purpose
where he says yt their daily sacrifice, called in greek Endethismos. should
cease for a time, by this they understand their Daily sacrifice. The Mass that
now begins to cease this application is falsely devised. For the sacrifice
that Daniel speak of was offered eueri day at two several ^od, xxix.
times which was in y^ morning and evening, and that sacrifice with other
Iwyshe sacrifices ceased when Christ y^ only true sacrifice offered himself
on y^ altar of the cross. You may therefore easly perceive y^, yt was not y^
sacrifice of the mas, for it is not done, both in the morning and theuening, as
y^ other was. and Eusebius says our lords supper under some byshopes was
ministered but once or twyse, in the year, the history of y^ dayelie sacrifice,
that Daniel speaks of, was fulfilled under Antiochus the tiran, for in his
time there was no sacrifice offered in y^ temple of god for the space of three
or four years In deed this is true. Antiochus, was the figure of Antichriste
for he took a way y^ true worshipping and honor of god. And trust in god, and
faith is extingnished, when men trust more, in their own power and works
the^ in gods grace they have certain other dreams and assertions but of no
virtue or strength. One is, they say the easter lamb was offered every year,
so Christ the true Easter Lamb ought to be offered often times nothing ca^
be more folishe then this Argument. For the easter la^be, was not offered for
sins but only was slain and eaten in remenbraunce of the deliuerau^ce of the
Israelits out of Egipte. But now the papists offer for sins the sacrifice
of the mass. For they are not contented with thonly remembrance of Christ's
death Other sacrifices were offered again, for they were imperfect, but Christ
being a perfect and sufficient sacrifice ought to be offered once, for ever.
They object that wha^ the preachers and doctors did sacrifice at y^ election
of Paul and fasted, y^ holly ghost said etc: the greek word ye they translate
to signify to do sacrifice, has in this place y^ signification y^ it has in
y^. ^iii. Cha. to To. xiii.
the Romans, y^ is to minister as a magistrate in y^ common wealth. And
therefore after y^ translacion of the papists every maiestrate is apreist. But
they y^ will be esteemed, to be witty and learned amongeste the^ reason after
this manner when Christ offered himself) the church also which is his spowse,
may offer him for sins in the Mass. For Christ and his church so agree and
so consent together. That what so ever the one does the other agrees to the
same. But this is a lie. For if Christ died for us, then the church must do
the same. Christ is the bread and high priest. Ergo we are the bread and
high priest also. Christ was offered say they with pain, and sufferinge of
the body. Ergo he ca^ be offered and suffer not. He was once a sacrifice, ergo
he ca^ be a sacrifice again. But this there talk is vain and foleshe. For we
seek not what Christ might do but what he did. And what the scripture teaches.
Also they obiecte yt it is better to give, then to take. In sacrifice we give,
and in our Lords supper we take it is therefore better to offer. But let them
first prove who gave the^ authority to do sacrifice after this man. It is
better to be a savior the^ a creature and seruante. Therefore as it is a
great blasphemy, a man to say he is a god, and savior, so it is great
blasphemy yt sinners shall go a bout to offer Christ for remission of sins.
So thus it co^eth to pass, yt the more they defend their errourres y^ more
ungodly they show the^ selves against Gods maiesti^ Some of y^ papists doubt
not to say yt we sin daily, therefore daily sacrifi^e is necessary. And they
say Christ took away the sin past only which is called original sin and that
satisfacion for other sins, must be made other wise, y^ is by works and
sacrifices And they put to many other things y^ differ so much from the
doctrine of faith as any christen man hearing the^ may easly perceive. For the^
it were co^seque^t that Christ is neither God nor a true savior. Now we have
declared, what the Mass is. Not a sacrifice for sins but an horible
abominacio^ before God. Al Christian me^ ought therefore to shone and ^^e from
it and tourn to the true use of our Lords Supper according to his most holy
ordinance. To whom be honor and glory for ever AMEN

Fines

