TO THE Right worshipful, Sir PETER LEIGH, Knight, grace be multiplied in this
life, and happiness in the world to come.
AS Hanna dedicated her Samuel, a Nazarite, to her God at Shilo, so am I bold
at your entreaty to separate this mine Anna, a Prophetess to the Lord at
Jerusalem: and do pray (...) may pass under the shelter of your worshipful
protection. The Saint is but homely arrayed, and not for these curious days
wherein we live: and in which the Son, though clad with glory: yet cannot
run it course, but with censure either of too high a pitch, and then it
burns, or of too low a being, and so it heateth not. Atheists, Papists, and
Libertynes, will censure my plainness both in matter of faith and fact, I
look for no other but to feel their piercing eye, and venomous tooth: yet if
I escape in some measure the sorrow of my Savior sighing, and saying: Thus was
I wounded in the house of my friends; Zach. 13.6
I make less reckoning of those that are without.

Happily the Title of the book may seem strange, and from the subject therein
handled; but if you think upon the Ladder Jacob saw in the way to Padan-aram,
whose first step was on earth, and last step in heaven, you will find that
none can attain perfection above, but first his feet must stand in the Lords
presence below. It was Anna her holy haunt, she frequented the Church here,
that she might come to blessedness there, we may not leap out of our mothers
womb into our fathers joy: but we must go by stairs from the Temple of
grace, to the Tower of glory.

In the mean time this is yours, and so am I in all duty and devotion obliged,
by many your respective favors to me, and mine, from you and yours. Nor do I
hope you will conceive the length, breadth, and depth of the love I bear you,
can ever be contained within the circle of these few lines. Epistles, and
papers may point at more love then they can express: but the heart is the
closet that keeps all, how ever these papers speak. And so I leave you, with
my very good Lady your wife, and all yours to the merciful protection of the
Almighty. From London. this 14. of December. 1608.

Your Worships ever in my love, W. LEIGH.

To my loving Countrymen, but especially to the Parishioners of Standish in
Lancashire.
MY dear brethren, beloved and longed for, these twenty years have I wrastled
with God, as Jacob did in Bethel, in tears and prayers, to gain a blessing to
my self in the salvation of your souls; and with what fruit, he knows best,
who knows all: as a father I have travailed in birth, again and again, that
Christ might be formed, or at least confirmed in you. Many a Sabbath have we
sanctified with a double solemnity of prayer, praise, and prophecy: Many a
month have we celebrated the Lords Table with the blessed memory of his death
and passion: Many a time as a Nurse have I wiped and wrapped up your stains:
and many a careful night have I told in mourning after your defectio^s: And for
any wrong I ever did you, here I am, bear record with me before the Lord, and
before his anointed, whose Ox have I taken, or whom have I impleaded. God will
witness with me before whom I stand, in the sight of men and Angels, that I
never sought yours, but you, that you might be molded for a better life, and
that Christ might be formed in you.

Yet may I say in some sort as it is in the Prophet: This day is a day of
tribulation and rebuke: Isay. 37.3.
for the children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring
forth. I speak not of all, for many of you has the Lord chosen, and you are
my hope, my joy and rejoicing, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming; but of many I may say, I fear left I have bestowed upon them labor
in vain.

While some with Reuben abide among the sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of
the flock, they are covetous: Judge. 5.
Some with Gilead abide beyond ^orden in the green fields, and meadows of
their delights, and they are careless: Some with Dan remain in ships, and are
gone beyond the seas; they dote upon their Romish Idols, and they are
faithless: Some with Meroz sit at home in the cells of their superstition, and
they are resolute recusants, who will not come to help the Lord, to help the
Lord against the mighty. Well, I say no more but this: These divisions of
Tribes are great thoughts of heart, yet may we not be heartlesse, but hold on
our course with unwearied diligence, hoping that if we sow in tears, we shall
reap in joy, as did they of whom it is said by the Psalmist; Ibant, flebant,
mittentes sua semina: They went weeping, and carried precious seed, but they
shall return with joy, and bring their sheaues.

A glayning of which sheaffe formerly fallen into your ears, but now I fear
forgotten, and gone out of your hearts, I have thought good, again to present
unto your careful and christian view; for it grieueth me not to rehearse the
same things often; and for you it is expedient. Asaphs song was melodious,
though Israel so^g it often; and the Arks marching about Jericho seven times,
was no shame in the siege and sacking of Jericho. As it is an office of the
holy Ghost to lead us into all truth, so is it to bring all things to our
remembrance which have been told us: seldom told, often forgotten; and who is
sufficient for these things? You are nails of the Sanctuary and it is not one
stroke can fasten you to your hold; but you must be often riuited with the same
heart, hand and hammer. I hope to see you in the high feast of Christ his
Nativity toward: yet for that I know not how the Lord may dispose of me, and
of mine occasions abroad, I have sent you this first step toward heaven, as an
exercise for the time. It was Anna her holy haunt, looking and longing for
Isreal's consolation; I pray God you may trace it on earth, as she then did: so
shall you be sure to tread it in heaven, as she now does. My good and
worshipful friend required it, I may not deny it: your souls need it, I may
not withdraw it: Take it then as a pledge of my dearest love, ever in my prayer
with you, ever in my practice for you. And now the very God of peace sanctify
you throughout, so as both in soul, spirit, and body, you may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: faithful is he which
calls you, which will also do it. Brethren pray for us* and the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

From London this 14. of December. 1608. Yours in the Lord assured, W. LEIGH.

ANNA HER HOLY HAVNT.
LVK. 2. 36 ANd there was a Prophetess one Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Asher, which was of a great age, after she had lived with an
husband seven years from her virginity.

37 And she was widow about fourscore and four years, and went not out of
the Temple, but served God with fastings and prayers, night and day.

38 She then coming at the same instant upon them, confessed likewise the
Lord, and spoke of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

39. And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord,
they returned into Galile to their own city Nazareth.


AMbrose says well, Morale est vt qui fidem exigunt, De Abitu Mariae in
Montana. cap. 3.
fidem astruant: It stands with all congruity that such should publish faith,
as languish after faith; of which number I hold this Anna to be, produced of
the holy Ghost in this text, as a worthy witness of Christ his blessed birth
and incarnation, and so to be preached in the high feast of this his solemnity.
In whom I observe three things of special note, for the practice and imitation
of all such as love the Lord Christ and his profession.

First, the description of her person: full of modesty.

Secondly, the practice of her life: full of piety.

And lastly, the profession and publishing of her Christ: full of verity.

And with this threefold cable of modesty, piety, and verity, is she haled up
to heaven; and having powered this precious balm upon the head of Christ on
earth, Math. 26.13.
why may not this Gospel be preached throughout all the world, as a memorial
of her, that she did it to bury him in her dearest thoughts?

And first for the person, ye see here a woman described in your sight, not
wanton in her looks, garish in her apparel, with painted face, curled hair,
or naked breasts, prepared for the Theater of men; but grave in countenance,
modest in behavior, and garnished with all religious virtues within, fit for
the temple of God. Such saints are seemly to speak to the praise of our
Savior, to profess his name, to witness his truth, to swaddle the babe, and
to sing his Lullaby, as this day, in solace of their saved souls, and full
solemnity of his blessed birth and incarnation.

And now that a woman does witness see the merciful providence, of our God,
who would have the coming of his Christ to be declared by all sorts of people,
and sex; that all might be inexcuseable who did not believe him, and all might
be cleared who did profess him.

He took testimnoie from the pure nature of Angels who sung to his praise,
Glory be to God on hie, and in earth peace, Luke 2.13.14.
etc.

He took testimony from the clear nature of the heavens, which shined to his
praise when he said, Vidimus stellam eius in orient, Mar. 2.2.
We have seen his star in the East Simple shepherds witnessed this truth,
when, as it is in the text, All that heard them, Luke 2.18.
wondered at those things which were told them of the shepherds.

Old Simeon lapped him in his arms, and laid him in his heart with this
profession of his praise, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word; I have seen enough, I have my love, I have loved
enough, I have my life. Aged Anna here an holy widow confessed likewise the
Lord, and spoke of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Yea John
in the womb springing, and children in Rama crying, confessed Christ in their
death, ere they could speak of him in their life. Finally Christ would be
professed both of men, and women, virgins, wives and widows, of old men and
babes, young men and maids, of holy Patriarchs, inspired Prophets, renowned
kings, that all states and both sexes might exspect redemption by grace, from
which they were fallen by transgression: Whereunto accorded Ambrose when he
said, Prophetauerat Symeon, prophetauerat copulata con^ugio, prophetauerat
virgo, debuit etiam vidua prophetare, nequa aut professio deesset, aut sexus:
Simeon prophesied, the married wife prophesied, a virgin prophesied: yea and a
widow must prophecy too, lest Christ might seem wanting to either sex, or to
any profession. And it is further to be observed for the credit of the cause in
hand, that none must witness their Christ, or publish his praise, but such as
lived to love him, according to that, I have believed, 2 Cor. 4.13.
therefore I have spoken.

Abraham was glad to see my day, says Christ, Ioh. 8.56.
and therefore he spoke of him. Moses longed after him that should come, Exodus
4.13.
and therefore he said, Mitte quem missurus es. David sighed after him, and
therefore he said, I will not go into the tabernacle of mine house, nor into my
bed, nor will I give mine eyes sleep, or rest to the temples of my head,
until I find out the place that is appointed for my Lord, the tabernacle of
the mighty God of ^acob. Now the mystery being revealed unto him, he said
presently, Behold we have heard it at Ephrata, which is Bethleem, and found it
in the wood: and we will enter into his tabernacle, and worship before his
footestoole.

Esaias ioyed at the birth, and therefore he spoke of him, and said, A child is
borne, Esaias 9.6.
and a son is given.

Jeremy of Anathoth in the land of Benjamin was full of the news, Ier. 31.22.
and therefore he spoke and testified thus: Behold I will create a new thing
upon the earth, A virgin shall inuiron a man.

So was Ezechiel by the river Kebar, and Daniel by the banks of Vlay, Dan.
9.24.
both Captives in Babylon, yet full of spiritual deliverance by Christ; and
therefore they testified much of his blessed birth, death, and resurrection,
with full deliverance of all the faithful in and through the Messiah. What
should I say more? Simeon longed, Anna expected, Mary sighed, Elizabeth
languished after Isreal's consolation; all lived to love their Christ, and for
that were chosen to publish his praise, and witness the truth of his blessed
Nativity.

The use of the doctrine in respect of us is this, that if men will be Prophets
to profess Christ, and women with Anna will be prophetesses to confess the
Lord, and to speak of him to all that look for redemption in Israel; they
must both believe the Lord, love the Lord, and live in him. Else will the Lord
say as he did to the wicked, Psalm. 50.16.17.
Why take thou my word in thy mouth, and thou thy self hate to be
reformed. Or else as he did to the damned devil, when he called him the holy
one of God, yet the Lord rebuked him, saying: Hold thy peace, and come out of
him; as and if he should say: Luke 4.35.
Tush devil though thou tell the truth, yet will I not be witnessed o^ by
thee. Like that of Paul to the Pythonesse, when he was grieved to hear Satan
witness of God, his saints, Act. 16.16.17.18.
and salvation. Where you see that each mouth is not for all meat, nor all
apparel for every back; each lamb is not for the sacrifice, nor all trees
are for the fabric of the temple: Christ will not be witnessed of any but of
men of worth; and if any will show forth his glory, let them take heed that they
themselves be not ignominious. Cum canerem reges, and praelia, Cinthius aurem
vellet, and admonuit, To sing of kings, and conquests, is too high a subject
for homely shepherds; you may not exceed your strain, least Apollo pluck you
back. And again he said well who ever he was that said: Quis tulerit Gracchos
de seditione querentes? Verrem de furto? Who can endure Gracchus to complain
against sedition, or Verres against theft? the one being a base thief, and the
other a rank rebel.

Ye have taken a profession upon you this day (my dear brethren) to confess
with Anna the Lords Christ, to publish his praise and to solemnize the feast of
his blessed birth and being; it stands you upon therefore to see unto it, that
by no lewd conversation you blemish his birth, but so to demean your selves in
all modesty, piety and godliness, as you may be worthy witnesses of his truth;
knowing with the blessed Apostle Paul, Tit. 2.12.
that the grace of God which (as this day) brought salvation unto all men, has
appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godlily in this present
world.

I dislike not of your feasting if Christ be your guest, and withal if you
feed upon his faith in the fair assembly of his saints.

I dislike not of your houses trimmed up with Holly, Bay, and Iuie, so your
hearts be prepared for God, and Christ to be your garland: your garments are
tolerable, Revel. 7.14. Revel. ^9.8.
if you wash your stoles in the blood of the lamb, and be arrayed with his
righteousness. And for your music, mirth and minstrelsie, so ye strike out
with David a song of Sion, and sing unto the Lord with a grace in your hearts,
Col. 3.16.
so ye dance as he did before the Ark of God, 2. Sam. 6.^4.
and sound out with the angels the babes lullaby thus: Glory be to God on high,
and in earth peace, good will toward men; ye may rejoice, I say ye may
rejoice: for such mirth and music is pleasant unto the Lord, and sweet unto
his saints: yea it is as one says, Mel in ore, in aure melos; in cord
Iubileus, Honey to the mouth, music to the ear, a Iubily to thy heart.

But if you will keep this feast with your dough sowred, 1. Cor. 5.8
and with the leaven of all corruption, being enemies to the cross of Christ,
making your belly your god, your glory your shame, Phil. 3.18.19.
for that you are wordly minded; I say then, you blemish the birth of your
Savior, you grieve the spirit, Ephesians. 4.30
and you are not worthy to witness his truth with Angels, Simeon, and Anna. I
say for conclusion, let the Babes birth (as this day) bury all thy sin in this
his solemnity, and in the midst of thy pride look upon his poverty. When
thy house is full furnished with guests, think how there was no room for him
in the Inn. Luke. 2.7* etc.
When thou art laid in thy bed of down, think how the Babe was found in the
cratch. When thou art lapt in thy warm clothes, think how the child was
swaddled in clouts. When thy tenants are about thee, and thy friends fawn upon
thee, think how solitarily the child was found with Joseph and Mary, all
alone. When thou art in thy peace, think upon his persecution, Math. 2.14.
and flight into Egypt, I say think upon the banished Babe. When thou art in
thy mirth, think upon his moan. When thou art in thy life joyous, think upon
his death dolorous: And i^ thou will with Anna truly profess him, be a
prophe^esse: go not in the streets to haunt the Theaters, Genesis 34.1 etc.
or see the shows of the Shechemits with Dina, but abide in the temple as she
did, and serve God with fastings and prayers, night and day* Watch and play (I
fear) these 12. days will be the exercise of many, bu^ watch and pray in the
practice of few: It may be all that hear me this day, can say, Psalm. 118.23.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made; but I fear me few can say, We will
rejoice, and be glad in it. The Lord deliver us from Baltassars feasts, that we
never take the golden and silver vessels brought from the temple at Jerusalem
(I mean our sanctified souls, Dan. 5.
1 Cor. 6.19.20.
and holy bodies bought with a price) thereout to drink our wine, vent our
sin, praise the gods of gold, and silver, of brass, of iron, of wood and of
stone. But to prevent both the sin and the judgment Baltassar saw, we will
not cease, by the grace of God, whilst the days of your banqueting go about,
we will not cease (I say) with the holy and patient Job, to sanctify you with
our prayers, and preaching, as he did his children.

We will rise up early in the morning, and offer up burnt offering^* that is our
broken hearts, with sighs and sobs to the number of you all: for Job thought,
and so do we, it may be that my sons have sinned and blasphemed God in their
hearts. Job. 1.5.


The Lord give us grace to temper our mirth with moan, our solace, Zach. 12.10.
with sorrow, because of him whom we have preached. Fill our hearts (O Lord)
with the fear of thy judgments, and feeling of thy mercies: and as we
profess thy name this day, and acknowledge thy nature as this day to be made
ours; so grant that our bodies and souls may be sanctified thereby, Ephesians.
5.3. etc.
and sin may be namelesse, and we blameless in all our dwellings. Amen. Amen.

Secondly, in this testimony of Anna, I do observe paucity o^ professors, and
that they are few in the world who exercise the work of faith to God, or
charity toward men. For of all the thousands in Jerusalem, and ten thousands
in Israel, only four persons, to wit, Mary, Joseph, Simeon and Anna attended
the business in cherishing the child Jesus: two at his birth in Bethlem received
him into the world, Exodus 13.2.
and only two in the temple presented him according to the law of the first
borne? Where were the Scribes? where were the Pharisees, where were the
Actuaries of the law? They said nothing of their Christ, they did nothing for
their Christ.

There was no King to protect him, no Prophet to declare him, no Priest to
present him in the Temple: he came, I say, Cum altum erat silentium and nullus
Propheta erat reliquus, when all was hush, and never a Prophet left. Only
Marie was mother, midwife, nurse and all; Luke 2.48.
she fed him at her own breasts, she swaddled him with her own hands; only
Joseph was his triumphant coach and attendant: he carried him in his arms from
Bethleem to Nazareth, from Nazareth to Egypt, and from Egypt back again to
Nazareth, and so to Galily: I say Joseph and Mary, they were no more; they bare
the burden without pomp of princes, or preasse of people to honor the babe:
yea and here in the Temple when he should be presented, who was there of all
Jerusalem that stepped out of their doors to do him any duty, service, or
homage, but old Simeon and aged Anna, Luke 2.48.
citizens of no great note, either for wealth, worship, or honor? And being
lost, only two sought him, Pater and ego, etc. Thy father and I have sought
thee with very heavy hearts. Esaias 9.3.
Al to justify that of the Prophet, both of their time and ours: Multiplicasti
gentem, and non magnificasti laetitiam, Thou have multiplied the nations, but
have not increased their joy; much people, little piety, many countries, few
conuerts: and whereof I may say as one did of the priests of his days: Multi
sacerdotes, pauci sacerdotes, multi nomine, paucire, Many Christians, few
Christians, many in name, few in deed.

It is, and has been ever the plaint of the Church, much to deplore the
frailty of her faith, with the barrennes of her womb, and to be like the
little worm Iaacob, which was trod upon with every foot; like little Zoar in
respect of great Sodom! Oh it is but a little one and my soul shall live. A
brand taken out of the fire, so are the faithful of God, few and fined. Zach.
3* 2.
A few berries after the vintage, a few tellies after the gleaning, a lodge in
a garden of cucummers frequented of few: and as a lilly among the thorns, so
is my love among the daughters; Cant. ^.2.
one Lilly but many thorns, and pricked because of it sweet perfume. I say,
religion is not of this world, but of another. This world loves her own, if
ye were of the world (says Christ) it would love you: but because ye are not
of this world it will loath you. I pray not for the world (says Christ) but
for those few whom thou have given me. Totus mundus in maligno positus, and
broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that tread it:
But narrow is the way that leads to salvation, and few there be that hit it.
All the Prophets run upon this string, and sound this doleful music:
Isaiah. 53.
who will believe our report? Help Lord for there is not one godly man left:
woe is me for I am like the summer gatherings, etc. Mich 7.1.


Our days are no better, nay surely worse. If a man be religious, he shall be
censured; if he be profane, he may be pampered; and who will believe our
preaching? is the mournful complaint of all the Prophets of this time: few
follow, many leave us: and of those few that follow, I fear in fine, if
Christ support not we shall be constrained to say as he did to the disciples
shrinking, Vultis and vos abire, Ioh. 6.67.
Will you also be gone?

Surely, surely, from his birth to his burial, the world was ever barren of
faith. And if you please yet further to urge it, you shall find that they were
but few who did help this blessed Babe, either in his life, or at his death.

The earth was barren of faith, when at his birth Angels from heaven must sing
his Lullaby. So was it of entertainment, when there was no room for him in the
Inn, but the stable must be his chamber, and the cratch his cradle: beasts of
the field had their holes, and fowls of the air had their nests: but the
Son of man had not whereon to lay his head. It was barren of preachers, when
the shepherds that kept their sheep upon the downs of Bethlehem, must leave
their flocks and publish abroad the thing which was told them of that child.

It was barren of protection by kings to be nurcing fathers, or queens to be
nurcing mothers, when Herod was up, and all Jerusalem, seeking the life of the
child to kill it. It was barren of Scripture when the Jews had locked it up,
and the Gentiles must be guided by a star to the place where the Babe was.

Finally, it was barren of mourners at his burial, when only Joseph of
Arimathaea, and Nicodemus with a few of the Mary's followed the hearse, and
gave him the last duty of eternal obsequie.

And so to conclude, and close with thy religious heart, never man spoke like
this man, and yet who did believe him? never man did like this man: and yet who
would obey him? never man died like this man, and yet who pitied him? Not he
but Barabas was in the popular cry of all, and Hosanna in the highest, was
turned to crucify in the lowest.

All I have said, is for our instruction and comfort. Instruction to teach us
that multitude is no true note of the Church of God, but rather the contrary:
for paucitie of professors, barre^nes of faith, and the narrow way, have ever
bin plaints of the true Church, and companions indivisible, so signified by
Christ, and to our comfort when he said, Fear not my little flock, for it is
your fathers mind to give you a kingdom. I say, you my little flock, and not
the multitude of this wicked world; for piety is not for popularity.

The comfort we gain is this, that we know we are of God, though the whole
world lie in wickedness.

Never should I deem my self to be of the true Church, but for it paucitie.

Never should I think of Christ to be the Son of God, but in his poverty.

The wreathed crown of thorns upon the head of Christ, is more precious then
all the diadems of princes; and the little flock is of more esteem in the eyes
of Christ, then are all the herds of the reprobate. The Turks and Sara^ens
who persecute the cause of Christ and Christians, are numberles: and the East
and West Indians, who know neither God, nor his Christ, are as a new world full
peopled with all impiety.

God grant they do not stand up in judgment against us in that great day, to
reprove us of far greater impiety, in that we have neglected so great
salvation in this our happy day of grace: wherein Christ, I much fear, has
not the gleanings of our parishes to profess him, of our words to praise him,
of our works to honor him, of our thoughts to joy in him, so as if it ever
might be said, now is the time with us, Multiplicasti gente^ non magnificasti
laetitia^, thou have multiplied our nation with all temporal blessings, but
thou have not increased our joy in heavenly comforts.

Our souls are sad, our zeal is cold, our spirits are dumpish, our faith is
frail; Ier. 9.3.
we are of no resolution, we have no courage for the truth: Col. 3.12.
we are a people of no bowels, either to pity the Babe in misery, or publish
him in majesty, What should I say more? We are of no religion: for that we are
of any religion, temporizing with all, resolving upon none. We neither love nor
live the life of the Gospel: but many walk, as I have told you often, and now
tell you weeping; who are enemies to the truth, whose belly is their god, and
glory their shame, and they do but mind earthly things. The Lord deliver us
from these sins, that we be not partakers of more heavy judgments then ever
yet we felt. What ever it is, I fear our future fall, Heb. 2.2.3
for our present neglect of God and godliness.

Now let us proceed, it may be some will object: How is it that women, as Anna
and such, 1. Cor. 14.34.
took upon them the function and ministry of teaching in the Church? since
Paul says, women must be silent, and not speak in the congregation.

I answer, although the office of teaching in the Church ordinarily be
committed of God to men; yet that the Lord may declare his freedom in
teaching, and that he is a free agent in all his works, and tieth himself to
no particular: he has sometimes endowed women with a prophetical spirit, to
publish his praise, and such a one was this Anna, Exodus 15.20. 1. Sam. 2. 2.
King. 22.
and of old, Miriam the sister of Moses. Also Hanna the wife of Elkanah, and
Hulda the prophets in the days of Iosia: And after al in the days of the
Apostles, the four daughters of Philip the Evangelist. Act. 21.9.


Nay I know not how, but though in these days women be most wanting in filling
of Churches following of Christ, and publishing his praise: Exo. 38.8. 2. Sam.
2.^2. 1 Samuel 18.6.7.
yet of old, women kept the door of the tabernacle, and came out with their
Timbrels, and praised the Lord, that Saul had killed his thousand, and David
his ten thousand; and sure I am, Luke 8.^.3. Math. 28.1.
about Christ women were most officious, to do him any service, either in life
or death.

Mary the blessed virgin and mother of Christ, no sooner received the message
from heaven of the conception in her womb, Luk 1.39. etc.
but her heart was full, and she dispatched her self into the mountain
country, to communicate the news to her cousin Elizabeth. And Elizabeth no
sooner heard the salutation, but the Babe sprang in her womb for joy, and she
was filled with the holy Ghost, and being full, she could not but vent it with
a crying loud voice, to the praise of her Savior: Blessed art thou amongst
women, Luke 2.^2. etc.
because the fruit of thy womb is blessed.

Where note that Mary is blessed, not for her virginity, or any worth in her
self, but for that the fruit of her womb was blessed; and yet may I say with
Augustine, Mar. 3.31. etc.
Motherly piety had done Mary no good, unless she had carried Christ more
faithfully in her heart then she did in her womb, to justify that of Christ,
when they told him: Thy Mother and brethren stay for thee. Who is my mother, or
who is my sister or brother (says he?) even he that hears the word of God
and does it; he is my mother, sister and brother. And this is the spiritual
kindred we have with Christ, more excellent then the carnal, by how much more
the soul excels the body.

What shall I say more? Women they were that ministered unto him in his life, at
his death, and after his death.

In his life, when they left their houses, Luke 8.2.3
country and delights, and followed him from Galily, ministering unto him of all
their substance.

Luke 23.49
At his death, when all his acquaintance stood a far off, the women that
followed him from Galily, beheld these things.

And women they were that ministered unto him after his death, Mar. 16.1. etc.
when they came early in the morning with spice, balm, and syndone to bury
him; to whom the Angel said, Go tell the Disciples that he is risen: where
observe that women Factae sunt Apostolorum apostolae.

And how negligent soever our women be in all duty to God and his Christ; yet
know they this to their sin and shame (and I fear to their judgment and
confusion one day) that though they will not conceive Christ, yet a woman did;
though they will not receive Christ, yet ^ woman did; though they will not
follow Christ, yet women did, and ministered unto him of all their substance;
though they will not behold Christ in his passion, yet women did: And though
they will bring no spice, balm or Syndon to bury Christ, yet women did: though
they will neither come to the Church, nor abide in it: yet Anna will, and there
continue both night and day, fasting, praying, and praising the babe Christ. I
tell you plain, these women will stand up in judgment against you one day, for
that they have followed the Lord, and ye are fallen from him: they have lulled
the Lord in mercy, and ye have wakened him in judgment: they have found him in
Bethel, and ye have lost him in Bethauen. I say in this, that they have been
officious to serve him in all duty, both in his life, at his death, and after
death: and ye have neglected him in all, served your selves, and done him no
devotion.

Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled about many things, one thing is
needful. Luke 10.41 42.
Mary has chosen the better part which shall not be taken from her; and that
was, when she sat down at the feet of Jesus to hear his preaching, thereby
lodging Christ more truly in her heart, then Martha did in her house.

Having thus made good unto you the sufficiency of restees, manifesting Christ
his blessed nativity, all of special note, 1. For Piety, 2. For Paucitie, 3.
For Perspicuitie:


It now remains that we come to the description of Anna her line, life, and
doctrine of Christ; every circumstance whereof is sufficient to give credit to
the cause she has in hand, and grace her person.

And first for her name, it is worthy ^our consideration, that it is a name of
worth: for Canna by interpretation, is gracious, Bonum nomen, bonum omen; of
which word, John was called the Harbenge^ (...) Christ: And Anna the mother o^
Samuel, a word proper to both sexes; to give us to understand, that neither is
of worth with God, but by special grace preventing, attending, perfecting: for
by grace ye are saved, not of your selves; it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
not of works, lest any man should boast.

And here give me leave a little to tax the pride of this world, who give
names rather savoring of flesh and blood, then of the spirit of God, and
practice of the godly.

Such were the cosins of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.60 61. etc.
who when she said her son should be called John; Tush, said they, there is
none of the kindred that is called by that name; which done, they left ^he
mother and went to the father, and made signs how he would have him called:
he wrote upon the tables, His name is John; as and if he should have said:
Psalm. 49.11.
Some build houses, and call them by their own names; but God has built me by
my son, and he shall be called John. To his further glory god has made me
gracious, in that I have begotten the Harbenger of my Christ; my wife is
gracious in that she has borne the Messenger of my Christ: and he is gracious
in that he may but untie the shoe latchet of his Christ.

Cleipe him not Zachary, Luke 1.63.
for the Prophets are ended; but cleipe him John, for grace is now begun, and
will never be ended; his name is John. Genesis 2.19.20.
When God had made Adam, and brought him into paradise, he suffered him to give
names to all his creatures, and for two causes. The first that he might
distinguish one from another: The second that he might have a property in all;
and it is thought he gave names according to the nature of the things.

Would thou distinguish child from child? let their names be significant: so
did the Jews of old, and it were not far amiss for Christians to practice
the same now; that as the Lord has made them thine by nature, so thou should
appropriate them his by grace, naming them of some great mercy or special
grace flowing from him. That names should be significant, it may appear by the
practice of all the godly. Adam of red earth, so called by God himself. Genesis
2.23.
Eve is Isha, which is of man, for that she was framed of his rib. Cain of a
possession, Genesis 4.1.2
for that his father thought he had begotten the promised seed, as a
repossession of that Paradise which he had formerly lost. But when he saw the
crookedness of Cain, he called his second son Habel, which is vanity,
condemning his own vanity in his thoughts. And it is of special note and
observance, that after that, he took occasion by the names of his children, to
unfold the misery of man.

Sheth, Genesis 4.25.
a child begotten after his own image and likeness, as well concerning his
creation as corruption.

Sheth called his son Enoch, which is desperation. Genesis 5.4. etc.
Enoch called his son Kenan, which is dispossession.

Kenan called his son Mahalaleel, which is perceiving death Rahel yielding up
the ghost in her painful travel, Genesis 35.18
called her child Bennoni, which is, the son of my sorrow.

Of such significant names of man's misery the Scripture is full* one I cannot
pass in silence, 1 Samuel 4.19. etc.
to wit of Phinehas wife, who when she hard that the Ark of God was taken by
the Philistines, and that religion was gone, she called the child Icabod; which
is, the glory is gone from Israel.

The Lord grant that we have never cause so to say, so to christen our
children, or so to sigh to the sorrow of our sinful souls, when as for our
unthankfulness, the glory shall go from England. The use of all is this: that
as nere as we can, we should cleipe our children with significant names, such
as are no sooner heard, but they should make an impression in us and them,
either of the Lords mercy, or our own misery. But and if we will take in the
pride of our hearts, such names savoring of flesh and blood as David did, when
he called his son Absalon, which is the fathers peace: 2 Samuel 3.3
let us take heed it fall not out with us as it did with him; for he became
his fathers bane. A good advertisement to see to our names, that we be not
better called, then qualified, as Absalon was, crossing a good name with a bad
nature.

As for profane names taken from the Gentiles, and such as savor of idolatry,
away with them, as Jupiter, Mercury, Venus etc. Names we may take of our
ancestors, so we follow their virtues, as David, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob.

It is written of one, Massala Coruinus.
that he was so obliuious, that he had forgotten his own name. I fear there
be many such who little regard to follow the virtues of such as they would be
called after; yea oftentimes we hear the sound of our names, but we forget
the signification.

Genesis 32.28
Thou shall be no more called Jacob but Israel, as prevailing with God, so said
the angel; and after Jacob had it, he never lost it, he never forgot it: and
it was with him as with Scipio Africanus, Qui nihil inde praeter cognomen
accepisse dicitur, he had nothing from Carthage but the bare name: so what had
he or what have we in this world, but a wrestling with God for a blessing?

The daughter of Phanuel.
From her gracious name, now come we to the faithful family whereof she was
descended, which is here said to be Phanuel.

A gracious child no doubt, of gracious parents, I mean, a flourishing branch
of a fruitful tree: for Phanuel is Peniel mentioned, Gene. 32.30. which is the
face of God, being the place where Jacob wrastled with the Angel, and said, I
have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved. In memory whereof
Phanuel learned 3. things, notable presidents for fathers of families to
follow, in making holy their children and household.

1 The sight of God in his word, thus: I have seen God face to face.

2 The wrestling with God for a blessing by powerful prayer, Hosea* 12.3 4.
and practice of all piety, thus: I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

3 The assurance of Gods mercy and blessing after such fight and contention,
in these words: my life is preserved.

Let this be a model to frame your families by: Genesis 18.19. Acts. 10.2. ^ Sam
6.11. Io. 11.1. etc.
so shall ye be blessed in all your habitations as was Abraham, Cornelius,
Abed-Edo^, Lazarus at Bethania, and Joshua, when he resolved and said, If it
seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve:
Joshua. 24.14.15.
but I and my house will serve the Lord.

Godliness is great gain, whereunto appertains not only the things of this
life, but of the life to come. 1. Tim. 4.8
Is it gain you seek for? and would you advance your houses? and prefer
your children? Then live godlily, and bring them up in his fear: so shall ye
not only honor them in this world, Ephesians. 6.4
but in the world to come. I have been young, says David, and now am old;
Psalm. 37.25
yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging his bread.

The remembrance of the just is with praise, but the name of the wicked is with
rottenness: Let the rule of the Apostle guide you in the bringing up of your
children and family in nurture, and holy discipline.

If there be any that provides not for his own, 1. Tim. 5.8.
and namely for them of his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then
an infidel.

Which is true and may be verified, Math. 6.20
not so much of temporal trash, as of heavenly treasure; eue^ of that which
r^st cankereth not, moth consumes not, nor thief breaks through, and
steals.

Men think it sufficient if they be godly themselves, though their children
be riotous. 1. Sa^. 2.27.
Let Ely his example answer that objection, punished for his impunity: and let
Iobes care of his children banqueting, Job. 1.5.
increase thy diligence in fear of their future fall.

The Senate and people of Rome as Tullie records, sent every year six of
their Princes children to the land of Hetruria, there to learn the art of
divination. To credit the profession of divinity, then Princes children were
sent to see into the entrals of beasts, and flight of birds; our inspection now
is deeper, and we soar higher, even into the bloody wounds of a sweet
savior, Romans 8.34.
bleeding on earth, pleading in heaven: and yet (woe is me therefore) both
mean men, and mighty think divinity too base for their profession. O that
we had the gleanings of our noble, gentle, and princely blood, for the credit
of our religion, weaned, vowed, and dedicated (as Anna did her Samuel)
Nazarites for the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.22
and in her own words thus: I will bring him that he may appear before the
Lord, and there abide for ever.

The Lord from Horeb enjoined this exercise to all fathers, that they should
teach their children thus: Deu. 6.20.
when thy son shall ask the in time to come, What mean these testimonies,
and ordinances and laws? then thou shall say unto thy son etc. Hezechiah
rehearses it as a benefit to all posterity, that godliness should flow from
faithful fathers to faithful children, The living: the living, Esai. 38.19
he shall confess thee, as I do this day, the father to the children shall
declare thy truth. And Paul leaves it for an instruction irreuocable: Ye
fathers provoke not your children to wrath, Ephe. 6.4.
but bring them up in instruction, and information of the Lord.

Of the Tribe of Ashur.
That Anna her testimony of Christ might be of greater credit, she is here
commended for the tribe whereof she came, Genesis 30.13
which was Ashur the eight son of Jacob: but before I come to speak of that
tribe in particular, give me leave a little to tell you of the tribes in
general.

And why the spirit of God has been so careful to distinguish tribe from
tribe, in the course of all the scriptures; which was I assure you for no other
cause but to find out the promised seed, eue^ Christ the Messiah and savior
of all the world, his blessed line and lineage. I say, to prove the incarnation,
that since it was his good pleasure to bow the heavens and come down to be
manifested in the flesh, it might appear in what flesh. For as in the search
of Acha^s stealth Joshua severed tribe from tribe, Joshua. 7.16.
and family from family, man from man, till he came to Achan the son of
Carmi, of the tribe of Judah, and he was taken.

So search the scripture, and you shall find in the book of generations, how
careful the Spirit has been to sever tribe from tribe, house from house, man
from man, till it came to Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham,
Mat. 1.1. Luke. 3.23
the father of all the faithful, and so of Isaac, Jacob, and Judah.

Now that Anna the prophetess is of the tribe of Ashur, and neither of the
tribe of Leui or Judah, it is much to instruction and consolation, to see that
neither the spirit of prophecy is tied to Leui, Ephesians. 2.12
nor salvation only to the tribe of Judah; nor we must despair of the grace of
God, since the Lord has given salvation apparently to those that were of
another tribe, yea to gentiles aliants from the common weal of Israel.

For if you look into the book of God, ye shall find that Ashur was the
son of Zilpa, handmaid to Lea. Genesis 30.12.13.

O Lord how wonderful are thy mercies, and ways past finding out! The lawful
wife despised, the handmaid respected, and of her must come Ashur one of the
tribes in Israel; and of that tribe sealed unto salvation, as many as of the
tribe of Judah, Revel. 7.6
even twelve thousand. Now in this particular tribe of Ashur whereof Anna came,
I do observe a double blessing prophesied of; one by Jacob, honorable, Ashur,
Genesis 49.20
his bread shall be fat, and he shall give pleasures for a king.

By Moses, a religious, and as it Anna the daughter of Phanuel: for says he,
Ashur shall be blessed with children, and he shall be acceptable unto his
brethren, and shall dip his foot in oil. Thy shoes shall be iron and brass,
and thy strength shall continue as long as thou live.

For the first, Deu. 33.24 ^5.
it may seem that Ashur was an honorable Tribe, and for honor to be humbled
to the obedience of Christ, and of his gospel, is a rare thing in this wicked
world: for not many mighty, not many noble are called, but GOD has chosen the
foolish things of this world, to confound the wise, and God has chose^ the
weak things of the world to confound the mighty things; and vile things of
the world, and things which are despised, 1. Cor. 1.26
has god chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught, the things that
are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence.

Nay, many in respect of this, that they are great, noble, princely, and have
dipped their foot in oil, as was said of Ashur, they take occasion thereby to
wax proud, vain, cruel against the poor, and grievous over the Saints of
God; respecting religion with like reverence as Rube^ did his fathers bed, who
defiled it, and so do they: and therefore I may say as he did, Genesis 49.4.
your dignity is gone.

Honor, noblenes, and gentility, stand not so much in your desce^t as in your
asce^t; not how you are descended of men, but how you do ascend to God; it is
not the greatness of your blood, but the generosity of your spirit, soaring
like Eagles where Christ is, feeding upon him your selves, and bringing him
down for others repast, to justify that: Kings shall be thy nursing, Esaias. 49
23
fathers and Queens shall be thy nurces, they shall worship thee etc; Which and
if you do not, then take heed to your place and high callings: for Pote^tes
pote^ter torme^ta pat^e^tur, the mighty shall be mightily tormented. Wisd. 6.6.
Esaias. 30.33
Topheth is prepared of old, even for the mighty it is prepared Fulmen petit
culmen. The higher the spire, the nearer to fire.

But come we to Moses prophecy of Ashur, which seems more proper to the
present occasion, and as it were, a pregnant prophesy of Anna:

Ashur shall be blessed in his children, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.24.25. etc.


Ashur in Phanuel, Phanuel in Anna, Anna in her Christ, of who^ she traveled
in expectation, till she saw him in the flesh presented in the Temple.

Ashur was blessed in his children, Anna in her Christ.

Ad to the blessing of the faithful children, a singular and rare constancy in
the faith, by such obedience thereunto as appertains, mentioned in this:

Thy shoes shall be iron and brass, and thy strength shall continue as long
as thou live: or as it is in one translation according with the original:
Sicut dies iuuentutis tuae, ita et senectus tua.

True in Anna, if ever in any of that tribe, whose shoes were iron and brass;
she stedily stood to the faith of Christ from the first day of her virginity,
to the last day of her widdowhead: I say, so long as she lived, she did
continue a virgin, a wife, a widow, and was found faithful and constant in
all estates. Sicut dies iuuentutis ita et senectutis: As was her youth, so was
her age. A just reproof to the men and women of these our wretched days:
wherein for the most part, all are shod with cork for shoes of brass and
iron: we are not of Ashur, stidy in the truth, but we are blown away with
every blast of vain doctrine, Ephesians. 4.1.
and there is not the least gale of prosperity, or storm of adversity, but it
makes us to go back as in the day of Midian, or like the children of Ephraim,
Esaias. ^.4.
which being harnissed and carrying bows, turned themselves back in the day of
battle.

Nay, Psalm. 78.9^10.
the Lord is so careful we should no^ turn back, that by his advertisement we
may not so much as look back, and therefore he said, remember Lots wife. Luke.
17.32


Yea and Paul went yet a degree further, when he said one thing I do, I
forget all behind, and hold hard to that which is before, etc. Where note,
Phil. 3.13 14.
that not only our foot and eye, but our very thoughts must go forward and
not backward.

You have begun well this good new year, now what should let you to go
forward? Let a daughter of Phanuel, and a child of Ashur, gracious Anna teach
the perseverance in this Christian life, to end thy widdowhoode in his fear,
as thou have begun thy virginity in his faith. And beware of relapse, both in
the point of faith and fact: if thou fall from faith, see thy judgment. Heb.
6.4.5.6. If from thine obedience, which is in matter of fact, then see thy
judgment. 2 Pet. ^.20.21.

No man that takes the plowe in his hand, Luke. 9.62.
and looks back, is fit for the kingdom of God: observe (O Christian) says
one, what Christ puts into thine hand, Non delicias, pecunias, et id genus
reliqua, sed stiua^, the plow stilt, which is thy pains in piety, never to be
left off, if thou look to reap blessedness for thy painfulnes.

It is said of the powers divine, in the first of Ezechiel, Ezec. 1.17.
Quod non reuertebantur, cum ambulare^t, that they returned not when they went.
and Eze. 46.9. churchgoers may not return by the way of the gate, whereby they
came in: but they must go forth over against it; ye must gain by your
devotions, and ever depart better instructed then when ye came. This is the day
of circumcision, ye must be cut, not in the outward skin, but in the inward
heart and conscience: for thus says the Lord, no stranger uncircumcised in
heart, Ezec. 44.9.10.
nor uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my sanctuary, neither yet the
Leuits that are gone back from me when Israel went astray from me after their
Idols, but they shall bear their iniquity.

So then for conclusion, let Anna her constancy be your rule, who first and
last followed Christ with perseverance, perseuerantia, cu^seueritate: be kind
to your godly motions, and cherish them, but be cruel to your bad affections,
and kill them. Solomon says well. Pro. 18, 9. He that is slothful in his
work, is even the brother of him that is a great waster.

The Angels upon the ladder were not seen to rest, Genesis 28.12 John. 1.51 Cant.
5.15
but either to ascend, or descend; and Christ in the Canticles is described to
have legs of marble in sockets of gold: to teach us that constancy in Christ,
is constancy in gold, and more precious then the Carbuncle Topas, or
Chrisolite, yea and more sweet the^ all the trees of incense. In via vi^tutis
non progredi, regredi est, and qui non proficit deficit: Not to go forward in
the way of virtue, is to go backward, and he leeseth that gains no^.

Which was of a great age, after she had lived with an husband seven years
from her virginity, etc.

In the description of Anna her person, I have told you that she was by
profession a Prophetess, by name gracious, of a religious family, and of an
honorable Tribe.

It now remains, we come to the maturity of her age, and threfold state of
her life, which she passed in all godliness and honesty: all to make her
witness of greater credit, to the honor of her Christ, whom she published

For as the wise man says, Age is a crown of glory, when it is found in the
way of righteousness Pro. 16.31. That is, when it is joined with religion* or
else the elder that the wicked are, the more they are to be abhorred.

Her age argued her honesty, virtue, and godly life: for the sinner, Psalm. 55.23
wicked, and unrighteous live not half their days: Pride, avarice, wine, and
women are hatchets to cut down the tree of thy life, ere it come to it full
growth. Dalila in her wantonness, Baltassar in his bolles, Dani. 5.1 ^ Sam.
18.9
Absalon in his pride, were all cut off in the midst of their days; sin
goes before destruction, and it hasteneth on the judgment.

As one flood puts on another till they come to the great Ocean, and then they
are swallowed up: so one sin puts on another, till we come to the grave, and
then all are swallowed up in judgment. I say therefore, Obsta principijs,
begin betimes, and let thine age and thine honesty grow together: for what an
incongruity is it to be gray in hairs, and green in affection? thy years to
go forward, and thy religion backward?

It is said of Anna, Quod haec processerat in diebus multis, because with the
course of her years, ran the circle of her religion, virtue and honesty; and
as the days of her youth passed, so the vanities of this world ever died in
her.

Erubescat senectus, quae se emendare non potest, that old age may be ashamed
and blush, that knows not how to begin to amend.

I say amend, for that many having passed their youth in sin, shame, and
ignorance, deem it too late to amend when they are old; as when they say, I am
now too old to learn: to whom I answer; Etiamsi senes magis decet docere,
quam discere, magis tamen decet discere quam ignorare, August: in Epist. ad
Heb. Although it be more seemly for old age to teach then to be taught, yet is
it much more seemly to learn then to be ignorant. The only thing that
lets in old age to learn and to amend, is avarice: Cum cu^cta vitia in seen
consenescunt, sola auaritia iuuenesc^t: When all vices grow old in age, only
covetousness waxes young. The use of all is, that our old age should ever be
a credit to our place and calling. As also that as our years do increase, sin
should decrease; and need we had, by Anna her example to weane our affections
in youth, that they do not ouerule us in our age. Ex peruersa volu^tate facta
est co^suetudo, et du^ co^suetudini non resistitur, facta est necessitas, of a
froward will is engendered an evil custom, and while custom is not withstood,
it grows to a necessity. Peccata senum praedicantur in quid, Old men's sins are
essential. I do further observe out of the text, that she passed the threfold
state of her life, in all piety and godliness. A virgin, a wife, and a widow,
she passed all without stain to any, a pure virgin, an honorable wife, a
religious widow: so she lived, and so she died, and for that her name is
memorable.

Now of these three kinds of life, to wit, virginity, marriage and widdowhead,
the Monks make much ado, and such a difference in the sight of men and God
too, as does no less argue the^ of foul impiety, then of just hypocrisy,
preferring virginity and widdowhoode much before marriage, even in the sight of
God: for they attribute unto virginity the fruit and merit of a hundred fold,
unto widdowhoode of sixty fold, but unto Matrimony, as a state more vile and
beggarly, only thirty fold.

Yea and yet some more superstitious the^ these, who left unto marriage no place
of fruit or blessing; but that of an hundred fold they gave unto martyrdom,
that of sixty fold to virginity, and that of thirty fold to widdowhoode;
reckoning marriage among those kinds of life, which are nothing pleasing unto
God, but only of mercy suffered to be, and are not far from fornication,
Whereupon this speech has fallen from their filthy mouths: Nuptiae teram
replent, virginitas Caelum, The married replenish the earth, but virgins fill
heaven; as and if lawful marriage had naught to do with heaven. O how truly
are the foul frogs taxed in the froth of their fornication, sin, and sodomie,
by Bale in his Votaries, thus? They frown at marriage, who laugh at letchery.

But leave we these hypocrites in their superstition, and let us see what the
Scripture says of these three states of life.

1 First, the scripture says, of a truth, I perceive that God is no respecter
of persons, but in every nation he that fears him, and works righteousness,
is accepted of him. Acts. 10.34.

2 And Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.19
Circumcision avails nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping of the
commandments of God.

3 And again, Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither
bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ
Jesus: And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise.
Out of all which I gather that God is no accepter of persons, nor respects
any man, place, state or condition of men, but as they respect him in true
piety and godliness.

He respects no person, place or state of life, but in the cause: blessed
cause, blessed person, whether virgin, wife or widdowe: cursed cause, cursed
person, whether widdowe, wife, or virgin. Give me a religious virgin, and I
will prefer her before an irreligious wife or widdowe; give me a religious wife
or widdowe, and I will prefer her before an irreligious virgin. For if God
respect not circumcision which was his own ordinance, and under the law, nor
rejects vncircumcisio^, which was abominable by the Law, but a new creature;
will he (trow you) regard virginity, which was never enjoined by law, but as a
new creature.

I gather again, that upon the touch of Christ, Reave. 7.14.
all states are sanctified, and never till we have dipped our stoles in the
blood of the Lamb: If then ye be Christ's, Gal. 3.29.
ye are Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise: not heirs for that ye are
Jews rather then Grecians, not heirs for that ye are men, rather then women,
virgins rather then wives, Kings rather the^ peasants: but ye are heirs
because of the promise, even of the promised seed; which laid up in your
hearts by faith, unfolds the inheritance unto you, and makes you heirs of his
heavenly kingdom. In which sense I may say with Augustine, Caelibatus Iohannis
non praefertur coniugio Abrahae, the single life of John has no prerogative
above the marriage of Abraham; and so to conclude with the Apostle. 1. Cor.
7.20.21. etc. Let every man abide in the same vocation wherein he was called.

Art thou called being a servant? care not for it.

Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to be loosed: art thou loosed from a
wife? seek not to be bound But if thou take a wife, thou sinnest not; and if
a virgin marry, she sins not: nevertheless such shall have trouble in the
flesh, I say in the flesh, not in the faith: for it is no touch of faith for
virgens to marry.

And therefore true it is, Molestiae coniugij, sunt paena peccati, non
matrimonij: the troubles of marriage, are punishments of sin, not of matrimony:
But leave we the comparison, and come we to Anna, how commendably she passed
these three states of life, in all piety and godliness: for it is evident by
the text, she was a chaste virgin, a chaste wife, and a chaste widdowe.

A rare thing in these unchaste days, wherein few, either virgins, wives, or
widows go unspotted: she lived with one husband seven years from her
virginity Ergo, she was a virgin unspotted in the day of her espousals.

She lived seven years with an husband; she lived with him, she lived not
from him; she lived to love him, she lived to obey him, him and no other: for
that had bin a death and not a life.

The text says well, she lived with him, which argued her patience as well as
her chastity: for if she had not been peaceable* it had been no life but a
death they led, according to that of Siracides: an evil wife is a yoke of Oxen
that draws diverse ways, he that has her is as though he held a Scorpion.

Lastly, as the Lord guided her in her virginity, honored her in marriage, so
he loved and protected her in her widdowhead, an estate of life much respected
of God, as may appear by the scriptures.

Wherein the Lord enioyneth from Horeb, (to which imperial law all owe homage)
Ye shall not trouble any widdowe nor fatherless child; Ex. 22.22
if thou vex or trouble such, and so he cry and call upon me, I will surely
hear his cry.

And it was a sin, with a vengeance laid upon the rulers of Israel, that they
judged not the fatherless, neither did the widows cause come before them.
Esaias. 1.23 Iam. 1.27


Whom to relieve, the Apostle makes a part of pure religion, and undefiled
before God.

But Anna her widdowhead was pairlelesse both for providence and piety: she
saw the Lord Jesus presented in the Temple, which she could not, either in her
virginity, or when she was a wife; to tell you that eue^ therein, widdowhead had
the prerogative above virg^nity, by the Lords providence. And the chastity of
her widdowhoode appeared in this, that she so continued for the space of four
score and four years.

Chambering and wantonness rotteth the bones, and shorteneth the life; but
temperance even in that, gives length of days. To live fourscore and four
years was much, and so long to live in chaste widdowhoode was more: but all
that time to serve God in the Temple night and day with fasting and prayer, was
most of all; far from the practice of our wanton widows, who ere they have
well finished the funerals of the first husband, are ready to sole^nize the
Nuptials of a second. Which though I dare not say, it is unlawful, yet may I
say, it is not seemly, and charge them with this fault, that they have soon
forgotten their first love.

It was demanded of Valeria the Roman (her husband being dead) why she married
not again: she answered that of right she could not, for that her husband yet
lived, though not in her house, yet in her heart; and till he were there dead,
she doubted she neither ought, nor could marry another.

And Marcia wife to Cato, being likewise demanded why she married not again,
answered, she could yet find none that would marry her but for hers. But
Amira her answer was full both of love and wit, when she wonde out her self
from second marriage, with this resolution.

If I should marry again (says she) then it must needs fall out that my
husband should prove either good or bad: if good, then should I ever live in
fear to loose him; if bad, then in grief to keep him, and therefore none is
best.

I speak this to correct the lightness of our days, wherein both Virgins,
wives, and widows are too wantonly given, neither regarding the veil of
their virginity, the honor of their marriage, nor the holiness of their
widdowhoode with gracious Anna.

It may seem in the Apostles time, that widows had their special place and
praise in the church, as you may read, 1. Tim. 5.3.6.11. Nor do I see why even
yet they might not do unto God the like good and acceptable service,
especially those of elder years: and for the younger women, I say with the
Apostle, I will that the younger women marry, and bear children, 1. Tim. 5.14
and govern their houses, and give no occasion to the adversary to speak
evil. Finally to preserve and keep thy chastity without corruption in all
three estates, six things are required, 1. sobriety. 2. labor, 3. plain
apparel, 4. a restraint of thy senses, 5. little speech, and that poudered
with honesty, 6. shu^ning of opportunities, as of persons, place and time.
Cassiodore super Matthaeu^.

And went not out of the Temple, but served God with fasting and prayers night
and day.

From the description of Anna her person, a mirror of all modesty for virgins,
wives, and widows to behold; it now remains we come to the practice of her
life in all piety, and publishing of her Christ in all true faith and verity:
her godly life appeared in this, that she did altogether deuote her self to
the service of her God, first amplified by circumstance of the place where, In
the Temple; secondly the manner how, with fasting and prayers: thirdly the time
when, night and day.

In that she went not out of the Temple, it argued that she was no gadder
abroad, but lived all in private to God, and with his saints in the great
congregation! whither she went no doubt, as the blessed virgin did to her
cousin Elizabeth, Cum festinatione, Luke. 1.39.
(...).
with all have. Non gaudet diu videri in publico, she had no joy to be abroad:
this blessed widdowe followed after faith, and not fashions.

She had no solace but in the assembly of Saints, no joy but in the fruit of
her faith, no pleasure but in the Temple of her God.

And therefore no doubt she said as David did, blessed are they that dwell in
thine house, they will be always praising thee. For one day in thy court is
better then a thousand elsewhere: I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
my God, Psalm. 84.4. etc.
then to dwell in the tabernacle of the wicked.

These days are Dinaes days; for many of our virgins, wives, and widows
will not be kept within our doors. Genesis 34.1. etc.
And others are so far from serving of God in the Temple, with gracious Anna,
night and day, that of all other places they love it least, and seek it last.

Yea, they never come but when they are carried, in the day of their birth to
baptism, and in the day of their death to burial.

Dina went out of her fathers doors to see the shows of the Shechemits: it
cost blood, and it lost honesty.

Bersheba washed her self in public, it killed her husband, 2. Sam. 11.2
it lost her honor, it endangered the king, and plagued Israel^

Had Iephthe his daughter kept within the doors, Iud 11.34.
it might have saved her life, but she was too proud of her fathers praise,
out she must to gaze upon his glory; well well, she bought it dear, for her
dance was to the grave, her tymbrels playde her passing peale, and the
Damosells mourned her funeral.

What should I say more? Esau lost the blessing with being abroad, and Jacob
got it with being at home.

In cunctis quae foris sunt vae vae, Amos. 5.16. And they shall say to all in
the high ways, alas, alasse^ David in one of his Psalms makes a good wife an
ornament for a man's house, and here I may make a widow an ornament for the
Church of God: Not then an ornament for the Theater, plays, spectacles,
fayres, markets, or doue-ales, there only to see and to be seen; No, no, she
must be as a snayle to carry her house upon her back, her children at her
breasts, her ha^dmaids at her heels, with care in her heart, and cost in her
hands, to buy balm, to bury Christ in her dearest thoughts.

He was a Pagan that said of Sempronia, that she could saltare and canere,
paulo elegantius quam decuit probae: that she could sing and dance more
minion-like then became a modest matrone. Shall heathen see into such sins,
and shall Christians be senseless? Of old, virgins were veiled, and the married
were covered, Genesis 24.65
and for that were called nuptae; but now all is garish, and the veil of
modesty is put away: bare head, bare neck, bare breasts, with painted face, and
oyled countenance; so far from all godly carriage and Christian couerture, as
they are from virginal modesty, and nere the suspicion of prostituted shame
and honesty. Trow you that God will be so answered when fire shall fine these
fashions, flash in our faces, and ye shall meet him in the clouds? when to
hide your selves it will be impossible, and so to appear, it will be
intolerable.

See in the second place what she did in the Temple; she came not to see
others, and to be seen her self: she came not as a money changer, to trade in
the Temple, or to haunt the seats of them that sold doves, whipped out by
Christ, Math. 21.12.

Nor did she come to serve the time, as those who now and then drop into the
Church for fear of danger, and when that is past, they are gone, like
Seamewes, who never stir but in a storm. But she came as you may here see, to
serve God with fasting and prayer, night and day. And this service of God it
was her love, it wvs her life, she loved it, and therefore she lived in it.

And sooner might ye draw the Sun from the firmament, then blessed Anna from
her deuotio^s. Her ear hearkened, her eyes watched, her feet were shodde to the
service of her God (...) serve him was the crown (...) head, and diadem of
her prai^e, she gloried in nothing more the^ that she might lick up the dust of
the sanctuary.

Nor did this service flow from a servile fear, but from a filial love,
according to that; Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again,
but ye have received the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15.
whereby we cry Abba father.

She served him purely and nothing with him, she served him only and nothing
beside him, she served him truly, and nothing for him; but woe is me to tell:
we are so far from serving him, that we make our God to serve us even in our
sins, according to that of Esaias: Esaias. 43.24
Thou boughtest me no sweet savor with money, neither have thou made me
drunk with the fat of thy sacrifice; but thou have made me to serve with thy
sins, and wearied me with thine iniquities.

Now come we to the manner, how she served God in the Temple, expressed in
these words, with fasting and prayers.

Not that she put any merit in the one or in the other, but used both as means
to strengthen her faith in the Messiah, whom after she did confess and
profess. And therefore it is said, she served God with them, and not merited
by them, or was justified through them: being a service, it was no desert but
a duty; wherein when she had done all that ever she could, Luke 17.10.
yet was she unprofitable, till she confessed the Lord, and spoke of him to all
that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

This therefore is the right use of our prayer and fasting, to be unto us as
it were bellows, by which our faith in Christ is refreshed and inflamed. And
it is specially to be observed, that fasting is put in the first place of her
service to god, thereby to teach us that we must be broken by abstinence, ere
we ca^ be well prepared to any good devotion. For as if you put an eg or
chestnut into the fire, and break it not, the heat no sooner comes unto it,
but it bursteth and leapeth out: yet not so, if before you put it in, you break
it never so little in the head. So may we say of me^, presuming to come before
the majesty of their God, who is a co^suming fire; if they come vnbroke^, fat,
and full, and not humbled with fasting, prayer and watching, they easily leap
out of the fire of their devotions, and fall away from heavenly conte^plation.
Not so Pueri illi Babylonici, mentioned in Daniel, who refused the portion of
the Kings meat, and choose rather to feed upon pulse. They would be broken
with prayer, abstinence, and fasting, the rather to abide the fiery furnace,
out of which they were delivered. Dan. 1.12


So Moses was with God upon the holy mount, Exodus 24.18.34.28
forty days and forty nights without meat or drink: he was broken like a
chestnut with abstine^ce, that he might the rather endure the fire of Gods
majesty.

So this holy Anna would be broken like a chestnut with prayer, fasting, and
watching in the temple night and day, to mortify the flesh, that it might not
abate the vigor of the spirit in the heat of her devotions.

It is therefore expedient (my dear brethren) that by your abstinence ye keep
under the flesh, especially in your devotions and service of God, 2. Cor. 12.2
and so as you may say with the blessed Apostle, whether in the body or out, I
cannot tell, God he knows: For the flesh is that Eve tempting us to eat of
the forbidden fruit. Genesis 3.6 Genesis 39.7
The flesh is Putiphars wife, provoking chaste Joseph to filthy lust. The flesh
is, Iud. 4.18 Judge. 16.19
that Iael beguiling Sisera, with feigned love to his destruction. The flesh is
that Dalila who pleasantly took Sampson into her bosom, and betrayed him unto
the Philistines, cut his hair, put out his eyes, and made him a scorn to all
the people.

The flesh is that dancing minion, Math. 14.8.
whom nothing could please but the head of John Baptist on a platter.

Finally, the flesh is that dorekeeping damsel, Math. 26.69.
Ad cuius vocem Christum negamus, at whose voice Peter abiured his Christ, and
so do we.

In regard of all which, it stands us upon as we love the salvation of our
souls in the service of our God, that with blessed Anna here, and Paul
elsewhere, we beat down our bodies with prayer, fasting, and watching, to bring
it in subjection to the spirit, 1 Cor. 9.^7
lest by any means after we have preached to others, we our selves should
be reproved.

Night and day.
Anna her devotion is here exemplified by circumstance of the time she bestowed
in the service of God, which was both night and day, as it is in the text,
spoken by way of trope; not that she ever dwelt in the Temple, for how could it
be said then, that she came at the same instant upon them? Or that her
fastings were such, or prayers so many, as she had no leisure either to eat in
the day, or rest in the night: for how could she ever then have come to such
maturity, and length of days?

But the speech is familiar, and meaning such, as does imply from the spirit
which spoke it, that she was frequent in her devotions, and a continual Church
commer. As we say of him who is a painful student, that he is never from his
book, nor from the presence of his Master: or of him, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
who prays much, we say he is always in prayer. Or of him who is a good
hearer, why such a one is never from the Church, sermon, and sacraments.

So may it be said of Anna the Prophetess, that she was much in prayer, and
fasting: hoc opus, hic labor, hoc artificium, hoc exercitium, it was her work,
it was he^ labor, it was her art, it was her exercise.

When ever any holy thing was performed in the Temple, were it in the morning
or in the evening, Praesto aderat, she was even at hand: nor did she at any
time neglect the public service, but was still present.

Holiness (says the sweet Singer of Israel) becomes thine house for ever:
Psalm. 93.6
holy saint, holy shrine, holy God, holy people, holy temple; holy Anna did
hallow it night and day, with her holy presence, prayer, and fastings.

Here learn then by Anna her due devotion, and daily practice of godliness, and
piety, how to frame your selves for the Church and holy assembly; handle not
the holy things with unwashed hands, but rather say with David, I will wash
mine hands in innocence, and so will I go to thine altar, Psalm. 26.6.

Learn with Anna to love the Church: where a man's treasure is, there is his
heart. Math. 6.21
Can there be greater treasure any where then in the temple of God? where he
has promised that his eye, ear, 1. King. 9.3
and heart, shall be perpetually. Say with David, Lord I have loved the
habitation of thine house, and the place where thine honor dwells, Psalm.
26.8. Is his presence there? is his honor there? Why should we then deny to
honor it with our presence? Is his heart there to love it? and dare thou to
loath it?

One thing (says the Prophet) I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple, Psalm. 27. When David desired
this one thing, it may seem he excluded all other things; and when he desired
it to require it, he made full account to obtain his desire.

When he required to dwell in the house of the Lord, he made it his
habitation; and when he would there dwell all the days of his life, he made it
no tabernacle for a time, but an abode for ever.

Finally to sanctify all with a sanctified end both of his abode, and biding
there, he said, I seek this solace in his sanctuary only that I may behold
the beauty of the Lord, and visit his Temple.

And so to conclude a doctrine from Anna her practice in the continual
exercise of her piety in the Temple, as also from David's desire to rest
himself with the sparrow over the Altar of his God, and ever to dwell in the
habitation of his holiness:

I gather, that it is beseeming the saints of God, incessantly to pray, duly
to fast, and daily persevere in the practice of all piety and godliness. For
he that perseuereth to the end shall be blessed; Mat. 24.13
and true it is, Frustra nititur, qui non innititur, the tree that is often
planted, and often plucked up, it never prospers, it bears no bows, it
brings no fruit. So is the planting in religion, virtue, and piety; if thou
leave thy first love, and be removed from the first ground of good faith and
obedience, thou art as a tree twice dead, Jude. 12.
and plucked up by the roots, and good for nothing but for the fire. O well
said Syracides. Eccle. 27.

Homo sensatus in sapientia manet sicut sol, stultus autem sicut luna mutatur,
A man of understanding is steady as the son, but a fool is changeable like
the moon. Just and holy men are stable like Abraham, the father of all the
faithful, who, as the fowls fell upon the carkase of the sacrifice, still
drove them away; and so as one says: Inceptum quod fecit, non reliquit
infectum, what he begun he never left undone; like unto that of Caesar's
expedition: Nil factum credens, cum quid superesset agendum, instat atrox, who
never thought thing well done, when any thing was left undone.

The use is good, and Anna was happy in her holy haunt: for that she brake of
no devotion, her love was full of labor; in prayer often, in fastings often,
in watchings often, night and day she took no rest, but in the sweet repose
of Isreal's consolation, whom she sought in the Temple till she found him, and
then ever treasured up in her dearest thoughts. Be it therefore far from us,
that our divinity should be without devotion, our profession without practice,
our zeal without such sanctity. May we sit at ease in Syon, and have no
courage for the truth? may the minister or the magistrate sleep? may the
people shift off so sovereign a service to their God and Christ? O then where
is our first love? where is truth? where is faith? where is religion? We had
all in the days of our trial, when the fire fined it, the cross grieved it,
and our martirs sealed it with their dearest blood: then was the word of God
precious as in the days of Samuel; then at midnight, Paul and Silas prayed,
sung psalms unto God, and prisons were shaken with true devotion.

And have we now left it in the happy days of our peace, and under the
government of so gracious a Sovereign? shall it grow under the cross, and
shall it grieve under the crown? shall it prosper in the days of persecution?
and shall it wither in the days of peace? shall the Ark of God pass through
the swellings of Jorden, and shall it make a stop in the sweet running waters
of Shilo? shall Moabs rest be Moabs ruin? then woe unto us that ever we lived,
to enjoy so great blessedness, with so little holiness.

But here is our woeful want, we are ignorant of our God, and we know him not:
we think any thing will please him, any religion, any obedience, any prayer,
any preaching, any duty, any devotion; like Themistius the Philosopher, that
would persuade Valens the Emperor, Deo gratam esse sectarum varietatem, vt ita
plur^bus modis colatur: That God was well pleased with varieties of sects,
because by that means he may have more sundry and diverse ways of his worship
and service. Or we deal with our great God of heaven, full of Majesty, full of
might, full of fear, full of fire, as it is recorded the Mexicans did with
Ferdinando Cortasio; who being much astonished with his great exployts, and
wondering whether he were a God or no, sent Ambassadors unto him with these
gifts and instuctions: Tria genera munerum ad te ferimus, primo quinque
homines; and si Deus quidem crudus es, and sanguine placa^dus, cape istos and
vescere; plures etiam dabimus. 2. sin bonus mitisque es Deus, en tibi herbas
and p^umas ad supplicandum. 3. si porro homo es, cape has aues and fructus,
quos damus in tuum and tuorum vsum.

In English thus: We present here before thy Majesty three manner of guests,
first five live men; and if thou be a cruel God and pleased with nothing but
blood, take these and eat, we will provide more: But if thou be a good and a
mild God, behold here are herbs and feathers to supplicate with; and if thou be
but a mere man, take this foul and fruit, which we give for thee and thine to
use. Christian quid rides, de te narratur fabula, Why smilest thou O
Christian, the tale is true of thee. You Papists deem cruelly of your God, and
you think him pleased with nothing but blood in your devotions; you have
diapred the earth with the blood of his saints: and, as one of your own Poets
says, you daily separate the soul of Christ from his body, and yet draw
incruently Christ's blood out of his veins.

We Protestants deem too basely of our God, and we think him pleased with any
thing, even flowers and feathers will fit our devotions; but fie upon such fealty.

You Atheists of these our days who dare say in your hearts, though not with
your mout^* There is no God: you think of him but as a mere man, foul and
fruit is for your devotion: whilst you make your belly your God, your glory
your shame, and mind nothing but these earthly things.

Well, Anna her devotion was another, night and day, she sought, she sued, she
wrastled and prayed and found God at Bethell: And for us, seeing as the Apostle
says, we receive a kingdom which can not be shaken, Heb. 12.28. etc.
let us with her have grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may please
him with reverence and fear, for even our God is a consuming fire.

She then coming at the same instant upon them, Luke 2.38.
confessed likewise the Lord, and spoke of him to all that looked for
redemption in Ierusa^^^.

We are now come to the last part and shutting up of all, which is Anna her
profession of Christ in all verity; without which, what formerly has been
said, is nothing either to Anna her praise, or perfection in piety.

For what is her gracious name? what is her godly family? what is her honorable
tribe? what is the maturity of her age, her chaste carriage in her virginity,
marriage and widowhood? what is the resting of her self in the temple, with the
continual service of her GOD there, with fasting and prayers both night and
day? I say what is all this good, without the sovereign good, Acts. 4.11 Leuit.
2.13
eue^ Christ the stone of our building, the salt of our sacrifice, Mat.
2^.11.12. Ephesians. 5.2.
the wedding garment we must put on, the sweet perfume, balm, and incense that
sauoreth and relisheth all our actions? without which (I say) al our devotion
(be it never so dear) is dead, distasteth with our God, and endangereth our
souls. And this is the reason why we say, Quod opera infidelium sunt peccata,
The works of Infidels are sin, be they never so just, never so chaste, never so
patie^t, (...) that it (...)

Now (...) Christ, I (...) when the (...) upon (...) when (...) by (...) when
the parents had brought in the babe Jesus, to do for him after the custom of
the law, then came Anna not by chance, or upon the call of any, but by
special motion of the holy Ghost (no doubt) and instinct of the Spirit; which
did suggest that even now Shilo was come, Genesis 49.10 Esaias. 9.6.
Christ was born, a Son was given, even the expectation of Israel, to all
that longed for him. In which longing she looked, and saw sufficient for her
salvation, nor had she ever seen with her eyes, had she not longed with her
heart: for in her (...) in her (...) notable (...) still to (...) good, (...)
us in (...) the Lord was his guest.

Daniel by the banks of Hula, while he was speaking in prayer, and confessing
the sins of the people, the man Gabriel appeared and informed him, Daniel.
9.21. etc.

While Zachary attended the evening sacrifice, and the incense was a burning,
the Angel said, fear not Zachary, for thy prayer is heard, Luk 1.42.

Isaac walked in the field praying, and saw Rebecca coming. Genesis 24.63


While the Ma^i followed the star, they found the babe. Math. 2.10 ^1.


And while Cleopas and the other talked of those things that had happened at
Jerusalem, Luke 24.14.15.
Christ drew near and talked with them. And when did the holy Ghost fall upon
the assembly and fill the house where they late? but when they were all with
one accord in one place, looking and longing after the promise. Acts. 2.1.

I say for conclusion, watch, pray, and practice piety, long and look after
the day of your redemption: blessed is that servant whom his master when he
comes shall find so doing. Matthew. 24.46.

But woe, woe, and woe again, to all such as neither watch, pray, long, Zeph.
1.12.
nor look, but lie in their sins, and are frozen in their dregs; how will
they answer the Lord at his fiery coming, who are so found? If judgment begin
at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.^7.18.
and the saints shall hardly be saved, where? where shall the sinner stand?
when to hide themselves it will be impossible, and to appear it will be
intolerable. O that men were wise, then would they understand this, then would
they consider their latter end. Deuter. 32.29.

See again, and weigh with me how the faithful, good, and godly do mutually
help one another in the service of God.

Simeon was praising and preaching Christ in the Temple, and behold Anna was
ayding with all diligence to further that blessed work; and superuenit, as it
is in one translation, she was upon him ere he was aware, and did communicate
with him in that holy service. So was Aaron to Moses: for that he had a
stammering tongue. Exodus 4.16 Acts. 13.2. 2. Tim. 4 10 Psalm. 122.1
Barnabas to Paul, though Demas did forsake him.

The people to David when they said, Come, we will go into the house of the
Lord.

So was he who said well, We together are Gods laborers, ye are Gods
husbandry, and Gods building. 1. Cor. 3.9.

And so (for the use of the doctrine) are all ye to us, when you help us in
our devotions, ayding us with your prayers, praises, and presence in the
service of God; flocking hither like doves to their nests, and coming upon us
at unawares, as Anna did upon Simeon when he had the babe in his arms, Esaias.
60.8.
with Joseph and Marie assistants in that blessed work. We are too solitary in
the service of God, well it were if we were more ayding one another in the
same. Birds of a wing fly together, beasts of a heard flock together: Judges.
5.15.16.
we are too single in our devotions, and the divisions of Reuben are great
thoughts of heart.

Now at Anna her coming in, she showed her religion in two things: first, she
confessed him in heart, and secondly, published him to others, when she spoke
of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem: justifying that of the
Apostle, Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall
be saved.

Where note, that heart and tongue are tied together, nor can any man say he is
religious, if he be silent; think he never so well, if he do not speak, he
is of a dumb and dead religion; For even as at the approach and presence of
the Son, virtue flowing from it, trees wax green, flourish, and yield their
fruit; so Christ the son of righteousness shyning upon his saints, Mala. 4
2.
what marvel is it, if they break out into praises, and smell more sweet
then all the trees of incense?

Again in that it is said she did likewise confess: See the consent of faith
and doctrine, that her belief and speech of Christ was all one with that of
Symeon; to wit, that he should be a light to the Gentiles, Luke 2.32.
the glory of Israel, a rock to the religious, a ruin to the reprobate, and
a sword to Mary's heart, all inuring that Christ should be both our life and
mortification

Learn further, that if Christ being made man, Philip. 2.7.
and taking unto him the shape of a servant, as he lay in the cratch was sung
of the Angels, and seen of the sheepheards; if in the Temple he was preached
by Symeon, and confessed by Anna, to the wonder of Joseph and Marie:

How much is it of greater wonder, that now neither seen nor felt, yet the
godly should relish him in souls, and found out his praise to their endless
salvation. O that we did know our own blessedness in the certainty of our
knowledge, by a more special mean and manner.

For we go not by sight but by hearing, nor do we admire Christ ex his quae
foris apparent, for that which we see in him, but for that which we have heard
of him: for it is not only, Blessed are the eyes that see, but also, Blessed
are the ears that hear the things that you hear. Math. 13.16.17.


Nor is it, Blessed are the pappes that gave thee suck, Luke 11.27.28.
but rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.

Ecclesiastes says well, Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the
house of GOD, and be more nere to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools;
for they know not that they do evil.

The Majesty and mercy of our God cannot be seen with mortal eye, but he is
apprehended by faith, and hearing, without further process, search, or
scrutiny. Thomas may sound into his wound by feeling, but he ca^ never sound
his will but by hearing.

For even as in aged Isaac when he blessed Jacob, all his senses failed him but
hearing, and only in that he was not deceived:

So in the knowledge of Christ our Savior, and in the certainty of his
truth, all our senses are senseless, but that of hearing: the voice is Jacobs
voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. Genesis 27.22


The Paganes papizing, and our Papists paganizing are palpable in their
religion, pleasing they are to all their senses, in all their devotions, but
only to that of hearing, and that also if it be fed with pipe and Organ: but
if you speak of preaching, and would fill it with heavenly harmony, they shut
the doors, they stop their ears, and they will not hear, charm you never so
wisely.

Only in this, Isaac said true, Psalm. 58.4 5
It is the voice of Jacob; but when he said, They are the hands of Esau, he was
deceived.

Jacobs voice will not deceive, it is the word of God: but Esau his hands will
still deceive you, they are but the inventions of men, and beggarly rudiments
of this world: as, Touch not, taste not, handle not, Gal. 4.9. Coloss 2 21.22.
which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and doctrine
of men.

And spoke of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Text.
When the heart is full, the mouth will vent, and as is the liquor within, Psa.
116.10.
so is the relish without. Mat. 12.34
I have believed, and therefore have I spoken, says one; and of the abundance
of the heart, the mouth speaks, says another.

Anna was full of her Christ, and therefore she could not but vent him; she had
treasured him up in her dearest thoughts, and for that she could not but lay
him out to her best advantage. O well said the kingly Prophet David, Psa. 108.3.
I will give thanks unto the Lord among the people, I will sing praises unto
thee among the nations.

To thank GOD in private is much, to speak of him among the people is more;
but among the nations to sing his praises, is most of all.

The doctrine is good, and this it is: the godly are never wanting in the
practice of this piety, that as they are faithful and true to God in
believing, so are they charitable toward men in publishing their Christ,
pregnant they are, and they cannot but bring forth.

Consider what she speaks of, she reads no destinies, nor tells no old wives
tales, she reports no news like the Athenians, Acts. 17.21 Tit. 1.12.
or speaks of belly-cheare, like the slow bellyed Cretians; her speech is of no
riot, ribaldry, or wantonness: but she speaks of him, viz. of her Christ, to
all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem: According to that of Peter, 1 Pet.
4.11.
If any man speak, let him speak as the words of God. Whereby we are
admonished, that our speech should be chaste, godly and gracious, ever tending
to edification, and the building up of our brother in god lines and piety; Ephesians.
4.26.
always mindful of our saviors aduertiseme^t, that For every idle word, Mat.
12.36
we must give an account thereof at the day of judgment. And surely this is
true, sanctified and spiritual speeches do inflame the soul, Psalm. 119.140.
according to that of the Psalmist: Ignitum eloquium tuum vehementer, and
seruus tuus dilexit illud: Thy word is wonderful fiery, and thy servant loves
it. And whereunto accords Jeremy 30.9. His word was in mine heart as fire,
etc. And that of Cleopas, Did not our hearts melt within us, when he talked
with us of these things? Luke 24.32.


But contrarily, vain, idle, and profane speeches do quench the fire of our
love toward God and man, according to that of the Apostle: 2. Tim. 2.16 1.
Cor. 15.33.
Stay profane and vain bablings, for they shall increase unto more
ungodliness. And again, Evil words corrupt good manners: Ecclus. 9.^7.
and Sit omnis oration tua in praeceptis altis simi: Let thy talk be with the
wise, and all thy communication in the Law of the most high.

It is here further to be observed that this blessed Matron spoke of God, not
to all, but to such as looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

To teach us that we must not cast our pearls before swine, Mat. 7.6.
or give holy things to dogs: for such are not capable of heavenly doctrine, or
divine mysteries, witnesses the Apostle: 1 Cor. 12.14.
Carnalis homo no^ percipit ea, quae sunt spiritus dei: The natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of God: as also Esaias the Prophet. 28.9.
Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand the
things that he hears? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from
the breasts. And David Secreta domini time^tibus eum, Psa. 25.14*
the secrets of the Lord are revealed to the^ that fear him, etc. Sapientia^
loquimur inter perfectos. But woe is me to tell: 1 Cor. 2.6.
few look for redemption (as it is in the text) either of their sins, of
their savior, or of their lost time; of their sins wherein they live: which
they are so far from breaking off by repentance, that rather they solace
themselves in them, according to that: Laetantur cu^ malefecerunt, et exultant
in rebus pessimis: The wicked are glad when they do evil, and rejoice in
their wickedness: to preach to such, is to beat the air.

But rather our words will carry weight, pierce, and wound such as travel and
be heavy laden, groan under the burden of their sins, Mat. 11.28
and look for the day of their redemption.

And as for the time lost, who does redeem it, though the days be dangerous?
And so I conclude from all I have said of Anna her unfolding of the heavenly
mysteries to such as look for redemption in Jerusalem:

The mysteries of God are treasures hid in the ground of our hearts, wherein
the Lord would be kept, as in a field of blessing: which if thou discover to
the Babilonians, that is, make known to the wicked and unworthy, as Hezechia
did to the messengers of Meradock-Baladan, King of Babel, ^say. 39.2.
when he showed them the house of the treasuries, the silver and the gold, and
the spice, and the precious ointments, and all the house of his armor; I say,
take heed of the like sin, least thou fall into the like judgment, which is
to go captive to Babylon, robbed of all thy riches, and the virgin Sion mourn
to see her sons or Eunuchs in the palace of the King of Babell.

If we preach peace, and they will not receive peace, we may shake the dust
of that place from our feet and be gone; Mat. 10.14
that dust shall judge dust in the great day. Into the city of Samaria enter
ye not, Math. 10.5
they looked for no redemption; and therefore the secret thereof might not be
reveled unto the^, according to that, Secreta domini time^tibus eu^, Psalm. 25.14
the secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him,

If any shall say, being suncke in sin, we are no worse then dogs, and yet
dogs may eat of the crumbs that fall from their masters table: Mat. 65.26
I answer, true indeed if you rise out of sin, and be no such dogs as bite and
bark at our devotions, but come in all humility, and (as the Chananite did)
sue and seek in true faith, and feeling the cru^mes of mercy that fall from
your masters table, then come and taste with Anna how sweet the Lord is, then
come and speak of him with Anna to all that look for redemption in Jerusalem.

And when they had performed all these things according to the Law of the Lord,
they returned into Galilie to their own city Nazareth.

Although this scripture say nothing of Anna whose story hitherto we have
followed, for the better manifesting of Christ in the flesh: yet it is
necessary to be annexed further, to make plain the history of Christ his
incarnation by special growth in body, and strength in spirit, with all
complements of wisdom, favor, and grace both with God and man.

Wherein I pray, you would observe three things: all clearing the truth of the
incarnation, and proving our Christ to be perfect man against Ebion, Carpocr^s,
Cerinthus, and such like; who dire the deity in denying, some the humanity,
some the divinity* I say this is cleared in this place by a threefold
subjection, whereunto the Lord would yield himself as the Son of man, but
never as the Son of God.

The first is his subjection to the Law out of these words: when they had
performed all things according to the Law.

The second was his subjection to persecution, which I may term a judgment of
the Law in these words: they returned into Galilie to their own city
Nazareth.

The third and last is his subjection to increase and growth in body, and
strength in spirit, by little and little; infallible proofs of his humanity,
and no way applyant to the divinity, out of these words, And the child grew
and waxed strong, etc. Christ was subject and under the Law: 1. Moral. 2.
Ceremonial. 3. Judicial.
According to that, When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
son made of a woman, and under the Law, Gal. 4.4. etc.
that he might redeem them which were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons.

He was subject to the Law Moral, when he said, Math. 5.17. Think not that I
came to destroy the Law, or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy them, but
to fulfill them.

He was subject to the Law Ceremonial, when he was circumcised and presented
in the Temple, Luke. 2.21
etc: all ended when the veil of the Temple rent asunder from the top to the
bottom, which Temple after was ruinated body and all, Mat. 27.51
Nepopulus rediret ad Iudaismum.

He was subject to the Law Judicial, when he endured his painful passion, and
upon the Cross was cursed for us all; according to that Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was accursed for us, for it is
written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. He performed all, that he
might make an end of all, so as no law might rise up in judgment against us.

When Christ was transfigured upon the holy mount, it is said that Moses and
Elias talked with him, and told of his departure which he should suffer at
Jerusalem. Luke 9.30.31.

To teach you no other then that ye are here taught, to wit, that Christ is
the end and accomplishment both of the Law and Prophets, whereof Moses and
Elias are chief; for whereat points the Law, but at a bloody sacrifice?
whereon stand the Prophets, but upon the Messiah sent and slain? and what is
their communication with Christ, but of his departure which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem?

So then the Law and the Prophets do accompany Christ, and Christ in person
does accomplish them: Christ, not Moses, not Elias, nor one of the Prophets;
and yet Christ with Moses, with Elias, and with all the Prophets; they to find
out his line, he to finish their course. And all this sprung from the endless
fountain of his love which love (I may say with the blessed Apostle) is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. or end, if ye will, for so says the same
Apostle: The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.^
and of a good conscience, and of faith vn^aigned: which holy love streamed
with his blood, when it issued from all his veins, to redeem us from this
killing law. Where by double right and authority he has conquered:

First, as the son of God, and Lord of the law.

Secondly, as the son of man in our person: which is as much as if we had
overcome the law our selves: for his victory is ours.

All the jurisdiction of the law was executed upon Christ.

First, it accused him as a blasphemer, Mat. 26.65
and a seditious person.

Secondly, Ioh. 11.50.
it made him guilty before God, of the sins of the whole world.

Thirdly, it so terrified and oppressed him with heaviness and anguish of
spirit, that his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground.
Luke 2^.44.

And lastly, it condemned him to death, even to the death of the cross: a
marvelous combat, where the law a creature gives such an assault to his
creator, and against all right practices his whole tyranny upon the son of
God, and he most innocent.

But to proceed, it may seem by the text, that the Evangelist does more
specially aim at some performance of the law, done by Joseph and Mary, in that
it is said: When they had performed all those things. etc.

True it is, and this their performance may be a president to us, whereon to
look in all our devotions.

First, that we leave nothing undone, which the Lord has commanded by his law.

Secondly, that we perform nothing of our own devising; but as it is
enjoined us by the eternal law of the eternal God.

The Babe was crucified, Mary was purified, and the child presented according
to the law; they performed al, and left out nothing: and they did it according
to no device of their own: but as the line and level of the same law led
them.

And here two sorts of people are sweetly taught, if not justly taxed by the
spirit of God, of intolerable impiety. First, such as think they please God
if they serve him by halfes, perform some things, but not all according to the
law of the Lord: Half prayer, half preaching, half Sacrament, half
Saboath, will serve their turn in their demi-deuotion; but Joseph and Mary
performed all. Secondly, such as do perform a service, but after their own
fashion, using for doctrines of the Lord, men's traditions in a voluntary
religion, Col. 2.22.23. Mat. 15.9.
and will worship, never taught from Horeb, never enjoined of the Lord: to whom
I may say with the Prophet, Esaias. 1.12 Heb. 3.5.
Who required these things at your hands? Moses was faithful from the gold to
the goats hair: our faithfulness is more in the hair then in the gold.

The use of al is this, by the example of Joseph and Mary, to aim at
perfection in all our actions with God, who requires thee to be faithful,
and never to break off thy course, till thou have finished the race: for what
will it profit thee to begin at the Font, and to break off ere thou come to
the Grave? to begin in the spirit, and to end in the flesh? to have ingresse in
Christ, and egresse in Antichrist? Gal. 3.3
sacramentally to reteyne Christ by baptism, really to forsake faith by
breaking the vow? I say: what will it profit thee to shift from Sodom, upon the
Lords command, 1 Timothy 1.19.
and to look back and lust after it ere thou come at Zoar?

Irridebunt te sane Daemones, Devils will deride thee (as one says) and say:
Luke ^4.30
hic homo coepit edificare, and non potuit consummare, He began to build, but
he could not finish. Jobs constancy was no less, if not of greater
perfectness in the fear and service of his God, when he said, Chap. 27. verse.
36. So long as my breath is in me, and the spirit of God within my nostrels,
my lips surely shall speak no wickedness, and my tongue shall utter no
deceit.

God forbid that I should justify you; until I dye, I will never take away
mine innocence from my self.

Paul, Paul, thy contentions were many for the truth; yet was thy constancy
above all thy contentions, when thou saydst with perfect faith and feeling, 2.
Tim. 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith.

The second thing clearing the humanity and incarnation of Christ, is his
persecution in this, that they Returned into Galily, to their own city
Nazareth: Implying thereby, that immediately after, he was presented in the
Temple, and his mother was purified, according to the law: and having now
recovered the strength she had lost in her late labor, whereby she became more
able to undergo the journey.

Now must they to Egypt, ere they might return into Galily, to their own
City Nazareth. This their flight foreseen of the Lord, and foretold to Joseph,
Mat. 2 13.
is set down at large by Matthew in the second chapter of his Gospel; but
omitted by Luke in this place.

To teach us that it is usual with the Evangelists, often, one to omit that
which another has: and some one to supply that which is wanting in the rest:
so as all in one, and not any one for all, do make perfect the circle of
Christ, his line, life, death and doctrine.

So is the body of all the Scriptures soulelesse and imperfect, if you stand
upon any one book, without the supply of all; but lively, absolute, and
perfect in their joint and just proportion, like the vision of wings, wheels
and beasts, mentioned in Ezechiel, which never go but as they are chained,
Ezec. 1.9.
linked, and locked together.

The use then is this: that if you will understand one Scripture, you must
examine it by another, and if you will be ignorant in none, you must give your
diligence to the reading of all, according to that of Christ, Search the
scriptures, Ioh. 5.39.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me. Not Scripture, but Scriptures.

Some are of opinion, to whom I assent not, that Joseph and Mary, after they
had performed the sacrifice of purgation, returned to Bethlem, that they might
dwell there; but it was not to be imagined that Joseph had a dwelling place
there, where he was so unknown, that he could not find a place to remain in
as a guest. And therefore I do easily grant, that the journey into Egypt was
between these, that is, after the purification and presentation, and before
their return back to Nazareth.

So as that which Luke says, of their dwelling again in their own City
Nazareth, was in order of time after their flight into Egypt: which Matthew
reports. Chap. 2.19. etc.

Where if the story report aright, Christ with his parents remained in exile
full seven years: for so they calculate the time from Herod his slaughter of
Innocents, to the days of Archelaus his son, at what time Joseph again
heard from the Angel of the Lord, Arise and take the Babe and his mother, and
go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the Babes life.

All to testify that which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet: Out of Egypt
have I called my son. Hosea. 11.1


A wonderful work and providence of God, that the Savior of Judah should be
cast out of Judah, and Egypt should nourish him: Egypt, I say, even Egypt, from
whence never any thing came before, but even that which was deadly to the
Church of God.

If the Princes of Judah will persecute Jeremy, and cast him into the dungeon,
the Lord will raise up Ebedmeleck the Nigro, to deliver him out of that danger.
Ier. 38.12.
And true it is, that the wise king says: If a man's ways do please the Lord,
Prou. 16.7^
he will make his enemies at peace with him. And it may be the Prophet meant
this or the like providence of God toward our Savior here, and Saints else
where, when he says: Esaias. 11.6.
The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid,
and the Calfe and the Lion, and the fat beasts together, and a little child
shall lead them, and the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe,
and the weaned child shall put his hand upon the Cockat^ice hole. The Lord can
play with poison, and tame the cruellest in his providence, when he pleases to
preserve either Saint or Savior.

If his providence be upon the fire, Dan. 3.25. Jonah. 1.17 Mark. 4.41 Dan.
6.22^ Iosu. 10.12 Matthew. 27.52.53.
it burns not, if upon the water, it drowneth not, if upon the seas, they
swell not, if upon the winds, they blow not, if upon the Lions, they devour
not, if upon Egypt, it persecuteth not; if upon the son, it goes not, if
upon the graves, they detain not, but deliver up their dead, to the glory of
their God; according to that of Augustine, Vbicunque fuerit prouidentia,
frustra^tur vniuersa contraria, Where the Lord has his providence, all cross
incounters are defeated.

But the use is this, though Egypt did preserve him, yet Judah did persecute
him, and soon it pricked that would be a thorn: for if you search with care,
and sound with judgment, you shall find that from the first conception of
Christ in the womb, to the yielding up of his Ghost upon the cross, In
articulo mortis, the Cross was ever his companion, and his life none other
then a painful passion: it has been ever in the practice of Satan to
malign the truth, and by all possible and potent means to bury the Babe in
his birth.

Gabriel no sooner came from heaven with that ioyfulll message, but straight
ways he raised a doubt in the heart of Mary, so as she demurred upon the
point, Luke 1.34.
and said, How may this be? Being found with child of the holy ghost, Mat. 1.18
etc.
Joseph was jealous of his wife. What should I say more? Herod was cruel, and
Bethleem was discourteous, when Christ found more humanity and kindness with
the beasts in the cratch, then with men in their Courts.

Luke 4.28.29.
Satan stirred up the Galileans, from a high steep hill to cast him down
headlong. Mark. 5.17
The Gadorens, to drive him out of their cost and country. Luke. 9.53
The Samaritans, to deny him lodging. John. 7.3.4
His own brethren, to circumuent him. Acts. 4.27.
Jews and gentiles, to bandy at his death, and to conspire against the truth
of his resurrection. So as I may well say, Inter flagella dat filium: He gave
his son to the tormentors.

And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with wisdom,
and the grace of God was with him.

Being now fallen into the dangerous days of the world, wherein all the
creatures of God are in a woeful declination, and there is nothing more geason
amongst men, then growth in godliness: I am bold to move your patience in your
wonted piety, yet once more to bear with mine importunity, whilst I make the
growth of Christ a president for your practice, and so return again to the
honor of his Priesthood; in whom I told you out of this text, three things were
of special note, to prove him perfect man, incarnate of the blessed Virgin
Mary.

First, his subjection to the law.

Secondly, his subjection to persecution, and flight into Egypt.

Thirdly, his subjection to increase, in that he grew as a child in body,
spirit, and grace, both with God and man. Of the two former I have already
spoken, now of the last, if God will, wherein two things are respectively to be
considered out of my text.

That as the child grew in our flesh, to make him a perfect man, so we must
grow in his faith, 2 Pet. 3.18
to make us perfect Christians: And that as our humanity was his, to make him
the son of man, so his divinity must be ours, to make us by prerogative the
sons of God. John. 1.12.
And as he through our humanity had feeling of our miseries, so we through his
divinity, 2. Pet. 1.4.
must have feeling of his mercy. If the child increase, men may not decrease,
or degenerate, the bow from the boale, the member from the body.

This child is the boale, building and body; we must grow up with him till we
come to be perfect men, Ephesians. 4.13.
even unto the age of the fullness of Christ: otherwise we are but blasted
bows, pible stones, rotten members, neither fit for boale, building, or body.

In that he grew, it proved him a creature of God by generation, of a local
being, subject to alteration, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.

In that he grew, it ouerthoweth a creation of Christ, which some urge without
generation; like unto that of Adam, who was made perfect at the first, as all
other creatures were.

In that he grew in body, and waxed strong in spirit, it overthrows the
Papists monster of transubstantiation, and all power of Priesthood, to make
Christ of bread, or of any other matter or mettle; for if he make him, he
either makes him a man or a child: if a man at the first, how then did he grow
from a child? if a child at the first, how then did he grow to a man? If Christ
so made, was a child by generation, then the priest was his father; if by
creation, then the priest was his God; but he is neither of both, but their
breaden Christ by usurpation, sitting in the holy places.

We say, Christ was made by the powerful working of the holy ghost, by a
perfect generation.

They say, they make him by words of consecration without any generation. We
say, the child was incarnate of the virgin, and so grew. They say, Christ is
impanate by them, and needs no growth. We say, body, blood, and bone, grew
together in this Child. They tell us nay: for the child they make and offer up,
is Incruentum sacrificium, an unbloody sacrifice. What should I say more? the
child we preach, is quadratus homo, full of favor, and fairer then the sons
of men. Psa. 45.2.
The Savior they make has no spirit, life, liking, or grace, either with God*
or gracious men.

The heaven of heavens is his habitation, whom we preach, and he sits in
glory, at the right hand of his father.

A poor box must cover and carry your Gods, crouding one another till they
moule together, and fall to rottenness.

But good Lord how long? how long shall evil men thus deceive* 2 Timothy 3.13
and be deceived? how long shall the child Jesus be hindered in his growth, by
such unkind stepdams^ Lurida terribiles miscent acconita nouercae? How long
shall these unnatural mothers make all Nations drunk with the poisoned cup of
their popish fornication? Reu. 17.2.2
But leave we the controversy, and come we to his misery and much mercy, which
he would effect by weakest means to the consciences of your Christian hearts,
who hear me this day; and now answer me in soul, as in the sight of God.

Balance the judgments of our God, with the inundation of our sins, and
whilst we see a growth in both, let us grieve under the burden; that sin has
increased, virtue has decreased in us, old mercies are wearing out, new
judgments are coming on.

The hand of God goes forward above in this unseasonable weather, nor is it
much weakened in his stroke of plague and pestilence, God grant his hand may
likewise go forward in the holy work of our repentance, and that we may grow
with the child Jesus, to the abating of these judgments.

Spes est, there is hope, for that the Lord usually comes to help, when our
cause is most desperate, and when all other succors fail, then comes the
suckling child in weakness to work our wonders: according to that of Esaias,
8.4: Before the child shall have knowledge to cry my father and my mother, he
shall take away the riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria. We have
stood much upon our own strength, power, and puissance, and what is that, but
as Damascus and Samaria? All our good must be wrought by the weakest means,
and in the growth of a child, will be all our gain.

Lastly, Christ his humanity is cleared in this, that he did grow in strength,
and increased in wisdom and favor both with God and man; But his divine and
godly nature did not increase or waxed in this world, but filled all, and yet
was fined from all; Ephesians. 4.10.
it knew all things, and was ignorant of nothing.

The idle Monks, from their dern Cells, have much busied themselves about
Christ, his miracles done in the days of his infancy, when he was a Babe and a
child.

They have filled the world with many a fable of his deeds and doings in
Egypt, Bethlem, and Nazareth; much like unto that of S. Christopher the giant,
who shrunk under the burden of this Babe (as they say) when he bare the world
upon his back, like an Atlas; but leave we these idle drones, in their derne
divinity, and be we silent of that whereof the Scripture says nothing but that
of his persecution into Egypt:

Of his growth in stature, with much increase of wisdom, grace, and favor,
both with God, and man.

Moses burial was unknown, Deuteronomy. 34.6
lest the people should commit idolatry upon his grave: and the Lord would
shut up in like silence what Mary said, and the child did, in the days of his
infancy, lest the world might be too curious of that in Christ, which little
concerned their salvation.

The advertisement is good from the spirit of our God, The secret things belong
to the Lord our God, Deu. 29.29
but the things revealed, belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that
we may do all the works of this law. And now to shut up all, with the shower
of his mercy: Exinaniuit se, Phil. 2.7.
He humbled himself, that we might be exalted.

He bowed the heavens, and took our flesh with our infirmities, that he might
have experience of our miseries: and though he were a son, yet learned he
obedience by the things which he suffered. Heb. 5.8.9


He suffered weariness that we might have rest. He suffered hunger that we
might be filled. He suffered ignorance, that we might have knowledge. Mar.
13.32
He suffered death, that we might have life.

And he did endure a crown of thorn, that we might be honored with a Diadem
of glory: his strange cries, his salt tears, his deep sighs, with many
griefs, and groanings, Heb. 4.15
show to our solace, that we have not an high Priest which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like
sort, yet without sin.

And it is here foolishly objected, that ignorance and these infirmities could
not light upon Christ, because they are the punishments of sin: the same may
be said also of death.

But rather the Scripture affirms, that he fulfilled the office of a
mediator, because what punishment soever we had deserved, he took from us,
and laid upon himself; yea even hell it self, with all it horror, though
some say contrary: Psalm. 18.4.
neither do we think that all ignorance is a punishment of sin.

For it cannot be thought that Ada^ when he was yet perfect, knew all things:
neither do the Angels bear the punishment of sin, when they are ignorant of
any thing.

They know much, but not all: for then were they as God; they are ignorant of
the last day, so is Christ as the son of man, though not as the son of God. And
therefore the speech of our Savior is indefinite: Mark. 13.32.
But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels which are in
heaven, neither the son himself, save the father. Where, as Ciril observes in
his 9. book of Treasures. Chap. 4. he says, not, the holy Ghost is ignorant,
but the Angels and the son: neither does he say the son of God, but the
son only; that it might not be grievous to the Angels and men, to be
ignorant of the last day: therefore he says, the son also is ignorant: and
this is no derogation to his Godhead, as he was God, he knew it well; but as
he was man, he was ignorant of it.

The use is good, that if Christ was not ashamed to confess his ignorance as
he was man, we should never so stand upon our learning and skill, as to make
our selves ignorant of nothing; for to be ignorant of that which the Lord will
not reveal is, Docta ignorantia, a learned and a devout ignorance.

Christ grew, we may not wither, Christ increased, we may not stand at a
stay; woe is me to tell: all states either stand at a stay, or else are in a
woeful declination* The child waxed, we men waine, body and spirit did grow
together in him; we pamper the flesh, we pine the soul, and we are of no
growth for godliness.

We might have been, ere this, men of might, of ready resolution and of ripe
judgment, strong as Sampson: But Dalila has cut our hairs, whereby we are
become as weak as water, and the Philistines have put out our eyes, Judge. 16.19
we see nothing.

2 Samuel 1.20.
O tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the uncircumcised be glad.

Popery practices much, and has mightily prevailed to make at, if not to put
^ut the eyes of piety; and our dalliance with the pleasures of this world, in
the lap of her delights (as with Dalila) has cut off our strength, and made us
careless of our God. O tell it not in Gath, etc. Caleb desired of Joshua that
he might possess Hebron, Iosu. 14.11.
there to fight with the sons of Anakim, for that they were mighty men and
giants.

And he went with this resolution: I am this day 85. years old, and yet am I
as strong as I was when Moses sent me; as strong as I was then, so strong am I
now, either for war or for government.

As was his name, so was his nature, Caleb is steel, he grew in strength,
with the child Jesus: the number of his years abated not the vigor of his
spirit: he chose Hebro^, that he might cut off Anakim, we flee Hebron for fear
of Anakim, Ier. 9.3.
we have no courage for the truth. Too too careful we are of our selves, and
of our children, that our bodies and theirs be faireful, and fashionable, and
yet all that grace is but grass; but for their growth in godliness, piety, and
knowledge of the Lord, for their strength in spirit, and abundance of heavenly
grace, we recko^ little, and we regard or look after no increase. If it please
God in judgment to cut down our children, friends or family, in the blade and
greeuenesse of their years; good Lord how then we wail and weep with Rachel,
for that they are not? But when we see them dead in transgressions, blasted
with sin, shame and riot, we never shrink or sorrow at it; but rather solace
our selves in the sight of their sins.

Answer me, O answer me, thou careless Christian, why art thou so faithless
in their funerals? Quid corpus plangis, a quo recessit anima, and anima^ non
plangis, a qua recessit Deus? Why do thou weep over the body, whereout the
soul is gone, and mournest not over the soul whereout God is gone?

Fruits of the flesh must decrease, but fruits of the Spirit must increase;
whereof read the blessed Apostle. Gal. 5.19. Romans 12.1. etc.

Agiselaus in his common wealth, took an account or reckoning both of the
youth and aged, how they lived, and how they profited in the knowledge and
practice of Philosophy: we christians are careless of both in divinity. And
Tully told his son Mark, that now he must needs abound in the rules and
precepts of Philosophy, for that he had heard ^ratippus a whole year, and that
in Athens. Forty nine years we have heard the Lord from the mountain of his
holiness; and yet I fear, we less abound in knowledge, faith, and feeling of
true godliness, then we did at the first. Revel. 2.4.
We have left our first love, our tree is blasted, godliness is gone, the
child increased, we decrease. The Lord even then put into our hands tale^ts of
gold, Luke 19.1.
and bade us occupy till he came. Woe is me to tell, we have lapt the^ in our
napkins, and returned him his own with no advantage.

The Israelites grew under the burdens of the Egyptians, like palm trees when
they are pressed: our God has delivered us from all both burthe^s and bondage
of the Egyptian Pharaoh, and yet we wither.

The grace of God is a continual curre^t, as Zachary says, ever emptying it
self from pipe to pipe, til it come to the poorest of his people: Chap. 4.12
we are as poor as ever the widow was, mentioned in the 2. Kings, 4. and our
Creditors are as cruel as ever hers were; but how we feel our selves filled
with the oil of Gods grace, to keep our souls from bondage as she did her
son, I leave it to each good conscience to consider of. And so for conclusion,
I say with the blessed Apostle, my dear brethren beloved, and longed for,
Seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye be also plucked away with
the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.17 18.
and fall from your own stedfastnes; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now and evermore. Amen
Amen.

GREAT BRITAINS GREAT DELIVERANCE, from the great danger of Popish Powder.

By way of meditation, upon the late intended treason against the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and all their Royal Issue:

With the high Court of Parliament at Westminster, there to have been blown
up by the Popish Faction, the fifth of November, 1605. If God of his great mercy
had not prevented the mischief.

The second Edition, corrected and enlarged by the Author.

Psalm. 5. verse. 11. Destroy thou them, O God, let them perish through their
own imaginations: Cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness, for
they have rebelled against thee.

Printed at London for Arthur Johnson. 1609.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince, Henry, by the grace of God, Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and Heir apparent of the Crown and
Diadem of this kingdom of great Britain, France, and Ireland.
PArdon me (my gracious good Lord, and dear Prince) if out of a loyal heart I
present unto your Princely view, what I conceived upon these late intended
Treasons, in solace of my soul, after the Lord had made the land so glorious
by deliverance: I say, Deliverance out of the hands of cruel enemies, who
struck at our fairest tree, to have cut it down, both root, bole, and
branches, if the Lord had not been propitious. And because your excellency is
the highest strain in all expectance, and the Heir apparent to that crown
and dignity, whose undoubted right, they have so wronged by sinister thought,
word, and work, as in former ages the like was never devised in any Nation,
nor (by the grace of God) ever shall: I have made bold in these few leaves,
and lines, to lay open the danger, with the deliverance; and the rather to your
Highness: for that in feeling sort, you may justly say, Quorum pars magna fui;
I have had my part of both: for man has endangered me, but God has delivered
me. If in the delivery and project of this my speech, your highness shall
find less Method then Matter, I hope your clemency will bear with my
passionate heart, more affected to grieve for them who devised the mischief,
and to joy for our selves that missed it, then I can well express, without a
troubled style. One says well, Vt luctus sic laetitiae loquu^tur leaves,
ingentes stupent: As are our sorrows, so is our solace: in their Mediocrities
they speak, but in their extremities they are silent, and say nothing. What
marvel then, if this our rauishment of so great joy for the delivery, and
deep grief of horror because of the danger, either enjoin me silence, or if
I speak, make me to utter my thoughts with such passion as little passes of
the Method, so it meet with matter, to express the meaning of a melting
heart? Nescit ordinem amor, Love is lawless: and a love thus boiling, how can
it but shed over, and keep no current, other then in your Royal acceptance,
ever seasoned with such heavenly sufferance, as is gracious both to GOD and
man. Digna prorsus and rara virtus humilitas honorata; It is a rare virtue when
humility is honored, and honor is humbled: the blaze whereof I saw in your
Princely countenance, when at your Highness Court at Saint James, it pleased
your excellency to lick up the dust of the Sanctuary there, (upon the Lords
day:) and after the Sermon ended, to yield such grace in public to the
Preacher, as that he might kiss your Princely hand: which ever sithence has
struck so great an impression of exceeding love, and loyalty in my poor
heart, as by the grace of God, I shall never leave to pray for your highness,
as I am most bounden: and also by all means study, how either my love or life
may express the service and duty I owe for so gracious an aspect. Gold and
silver I have none: such as I have, I give: In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, be you established. Yet if it please your good grace to receive this
simple New-yeares gift, with the least acceptance, and as the first fruit of my
labors in your Highness service: It may be, I shall with Ianus, look
backward to the old year, and out of my small store, offer a pearl of an
higher price. Till when, and ever, I pray God safely to keep your Royal
person, to his glory, your own comfort, and Englands joy.

Your Graces Chaplain, most humble at command. W. Leigh.

Great Britains great deliverance, from the great danger of Popish Powder.
THE Papists of these our days, falsely called Catholics (unless it be in
this, that they are universally evil) have ever since the first year of
Elizabeth, our late Queen of famous memory, even to this day, endeavored the
subversion of their dear country, to set up their Babel of al confusion: And
have sought by all possible and potent means, to make this Church and Country
(the noblest of Nations) an Akeldema, or field of blood.

Witness all their Rebellions that have been raised since that time, either
in England, Ireland, or Scotland, ever fed with the gross Viands of Popish
Bulls, and Indulgences, fetched from Rome, by Sau^ders, Morton, Felton, Edmond
Campion, and Robert Parsons, most, or all factious Priests and Jesuits; and
since spread and divulged by the poisoned breath of thousands of their
Sem^naries, vermin of the Church, and bane of Christendom.

These have done much, and devised more against the ^tate then ever was thought
upon in elder times; and not so much by open hostility, as secret treasons
excommunications, and confi^ca^^ons, against the lives, souls, and goods, both
of Prince and people, who were not pleasing to their devotions.

But of all that ever were, this last device of gunpowder to blow up all, was
most detestable, devilish, and damnable; as wherein hell was shaken, with all
it furies, to have effected their thrice bloody practice, with this fiery
resolution, of their angry Goddess Juno: Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta
mouebo: If God will not, the devil shall.

Whereupon when I do think, 2. King. 8.11.12. etc.
it is with me, as it was with Elisha, when he looked upon Hazael his person,
and saw in his countenance his intended cruelty, toward the Israel of God:
he looked upon him steadfastly, till Hazael was ashamed, and the man of God
wept, and Hazael said; Why weepeth my Lord? Whereunto the Prophet answered,
Because I know the evil that thou shall do to the children of Israel: for
their strong Cities shall thou set on fire, and their young men shall thou slay
with the sword, and shall dash their Infants against the stones, and rent in
pieces their women with child. Then Hazael said; What is thy servant a dog,
that I should do this great thing? And Elisha answered; The Lord has showed
me that thou shall be King of Aram.

We have steadfastly looked upon you, O ye Romish Aramites, more cruel then
Hazael, and less compassionate then he; we have wept over your tyranny as
Elisha did, and ye are not ashamed, as Hazael was: the prints of your former
cruelties have pierced our hearts, but this last impression has even wounded
our souls; wherein we see nothing but traces of blood, and (as it were) the
black face, and countenance of confused desolation.

King, Queen, Prince, with all their Royal issue, the only remain of our
religious hope; Council, Peers, and Prophets, the next support of our happy
estate; grave Judges, and learned at Laws, with the Knights of the Parliament,
and Commons there assembled, a third pillar bearing up the kingdom; all these
our honors had gone in a day. Woe unto us that ever we sinned, to deserve the
hazard of so great a judgment.

Which once accomplished to their full, then had we felt (to our woeful
experience) how speedily, the mischief would have spread it self into the body
and bowels of all the kingdom; wherein nothing should have been heard, but
rumbling of shot, and crashing of armor, outcries of mothers, and yelling of
children: nothing seen but sacking of cities, burning of towns, razing of
Towers, and wasting of the land, with destruction of parts, and desolation of
the whole: Quorum animus meminisse horret luctuque refugit. And yet as all this
were nothing, or not enough, we should have seen these miscreants never
satisfied with the blood of the Saints, till they had changed our religion for
superstition, our knowledge for ignorance, our preaching for massing, our
subjects for Rebels, our Counselors for conspirators: and so have brought upon
us and ours a most woeful Sabbath, when both the laws of God and man (which
are the sinews of a sanctified State) had been dissolved, and silent.

Now if any shall say, as Hazael did, Am I a dog, that I shall do this great
evil? I answer with Elisha, though in differing terms, yet in equal sense:
The Lord has told me, and experience has made it good, that where Romish
Hazael is King, there is cruelty.

Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri. The first walls of Rome were laid in
blood, and ever since they have been scemented with such mortar, as is
evident, by the ten cruel persecutions of Emperors, in the first 300. years
after Christ, and by the cruelty of Popes ever sithence: wherein Emperors have
been Dogs to bite, but Popes have been devils to devour, and make havoc
of Gods Saints; nay worse then devils, and more audacious, according to that,
Non audet Stygius Pluto te^tare, quod audet effrenis Monachus, plenaque fraudis
Anus. Unbridled Monk dares undergo, what devil himself he dare not do.

And here might I seasonably tax the perpetual hatred, and intolerable
cruelty of that Roman Antichrist, toward the professors of Gods truth and
Religion: of whom I may truly say, as the Prophet did of the Babilonians, that
they are, and ever have been a people vile in name, and sore in affliction.

Graves are pregnant, and would bring forth their dead to plead their just
cause against their cruelties; and Abels innocent blood cries vengeance out of
the earth against these cursed Cainites: and from under the Altar, me think I
hear the souls of them that are killed for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they maintained, cry with a loud voice, saying; How long Lord,
which art holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth?

Of many, take these few for all: Et leonem ex vnguibus. Nor will I kallender
any but modern cruelties, and such as are yet fresh bleeding in the memories
of men living, of this age and climate.

Mariana tempora, Anglicana stigmata; Mary's times, are English stains: and
who gave the dye, but that Romish and red Dragon, bloody beast, and whore of
Babylon? not satisfied with the blood of Martyrs then living, but ransacked the
bones of their dead, and burned them, to glut up their cruelty. Witnesses the
buried bones of Paulus Fagius, and Martin Bucer.

Andwarpe and Naples, can witness like cruelty upon a mother Queen, and
Prince of great hope; whose Funerals as some say, were solemnized both in one
month: at Naples with joy, and at Andwarpe with grief; done by that
Sanguinarie Inquisition of Spain, Romish red Dragon, and bloody beast of
Babylon, whose Horses mouths fume nothing but fire, Revel. 9.17.
smoke, and brimstone.

Paris and France, do yet stream with the blood of the innocent, murdered and
slain in that cruel massacre, on Bartholomew day, 1572. wherein the Shatilian
was slain, and diverse others, noble and excellent men, with all the flower of
the Gentry, and Protestants in France, to the number as is thought of 100.
thousand; all done and devised by the two Cardinals of Lorraine and Peluey,
countenanced by the Queen mother of France, See the mutabilitie of France, for
the ^^mber.
aided with her Guis^an faction, and executed by Mand^let, with such cruelty,
that out of the Court of the Gaile, called the Archbishops prison, the blood
was seen in the broad daylight, to the great abhorring and fear of many that
beheld it, run warm, and smoking into the streets of the Town, and so down
into the River of Scene.

So great a dishonor, and so great an infamy to that Nation, as the most part
of them are ashamed at this day of their own Country, defiled with two most
filthy spots of Popery, falsehood, and cruelty; of the which, whether has
been the greater in that religion, it is hard to say.

I pass to speak of the Butcherie of Henry, late King of France, by two
Iacobin Friars, with poisoned knives in their hands, and Popish Bulls in
their bosoms; which Guignard the Jesuit was not ashamed to call an heroical
act, and a gift of the holy Ghost.

I say nothing of Parry his stab of death, and Lopas his Pill of poison,
intended against Queen Eliza, of famous memory, by their own confession, the
best natured and qualified Queen, that ever lived in England: yet this may I
say, that the dagger was sharpened, and the Pill was poisoned with the venom
of Popery; else Benedetto Palmio, and Hannibal Codrotto, two factious Jesuits,
had never been traduced as bellows to blow the fire, and kindle the coals of
so great a mischief, with this warrantie, to inflame their hellish hearts:
that the fact was lawful and meritorious.

But if all these were clapped in one, they may not balance with the weight and
woe, of our late intended dismal day, if God of his great mercy and wonted
clemency, had not put by the deadly blow.

For a day of death, like that of Doom, in ictu oculi, had put out the light
of England, King, Queen, Prince, Peer, and people; All had perished, and all
at once.

Servants had ruled over us, and none could have delivered us, Lamen. 5.^. etc.
out of their hands: our inheritance had been turned to the strangers, and our
houses, to the Aliants: our fathers had been childlesse, and our children
fatherless: In our English Rama had been a voice heard, mourning and weeping,
and great howling: Mothers weeping for their children, and children for their
mothers; and neither had been comforted, because they were not.

We should ere this, have drunken our water by measure, and eaten our bread by
weight: Lamen. 5.4. etc.
our skin had been black as an Oven, because of the terrible famine: they
had defiled our women in Sion, and our maids in the Cities of Judah: our necks
ere this had been under such persecution, as we should have been weary of
ourliues, and never have had rest when our souls had bin put into the hands of
so viperous a generation, who would have shut up our lives in the dungeon, and
cast a stone upon us: Lamen. 3.5.3.
I say, so general a judgment, so speedy and so bloody, had never been in
any kingdom.

Nay more, that deadly blow at once, and in Ictu oculi, ere this, had taken the
elder from the gate, and the young men from their songs; it had silenced the
Prophets, and dissolved the laws, both of God and the Nation: I say still, as
formerly I have said, so general a judgment, so speedy, and so bloody, had
never been seen in any kingdom.

The Royal Palace of Westminster, City, and Sanctuary there, built by the
Noble Kings of this Land, and now honored with the presence of as mighty a
Monarch as ever went before, with as wise a Council as ever England had, with
as full a Senate of Nobles as ever sat there, with Bishops for learning,
gifts, and graces, equalling (if not above) the reach of former times, and with
Knights and Commons of the lower House of Parliament, in all respects suitable;
this Royal Place and Presence, with all the Honor, Puissance, and Piety
thereof, to have bin blown up at once, and in Ictu oculi: I say still, so
general a judgment, so speedy and so bloody, had never been seen in any
kingdom.

O unnatural and degenerate Englishmen! how could you ever endure, to thirst
after the destruction of so sacred a Senate, and sweet an assembly? how could
you find in your hearts to seek the destruction of so benign a prince and so
Royal an issue, with the utter subversion of so glorious a state? by bringing
into the bowels thereof that Romish Apollyon, Reu. 9.11.
mentioned in the Revelation; who where he is victorious, staineth the earth
with blood, the air with blasphemy, and the heavens with his abominable and
luxurious incontinencies.

The old worthy Romans the two Decii, thought it the most heroical thing that
might be, to vow themselves to death for their Country, and even to spend
their lives in defense of their Altars, Temples; and Monuments of their Elders,
but you seek to see your Country bathing in the blood of your Prince, Peers,
and Prophets, in the blood of your parents, kindred, and friends; to see the
cities, graves, and temples, of your predecessors, consumed with fire: to see
your Records burned, your Actuaries destroyed, your virgins deflowred, your
women ravished; and finally, to bring the noblest of Nations into a perpetual
slavery and servitude, by as deadly and dolorous a blow, as ever was devised,
or done, in any kingdom, except in that kingdom of darkness, where is
nothing else but hell, horror, and all confusion.

Surely, surely, for this your intended mischief, and your former murders,
the worm that never dies, will gnaw your rebellious hearts, and the furies of
hell which never give rest, will haunt you in your habitations: where ever ye
go, they will speak in the voice of those Kings, Queens, and Princes, with
whose blood you have embrewed your traiterous hearts, and hands; as it is said
Caesar's ghost did to Brutus and Cassius, whom in the Senate they murdered with
such cruelty.

O unkind Countrymen, and cruel Caitiffes; I have been your bliss, but you
are now my bane: I have been your mirth, and you are now my moan: I have
been your wealth and shadow in a flourishing Empire, but you are now my want
and woe: in a decaying estate, I have preserved your wives to your comfort, and
your children to your great joy; but y^ have made my wife husbandlesse, and my
children fatherless, to their unspeakable grief. I clothed you with scarlet,
and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel, spotted with the purest
Armines; but you have covered my dead corpse with a Carpet of green grass,
diaperd with my dearest blood. Finally, I have kept your Daggers within your
sheaths, and you have sheathed them within my heart: Fie, fie; Flee, flee: And
whither can you flee, but the Hagge will ever haunt you? nor can you ever fare
well, till the Fury find you faultlesse. Interim nos ad sepulehra vadimus: We
sleep in peace.

The Lord deliver our Church and Country from all such Brutish and Cassian
cruelties, so as never they be able either to touch the Lords anointed, or
do his Prophets any harm: and praised be the Lord which has not now given us
a prey unto their teeth, for our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the
snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken, and we are delivered.

Let this suffice for the danger devised by men, but undone by God; and if any
would know by what men, and of what Religion; I answer, by Englishmen, and of
the Popish Religion: Nor will I say that all of that faction were privy to
that practice, yet may I say, that none (for ought I yet hear) were of the
conspiratie, but the popishly affected, and so branded: which when God has the
glory, and the truth is known, then will it appear how far the humor has
spread it self into the body of all the kingdom, too much (God wot) decayed with
that deadly malady.

Yet I hope well, in time, if such be the fruits of Popish Religion, that few
will gather Apples of that blasted tree, a tree of Sodom, fair in sight: but
in truth, and touch, nothing but Cindars, and rottenness; and of all the
stains that ever Popery had, I am persuaded that this is of the deepest die.

For in stead of blowing up us, they have blown up themselves, and their
Religion, with such a wound to their cause, as will never be cured by any
craft, being blotted with one of the horriblest Treasons, that ever was
contrived, and such as God and Nature could never brook to be amongst the
cruellest Cannibals, Turks, or Scithians, that ever were. No marvel then, if
Civil states abhor it, Christian Nations detest it, Religious Kings spit at
it; and the Chronicles of all times record it, for such an Antichristian
stratagem, Romish Monster, and Popish prodigy, as never might endure the sight
of any Sun, but was strangled in the birth, ere it could be borne, and killed
in the blade, ere it came to any growth.

Strangled (I say) and killed, by no other hand then the hand of God, and even
then when the deuisers deemed it done: for the Vault was ready, the Powder was
laid, the trains were made, the match was prepared; Fercy was busy, and
Faukes was bloody in resolution to give the charge, with a Crucifix about his
neck, and hair about his loins, to tell you of what tribe he was; yet eue^
then, and in the rage of all this fury, the Lord said: Stay thy bloody hand
the sacrifice is not pleasing.

For what has England done, to deserve so heavy a judgment? I am their God,
they are my people, and for my great name sake, I will be propitious, and make
them glorious by deliverance: The Sunneshine is theirs, and the gloomie day is
yours: your designs are upon your own heads, your Daggers are turned upon
your selves, and sheathed in your own bowels; ye have been fighters against
God, ^ee will not be warned, Acts 5.39.
that ye might be armed: Wherefore now Discite iusticiam moniti non temnere
diuos.

Your own Letters shall discover the Treason, and the writing of your own
hands shall betray the mischief of your own hearts; I will fight against you
with your own weapons, and I will weary you in your own ways.

The old Florentines had a Bell, which they called their Martynella, and they
rung it ever before the siege of any City, to warn the besieeged, either to
yield, or die. It was a mercy, to prevent a misery. But your Martynella has
given no such warning to us: and therein were you less merciful then the
Florentines; How be it, so it is, that your Bell has rung your passing Peale,
and the Lord has turned your own writings, to be death to you, and life to
us: blessed be his name therefore.

One says well, Vbicunque fuerit prouidentia, frustrantur vniuersa co^traria,
Where the Lord has a providence, all other encounters are defeated; If his
providence be upon the fire, it burns not: If upon the seas, they swell not:
If upon the winds, they blow not: If upon the air, it infecteth not: If upon
the Lions, they devour not: If upon the Sun, it goes not, but stands
still in Gibeon, Joshua. 19.12. etc.
and the Moon in the valley of A^alon: If, I say, his providence be upon the
graves, they detain not, but yield to deliver their dead, and Lazarus must
come forth.

How then should any creature stir to the subversion of so blessed a State,
whilst the providence of God houered over it, like the wings of the Cherubims
over the mercy seat: yea his providence it was, to prevent us with mercy and
loving kindness, and ere ever we prayed, to be propitious, to think upon us,
ere we thought upon him, to deliver us from the blow, before we saw the
danger. And to conclude, it was his merciful providence to turn your prayers
into our bosom, a cross to that you meant it, ominous to you, but glorious to
us. I hope (says the Writer) God will give you the grace to make good use of
it; and what better use could ever have been made, either to Gods glory, the
good of his Church, the safety of the King, Queen, and Prince, with all their
Royal issue (I say) what better use could ever the receiver have made to show
his loyalty to his Prince, and love to his Country, then by dealing as he
did? for which he shall be honorable in this generation, Eccle. 44.8. etc.
well reported of in his time, and be of them that have left their name behind
them, so as his praise shall be spoken of.

I may conclude with Zachary, and make good the Lords providence over this
English Nation, to the great comfort of all the godly, and the astonishment of
the wicked elsewhere in the world: Cease your attempts against the Truth, for
the hands of Zorobabel have laid the foundaiton of this house, his hands shall
finish it: Zach. 4.9. etc.
and who seeing the stone of Tin in the hands of Zorobabell, shall despise
the day of the small things?

The house is the Church of God here in England, Zorobabell is our Christ here
in England, he has laid the foundation in England, he will also finish it in
England: And who seeing the line in his hand to build by, which is his word,
in England, and the stone of Tin to build up, which is his people of England,
dares ever despise the day of the small things? small to the siely and
sensual eye of flesh and blood, despicable to the worldly Monarchies, and of
small beginnings, yet precious to God, and now made glorious by deliverance.
Psalm. 149.4.
His providence is over all: And as the Prophet says, these seven are the eyes
of the Lord, Zach. 4.10 11. etc.
that go through the whole world; his graces still abound, and are a
continual current in his Church, like the two Olive branches, emptying
themselves through the golden pipes into the gold.

Golden Prince, golden Peer, golden Prophet, golden people, fined from the
dross of sin, and superstition, to be pure metal, and as it were spangles
of gold in the holy Sanctuary of your God: Empty, O empty your praises, pipe
by pipe, from the highest Majesty, even to the lowest of the people, and give
God the glory.

And thou virgin daughter London, write upon thy walls, Peniel, and say the
face of God was toward me: Genesis 32.30
Thou princely Palace Westminster write upon thy seats of Justice, and high
Court of Parliament, write upon thy Vaults, Cells, and Sepulchers; write upon
thy doors, posts, and passages, Beer-lahai-roi, and say; Thou God look on
me, Thou Imperial seat of great Britain, Genesis 16* 14
fragrant for thy flowers, and for thy Collar of Mirtles twisted with the Roses
of both houses, dignified with the Diadem of Rubies, wreathed with the arms
and supporters of both kingdom; (I say) thou great Britain, famous as at the
first for thy old name, honorable now for thy new birth, and ever blessed for
thy happy and so desired an union, whereby our former ruins are repaired,
streams of blood are stopped, old malice is worn out, and deadly fude is
forgotten: for all which abundant great mercies, as also for this thy late
deliverance, write Ruhamah, Ruhamah, Mercy, Mercy. Hose. 2.1.
Write upon thy Ports, Holds, and Castles, Mercy. Write upon thy Towers,
Towns, and Temples, Mercy. Write upon thy fields, ways, and wastes, Mercy.
Write upon thy Corn, Coin, and Cattle, Mercy. Say, the Lord has had mercy
upon us, he has had pleasure in his people, and has made the meek glorious
by deliverance. Psalm. 149.4.


For all which Mercies say, God is my King of old, Psalm. 74.13.
the help that is done upon the earth, he does it himself.

Say with Eliphas Job his friend, but Great Britains Prophet; Job. 22.29.30.
When others are cast down, then shall thou say, I am lifted up, and God shall
save the humble person: for the innocent shall deliver the Island, and it shall
be preserved by the pureness of thine hands.

Innocent King, innocent Queen, innocent Prince, Peer, Prophet, and people;
Genesis 18.23
if not for fifty sa^e, yet for forty: If not for forty, yet for thirty: If
not for thirty, yet for twenty: If not for twenty, yet for ten just persons,
the Lord has put by this terrible blow of these wicked Shebaes: For should not
the God of all the world do according to right?

Plead thou our cause (O Lord) with them that strive with us, Psalm. 35.1.25.
and fight thou against them that fight against us: Let them not say in their
hearts, There, there, so would we have it: neither let them say, We have
devoured them. Which and if they had, then might we have said with the
prophet; Esaias 24.11.12.
There is a crying in the streets, all our joy is darkened, the mirth of the
world is gone away, in the City is left desolation, the gate is stricken with
destruction.

Then might we have sung with David, 2. Sam. 19.19. etc.
the mournful Lamentation he uttered of his King to his Country; O noble
Israel, he is slain upon thy high places, how are thy mighty overthrown!
Saul and Jonathan, were lovely in their lives, and at their deaths they were
not divided.

Then might we have said, that upon the fifth day of November, we should never
have kept merry feast, the day of the dissolution of so blessed an estate.

We might have said indeed, that this year 1605. had been a year of
Revolution, and that Tuesday were our dismal day, Critical in Scotland, the
fifth of August, for Cowry his treason: and dismal in England, the fifth of
November, for Faukes his design, plotted by bloody Papists, the bane of
Christendom: and Dolmans dogs now warranted by a new doctrine to bark at
Kings, and bite the Lords anointed, if they be not pleasing to their devotions.

And here a little pardon me in your patience, if in further detestation of
Popish Impiety I let you see a strained Paradox, of that enormeous sect; who
to make good their foul fault of parricide (for what are Kings but nursing
fathers to the Church of GOD) have brought in a doctrine to maintain, that the
Pope may depose, and subjects may deprive their kings both of life and
liuelihood, if they fail in faith, or obedience to the Apostolic Sea: as may
appear by Dolman, Cymanca, Rosseus and Feu-ardentius, belowes advanced to blow
the fire of distempered spirits, and pointing at nothing more then woeful
desolation, if by distraction of parts, and dissolution of the whole, they
might bring into Christian states confusion, the mother of ruin and all
mischief. Surely if not to pray for a king be an undoubted sin, it is a
greater sin to think upon the killing of a King; to commit the murder, and
do the deed, is double to that: but to traduce and draw the lawfulness
thereof into a doctrine, thereby to poison the posterity, is a treble sin,
and well deserves a double death.

But it is no wonder to see such works fly abroad from Italienated spirits,
who have filled the world with the froth and fury of their own madness: one
is not ashamed to write a book in praise of Sodomy, another to put out proiects
and pictures of shameful villainy; and why not Dolman with the rest of his rank
and rabble, Authoritate Apostolica, to write books in praise of Parricide? and
that not of mean men, but of Magistrates, yea even of Kings, and of the Lords
anointed. But good Lord how long? and what will be the title of their next
treatise? surely some Popish Pamphlet or other, of mental reservation, to
maintain a modern mischief, by a Popish paradox; but we will leave them to
the lust of their extrauagant thoughts, and still follow the stream of the
Lords many goodnesses and mercies toward us: and as of the present, so with
some memory of precedent mercies; whereof we may say, that if ever any people
under heaven felt the royal presence, the particular providence, or stable
promise of their GOD in familiar sort, it is, and has been, this English
Nation.

The time was when Tullie said of our poverty to Trebatio: In Britannia nihil
esse audio neque auri neque arge^ti: I hear there is nothing in great
Britain, either of gold or silver; but were Tullie now alive to see how the
Lord has enriched this Nation with his hidden treasures, and made it of more
esteem, then those hills of robbing Rome, he would cease to mock at our
poverty, and admire our plenty, whose earth is an Eden, and Clouds drop down
fatness.

The time was when a Pagan Poet plaide upon our barbaritie, joined us with
Scythians, put us out of the world, and said: Britanni diuisi ab orb; but were
he now alive to see how God has softened our hearts with the sweet relish of
his heavenly science: Quae Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros: he would cease
to say, Orbis in vrbe, and think the whole world were within our continent.

The time was when all our garments were tumbled in blood and as in Troys
destruction so in ours, bright burnings gave us light, when diverse conquests,
sundry invasions, the Barons wars, with the destruction of the houses of
York and Lancaster, and many a foughten field between the two Kingdoms rent
our state, and wasted it with much fire, and woeful hostility: But now by the
providence of almighty God, our Rivers run milk, the houses with the
Kingdom are both united in a peaceable Prince, and blessed Progeny, the only
remain of our religious hope.

Nor has the Lord yet failed us in his providence, but his mercy toward us
is stretched out still; forty four years we enjoyed a peerless Prince, and
a Maiden Queen, as was her name, so was her nature ordained of GOD to give us
his peace; for so is Elizabeth, even Gods rest: But when her glass was run
and done, she must to demurre with death. Then I say, even then, if the Lord
had failed us in the right of succession, we might have said as Be^seba did to
David, in the like extremity: If thou Lord do not appoint a successor, I and
my son Solomon shall be reputed vile; I say, if any Romish Adonias had
succeeded Elizabeth, 1. King. 1.20* 21.
all the Protestants in the Land ere this had been reputed vile, but thou Lord
God of the spirits of all flesh, have not failed us: but appointed a man over
the congregation, to lead us out and in, that the congregation of the Lord,
should not be as sheep which have no shepherd. And as Moses prayed for
Joshua, so do we for thine anointed: O give him of thy glory, that all the
congregation of the children of Israel may obey. Number. 27.20.


And so to come and close with the rest I aim at, having passed by the Lords
providence so many Iordens of dangers, and having enjoyed so many merciful
refreshings, like the sweet running waters of Shiloas that go softly by Sion;
having I say been made blessed by so many deliverances of old and now by this
of new, the greatest of all: (endangered by men, but delivered by God) now let
us jointly give him the glory, who has made us so glorious by deliverance.

Dread Sovereign, dear Queen, sweet Prince and progeny, cast down your
Crowns at the feet of your Savior, and say; We have been saved by thee.
Earls, Nobles, and Barons, lay by your Robes of estate, with your ensigns of
honor, praise him who has preserved you, and say; We have been saved by
thee. You officers in Court resign up your staves into the hands of God, and
say, We have been supported by thee. Ye learned Bishops, and Fathers of the
Church, slide from your Consistories, and say to the great Bishop of your
souls, We have been kept by thee. Ye Knights, Squiers, and Gentry of the
Land, unarm your selves, and with your Crests lay your Laurel in the lap of
Christ, and say, We have conquered through thee. Thou high Court of
Parliament, dissolve for a time, and say, O Angel of the great Counsel, we
will consult with thee. And lastly, Thou Lord God of Gods, and preserver of
men, let there be silence in heaven, for the space of half an hour, Reave.
8.1. etc.
till these Saints praises and prayers be offered up.

So shall we sing with a godly Ouation, and a grace in our hearts, Kings of
the earth, and all people, Princes, and al Judges of the world, Psalm. 148.1*
etc.
young men and maids, old men, and babes, praise the name of the Lord; for his
name only is excellent, and his praise above heaven and earth: he has
exalted the horn of his people; and his Saints shall praise him, even the
children of England, whom he loves and has made so glorious by deliverance.

Praise the Lord, O virgin daughter London, Praise thy God O England, the
glory of Kingdoms, and beauty of all Europes honor, Psalm. 147.2. etc.
for he has made fast the bars of thy gates, and has blessed thy children
within thee, he has set peace in thy borders, and satisfied thee with the
flower of wheat: Let the praise of God therefore be ever in thy mouth, and a
sharp two edged sword in thy hands, to be avenged of the Heathenish Atheist,
Psalm. 149.6. etc.
and to rebuke the bloody Papist; such honor have al Saints.

And now to speak to you Authors and Abettors of these desperate Treasons,
Cease your Rebellions, lay by your bloody designs, recount with your selves
your former, both faithless, and fruitless attemptes, against the Lord, and
against his anointed; Reckon with your selves your former losses, in the year
1588. when the winds, the Seas, Rocks, and Shelues fought for us, when the
River Kishon swept them away, Judge. 5.20.21.
from our English Coast, to Dingie Cush in Ireland, with a Beesome of such
destruction to their great Armadae* and frighting to our English Fugitives
abroad, and of their favorites at home, as by the grace of God has brought
them out of all heart, out of all ability, and possibility ever to attempt
the like.

Learn what it is to fight with GOD, We must increase, Ioh. 3.30. Reu. 18.2.
etc. Genesis 41.32.
you must decrease; for Babylon is fallen, so told you by the Angel, as a thing
already past and done, and doubled in speech like Pharaos dream, to tell you
of the certainty, and expedition thereof. Cease, O cease to provoke the Lord
any longer, and end your malice against his Saints, ere malice end you; lest
he say unto you, as he did unto Mount Seir: Because thou have had a perpetual
hatred, and have put the Israel of God to flight by the force of the sword in
the time of their calamity, Ezec* 35.56
when their iniquity had an end: Therefore as I live, says the Lord God, I
will prepare thee unto blood: and blood shall pursue thee: except thou hate
blood, even blood shall pursue thee.

God is witness, before whom I stand in the sight of men and Angels, that I
speak not this to seek the blood of any, their blood be upon themselves,
and theirs, till they have dried it up by unfeigned repentance: I wish the
conversion of all ( viis and modis) by all good means. I wish our Laws may
still be written in milk, and that his Majesty's Royal heart, may continue a
depth of rare mercy. I wish our preaching may savor peace, and that the
Magistrate may still strike with a trembling hand.

Yet give me leave to pray withal, that the rage of the enemy never grow so
sower as to turn our milk into blood, mercy into judgment, peace into war,
sythes into swords, and them to be hallowed in the blood one of another; which
I fear, both must and will ensue, if they grow so great in the contempt of
God, so grievous to their Sovereign, and so intolerable to the State: which
if they do, then be wise O ye Kings, Psalm. 2.10. etc. Psa. 85.10
be learned, ye that be judges of the earth. Let mercy and truth meet together
in you: Let righteousness and peace kiss each orher. Take the sword into your
own hands, and strike, O ye Worthies of Israel, for Zeba, Judge. 8.20.21.
and Zalmana will never be killed by the weak hands of Iethro: for as the man
is, so is his strength: The Minister may speak, and the inferior Magistrate
may strike: and both with a trembling heart and hand, like the child Iethro:
but assure your selves, that Romish Zeba, and Popish Zalmana, will never die
till you rise up, and with your own hands fall upon them, as Gedeon did: for
as the man is, so is his strength.

Sit in vobis materna pietas and paterna seueritas: exhibete vos matres
fouendo, patres corripiendo: extendite vbera, sed pro^ucite verbera: that is,
Let there be in you a motherly pity* and a fatherly severity; show your
selves Mothers in cherishing, but Fathers in correcting: Lay out your breasts,
but withal draw forth your rods; and ever so Vt nec vigor sit rigor, nec
mansuetudo dissoluta, as neither your force be rigorous, nor your forbearing
re^chlesse: but say with the Orator in the temper of both: Natura me clementem
fecit, Respub* seuerum postulat: sed neque natura, neque resp. me crudelem
efficiet: Nature has made me mild, the Common weal requires I should be
severe: yet neither Nature nor the Common weal, shall ever make me cruel.

And if any man shall scandalize thee of cruelty in thy just severity, and
say, O where is love! I answer: Ne timeas contra charitatem esse, si vnius
scandalum multolum pace conpensaueris. Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas,
Never fear the breach of charity, where with the scandal of one, ye may
recompense the peace of many; for better it is that one die of many, then that
the unity of all be dissolved.

He was wise that said it, Pro. 25.4.5
and I hope the wisdom of this age will approve it; Take the dross from the
silver, and there shall proceed a vessel for the Finer: take away the wicked
from the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness: but
beware of delays, for they are dangerous: and in the execution of justice,
they are deadly dangerous: according to that; Because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is
fully set in them to do evil. Eccle. 8.11


Witnesses Ely his impunity toward his children, which lost him the
Priesthood with his life, and brought upon him and all Israel so heavy a
judgment as Phinehas wife dying, 1 Samuel 4.21.22.
left the memory thereof for all succeeding ages, when she bore a son, and
called him Ichabod: that is, the glory is gone from Israel.

Happily Ely ^pared them, for that they were his children, and out of his love
and fatherly affection toward them. He deemed it less sin to show some
indulgence; but one says well: Iustitia non nouit p^trem, non nouit matrem,
non nouit seipsum: Responde mihi Iudicium, dixit Nathan, and sic David dedit
iudicium contra seipsum: David gave judgment against himself in a Plea of
faith, and fact. 2. Sam. 12.5. etc.
How then may Princes spare others, if they be found guilty in either of both?
Hierome is more peremptory in a case of like importance, When he says; Licet
paruulus ex collo pendeat nepos, licet sparso crine, and scissis vestibus vbera
(quibus te nutriuit) matter ostendit, licet in limine pater iaceat, percalcatum
perge patrem, and sicc^s ^culis ad vexillum cruc^s euola; solum pietatis genus
est in h^cre esse crudelem Gladium tenet hostis, vt me perimat, and ego de
matris lacrimis cogitabo? Propter Patrem, Christi militiam deseram, cui etiam
sepulturam Christi causa non debeo: which I may English thus* Although thy
little Grandchilde clinge about thy neck, and say spare father; Although thy
mother come forth, with spread hair, and torn raiment, and show thee the
pappes, where once thou sucked thy life, with her love, and say; spare son:
Although thy father cast himself down upon thy threshold to keep thee in;
tread upon thy father, and with dry cheeks fly to the execution of thy
profession. It is an only point of godliness in this case to be cruel, and a
sovereign Pity, to be pitiless. Shall the enemy hold up his hand to wound
the Church? and shall I think upon the tears of my mother? Shall I because of
my father, cease to fight for my Christ? to whom I owe no burial, for the
cause of my Christ, but am to leave the dead, to bury the dead, whilst I
follow him.

Whereupon I may well say, that mercy may have it excess, and pity may be
great cruelty: especially then, when it ouerfloweth to the good man's danger:
mistake me not, I like of love, but when it is tempred with fear, I like it
better. I know it may do much with the better sort, but not with the greater:
according to that of Augustine, Meliores sunt quos dirigit amor, sed plures
sunt quos corrigit timor: They be better whom love directs, but they be more,
whom fear corrects: and therefore the temper of both is melodious in the
ear of a sanctified and settled State.

And so to draw toward an end, and at last to conclude, out of that which has
been spoken, both of former Popish cruelties, and out of our happy deliverance
from their last intended Treasons, powdered with so many mischiefs: (I say) in
caution of future peril by men of that generation; Take heed of Popery, take
heed of Papists, and tolerate neither their cause nor person: for if you
tolerate the person, it will credit the cause: therefore to tolerate neither
of both, in a state so sanctified as ours is, I hold it safest. What then is to
be done, will some say? Away with both head, and tail: for Popery kept under,
will practice treason: if it get aloft, it will play the tyrant: therefore no
way to have it, is safest, and with least danger.

Further my advice is, that you trust them as little as you may, and never
converse with them but for their conversion; and if after once or twice
admonition they grow refractarie, Deuita, knowing that he that is such is
perverted, and sins, being damned of his own self: I say, trust them not,
for they are faithless, and hold it for a doctrine, that fides non est
seruanda cum Heriticis; in which Rank, they reckon all the Protestants of this
land to be.

Again, take heed of them, for they are busy bodies, and walk inordinately
amongst you: they are impatient of our profession, great peace, and much
plenty; they compass Sea and Land, Man. 23.15
to make one of their profession, and when he is made, he becomes twofold
more the child of hell, then he was before. Reu. 14.11*
These busy bodies take no rest; and to have no rest day nor night, is proper
to such as worship the beast and his Image, and to whomsoever receives the
print of his name.

Beware of their blind guides, Jesuits, Seminaries, and Seedsmen, who to
betray the truth, sow the tares of all treasons, at all times, and in all
places. They are the Frogs of Egypt, that leap into kings chambers, and busily
possess the Courts of Princes, and mighty men, either to poison their hearts
with the enchanted Cup of Romish superstition, or to bereave them of their
lives, if they fashion not to their devotions: they leave the Pulpits, they fly
from the horns of the altar, they disclaim the Oratories, and they become men
of State, managing the Empire, and marshalling the commonweal of Princes: so
as I may well say of these new Nouices, as was said of the Monks of old;

Quicquid agit Mundus, Monachus vult esse secundus; Where ever the world is
one, the Romish Clergy will be another.

Lastly, beware of mixture, and shun the sins of Samaria, who were a mixed
people, and of a confused Religion, tollerating both the persons and causes of
Idolatry: As you may read in the 2. of Kings. 17. verse. 24. for the persons.
And verse. 23. for the cause. And the Jews in the days of Christ, thought it
as grievous an imputation as they could devise, to lay upon him, when they
said: Say we not well, 48.
that thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? And surely so it is; for to be
of two religions, is to be of no religion: and to tolerate both, is to
confound all, either in a kingdom, or in a conscience.

It is memorable, and it may go for a Caution to all Christian Kings and
Princes, what is recorded in this case, of the unconscionable offer of great
Chan, the Tartarian Prince: of whom Lipsius reports, that when Stephanus,
that mighty King of Poland was dead; Lips^i mo^^a and Exemp. Pol^t. 3. lib.
20.11.
he amongst others, sent his Legate to the assembly where the new Creation was,
with these three motives, to move them to make him King.

1 First, that he was mighty, and could bring myriads of horsemen out of his
own lands, either for the defense or enlarging of their kingdom of Poland.

2 Secondly, that he was frugall, and could live in time of famine, only with
horse flesh.

3 Thirdly, for the Religion, (whereof he heard there was much dispute among
them) that he was indifferent, saying; Tuus pontifex meus pontifix esto: tuus
Lutherus meus Lutherus esto: Your Pope, shall be my Pope: and your Luther, shall
be my Luther. It was the Tartarians sin, to be so indifferent, and so readily
to offer a tollerance: and it was the Polonians sin, so long to suffer a
mix^ure of many or more religions then one in one Kingdom. And yet how ever,
either fear or folly, moved the Polonians for the time to endure it, and to
stain both their kingdom and conscience with so great a brand of wickedness,
(notwithstanding the Emperors large offers otherwise:) yet that of Religion
was thought so idle, as they rejected it with laughter, saying; Ecce hominem
paratum, omnia sacra and deos deserer eregnandi causa.

But good Lord, how inestimably are we beholding to thee our good God, for so
great a mercy, as to give us a King in thy love, when we were a people not to
be beloved! whose Princely relish sauouring true piety, did so much distaste
either an alteration of the religion we have: or a tolleration of any other,
as in public he did contest against both, in these words: I do protest
before God and his Angels, that I am so constant for the maintenance of the
Religion publicly professed in England, as that I would spend my dearest blood
in defense thereof, rather then the truth should be overthrown: And if I had
ten times as many more Kingdoms as I have, I would dispend them all, for the
safety and protection thereof. And likewise, if I had any children, that should
yield either to the Popish faith or faction, I desire of God, that I may rather
see them brought to their graves before me, that their shame may be buried in
my life time, never to be spoken of in future ages,

Deuteronomy. 22.11.
By the Law of God, no man may wear a coat of Linsey-wolsey: If I may not
wear a garment so wouen upon my back, may I wear a Religion so twisted
within my heart? May Princes tolerate it in their Kingdoms? may fathers in
their families? It were a grievous imputation to either of both, and that which
the adversary himself would never yield us: they will neither tolerate us
nor ours; and why should we endure either them or theirs? ^f the evil will not
yield to the good, why should the good yield to the evil?

Do but mention a tolleration of Religion in Rome, and Rome will be ragious:
do but speak of such a thing in Spain, and it will be thought prodigious*
France is fearful in delivering it Edicts, and whole Italy is resolute never
to yield either to our cause or persons. Why should we then endure either them
or theirs in their known Idolatry?

Were the Law of GOD on foot, that Idolaters should die the death, Deuteronomy. 13.9.
soon would the controversy be determined, and motions for tollerations in
Christian commonwealths, would seldom be mentioned: but whilst we demurre
upon the point, and stand a disputing, whether Papists be Idolaters, whether
Rome be Babylon, the Pope Antichrist, his Religion Antichristian, and whether
his lovers and friends be enemies to the State, and dangerous to a Kingly
rule: (I say) whilst we demurre upon such doubts, and are a debating the
Question, Popery will increase, and presume to gain, if not an alteration,
yet a tolleration: if not a tolleration, yet a conniuence: and if not that, yet
such a perpetual respect, and favor of some, as will endanger the state of all,
if we endure it any longer.

By the law of God, the Idolater (I say again) must die the death. Exodus
22.20. And if an Israelite will go in, and dally with a Midianite, before
Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation: zealous Phinehas, with his
spear in his hand, may enter the Tent, and thrust them through, that the
plague may cease from Israel Numb. 25.6.

The Lord has sworn that he will war with Amaleck, from generation to
generation Exodus 17.

And amongst other ordinances laid down by God for his people, this was urged
again to be remembered, thus: When the Lord has given thee rest from all
thine enemies, and the land for an Inheritance to possess it, then shall thou
put out the remembrance of Amaleck from under heaven; forget it not. Deuteronomy.
25.19.

And 400. years after, Saul was plagued for sparing Agag of the Amalekites, 1.
Sam. 15.
and not executing of that law.

The Lord (I can assure you) requires a through conversion from sin: and why
not a through subversion of sin? The Tabernacle of GOD has it Censer,
Snuffers, and Beesome, to purge the Sanctuary, and sweep away the filth: and
if you build, the rubbish must be removed ere you lay the foundation: be the
body never so healthful, it will decay, without an euacuation: and until you
take away the dross from the silver, ye can never make a vessel for the Finer.

It was Ieremies moan at Anathoth, Jeremy 6.29.30.
in the land of Benjamin: The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed in the
fire, the founder melts in vain; for the wicked are not taken away. As if
he should say, All our labor is lost, and it is in vain, that we have
wearied our selves, with our prayer and Preaching; if the wicked be not taken
away.

And it is apparent this day by the baser sort of these audacious Rebels, too
much emboldened by his Majesty's most gracious and godly clemency, which they
have abused; and whom if they had requited with such an unkind kiss of
killing cruelty; yet might he have said with the Orator, Non vitium nostrum,
sed virtus nostra nos afflixit.

Yea and to speak from a more powerful spirit, his majesty and Senate, being
then about a work of so great consequence, both for the good of the Church and
commonweal; If that Court then had been their coffin, and they had dyed so
doing, yet might they have said in the silence of their souls; Happy is the
servant, whom when the master comes he shall find so doing.

And now if any man shall say, to blot out the memory of this so memorable a
mischief: O it is done, let it die, since the danger is past, and the
deliverance is now old: let that man know, Conuenit laude^ Dei esse perpetua^,
Seemly it is that the praise of God should be perpetual. And if by this
deliverance, England then, England now, England ever be made blessed, we had
need rather to write it in Marble, with the point of an Adamant, to continue,
then with the clawe of a Crow in the dust of oblivion, to be forgotten.

When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion after 70. years bondage in
Babylon, it is memorable (...)


