Queen Elizabeth, PARALELD IN HER PRINCELY virtues, with David, Joshua, and
Hezekia. 1 With David in her afflictions, to build the Church 2 With Joshua in
her puissance, to protect the Church 3 With Hezechia in her piety, to reform
the Church.
IN THREE SERMONS, as they were preached three several Queens days. By
William Leigh, Bachelor of Divinity.

ISAYAH 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens shall be thy
Nurses, they shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and lick up
the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, for they shall
not be ashamed that wait for me. LONDON. Printed by T. C. for Arthur Johnson,
1611.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCESS, ELIZABETH, Daughter to our Sovereign Lord
the King, etc. Grace be multiplied in this life, and happiness in the World to
come.
MADAME,
I Am bold to put into your Princely hands this Balm of Gilead, a Newe-yeares
guifte, of an olde-yeares store, powered upon the head of Queen Elizabeth, in
her life, and now again sh^^^ upon her sacred hearse, after her death, the
iniqui^^^ of the time requiring a rescue of her (...) soul, from the virulent
tongue of Popi^^ piety, then which I am verily persuaded, there was never
malice upon the earth more implacable.

Sanguine placactis ventos and virgin caesa: the boisterous winds (as poets
feign) were stilled with virgins blood, but here no virgins blood, no Princes
blood, no martyrs blood, no Saviors blood, can quench the fire and fury of
popish indignation, or appease their God Apollyon, who pitieth neither sex, nor
age, person, or presence, be they quick, or be they dead, all is one. Bucers
bones must he burned, and the sacred soul of Queen Elizabeth, her Manes,
spirit, and ghost, may not pass to bliss, without a blast of Parsons poisoned
pen, and breath, thinking it not sufficient to glut themselves with the blood
of their Sovereigns, unless with their buried bones they might ransacke their
blessed souls.

Witness the modern doctrine of these our days, divulged by Dolman,
Benedetto Palmio, Haniball, Codrotto, Guicknard, Ambrose Vyrard, Mariana, and
others of that Iesuited crewe, who hold it not only lawful and meritorio^s to
kill Kings (if they be not pleasing to their devotions) but ^ith all an
heroical act, and a gift of the holy ghost, which Rauelacke their design^d
agent ^ately put in practice upon his li^ge Lord, the King of France, by no
^essesatall then mortal stabbe. This their damnable doctrine, bloody stroke,
and poysone breath, against the lives and souls of Princes have made me to
reuise my papers, and with James, to look back upon my former thoughts, how
upon the view they might frame in opposition against these more then
heathenish, and no less then hellish designs, whose thirst is never quenched
but with the blood of their Sovereigns, nor gorge ever filled, but with the
gross viandes of popish bull, and indulgence, pardoning from time to time
their damnable agents to subvert states, by two of the last and most dangerous
stratage^s that ever were devised against the Church of Christ, Parricide, and
Perjury, thereby taking away all faith from God, fealty from Princes, and
commerce with men. And what is that other, but the breeder of all wickedness, the
mother of mischief, and Babel of all confusion.

Time was when an Angel durst not reprove a devil, but said, The Lord rebuke
thee. Now Iesuited devils dare reprove Angels sent from God to be our
Sovereigns, and say, Rauelacke may kill thee.

Time was when none might touch the Lords anointed, or do his prophets any
harm. Now popish powder may blow up, popish knife may kill, and popish
brambles may tear the flesh of Kings.

Time was when Rulers were regarded, and Kings had their Majesty's, quick and
dead, as the Royal Chapel of Westminster can witness, even from their
Diademes, down to their dust. But now Iesuited cruelty may crush all rule,
burst the bands of all obedience, curse Kings, ouer-awe authority, and are so
far from honoring the shrines and majesty of Princes here on earth, as they
have not spared to malign their souls in heaven. In a word trust them, who
will, and they shall find their doom is still for death, their drum for
destruction, and their march in the cry of Edome, Down with it, down with it,
even to the ground.

A man would have thought they might have spared her soul, whose body they
could never still, with more then thousand intended treasons against her state,
and person, by poison, stabb, and shot: by foreign invasions, homerebellions,
and domestical encumbrances, from all which the Lord still made her glorious
by deliverance. And now her soul being tied in the bundle of the living, and
she gathered unto her fathers in peace, they cannot spare to banne what God
has blessed.

I shall not need to stand in defense either of her sacred life, or death,
whose saved soul the heaven of heavens does now possess. Neither shall I
need to beat back his poisoned breath, who now is breathless, and knows
by this what it is to have touched the Lords annoyn^ed, either in her life, or
in her death, that hellish breath is beaten back by guste and gale of a more
heavenly air: and fully answered by two reverend fathers of our Church:
divines of worth, whom the pride of popery may envy, but shall never match
otherwise then (as their manner is) with the ^ume, feathers, and froth of their
own inu^ntions, lighter then vanity it self. For were their pens as
perilous as their powder, the shot were more dangerous, but (to God be the
praise) truth has discovered their pen of ignorance, and their powder of
treason. My purpose is not to stir Elizabeth's sacred hearse, whose grave is
full of Princely earth, and her obsequies are ended, my thoughts are higher
eue^ to match her Manes in bliss, with greatest of Sovereigns there
(Sovereignty it self only excepted) I mean with David, Joshua, and Ezekia,
guides, and Kings of Isreal's Judah.

Pard^n me (gracious Lady) if I put this under the shelt^r of your highness
protection, Semblance of sex, name and blood, together with your high place,
person, and piety, craves no less at your Princely hands, then protection of
her shrine, and Ghost. She a Kings daughter, so are you: she a maiden Queen,
you a Virgin Prince: her name is yours, her blood is yours, her carriage is
yours, her countenance yours, like piety toward God, like pity toward men:
only the difference stands in this; that the fair flower of her youth is
fallen; yours flourishes like a Rose of Saram, and a Lilly of the Valley. Her
days are determined on earth, and begun in heaven; yours are a doing on earth:
and blessed be the current till they be ended: ever may your happiness grow
together, and make you blessed with that immortal crown, that withers not.

The Sermons I here present, were preached under the shadow of her blessed
government* and in the three last years of her gracious reign. When (if God
of the surplusage of his love toward this English nation had not ended one
mercy with the beginning of another) I fear our mourning days had not been
yet ended. But God almighty without whose providence nothing proceeds, and
without whose mercy nothing is saved, has ended one b^essing with the
beginning of another, even the blessed reign of Queen Elizabeth, with the
thrice happy government of our Liege Lord, and King, your father, in whom the
flowers flourish, and the Kingdoms are united, Religion prospers, and
superstition withers, with a Royal issue ever to live, the only remain of
our religious hope. One is easily overcome, and two will make resistance, but
this threefold gable is not lightly broken, being beautiful as the bands of
Zachary, wherewith the Church is honored, the State is strengthened, the
subject is comforted, and our sovereign Lord the King your father, no less
blessed in his three children, then in his three Kingdoms. The Lord God of
heaven, maker of Kings, and directer of Crowns, give unto you all grace in
this life, and glory in a better.

Amen. Amen.
Your Graces most humble at command, WILLIAM LEIGH.

THE FIRST Sermon.
PSALM 123. David with all his affliction.




THE people (as you may here see) are pas^ionate for their King, and they pray
for him Again, the King is careful over his people and he prepares for them.
The people pray that their King might ^e remembered of God in all his affliction
(...) King prepares, that the people may have the Lord propitious in all their
deuotio^s.

And such is, or ought to be, the intercourse of love and loyalty betwixt
prince and people; happy Prince so prayed for, blessed people so provided for,
and Isreal's Judah was blessed in both.

Now the matter of their prayer was, that God would establish his promise made
to David their King, concerning his church: that he might build a place for his
aboade in Sion, the mountain of his holiness. It Psalm. 93.
was his care, it was his affliction. I say affliction much affecting his
royal heart, that himself with the nobles of Judah and Israel, should have
their solace in seeled houses, whilst the Ark of God was covered with 2. Sam.
7. 2.
skins, dwelt in tents, and had never a cottage to shroude in.

Birds had their neastes, foxes had their Mat. 8. 20
holes; but neither poor CHRIST, nor his afflicted Church, could ever find
rest or repose in this miserable world, destitute, afflicted, and tormented,
whom the world was not worthy of, they wandered Heb. 11. 38.
in wilderness, and mountains, and caves of the earth. Never pilgrim^lesse
pitied, never ship more tossed, never Tabernacle oftener shifted, then that
of the Arc, and presence of the Lord.

Witness these two, and forty remoueals Numb. 3^
in the wilderness ere Israel came to Canaan; besides the small rest it had
at Shilo in Eli his house, at Ashdod with the 1. Sam. 4. 5. 1. Sam. 6. 7.
Philistines, at Bethshemesh, Kiriath-i^arim, Abinadabs house; Obed Edoms, and
never at quiet till it came to Sion, nor that a Sanctuary for ever to dwell
in, but a Sacrament of a better being and Tabernacle Heb. 8. 2.
in heaven, which the Lord has pight, and not man.

For even now the stones of Sion lie in the dust, and her ruins are
vnrepaired, Lament. 1 4.
the holy people are helpless, piety is a pilgrim upon the earth, and the
little flock finds poor pasture to feed upon, euerin motion never at quiet
til it come, and retire into the bosom of it best beloved, like the dove in the
deluge who found no rest for the soale Genesis 8. 9.
of her foot, till she returned again unto the Arc.

This Arc thus tossed in the deluge, and tired in the wilderness, despised of
the heathen, and much neglected of the true borne Jew, together with Labans
much lowering at home, when in Jacob it was consumed abroad Genesis 31. 40.
with heat in the day, and with frost in the night, weather beaten and weary,
till David a Type of Christ gave it rest, who eaten Acts 13. 22. Psalm. 49. 9.
up with the zeal of Gods house devoured all difficulties for the
accomplishment, who thought upon nothing more then of a place, and habitation
for his holiness to dwell in, his meat went from him, so did his sleep, and
he charged his soul with an oath to God for the performance.

These holy thoughts thus affecting his heart, and afflicting his soul, made
the people sensible of his sorrows, and therefore pierced their hearts to
provoke their prayer thus, Lord remember David in all his Afflictions.

Wherein I do observe two things of 1
special note, the first is, the peoples passion for their King, they are
afflicted with him* and therefore they pray for him, the second is David's
preparation for the people, he is 2
careful of them, and therefore he prouides for them a place: an habitation
for the Lord to dwell in. So as their feet might now wander no more, but stand
in the great congregation they loved so well, and by the Altars of their God
they held so dear.

And for the first: I mean the peoples passion for their King, ye know the
saying of old, Componitur orbis Regis ad exemplu^. And Claudian:
it has it extent from Court to Country, for peoples passions are framed to
their Princes affections, like Hippocrates twins they weep together, and they
laugh together, they live together, and they dye together, witness their joint
sorrows after Abners hearse; the King wept, and the people wept, and though the
people would feast; yet when 2. Sam. 3.
they saw the King would fast, it pleased them, for as the text says,
whatsoever the King did pleased the people. His passions were theirs, his
afflictions were theirs, to teach us that peoples actions do Sympathize with
Princes affections, the Court is dead if the King be not cheerful, and
subjects sorrow, when their sovereigns are sad, Princes smyles, are peoples
joys like the luster of the same, so are the countenance of Kings: with their
shine they carry comforts, but never so little shadowed with clouds of grief,
(good Lord) how the subject then mourns, dear is the love of God in the
souls of his Saints, but next to that is the sacred band of love and loyalty
to Princes, fathers, friends and families are further off, sovereigns are the
highest in the rank.

If leisure would serve to turn over some few leaves of sorrow, and search
into the records of grief, easily might I find that peoples passions, for
their Princes have been most piercing, great was their care over David, when
they stayed him from the battle, least the light of Israel should be
extinguished. So was it over Saul when 2. Sam. 21 17.
they mourned his funerals with this doleful dittie; Ye mountains of
Gilboah, upon you be neither dew, nor rain, nor fields of offering for then
the shield of the mighty is cast 2. Sam. 1. 21.
down. The shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.

The mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Zachar. 12. 11. 12.
valley of Megiddo, where Josias was slain, will never be forgotten, where
every family mourned a part, etc. and uttered their passions with this
pitiful plaint, the Crown of Lament. ^5. 16.
our head is fallen: woe unto us that ever we sinned.

Lastly, that one may stand for all, I appeal to your own passions, who have
at any time seen your own sovereign, whether your tears of joy have not
expressed your fear of grief, mourning like the Turtle-Doue, whose sweetest
song is in her sorrow; least having lost her mate she should not find him:
and having found her mate, least she might loose him, thousands within the
kingdom do thus blend in their moist and mixed tears upon the sight and
thoughts of their sovereign.

And here leave we the peoples passions, and come we to their prayer, the
sweet perfume of their devotion in these words. LORD remember David in all
his affliction.

Wherein first I do observe, in that the people fly to GOD for their King
with no less love, then loyalty they Romans 13. Prou. 8. 15. 16. Psalm. 77.
hold that the powers that are ordained of God, they hold that he loses the
collar of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle, they hold that he
sits in the midst of magistrates, and demands an account of their
government, I say they hold that it is he, and he alone that sets up, and
pulls (...). 12. 18 ^^^l. 82. 1.
down; that leads his people along by the hands of Moses and Aaron.

We say then with him who said well, Abrahamum non invenit dominus, sed fecit
patrem multarum gentium, the Lord did not find Abraham, but he made him a
father ^en. 12. 1. Exodus 3. 2.
of many nations, he called him from Hur of the Chaldeans, Moses* from the
sedges, and David from the Ewes great with la^be, to feed ^sal. 78. ^1.
Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

Nay, Christ Jesus king of kings, and Lord of lords, not by intrusion, but by
inauguration from his father, thus; I will set my king Psalm. 2. 6.
upon my holy hill of Sion. Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

Antichristian then, miserable and damnable, is the doctrine of all such as
dare say, that Popes may either set up, or pull down Princes, discharge the
subject of his obedience, put a knife in the hand of any to sheath it in the
bowels of their sovereigns. Antichristian was the practice of that proud
Pope, who trod upon the neck of Kings and Emperors, and made them to hold his
stirrup, and because they held not steddily, tripped the crowns from their
heads. Ego et r^x meus argued neither faith nor frailty in Cardinal Wolfey, and
I may fastly say, it was disloyalty in Warwick to give out, that he had
rather make a King, then be a King, nay nay proud pear, it was never in thy
power to make a King, for the making of a King, is the work of a God, and if
it be true of all Job. 1. 21.
things, much more of a Kings. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, as it
pleases the Lord, so come things to pass.

Then cease your malice you miscreants of states, for you can never prevail
against the Lord, the powers that be, are ordained Romans 13: 1. 2. Prou. 21. 30.
of God, and who resists them, resists the ordinance of God.

Is it possible to back the Sun, Moon or Stars, in their speedy course; can ye
hush the harmony of the heavens? or still the raging of the sea? ca^ ye alter
the course of the year of seed time, and harvest, of winter, and so^mer? of
the day, and of the night, can ye either give ^ife, or deliver fro death? can
ye create a new world with another government? then may ^ye resist the Lords
ordinance in this. Alter states, and pluck away all power from a powerful God.

But it is not in you, or your Roman God (o ye popish repiners) its not your
boisterous bull can push down a Prince, its Revel. 9. 3.
not the croaking of your frogs, and Locusts, your Iesuited crew and
Seminary brood, can blast our doctrine, blemish our state, or bereave us of
our Sovereign, disquiet you may, destroy you may not: for Proverb. ^8. 2.
the offenses of the people, there be many Princes, and if our sins sack us
not, we shall never fall, if the Lord say prosper, how can our branch wither?
and if he say from heaven ride on, because of the word of truth, of meekenes,
and of righteousness, who dare say from the earth, light off, ride, rule, and
Psalm. 45. 4.
reign no more, traiterous is the heart that thinks it, traiterous is the
mouth that speaks it, traiterous is the hand that works it, traiterous is the
pen that writes it.

And yet woe is me to tell: this our age and climate is pestered with men of
such poisoned breathes, who dare both think, say, do, and write that a
mortal man may manage kingdoms, and authorize subjects to deprive their
Princes, as if the powers that be, were not ordained of God: their faculties
are of force, their bulls are divulged, their antichristian doctrine is
traduced by Symancha, Costerus and Dolman, who have blackened the air with
their derne divinity, whilst they auerre that subjects may rise, rebel, and
kill their kings, if they be not pleasing to their devotion.

Augustine mourned much, for that he Augustinus in confession.
had ever read against the true God Tonantem Iouem and adulterantem, of a
thundering God, and of an adulterous God, for so deemed the Pagans of their
Jupiter Capitolinus: Much more may Papists grieve, that ever they either read
or reverenced in the place of God their capital Pope, tonantem and
adulterantem, a cursing God, and a carnal God, adulterating states, and
cursing Kings, and yet to God be the praise, his Bull bolts are but birdboults,
blunted by a better God, witness the flourishing and blessed estate both of our
Church and kingdom, under the happy government of our dread Sovereign, by
whom the Lord has multiplied our nation, and increased our joy, and never with
no blessings powered upon her from heaven, then since Impius Quintus cursed her
from the earth, for she lives a blessed Prince, and he is dead, a cursed Pope,
and if any traiterous Bechry, the son of rebellious Iemini have in his heart
so bad a thought, or in his mouth so foul a word, (kindled with heat of that
bull) as to say A precibus ad praelium, from prayers to your pikes and to your
tents ( o Israel) we have no part in Queen Elizabeth: let the judgment of
Bechry fall upon him, and let all the people say, Amen.

And let this suffice for the second observation, teaching us by the example of
this religious, and passionate people, praying for their king, that who plead
or practice the contrary, do violate the Lords holy ordinance, and lay
violent hands upon his anointed, whom to obey by rule of reason, and all true
religion, not our actions only are tied with our words, but our very thoughts
must be chaste that way, according to that.

Detract not from the king, no not in thy Eccles. 10. 20.
thought, for the fowls of the air shall carry the voice.

Nay were our Prince as evil as she is good, and were she set over us in
judgment to plague us, as she is in mercy to save us, I mean to shelter us as
the shadow of a Esaias. 32. 2.
great rock in a weary land, were she as bloody in persecuting, as she is
careful in cherishing, finally were she as great a Pagan: as she is a
christian, yet stands it with religion, piety and godliness not to touch her
life, but to pray for her safety: so were the people of the Captivity
enjoined to do by Jeremy, Seek the prosperity of the City, Jeremy. 29. 7.
whither I have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray unto the Lord
for it, for in the peace thereof shall you have peace.

And Baruck. 1. 11. says, pray for the life of Nabuchadnezzar king of Babylon,
and for the life of Baltasher his son, that their days may be upon earth as
the days of heaven.

What should I say more? Under Augustus Luke 2. 1*
Caesar all the world was taxed, and under Tiberius Caesar the Lord was
crucified, and yet said he of both, Give to Matt. 22* 21.
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods.
Though Nero was cruel, and Domitian was bloody, yet Paul's divinity was, that
every soul should be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but
of God, exhorting with all, that first of all prayers, intercessions, and 1.
Tim. ^* 1. 2. 1. Pet. 2* 13. 14*
giving of thanks should be made for all men, but especially for kings* from
the same spirit spoke Peter, when he enjoined submission* to all public
government for the Lords sake, whether unto the King as Supreme, or to others
as subordinate.

Where the Apostolic doctrine is, as you may see that Popes are inferior to
Kings, who^ they must obey, as their Superiors, so far from all primacy, as
they may not challenge a parity, by the word of God, but must yield a
precedencie to their Kings, as to their Sovereigns, and next unto God supreme
governors upon earth, whereunto both popes and al papists, if they have souls
must be subject. Nec attendat verus Obediens quale sit quod praecepit: hoc
solum contentus quod praecipitur, sincere obedience never reasons with the
means, but quiets it self with the command, and quits the conscience with the
precept of his God, who presses nothing 1. Pet. 2. 17.
more then homage to himself, and honor to his anointed. Qua Obedientia
vnicimus daemones, Caeteris virtutibus oppugnamus, by which obedience to God,
and the King, (as one says well) we subdue devils, by other virtues we do but
oppugn them. Satan and sinners are never seen more shrinking then in our
obedience, it daunts men and dammes devils.

Now the subject of the peoples prayer (...) passion for their King was that
the Lord Would remember him with all his afflictions. Where first observe: that
Kings, even Kings, have their trials, troubles, and crosses in this world, and
may say in the height of all their honor, as Paul did, in his persecutions.
Idy daily, for besides the things 2. Cor. 11. 28.
that are outward I am cumbred daily, and have the care of all the Churches,
wars without, treasons within, Counselors perfidious, subjects seditious,
and are not these afflictions? O well said Alexander, Regum est benefacere and
male audire, Its incident to Kings well to do, and evil to hear, and euilly to
be entreated: and that Emblem is for Princes which one of that rank set upon
his hearse, to wit a lamp burning with this Empress, Alijs micans meipsum
consumo, whiles I shine to others, I consume my self.

It would be tedious to tell of Princes thoughts even in the bed of their
rest, as it was with Ahashuerus the King, when in the silence of the night he
could not sleep, but Ester. ^. ^. etc.
commanded to bring the book of the Records, and Chronicles, that he might
solace his soul in seeking to succor them, who had saved him. Baltassers
Emblem was fearful even in the height of the feast, and it may be a Motto to
all the mighty; that they neither presume (...) their (...) nor boles, least a
fearful handwriting upon the wall, warn them both of their sin* (...). ^.
and of their shame, that they have praised the Gods of gold, and of silver, of
brass, and of Iron, of wood, and of stone, but the God in whose hands their
breath is, and all their ways* him have they not glorified. Give Verse. 23.
ear therefore you that rule the multitudes, and glory in the multitudes of
people, for the rule is given you of the Lord, and power by the most high,
which will try your works, and search out your imaginations, because that you
being officers of his kingdom have not judged aright, nor kept the law, nor
walked after the will of God, horribly and suddenly will he appear unto you
(says the wise man) for an hard judgment shall they have that bear rule, he
that is most low, is worthy mercy, but the mighty shall be mightily
tormented. Wisd. 6. 6.

But it may be to flatter Princes, Sicophants will say: these trayals are for
tyrants, they touch not the godly; good, and religious kings may keep and
carry their crowns without cober, pass their time in pleasure, wallow upon
their beds of delight, ^^t down their diade^nes without danger, ^^d bid all
doubts adewe. I answer no: For if there were no care to get a Kingdom for
that they have it, yet is there care to keep it, for that they may loose it;
nor is the care of conscience least, or last of the three in a godly King,
which labors to quit it, when the great Judge of all the world shall demand
an account of their Government. Psalm. 58.

The good Kings of Israel and Judah, have ever carried this conscience with
their Crowns, and have carefully studied they might be bossed with blessing
from God, both upon themselves, and upon their people, never failing them in
the field, to fight their battles, nor in their Oratories, to further their
Devotions, with a care of their Levites to serve at the Altar, and abundance
of sacrifice for the holy offering, yea and more then all this, so careful of
their God, and good of his Church, as they never failed to honor it with their
presence, and Ps^^
to sanctify it with their prayer; Now, h^^ all this could pass them, without
passion, trouble, and affliction, I leave it to the feeling consc^^^^^ of
faithful Kings, whose wrought Crowns of gold often are worn, with the
wreathed crown of Christ, pricking in their hearts with like passionate
speech, Lament. ^. 19.
as when he said, Remember mine affliction and my mourning, the wormwood and
the gall, he was a King that said it, you may believe it, Psalm. 38. 2.
Lord thou have made me a very butt for thine arrows, being tipped with gall
and sorrow.

But of these troubles and fiery trials of Kings, I have said sufficient, and
it may be have dwelt upon the general too long, pardon me to come a little
nearer home eue^ to David's passions, and particular affliction, which more
nerely grieved him, to wit the care he had together with the house of his God,
to build up the hearts of his people, true religion, piety and godliness, the
continual care whereof has so troubled the Gen* 5. 2. 2.
thoughts of the godly from the days of Enoch, who then walked with God, to
the days of Queen Elizabeth who rules for God, as they could never sway the
Scepters of their rule, but with rent of their hearts, to (...) 5. 18.
see Sio^ desolate, and her stones ly in the dust.

Kaine began the ruins, and Esau made the breach, nor ca^ the rubbish be
removed till time be no more: Kings may be nursing ^say. 49. 23.
fathers, and Queens may be nursing mothers to foster, and cherish the Church,
well may they provide, pray and fight for it, yet never prevail, but with the
peril of their lives, nor ever to build but with blood according to that of
old, Sanguine fundata est ecclesia sanguine caepit, sanguine succreuit sanguine
finis erit, the Church in blood first founded was: in blood it did begin, by
blood it shall increase and so at last by blood shall end.

The blood of Abell began the broyle, Revel. 12*
and the blood of the lamb ended the battle, and ever since Michaelis praelium
adduxit Dan. 12.
periculum, the great Prince that stands for the children of the people has
fought the field in a time of trouble, such as never was since there began to
be a nation, yet Revel. 1^* 11.
with a glorious conquest, for they overcame by the blood of the lamb, and the
word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death, the
blood of the lamb: there is their sacrifice, the word of their testimony,
there is their covenant, and they loved not their liue^ unto death, there is
their martyrdom. Therefore rejoice ye heavens: and ye that dwell in them but
woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, for the devil is come
down unto you: which has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time,
he persecuteth the woman which has brought forth the Manchilde* drives her
into the wilderness, casts out of his mouth after her, floods of water,
which when the earth has swallowed up in her relief, then was the Dragon
wroth with the woman, and went and made War with the remnant of her seed,
which kept the commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

So as I may well say, It has been ever, is, and will be, the woe of the
Church in this world, to fight in blood, to have the stones of her building
symonted with such mortar, Night by night to hear Alarm upon Alarm, and all
in the Cry of Edome: Psalm. 137. 7.
Down with it, Down with it, even to the ground.

Inter flagella dat Filium; So the Father gave his Son. Caedebantur,
vrebantur, torquebantur, tamen multiplicabantur; They were beaten, they were
burned, they were racked, yet ever they increased; So the Son sent his Saints
into a senseles world, void of Faith, and without feeling, pity, Psalm. 105.
18.
or compassion of Joseph's affliction, the Iron entered into his soul, and men
were senseless.

This David saw in the sorrow and silence of his soul, when upon the sight
of the ruins, he thought upon a repair, how the tired Tabernacle might rest,
and the Arc of GODS Presence tossed from place to place, in the waste and
Roaring wilderness of this world, might once repose in the Bosom of it
CHRIST, as in a retyring Camp after the day of battle; And yet (God wot,)
with no world of continuance. For that very Temple he thought upon, vanished
with his thoughts, and is now gone, both stick and stone; Ne Populus rediret
in Iudaismum; Least the People might return again to Iudaisme.

All to teach us, that Piety is but a Pilgrim upon Earth, Towers, Temples, Et*
delubra Deorum, have their dismal days; The beautiful Gate of the Temple
became a Stable for Pompeyes horses, and where is now that fair Fabric? How
is the Gold become so dim? The most fine Goulde is changed, and the stones
of the Sanctuary lie scattered in the corner of every street.

To teach us again, that dust will devour dust, when Time shall be no more,
and that all Saints with their Sanctuaries, shall Simbolize to a better state
and being, even eternally to rest in a Tabernacle, not made with hands, but
pight in the high ^el. 21. 22.
Heavens. The LORD GOD Almighty, and the LAMB, are the Temple of it, and
there shall be no more Affliction, no more curfe or grieuance, but the Throne
of God, and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him,
they shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads.

Till which joyful Sabbath, and Eternal rest, laid up in the bosom of our
Christ, Princes must build in grace, that they may be blessed in glory: They
must be religious on Earth, that they may reign in Heaven, they must carry
care in their hearts for the Church of God, that they may wear crowns upon
their heads in sign of victory: ^uel. 7. 9.
In a word, he that feels with David, will be afflicted with David, and
seek ^y all means possible, in his Princely power, how to build up a people
for his God, how to prepare a place for his Presence, how to perfect and polish
the work, that it may be to the glory of God, to the discharge of his duty,
and the salvation of that people, over which the Lord has placed him.

And here next in place seasonablie, and from my Text, it is yet further to
be considered, how David aggrauateth his affliction, by the a^iuncts of his
grief, all signs of sorrow, and companions of care when the soul is
troubled, he had no delight, either in his meat, drink, sleep, rest, Palate,
Palace of pleasure; but bids them all be gone, till he had done his endeavor
to find out a place, an Habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.

When CHRIST should redeem Lazarus from the Grave, and repair his ruins,
John. 1^
it is said: Quod fremuit, Turbatus est; and Fleuit, that his soul was sad,
that his spirits were troubled, and that he sent out Tears from a pensive
soul, for his dead Friend.

Like Troubles afflicted David here, when he should raise a Temple out of the
dust of Sion, it took away his sleep, his meat, and his mind, from all
earthly solace: and tied him to the Temple he so thought upon. It followed
him sleeping, and it left him not awaking, either in bed or at board. Where
when he sat in solace, and saw his seeled Houses, with the Rich hangings of
his Court, embroydered with gold, Lord how his blubbering tears did bedeaw his
Trencher, to think how the Arc of his God lay in the open field, tired in
Tents, weather-beaten, and weary, without shelter to shrowde it, other then
those worn Curtains of skins and Canuas.

The use is good, like affliction has followed the godly of all Ages, in the
care and conscience they have ever had to build up a Church, in the hearts and
souls of Gods Sai^ts, and I am verily persuaded, that if all the cares in the
world besides might blend in one, they could never be found so piercing, so
bleeding, so dear, so desperate in designs, as is, and has been the care
and conscience of our souls, in tender whereof, good and godly men have
neither cared for meat, drink, sleep, friends, life, death, nor the hazard
of their own Romans 9. 3.
solues, if I may say so, And why may I not, when Paul wished himself to be
separated from CHRIST, for his brethrens sake?

This affliction cut the heart of Abraham Genesis 22. 9. 10. Genesis 7. 33.
asunder, when he (the Father of all the Faithful) should at one blow cut
off all hope in Sacrifycing Isaac his son, his only son, whom he loved,
this Affliction battered the heart of Jacob, when he saw the bloody coat of
Joseph, and said with a sorrowful soul, Fera pessima deuorauit eum; a cruel
Beast has devoured him. Psalm. 10* 18.
This Affliction rent the heart of Joseph, when the Iron entered into his soul,
and none was sorry for his affliction.

This was the affliction that molded the heart of mild Moses, to such
compassion over Israel, for their Idolatry, when the Lord Exodus 3^ 32.
was angry with them, as he wished himself raced out of the book of Life,
that Israel might be saved.

This Affliction (like a sword,) pierced through the soul of MARIE, that the
thoughts of many hearts might be opened.

This Affliction, like a dampe, stroke the heart of Paul, when he said, I
die daily, 1. Cor. 11. 29.
who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?

This, this was the Affliction that melted the heart of CHRIST, when as a
suter, he stood at the door, and knocked, saying. Open unto me, my Love, my
Dove, mine undefiled: Cant. 5. 2.
for my Head is full of deaw, and my Locks with the drops of the Night, and
yet can have no entrance.

Finally, that others might have a Fellow feeling of the Afflictions and
miseries Christ suffered upon the Cross for us, his Church, he calls upon
the Passengers that go by; that they should look upon him, and pity him in
this pains.

Have ye no regard at all, ye that pass by this Lum. 112.
way? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is
done unto me, and wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in his fierce wrath. O
remember mine Afflictions, and my mourning, the wormwood and the gail.

Well, I say no more, because I see you passionate, these are gone before, and
are all heirs, even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with JESUS CHRIST, and
so shall you be, if you suffer with him, as they did, that ye may be
glorified with him as they are.

And so again to David, the Seas of whose Afflictions to sound, were to beat
back a Jorden, to reckon up his cares with 1. Chron. 22.
his cost, for the provision of that Work, which another should perfect, were
an endless account, to express with pen, or speech, the passions he felt in
following the business, were for a more powerful spirit then I feel in my
self, I cannot come near the depth thereof.

Yet this dare I say (as I have said) that all the joys he had in this
world, either of pleasure or profit, he passed by them, with an Abrenuncio,
leaving off all Princely sportes, and Kingly delights, till he had done with
the devotion of his GOD, his meat, drink, and sleep, his house, bed, and
Palate, his Court, Crown, and Kingdom. These were least and last in his
thoughts, he never deemed them dear, but in the denial, binding his soul to
God by vow and oathe, never to delight in earthly solace, till he had
fulfilled his heavenly joys, and found out a place for the Lord, an habitation
for the mighty God of Jacob.

The beauty of which house though he might not see, for that he was a man of
1. Chron. 22. 8.
blood, and Solomon his Son must perfect the work, yet as Moses from Morijah,
though he might not enter that earthly Canaan, Deuteronomy. 34.
ioyed in the sight of Canaa^, as a type of that heavenly being, he was to
enjoy upon his death: so David though he might not finish the work he had in
hand, yet exceedingly ioyed that he might provide for the temple below, a
pregnant type of that heavenly Jerusalem, which is above. Gal. ^. 26.


Now the building of this house here on earth where his people might more
safely rest, and render up their vows to God in heaven, was David's holy care,
and greatest part of his affliction, with which if you mark well, you shall
find he began his reign, continued his rule, and ended his princely life:
for upon his entrance, it is 2. Sam. 5.
said that David took first the fort of Sion, and with thirty thousand of
the chosen men of Israel, rose and went from Baal of Judah, which is
Kiarathiearim to bring from thence the ark of God to Abinadabs house that was
in Gibeah. Thence to Nachans threshing Floor, and so to the house of
Obed-Edom, the Gittyte, where after it had continued three months, with a
blessing to himself, and all that he had, then David 2. Sam. 6.
with gladness brought it into his own city, and set it in his place in the
midst of the Tabernacle that David had pitched for it: where after he had
offered burnt offerings, and peace offerings before the Lord, he blessed the
people in the name of the Lord of hoasts.

How this care continued his rule, it may appear by the princely preparation
he made, as of the place to build upon, so of things necessary for the
building, of Algunum wood, fyr-trees, and Caedars from Tire, Sidon and Lebanon,
of gold from Ophyr, of pearl from the Isles, of silver, brass, and Iron, from
all about his kingdom, all totalled by David himself, when he bequeathed it
to God as a legacy for Solomon his son, to bestow upon the Temple. In
these words, Behold my son, according to 1. Chron. 22* 14.
my poverty, have I prepared for the house of the Lord, an hundred thousand
Talents of Gold, and a thousand Talents of Silver, and of Brass, and of Iron,
passing weight, I have also prepared Timber and Stone, and thou may provide
more thereunto; up therefore* and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

According to my poverty, that may be thought strange, I say strange, that
there should seem to be penury in such plenty, want in so much wealth, and
poverty in so great abundance: but what is Gold to Grace? I tell it from my
God, and speak it from my soul, that who will be rich in Heaven, must be a
beggar on earth, though not in reputation of this world, yet in estimation of a
better, accou^ting all things but dung for that excellent Knowledge, which
Phil. 3. 8.
is in Jesus Christ: CHRIST is a costly guest, and to give him entertainment,
will cost Kings their Crowns, Scepters, and Diadems, all to be thrown down at
the feet of Christ, Lands, lordships, and possessions to be sold, and
distributed to every man as he has need, the half we have to the poor, and
restitution fourefold of all we have wrongfully taken, which done, the
liuelyhood will be small in pede Computi, if thou bury him in thy heart, ^^^k.
19. 8*
it must be broken, and he will lie alone, and in such a Tomb (as never man
lay in but Luk, 23. 52.
himself, what should I say more? Christ his Cross, and Crown, his Faith,
and Religion, will cost you Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, Life, and all,
according to that, Lu. 14. 26*
he that loves any of these better then me, is not worthy of me.

Finally, Marie her Tears, Hayres, Perfume, Box and all must out, ere CHRIST
come in, either to lodge in her house, or lie Luke 7. 3^*
in her heart; Largiter demus Christo quae demus; Spare no cost, to spend it
upon thy Christ. Ad quid perditio haec? what needs this waste? so said Judas in
his sin, that son of perdition, Matt. 26. 8.
who purchased a field with the teward of his iniquiitie. Rather say with
David, God forbid I should build him an house of that which cost Act. 1. 1^
me nothing.

Pardon me in your patience yet a while, if I further press this point of
ple^tifull provision toward the Lord and his Religion, in these chilling and
cold days of decayed Phil. 2. 2*
Devotion; wherein both Princes and people are prodigal to spend upon
themselves, but too sparing (God wot) to maintain the religion of God, and of
his Christ, and I fear one day* Moses will stand up in judgment against us,
with a ready and a willing people, to condemn us in this, that they have been
more careful of the type, then we of the truth; they to build a Tabernacle,
then we a temple: they of the Sacrifice, then we of the Sacrament: they of the
law, then we of the Gospel: they of Moses, then we of Christ: yea they of
Agar of mount Sina, which gendereth Gal. 4. 26.
unto bondage, then we of Jerusalem, which is above, and free, and the mother
of us all. Exodus 25. 1. etc.


It is memorable, and of due regard, what the Lord commanded Moses for the
Fabric of the Tabernacle, how all such, whose hearts gave it freely, should
offer toward the building, for forced obedience fashioneth not with God, he
loves the cheerful giver, and faithful receiver. A 2. Cor. 9. 7
free offering will I give unto the Lord, and praise thy name, because it is so
comfortable, Ps. 54. 6.
so says David to his saving God.

Now in this their alacrity, cheerfulnes, Exodus 35. ^1. etc.
and diligence, they set upon the work, 1. in their joint unity without
distraction 2. in their great cost without grudging 3. in their much labor
without wearines, 4. and (...)

The people were of one heart in one work, for one God, their number was Exodus
38 26.
great, even six hundred thousand, three thousand five hundred and fifty men
that offered from tweentie years old and above, every one at the least half a
sicle of silver, the gold was much that was occupied in all the work, wrought
for the holy place, and freely offered even twenty nine talents, seven
hundred, and thirty sicles, Exodus 38* 24. 25.
according to the sicle of the sanctuary, the silver was above an hundred
talents, the brass of the offering seauentie talents, and every man which had
blue silk, purple and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats hair, and rams
skins, dyed red, and badgers skins, brought them; women brought their taches,
and earrings, and rings, and bracelets, and Jewels of gold, and offered a free
will offering Exodus 38. 8*
unto the Lord, nay they spared not their looking glasses of brass, but cast
them in for the lauer, the Princes and rulers brought Onix stones, and pearls
of price to set in Exodus 35* 26.
the Ephod* and in the breast plate, as also spice, oil and sweet perfume.

The use is good, they robbed themselves to enrich their God. Now we rob*
our God to enrich our selves.

Then Bezaliel and Aholiab left their work to tell Moses, that the people had
Exodus 36. 4. 5.
brought too much, and more then enough.

The Bezaliels of these our days may leave their preaching, and tell Moses the
people bring too little, and less then nothing. Will a man spoil his goods
(says God by the Prophet Malachie?) yet have Mal. 3. 8.
ye spoiled me, and if ye say wherein? I answer in Tithes and Offerings,
ye are religiously wise, I will press it no further, but proceed with the
rest.

And now as David's care to build God an house did begin his reign, so did it
end his life: He could not die till he had determined of that business with
Solomon his Son to perfect the work, and with the Nobles of Israel and
Judah, to be his assista^ts.

David commanded all the Princes of Israel to help Solomon his Son, saying:

Is not the Lord your God with you? and has given you rest on every side, for
he has given the 1. Chroni. ^2. 17. 18. etc.
Land into my hands, and the Land is subdued before the Lord, and before his
people, n^w-set your hearts and your souls to seek the Lord your God, and
arise, and build the Sanctuary of the LORD GOD, to bring the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord, and the vessels of GOD, into the House built for the
Name of the Lord.

See the passage of his passions, and* how he aggrauates his Afflictions, for
the Church, with his Affections toward the Church, both in his life, and at
his death: as if he should have said; Now must* I die, yet bury these my
last words in your dearest Thoughts, and think upon them, when I am gone.

I have lived to fight your battles, and have quieted the Land before your
eyes, I have been your King in war, that peace might be within your
borders, and by my hand the Lord has given you rest on every side. Now
therefore, see to his rest who has thus repaired your ruins, build God an
House, with an habitation to dwell in: Bring in the ARC of the COVENANT, and
the Vessels, cover it with a veil: Turn your tossed Tents into a* steaddie
Temple. Wander no more in the wilderness of Shinai, (which is shaken) but come
to mount Sion, and there abide by his holiness.

You may build, so may not I, for that I have been a man of blood, yet have I
1. Chron. 28. 2.
thought it a duty well beseeming my place, to leave nothing undone that may
further the work, and help my successor, look into my store when I am dead,
and see my provision that I have made for the house of my God.

I have prepared Caedars from Sidon, and Algunum wood from Tire, an hundred
thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver, of brass,
and of 1. Chron. 29. 2. etc.
Iron passing weight, I have prepared maso^s to hew, and polish the stones,
carpenters to fashion, and frame the timber, and all men expert in every work.

But what is all this wealth if it be not bestowed, and what is all this matter
if it want form? and what of all this provision if it come to no perfection?
when it falls into the work, then it is fashionable; but lying upon an heap
it has no honor.

In regard whereof the good King was careful even at his death to charge both
suruiuing Prince, and Peer by a double bond of a double duty; one of faith to
God, another of fealty toward their King, that they should be careful of the
work: Solomon to build, and his Princes to be ayding.

Whereby we are taught, if we list to learn, that as matter is nothing
without form, and provision is less, if it fall into no work, so Princes
(though potentates in themselves) yet are far unable to perform much: either
for the good of the Church, or commonwealth, but as they are aided by Peer
and people.

In that honorable expedition against Iud. ^. 1^ etc.
Iabin King of Canaan, the Princes of Isachar were with Deborah, and Isachar,
and also Barach, he was set on his feet in the valley, it was in the day of
battle, and they fought for Deborah: but the divisions of Reuben were great
thoughts of heart, and Meros with her inhabitants were cursed of GOD, for that
they came not to help the LORD, against the mighty.

I am not able to bear you my self alone, Deuteronomy. 1.
so said Moses in the day of his government, how can I alone bear your
cumbrances, and your charge, and your strife, bring you men of wisdom and
understanding, and known among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over
you, if in the day of battle, government, and grieuances, Prince and people
were aiding unto their King? why not in the days of their Afflictions, while
they build the Church, should not Peer and people help to further the work.

Surely, surely, this mutual help twixt Prince, Peer, and People, is the
maine Buttresse of States and Kingdoms. Kings may commannd, Peer, and People
must obey, and all must lay their hands to the work: if either they look to
build anewe, hold up that which is built, or repair the ruins of that which
is decayed.

What marvel then, if David for a Legacy of his love to build God an house,
laid his command upon the Princes of Israel, that they should remember him in
this, when he was gone, and look upon him in his loving Son, live to aid
him in the work he had begun, and never leave him till he perfected the
work, obliged thereunto by double band of a double debte, one to God, whose
work it was, another to the King, whose Subjects they were: Not doubting but
their Religious love to the King of Heaven, and like loyalty to their King on
earth, would tie them by sacred vow and Oath to God, as it had done him, never
to take good rest, or sweet repose till they had built God an house, an
habitatio^ to dwell in.

And so for Conclusion to you, mighty Kings and Potentates of the world,
search the sacred Register, and ye shall never rue the reading, how David,
with the care of Gods house, and Religion, he began his days, continued his
Reign, and honored his death. He fought for it, he prayed for it, he
prepared for it, he cast for it all the days of his life, and he cared for
it at the hour of his death, deeming it a dismal dissolution, for a King to
pass out of this world without an holy resolution of a better, together, with
pain and passion of the posterity, how to build God, his Christ, and Church
in their dearest Thoughts.

But it may be demanded, where is Abiathar, in all this business? Where are
the Priests and Levites, and why do they neither build nor prepare for the
work; Is the King afflicted, and are they without passion? does the King take
no rest, and are they at ease in Sion? surely it seemed expedient there should
be neither mention, nor memory made of them in this place, least happily they
might seem to take precedencie from Princes in manageing the affairs of the
Church, practice they may in it, but neither may they prepare with David, build
with Solomon, pray, sing, and sacrifice they may; order they may not, for the
Corites must be ordered by David, preach they may, rule they may Pope with
prince has neither pre ^edency nor parity.
not, but as they are subordinate, for government is for the King: convince
they may, convent they may not, processes are for Princes. In a word, the day
of Dedication is for Solomon, counsels, proclamations, punishment of
delinquents all, (except the censure of excommunication) are for Kings, and
except they be subordinate, and under them they have no power in government,
well may they bear the arc, but they may not command it from Abinadabs house,
or transport it but ^. Sam. 6. ^3.
as the King will.

The doctrine is good to pull down the pride of popish primacie, advancing 2.
These. 2 4.
it self above that is called God, or that is worshipped, robbing GOD of his
honor, and Kings of their homage, but I know you will say as the wicked did
in the days of Malachy: wherein have we robbed thee, O GOD? wherein have we
robbed you O Kings? I answer in taking from the LORD his own ordinance, and
in taking from Kings their lawful authority, GOD has ordained the King as
supreme both in Church and commonwealth, ye have limited his power in civil
obedience, ye have taken away his power in ecclesiastical jurisdiction, ye
say crowns, and kingdoms are yours to dispose, and Church government is a
part of Peter's patrimony, but I say no: Pasce, John 21. 15. 16. etc
pasce, pasce, is his, and your portion, and whatsoever is more then this
comes of evil.

It is evil to feed upon the flesh of Kings, and to tread upon the necks
of Emperors, it is evil to demolishe states, and to confound order, it is
evil to take to your selves upon a forged Donation, the Imperial City of
Rome, the Palace of Lateran, the Kingdom of Sicily, Apulia, and Capua, the
Dukedom of Ferraria, Canellam, and Commodam, with Matilda her portion.

It is evil to take to your selves, and tie to your gyrdle, all the keys of
Heaven, Earth, and Hell.

Was there ever Pride like this? was there ever Avarice like this? Was there
ever Blasphemy like this? To take glory from God, homage from Princes, honor
from Angels, as more excellent then they, in jurisdiction, administration,
knowledge, and reward. For so says Antonius. Intertia part summ^ maiorit,
lib. ter. Did. 19.


In brief, was there ever Creature subject to no power? no, not to himself?
As Biel says, if he list to appeal from himself. O heavens be astonished,
and thou earth tremble at this tyranny.

So auerse from God, and so opposite to the mildness of Christ, as he may
well be called that Antichrist, and man of Rome, the ruin of all Religion. For
Christ was poor, he is rich, Christ was Crowned with gold, and Diamonds.
Christ was lowely, riding upon an Ass. He exalted upon the shoulders of men.
Christ his Kingdom not of this world, his altogether of this world, both in
power and pomp.

In a word, Christ gave all, he takes all, and gives nothing, unless it
be, in giving that, which is not his own: As Absolution from sins, Pardon
from pain, Kingdoms from Princes, as he did this kingdom of England.

But all the cunning is in catching, and in the mean time, we bless our God
in heaven, and leave this earthly God, to sport himself, with his usurped
power, in giving Pardon to those that need it not, Blessing to those that
desire it not, Cursing to those that care not for it, and Crowns, to such as
by the grace of God, shall never wear them.

What should I say more, but make way to the rest? and assure you of this, That
this mystery of iniquity, of Popes power over Kings, was first revealed, and
broken forth then, when Boniface the third obtained of Phocas, to be called
universal Bishop, and since that time.

Perijt virtus Imperatorum, and Pietas Pontificum. The Emperors waxed weak,
and the Bishops wicked, whereas before they were of a milder spirit, molded to
greater obedience, more subject to their Sovereign, and yielding to Princes
that which was their due.

You are religiously wise, and by this little which I have said you have seen
enough, I will therefore say no more but rest my self, and I hope you upon
this loyal resolution, that David is set before al in the Genealogy of
Christ, for that the dignity of a Matthew. 1. 1.
King is chief and greatest in power, so great in care, not as a private man,
but as a public Magistrate to answer for the sins of many and the good of
all, ordained of God to be their King, and as Cyrill says, the knitting
together or Iuncture of godliness in the prosperity of his people.

Which to effect as you have heard, was David's care both in his life and at his
death, leaving it as a legacy to Solomon his son, and success together with
his Pears, and Princes that as Simon in the Machabees ^. Match. ^6. 2. etc.
did for fighting, so should they for building, when calling his sons Judas
and John he said with good courage now I am old and ye are of a sufficient
age, be ye therefore in stead of me, and go forth and fight for your nation,
and the help of the heavens be with you. So David, go forth and build for your
God, and the help of heaven be with you.

As and if he should say, yet further, I am wearied with wars abroad, and
worn with mine afflictions at home, I am old, weak and withered, but ye are
young, strong and flourishing, out of my poverty I have afforded you some
store, let it be speedily bestowed upon the work, and build for your nation,
be ye therefore in stead of me, and the help of heaven be with you.

And now me thinks it is with me as it Abacuck. 2. 2.
was with the Prophet Abacuck when the Lord answered him, and said write the
vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it, for
the vision is for an appointed time, and now is the time, at last it shall
speak, and now it speaks.

Parallel the passions of Princes, Queen Elizabeth, with King David's in their
grieuances, for the maintenance of the religion of their God, and see whether
our English Judah have not as great cause to pray as ever Isreal's Judah had,
Lord remember Elizabeth in all her afflictions.

Afflictions, I say afflictions before her reign, and since her reign
piercing her sacred breast, like a continual Archers shot, whose arrows are
tipped with gall and sorrow, and now be strong my spirit, and fly out my voice
to compare them in their afflictions.

David was the least and last of his fathers 1. Sam. 16 11. Psalm. 129. Psalm.
69. 8. 1. Sam. 17 28. 1. Sam. 18. 1. Sam. 20 1. 1. Sam. 22* 9.
house, so was Elizabeth of her fathers family.

David persecuted from his youth, so was Elizabeth.

David contemned of his brethren, Elizabeth of her sister, Saul a King
persecuted David, Marie a Queen was wroth with Elizabeth.

David an exile in the holds of Engeddi, she close prisoner in the holds of
Wodstocke.

Doeg reviled David unto Saul, so did Gardener Elizabeth unto Mary,

David declared his innocence unto 1. Sam. 24 4.
Saul, so did Elizabeth unto her sister, Much was suspected by David which they
laid unto his charge, things which he never Psa. 35. 11 12.
thought, and they ever failed in the proof.

So was it with Elizabeth, her hand yet witnesses to the innocence of her
soul, which she left as a constat of her loyal heart, in these lines, and
letters never to be blotted out, Much suspected by me: nothing proved can be,
quoth Elizabeth prisoner.

Saul in his spirit of fury purposed to 1. Sam. 18. 10. 11.
have killed David playing upon his harp.

Winchester in his spirit of popery purposed to have murdered Elizabeth at
her devotions by Paul Penny and James Basset.

David relieved and pitied by Achish King 1. Sam. 27. 1.
of Gath; a stranger to his person, and an enemy to his religion.

Elizabeth pitied by Phillip of Spain, a friend to her person, yet no friend
to her profession, let the bed curtains, and arrasse witness, Philips
parlience with the Queen for Elizabeth's preservation.

David was spoiled of his wives by the 1. Sam. 30 5. 6.
Amalekites at Ziglack Lady Elizabeth robbed of her sworn servants at the
Tower of London, when left alone, and forsaken of all, she went on wearily
with a woeful heart, and said in the silence of her soul. Tanquam Ouis, as a
sheep to the slaughter, so am I sent.

David had many Doegs in Court, and 1. Sam. 22 9. 1. Sam. 25 3. 1. Sam. 20 11.
etc.
Nabals in the country, to wrong him with the King, and pinch him in his
provision, and not a friend durst speak for him but Jonathan, and he aloof
with arrows, when he saw the Kings wrath implacable, she poor Lady had
many Stories in Court to wrong her with the Queen* and to persuade her to
strike at the root, and the branches would wither, many Nabals in country, who
pined at her provision, and not at Jonathan to speak or shoute for her
safety, for that the Queens heart was implacable.

But see a wonderful providence of God in her preservation, Gardener hoped to
live to see her dead, but she has lived to see him buried, his flesh turned
into dust, and his bones to rottennes. Story repented that he had not stroke at
the root: whilst he cut off the branches* ^u^ God has so ordained that the
root should live, to ha^g up that blasted bow. The time was when a poor child
four years old might not bring her a nosegay without suspicion, and churlish
check of her cruel keeper, but now God has so ordained, as both young and
old, high and low, Rich and poor, do hang up a garland in her praise, with a
prayer to his providence, for her preservation, ever to live, with this
resounding Echo, live, live,

The time was, when passing a prisoner from Windsor to Woodstocke, the poor
people joy full of her presence, ra^g the bells in a village or two, whereat her
keeper raged, and railed upon them as Rebels, clapped the Ringers in the stocks,
and so stayed the bells, but now Benefielde has his passing peale, and to God
be the praise, I hope there is not a bell in England that rings not, a tongue
in England that prays not, an heart in England that ioyeth not in, and for the
life of their sovereign; if any Meroits there be, who will not do as we do,
let the curse of Judge. 5. ^^
Meros light upon them, for that they come not to help the Lord, against the
mighty, and let the Israel of God ^ay Amen.

To pass by her afflictions, sithenc^ her reign I may not, even since she
came to the royal diadem of her crown, and dignity no sooner set upon her
head, but the care of her people was in her heart pressing out this passionate
speech. I care not for my self, my life is not dear unto me, they which
might know what cares I bear with this burden, would never think I take no
great joy in wearing the Crown.

Balance them with David's afflictions, and if ye be not partial of her
perils, you shall find them such as may pierce your hearts to provoke your
speech, and pray, Lord remember Elizabeth in all her afflictions ^. Sam. 5. 17.
and 8. 1
upon David's entrance, the Philistines were against him, the Aramites against
him, Edom and Ammon with the Moabites, and Hagarens, the Grecians,
Sirogrecians, these are foreign foes, many in number, mighty in power,
malicious in heart, bloody in hand and practices, how many and mighty were they
who cast their heads Psalm. 83. 6. 7.
together with one consent, and as it is in the Psalm, were confederate, these
were enemies of state, foreign and abroad.

And were they less dangerous at home. 2. Sam. 15 1. 2. Sam. 20 1. 2. Sam. 6.
16. 2. Sam. 16 5. 2. Sam. 16 21. 2. Sam. 3. 27. 39.
Absolon his own son, Absolon by name, the fathers peace, became the fathers
bane, and sought his death, who gave him life. Seba the son of Bechry a man
of Gemini with his wicked root, disclaimed that he had any part in the son
of Iesse, Michol mocked him, and despised his devotions. Shemey curses,
Achitophel plotteth, Abner dies, and the sons of Zerniah are too hard for
David.

Foreign power were against our Elizabeth, and are confederate; Balaam, and
Balack, Turk, and Pope, with all their united forces, and for our home
treasons they are greater then they can be expressed with tears, they break
the heart, ere they can bedewe the cheeks; mighty Absolons, and base borne
Sebaes, many Achito^hels, I mean plotting Jesuits, and Seminaries, with their
whining Cardinal Allen, in their bloody designs, have disclaimed their
Elizabeth, Shemey curses, Pope Pius is become Impious, and the curse is
turned upon himself, for Elizabeth lives a blessed Prince, and he is dead a
cursed Pope, Lord remember Elizabeth, etc.

Nay more, to make full the measure of her afflictions, the Michols of this land
are many, 2. Sam. 6 16.
who disdain our David, dancing before the Arc, scorn her devotions, and
mock her religion, tra^ple under foot the blood of the covenant as an unholy
thing, Heb. 10. 29.
and is not this an affliction? yes no doubt, and an afflicting affliction, and
therefore we had need to pray, Lord remember Elizab: etc.

Lastly our sins, even our loud crying sins, hazard the life of our
Prince, our unthankfulness to God for her, our cold devotion, and chilling
zeal, being fallen Revel. 1. 4
from our first love, our neglect of the word, Sacraments, and Sabaoths, our
general Apostasy from the Faith, our lack of love, our great oppression, and
gnawing usury, our extrauagant lusts of the flesh, our excessive Pride, and
hellish heat of Ambition, (I say) any of these hazard a Prince, all these
together, shake the State, and therefore we had need to pray, Lord remember
Elizabeth, etc.

In tender of whose deliverance, long life, and happy reign, there remains
a duty to be performed, this day, on our behalf, eue^ with our good God, to
plead her cause, and pray for her person, Lux haec venerabilis Anglis. This day
is dear to England, and of all the mercies of our GOD, registered in the
Calendar of his Love, next to that of his Son CHRIST, Albo signanda lapillo,
to be of blessed memory, wherein we have found to our unspeakable joy, and
do feel to the gladness of our hearts, that the people that walked in
darkness, have Esaias. 9. 23
seen a great Light, and we that erst dwelt in the Land of the shadow of
death, I mean of popery, and gross Idolatry, upon us has this Light
shined, God in mercy, has increased our joy in the life, light, and
government of our dread sovereign, in whose fun-shine now we walk, and pray
that her day may ever dawne.

The allusion is good: from our Christ* to our Queen, for by him and her, the
yoke of our burden, the staff of our shoulder, and the rod of our
oppressor* has been broken, as in the day of Midian, Esaias. 9. 47
and surely till these her Al^ion days, every battle of the warrier has bin
with noise, Psalm. 72. 6
and tumbling of garments in blood, but hers has been in softnes, and in
silence like a shower of Rain upon a fleece of wool, Esaias. 8* ^*
like unto Siloah, that runs softly by Sion, like unto the battle of
Salmos, has fought our Salem Queen, Sine Sudore, and sanguine, without sweat
or blood, and like her Christ, patiendo potius quam agendo auxit imperium, her
conquest has been without blood, or broyle, rather by sufferance, and
succouring of others at home, then by seasures abroad has she enlarged the
bonds of her Empire.

And here seasonably, and for conclusion 1. Sam. 17 45. etc.
of all, spare me in a word to Parallel the two Princes, as in their
afflictions, so in success of blessings, to make the yoke of their heavy
government more supportable.

David killed Goliath in his weak strength, with prayer in his mouth, and a
peeble stone in his hand; he stroke him on the forehead, for that he did
confront his God, Etibi percutitur vbi deerat Christus. There he felled him,
where Christ was failing. Queen Elizabeth in her weak, and femimine sex, to
give God the glory, has subdued that great Giant at Gath, I mean that man of
Rome, with the sweet perfume of prayer in her mouth, and the power of the word
of God in her blessed hand, a stone hewn out of the mountain without hands,
as Daniel says, dashing in pieces Dan. 2. 45.
all the marbles of this world, in the spirit and speech of David has been
her royal martch. Thou come to me with a sword, with a spear, and with a
shield, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, that God of the
Host of Israel, whom thou have railed upon, this day shall the Lord close thee
in my hand, that all 1. Sam* ^ 45. 4. 6. 2. Sam. ^
the world may know that england has a God

David brought the Arc into his City by the hands of the Levites. So does
Queen Elizabeth the Religion of her Christ, into the bowels of al her
kingdoms, by a beautiful 2. Sam. ^ 10. 11. ^^
ministry. David dedicated the vessels gotten of the Gentiles to the use of
the temple, so does she the spoils of the Papists to the maintenance of the
Church, David put Garrisons in Edom, and made Siria tributary, and the Lord kept
David whithersoeuer 2. Sam. 8. 14.
he went.

Ireland, France, and Flaunders have bin guarded with her Garrisons, paid her
tribute, and done her homage by land, and by* sea^, have her colors displayed
in their defense to keep them from the spoil of Popery, David with these
heavenly had the* success of earthly blessings, for he was rich and his
kingdom was populous, he was needing to none, and yet most of his
neighbour-nations had need of him.

Queen Elizabeth is blessed of God in her bounty toward all her shipping,
shot, men, and munition are a wall of defense to her self, a guard of comfort
to her neighbour-bordering friends, and a terror to her frowning enemies.

What should I say more, David is dilectus domini, the beloved of God, she is
Elizabeth Gods rest, whose quiet rule and peaceable government in and for her
Christ is to all her loving and loyal subjects as it were a retyring camp
after the day of battle. ^. King. 2. ^1.


Finally David's reign was with the longest, and near the highest of his
rank, the days of our Elizabeth are fair, and full, and the Lord lengthen
them as the days of Joshua, which had the fairest creatures at command, till
the battle was ended, and the fight finished, and thou GOD of time and of all
eternity so determine her days as may be most to thy glory, best for the
poor Church, for Englands good, and the salvation of her princely soul. Amen,
Amen, Deuteronomy. 33. verse. 26.
and the help of heaven be with her.

THE SECOND Sermon.
IOSVA 10. 12. Then spoke Joshua unto the Lord, in the day when the Lord gave
the Amorites before the children of Israel, and said in the sight of Israel,
Sun stand thou in Gibeon, and thou Moon, in the valley of Aialon.
TWo mighty nations did (...).
contend in the womb of Rebecca, the one in Esau, the other in Jacob, but by
the providence of God the younger prevailed against the elder, and gained the
birthright with the blessing.

Such woeful contentions have ever bin in the womb of the Church, betwixt the
Israel of God, and Esau his brood, and pro^eni^, (...) 29.
yet has not the Lord failed in mercy to deliver his Turtle-doue from the
violence of the assaulter.

As we here find in Joshua, and feel in our joyful experience this day: who
maugre the spite of Esau, Ismael, and all the Amorites of our State, Church,
and Kingdom has graced our nation with a birthright, and a blessing, a
birthright in our Christ, a blessing in our Prince, both such as Esau with
Heb. 12. 17.
all his Romish Edomites shall never obtain at Isaacks hands, though he beg
and seek it with plaints and tears.

For so good a God, so gracious a Prince, so happy and desired a peace, so
great plenty, with such abundance of all things, and a time of continuance, so
long and so bright, of all Gods blessings, both heavenly and earthly is not for
Moab, Ammon, or Heb. 12. 22. etc.
mount Seir, but for the hill of Gods holiness, Israel, England, and mount
Sion.

Nor do I doubt, but this blessed day will yet dawn and lengthen like the day
of Joshua, Gods mercies will yet abound, his graces flow over, the enemies of
our State be discomfited, and the help of heaven shall prosper our Prince* ^^
it did Joshua: if we practice and pray for her preservation. Yea the Lord shall
Esaias 28. ^1.
stand for England, as he did for Israel in mount Perazim, he shall be wrath
as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and
bring to pass his act, his strange act, even to match the power of
Elizabeth, with the might of Joshua, her prowess, with his puissance, a maiden
Queen, with a manly king, to deliver his Church from the disastrous designs
of Adoni-zedeck and all his Romish retinue.

And first of Joshua, as I am guided by my text, whose puissance was such as

First prevailed with God. 1


Secondly, with his fairest creatures. 2


And lastly, with his greatest enemies. 3


He prevailed with God in the highest heavens.

He prevailed with his creatures, in the firmament of his power.

He prevailed against his enemies in the vaste valley of Aialon.

Tendit ad ardua virtus. There was never King adventured upon greater dangers,
the Heb. 12.
God with whom he dealt was a consuming fire.

The creatures he encountered before that time were never backed, and the
enemies be subdued, were five mighty Kings of the Amorites, with all their
retinue, like grasse-hoppers upon the ground for multitude, and thus with his
heroical spirit, as Siracides says, he rushed in upon the nations in
battle, and in going down of Betheron Eccles. 4^ 6.
he destroyed the adversaries, that they might know his weapons, and that he
fought in the sight of the Lord that gave him might, and in the shine of the
Sun that gave him light, entreating the one, and commanding the other to be
propitious.

Now for the weapons of this his warfare 2. Cor. ^^ 4. 5. etc.
(as you here see) they were not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty in
operation to cast down holds, for he sent to God the arrowe of his deliverance
which was his prayer when he said, Then spoke Joshua unto the Lord, he sacked
both Sun and Moon with the word of his command, when he said. Sun, stay
thou in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Aialon, and then he drew out
his sword to take vengeance of his enemies that rose up against him, when he
set Israel in their possessions.

Thus honorable Joshua, managed the battle like renowned David, when he
marshalled the field, and said. Let the praise of God Psalm. 149. 6.
be in your mouths* and a sharp two edged sword in your hands to be avenged
of the heathen, and to rebuke the people.

Jacob wept and prayed, and found God at Ose. 12. 4.
Bethel, Joshua fought and prayed, and found God at Gibeon, the Sun and Moon
obeyed the word of Joshua, because the God of heaven heard the prayer of Joshua,
O piercing word and powerful prayer, so to prevail, when all other succors
failed, for the day was welneare spent, the battle was scarce begun, the
passages were dangerous, dark night approached, Israel knew no way; the
Amorites were acquainted with every winding, bogges, bushes, and shady groves,
rocks, hills, and derne dales, might have broken the battle, and disordered
the camp, in the darkness, and silence of the night, if God had not lengthened
the day, and therefore Joshua his issue was but one, and it was a strange one, to
dismiss the night and bid it be gone, to stay the passage of the Sun, to bid
it stand, and spare no light, till the fight were finished, that God and Israel
might have the honor of the day, by that most miraculous and heavenly station.
Now tell me who was there before him, like to him that thus fought the battles
of the Lord, for the Joshua 10. 14.
Sun stood still at his command, and one day was as long as two.

Here to determine the certain hours of that day, and minutes of that
heavenly station I dare not, for that the Scripture seems silent of that
secret, although the authors of the Hebrewe Homilies induced with sharp and
subtle reasons have written of threescore and six hours standing, Midra^
Joshua.
others of a natural day, which is four and twenty hours, others of an
artificial, or diurnall day which is twelve hours, mentioned by our Savior
Christ, John. 11. 9*
when he said, are there not twelve hours in the day? if a man walk in the
day he stumbleth not, etc.

But in answer to all: it shall be sufficient for us to know that the Sun
stirred not, till the battle was ended, and Israel had avenged himself upon
the heathen, the Lord was merciful to give them light, that they might walk
and fight in the day, and not stumble by night in the desert; one day was as
long as two, and it is sufficient for us to know that such a day did never
dawne, such a battle was never fought, that there was never day like that
before it, nor after it* ^herein the Lord heard the voice of a man, and so
fought for Israel.

And here see the power of prayer, he heard the voice of a man, and fought for
Israel, but the Lord fought not, while Joshua prayed not, nor was it the voice
of an Angel, but the voice of a man that prevailed with God for Israel, nor
was it any volly of shot, no spear or pike, no warlicke stratagem, horse, or
sword, could pierce the enemy, till the voice of Joshua had pierced the
heavens, that shoot of prayer that shiuered Joshua 6. 20.
the walls of Jericho, amazed the hearts of the Amorites, weakened their
hands, and subdued their power in the valley of Aialon, Joshua was never so
puissant in his fight, as in his prayer, for in his fight he prevailed but with
men, but in his prayer he prevailed with God, his faith, his prayer, and his
love conquered him that comandeth all, according to that Solus amor triumphat a
Deo, only love conquereth God.

God by the Prophet shows us a Sentinel set upon the walls of Jerusalem, a
watchman in his tower, that wardeth and warns only by his prayer, which all
the day and all the night continually should not cease, keep silence, or give
God any rest, till he Esaias. 62. 6. 7.
should repair, and set up Jerusalem, the praise of the world. Its true, Its
true Orationes and Lachrimae sunt arma Ecclesiae, prayers and tears are church
weapons, Oration deum lenit, lachrima cogit; haec vngit, illa pungit, prayer
softeneth tears in force, this melts, that pearceth the sweet soul of thy
Savior to pity thy plaints, in the days of thine affliction as in the day
of Joshua.

And hereby the example of Joshua, ye that are potentates of the world, mighty
men, and Princes of the people, spare me a little to provoke your prayer as
more prevailing with God: by privilege of your spirits, then others of lower
rank, Are the Amorites abroad? are your states endangered? is the Church
grieved? and are your souls afflicted for your selves, and for your people? ye
may be bold with God for ye have precedencie, as Joshua here had even by the
power of your prayer, to make him propitious. Spare me while I spare no
Creature, in Heaven, Earth, or Hell, privileged Exodus 14. 1, Number. 20. 1.
from the power of your prayer, by which they are enforced to yield to the
necessity of the Saints. Moses prayed, prevailed with God, and had precedencie
of the people, when he divided the red Sea, and put back Iordane, when he
stroke the Rock, and enforced soft, and sweet water to gush out.

In the height of his hands was the health of Israel, for when they were lifted
up, Amalek Exodus 17. 11. 12.
fell, but when they shrunk, Israe fainted, when Eliah prayed, the Heavens
were as brass, and when he prayed again, the Clouds dropped down Fatnes,
Lyous Iam. 5. 17
mouths were stopped at the prayer of Daniel, and the childrens prayer beatte
Dan. 6. 22
back the Flame.

By the wrestling of prayer, the Angel Dan. 3. 23
yielded: and at the command of prayer, Devils were daunted. Luke 10. 17.


What should I say more? By the power of prayer, Sheol is shaken, Hell is in
horror, sickness cease, years are added, wind and Seas obey. Mark. 4. 41.


Such privilege prayer has, especially in Men of might, Princes,
Patriarchs, and Prophets, which made the Israel of God, when careful of their
king, to pray that the Lord would be attent unto his proper prayer, as more
prevailing then theirs, when they said, The Lord hear thee in the day of
Psalm. 21. ^
Trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob defend thee; being well assured of
this, that the prayers of godly Princes are, and ever have been powerful with
God, and profitable for his people. Solomon prayed, and the Temple 1. King. 8*
10. etc.
was filled with the Cloud, and the glory of the Lord. David prayed, and
doubly prevailed with God: First, that himself 2. Sam. ^* 17. 17.
might fall into the hands of God, rather then of men: Secondly, that the
people might be spared, and himself plagued.

Ezechia prayed, and God restored him 2. Kings. 20. 2.
to health, with increase of days, even fifteen year of the surplusage of
his love, assured unto him, by the shadow of Ahaz his dyall, upon the wall,
brought back ten degrees, Esai. 38. 1.
to make good the Lords promise upon his prayer. And why might not Iosuah, a
prince and Savior of his people, by prayer to God, command the creature, even
the fair Fabric of Sun and Moon to none no more till Israel were avenged
upon their enemies?

Pardon me in your patience a while, If to parallel these Princes prayers, in
their precedencie with God, I leave not out our own Princes at home, the
perfume of whose prayers are yet sweet in this our English Eden, and like the
smell of a field Genesis 27. 27.
which the Lord has blessed, that powerful prayer of Edward the sixth made at
his death and in the hour of his dissolution shall never die while the state
stands Holinshed in Chron.
but ever be blessed by it, O my God defend this Realm from papistry, and
maintain thy true religion, that I and thy people may praise thy holy name:
and therewith all he said, I am faint Lord have mercy upon me and take my
spirit.

Let me never live to pray more, or pray to live longer, if I be not persuaded
in my soul, and from my God that even yet the blessing of that prayer is upon
this people, as a wall of brass, to beat back popery as Iosuas day
lengthened til the Amorites were vanquished, and as pure mirrhe dropping still
upon the bars and handles of our Cant. 5. 5.
doors to sweeten England in the maintenance of true religion and piety.

Again at the birth and baptism of his Hollinshead in Chronic.
dear sister Queen Elizabeth: our dread Sovereign who now lives, and long
may we say Live, live, the King of Herauldes, when the christening and
ceremonies were ended, proclaimed this prayer, and with what effect judge ye.

God of his infinite goodness send prosperous life, and long, to the high and
mighty Princess of England Elizabeth.

Surely, surely, a Prince so high in the favor of God, and so mighty with
men, so blessed with days, and prosperous in her reign, so beloved at home,
and so dread abroad, so absolute for blessings, and so admired for government
was never seen in England. Herald thy prayer was powerful and prevailed with
God, for thy proclamation has wrought heaven and filled the earth with the
cloud, and glory of her happy reign. I might here speak to make good the
doctrine I aim at of that disastrous disease of our nation, the Kings evil,
cured by no hand, but of the Lords anointed, upon whose sacred touch and
prayer, thousands within the kingdom have been delivered from that woeful
malady the humor being beaten back, the veins purged, and the canker
killed, when neither surgions skill, nor Physicions cunning could help, the^
had the Prince precedencie by prayer, Null^s adhibitis pharmacis to relieve the
patient, it may be the cause is secret in nature but not in grace, which
usually helps when all other succors fail.

And thus you see: how Princes prayers, and pleadings with God have much
prevailed, Romans 8. 23
being graced with faith, not a creature of God but it stands at their check,
if they grieve, the creatures groan after a deliverance, God in heaven, and
his Gods on earth do sympathise, they soar high who Numb. 27. 16.
came from an high, and their generous spirits beg much at the hands of the
Lord God of spirits, there was never yet any truly noble, or of an honorable
descent, but from an heavenly asce^t. Its not your royal blood, but the honor
of your God that makes you noble: your greatness is in the breath of his being
according to that, Nemo vir magnus vnqua^ extitit sine diuino aliquo afflatu
and numine, there was never yet any great man molded on earth, but had his
mind inspired with some divine influence from heaven.

And now from the combat Joshua had with his God by prayer, come we to the
command he had over the creature by the word, wherein spare me a while to
speak, and it shall be as I hope a seasonable instruction lessoning us how to
demean our selves toward God, as the whole host of his creatures may stand
either for us, if we do well, or against us, if we do evil, the lesson is
short and soon taken out.

For if we be at enmity with God, then all his creatures will be at enmity
with us, The earth will swallow us, the water will drown us, the air will
infect us, and the fire will consume us, Yea the basest creatures upon the
earth will bandie our destruction, worms will eat our entrals, Lice will
consume our fair flesh, flies will fright us, and frogs will leap into our
Kings chambers, monstrous visions will trouble us, and make us swoone, as
though our own souls should Wisdom. 17. 9. 10. etc.
betray us, the darkness of the night will be intolerable, and the thoughts of
the grave insupportable, What should I say more? the whistling of the winds,
chierping of birds, amongst the thick branches, the water falls, the skipping
and roaring of wild beasts, with the sound that answers again in the hollow
mountains, these fearful things (as Solomon says) will make us appalled for
the less, that the hope is whithin, the more is our torment without.

Nay which is more then all I have said, and I yearne to speak it, if we be at
enmity with God, his word, and Sacraments, will be our enemies, the law will
fright us, and the Gospel will flatter us to our destruction, the blessed
Sacraments, seals of our assurance will rub off, if irreverently we rub
upon him, Psalms, Hymns and spiritual songs will turn to doleful ditties,
and our melancholy will mar our melody, Songs of Sion to us will be but
songs of sorrow with a woe and welladaie, that ever we were at enmity with our
God and Christ.

But e regione altera, if we be in amity, and friends with God, as Joshua was,
then all his creatures will fawn upon us, the earth will support us, and the
air will cheer us, the water will cool us, and the fire will comfort us, our
meat will feed us, and our clothes will warm us, our houses will shroude us,
and our beds will ease us, yea and God will make our greatest enemies, either
our friends or our footestoole.

What should I say more? if God be thy friend, the beast that bears thee, will
bid thee beware as he did Balaam, and Ionathans arrow will bid thee be gone as
he did David, thy weak sling and peeble stone shall quell a Giant, and with
the iawe bone of an ass thou shall kill a thousand, Stars shall fight for
thee as they did for Deborah, and the river Kison shall sweep them away.
Ravens shall feed thee as they did the Prophet, and the Cock shall crow thee
to repentance as he did Peter.

Nay if thou be in amity with God, the night will be short and thy sleep
sweet, the grave will be to thee as a bed of down, there to rest till the day
of thy resurrection, word, Sacraments and Sabaothes will be thy solace, till
thou come to that Sabbath of rest, thy prayers will sent sweet as perfume, and
thy praises sound in thy soul like harmony of the heavens.

In a word, and so to conclude with my text, and close with your religious
ears, and hearts, ye may not marvel if Joshua having God his friend, had also
the command of his fairest creatures, and bad them stand still who never stood
before, for the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent.
Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly
that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for three years, and
six months, and he prayed again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.

The use is good and much to our comfort, if we be fervent in prayer, for we
have a greater command then either Joshua or Elias had, they commanded but the
creatures, we command the creator, even the Lords Christ, we bring him down,
we must make him ours, with all the benefits of his passion even remission of
sins, and everlasting life to the which God bring us.

And let this suffice to satisfy you of Joshua his great puisance, as
prevailing with God by prayer, and with his creatures by command. All the Host
of heaven, earth and hell being (as I have told you) man's Hosts from the Lord
of Hoasts, whilst we be friends with God, and fetch them off by faith, either
to defend our selves, or offend our enemies in the day of battle, otherwise if
we be at enmity with God, as likewise I have said the basest of his creatures,
as lice, flies and frogs are big enough Exodus 8. 3. etc.
to beat down Pharao in his pride, or the greatest monarke in this world in
his presumption against the Lord.

And now come we from the prayer and word of Joshua, to the arm and sword of
Joshua, which likewise prevailed against the Joshua. 10. 19. etc.
five Kings of the Amorites, and subdued them in the valley of Aialon.

Where first observe, that he did not neglect the means because of the
miracles, or left to fight on earth because the son stood still in heaven,
but he whetted his Deuteronomy. 3^. 41.
sword upon the promise of his God, and used but the creature as a glorious
light only to give him light, till the battle was ended, to teach us that
though it please almighty God often whe^the fight is no less dangerous then
desperate to relieve us by miracle, yet may we not cast off the means.

For when David (that sweet singer of 2. Sam. 23 1. Psalm. 147. 12. etc.
Israel) would stir up Jerusalem to praise the Lord for the blessings of the
land amongst many blessings there mentioned, first in the rank he marshals
this. He has made the bars of thy gates strong, he does not say, he has
made thee strong, but he has made sure the bars of thy gates. We are his,
but the bars are ours, nor may we so depend upon the help of our God, as we
may cast away the means of our defense, for Non aufert portas diuina
prouidentia, sed corroborat, the Lords providence takes away no gates, but
makes them strong, the gates are ours, but the providence is his. He takes
away no Kings, no garrisons, no gold, no ships, no shot, no men, or
munition, all these are bars of our defense, and they are ours, but the
providence is his: he takes away no laws, no liberties, no customs, no toll,
or tribute, all these are bars, and all are ours, but the providence is his,
he takes away no counsel of state, no nobility, no gentry or commons of the
land, but he makes them all sure bars of thy gates O England, and these are
ours, but the providence is his.

In fine, and for conclusion of all, England has her bars of iron, and gates
of brass, and her wall is impregnable, environed with rocks, shelues and seas,
and by them we are fortified Ad miraculum vsque: yet what of all this, if we
fall from God and fail of his providence?

Surely all is nothing, and God by the Na^m. ^ 8. 9. etc.
Prophet will correct our security as he did Nineveh, when he said, Art thou
better then Alexandria the great, which was full of people; that lay in the
rivers, and had the waters round about her, whose ditch was the sea, and had
her walls from sea to sea, Aethiopia and Egypt were her strength, Put and
Lubyn were her helpers, yet was she carried away, and went into Captivity, her
young children were dashed in pieces at the head of all the streets, and they
cast lots for her noble men, and all her mighty men were bound in chains.

So then sin within, cries vengeance Genesis 1^ 20. etc.
without, and there is no providence of God either can or will prevent deserved
judgments, If our bars be never so strong, wickedness will burst them. Its
not our situation in the seaes, nor association with Put and Lubin, the
greatest of our neighbor kingdoms can keep us from captivity, if either we
presume upon our might, or neglect the means of our salvation, by the word, or
preservation by the sword. Joshua was a Savior of his people, and by means of
both, he wrought their deliverance, and in the right of both he held his
inheritance.

But it may be demanded what it was that put such spirit into Joshua, and made
him to adventure upon all these so great difficulties, surely search and you
shall find that the match that kindled the fire burned in the breast of Joshua,
and inflamed his royal heart with courage to contend with God his fairest
creatures, and cruel Kings, was the promise and assurance God gave him of the
victory, as you may see in the precedent verses of my text, when the Lord said
unto Joshua: fear them not, for I have given them into Verse. 44. ^^^se. 8.
thine hand. None of them shall stand against thee.

Now in this promise was the might of his power, his prowess, and all his
puisance, his thought of the promise so elevated his soul above, with
assurance of deliverance, that he never doubted danger below, it may be he
thought upon the promise that made the barren womb Genesis 17. 15. etc.
of Sarah fruitful, it may be he thought upon the promise God made to Jacob
in his dangerous peregrination to Bethel, Ero tecum. It may be he thought
upon Genesis 28. 15.
the promise of Isreal's deliverance out of Aegipt: and how the Lord made it
good with an high and mighty hand, he knew Exodus 3. 20.
that arm was not weakened, nor his hand shortened, nor his power limited to
bind the heavens to obey his will, and make Esaias. 59.
good his promise of Isreal's safety, and the Amorites confusion.

Thus armed with the promise, he fell upon the enemy pell mell, he feared
neither might, nor multitude, he slew them with a great slaughter at Gideon,
and chased them a long the way that goes to Beth horon, he smote then to
Azecha and to Machedah, but see upon the sudden, how the spirits of the
mighty were daunted, how the army was discomfited, and Israel endaungered,
their glorious day begun to be darkened with a gloomie night, and when the
fight was at the fairest, they had lost the field if Joshua his prayer had
not prevailed with his GOD, for a longer day, that the sun in Gibeon, and the
Moon in Aialon might yield their shine; till their swords were sated with
the blood of the heathen.

And it is a secret in the Lords promises, that for the most part they are in
the general without mention of particular means, I have given them into thy
hands, but by what means? It is not mentioned, to teach Joshua 10. 8.
us that the LORD is a free Agent, and is tied to no particular, all the
creatures of GOD are his: to make good his glory, and protect his Church:
where he will, when he will, and as he will, he that put into the hand of
Sampson the Iawe bone of an ass to beat down the Philistines, Judge. 15. ^5.
etc.
he puts into the power of Joshua two glorious lights to vanquish the Amorites,
who might say with greater majesty then Sampson might, with the jawe-bone of
an Ass, are heaps upon heaps, with the jawebone of an Ass have I killed a
thousand: Nay rather, with the brightness of the Sun are heaps upon
heaps, and with the body of the Sun have I killed a thousand, supported
with the promise made unto me from the height of all sublimitie.

I have now power over the glorious creature, to command it light, and to
double the day for our deliverance.

It may be (my brethren,) that when Iosuah saw by the approach of the black
night, that all other succors failed. It may be the promise had a check in
his heart, and for a while his faith fought with frailty.

Yet true it is, and made good, as ye may here see, by his experience, that
the righteous Ps. 3^. 25.
shall never finally fall, nor shall there ever be temptation laid upon them
greater 1. Cor. 10. 13.
then they are able to bear, but in the midst of the temptation, God will give
a gracious issue: for if the earth will not, the heaues shall and rather then
dark night shall endanger the Camp, by the station of the Sun, the day shall
be doubled, for Isreal's deliverance.

The use of this Doctrine, concerning Heb. 4. 1. etc.
the promise of our God, is good, as in temporal, so in spiritual
deliverances: and therefore I say, with the blessed Apostle. Let us fear,
least at any time, by forsaking the promise of entering into his rest, any of
you should seem to be deprived.

David said, my foot had welneare slipped, Psalm. 73. 2 etc.
but he recovered himself, by laying hold upon the promise. All falls are
fearful, Prou. 24. 16.
but yet recouerable, if we forsake not the promise. But so long as we leave
the promise, we fail of grace, and that's a fearful fall, to fall from Moses,
and to light upon Christ, is no danger; to fall from the Law and to hit the
Gospel, is no peril. To fall Heb. 3. 12
through sin, and to hit a Savior, is recouerable, but if we miss a Savior
and fall upon sin: if we forsake the Gospel and light upon the law, if we
leave Christ, and follow Gal. 3, 24.
Moses, if we forsake the promise of his saving grace, we shall both feel, and
find that our case is dangerous, deadly, and desperate. Besides; the peril of
being deprived for ever entering into his Rest.

The Angels fell, Caine fell, Judas fell, Achitophel fell; Had any of these
fallen upon their CHRIST, they had never fallen so far: but all mist the
promise, and for that they are gone, their fall is irrecouerable.

Howbeit, when any of the Patriarchs fell, Kings, or Prophets; when Peter,
Paul, fell, or the dearest Disciple of Christ fell, all recovered their Falls,
by feeling the Promise, which was the hold of their inheritance, and so with
speedy passage, they flew up in all their Afflictions, into the bosom of the
Promise, as it were, even from Heb. 10. 22. 23.
the nethermost hell, to the highest heavens.

What should we then do, but hold fast our profession, and rest upon his
promise, as Iosuah did? and so go boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may
receive mercy, and find Grace, to help in time Heb. 4. 1^
of need, whereunto all the godly have had their recourse: as had the Dove to
Genesis 8. 9.
Noahes Arc, when elsewhere she could find no footing; or as the Rivers
have to the great Ocean: and blood to the heart upon a sudden fear, for as
(...) care, when all other succors fail, the blood has it current through
all the veins, and runs to the heart, to comfort it. So likewise in the
manifold distresses of this life, and great Romans 1. ^6.
fear of future falls by sin, death, and d^mnation, there is no comfort to
the current of the word, which caryeth with it the promises of eternal life.

So said David in the day of his Afflictions, It is my comfort in my Trouble,
for Psalm. 119. 50.
thy promise has quickened me.

And again, I have hid thy promises in my heart, that I might not sin
against verse. 11.
thee. Say soul, say Saint, I will walk in confidence of my cause, and
calling, guarded with the promise of my GOD and CHRIST, I will walk even to the
gates of death and Hell, and say as Hester did to Ahashuerus, in the day of her
distress. I will Hester. 4, 16.
go on, and if I die, I die. But how can I ever die, having my portion in that
promised Ps. 27. 13. 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19.
seed, who has rede^med my soul? having the Gospel of promise to instruct
my soul, his holy spirit of promise to apply Romans 4. 11 To. 14. 16.
my soul, the Sacraments, seals of his promises to assure my soul, with that
heavenly Canaan, and ^^nd of promise, to receive my soul.

It cannot be that a soul thus blessed, should ever perish, and therefore
say, with a godly Oration, as Deborah did, in her Judge* 5. 21. 13.
triumphant song, after her honorable expedition against Iabin king of Canaan,
O my soul thou have marched valiantly, and the Lord has given me dominion
over the strong*

But to the rest, and now a while to solace our selves in the garden of our
delight* there to repose among the flowers of our Roses.

Parallel the two Princes of Israel and Englands Iudahes, compare them in their
puissance, and Balance them alike, upon the scales of true Nobility,
Religion, and* piety, and then tell me whether Queen Elizabeth may not help
with Iosuah* to perfect the Register of the blessed.

Blessed Kings, and blessed Queens, renowned for their power, and by whom the
Lord has gotten great glory.

Iosuah was a Savior unto his people of Israel: Queen Elizabeth is, and has
Eccl. 46. 1
been long, a sweet repose unto her people of England.

Joshua and Caleb were appointed for the search of Chanaan, the place of Gods
behest Numb. 13 ^. 9. Numb. 14 6. etc.
where he would plant religion, and establish a Church, as a type of our
heavenly being, and only they were found faithful in the search, whom the
people would have stoned, for commending the land.

Now of all the Kings and Queens of England, who have been more faithful in
the search of true Religion, went to it with better courage, and have so well
reported of it as her brother? that blossom of blessed memory, and she
without fear of any of the sons of Anakim, Giants of Popery, with whom not
only this our Hebron but all the world was pestered, Mose^ Joshua 14. 15.
being dead, God magnified Joshua in the sight of Israel by a miraculous mercy
in bringing the Ark of God through the swellings of Jordan, where it stood
both Joshua 3. 17
still, and dry even in the depth and channel of it, her sisters days were
seas of persecution, and therefore are rightly called, and ever so will be,
Mariana tempora, swelling above the height of Jorden, with fire, and faggot,
against the Saints of God, and whose (I pray you) stopped the stream of that
blood, and quenched the fire of that popish fury, but Queen Elizabeth, whom
the Lord magnified in the sight of all England, to back that Jorden, and bring
her people with the Arc of her God to this our rest, and sweet repose.

Joshua having passed Jorden, he set up Circumcision Joshua 5. 2
again the second time, which for forty years space had been left off in
the wilderness. Queen Elizabeth purged the Sacraments of her Christ, and
reduced them to their right form, left off, if not welneare lost in the vaste
wilderness of popish impiety, for more then forty years ten times told.

Joshua was directed in all his ways by Joshua 1. 8
the book of the Law, and what other star has guided the heart of Queen
Elizabeth, there was not a word of all that GOD commanded, which Joshua caused
not to be read openly. So she the everlasting Joshua 8. 34. 35.
Gospel to be preached and published throughout all her Realms and Dominions.

Iosuah makes a Covenant, with a double vocuher, for himself and all his
family, in these words, I and my house will serve the Lord. Iosuah, 24 ^4.
15. etc.


Queen Elizabeth has bound her people by statutes and laws, to the worship
of God, her self not second to any, in rendering her vows.

There was none able to withstand Iosuah all his life, for the Lord was with
him, Joshua. 1. 5.
and he was famous throughout all the world.

Queen Elizabeth has beaten back all her enemies, and who has resisted her
power? for which her prayers is with God, and her fame with men.

At the sound of the Trumpet, the Joshua. 6. 1.
walls of Jericho fell, after Iosuah had compassed it about seven times, with
the shower, and shoute of his devotion.

Not seven times, but seventy times seven times, has Qu. Elizabeth by prayer
to God, and prophesying with men, sacked that Romish Jericho, whose walls (to
God be the praise) by her princely power, and prayer, are well shiuered at
home, and shaken abroad, with Iosuah his curse, to all such as shall repair
the ruins, cursed be the man before the Lord, that raises up, and builds up
this Romish Jericho.

Let him lay the first stone thereof in his eldest son, and in his youngest
son set up the gates, that is, let him build to the destruction 1. King. 16.
24.
of all his stock, as Hiel did in Bethel

Ai could not be won till the execrable thing was out: Iosuah could not sack
it till Iosu. 7. 12
sin was punished, and the Host purged, and purified of Achan his stealth.
Achans rebellion is discovered in Ireland, in the north of England, and in the
south themselves, with their Babilonish garment. Sicles of silver, and wedges
of gold, execrable things in the Host, to steal away the hearts of subjects,
from their allegiance, have been brought by our Iosuah, into the valley of
Achor, there to suffer condign punishment, some by execution, some by
banishment, some by confiscation of goods, with this just sentence from Iosuah,
of their death and doom.

This place where ye die, shall be called Iosu. 7. 25. etc.
Achor: which is trouble, for in as much as you have troubled us, the Lord
shall trouble you, and turn his fierce wrath from our nation.

The craft of the Gibeonites procured Joshua. 9. 4. etc.
them peace with Iosuah, they beguiled their Prince, with the presence of an
Embassage from far, and with an argument of their love to God, and loyalty
to him, for they say, we came from far, we are thy servants, we seek the
Lord thy God, and have heard his fame: Now therefore make a league with us,
look upon us, we come from far, our sacks are patched, our shoes are clouted,
our bottles are rent, and bound up, our bread is mouled, our drink is sowred,
and we are all of the old. Love is not suspicious, it believes 1. Cor. 13. 7.
all things, it hops all things. It endures all things, it knows not it
own. The Gibeonites of this Land have beguiled Queen Elizabeth with a fair
presence of love to God, and loyalty to her person, and with their patched
cloak of Antiquity, Clouted shoes, and Bottles, mouled bread, and baggage of
popish trash, they would beguile, and still bear the world in hand, that they
are all of the oulde, and so they are in rottenness, rotten hearts to God,
rotten hearts to their Prince, as may appear upon the breach of covenant with
our Iosuah: Even this day they should hew wood for the sacrifice, but their
Axes are dull: they should draw water for the house of the Lord, but their
buckets are broken: they should attend the Altar of the Lord, but they have
dug it up: Our Iosuah has given them life upon the contracte, and put them
near, and about the holy things, and is it not strange, upon forty years
kind usage, they should have no greater familiarity with their God and
Prince? no wood, no water, no Altar, no prayer to God, of all this long day of
Iosuah, so continued, and so blessed for her preservation? what none? why then:
He that is filthy? let him be filthy still: He that is Popish, let him be
Popish still; and whiles ye would seem to beguile us Revel. 22. 11.
with your Antichristian Antiquity, we will rest upon our New-Religion, and
say, Antiquitas nostra Christus; ours is not new, but renewed, like the book
of God, for a long time lost, but found at last, by the good King Josias, and
we sing, as it were* 2. Chron. 34. 15. etc. Joshua. 2* 25. etc.
a new song: Reuelat. 14. 3. Aliud est nouare, aliud est renouare.

Iosuah not knowing his successor, recommended the people over to God at
Sichem, and tied them by covenant to serve the Lord, and for an heir apparent
erected a stone there to witness against them, if they should at any time deny
their God.

Albeit (says Queen Elizabeth) it does Holinshead in Chron. A pregna^t
prophecy of this our joyful day* blessed with no less happy then hopeful
succession.
please almighty God to continue me still in this mind, to live out of the
state of marriage, yet is it not to be feared, but he will so work in my heart,
and your wisdoms, that as good provision may be made in convenient time,
whereby the Realm shall not remain destitute of an heir, that may be a fit
governor, and peradventure more beneficial to the Realm, then such of*
spring as may come of me, for though I be never so careful of your weldoing,
and mind ever so to be, yet may mine issue grow out of kind. And for me it
shall be sufficient, that a Queen having reigned such a time lived and died a
virgin. The Lord Numb. ^7. 16. 17.
God of Gods, the Lord God of Gods will provide you a Prince of wisdom, to
go out before you, and to bring you in again.

Lastly, and to make good my text, Joshua, as I have said, was thrice noble, in
that he prevailed with God, to cammaund the creatures, till the field was
foughten, and their enemies were subdued. That Mirabilis annus of 88. will
never be forgotten, so long as the sun, and moon endures, When the stars
fought for our Deborah, Judge. 5. 20. etc.
as the sun and moon did then for Joshua. Nay more, the river Kison swept
them away from Callis in France, to Dingle-Cushe in Ireland, Seas, Rocks, and
shelues fought for England, she armed her self with prayers to God against
that great Armado, and prevailed, that the enemies Esaias. 31. 3. etc.
might know they were men, and not God: and their horses flesh and not spirit;
That the ships were but wood, the tacklings but hemp; Their Oars but reeds,
and their powder but dust, nay their topgallant must stoop at the majesty of
a greater God, and veil at the puissance of Queen Elizabeth.

Let Tilberie Camp speak to the praise of her presence, and powerful prayer
there, when with God in her heart, and a commanding staff in her hand, she
uttered these, or the like words in her Princely march.

Come on now my companions at arms, and fellow Soldiers, in the field, now
for the Lord, for your Queen, and for the kingdom, for what are these proud
Philistines, that they should revile the Host of the living God? I have been
your Prince in peace, so will I be in war, neither will I bid you go and
fight, but come and let us fight the battle of the Lord, the enemy perhaps
may challenge my sex for that I am a woman, so may I likewise charge their
mould for that they are but men, whose breath is in their nostrels, and if God
do not charge England with the sins of England, little do I fear their
force, we commend your prayers, for they will move the heavens, so do we your
powerful preaching, for that will shake the earth of our earthly hearts, and
call us to repentance, whereby our good God may relieve us, and root up in
mercy his deserved Judgments intended against us, only be faithful and fear
not. Si deus nobiscum quis contra nos?

And thus she went on in her holy march, with her Princely power, spirit, and
prayer against that invincible Navy for preparation, might, and bloody
designs, the greatest and most fearful that ever was intended any nation.

For as Emanuel van Meteran reports, their ships were an hundred and
fifty, furnished with eight thousand mariners, besides of slaves for the
Galleys, two thousand, eighty eight, of Soldiers twenty thousand, besides
noble men, and gentlemen, voluntaries, they had great cast pieces 2650. pieces
of brazen ordinance 1600. of Iron 1000. bullets 120000. gunpowder 5600.
quitals, of match 1200. quintals, Muskets and Calliuers ^000. Halbarts and
Partisanes 100^0.

This Navy, as Diego Pimentello afterward confessed, was esteemed by the King
himself to contain two and thirty thousand persons, and to cost every day
thirty thousand Ducats.

Add to all this Parma his forces, in the Low Country thought to be forty
thousand strong, Dukes, Princes, and Potentates, from Italy, Spain, Sauoy,
Hungary, Hesse, with many Turkish captains; all hasted* (...) luyt of the
Spanish Armado.
thither to the service, and were had in Parma his court and camp. The Pope
Sixtus Quintus placed his part, with six cinque, for all he published a
Cr^sadoe, as against Turks and Infidels, with ample Indulgences, he bestowed
the Realm of England upon the Conqueror, and proffered a million of gold
toward the service: and if all reports be true, he dispatched out D. Allen
the great Apostle of our English Catholics, to lie alooffe, with a Frye of
Seminaries and Jesuits, vermin of our Church, to poison within, and corrode
the very bowels of their dearest country.

But there is no counsel against the Lord, No might can march with his
Majesty: Proverb. ^ 1. 30.
Man's wisdom is but foolishnes, his greatest strength but weakness, his
life, but a breath, and all his honor but a blast, for the Lord had no sooner
blown upon all this their pomp and pride, but their spirits were daunted,
their Armies were discomfited, the great Armada was scattered, beaten, and
broken, with it own burden, and as they say, only fifty three poor ships
returned home, to carry tidings of all the test.

Thus England had the honor of the day, day* like that of Iosuah, bright
shining from heaven, wherein the black night of our throu^^^^ destruction was
beaten back by the puissance of our Prince praying, our Armies fighting, and
the creatures of God relieuing, to make us glorious by deliverance.

And now to close with your religious cares and hearts, which hear me this
day, our care is for our Prince, to keep her in life, the crown of our head,
the breath of Lament. 5. 16. Lament. ^^ 20.
our nostrels, and the anointed of the Lord, under whose shadow we have bin
thus preserved alive amongst the heathen. Where must we then begin to beg that
the line of her life may be lengthened, but at the Author Heb. 12. ^^ Dan. (...)
of life? that her days may be multiplied on earth, but at the ancient of
days in heaven. Joshua could not stir a creature till he had moved the creator,
nor stay the Sun till he had communed with his God, as it is here. Then spoke
Joshua unto the Lord, etc.

For it was as in the day of famine, when Hose. 2. ^^ 22.
God by the Prophet promised plenty, saying, in that day I will hear (says
the Lord) I will even hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the
earth shall hearethe corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear
Israel, yet all as it (...) this caution I will not hear the (...) till the
heavens hear the earth, I will not hear the earth, till the earth hear the
corn, the wine and the oil, nor will I hear the cry of these: till these
hear the cry of Israel, so as Israel must be the Primu^ mobile, to move the
Lord to mercy, No corn, wine or oil, no earth, sun or heaven, could
prevail with the God of heaven, till the prayers, plaints and cries of Israel,
there and Joshua here at Aialon were out, and piercing to make him propitious.

Therefore you that stand this day for the Lords anointed, and keep it
solemn ^. Chron. ^. 13. 14.
like one of the feasts of Judah, I exhort with the Apostle, that first of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving 1. Tim. 2. 1. etc.
of thanks be made for all, and especially for Queen Elizabeth, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life under her, in all godliness and honesty,
without which prayer to God, all other succors are but vain. For her counsel
may advise, her officers may care, her guard may keep watch, her Soldiers may
fight, her Ladies may love her, and her handmaides may attend her, her
Physicians may apply her person, her Cooks her diet, yea and her Revels may
solace, and refresh her wearied spirits, all these with all the subjects of the
land may wish and work her good: yet all nothing without the Sovereign Psalm.
127. 2.
good, for except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build
it.

Come then ye Counselors of state, and advise with your God, come ye officers
in Court: resign your staves, and be instant with your God, come ye Soldiers
out of the field, let fall your weapons, and yield to your God, Ye Ladies and
maids of honor leave your closets, and attend your God* Physicians lay by
your Cordials, and apply your God. You reverent fathers of the Church slide
from your Consistories: and pray to your God, you preachers, people, and all,
contend with your God for a blessing this day, that it may yet dawne, a bright
blessing to this English nation.

Joshua prevailed, as I have told you, and was encouraged to command the
creatures, because of the promise, we have a more precious promise from God,
and a greater command even to still the heavens till our prayers be offered
up, there was silence in heaven for the space of half Revel. 8. 1. 2. 3*
an hour, till the Saints prayers were offered up, and now tell me whether is
the greater command to stay the Sun in Gibeon till the Amorites be vanquished?
or to silence the heavens till the Saints prayers be answered?

Again, the rather to embolden us to pray with confidence, we have as good a
God to go to, as ever Joshua had, even the Lord Iehoua, we have as good a
mean to go by, as ever Joshua had, even Jesus Christ the righteous, we have
had as good a cause in hand as ever Joshua had, even the life of our Queen, the
safety of her state, and the preservation of Gods Church, we have as stable
and certain promises to assure us, as ever Joshua had. Ask and you shall have,
seek, and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, why then
should we doubt of like success? but be well assured that the Lord will make
this glorious day of her highness reign, like the day of Joshua still shining
over this our English Judah, as he did the Sun and Moon over Gibeon, and
Aialon, which he grant for his sons sake, to whom be praise, and glory both
now and ever.

Amen. Amen.
THE THIRD Sermon.
2. KINGS 18. 5. 6. Standish Church twice ruina ted, was built again in the
happy reign of Queen Eliz: begun anno 8 and finished 31.
which the Lord commanded Moses.
I If I should be silent and say nothing in honor of the day, we now
solemnize surely these stones might speak to the praise of their sovereign,
under whose happy government, they have bin reared, and made beautiful (as
you may see) like the polished corner stones of the Temple, and not these
stones only: but the abundance of all your grass, corn and cattle, upon a
thousand hills: together with the comforts of your wives, children and
servants, yea and which is more then all the 1. Pet. 1. 9.
rest, the solace of our saved souls, filled with the fatnes of all Gods
blessings, would Esaias 32. ^
say of their Elizabeth: as did the Prophet of good Ezechias, she has bin to
us as an hiding place from the wind, and as a refuge from the tempests, as
rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land. Nay more, if David upon 2. Sam. 1. 24.
the death of Saul, might thus mourn his funerals* and say, ye daughters of
Israel weep for Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with 1. Sam. 2. 24.
pleasures, and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel, how much rather
may we joy in the day of the gladness of our hearts, for the life of our
Queen, and say you daughters of England, joy for Elizabeth, who clothed you in
scarlet, rich garments, and costly jewels, feeds you with the finest flower
of wheat, with honey out of the rock, and sets peace in all your borders.
Surely he has not dealt so with every nation, and therefore O England, clappe
your hands, sing and say In nablio decachordo, Psallam Psalm. 92. 2. 3.
tibi, I will praise the Lord upon an instrument of ten strings, yea as long as
I have any being will I praise the Lord.

For truly if we do not beat back the Esaias 59. 2
river of Gods mercies with the seas of our ingratitude, if we do not check
the Lord in the means of all his mercies toward us, with our impiety, if we
do not prejudice the Crown and diadem of his anointed: we cannot but say
by her as by a Conduite, all the waters of life is conveyed unto us, and not
conveyed only but continued; not for a year, twain, or twenty, which is
much in the reign of Princes, but for forty four fair years: now past and
gone, the Lord of heaven, with the line of her life, has drawn out the
happiness of our days, in multiplying our nation, and increasing ourioies.
Who maugre the rage of al rebels, the malice Esaias 9. 3.
of al wickedness, and the spite of al popery may say yet, God is good unto
England, eue^ to those that are pure in heart, yet are his blessings upon his
anointed, yet he is her strength and her salvation therefore. We shall not
much be moved* fremat orbis, and Orcus, illa erit secura. God spoke once or
twice have I heard it says David* That power belongs unto God, and to thee o
Lord mercy, for thou rewardest every one according to his works. Psalm 62. 11.


And now the rather to provoke the Lord that he would continue still the
blessings we enjoy for Englands saftie, and his own glory, you have done well
to honor this day with your presence, and to sanctify yet with your prayer
the day, that it might still dawne, the Prince that she might still live, and
your selves be ever blessed under so happy a reign, and government.

With whose bright beauty, that you Cant. 4. 9.
might be enamoured the more, and as it were wounded in love with one of her
eyes: and with a chain of her neck, I have thought good to match her in her
princely piety, with good Ezechia, one of the best Kings of Isreal's Judah.

His princely heart was replenished with four religious virtues, more precious
the^ the Carbuncle, ^opas, or the ^risolyte, which like a collar of Esses, and
a Chiane about his neck, so wounded his subjects with love, and Lam. 4 20.
loyalty, as when they called him the breath of their nostrils, they deemed
their life lapped in his love.

Now the chain of his government held by these four lincks, all religious
virtues fit for a Prince, and as it were, synewes of a sanctified state.

The first was his faith, and kingly 1
confidence in his God, for so says the text. He trusted in the LORD GOD of
Israel.

The second was his princely magnanimity, 2
ever contending with the best of his rank, for after him there was none like
him, neither were there any such before him.

The third was his constancy, for he 3
claue to the Lord, and departed not from him.

The fourth and last was the pattern of 4
all his piety, for he kept the commandments which the Lord God commanded
Moses.

And all these virtues flowed from him like the rivers of Eden out of the
Paradise of God, to water and refresh the dying; and declining plants of Judah,
which Ahaz his father had shaken with a dangerous 2. Kings 16. 2. 3. 4.
and Idolatrous rule.

Now for his faith, here first in the rank and the fairest of all the rest,
and as it were Leuitic. ^ 13.
the salt of the sacrifice: seasoning the soul of this religious King; ye fee
it was right, for it pitched upon the soueragine good: eue^ upon the Lord God
of Israel, in whom he trusted.

I say he trusted in one God, not in many Judge. 6. 1*
Gods, in the God of Israel* not in the Gods of the nations, as it were
speaking with Moses in the silence of his soul, our God is not Deuteronomy. 32 31.
like other Gods, our very enemies being Judges, so sovereign a faith in a
sovereign Prince, pitched upon so sovereign a God, is more precious then a
diadem upon his head, or the diamonde upon his right hand.

For he knew with David, and found it true in his own experience, that no
King is saved by the multitude of an hoaste, neither is the mighty man
delivered by his great strength, he knew tha^ an horse was but a vain thing
to save a man, howbeit Psalm. 33. 16. 17.
he knew that the eye of the Lord is always upon them that fear him, and
upon them that trust in his mercy, he knew Psalm. 74. 12.
that God was his King of old, and the help that is done upon the earth he
does it himself, and therefore I will go forward Psalm. 71. 16,
in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of thy righteousness,
even of thine only.

In this co^fide^ce, he beat back the rage of 2. King. 18. 17.
railing Rabsecha in the day of battle, saying unto his people, be strong and
courageous, fear not, neither be affraide, for the King of Assure, neither for
all the multitude 2. Chron. ^2. 7. 8.
that is with him, for there be more with us, with him is an arm of flesh, but
with us is the Lord our God for to help us and to fight our battles.

Surely it was an argument of a sovereign faith in the day of his affliction
to run to GOD, when most men run from GOD, some to the Devil, some to their
Idols, some to the creatures, and some to their own works, unwisely wrought.
Doleful was the song of Moses Deuteronomy. 32. ^7.
even in that particular; when he said of Israel the LORDS peculiar, they
offered unto Devils, and not to God, but to Gods whom they knew not, new Gods
that came newly up, whom their fathers knew not.

Ahaziah being sick upon his fall, fell from his GOD, whenhe^ s^nt to
Baal-zebub, the GOD of Ekron to enquire of his recovery, whom the Prophet
justly taxed, both of his diffidence, and of his death, when he said. Is it
for 2. Kings 1* 3. etc.
that there is not a GOD in Israel? that ye go to Baal-zebub the God of
Ekron? tell the Kings he shall never come off his bed, but dye the death.

Saul in his extremity sought to the 1. Sam. 28 7. etc.
witch at Endor, and left the LORD, it made a rent in the Kingdom, and brought
a ruin to himself, with an utter subversion to his house and family, while
Israel trusted in their GOD, they failed of no blessings, but when they joined
themselves Psalm. 106. 28.
unto Baal Peor, and did eat the offerings of the dead: then they provoked him
unto anger with their own inventions, and the plague brake in upon them, Bala^
sought to Balaam, and was cast away Numb. 22 2. etc. Jude. 11. 1. Kings* 20. 23.
by the deceit of Baalams wages, and the Aramites shifted from the GODS of the
hills, to the Gods of the valleys, and because they left the true God, they
were relieved with no God.

Ahab and Asa joined with Benada^, a professed enemy of GOD, and in the day of
their distress* had they trusted in the LORD GOD of Israel: Hanany the 2.
Chron. ^ 6. 7.
Seer had never so sharply reproved the sin with the judgment, because thou
have rested upon the King of Aram, and not rested in the Lord thy God,
therefore is the host of the King of Aram escaped out of thine hands, and
because thou have let go a man whom I appointed to dye, thy life shall go for
his life; and thy people for his people.

Good Iehosaphat is reproved by the same Prophet, for leaving the Lord, and
loyning with Ahab in the seege at Ramath Gilead: would thou help the
wicked, ^. Chron. 19. 2.
and love them that hate the Lord, therefore for this thing the wrath of the
Lord is upon thee. A good caution for Princes to beware with whom they enter
league, whom they help, whom they love: that the wrath of GOD be not upon
them.

What should I say more? but conclude with this advertisement, cursed is the
man Ier. 175.
that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart
from the Lord, but blessed is the man (with good Psalm. 34. 22.
Ezechia) that makes the Lord God of Israel his souls support, with this no
less Christian then Kingly confidence, the Lord redeemeth the souls of his
servants, and none that trust in him shall ever perish.

Again, it is of due regard in this good King to perfect his praise in the
full affiance he ever had in his God, that he did acknowledge him both God, and
Lord, for so it is here said, he trusted in the Lord God Io. 20. 28.
of Israel, Lord of heaven, and Lord of the earth, Lord of life, and Lord of
death, Lord of Israel, where he was King and Lord of the nations, he was to
subdue; yea and his Lord too (though he were a King) as to whom he ought both
faith and fealty, with a limited subjection of all his power, to his blessed
will, and sovereign command, and therefore it was not without cause David
ended his Psalm with this beatitude. Blessed are the people, whose GOD is
their Psalm. 144. 15.
LORD, for Multi habent eum in Deum, pauci in dominum. Many take GOD to be
their creator, but few make him their Lord, and governor, many will be
graced with his stamp as he is God: but few will be guided by his rule, as he
is Lord, that hand th^^ made them must not direct them, and even in that they
disclaim their subjection, therefore they make him their God, but not the Lord.

Sound it in a true sense, and with a sanctified soul, and you shall find
that lack of consideration in this very point of piety, is, and has been,
the breeder of all Atheism, mischief, and wickedness in this woeful world,
the Angels had kept their Iud. 6.
first estate, if they had made their God their Lord, Adam and Eve his fairest
creatures had never fallen so far, had they not failed in their obedience to
that Lord, that was their God, Israel played the harlot under Esaias 5. 7. 15.
every green tree, she was disloyal to her Lord, and therefore no marvel if
they went into Captivity, when their God was not their Lord.

I might tell of Sodom, and Gomer, Shilo, and Sion, of Nineveh, Carthage,
Babylon. Corinthe, and Thessalonica, with all the Cities of Asia, where once
the Gospel flourished, like a green tree in the midst of the Paradise of
GOD, and what is the reason of all their ruins? and no other cause of their
woeful supplantation? but that God was not their Lord? they failed in fealty
to God both in matter of Ierem. 5.
faith, and fact, they were misled through misbeliefe, they burst the ba^ds of
all obedience, they rebelled against their God, in that they did not use him as
their Lord.

They would live by him, but they would not be led by him, and so he was their
God of destruction, but not their Lord of protection.

Finally I am prswaded that sin was never more sinful, and deserved Iudgemnts
never more doubtful, and the breeder of both is nothing else but this: even
our rebellion against the Lord, we dare not but say he is our God, and yet we
deny him, homage, and how is he then our Lord? Our secret Idolatries, and
open stealth, our gnawing vsuries, and extrauagant lusts of the flesh, our
excessive avarice, and grievous oppressions, our contempt of the word,
Sacraments, and Sabaoths, our general Apostasy from all good, and godliness,
with our lewd lives led by no rule, show that we are irregular, dead to God,
and fallen from all obedience to our Lord, we do not trust in the Lord God of
Israel

And so to conclude, and close with your religious ears and hearts, who heard
me this day, place your confidence in the breast plate of your Lord God, and
when all other helps and succors fail, with this good K. Ezechia, trust in
the Lord God of Israel.

Trust not in friends, for they will fail you: Trust not in this world, for
it will forsake Micha. 7. 5. 6. etc.
you: trust not in pleasure, for it will flatter you; trust not in wealth, for
it will Ieaue you, trust not in strength, it will weaken like water; trust not
in beauty, it will vade like a flower; trust not in wit, its often wavering;
trust not in Learning, its always doubting; trust not in Honor, its still a
sliding: trust not in Princes favor, its often fleeting; trust in no society,
in marred with factions; trust in no earthly 1. Ioh. ^. 4.
joys, they are but borrowed passions; All these Trusts are but transitory:
worn out with Time, but that transcendent confidence, of thy GOD, and LORD,
neither vadeth nor vanishes, out abides for ever.

It effects wonders where it works, and it tyeth the providence of the
Almighty to thy particular; it hales on the Heavens to help the Earth, and
like a Hos. 2. 21* 22.
threefold Cable from the Kings heart, to the Lords ear; it pulled him down
to be propitious: when tied to the Sun, it drew Esai. 38. ^
it back ten degrees; tied to Time, it put it on fifteen years, as an
Addition to his 2. Chron. 32. 20. 2^
days, and tied to the Angels, it brought them down to scatter and kill the
Host of Assure.

And now tell me (ye Atheists of the world) Artists and Politicians, in whom
Nature ever abridgeth Grace? tell me, what starrie influence, wit of man,
might, or ability, could ever have effected so admirable wonders? had they not
been haled on rather by tie of Religion, then by touch of reason? for Fides
non habet meritum, vbi humana ratio praebet experimentum: Faith has no
prehemine^ce, where reason makes experiment; well may it here houer below,
but it can never reach the height of the Heavens; well may it make men famous
on earth, but it can never make them glorious in heaven.

O Religion, beautiful is thy band, it chameth man to God in his obedience,
and God to man in his deliverance, but where it is not: Princes powers are but
cords of ^ofe. 6. 4.
sand, their glory but a morning dew, their spears but Reeds to pearce their
own entrals, and with all their wit they do but weaue unto themselves spiders
webs, uneath able to keep out a fly: much less the fire of Gods heavy wrath
Esaias. 59. 5. 6.
and indignation against delinquents.

Nay oftentimes it falls out, that where there is a trust and confidence in
the creature, more then in the creator, that very creature turns to their
destruction, who trust to it, Sampson twice trusted Judge. 6. 16 18.
in his strength: and it was first cut off by the weak and feeble hand of
Dalila* again he trusted in his strength, and it pulled down the house,
as well upon himself: as upon the Philistines, Abso^on trusted in his fair
face, feature, and 2. Sam. 18 9.
beauty, and his golden locks tied him to the tree, till Abner had pierced his
heart with a spear.

That very sword wherein Goliath trusted, ^. Sam. 17. ^0. 51.
cut off his own head, and the spear he tossed at David before the comb^te,
advanced his head in the sight of all Israel What should I say more of that
multitude of men wherein David so trusted? thousands Psalm 9. 7.
fell upon his right hand, and ten thousands upon his left, and this good
King when he shrunko but a little from his God, and in some princely ambition
showed his treasures, wherein hee-trusted* 2. Kings. 20. 12. 13.
to Baladen King of Egypt, it was the ruin of his house and cause of Isreal's
captivity.

The use is good, and seasonable for the day on solemnize, I shall never think
so long as I have a thought in my heart, that ever Queen Elizabeth I could
have rained, and ruled so happily* to the honor of her God, preservation of
her state safety of her people; and wonder of all the world, but that she
only trusted in the Lord God of Israel. It was her faith, and full affiance in
her God, that made her so glorious by deliverance.

For was it reason or faith that put (...) the stabbe of Parry, and poisoned
the Bill of Lopus? was it reason or faith that scattered the great Arm^^^ of
Spainee? when the sturtes fought for England, and the River Kison swept them
away, sink their Judge. 5. 2.
ships, wherein they trusted, and cast the cark^sses welneere upon every coaste
from Portesmouth in England, to Dingle Cushe in Ireland.

Was it reason or religion, when in the day of her afflictions she went
toward the tower Tanquam Ouis, a poor persecuted prisoner, that brought her
back again not long after, to her palace of Westminster? a free borne
Prince, and that I only say no more, but haste to the rest, Is it reason or
religion, that with the lin^ of her sacred life still draws on the mercies of
our blessed God? Sweet as perfume, Genesis 27. 27.
and like the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed: surely, surely if I
should ascribe these our blessings by her gracious government rather to
policy, then piety, to reason, then religion, to the puisance of her power,
then to her trust and confidence in her God, I should prejudice the right of
faith, and the Princely virtues of her heavenly mind.

And so to the second virtue wherewith the religious heart of this good King
(...) replenished, which was his magnanimity, to wit a generous mind, and
spirit, soaring high, and seldom aiming at mediocrities, never content to sit
down with the worst, but ever striving to contend with the best of his rank,
and therefore it is said, that after him was none like him, amongst all the
Kings of Judah, neither were there any such before him, for he did emulate the
virtues of all the ancient Kings of Israel and Judah, that went before him, and
matched them, he did animate the succeeding Kings of Judah, and made himself a
pattern Phillip. 3* 17.
for them, so walk (says the Apostle) even as you have us for an example, so
rule (says this good Prince) even as you have us, for a president.

Like the sun amongst the planets, so are eminent Princes amiddest their
peers, they lighten all above and all below, precedent Kings are honored,
succeeding Kings are bettered by them.

Yet so as this heroical virtue of Magnanimity ever springs out of the
fountain of faith, her first and fairest in the rank of all religious
virtues, for faith is ever operative: it will work, it will strive, wrestle,
and contend with the best by the best means, and for the best blessing.

Out of this virtue it was, that Samps^^ Judge. 14. 12.
contended with the Philistines, and not in strength only, but in wit had
excelled them all, if they had not plowed with his heiffer, out of this virtue
Job conetnded for uprightness with all the land of Hus, when Job. 1. 8.
the Lord said of him, that there was none like him in the earth, for an
upright and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Out of this
virtue David played with Lions, as with Kids, and with Bears, as with Lambs.
Out of this virtue Solomon contended, when for wisdom he excelled all the
children of the East, and all the wisdom of Egypt, for so says the text,
he was wiser then any man, yea then ^. King 4. ^0. 31.
were Etham the Ezrahite then Heman, then Calcal. then Darda, the sons of
Mahol: nay he was famous throughout all nations round about.

What should I say more? out of this virtue Genesis 32. 28.
Jacob contended with God for a blessing at Peniel, his generous spirit failed
him not, till he had won the prize, and was styled with that most renowned
name of Israel: as prevailing with God.

Lastly, thus animated, Paul challenged Romans 8. 38 39.
all the creatures of God to combat for the honor of his CHRIST, I say all
above, and all below, either fiery, earthy devils, and damned, when he said,
what shall separate us from the love of Christ^ shall tribulation, or anguish?
shall persecution, or famine, shall nakedness, on cold, shall peril, or
sword, shall death, or life, shall Angels, principalities, or powers, shall
things present, or things to come, shall height, or depth, shall any creature
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord?

I may say then, as of all these, so of good Ezechia, Nihil habuit vulgar, he
had no base mind, he contended for no trifles, but for the honor of his God,
and good of his Church, his generous spirit carried him above the pitch of
vulgar conceit, which houereth below, and ay^eth at mediocrities, and
therefore Hesiodus speaking of such high hearts, calls them not without cause
Kera epam^^^i. Whom minds soar on high, without commerce of earth, or earthly
things.

I may be sparing of this Parallel, for that her Maj. has put me from it, as
she did herself, when from that Climate of her much modesty, she did
recommend unto her Council the care of her people, that they might be ruled
with like justice and temperance, she ever affected in her Princely heart, and
contended with the best that they might ever enjoy that blessing.

A Prince (says she) is scant well furnished, if either he lack Justice,
Temperance, Magnanimity, or Judgment: As for the two latter, I will not
boast, my Sex does not permit it, but for the two first, this dare I say:

1 Amongst mo Subjects, I never knew a difference of person, where right was
one. 2 Nor ever to my knowledge preferred Holinshed Chron.
for favor, whom I thought not fit for worth. 3 I never lent mine ears to
credit a tale, that was first told me. 4 Nor was so rash to corrupt my
judgment with my censure, before I heard the cause. 5 If others whom I put in
trust to hear the cause* marred it with partiality, it was not my fault. 6
This dare, I boldly affirm, my verdict went ever with the truth of my
knowledge. 7 And I never used over sudde^ resolutions in matters that have
touched me full near. 8 I ever have, and do contend for the truth with all
good conscience. 9 And let me live no longer, then I may live to dare the
enemies of my God, with an undaunted spirit, warra^d d^^re* Lord all this with
thy command.
These were the Poesies of her rule, these are the perfumes of her life, such
is her government, graced with no less magnanimity and judgment, (which in
her Princely modesty she would put off) then of justice and temperance,
wherein she may contend with the highest of her rank, and so to the rest.

A third virtue, replenishing the heart of Ezechiah, was his constancy in the
Faith, where it is said, he claue unto the Lord, and departed not from him,
implying a threefold passage in piety, fit both for prince and people, (1) a
seeking of God, (2) a findi^g of God, (3) with an abiding by him, for we
cannot Esaias, ^1*
cleave unto him, till we have found him, nor can we find him, till we have
sought Esaias 5 5* 6. 7. 8.
him, and when we have sought, and found, then to abide by him, and not to
depart from him, is no less Christian then Kingly constancy*

In our seeking the soul is exercised, in our finding the soul is satisfied*
and in ou^ abiding by him, our soul is incorporated into our God.

And thus are we not only infran^hised into that heavenly inheritance, made
free (...). 8. 32. ^^.
and familiar with God, but as it were glued unto him, by an inseparable ^nion,
and so the original in this place will bear i^, for like as with glue two
table^ they be ioy^ned and bound together, as and if they were both one. So by
a true and lively faith, may God and man be (...) together Quasi vnum quiddam
fiant. For he that sanctifies, Heb. 2. 11.
and they that are sanctified, are both one. And again, Amor non sinis ^ma^tem
esse ^uispsius, sed ama^i.

It is no^then our seeking of God, but it is our finding of God, nor ^^ is our
finding of God, but it is our abiding by God, that makes ^^ blessed. It we^e
better we never felt God, then to fall off after we have ^^lt his sweetness,
the backsliding Israelite is the Heb. 6. 4* 5. etc. Psalm. 78. 9* 2. Tim. ^* 10.
Acts 1. 16*
worst Israelite, and to slide from piety, is as the sin of Apostacy, it
was the greatest dishonor that ever Ephraim had, to start back in day of
battle, nor will never be forgotten in Demas, or forgiven in Judas, their
falling off by a woeful separation, the one from Paul, and the other from
Christ, etc.

And even in this hold of a constant faith, religion, rule and government did
Ezechia excel Solomon, ^ohas, Valerian, Commodus, and other Princes of the
world, who at the first were religious, but in the end went back, and fell
away, some to this God, and some to that, all from the God of heaven, whose
deserved judgment was for that they left off their familiarity with their God
1. Kings 11. 4. 5. 6. 1. Kings ^1. 30. 3^.
and Lord, and had no recourse to the holy Oracles, sacrifice, and Sabbathes,
the Lord made a rent in their kingdoms, and estranged the hearts of their
people from their due obedience.

For surely this is true, Princes shall never strike an impression of majesty
from themselves in the hearts of their subjects, but by an impression of
majesty from their God, with who^ if there were no piety, yet it sta^ds with
policy they should be familiar, of much commerce, conference, and counsel.

Had it not been known to all the people, Exodus 24. ^18.
that the Lord did commune with Moses by the space of forty days, and forty
nights upon the holy mountain, in great Exodus 34. 28. Exodus 33. 11. Exodus 34.
29. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Exodus 31. 18. Exodus 19. 16. Deutro. 32. ^0.
familiarity? Had they not seen the brightness of Gods glory shining in his
face* which they could not behold without a veil, had they not heard his word,
not as the word of man, but as it was indeed the word of God? Had they not read
the tables he brought written with the finger of God, had they not heard the
thunder, seen the fire, and lightening with an astonishment of the majesty of
God in his minister Moses, their guide, and governor through that waste and
roaring wilderness to Canaan, I say, had they not seen this his familiarity
with God: the God of his command, would they (trow you) ever have been kept
in their obedience, being a people so Deutro. 9. 24.
rebellious and mutinous?

I might say the same of Joshua, Gedeon, David, and of all the Kings of Israel,
and Judah, 2. Sam. 3. 36.
their familiarity with their God made them gracious with their people, may
the very Pagan Princes of tho world, that they might the rather confirm their
laws, and make their decrees of more acceptance with their people, they fained
a familiarity with their Gods, secret conference, and much co^merce, as Numa
Pompilius with Aegeria the Nimphe, Scipio Africanus with Jupiter Capitolinus,
Pisistratus with Minerua, Lycurgu^ with Apollo, and Mahomet when he first laid
the fou^datio^s of Turcisme by a taught pigeon, pidling in his ears, as it had
been the holy ghost, there whispering secret revelations, yea and all the
Muncks from the hollow vaults of their derne Celles are bold to make good
their derne divinity by vaunt of more special revelations.

The project is for religious Kings even from the grace and familiarity they
have with God, to make them gracious with the people, for if as you have heard
to credit the laws of men with man, as Tully says, T^nt^legis vis est, vt ea
non homini, sed deo Delphi contribueretur, how much more to Proverb. 8. 15. 16.
credit the divine laws of God, by which Kings rule may we say, Tantalegis vi^
est, vt ea non homini, sed deo Israelitico tribueretur.

Such is the power of that law by which we govern, as we dare not asoribe
yet^^^* Joshua. 3. 10.
^y Delphick God, but to the living God of Israel, and say, populus dei non
acquies^at in vlla doctrina: priusquam audiat hanc vocem. Sic dicit dominus. We
will that our people being the people of God, rest and repose Psalm. 3. 8. Esaias.
56. 1.
then salvation upon no Oracle, till they hear this voice Thus says the Lord
Jehovah.

It may go for a Lamentation to see how mighty men and Princes of the world
estrange themselves from God, cast off his yoke, burst the bands of all
obedience, ^er. 5. 5.
fly religion, and are as it were affraide to be familiar with their Christ,
least happily they might s^eme to be strange to their earthly passions,
pleasures and Parasites, who in force nothing more then this, that it stands
not with the greatness of man to be too familiar with God, or with the Kings
crown, to be cast down at the feet of poor Christ, Religion is for
Regulars, Princes are free and subject to no rule.

Thus they measure their right by their 2. Esdras 15. 16.
might, and frame their conscience to their gre^^ command, so they may close
with this world, they shake hands with the other, and sue out that proud
partition in their hearts, Diuisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet; so we may
reign on earth, let God rule in heaven.

The use is good: I fear it is with many both mighty and mean men in these
worst and last days of the world, who think if they be gracious with God,
they cannot be gracious with men, and therefore do often feign impiety for
fear they should not seem profane. It was Augustine^ sin 2. Confess cap. 3.
before his conversion, when he said ^ingebam me fecisse, quae non fecoram, ne
vider^^ abiectior quo eram innocentior, and ne vilior haberer, quo eram
castior. Oftentimes I fained my self to have done the sin I never did* least
I might seem less honored, for being more honest, or less profane* for
being more pure. Alas with what compari^ons did I walk (says he) the streets
of ^^bilo^ and wallowed in the fil^h there of as in a bed of Cynamon and pure
perfume, for (...) flesh and blood senteth sin to be sweet, but the
sanctified soul deemes it perfumed poison.

Well, it was not so with this good king Ezechiah, when he claue unto the
Lord, and ^. King. 8. 6.
departed not from him, nor is it so with our dread sovereign, whose right
has bin her might, I mean her religion with God, her Eccles. 8. 23.
might with men, and her constancy in his faith, has made her more honorable
then the hills of robbing Rome, Semper eadem, is Psalm. 6. 4.
her princely poesy, a Constat to the world, of a constant Prince, and
steddie rule.

And so to the last virtue and Diamond, in the hand, and heart of good
Ezechiah, to 2. Kin. 18. 6.
wit, the heavenly pattern of all his piety, in these words, he kept his
commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses, where you may first see, that in
the law of the Lord was his delight, and by that holy book, he Psalm. 1. 2
directed in all his ways, whether Theoricke or Practicke, it was the rule of
his Faith, it was the rule of his Life; and not of his only, Phil. 3. 16
as a private man, but as a public Magistrate, he laid that Line and Level
of 1. Chroni. 30. 2 Chronicles. 34. 23. 1. King. 12. 25.
the Law, to the souls of the Subjects, thereby to be guided in all their
ways, he did not devise unto himself any other government then that of
Moses, which he had received from the holy mount, he did not with Jeroboam,
devise a calfe at Dan, and a calfe at Bethel, with an holie-day to the Lord.

He did not forsake the fountain of liuing-waters, and dig unto himself
Cesternes, Ier. 2. 3
even broken Cesternes, which could hold no water.

Finally, in all the Seas of his tossed government, he never lost the Pole, I
mean the word of his God, but ever had it in his Exo. 32.
eye, and so directed the stern of all his religious reign, to the honor of
God, and good of his people, with such a blessing to himself, as neither Time
nor eternity shall ever blot out.

But woe is me to tell: the lack of this line, level, book, and star, as in
the hearts of Princes, so of their people, has been, is, and will be, the
subversion of States, and destruction of souls in all Ages, the missing of
Moses, has been the breeder of much mischief in the church of God, it has
cost blood and lost faith, ye cannot miss the good, but ye shall hit the
evil, ye cannot fa^le of faith, but ye shall fall from grace, and if ye be
we^ry of H^b. 3. 1^ 2 Thessalonians. 2. (...) 4. 4
the word of God, ye shall be tired with the traditions of men, the time was,
when Scriptum est, did beat back devils, and they have Moses and the Prophets
did choke the damned, the ^^k. 16.
time was when Search the Scriptures was in the command of Christ, and men
thought (...). 5. 39.
that in them they had everlasting life, the time was when Angels were cursed,
if they ^^l. 1. 8. 9
preached any other Gospel then that which was delivered by Moses, and Christ.
But now devils, damned men, and Angels are let loose, ^et at liberty, and free
to Preach what they will; so they miss the Scriptures.

Moses and the Prophets are beaten back with Romish Institutions, decretals
Apostaticall, lying Oracles, illusions, and flattering diuinations, with
unwritten vanities, never saw this sin, so soar a sight next to the
sorrows of a Savior, as the razing of Scripture in the hearts of Kings, and
souls of subjects, which has brought upon a great part of Christendom, seas
of error, heresies, and Idolatry.

Nor are our adversaries the Papists, least in this conspiracy against Moses,
and the Prophets, whose books with their bones 2. Chr. 13 ^1.
they have both buried, and burned, shut the doors of the Temple, quenched the
holy lamps, overthrown the Altars, killed the Prophets, disordered the bread
upon the pure table, subverted all, as Ierobo^m did, and yet say: we are the
true Church, away from us. I am holier then thou, under which fair pretense of
holiness and humbleness Col. 18
of mind, (as the Apostle says) they beguile the souls of the simple: and at
their pleasure bear rule over the consciences of men, advancing themselves in
those things which they never saw, rashly pu^t up with their fleshly minds,
and hold not the head, whereof all the body furnished and knit together by
iovnts, and bands, increases with the increasing of God.

Now to dim the brightness of this Sun, and to dearne the Doctrine of
Christ, sealed with his precious blood, they have cast a mist in our eyes, and
would cover their wickedness with a cloud of fair pretense: Matt. 15. 9.
urging for doctrines men's traditions, and saying of the Scriptures and word of
God as Judas said of Mary when she powered out Mat. 26. ^
her ointment upon Christ his head, Ad quid perditio haec? what needs this
wast, ye have Fathers, Councels, Popes, Cardinals, Doctors, Angelical, and
Seraphicall, ye have Sorbonists, Canonists, Friars, Muncks, and Jesuits,
these are yours to conquer the field, ye need none other forces, the Scripture
is but a dull, dead, and a dumb letter, it has no life in it, but these have
both light, and life.

When I think upon this their bare brag, without blows, they seem to me much
like that vaunting Ambassador full of foolish babble, sent from the Aetolians
to F. Quintius then chieftaine in Achaia: who (as Liuie reports the story)
after he had bragged much of the Aetolian forces both by sea and by land, and
their point blanck-shot, fierce horses, and puissant infantry, at last he came
to terrify with naming a sort of strange Nations, their assistance that
scarcely had beeno heard of before, to wit, the Dakes* the Medians, the
Cadusians, the Aelimenans.

Whereunto Quintius answered, now in good sooth (says he) this is mine Host of
Chalcis up and down, who when we wondered upon a time how he met with that
plenty of Venison, we had and such variety withal, the man nothing so
glorious as these fellows here: smiled pleasantly upon us, and said, we
were very welcome to a feast of good tame swine, and no better, but welfare a
good Cook, my masters, (quoth he) who by his cunning hand, what with
seasoning it, and what with serving it up with diverse sauces, has made all
this fair show of wild flesh, and the same of sundry sorts. Even so says
Quintius, this great boaste of little roste, these diverse kinds of Armies,
these many names of Nations, never heard of before, to wit, the Dakes, the
Medes, the Cadusians, the Aelimeians, they are but Syrians, when all is done.

Quidrides papista, de te narratur fabula. Why smilest thou O Papist, the tale
is true of thee, your popish provision is cooked with a curious hand, like the
feast of Chalcis, and yet it is no Venison, but plain porcke and no better,
and for your glorious titles of Romaneforces, as Popes, Cardinals, Canonists,
Friars, Monks, Jesuits, and Sorbonistes never had before; they are but Syrians
when al is done, Sectaries, Schismatikes and Symonistes, which if you please to
balance with the gold of the sanctuary, and lay them with the body and soul
of all your religion upon the scales: with the scriptures of God, ye shall
find them lighter then vanity it self, for as the Prophet ^eremie. ^3. 28.
says, Let him speak my words faithfully, for what is chafe to wheat?

I know it will be opposed that they are learned, wise and witty, I never
denied it, and so were the Scribes and Pharisees in the days of Christ, as
also Julian, Porphiry, and Arius, with all the heretics that have been
sithence, as Gangrenes in the Church of God, and therefore I may well apply to
our learned papists, that which of old Tully said of the Grecians. Tribus
Proflacco.
illis literas, do multarum artium disciplinam, non adimo sermonis ieporem,
ingeniorum d^umon, dicendi copiam, and ^. We yield them to be learned, we
grant that they are skillful in many arts, we take from them no elegancie of
speech, no sharpenes of wit, no copy of words, to be brief, if they assume
any thing more, we envy it not. At religionem illi nunquam hab^erunt: they
were never religious says Tully, and he gives the reason, Quippe quibus
insiurandum iocus est, testimoniam Ladus, they never cared either for an Oath,
or for the holy Oracles, but made a l^ll^ of the one, and a sport of the other.
Now of what esteem, Oaths, and Scriptures are with Papists, I leave it to a
further search and examination, only this for the time being far spent:
religion and faith they never had it, as unto whom Oaths are but lests, and
the sacred Scriptures sports and plays, nay rather their prayer is with the
Pagan Poet, Da fallere, da iustum, sanctumque videri. Give me the gift to
decoiue, and yet give me to seem both just, and holy.

Well I say no more, but leave them to Gods mercy, further to enlighten their
hearts, when his good pleasure shall be.

And so pass to parallel* the Princes, I have in hand in the success of their
government, and how God blessed them alike in their religious endeavors, Fzekia
2. Kings. 18. 6. Matthew. 2. 2. Luke 16. 29.
kept the commandments which the Lord had commanded Moses. And what other
star has guided the heart of Queen Elizabeth? but Moses, and the Prophets,
with this book of life here in my hand which upon her entrance she laid in
her lap, and ever sithence she has kept in her (...) London witness who gave
it, with how joyful an affection she received it, and let the applause of all
the people as then so still marshall her Princely progress in the silence of
their souls, and say Prosper with thy glory, ride on, because of Psalm. 45. 4.
the word of truth, of meekenes, and righteousness, and thy right hand shall
teach thee terrible things.

Ezekia succeeded Ahaz, a good son 2. King. ^8. 1.
to a bad father, So did Queen Elizabeth Mary, a Religious Prince, a
superstitious sister.

Ezekia began to reign when he was Verse. 2.
five and twenty years old. Calculate her majesty's years when she began
her blessed reign, and ye shall find her thereabouts and not much under.

Ezekia opened the doors of the house of the Lord, which Ahaz his father had
2. Chron. 29. 3. 2. Chro. 28. 24.
shut up, he opened them in the first year, and in the first month of his
reign, and repaired them. Queen Elizabeth deferred no time, to establish
Religion, but opened the doors of the Lords house, even in the first year,
first month, and first day of her reign, procuring the Lord to be honored
aright with the pure Religion of her God, and a parliament Royal to establish
the same.

Ezekiah brought in the Priests and the 2. Chron. 29. 5.
Levites, and gathered them into the east street to sanctify the house of the
Lord God, and to carry forth the filthiness out of the sanctuary, Queen
Elizabeth called home her exiled ministers, and Levites from Geneua,
Frankeford, Zuricke, and most parts of Germany, to purge the sanctuary of it
pollutions: and to cast forth the filthiness thereof. Ezekia at the very first
took away 2. Kings. 18. 4.
the high places, and defaced the Images, and cut down the groaues, he brake
in pieces the brazen serpent, that Moses had made (for unto those days the
children of Israel did burn incense to it) and called it in contempt of that
their Idolatry no more a Serpent, but Nehushtan, a piece of brass. What were
your Altars of stone but high places? And what were your Roode loftes, Celles,
and shrines of Saints, but groaues of superstition? what was all your Imagetie,
with lights, lamps, Pax, and palms, but gross Idolatry? and whereunto
England burned incense to the Queen of heaven till Elizabeth came, but then
even at the first down they went: and broke they were by her princely power,
and warrantie, the careasses whereof lie at this day, monuments of popissi
Idolatry, and of her majesty's blessed reformation with this disdain, what are
they now but stick and stone, and worse then Nehushtan, bruised brass?

The Temple being purged, and Imagery 2. Chron. 2^. 28.
defaced: the King with his Princes prepared for the sacrifice, even a sin
offering for the Kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah, with a burnt
sacrifice and an offering of praise unto the Lord, in the words of David and
Asaph the Seer, they sung Psalms, they blewe the Trumpets, and so they praised
the Lord with joy, bowed themselves, and worshipped, whereat Ezechia rejoiced,
and Verse. 36.
all the people that GOD had made them so ready, for the thing was done
suddenly.

Queen Elizabeth having purged the Church of England of that pregnant Idol,
the Mass* what has she less done, then prepared for the holy Sacrament of*
the blessed death, and passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? a sin
offering in deed for the Kingdom, for the sanctuary, and for this our
English Judah. And how often sithence has she sanctified it with her prayer,
and honored it with her presence? her Virgins, Peers, and people bearing her
company, with Trumpet, Organ, Voice and V^all, that GOD had made here her
people so religious, for the thing was done suddenly, and I pray God Revel. 2.
4 Numb. 11 6.
we have not lost a part of that our first love, that our Manna grow not
loathsome, that we be not colder now, then we were then, and that the first
ten years do not blemish the last twenty of her gracious reign, what ever
it is? me thinks, there is a want both of faith to God, and fealty toward
the Prince. Revel. 3. 19.
Grant Lord we may be zealous and amend.

Ezechia came to his reign in desperate times, when Ahaz his father had
perverted the state both of Church and commonweal, fetched Altars from
Damascus, and sacrificed his sons to the fire, 1. Kings 6. 34.
became tributarie unto Assure, exiled the godly of Judah, and had brought in
the abominations of Babel, and subscribed to Tiglath Pilesar, King of Assure,
saying, I am thy servant and thy Son.

Even so, Queen Elizabeth began her reign in desperate times, when her
Sister had shaken the State, with no less fearful then fiery designs,
fetched Altars from Rome, and sacrificed her chiefest subjects to the fire,
exiled the godly of the land, brought in Strangers, because a vassal to the
Pope, and subscribed to his power, saying: I am thy Servant, I am thy
Hand-mayde.

Ezechiah withstood Assure, paid him 2. Kings* 18. and 89.
no tribute, yielded him no homage, resisted Rabsechah, and endured his
railing, with a Princely patience, committting the success to God, who made
him glorious by deliverance.

And did not our gracious sovereign withstand the Pope, and all his vassal
Kings? Did she not discharge herself and people of all Tribute, Toll, and
Tax, that way?

Has she not endured the raylings of many Romish Rabsecahes, with a Princely
patience? and having committed the success of all her affairs to God, is she
Ps. 149. 4.
not made glorious by deliverance, whiles they are a dead, accursed, and
cursing crew, and yet she lives a blessed Queen, long may we say to our
solace, and their sorrow, Dan. 6. 21
live, live.

It is said of Ezechia, that the Lord saved 2. Chron. 32. 22.
him, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, from the hand of Zenacharib, King of
Assure: and from the hands of all other, and maintained them on every side,
good LORD how have the Leaguers cast their hands together with one consent, and
consederate against thine anointed, thy Church Psalm. 83. 3
and people in England, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalecke, the Philistimes, with
them that dwell at Tire, I mean the Tabernacles of Romish Edomites, whose cry
was down Ps. 137. 7.
with it, down with it, even to the ground, let us take to our selves the
house of God in possession. But (good Lord) how often Ps. 83. 12.
have we been saved, both Prince and people, from this ill kind of men, how
have thou maintained us on every side, thine Angel fought for Ezechia, thy
Stars Psalm. 12. 7 2. Kings, 19. 35.
have fought for Debora, and the river Kison has swept them away, O my God
make them still like unto a wheel. And as the Judge 5. 20 21.
stubble before the wind.

In the days of Hezechia it is said, that many brought offerings unto the
LORD ^^ Jerusalem, and presents to Hezechia, 2. Chron. 32. 23.
King of Judah, so that he was magnified in the sight of all nations from
thenceforth, they persecuted Churches of other Kingdoms, and poor exiled
Christians, let them speak to the comfort of their souls, with how great joy
and gladness, their offerings here in England have been tendered by them, and
received by us, let them speak to the honor of our Queen and country, how
liberally they have bin maintained, when they had nothing to feed upon, but
wind and air, yea and what nation is there, in whose sight Queen Elizabeth
is not magnified, and either dread for her puissance, loved for her virtue, or
admired for her government?

To be brief, Ezechia had exceeding 2. Chron. 32. 27. 28
much riches, and honor, treasures, of silver and gold, of precious stones, of
sweet odors, and of shields, and of al pleasant vessels, storehouses for the
increase of wheat, wine, and oil, stals for all beasts, and ranges for the
stables.

The Lord has blessed our Queen with his hidden treasures here on earth, and
her honor is great in her abundance, her Garrisons are full in Ireland,
Flaunders, and Barwick, and yet her treasures are not exh^^^sted, and for her
store of shields, shot, and munition, wheat, wine, and oil, stalles for
beasts, and ranges for stables, let her officers speak both in Court and
Country, sure I am we feel no lack, her exactions are not grievous.

Lastly, and so an end of her praise, but never of our prayer to GOD for her.
Ezechia Esaias 38. 1
was sick unto the death, he prayed unto the Lord, and he heard his prayers,
and pitied his tears, and the Lord spoke comfortably unto him, and gave him a
sign of his recovery, by the going back of the shadow of Asa his dial
ten degrees upon the wall. A sure symboll or Sacrament of fifteen years more
to be added unto his days.

Where note first I pray you, that the promise from God was fifteen: and the
degrees were but ten, to teach us (as one has truly observed) that the Lord
ever gives more graces unto his word, then to his Sacraments, that begettting,
these but confirming the faith, which the word has formerly be gotten.

But to the comparison in hand and project I ay me at, we know that Princes
Ps. 82. 6. 7
are GODS: yet must they dye like men, there is no difference in the moulde:
from the rich Crown of Kings, to the poor beggars crutch, all must grind to
greet, and to determine of the life of Kings, and period of Kingdoms, is not
the least of Gods secrets only reserved to himself, yet if when it shall
please the Lord to touch our dread sovereign with sickness, the harbenger of
death, it would likewise please him to pull back the dial of her days some
few degrees, and add more years unto her days, it were, and would be as
great a blessing to us of England, as ever Hezechia his life was to Isreal's
Judah: which and if it may not by reason our many Prou. 28. 2.
sins, then Lord take her to eternity never to dye.

And in the mean time, whilst we may enjoy her blessed reign, with her
life, let us foster and cherish Elizabeth: as chaste Abishagge, with the
worthies of Israel, did their David, of whom it is written 1. Kings. 1. 1.
that when he was old and stricken in years, they covered him with clothes,
but no heat came unto him, The counsel was to find out a fairer virgin to
stand before the King, to chearish him, and lie in his bosom, that the King
might get beat, so they found one Abyshag a Sunamite, and brought her to the
King, the maid was exceeding fair, and cherished the King and ministered unto
him, but the King knew her not.

The use is good, for in the person of David, you may behold (as in a mirror)
the state and condition of Princes, what it is: Princes are old, cold and
chillery, Princes Psalm. 82. 6. 7.
must decay, and wear away.

In the person of David's servants, and fair Abishage, is to be seen the love
and loyalty toward their Sovereigns, what it ought to be, they stretch their
wits to advise and practice with all their power, how to preserve the Lords
anointed, subjects must be careful of their King.

The public and private prayer of all the land, who owe faith to God, and
fealty to their Prince, all praise, and prophecy this day, what is it but
chaste and fair Abishage, found out to foster their liege Lady, the Queen, to
stand before her, chearish, and lie in her bosom, to get her heat, and
lengthen her life, but oh that our prayers were more powerful, yet to prevail
with the Lord of life, that she might live to his glory, and our comfort,
sweet Sunamyte let thy virginal vigor pierce her veins, warm her blood,
refresh her spirits, Lord let the powerful prayer of priest, Peer and people
prevail with their God, for the safety of his anointed.

Without which it is to small purpose what ever we can say, do, or devise, for
what is policy without piety, except the Psalm. 127. 12.
Lord keep the city, the watchman watches but in vain, and except the Lord
be her guard great is her danger, for all humane succors fail in their
greatness, no gold of Ophir, no Orient pearl of Peru, or Ier. 17. 5.
Mexico, no arm of flesh, no horse, ship or shower of shot, no watch, guard,
or counsel, no Physic, drink, or diet, no furs of spotted Ermynes, or sweet
Sables, can preserve your Elizabeth, give her life or length of days, fair
Abishage must give her heat. It is the perfume of our prayer to God in heaven:
that must preserve our Prince on earth. And so let us pray, O Lord God
almighty, etc.

FINIS.

