FOUR SERMONS, PREACHED AND PVBLIKELY TAVGHT BY RICHARD LEAKE, Preacher of the
word of God at Killington, within the Baronrie of Kendall, and County of
Westmerland: immediately after the great visitation of the pestilence in the
foresaid County.

Ezechiel 24. verse. 13. Thou remainest in thy filthiness and wickedness,
because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness, till I have caused my wrath to fall upon thee.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KINGSTON, for Thomas Man. 1599.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, M. THOMAS STIKELAND, AND M. JAMES BELLINGHAM, Esquires,
and two of her Majesty's Justices of the peace, within the Baronrie of Kendall,
and county of Westmerland, RICHARD LEAKE wishes all graces needful for this
life, and the continual increase of all graces pertaining to eternal life, to
the end of their days.
IT is not unknown unto your worships, and to us all round about, what great
and manifold dangers have ouerspread all our country, by the space of these
two last years and more, as well by dearth, as also by strange and fearful
diseases, and sicknesses. It is no less known unto us also, how little good,
and small relief, all outward means of remedy and comfort brought unto the
distressed ones in their extremities, and who knows not how lamentable and
woeful was the state of the afflicted one, (especially in such places as were
infected with the pestilence) and what fear came upon us all thorough that
their affliction; what mourning amongst them, and daily devises amongst our
selves, how to avoid and escape dangers? I wish from my heart, that the
original breeding, and first occasion of these lamentable times, were as well
known, or herafter may be known of us all, viz. how that it was not infection
of the air, distemperature in their bodies, much less the malicious and
devilish practices of witches, or yet blind fortune, or any other such like
imagined causes, which were breeders of these evils. But the mass and
multitude of our sins, in rebelling against the holy one of Jsrael, these (I
say) have been the prouokers of the Almighty, to make us drink of the cup of
afflictions, these have pulled upon us al these plagues, and brought upon us
all these fearful and afflicted times, wherein we have lately been: which
point, that it might appear plain to the sight and view of all my neighbors
(whose hearts have awaked at the beholding of the said calamities) I have
labored in this little treatise following, to make known, what has caused
all these woes, and who has wrought and brought unto us better days, as also
what duty we owe to the Lord, for our gracious and long desired deliverance.
Which I am bold to dedicate unto your Worships, and that for two respects:
first, for that I persuade my self, that you are both favorable, and also
forward to entertain, and bid welcome all that bring the glad tidings of
salvation: whereby I am resolved that you will not only your selves accept and
take in good part, these my poor labors, but also patronize, countenance, and
defend the^ against al those, who shall deride and scoff at them, as they do
at all good things, in my self or others, and secondly, for that you be
Magistrates, and Justices within those limits and precincts, most parts whereof
have bin infected most pitifully, and (I am persuaded) most justly, for those
great and capital sins, which rule and reign amongst us: as gross Popery,
and blind superstition in very many places, in so much, that I am afraid,
that that abominable Idol of indignation the Mass is used in diverse places
about us, and that very boldly: add hereunto, filthy drunkenness, abominable
whoredoms, open profanation of the Sabbath, unlawful pastimes, with infinite
many more, which the further they be ripped into, the more filthy stinch
arises out of them. These and such like sins (I say) being so pregnant and
rise amongst us: I doubt not, but as you espied them, and heard them cried
against by word and writing, you with the rest of your associats joining with
you, will hold on in zeal of Gods glory, the peace of Gods children, and the
discharge of your own duties, that these sins may have those laws executed
upon them, which most christianly is provided in this land, for restraining
them: which (no doubt) shall so greatly tend to the glory of God, the
furthering of the couse of the Gospel, and the flourishing estate of our
christian commonwealth that in short space, the excellent effects of this
zealous government, shall prove the truth and vprightnes thereof. And thus
briefly I cease: committing this little work, and the issue thereof, for
acceptance at your Worships hands, and all other that shall read it, to the
wisdom of him, who has the disposing of the hearts, even of Kings and
rulers, even one God, and three persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Spirit, to whom be glory, majesty, dominion and praise for evermore.

Your Worships bounden, Richard Leake.

To the Christian Reader.
THe occasion (good reader) of my offering this poor mite into the Lords
treasury, and of sending abroad this fruit, which the increase of my small
talent brings forth unto the Lords family, was this: I pleased God by the
space of two years together, to give our country (in the North parts of this
land) a taste of his power in judgment, being provoked thereunto by our
manifold enormious sins: he visited us with many and grievous sicknesses, as
first with the hot fever, after, with the bloody issue, and lastly, most
fearfully with the extreme disease of the pestilence, inflicted upon many,
and shaken at all in our whole country. And albeit neither I, nor any of the
people under my charge, were infected therewith, yet had we all of us, the
cause thereof within our sinful hearts, as well as any others: it had
environed us almost round about, we had scarcely any way to turn us, but
mourning might be heard; so that we expected no better than neighbors fare.
Furthermore, in this time, and before (as it is well known) the Lord our God*
did chasten and punish this whole land with dearth and famine of bread, and
scarcity of other victuals in diverse places, since which time of tribulation,
it has pleased him (who is God, blessed for ever amen) to make known his
power in mercy, as he had before manifested the same in judgment. For be gave
plenty and cheapnes of bread and all kind of victuals in stead of scarcity
and dearth: he extinguished the heat of sickenesses in those places where it
was most fervent, and withheld it from those places unto which it was most
fearfully threatened, so that then might be heard amongst us, mirth in stead of
mourning, songs in stead of doleful sighings; gladsome salutations in meetings,
in stead of diligent shunning each of others presence, for fear of infection.
The boistrous storms of afflictions now driven away, and calm showers of
comfort descending: the clouds of his heavy displeasure now being dispersed,
and the brightness of his favorable countenance shining upon us: sickness now
ceased and health restored: famine taken away, and plenty ministered; I thought
it high time not only to preach unto the people of my own charge, these
sermons following (which teach plainly what use we are to make of these and
such like works of God, and what duty they bind us unto) but also to publish
them for the benefit of all such as the doctrine does pertain unto. This
occasion and opportunity offered (being well considered of all them who shall
read these Sermons) may serve sufficiently to excuse me of all such wants as
shall be espied in me: for the proverb is not more old than true: a little
betime is worth much too late. How good is a word in due season? (says
Solomon) Pro. 15.25. as if he had said, Oh who is able to declare how good a
word is, which comes in due season? He himself afterward shows whereunto
it may be compared: A word (says he) spoken in his place, is like apples of
gold, with pictures of silver, Chapter 25. verse 11. Now sure am I, that there
is no wise body can deny, but these Sermons were spoken in season, and also
published in season, except some shall say, that they had better have come
sooner, which I could not remedy: and yet I fear not their coming too late:
for the dangers are lately passed, the deliverance newly obtained, the prints
or marks of his correcting rods, are yet to be seen in many great towns,
whose habitations are as yet scarcely replenished: the noise of their mournings
and gronings, which were sore chastened, are as yet sounding in some of our
ears: his gracious blessings are as yet even in our mouths; so that neither
his punishments upon the wicked, his chastisements upon his children, nor his
several blessings upon them both, now again multiplied, can possibly be out
of memory. If any say that they (such as they are) be published over hastily,
because peradventure they may seem to prevent the publishing of some more
learned man's work taken in hand upon the like occasion: I answer, that even
for this purpose I stayed these my Sermons a whole season, gladly desiring, and
earnestly expecting the publishing of some of their labors, upon the same
occasion, and to the same end, that I have published these: yea, so long I
stayed, till I feared, that if I should have lingered any longer, the fitnes of
the time would have stolen away; and yet could I hear of none which went about
or intended any such matter. Wherefore thus long I stayed, looking for some
man's labors to do more good, and no longer would I defer, least there
should be no man's labors set forth upon the same occasion, which might do any
good.

Now then (the premises considered) I pray thee Christian reader, to take in
good part, this my labor, and then it shall be as an earnest penie of some
riper fruits out of my poor garden, when God shall minister a fit season to
gather them, and to send them abroode, I aim at nothing herein, but the glory
of God, the benefiting of others, and the discharge of my own duty, if by any
means I might attain thereunto, though but in some small measure: and though
I miss thereof with men; yet not with God, who regards and accepts the
will and desire. As for the malicious and envious carpers and scorners, who
have Eagles eyes to see motes in godly men's labors, but blind as Moales, to
see beams of wickedness in their own lives; ready to censure others of all
wants, but sooth themselves in their own ways, if they envy me, it is but
their property, if rashly they censure, and judge amiss of me, it is their
ignorance, if they with open mouth bark at me, I have therein many to take
part with me, whose books I scantly am worthy to bear after them: none
whereof could ever write so learnedly, deliver the truth so zealously, or do
any work so profitably, but either Atheist, Papist, sectarie, one wicked
person or other, was ready at hand either privily or openly, to labor by
power and policy, persuasion or threatening to hinder the good success of
those their labors. I therefore account all their malicious carping and
scornful censuring, the fruit which their profane lips do daily bring forth.
But unto such as fear God and have need to be increased by the mutual help of
their brethren (I say) read these sermons diligently, and meditate upon the^,
that ye may see the works of god, and the use ye ought to make of them, when
God has chastened you by sicknesses or any other way, humble your selves
before God repent and turn nearer unto him, and again when he has mercy
upon you, and grants unto you ease and comfort, then beware, sin no more
least a worse thing come unto you, which, that it may be fruitful, God for
Christ his sake grant through the mighty working of his holy spirit, unto
which one God, Father, Son and holy Ghost, be glory and pray for ever. Amen.

Thine in the Lord: Richard Leake.

THE FIRST SERMON OF THE DVTIE OF OUR deliverance: drawn out of this portion
of the word of God following: viz.
Ioh. 5. verse. 14. And after that Jesus found him in the temple, and said unto
him, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto
thee.


THese words are a speech or kind of exhortation, The sum of ye whole verse.
made by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, unto the poor man, whom a little
before he had healed, describing unto him the duty of his late received
deliverance: as also by a loving and friendly caveat, forewarning him of the
fear and danger of a relapse into sin again, and former follies. Wherein,
The parts of it.
for the better explanation of the particulars, we have to consider these parts
or special circumstances.

First, the time when Christ uttered these The time when.
vz. a little after he had been healed of his great and grievous pain, to the
end he might the better remember it: and immediately he had talked with the
Pharisees Christ his enemies, least by persuasion they should have corrupted,
or by threatening feared him, not to give God his due: drawn out of these words
of the text: And after that.

The place where.
vz. the temple: he found him in the temple: a fit place, that such heavenly
and divine words might take more effect. David coming into the temple, always
his zeal and earnest desire to praise God was kindled. And if there be any
spark of grace, usually it will burst out, coming into the temple, the
ordinary place where God is worshipped.

The words of exhortation themselves.
and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more: a The loving
caveat.
forewarning the danger of not doing the duty aforesaid, in these words:
least a worse thing come unto thee.

Of all these parts, and their several branches in order.

The time when.
was a little after our Savior Christ had showed the great miracle upon him,
in healing him of his disease, which had vexed him thirty eight years, to the
intent he might the better remember it. Where first we are to note, Christ a
careful shepherd.
the careful dealing of Christ as a true shepherd, to use all means for
gathering into the fold, the lost and straying sheep; he omitteth no
occasion, neglects no means, neither is hindered by any labor, to instruct
and edify either by doctrine, or miracle. The like course must be imitated of
all the faithful shepherds of Christ Jesus: to be instant in season, and out
of season: 2. Tim. 4.2. 1. Cor. 8.13. and 9. ver. 21, 22, 23
to exhort, to improve, rebuke: And with Paul, to become all unto all, to the
end they may win some.

Again, we note here the duty of all Gods children, when God has bestowed
his blessings upon them, even immediately thereupon to render thanks, and sing
praises to the highest. Exo. 15.2, 3. etc Judge. 5.2, 3. etc.
Thus did Moses after the great deliverances God gave unto Israel. Thus did
Deborah when God had given her victory over her cruel enemy Sisera. Thus did
David for every miraculous blessing God showed upon him, using this or the like
speech: Psalm. 116.12.13.
What shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me?
Luke 17.16.
And finally thus did the tenth leaper when Christ had cleansed him, return
with speed to give God praise. So that hence I conclude this doctrine, Delay
not thy thankfulness when God offers his mercy.
that immediately upon the bestowing of Gods blessings upon us, we ought with
thanksgiving to put them in remembrance. As most of us now living in the North
parts of this land, have most largely tasted the comfortable, and never
stinting stream of his mercies. First, in preserving us in the pinching time
of dearth. Next, Some particulars wherein the North-parts have found God loving
to them.
in turning our poverty into plenty. Thirdly, his miraculous saving us in the
vehement and ouer-spreading time of the pestilence. So that when to man's
expectation we have been within the reach of it: yet even then has his power
in mercy ouerreached and prevented the same. So that in regard of these late
received deliverances, Our danger bypast.
I may very fitly use the patheticall conclusion that David uses, after a
large survey of his mercies: Psalm. 105.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

The subtle dealing of the Pharisees.
the Pharisees dealt with him as they were accustomed to deal with all
others, who they saw to favor Christ, Note. Ioh. 9.24. Ioh. 6.47.48.
and that they run into great danger if any way they did affect him. Thus
dealt they with the man that was borne blind, whom Christ had healed, The
cruelty of ye Pharisees, when the other would not prevail. Ioh. 9.22.
and with those servants by which two means they held back many, yea even of
the chiefer sort, Ioh. 12.42, 43.
that they durst not openly profess any good will to Christ. Our Savior
Christ therefore espying the danger this poor man was in, after he had talked
with the Pharisees, The love and care of Christ to call upon us when we are in
most danger.
thought it then a fit time, even immediately thereupon, to utter these words of
the text, thereby to bring into his remembrance afresh his late received
benefit: as also to make him bold and zealous in the course of a Christian, by
showing him the danger that would ensue, if he did it not.

Here may we note, Dangerous for weak ones to be conuented before persecutors.
that it is very dangerous for weak Christians to hearken to the subtle
persuasions of Gods enemies: or to be called before them being in authority
and to be threatened: as may appear by the often reuolts and recantations of
many weak Christians in the Primitive Church, and our own Church of England,
when they were urged thereunto by persecuting tyrants, or bloodsucking Bishops.
A special remedy against fear and fainting in our troubles for the Gospel
sake.
Therefore that neither the one may deceive them, nor the other terrify them,
they are themselves to use incessant prayer, that God would give them his
spirit, to lead them into all truth: and being in the truth, that he would
in his mercy vouchsafe them the spirit of boldness, to profess his name even
before kings and princes, and never be ashamed.

The duty of good pastors.
Secondly in Christ we are here to note the duty of good shepherds over their
flocks, as also of stronger Christians to their weaker and new converted
brethren, The duty of one Christian to another.
vz. where they epsy the intrume^ts of Satan so busy, both by persuasions and
threatenings, to quench the spirit of God in new conuerts, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. 1.
Pet. 22.
even then to be as ready as Christ was here, whenever they meet with
them, Exhort one another daily. Esaias. 2.3, 4.
either in public exhortations, or private conferences, with Christ to put
them in mind of their late deliverances out of the claws of Satan, and
kingdom of darkness, and of the danger yt will ensue, if ever they fall away.
And thus much for the first part of the text, drawn out of these words, and
after that.

The second part.
The second part, vz. The place where. The place where our master Christ uttered
these words to the man whom he had healed before, was the temple. Jesus after
the miracle showed in healing the man, got him out of the way for a certain
space: and coming into the temple, there he found the man upon whom the
miracle of healing had been showed, lately come from talking with the
Pharisees: whereupon Christ, what in regard of the urgent occasion, and what
in regard of the fitnes of the place, utters the words of exhortation in my
text: Behold, thou art made whole. The temple was the place where God had
promised his presence, when they came either to pray, or to persuade unto
Christianity: as the Lord promised unto Solomon the builder of the temple in
these words: And the Lord said unto him, 1. King. 9.3.
I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication that thou have made before me. I
have hallowed this house (which thou have built) to put my name there for ever:
and mine eyes, and mine heart shall be there perpetually. Christ therefore in
this temple persuading unto newnes of life, had the promise of his fathers
presence, to make his persuasion powerful, as also to print in the heart of the
hearer, a more reverend regard and estimation thereof being delivered. David a
type of the militant Church. Read Psalm. 84. and Psa. 122.1.2 1. Chon. 29.9.
David being a true type and figure of the Militant Church here on earth, never
came into the temple but his heart leapt for joy, his joy was increased, and
his zeal kindled: yea that which being out of the temple he could never
attain unto, was in the temple made partaker of. Salomons temple a type of the
spiritual temple.
Though that temple was a type and figure of the spiritual temple never made
with hands: and there is not the same use of it now, as there was then, yet
have we at this day two things, Two things now resembling Salomo^s temple.
Ioh. 4.24.
that may fitly resemble that temple, and where God will as well hear the
prayers, and receive the sacrifices of his Church, being done in spirit and
truth, as he would then.

Godly societies meet together for exhorting one another. Matthew. 18.20.
wheresoever and whenever they meet together, according to the rule and
warrant of Gods word: to such Christ has promised his presence, saying: Where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them.

Public assemblies of the faithful at the house of prayer.
to power forth prayers to the Lord, be partakers of the word preached, and
administration of the Sacraments. Where such assemblies are employed to these
aforesaid uses, they are not as the Prophet calls the temple in his time, the
den of thieves: Esaias 56.7. Ierem. 7.11. Mar. 11.17.
but they are even the blessed throne and kingdom of Christ Jesus, to whose
faith and constancy Christ has promised such power, that even the gates of
hell shall never be able to prevail against them. In these two temples (as I
may call them) when we meet with our brethren, it is not our duties to prate
and chat of worldly matters, but rather every one of us, Heb. 3.13.
to exhort one another while it is called to day, least we be hardened through
the deceitfulnes of sin. Yea, to keep the profession of our hope without
wavering, and to provoke one another unto love and to good works: Heb. 10.23,
24, 25.
not forsaking the godly fellowship that ought to be amongst Gods children.
And to be careful always to cherish and embolden the weak, putting them in
mind of their miraculous deliverance out of the kingdom of darkness, into the
kingdom and clear light of the Gospel. And thus much of the second part.

Of the third part, which is the words of exhortation themselves: wherein we
have to consider these three branches following.

First, a rehearsal of the benefit done to the behold thou art made whole.

The principal cause of his long sickness, Sin no more. As if he should
say, sin has bin the cause of thy former sickness: if therefore hereafter
thou will remain a sound man, sin no more.

Thirdly, what must be the effect of this miracle sin no more, or to cease
from sin. Romans 2.4.
The bountifulnes of God ought to lead us to repentance.

Of the first branch: Behold, thou art made whole. Where first we are to
consider that our Savior uses a word of attention, or to make the matter he
has in hand take more effect, says: Ecce, Behold. Psalm. 32. v. 5.7.
The Prophet David speaking of any extraordinary matter, always uses an
hebrew verb, importing ye like, which is Selah: so likewise the servant of God
Moses, using any vehement exhortation, commonly has this word, behold or
remember, as thus: Behold, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Exodus 20.
I set before thee this day, life and death, blessing and cursing. The Prophets
of the Lord speaking either of the manifestation of Christ in his humane
nature, or of his second coming again to judgment, or of any such great
matter, uses this word behold. As Esaias: Tell the daughter Sion, Esaias. 62.11.
Zach. 9.9. Matthew. 21.5. Mal. 4.1.
Behold, thy King comes, meekely riding on an ass, etc. And Malachie:
Behold, the day comes that shall burn like an oven, and all the proud, yea
and all that do wickedly shall be stubble. Apoc. 1.7.
Behold, be comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, etc. and 22.7.
Behold I come shortly. Even so here as a preface to the declaration of the
benefit done to him, Christ says, Behold: give ear, consider well what I have
done for thee, pass not lightly over that miracle I have showed upon thee, in
giving thee health. Where we are to note, Receive his word, miracles and
mercies with attentio^.
that GOD would have us receive his word, his exhortations, threatenings,
blessings and miracles, with attention, heed taking, and waying well, who it
is that does such things for us, and what is done, as we ourselves.

O my countrymen, and dear brethren in Christ Jesus, (for whose sake the Lord
has moved me to pen this little treatise) have just occasion to give ear
what the Lords Echo sounds in our ears daily, Above many others the North
parts.
after our great and late received deliverances: even thus, Behold thou art
made whole, etc. Whereunto let every one of us fill our families, our
meetings, and conferences with this heavenly harmony and sweet sounding
melody, answering the former behold, saying then, since it is so indeed: My
soul praise thou the Lord, Psalm. 13.1.2. Psalm. 57.7.8.
and all that is within me praise his holy name. Awake thou my glory, awake
lute and harp, I my self will awake right early. And let us one provoke an
other to praise the Lord of might, for his miraculous mercies, as Deborah
stirred up her own soul, and Barake, to sing praise to God for their
triumphant victories: Up Deborah, Judge. 5.12. etc.
up, arise sing a song: arise Barak, etc. Even so, up O Westmerland,
Comberland, and Northumberland: up ye several towns, congregations and
families, and every particular soul; whose safety the living Lord, by the
shadowing wings of his mercy has preserved, and sing a song: cease not, but
make the earth sound again with the voice of thansgiuing, and provoking one
another with such patheticall speeches as this: O behold how greatly the Lord
has loved us, how mightily he has delivered, and has shadowed us under the
wings of his mercy, until the dangers were over past. And thus much for this
word behold.

Of the benefit it self. In the manifestation of the benefit, we have to
consider four circumstances.

The first circumstance.
Of the first circumstance. Although it can not be gathered by express words in
the text what manner of disease it was that troubled him: Not expressly, but by
circumstances.
yet by circumstances it may probably be coniectured. In the 3. verse of this
chapter is set down, that blind, lame, and withered resorted to the poole,
waiting for the moving of the water: so that it is very likely, that one of
these he was. To set down which he was, I gather that a certain lamenes or
witherednes did occupy and possess his whole body, which is proved by his
answer to Christ, verse. 7. Sir, I have no man when the water is troubled to put
me into the poole. And the Greek word signifies, to be carried by the help of
another.

The second circumstance.
Of the second circumstance. The text sets down that he had been diseased
38. years, verse. 5. a long time, and if a man should consider of it with
mortal eye, it were able to make him think God either had forgotten him,
Though long we languish, yet still wait with patience.
or given him over. Yet hence if we rightly weigh it, we may consider many
excellent points. First, we are here instructed to patience: for the time of
thirty eight years was very long, Calvin. in Ioh. cap. 5. ver. 7. quantumuis
diu nos suspensos teneat, sic anxie gemamus sub nostris arumnis, vt longi
temporis taedium nu^quam nos exanimet.
wherein God deferred his helping hand in healing this miserable man: which
notwithstanding God had decreed from the beginning to do. The like patience
ought Gods children to have in bearing any other afflictions of the body
whatsoever: for as he dealt here with this poor soul, so deals he for the
most part with his whole Church, and every particular member of the same. He
deferred the deliverance of his people Israel, Exodus chap. 1. to chap. 12.
from under the captivity and bondage of Pharaoh, even for the space of four
hundred and odd years, yea so long, till the enemies thought to have them
their bondslaues for ever, and his poor Church despaired of their deliverance.
Read 1. Sam. chap. 17. to chap. 31. where is set down the death of Saul.
He suffered David (after he was anointed king over Israel) to be for many
years tossed to and fro as an abject, and at every turn to be in danger, yea
even forsaken and hated of all, like a forlorn creature: so that David (if he
had not possessed his soul with patience, and relied on the promises of the
Lord) might have thought Gods mercies turned into mere mockery, and his
promise no better then a vanishing puff of wind. 2. King. 38.
He suffered his rebellious Israel to lie so long weather beaten under the
captivity of the Babylonians, that though there was exta^t a promise from his
own mouth, that a remnant should return: Ezekiel. 14.22. and 39.25.
yet were they out of al hope ever to return, but even in that strange land to
lie buried in the dust and ashes of everlasting ignominy and reproach. Yea so
hopeless were they of any return, that the Lord God was enforced to send his
Prophet unto them, and to demonstrate their deliverance, Ezekiel. 32. ver. 1. to
verse. 14.
(though now in their judgment desperate) by the similitude of giving life to
a great number of dead men's bones dispersed and scattered here and there.

To conclude and come nier our own times: the Lord suffered for many hundred
years this land of ours, wherein we live, to lie fallow and ouergrowne
altogether first with Paganism, and then with the brambles and bushes of
Popery and superstition, small hope that ever it should have bin a well tilled
field, and sweet garden to the Lord. Many the like proofs might I bring, yea
even from the head of the Church Christ himself: but the former already
alleged, are sufficient to prove my propounded proposition, vz. that as
Christ deferred for the space of thirty eight years to cure this lame man,
the like he has done, and does now, in afflicting his Church generally, or any
particular member thereof, be it of the body or the soul.

Now follows the second branch of my proposition: which is, that for all this
long delay of the Lord, yet was it decreed with him from the beginning in the
fulness of time, and his own appointed season, to work their deliverances. So
when the four hundred and thirty years were expired, the length and date of
time, he had decreed the Israelites should be in captivity and bondage under
Pharaoh: Exodus 12.41.
even the very same day did the Lord bring his people Israel out of Egypt,
Exodus 12.4.
even with ye spoil of their enemies, and the enriching of themselves. So did
he with his servant David, when he had a long time soked him in afflictions,
and fined him in the furnace of adversity, so that thereby he had fitted him
for such a future dignity: even then did the Lord take Saul out of the way,
2. Sam. 2.
and with great pomp crowned David King of Israel.

The like may be said of the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem under the
Babylonians: who when they thought they should never return to the temple any
more, to build up the breaches thereof, and to sing praises to Jehovah in their
own land: yet then, when they least looked for it, did the Lord bring them
again, Ezra. 1. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
and gave them power to repair the breaches of the temple, and to build up the
broken walls of Jerusalem. And withal, those rods of his indignation (I
mean the Babylonians) he cast into the fire, and utterly consumed, with the
breath of his nosthrils. And how true find we this by the experience of our
own nation, that when the Gospel and the light thereof was even as it were
quite buried, Gods glory defaced, his Saints (if any were raised up) cruelly
murdered, and in stead thereof, first the stinking dung of Paganism, and after
that the perilous poison of popery planted, small hope that ever any redress
should be had: yet even then did the Lord put into the heart of King Henry the
8. of famous memory, to begin a reformation, King Edward the 6. painefully to
prosecute the same, and now our gracious Deborah to finish and build up that
which the other two in their own did not: whose glorious and gracious
government God long prosper, with increase of knowledge, zeal and power, for
the glory of his great name, the propagation of the crown and kingdom of
Christ Jesus, and the utter defacing and racing out of the traces of
Antichrist. Amen, Amen.

And to conclude by the example of this poor man, he had been diseased 38.
years, old, and so the less hope, withered and dried up, so as to the
judgment of all he was like to die so, as long he had lived. Yet when Christ
saw his appointed and due time, he came and made him a sound man as ever he
was. Hence (as I said before) let us learn patience in our greatest miseries:
and though our burdens which the Lord has laid upon us be such, as often they
make us groan, yet still let us sigh and groan under hope, The burdens of
the faithful vpholden by the Lord.
with full assurance grounded upon Gods promise, that when he sees it most
meet, he will work our deliverance. Let the due consideration hereof, take
away from us all murmurings, grudgings, or male-contented hearts in all our
troubles, whether they be troubles of the body, or anguishes of the mind,
still grounding our patience upon Gods revealed promise in his word, as thus:
All things shall fall out for the best, Romans 8.28. Verse. 38. 1. Cor. 10.13.
to the^ that love God. Nothing shall separate us from the love of God in
Christ. And, God is faithful, who has promised he will lay no more upon his
children, then he will make them able to bear: but in the midst of the
temptation he will give them a happy issue and joyful deliverance. And when
thou art weary therewith, have recourse unto Christ, Matthew. 11.28.
and he will take thy burden upon his back, and relieve thee.

Now, if any demand of me the reason why the Lord does so sore, and for so
long a space afflict his children before he work their deliverance: my
answer is this. The Lord does it for diverse ends: some whereof I have here
(for the comfort of his afflicted ones) set down as follows.

First the Lord does sore afflict his people, 1 Reasons alleged, why God does
so long and largely afflict his own people.
and long delay before he work their deliverance, to teach them humility,
least they should out of measure be puffed up. For this cause did he sore
afflict and buffet the Apostle Paul.



David, in afflicting him so long, til David could say from his very heart, It
is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy law.

David make of his affliction, saying: Before I was afflicted I went wrong.





The Lord grant for his infinite mercies sake, The application.
that the long and late afflictions laid upon us and our country, may work
these aforesaid effects in us, even to pull down our proud hearts, to
mollify our hard hearts, to instruct and teach our ignorant hearts, to direct
aright our unstable and wandering hearts, to make chaste and pure our unchaste and
whorish hearts, and to redress and amend our wicked and transgressing hearts:
that so our pride being turned into humility, stiffeneckednes into
circumcision, instabilitie into certainty, dishonestie against our husband
Christ, into loyalty of a conscience unspotted: and to conclude, our daily
sinning into a continual godly sorowing for the same: we may then say with
David, (as many I mean as have these aforesaid effects wrought in them by
their afflictions) glad are we, and good has it been for us, that long,
largely, and yet most lovingly, the Lord has afflicted us, seeing they have
taught us the misery of our days, the danger of our sins, the loathing of
this wretched world, and a love of the life to come.

vz. It is the usual manner of dealing with the Lord, to defer his helping
hand and full deliverance, till all means of help invented by man be
frustrate, and the case in the judgment of many seems desperate: God helps
when all other means are helples. The end of the Lord so long deferring.
thus did he with this poor man, and in all the aforenamed proofs. And he
does it for this especial end, that in victories, conquests, or deliverances,
God might have his own, which is even the whole glory. If we had no warrant
out of Gods word, for the confirmation of this point: yet our own experience
these two years bypast, Our countries late visitation approve it.
in the most places of our country, is of sufficiency to testify and witness
how true a doctrine his is, seeing that no watching, no government, great
multitudes or careful keeping could prevent his punishments, but they came
upon us: no physic could stint it, but it increased and continued: yea when
all man's remedies were administered, yet were the poor afflicted ones still
remediless: so that great towns, many congregations, and infinite families
espying all these hopes, now hopeless: and though by some called comforts, yet
comfortles now, have in utter despair of them all, let go the anchor, pulled
down the sail, and committed the whole custody of their poor tossed ship to
him, who first raised up the tempest against it, and he, even that mighty God
Jehovah, (who justly for our countries rebellion against his almighty
majesty, did wound the hairie scalpe of his enemies, and the transgressions of
his rebellious Israel) did in the end (O admire his mercies) heal that which
before he had wounded, saved us, that in the sight and judgment of many seemed
as forlorn: and in stead of many black and gloomy days, tokens of his anger,
has at last spoken peaceably unto us again, and granted us more then we
expected, or our hearts could desire. O my countrymen dear, then le^ ^^^^rge
the patheticall exhortation that (...) ^oth in his Psalm, to all men in his t^
(...) ^red out of dangers: O that we would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, Psalm. 107.5.
and declare abroad the works that he does for us most sinful men.

Further, in that he healed this man, which had been possessed with a lamenes
or numnes so long a space as thirty eight years in his whole body, appears
the exceeding great power of almighty God: for in that the disease was
universal over the whole body, and besides had continued so long till he was
old, The power of the Lord set forth.
there is no rule in physic that ever could give him any hope of recovery:
yet herein note the unspeakable power of the Lord, that by speaking a word or
two, he healed him perfectly: in man's hope past healing. By the like power he
healed the woman of the bloody issue, Luke 8.42.
who had spent all her substance upon Physicians, and could not be healed. By
this power he healed the woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years,
and was bowed together. Ioh. 11.43, 44. Mar. 7.32. and 9.26. Matthew. 11.5. and
24.36. Mar. 1.42. Ioh. 6. Matthew. 14.19.
By this power he raised Lazarus from death to life, who had lien in his grave
four days. By this power he made the deaffe to hear, the dumb to speak,
the lame to go, and cleansed the leper. By this power he fed five thousand with
five barley loaves and two fishes. I may in like sort speak of this mighty and
exceeding great power toward all those that are translated and delivered out
of the kingdom of darkness and Satan, into the kingdom and clear light of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. What a great power of the Lord was it, Act. 9.1.20.
that persecuting Saul was healed of his sin, and made zealous Paul,
preaching Christ Jesus and him crucified? What a great power was it, that Mary
Magdalene, in who^ reigned and dwelled 7. The true conversion of a sinner
manifests Gods power. Luke 7.37.38. etc.
devils was clea^sed, made whole, and a woman ever after to weep for her sins,
and to wash Christ his feet with her tears? But greater was ye manifestation
of his power, when he healed the man which had a legion of devils in him. And
at this day may every true convert say: oh the exceeding greatness of Gods power
toward me poor wretch, who being under the bondage of sin, and thereby the
bondslaue of Satan, all the power that was in me, or that I was able to make,
could never make me free from that thraldom, till that the exceeding power of
GOD, by the sounding ministry of his word, cried unto me: Awake thou that
sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Such a
miraculous power, and a powerful miracle is the raising up of a sinner from
his snorting in iniquity, to walk and run the race of a Christian.

Moreover, Note his mercy.
as we note his power in healing him of such a long continuing sickness: so
note we his compassionate mercy, in having a feeling and before touched with
our infirmities We have an high Priest, Heb. 4.15.
who cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all
things tempted in like sort as we are, sin only excepted. This his compassion
and mercy, made him to weep over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41.
viewing their great sins, and his fathers wrath ready to fall upon them for
the same. It made him pity the great multitude of people that came pressing
upon him, when he saw them as sheep without a shepherd. It made him to sigh
and groan at the hardness of the peoples hearts: yea so forcible and plentiful
was it in him, that he never denied help to the miserable, comfort to the
comfortless, nor heavenly counsel to them that carefully sought for it. His
love to us for our salvation, is as large as the East is from the West, Psalm.
103.12.13.
and the North from the South, as great and greater then the love the father
has to his son, or the mother to the babe sucking her breasts: for that he
even spreads out both his arms of mercy, ready to embrace every sinner,
truly turning unto him: and clocketh us unto him by his liberal mercies,
Matthew. 23.37. Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12, 13.
even as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings. Yea, this one thing
does greatly extol the largenes of his love and favor, in that he extends
it to us, without any of our merits or deserts. For he loved his own, before
ever the foundation of the world was laid: Romans 9.23.
ere ever Jacob had done good or evil, he loved him, and hated Esau. The
Apostle Paul says: Romans 10.12.
He that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him. Rich he is in
power, able to help; rich he is in mercy, most willing and ready to hear
all those that call on him faithfully. I should be endless, if I should
repeat the proofs of this great love and mercy of God, The love of God to us
in his son Christ is endless.
in and by his Son Christ Jesus. But because his love to us is endless, I
will here end the speaking of it with that admiration, wherewith the Apostle
Paul ends his speech of Gods election and reprobation: O the deepnes of the
riches, both of the power and mercies of God, Romans 11.33.
how infinite is the one and the other, not able sufficiently to be expressed by
the tongue or pen of any man?

Our duty hence.
Our duty hence that we must learn, is regeneration and true repentance:
otherwise we shall treasure and hoord up wrath and clouds of witnesses
against the day of wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God: Romans
2.3.4.
Seeing the bountifulnes of God ought to lead us to repentance.

The comfort we may hence reap is great: The comfort
Art thou sick? art thou afflicted? art thou pressed down with the sight of
thy sins? criest thou after Christ, and desire with blind Bartimeus, to be
healed of thy infirmity? No sore to the Christian but Christ will serve it.
then continue thy crying, labor that thy sighs and groans may be increased,
yea (if it were possible) even to pearce into the heavens. And though thou
find not present remedy, despair not; consider Gods power is able to raise
thee up when thou art fallen; consider also his mercy to be such, that
although the wife play the harlot, and her husband give her a bill of
diuorcement, he will never receive her again: yet says our gracious and
merciful God unto our sick souls, turn again thou disobedient man, whosoever
thou be, and though thou have committed whoredom with thy lovers, Ierem. 3.2,
3, 4.
yet will I receive thee into my favor again. And thus much for the second
circumstance to be considered in healing of the man, vz. how long he had
been grieved with his sickness.

Of the third circumstance, vz. what means the poor man used for his
recovery himself, and yet all in vain. Here we must consider, that there
was in Jerusalem a poole or pond at the South side of the city, Tremelius and
Iunius in Ioh. 5. Hebr. Sir.
near unto the Sheep-market, the name whereof was Bethesda, or in the Syrian
language Bethchesda, which signifies the house of bountifulness: for because
in that place God most mercifully showed his power, in healing many of their
infirmities. Hierom greatly erreth in calling it Betheder, Gregis domus.
which signifies the house for beasts and cattle: for mention is made here of
a po^d, which was near unto the Sheep-market. Calvin affirms those to want
all reason, Call. in Ioh. c. 5. ver. 2.
who call it Bethseda, as though it were a place of fishing, adiudging the^ to
determine of the word more probably, who do expound it locus effusionis, the
place of pouring out water. The Hebrew word signifies a falling downward: for
I think the water was drawn from it by conduites, that the priests might draw
thence water. The virtue of the poole was this, that always at a certain
season an Angel descended into it and troubled the water, and whosoever then
first after the moving of the water stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever
disease he had.

Here by the way we may not think, that the virtue of healing consisted in
the water: for says Calvin: Call. ibid.
Sic externum symbolum co^mendat, vt symboli aspectu, ad ipsum vnicum gratiae
authorem aegrotire spicere cogantur: For this cause does he commend the
outward sign, that by the sight thereof, all sick men may be enforced to
have respect by recourse unto God, the sole author of all grace. Yea herein we
must acknowledge Gods power to be such, as that he is able at his pleasure to
use the very cleme^ts to be instruments of health, God can use ye very clements
to stand for the good of his own.
or any other blessing in his own appointed time, unto such as are his own in
Christ Jesus: as on the contrary, he is able to make them all serve for the
manifesting of his power in wrath, against all such as rebel against him,
Every creature against the wicked.
or his Church: as may be seen in Pharaoh, and the congregation of Choree,
Dathan, and Abyram, where the water drowned the one, and the earth opened her
mouth to swallow up the other. And to conclude, (this being but spoken by way
of digression) in that he made the muddie and troubled water to heal,
Digression, yet necessary.
we note that the Lord oftentimes does execute his will, and manifest his power
in mercy, by contrary and unlikely means in our judgment. The Lord often
heals by contrary and unlikely means
So Helisha healed the waters by casting salt into them: whereas naturally salt
mixed with water brings barrenness. Here by the muddy water in this pond was
many a man healed: whereas naturally a clear and christalline water is more
apt for man's health. The like course the Lord uses in spiritual things, he
works life by death, joy by sorrow, exaltation by humiliation, comforts by
the cross, peace by war: He sends to hell before he bring to heaven.

The end of his so doing.


yea those that he brings to heaven, he first makes them sail by hell. And
the Lord does thus for this especial end, that Gods Church may be assured,
that the Lord is able to execute his will and perform his promise, although
the means or instruments of executing the same, seem unto them never so base
or unlike, yea though there appear to man's judgment no means at all, yet
even then can the Lord our God perform and execute that, which he in his
eternal wisdom has already decreed.

Now to return again into the way from whence we have digressed, this lame
man hearing of so many to be healed in this pond, came by help thither, but
being there he was never a whit the better: for lying there a long time, still
he was prevented of the benefit of the water, because other went down before
him. Here we see he used the likely means and the lawful means, Outward,
likely, and lawful means always prevail not.
and yet had no redress thereby: because it was the purpose of God to heal
him after a more miraculous manner, for the more speedy conversion of the
party healed, and further manifestation of his own glory. Let us a little
further consider this matter. This sick man used the lawful and likely mean
to be healed of his infirmity: so is it lawful for those that are sick, to
use the advice of the Physician, and receive the herbs for medicine, The
sick may receive the herbs for medicine in the Lord, not otherwise.
so far forth as they are the Lords instruments, but no further: and if
health come thereby, to give God the whole honor, as his own due. Again, in
that he used the likely and lawful mean to be healed, and yet could not,
because God had delaied his recovery for another end: let every one of us make
this use of it, and think, that when we are sick, or otherwise troubled, and
do use the lawful and outward means appointed by God for our deliverance,
and yet find no recovery thereby, not to murmr, A necessary consideration.
grudge, or think with the Atheist, God has forgotten us: but by the example
of this man, to rest contented, resolving with our own souls, that God does
defer our recovery for some better end, known and already decreed upon
with the Lord, though hidden and unknown to our blind eyes, even either more
miraculously to restore us to health again, for our greater repentance, and
more manifestation of his own power, or else fully and finally to work our
deliverance, by making a dissolution of our frail tabernacle, and conueying
our soul into the bosom of Abraham, I mean the eternal and unspeakable
joys of Gods kingdom.

Furthermore, in that this man used the likely and lawful outward mean for
his health, and found none, we may note a most profitable doctrine, Man may
purpose, but God disposes.
vz. that Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that must give
the increase. The fishermen may take great pains in fishing all night, and
catch just nothing, till Christ come and command them to launch into the deep
and make a draught: which done, though before they had tried that place, yet at
Christ's command shall they catch an innumerable multitude of fishes. Luke 5.6.
Psalm. 127.1.2. Psalm. eodem.
Unless the Lord keep the house, the watchmen wake but in vain. It is but
lost labor to rise early, and go late to bed, unless God bless our labor.
And therefore all our duties in physic for health, What course we ought to
take in all our dealings.
in matters for wealth, and in going about such occasions as are beseeming our
calling in this evil world, to commend the beginning, middle, and issue
thereof by prayer to almighty God, that he would so direct us in them, as may
stand with his glory, and redound to the comfort of our own consciences.
Further, Note well all the profane and graceless Atheists.
note another excellent point, which is, that if men walk in their lawful
trades and callings, using lawful and ordinary means of deliverances out of
any danger, do notwithstanding prevail or profit nothing at all, till God of
his mercy give the blessing; what shall we think of them, that in sickness
counsel with witches and sorcerers, The practices (...) such very dangerous.
in troubles raise up spirits, for things lost use enchauntment, for to have
their suits go forward use briberie, for their benefices use symonie, for
preferment use flattery, with the Herodians? Yea to conclude, what shall we
think of all such, as make gain wrongfully gotten, their god, and wicked and
ungodly practices the whole course of their life; but that even the heavy
judgment of God hangs over their heads: and as their beginnings and
proceedings are in sin, so let them assure themselves, without speedy
repentance, their endings shall be in same, even sudden confusion both of body
and soul, with all the reprobates and castawaies mentioned in the Scriptures.
A caveat.
Let all bold hardy men therefore take heed, who enterprise many actions
without either prayer to the Lord, or warrant of his word.

Lastly, it might (in regard of the flesh) have been a matter of great grief
unto this poor soul, to see all others that came to this poole to be helped,
yet he lie still, expecting remedy and found none. Yet hence let us learn
this for our own use, that though we be sick, and our neighbors likewise, we
in trouble, they so likewise, they are made whole and delivered, yet we still
tossed to and fro, not likely any deliverance: and it may be this befalls
us, when we are more careful to serve our God then they were, not to be hereat
dismayed, seeing the Lord (as I have said before) has secret ends in his
eternal purpose, of our continued afflictions or sickness, yea even such (if
we abide with patience) as shall be to our greater comfort both inwardly and
outwardly. And thus much for the third circumstances to be noted in his
healing, vz. what means the man used himself for his recovery, and found none.

Of the fourth circumstance, vz by what means at length he was made whole.
The author of his health.
The Israelites (as it is recorded, Numb. 21.) for their rebellion against the
Lord, were stung and venomed with fiery Serpents, a pain most intolerable,
which neither plaster or medicine could abate: til at the length upon the
earnest cry of the people, and Moses, the Lord commanded Moses to make a
brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.6.
and set it up upon a pole, with this promise, that as for sin they were
stung with a Serpent, so whosoever looked up upon that Serpent which Moses so
up, should presently be healed, and no other way. Genes. 3.
Our first parent Adam transgressed God commandment: for a punishment whereof,
God inflicted upon him sickness both in his soul and body, and which should
continue from generation to generation in his whole posterity: which
sicknesses and diseases, as they came upon us for the disobedience of one, so
can they never truly be healed and taken away, but by the obedience of one
man. The first man sinning, and so bringing condemnation upon all, was Adam.
The second man fulfilling the law, and thereby bringing salvation to all, that
by faith and true repentance accept it, was the man Jesus Christ, a man in all
points as the first Adam was, sin only excepted. Donec coelestu^ medicus opem
nobis fert, nos non tantum intus fouemus multos morbos, sed etiam mortar.

Calvin in Psalm. 103. ver. 3. 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1. Pet. 1.19. Romans 5.4. Ioh. 14.6.


He was that immaculate lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
and who was the author and sole worker of this poor man's health. He it is who
is the true Physician for every diseased soul and body: the plaster and very
purgation it self which must cleanse and clear us from all our sins
whatsoever. And who alone is all sufficient, and able to present us holy and
pure to God his father: by whom also we have access unto the throne of God in
our prayers. It is this Christ Jesus, who is the way, the truth, and the life:
unto whom is given a name, in whom must be saved all that are registered and
written in the book of life. Here then do we see, whether all sick men, all
sore men, al troubled and distressed men, yea to conclude, all prodigal and
sinful men must resort to be healed of their sickness, eased of their
griefs, and receive forgiveness of their sins, even to Christ Jesus, the top
and root, beginning and ending, the (...) and (...), Apocal. 1.
and the corner stone of our salvation: and with the halt and lame in the
Gospel, to cry out unto him, Luke 17.15.
O Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me. Let the Pope promise health by
his pardons, the Iusticiaries by their works, All means of health by man
mere mockery, without Christ Jesus.
the Votaries by their vows, the Heathen by their blind mentions: yet when it
comes to the hammering, and the day that every man's works shall be tried by
fire, they shall then find that all these invented means of health, are even
a potion of rank poison prepared by the devil: and that it is only the blood
of Christ Jesus that must purge out the poison of the Dragon, and cleanse us
from all our leprosy whatsoever.

This point being most pregnant, I might be very plentiful in proofs out of
the word of God for confirmation, in gathering profitable doctrines for
instruction, and in laying down many duties for edification: but seeing it is
so plain a point, Christ our salvation a plain point.
that proposuisse is confirmasse, so manifestly in the word described, that he
that runs may read it: so sensible a matter, that they are past feeling who
are not touched with it: and finally to all the elect ones of the Lord, a
matter of such certainty, that whosoever doubts of it, A most certain point
for truth
he is puffed up in the raging bellows of his own imaginations: and without
speedy repentance, it shall be a stone to fall upon them al, of such weight
that it shall grind them all to powder. Therefore I will here end it, Matthew.
18. 1. Pet. 2.8. Matthew. 11.28, 29.
with Christ his large offer to all that lack help: Come unto Christ all ye
that labor and are heavy laden and he will refresh you. Cast your cares and
your distressed causes upon his back, and rest contented that he cares for
all his own. And thus much for the fourth circumstance to be considered in
healing the man, which was the means, or party by whom he was healed.

THE SECOND SERMON OF THE DVTIE OF OUR DELIVERANCE. The second Sermon.

THe second branch of the exhortation, vz. what was the cause of his sickness,
drawn out of these words, sin no more: It appears here that sin was the
cause of his sickness, and sin is the cause of our troubles, griefs,
losses, hurts, dangers, or damages whatsoever, yea of sickness, be it of body
or of mind. That this may better appear, let us search out the original of
sickness, sorrow and grief, and we shall find that before sin entered, there
was neither sickness; sorrow, nor grief: but as soon as ever sin entered,
the other were inflicted, as a just reward for sin. When, where and how sin
entered, you may find plainly in Genes. 3. When.
It entered even then when our first parents were created in their happy estate
of innocence, like to the image of their Creator, perfectly righteous in the
soul, and all the parts thereof thoroughly sound in the body, and the
constitution thereof, yea both in body and soul free from any grief, vexation
or sorrow. Sin entered in Paradise, Where.
our parents being placed there. The means.
The means whereby he entered, was by the subtle persuasion of the Serpent,
the devils instrument, and by our parents voluntary hearkening and yielding
thereunto, to disobey and break the commandment of their Creator: which so
soon as ever they had done, the curse of God for the same fell upon our
parents for sin. If we will set down what it is, it is nothing else but the
transgression of the law of God. 1. Ioh. 3.4.
Presently after ye transgression of the law of God, entered the reward or
punishment of this their transgression, which was mortality in stead of
immortality, Man's miserable case after his fall.
weakness in stead of strength, sickness in stead of health, toil and travel in
stead of continual rest and peace, sorrow and sadness in stead of joy and
comfort: the earth to yield nothing but brambles, briers and bushes (though it
be tilled) in stead of plenty of good fruit; to travail up and down as
pilgrims upon the face of the earth, in stead of perpetual possession of
Paradise: and though they thus prolong their toyling days for a time, yet at
length enforced to yield to natures course and to dye, in stead of living for
ever the life of the Angels. All this is apparent in the third of Genesis.

You have heard now the first man that ever sinned, even Adam, the first man
(that as a merit for his sin) ever was sick or troubled, even Adam. You have
heard what happy case he was in before he sinned, and what woeful estate he
was in after his fall, a creature full of sorrow, toil, trouble, fear,
grief, vexation, digging and deluing, planting and sowing, and yet but to
reap little increase: and though he was before a most pleasant plant of the
Lord, seated in a most fertile soil, yet now through sin, is he even become a
filthy puddle and standing poole of all iniquity, a servant to Satan, and a
poor prisoner to the devil.

Hence let all Gods children learn to affect holiness of life, The use.
and loathe the life of the wicked: yea even all the motions, objects and
occasions of wickedness, so far as the very garment stained with sin, shall
be unto them odious and loathsome. You have heard now the root to be infected,
and the bole poisoned, and withal you have heard the cause of this infection.
The root and bole are our first parents, they sinned, and presently upon their
sin came shame for a fault, and all kind of troubles and diseases as their
due desert. Let us now examine a little whether this poison has not infected
all the branches, I mean Adams posterity, which posterity we our selves are.
Herein let us consider that Adam and Euah were not private persons, Calvin. in
Psalm. 51. ver. 7.
but such as had in them the state of the whole world: what good Ada^ had, he
had it for his whole posterity: All men in Adam have sinned.
what evil soever he brought upon him through sin, it was to be propagated
upon his whole posterity. Therefore it is that David cries and says: Psalm.
51.6. Contra Pelag. qui dicunt peccatum non esse haereditarium, sed sola
imitatione ex Adamo profectum. Genes. 6.5.
Behold, in sin my mother conceived me. We bring sin with us from our
mothers womb, and therefore sickness and sorrow the stipend of sin. And the
Lord says, that the imaginations of man's heart are evil continually. Hereupon
it plainly follows, that even al of us may impute our sickness, our sorrow,
weakness and wants, troubles and torments, dangers, and finally death it self,
to our sins, as the original and first cause of them. That sickness and
death did take hold upon all Adams race, even every one of us for sin, Paul
makes very plain thus: By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, Romans 5.12.
and so death went over all men, for as much as all men have sinned. Verse. 18.
And by the offense of one man the fault came over all unto condemnation. Verse.
19.
And by one man's disobedience many were made sinners.

Now let us come to prove by example out of the word, how in Adam his
posterity for sin, God has inflicted sometime sickness, sometime sores,
sometime troubles of body, sometime grief of mind. Upon his own children,
as loving corrections, to make them more diligent scholars in Christ's school.
Upon the wicked, either to draw them to repentance, (if they belong unto Gods
kingdom) or if they hardened their hearts as Pharaoh, then to make them even
beginnings of the flashings of hell fire. And first let us see out of the word,
how for sin the Lord has afflicted his own Church, with sickness, trouble,
danger, etc. In Genes. 6. appears, that because the sons of God, contrary
to his commandment, joined in marriage with the daughters of men, I mean the
wicked seed, and for other great sins amongst them committed: when after a
long time of repentance given them by the Lord, they would not amend, the Lord
destroyed them, and the whole world ( Noe and his family excepted) with water.
When David had grievously offended the Lord, with Berthshebah the wife, 2. Sam.
11.4.17.
murder upon Vriah the husband, and after all this by laboring to cloak his
sin, the Lord therefore inflicted upon him these troubles. 1. His own son
Ammon to defile his sister Tamar, 2. Sam. 13.14. Verse. 29.30, 31, 32. 2. Sam.
16.22.
and commit incest with her. 2. One of his sons to kill another. 3. And in
the end as a just recompense for his adultery, the Lord suffered his own
son Absalon to rebel against him, take away his fathers concubines, and to
lie with them. Again, when David in pride of heart numbered his people, contrary
to the Lords mind, the Lord for a reward of his sin, infected the whole land
of Israel with the disease of the pestilence, 1. Chro. 21.14.
in so much that there dyed of the sickness 70. thousand men.

O my countrymen, in the Lord Jesus, I beseech you thoroughly and soundly let us
search to the bottom, the original and chief occasion of our so great and
long a visitation, and I am afraid we shall find, that not David's adultery,
murder, and proud heart alone, have procured these afflictions to fall upon
us, but a huge mass of many infinite sins more, A mass of sins amongst us
crying for vengeance.
which this 40. years bypast, we have till now hoorded and treasured up
against our selves, till they made such a cry in the Lords ears for
vengeance, that (though his mercy be great) yet they have enforced him at
length, to power out upon us the violl of his wrath and by these afflictions to
manifest unto us his indignation kindled against us. The Lord give us eyes to
see this, hearts to be sorry, and a care and continual conscience, ever
hereafter to walk more carefully, as in the Lords presence.

To return again to David: as you have heard the Lord to have dealt sharply
with him in outward troubles, for his sins: so how he dealt with him by
inward troubles, griefs, and sickness of the mind: Psalm. 6. and 38. and 55.
and 77.
his often complaining in these Psalms quoted in the margent, sufficiently
does witness. Which Psalms I wish the gentle reader to peruse and ruminate
upon them, assuring him (if he be distressed in soul for sin) thereby he
may receive and find comfort. The Israelites offending God, Number. 21.4, 5, 6.
in murmuring against Moses and Aaron, the Lords messengers, were stung with
fiery Serpents, and destroyed with the meat in their mouths. Yea, that
excellent woman Myriam, Aarons sister, but once murmuring against Moses, Exodus
12.1.2.
for marying a woman of Aethiopia, and because the Lord talked more familiarly
with her, then he did with Aaron and her self, Verse. 10.
the Lord for this sin smote her with the disease of the leprosy, that she
was all over as white as snow, Verse. 14.
till that Moses made earnest suite and intercession to the Lord for her
health. Hezekiah was grievously sick both in body and soul, 2. King. 20.
Esaias. 38.1. 2. Chro. 32.14. Hosea. chap. 8. and chap. 9.
till in mercy God restored both to health. Sin and iniquity was the cause
of famine and sword, threatened to the rebellious Jews. Often we find in the
Gospel, that our Savior Christ giving sight to the blind, or health to the
sick, uses this speech, Go thy way, Mar. 2.5.
thy sins are forgiven thee: as if he should say, sin has been the cause
of thy long sickness, but now thy sins being pardoned, which before as fetters
chained thy feet, thou may rise up and walk as a sound man. And of all
other most excellent and memorable is that of the Apostle Paul to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.30.31
where he tells them, that for the abuse and profanation of the Lords Supper
amongst them, Profaning of the Lords Supper caused death.
many of them are weak, many sick, and many fallen asleep, that is, dead.
Truly I am persuaded, that one of the greatest and capital crimes, that has
pulled these plagues upon our country, This holy Sacrament greatly profaned in
our North parts of this land. First by the pastor, and how.
and has made us a talk in the mouths of the people of other countries, is
the grievous and monsterous profanation of this holy Sacrament the Supper of
the Lord, being for so long a time so horribly profaned, both of pastor and
people. The pastor (or at least he that occupies the room of a pastor)
without all due care and consideration, ministers it to all alike without
exception, examination, or making any separation of the unholy from the holy,
the profane from the sound professor, the dogs and the swine from the sincere
and sanctified people of the Lord: who ought to use the power of the keys
belonging to their calling, if any such unclean and unsanctified people do
offer themselves to communicate, themn by the power aforesaid, to bar such
men from the Supper, until there appear in them testimonies of repentance,
and change of manners. This being the true and only remedy prescribed by
Christ himself, both against such men, and to take away all offenses of the
Church: and finally to escape the just vengeance of God, that ever from time to
time have fallen upon the contemners of the Gospel and Sacraments. But alas,
thee careless guides and unsavory salt, The lets that stay them from doing
their duty in this behalf.
either because they are men-pleasers, dare not: or because they may be
attainted of some notorious fault themselves, will not: or else because they are
silly, simple, ignorant sots, and know not how to do it, do still continue
in their careless course, to the utter destruction of themselves, and many a
poor soul under their charge, The poor souls in great danger hereby
unless God in his great mercy take pity upon them. These evil workers, nay
rather betrayers of the silly sheep of Christ, either know not, or at least
care not for so many inuectiues, as the godly fathers in the former ages of the
Church, have given out most boldly, both by word and writing against the
pastors, who suffer such monsterous profanation of the holy Supper of the
Lord: as also the great care that Christian Churches have still had, to keep
themselves clean from that pollution. Amongst the multitude of ye godly
writers, I cannot pass over but set down that most excellent saying of John
Chrysostom in his Homilies upon Matthew concerning this point, whose words are
these: Chrysostom in hom. 38. in Mat. c. 27
No small punishment hangs over your heads, if knowing any man to be taken
in wickedness, you suffer him to be partaker hereof, for his blood shall be
required at your hands. Therefore if any Captain, if the Consul himself, if
he that wears the crown come unworthily bar him and keep him back,
Against the unlawful fearing of any.
thou have greater authority then he. Therefore if a most clear spring of
water were committed unto thee, to keep it only to serve the flock, when
thou did see beasts use to strike and gore, and most filthy swne come
toward it, thou would not suffer them to go down into the water, nor to
trouble the spring. And now when as the most hallowed spring, not of water, but
of blood and the holy Ghost is committed unto thee, if thou shall see men
notoriously defiled with sin come unto it, will thou not be angry, nor
forbid them? And a little after he says, If you will fear men, he will laugh
at you; if God, you shall be reverenced of men. Surely I will rather yield my
body to death, and suffer my blood to be shed, then to be partaker of this
pollution.

For the example of the practice of Christian Churches, one example likewise
shall suffice, which shall be the example of the Greek Church in former
times, The example of the Greek Church. (...). A congregation of the faithful.
who had such a reverent estimation of this holy banquet, that the very name
wherewith they called it, argues the same. First, Vocarunt eam (...): that is
to to say, a congregation of the faithful, which was so religiously observed:
Quod quamuis tolerabantur in concion. publicis prophani, verum vbi inchoanda
erat ipsa Dominicae caenae communicatio, iubebantur illi discedere, and
accedere etc. Although the wicked and open profane were permitted to be
present at their public preachings and sermons: yet whenever the Supper of
the Lord was to be administered, then they used these words: Depart ye wicked
and profane, and draw near ye that truly and sincerely profess Christ and
his Gospel. Again, Vocarunt eam (...): A holy table.
they called it a holy table, both in regard of the holy and heavenly food of
the soul there offered: as also in regard of those holy people, who alone are
admitted to the eating thereof. So that these being well considered, I will
conclude this point concerning the pastors abuse in the aforesaid profanation,
with this earnest wish: that all who are called to this weighty calling of the
work of the ministry, with care and conscience so to behave themselves
therein, as they that shall give account in the great day of the Lord for every
soul that has perished within their charge, through their negligence.

For the peoples profaning this holy Sacrament, Secondly it is profaned by
the people, and how.
I my self have bin often an eye witness (God is my record) to my grief, when
I have seen great multitudes of people in the house of the Lord, My self an
eye witness.
with striving, thronging, and pressing forward, contend who should first
receive the outward elements at the hands of their minister, making no better
then a common banquet of it, or as though they were in extreme haste. Again,
the Parsons proctor to be reckoning for his fees in the very time of
administering the Supper, Great profanation, and worthy punishment.
and that within the Lords house, not far from the minister, as great a noise
of brauling about him, as of singing Psalms amongst the Communicants: yea
far greater, for the one is often used, the other very seldom or never. I
might be large in laying down such manifold abuses as these, Many more besides
these.
which I have seen with mine eyes, as every one after they have gotten their
rightings (for so our silly ignorant people call it) to hasten out of the
congregation, never reverently abiding till all be partakes, that they might
all depart with a joint thanksgiving. But these are sufficient to the reader,
to testify how justly I am persuaded, Ex vnguibus leonem astima.
that for these and such like abuses, the Lord has rightly plagued our
country. After the receiving of this holy Sacrament and seal of the true
Christians salvation, they hold on a malo in peius, they then go for good
fellowship to the tavern or alehouse altogether, The Magistrates coldness in
correcting, a great cause of these abuses.
and thence they come not till they are inflamed and made drunk with strong
drink, and then out they must, but otherwise then they came in: for now they
run out to purge themselves and their heavy stomachs, by belchings and
beastly vomiting: others to brawle and fight: so as it would wound a Christians
heart, to see how the senseless souls, worse then brute beasts, This cries
for vengeance, without speedy repentance
do in receiving the bread and wine at the Supper of the Lord, eat and drink
their own condemnation.

Others there be, more nise in outward show, As evil as the other.
it may be will walk solitary that day, abstain in outward appearance from
their wonted course of sin: but if they do this for one day, two were too
many, and therefore the morrow after the Supper, is as the day before, even to
drink sin like water, and draw iniquity as it were with cartropes.

A third sort of unworthy receivers there be in our country, whom I may very
well call carnal gospellers, and lip-professors, Too many of such amongst us.
who do receive this holy Supper together with Gods dear children, and
thereby do make their solemn profession of newnes of life: but after a season
it proves rather worse with them then with the former: for they are such, that
though they cry, Lord, Lord, voce: yet they deny to do the will of their
heavenly father, What dangerous effect follow such wicked dealing.
vita: and so are an occasion to the wicked and professed enemies of Gods
truth, of blaspheming that glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, whereof they make
profession, though unsoundly, and after an unclean manner. These men, to
speak plainly, they are very near unto, if not the same men whereof Christ
testifies, Matthew. 12.
that they expulse out the unclean spirit: but after a season the same spirit
returns again, he brings seven other spirits with him worse then himself,
and finding all clean swept and garnished, they reenter and take possession in
the man, and make their dwelling there: whose latter end (horrendum dictu) is
worse then the beginning. And such as Peter painteth out, 2. Pet. 2. ver. 20
who after they have in show thrown and shaken off sin, and bidden the world
adieu, do notwithstanding after all this, enter covenant to be Satan's servant
again, in whom the proverb is too true: Verse. 22.
The dog is returned to his vomit, and the sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mare. The Lord for his mercies sake, Amen, Amen.
work reformation hereof both in pastor and people: which reformation if
presently it appear not, I fear me a worse day, I fear the sequel.
then hitherto has been seen, will ensue: whereof more at large hereafter.
And let this suffice also for proofs out of ye word, how the Lord for sin
sends troubles and sicknesses, both of body and mind upon his own people.

Let us now in a word show how he does it upon the wicked: wherein I may fitly
use the speech of the Apostle, that if for sin judgment begin at the house
of God, what shall be the end of the wicked? A fearful end without all doubt.
And if he deal thus with the green tree, what may we think will be the
end of the dry and withered tree, but to be cast into the fire and burnt up
for ever?

And first, most famous and worthy of all memory is the example of Gods
judgment upon Ioab and al his posterity, 2. Sam. 3.29.
for murdering so cruelly and deceitfully two valiant Captains, Abner and
Amasa, as appears in their stories at large: where David thus threatens the
judgment of the Lord against him, and his whole posterity, saying: Let the
blood of Abner fall on the head of Ioab, and on all his fathers house: that the
house or issue of Ioab be never without some that have running issues, or a
leper, or that leans on a staff or that falls on the sword, or that
lacks bread. Lo here how many ways, for this bloody fact, God will plague
and punish him. First with running He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed again. Poverty, Cain for shedding the innocent blood of his
brother Abel, Genes. 4.
was both he and his posterity made runnagates over the face of the whole
earth.

In the 7. and 8. of Exodus, you shall find how often the Lord plagued Pharaoh
and the whole land, for cruelly oppressing his people, even with ten principal
plagues: there withal their great and capital offenses. 1. King. 13.
So he dried the hand of king Jeroboam, when he stretched it out against the
Prophet of the Lord to take him. Take heed of this, the covetous men that have
long noses to smell your profit a far off.
Ahab and Iezebel, because unjustly they took away Naboth his vineyard, and
lead a great number a whoring after strange gods, the Lord caused Iezebels
dainty carcass to be eaten up of dogs, by the wall of Izreel: yea, that his
posterity should never have the honor of a comely burial: but if they dyed in
the city, 1. King. 21.25. 2. King. 9.10. 1. King. 24.10. and 16.3.4.
the dogs should devour them: and if in the field, the fowls of the air
should eat the^ up. Even as the Lord executed his fierce wrath upon all
Jeroboam his seed: and upon the whole house of Baasha, for their Idolatry.
Let all covetous cormorants, and Idolatrous whoremongers repent, for fear the
like judgment should fall upon them. 2. King. 1. ver. 1 2, 3, 4.
Ahaziah having gotten a fall through a lattise window, and hurt himself very
sore, despaired of help from the true God, and therefore sent messengers to
enquire of the god of Ekron, concerning his recovery: which thing was so
abominable to the Lord, that he sent a messenger unto him, to tell him, that he
should not come down from the bed whereon he lay, but dye the death. In our
sickness seek unto none but God. 2. King. 6.
Beware in our sickness we seek not unlawful means for our recovery. The
King of Syria his host coming to take the Prophet in Dothan, the Lord for
their boldness smote them all with blindness. A dangerous matter to attempt the
persecuting of Gods children. Gehezi for coveting that unlawfully, 2. King.
5.27.
which his master had refused of Naaman religiously, when it was offered, was
smitten with a leprosy. And of all other, 2. Chro. 21.18.19.
most fearful is the sickness and death wherewith the Lord smote Jehoram, for
unnatural murdering his brethren, and for abominable Idolatry: he smote him
with an incurable disease, even the disease of his bowels: so that day by day,
through the disease, his bowels fell out: so after the end of two years,
continuing in this sore disease, his guts fell out with the disease. And lastly
of Herod, Act. 12.25.
how horrible a thing to be heard, that for his pride, and arrogating glory
to himself, which was only due to God, Pride will have a fall.
was most fearfully thrown down from his throne of estate, and devoured of
worms.

To leave the testimonies of the word, and to come to the demonstration of Gods
fearful visitations by strange sicknesses, Examples of Gods judgments upon
wicked persecutors of the Church.
against wicked persecutors of Christ's Church, and blasphemers of his name,
recorded and spoken of in ancient histories, let this be the first. One Henry,
a famous Archbishop of Mentz, a virtuous and well disposed prelate, being most
cruelly dealt withal by the Bishop of Rome and his substitutes, and being
debarred of all lawful proceeding and judgment in law against him, mildly
answered the wicked Judges thus: Seeing that neither by appeal to the
Apostolic sea, nor by your upright sentences of your selves, I can have my
innocence tried, I appeal to the Lord Jesus Christ, as to the most high and
just Judge, A righteous appeal.
and cite you before his judgment, there to answer me before the high Judge:
for neither justly nor uprightly, but by corruption (as it pleases you) you
have judged. Whereunto they scoffingly answered; Go you first, and we will
follow. Not long after the said Henry dyed: whereof the two Cardinals, that
were the wicked Judges, having intelligence, said one to the other iestingly:
Behold he is gone before, and we must follow after according to our promise.
And verily they said truer then they were aware of: A terrible example for
corrupt Judges to beware.
for within a while they dyed both in one day. For the one sitting upon a Iakes
to ease himself, voyded out all his guts into the draught, and miserably ended
his life. The other gnawing off the fingers of his hands, and spitting them out
of his mouth (all deformed in devouring himself) dyed. And one Arnold, who
became a false Judas to the good Archbishop, in accusing of him, when he
should have excused him: Anno Do. 1105. Ex Helmoldo and Gotfrido Viterbiensi.
and Act. and Mon. Fox. page 196.
shortly after dyed likewise, and for certain days lying stinking upon the
ground unburied, was open to the spoil of every rascal and harlot.

The like horrible and fearful stroke of Gods hand, was executed upon a wicked
papist and persecutor of ye good Merindolians in France, who was called John de
Roma: this wicked wretch, of mere malice against the truth, plagued the poor
protestants of Merindoll, with a strange and unwonted kind of torment, wherein
he most delighted, and most commonly practiced: he filled boots with boiling
grease, and put them upon the legs of Christians, tying them backward to a
form, with their legs hanging down over a small fire: and in this torment
he examined them of their faith, belike thinking by this intolerable pain, to
make them revolt from their faith. This monster at length having almost
finished the date of his wicked days, fell sick of a most horrible disease,
strange and unknown to any Physician: so unnatural were the pains, wherewith
he was continually vexed in all his body, that no ointment, no fomentation,
nor any thing else could ease him one minute of an hour: neither was there any
man could tarry near about him, nor yet would any of his friends come near
him, so great was the stinch that came from him. For which cause he was carried
from the Iacobines to an hospital there to be kept. But the stinch and
infection there so increased, that no man there durst come near him: neither
was he himself able to abide the horrible stinch that issued from his own
body, full of ulcers and sores, and swarming with vermin, and so rotten, that
the flesh fell from the bone by piece meal. Whilst he was in these torments
and anguish, he cried out often in great rage: Oh who will kill me? Act. and
Mon. page 945.
who will rid and deliver me out of these intolerable pains, which I know I
suffer for the evils and oppressions that I have done to the poor men? In
these horrible torments and fearful despair, this blasphemer and cruel
homicide ended his unhappy days and cursed life; as a spectacle to all
persecutors, receiving a just reward of his cruelty by the just judgment of
God. Being dead, none would come near to bury him; but a Friar of his own
order, with a hook caught bold of his stinking carcass, and drew him into a
hole of the earth.

The like fearful judgment was upon the Lord of Reuest, being chief
president of the parliament of Aix, putting many a good christian to death:
afterward was himself stricken with such an horrible sickness, that for the
fury thereof, his wise, or any that were about him, Page eadem.
durst not come near him, and so dyed in this fury and rage. The like
fearful sudden death had Barthol. Cassaneus, who succeeded the other both in
place and persecution. I can not but set down likewise a note of another
bloody persecutor of the poor Merindolians, John Miniers Lord of Opede,
whose judgment from the Lord, for shedding so much innocent blood, was a
strange kind of bleeding in his nether parts, Like for like.
like to a bloody issue or flux: and not being able to void any urine, Page
953.
till by little and little his guts at length within him rotted, and his
intrals began to be eaten up of worms. In which extremity, The wicked in
their extremities howl and cry most desperately.
raging and casting out blasphemous words, and feeling a fire burn within him,
from the nauill upward, with extreme stinch of his lower parts, at length
finished his wretched life.

The like may be said of one of the accusers of Narcissus, the good old Bishop
of Jerusalem, who wished if his untrue accusation were not true, that he might
shortly fall into some great and grievous sickness: which wish most fearfully
afterward was executed upon him, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 9.
and that shortly after being stricken with a sore sickness from top to toe,
and so dyed.

And to conclude this point, the like may be said, concerning the sudden death
of one Nightingale parson of Crondall in Kent, who was made by the Cardinals
authority, chief Penitentiary of that Deanery. He coming into the pulpit upon
a Shroue Sunday, read publicly the Popes bull of pardon that was sent into
England, most blasphemously uttering these words: That he fully believed, that
by the virtue of that Bull, he was as clean from sin, Intolerable blasphemy.
as that night he was borne: immediately upon the same, fell suddenly down out
of the pulpit, and never stirred more hand or foot.

These are sufficient to prove unto you this point, how the Lord for sin
inflicteth upon the wicked, sicknesses, diseases, and troubles of the body. And
how he deals most fearfully in tormenting their consciences, I refer you
over to Cain, who supposed every man would kill him that met him. Both body and
soul plagued in the wicked by the Lord for their sins.
To Saul, who wished himself slain. To Achitophel and Judas, who hanged
themselves: and the too many experienced testimonies in our own times both of
men and women, that having been plunged to desperation, at the view of their
horrible iniquities, have been the instruments of their own death themselves.

A Catalog of them all.
Let us now as in a little Catalogue set down all these several sins
aforenamed, so severely punished by the Lord in several wicked men, that so
the diligent reader may more easily bear them away, to make him ever hereafter
learn by other men's harms to beware: and my propounded proposition be by so
many clouds of witnesses ratified and confirmed: so to continue herafter
without controlement.

Murder and shedding of innocent blood, Murder.
punished in the offender and his posterity with the state of a runnagate as
in Cain: with running issues, lamenes, blood for blood, poverty: as in Ioab
and his posterity.

Hardues of heart, and contempt of Gods Hardness of heart.
as corn and cattle: yea loss of children, as in Pharaoh.

Stretching the hand to make our authority Abusing of authority to persecution.
punished with withering and drying up the hand, as in Jeroboam: and punished
with the blindness in the king of Syria his servants.

Covetousness, oppression, and killing, Covetousness, oppression and killing.
to Ahab, Iezebell, and their posterity.

Pride and exalting of our selves against Pride and exalting against God.
by making the offender like a brute beast, as in Nabuchadnezaar. And with a
fearful sudden death, as in Herod.

Despair of Gods help in extremities.
Despayring of Gods help in our sickness, and seeking the help of false gods,
punished with never recovery of health: but dying of it, as in Ahaziah.

Extreme covetousness.
A covetous heart that cannot be content to forgo any profit, if they may have
it, whether it stand with a good conscience or no, and often joined with lying,
punished by the Lord with leprosy for ever: as in Gehezi, Elisha his servant.

1. King. 16. Idolatry in our selves and drawing others unto it.
To commit Idolatry our selves, and by our persuasion, or power, to draw others
to do the like, punished in Batasha and his posterity.

Unnatural murdering of our kindred, joined Unnatural murder. 2. Chron.
21.13.14.15.16.
most fearfully plagued with the disease of the bowels incurable, and in the
end the guts to fall out, as in Iehoram.

Desperation.
Desperation of Gods mercies, punished with killing and hanging themselves: as
in Saul and Judas. Corruption in judgment, and condemning the innocent without
a cause, plagued with fearful and sudden death, as has been showed by the
example of the Cardinals, judges of the good Archbishop of Mentz.

Strange and unnatural persecution.
Unnatural and not heard of before persecution against the poor saints,
plagued with strange and unwonted diseases: as in John de Roma, a Iacobine, the
Lord of Reuest, and the Lord of Opede.

Blasphemous derogating from the crown Blasphemies.
the washing away of sins in all men, and arrogating the same to the Pope and
his pardons, plagued with sudden and present death, as in the parson of
Crondall aforesaid.

Last of all, let us by some few proofs out of the word, confirm this which
has been illustrated, both out of the examples of the Scriptures, and the Acts
and Monuments of our own Church. In the 29. Deuteronomy. 29.22.
chapter of Deuteromie, verse. 22. Moses shows, that the generation of the
Israelites which was then for to come, and the strangers that should come from
a far land, shall say when they see the plagues and diseases of this land,
wherewith the Lord shall smite it: Verse. 24. Verse. 25.
Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land? And they shall answer,
Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, which
he made with them. And chapter 31.17. Cap. 31.17.
They shall be consumed, and many adversities and tribulations shall come upon
them. Then they shall say, Are not these troubles come upon us, because God is
not with us? Of all other places in the Scriptures, let the 28. of
Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26.
and the 26. of Leuit. be as glasses for all men to behold themselves in: where
you shall find, for disobedience and breach, of Gods commandments, the Lord
will inflict upon them most extreme diseases, and sores of the body: as the
pestilence, Verse. 21.22 Verse. 27.
a consumption, the fever, the burning ague, the botch of Egypt, the Emerodes,
the scab, and the itch. He threatened to smite them in the knees, Verse. 35.
and in the thighs, with a sore botch, that they could not be healed, even
from the sole of their foot to the top of their head. For other griefs of
body, and horrible torments of the mind, that there is threatened against the
obstinate offenders: I wish the godly to peruse them, thereby to be as bridles
and stays unto them, whenever Satan by his suggestions, labors to drive
them thereunto. Take the sower with the sweet.
And I wish that the wicked would (in their boldness to drink up sin like
water) once give a glance back to these fearful threats of the Lord, and
view what shall be the woeful end of their gross and abominable wickednesses.
I wish also that both these, and all the aforenamed proofs, together with the
manifold examples out of the Scriptures, and sundry histories of the Church
before alleged, Let them be for a Christian Chronicle.
be in stead of a little Chronicle for all sick and sore men, either in body or
mind, for all those that are strangely visited, or grievously afflicted, to be
exercised in: wherein they may find the Lords judgments from time to time,
executed upon the wicked and abominable livers, without abatement,
controlement, or dispensation, fearing no power, The wicked never able to stay
Gods judgments.
prevented by no policy, stayed by no bribes, nor abated by any medicine: till
such time as he has laid the honors, houses, habitations and whole
posterities of the wicked even with the ground. The end of the wicked.
As may be seen of Jeroboam, Baasha, Ahab, and Ioab, that I say men visited
with sickness, upon a sound sauerie of the premises, may without delay enter
into a serious speech, and due consideration of their own estate, in regard
of sin: Search soundly without soothing your selves.
and if they find that such sins as you have heard here before to be
plagued of the Lord, to rule and reign in them, or any sin and transgression
of Gods commandments, then let them impute the cause of their visitation, to
their own sins, and wicked conversation, resolving further, that he will not
withdraw it, who has sent it, he will not heal them, who has wounded them,
they shall not recover of their sickness, nor come down from the bed whereon
they lie, till such time as the Lord see them broken hearted with David; and
vowing to his majesty, the continual sacrifice of a better life, or at least,
if they pass that disease or fit (unless they from the heart repent) let them
look ere it be long, One being gone, another will come, unless thou repent.
to come under the extremity of some other: that shall be as a beasome in his
wrath to take all away. Last of all, I wish even from my very heart root in
Jesus Christ: that all of you my Countriemen (for whose comfort especially I
was moved, to pen this little unworthy treatise) may search, and thoroughly
ransacke your hearts to the bottom: for these sins, vz. Murder, contempt of
Gods word, persecution of Gods children, covetousness, oppression, killing,
pride, despairing of Gods power: Idolatry, lying against ones own conscience,
despairing of Gods mercies, which sins flourishing in the reprobates, have
been fearfully plagued as you have heard before. Search till we find them,
for they are amongst us.
Search further for wicked and unlawful marriages: for whoredom, murmuring
against Gods faithful magistrates or ministers. And so the monstrous
profanation of the supper of the Lord: sins for committing whereof, the Lord
has grieuouslie punished his own people, as plainly has been proved: yea
and for many more, then all these would I have you, with your selves to make a
particular and strict examination, Pray you so likewise. Ephesians. 1.17.18.
and I beseech God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the eyes of
your understanding may be enlightened, that you may discern and clearly see
how far you have entered a covenant, and bound your selves in league with most
of these sins, and many other most abominable sins; Over all generally. In
many places.
as your horrible Atheism, affected ignorance, gross Popery: and in most
places mocking, and contemning the Lords ordinary means of your salvation: in
seeing of them, acknowledge your long and continued afflictions, to be sweet
corrections, The Lord has dealt easily with you, as yet.
in regard of that fearful and dreadful condemnation, they have long since
before this cried for, as a stipend of desert due unto them; yea in utter
loathing of them, and hearty grief for offending God by them: let us all cry
with the prodigal child: that for our sins we are not worthy to have the
heavens to cover us, the earth to bear us, Luke 15.21.
Jehovah to protect us, or Jesus Christ ever to be a Savior unto us: yet here
not to stay, but in hope as our anchor, through faith, as our hand, by the
promise of the reueiled word for our certainty to prease and post forward, and
with the Eagle to soar up to the true physician of our souls, for healing our
sicknesses, the good Samaritane to bind up our wounds, the everlasting high
Priest, for bearing our infirmities, even Jesus Christ the righteous: that
thereby our sins, the original of our sicknesses, may be blotted out and
clean cleansed: and from Christ we may hear this comfortable voice: Arise and
walk, etc. Be whole, for thy sins are forgiven thee. My beloved in the Lord,
No sound course but this to save us from perishing.
except this through course be taken, never look for saving, sound, and
continuing health; but even with Gehezi to die a leprous man. Now as I have
spoken of particular men, for particular sins diversely diseased: so may I
speak of whole countries, kingdoms and places, who for sin and iniquity have
been plagued. Some with sudden destruction, Genes. 19.
as Sodom and Gomor. Some with captivity, as the Israelites under the
Babylonians. 2. Chro. 36.
Some with having the godly, wise, and aged Counselors taken from the^, as
Esaias threatens the Jews. Esaias. 8.1.2.3.4 1. King. 20. 2. King. 6.19. 2. King.
17.29.
Some with death and famine, as was Samaria and Jerusalem, and as this our
nation of late: and some with the disease of the pestilence, burning ague, and
bloody issues, as this our own land: first, not long since in the South parts:
We have felt the same.
and now these two years last past in our Northern parts. And seeing it has
been proved, that these corrections and punishments flow from our own
disobedience and wilful rebellion, From whence these punishments flow.
therefore if ever the effect we desire to have removed, let us first take
away the cause, which is our sins, Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
and assure our selves the effect will cease, which is Gods fearful
punishments. vz. what evil soever we suffer either in body or mind, we may
impute it to our sins, Psalm. 38.5.
as the original and first occasion thereof: whereupon may be gathered a
second doctrine. Calvin. in Ioh. cap. 5. verse. 14.
Non sunt fortunae hominum calamitates, sed totidem sunt castigatoriae ferulae:
Our sicknesses, diseases, or griefs, be they inward or outward, proceed not
from fortune, or by chance: Amos. 3.6.
but by the foredecreed counsel of the highest, that they may be as so many
checkes unto the pride of our sins: the truth hereof being granted, there
ensues an exceeding comfort to the conscience, A comfort.
careful of Gods service, vz. that our heavenly father takes no delight, nor
pleasure in punishing us: and therefore does he never severely scourge us,
Calu. ibid.
but when he is highly offended by our transgressions, and perforce urged to
change mercy into judgment, The Lord is haled on to judgment by our sins.
and his loving countenance into severe corrections. And thus much generally
have I set down, and proved the cause and original of sickness, sorrows,
troubles and death itself in all men living upon the face of the earth, as they
are Adams branches and posterity.

Now least the godly man (for conscience sake persecuted, or for his further
trial of the Lord afflicted) should be too much dismayed, and think his
persecutions were but just plagues for sin, and his crosses no comforts,
contrary to the sweet promises of the Gospel in that behalf: How and for what
end afflictions are laid upon the godly.
therefore let us search how and in what sort they are laid upon the godly. The
nature and condition of all troubles both of body and mind, in respect of
their first original, are qualified to the children of God and true
Christians: not by any dignity, or desert at all of their own, but as Elisha
healed the bitter and venomous waters, by casting salt into them: Note well.
so the bitter and intolerable sting of death, the bitter and unsavory
sicknesses and diseases both of our bodies and our souls are healed, the
nature of them changed, the poison removed, by the sauourie salt of Christ his
blood: yea, all sick, halt, lame, and withered men, have their griefs eased,
by the troubled, persecuted, scorned, scoffed, and crucified body of our Lord
Jesus Christ: as this sick man was healed in his body, by troubling the clear
water: Christ his blood shedding being (in judgment of wicked men) as unlikely
to work us any good, as salt to make fruitful, or muddy water to make a lame
man whole. In this, Christ Jesus our debt for sin is discharged, and upon his
cross is the obligation of ordinances (that was against us) fastened, Revel.
3.18.
and he is the very purgation that cleanses, the saving eye-salue that gives
light, Matthew. 3.17. Collos. 1.13. 2. Pet. 1.17.
and the wel-beloued son of God, by whom our cries are conveyed to his
father, in whom he receives and hears our plaints, and for whose sake we
enjoy all the blessedness and good things that ever we have.

Christ wholly altered the nature of afflictions to his own Church.
Now therefore in this Christ our alone Savior. sickness to his faithful
members is as comfortable as health: affliction as sweet as peace, adversity
as acceptable as prosperity, death as welcome as life, the grave as a most
sweet perfumed chamber, for the bodies of the Saints to lie in: for they can
with S. Paul say, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. It makes them not
fear death, but rather in Gods appointed time desire it, in seeing the
miseries of this present life, and by a lively faith soaring up into the
unspeakable joys of the life to come. And therefore they say with Paul: We
know, that if this earthly tabernacle of ours be dissolved, 2. Cor. 5.1.
we have a building given of God, not made with hands; but eternal in the
heavens. And Christ Jesus whether we live or die, is unto us both in life and
death advantage: yea, we seeing that while we live, 1 Thessalonians. 5.10. Phil. 1.21.
we are naked in this world, we sigh; desiring to be clothed with our house,
which is from heaven. And seeing while we are here iournying upon the earth,
we are absent from our head and husband: therefore we desire to be dissolved,
Philip. 1.23.
and to be with our husband and Savior, which is best of all. And finally,
seeing there is nothing in this world, but corruption, Eccles. 1.1.2.
alteration and vanity, we wait, we look, and long for the day of our
refreshing, when we may forever lift up our heads, meet our elder brother in
the clouds, and receive the incorruptible crown of glory, laid up in store
for all the Lords elect, ere ever the foundations of the world were laid.

Thus Gods children may rejoice, when the wicked shall howl and weep, they
shall be satisfied as it were with marrow and fatness, yea even when they
seem to be full of faintnes: when the fat bulls of Basan, and the devouring
lions shall be sent empty away: yea they shall clap their hands, and lift up
their heads for joy of that. In terror and fear whereof, the wicked shall gnash
with their teeth, grin like a dog: and for avoiding of it (though all in vain)
they shall wish the rocks to open, the hills to cover, and the mountains to be
as a shelter unto them, from the glorious presence of him that sits upon the
throne. Thus death against the godly has no sting, hell against the Christian
has no victory, Read Heb. 12 11. Psalm. 30.8.9. and 34.18.19 and 119.71.
affliction is not our confusion, as husbandmen use to bring dead trees and
burn them in the fire: but our affliction is for our firmer and further
consolation and edification: like as a good husbandman purges his vine, that
it may bring forth more fruit. Psalm. 30.5.
Heaviness with the godly may endure for a night: but assuredly peace and joy
comes in the morning. Seeing then that thus happily it goes with us all in
our greatest afflictions (if we belong unto Christ) I will conclude as Saint
Paul concludes his treatise of our immortal state in the life to come: that
seeing death once had dominion over us, but is now destroyed; afflictions
hurted us, but now they profit us; sickness affraied us, but now comfort
us: even thanks and all thanks be given for ever to God the father, 1. Cor.
15.57.
who has give us this happy victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now for the wicked, their sickness, sores, As for the wicked it is not so
with them.
griefs and vexations, are still unto them as stipends of sin, tokens of
Gods wrath, and (unless they speedily repent) even beginnings (as I said
before) of the flashings of hell fire. I deny not but the godly man may have
for the outward operation, the same sickness, sore, For the outward operation
of the sickness they may agree. Call. in Psalm. 37.19.

A difference between the afflictions of the godly and ungodly. Psalm. 1.4


grief and trouble, that the wicked and ungodly have: yet inwardly ever this
difference shall be found: Quod Deus suis in necessitate manum porrigens,
impios deferit: God in time of his childrens necessities, be they never so
great, still stretches out his hand for helping them, and upholding them,
least they fall: but as for the wicked, it is not so with them: he utterly
rejects them, forsakes, and gives the^ over unto their own hearts lust.
Propter peccatum.
Flagellantur iusti propter probationem, iniusti ad perditionem: The godly are
afflicted for their greater trial: but the wicked are afflicted for their
confusion, because of their great sins. Esaias. 9.13.14.
For the people (says Esaias) turns not unto him that smites them, neither
do they seek the Lord of hosts. Therefore will the Lord cut off in one day
from Israel, head and tail, branch and rush. Pijs afflictio est disciplina:
qua docetur iram Domini effugere, and voluntati eius obsequi: Affliction to the
godly is for discipline in themselves, whereby they are taught to avoid the
Lords wrath, by reformation of their lives, and willingly to yield obedience to
his commandments. Whereupon Paul says, When we are judged, 1. Cor. 11.32.
we re chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the
world. Impijs vero afflictio, est obduratio, qua a malo in peius progrediuntur,
sicut Pharaoh. But unto the wicked, In every affliction two things to be
considered.
affliction is a mean of hardening their hearts, whereby they proceed from
worse to worse. In every affliction two things are to be considered: first,
Gods judgment: secondly, Gods mercy. The wicked partaker of the former but
never of the latter.
The wicked in their afflictions are partakers of the one, which is Gods
judgment: but never of the other. The godly are partakers of both; judgment
for their sins, mercy for Jesus Christ his sake. Hereupon says Nahum: Nah.
1.7.
Good is our God, and comfortable to his own children in the day of trouble.
And David: Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Lo his
mercy, whereof the wicked are never partakers. So that herein appears again
wherein the godly are common partakers with the wicked in afflictions, and
where they differ. Psalm. 85.


The last thing that I will note out of this part and so end it; is this: That
in the words, sin no more, we may note that the Lord was privy to al his
former sins and offenses that ever before he had committed: and therefore it
is, as if he should say, I have seen, noted, and observed all such sins, as
ever before this thou have committed, either publicly or privately, inwardly
or outwardly, by thought, word and work: and for the same have afflicted thee,
and also in the end delivered thee: take heed therefore thou sin no more.
Hence note the Lord has Eagles eyes to see the corners of our hearts, and all
our sins never so closely committed: nothing so secret but it shall be made
manifest: Mat. 10. Read Psalm. 138.
and that which is committed in corners, shall be published on the house top.
Then ever hereafter let every man work as in the day time, walk as in Gods
presence, behave themselves as having the Lord an eye witness, who if we do
well, in his mercy will accept of us: but if we do evil, Genesis 4.7.
then know sin stands at the doors, who will never cease crying in the
ears of the Lord for vengeance, till such time as it be powered down upon the
wicked in fearful manner, and executed upon the unbelievers, to their
everlasting destruction. And thus much for the second part of the words of
exhortation, which is, that sin was the cause of his long sickness.

THE THIRD SERMON OF THE DVTIE OF OUR DELIVERANCE.
The third Sermon.
NOw follows the third part, vz. what must be the effect of his health,
recovery, or what must be the duty of his deliverance: drawn out of the
same words that the other part was, though not in the same sense, Sin no
more. This is the subject of the whole treatise, describing the duty that this
man healed must ever be mindful of, to his loving and merciful father for
his great and large deliverance: and in him may fitly be gathered the duty of
all Gods children to the Lord, for so many liberal and loving mercies, as
continually he powers upon them. Particulars showing the mercies of God.
How greatly this poor man was bound to render thanks to the almighty for
his deliverance, I have before set down in some particulars: as the dangerous
disease over his whole body: the long continuance of it, even most of his life:
the little good that any likely means of outward medicine did for him, with
some other more: the consideration whereof, could not but make him return from
the water with Naaman, and come to offer the rich and precious gift of his
whole heart to the Lord, as an acceptable sacrifice, wherewith he in mercy is
ever well pleased. The like course if every one of us would take, after our
great and marvelous deliverances, even with the Ruler, Ioh. 4.52.53.
whose son Christ had healed, being at the point to dye, to enter into a
serious and through search, This particular course is meet for all of us, the
more to move us to thankfulness.
of the very particular circumstances, of the danger wherein we were, and the
deliverance thereout in Gods mercy; it could not but urge the efficacy of
this point wonderful much, Sin no more.

And first I will by some examples and proofs out of the Scriptures show, how
from time to time the godly being delivered out of any dangers, either
spiritual or corporal], the Lord has required, and they willingly have
acknowledged some special duty therefore. Moses with the Israelites, having
enjoyed the great and memorable mercies of the Lord, in overthrowing Pharaoh,
and delivering them from him, letting them go through the red sea as on dry
land, do present]y join all together with heart and voice to praise the Lord,
Moses beginning, and they all following in the heavenly melody of
thanksgiving, thus: I will sing unto the Lord: Exodus 15.1.
for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse and him that rode upon him has he
overthrown in the Sea. Verse. 4. The deliverance.
Pharaohs charets and his host has he cast into the Sea: his chosen captains
also were drowned in the red Sea. Therefore as his duty, he acknowledges and
says, Ver. 2. The duty.
The Lord is my strength, and my praise, and he is become my salvation. He is
my God, and I will prepare him a tabernacle. He is my fathers God, and I will
exalt him.

Judge. 5. Ver. 27.
The Lord having given Deborah and Barak a triumphant victory over their cruel
enemy Sisera, Deborah thereupon reasons of the miracle in her song, and
resolves of performing a most excellent duty, as thus: They that remain, The
deliverance.
have dominion over the mighty: the Lord has given me dominion over the
strong. Ver. 13.
He (meaning Sisera) bowed down at her feet he fell down, and lay still: at
her feet he bowed him down, and fell and when he had sunk down, he lay
there dead. Therefore as our duty, Verse. 2.3. The duty.
Praise ye the Lord for auenging of Israel, and for the people that offered
themselves willingly. Verse. 12.
J will sing unto the Lord: I will sing praises unto the Lord our God. Up
Deborah, up, arise, and sing a song arise Darak, and load thy captivity
captive, thou son of Abinoam.

Psalm. 107. The deliverance.
David rehearsing in the 107. Psalm many and great deliverances: as first of
dispersed strangers, and their misery, verse. 3.4.5.6.7. deliverance out of
captivity and prison, verse. 10.11.12.13.14. and lastly, the deliverance of
poor tossed shipmen from the dangers of the seas, verse. 25.26.27.28.29.30:
adds the duty of all such as are delivered therefrom, thus: Ver. 8.15.21.31.
The duty.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the sons of men.

In the 105. Psalm, David from the beginning thereof, unto the latter end
thereof, Psalm. 105. The deliverance.
is wholly occupied in expressing Gods miraculous and merciful power, in
protecting Israel from Abraham's time (when they were but a few in number, and
strangers in the land) till such time as by a mighty hand; and outstretched
arm, he brought them into the pleasant land of Canaan. And in the last verse
he notes what use they must make of so many mercies, and what duty diligently
they must walk in, for Gods favorable dealing with them, thus: That they
might keep his statutes, and observe his laws. Praise ye the Lord. Ver. 45.
The duty.


Many more proofs I might allege out of the word of God, for corporal
deliverances bestowed upon the Church from time to time, and what must be the
duty of such deliverances: but these may suffice for the plain proof of
outward deliverances and their duties. Of spiritual deliverances. The
deliverance. Luke. 1.74. Verse. 77. Verse. 79.
Now of spiritual deliverances, and their duties.

Being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: knowledge of salvation given
unto us by remission of our sins in Jesus Christ: light given to us that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, and guiding our feet into the way of
peace: must of necessity in the partakers of this deliverance, bring forth
this duty: even to serve the Lord without fear, Verse. 74.75. The duty.
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 13.12. The deliverance.
notes a great deliverance in a few words: The night is past: and being so,
never forget the duty which follows: therefore let us cast away the works
of darkness, Verse. 13.14. The duty.
and put upon us the armor of light, hereafter to walk honestly as in the day
time, not in gluttony, and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and
envying: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Cor. 6.20. The deliverance. The duty. Verse. 20.
Paul tells the Corinthians of a great deliverance, thus: Ye are bought with
a price: and therefore your duty is to glorify God both in your souls and
bodies: for they are the Lords. And again, Seeing ye are so dearly bought,
and purchased with such a precious pearl: therefore be not the servants of men.
1. Cor. 7.23.


1. Pet. 2.18.19. The deliverance.
Peter speaks of a most comfortable deliverance: Ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation: but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a lamb
undefiled and without spot. And therefore seeing the purchasing of our
salvation was a matter of such difficulty: for silver and gold could not do
it, a matter of such necessity: for the devil ruled over us, as a cruel
tyrant: a purchase at such a high rate, and the matter of it of such a precious
valuation: for it was the blood of Christ, being most precious, and the lamb
of God undefiled and without spot: 1. Pet. 1.17. The duty.
all Christians duties therefore it is that are partakers hereof, even
hereafter to pass their time, and spend the days of their dwelling here on
earth in Gods most holy fear.

Now out of all these testimonies and examples which have hitherto been
alleged, concerning Christians duties, for deliverances either spiritual or
corporal, may further very fitly be gathered what is the end of the grace and
favor of God toward us, in, The end of Gods mercies toward us.
by, and through his son Christ Jesus, even thus: Vt Deo reconciliatus
peccator, salutis suae authorem, pie, sancteque vtuendo colat: That the sinner
being reconciled to God, must ever after glorify the author of his salvation,
by leading a holy and vncorrupt life. Yea, Eodem verbo quo venia nobis
offertur, simul vocamur ad poenitentiam: By that same powerful word of the
Lord, whereby health, life, liberty, or forgiveness of sins is offered unto
us: by the very same word is sounded out unto us, Sin no more.

Now it follows more thoroughly to search into the natural sense and meaning
of these words, The natural sense and meaning of the word.
Sin no more: and to set down chiefly what is meant hereby: the which words
uttered by our Savior Christ to the man healed, I take it may be thus
resolved. Whereas thou from the first time of thy cradle, till now, that I
looked upon thy distressed case, have been no better then a dead man, in thy
sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. Esaias. 5.18.
drinking sin like water, and drawing n sin as it were with cart ropes, sin
reigning in thee, Romans 6.12.
and Satan triumphing over thee, by captiuating and enthralling all the powers
of thy soul, to his own bend and obedience, making thee come when he called,
and run when he bad thee: this sickness in thy soul made sores in thy body,
and thy senseless and secure conscience brought an universal lamenes to thy
carcass: so that as the parts of thy soul being bereaved of their powers,
were no better then withered and unprofitable branches: John. 15 5.6
even so the whole constitution of thy diseased body, lay withered and dead, no
part able thoroughly to minister comforts to another, till such time as I
viewing thy case, had compassion on thy calamities, and in my power healed that
disease with a word, which all outward medicines could never do by continual
practice. Seeing it is so, the wages I wish is a continual watch against
sin, my fee, a fear to offend, and all the reward I require, is true,
hearty, and unfeigned repentance for all thy sins, Psalm. 51.
an acceptable sacrifice wherewith I am always well pleased. And as before
through sin thou wast sick, through sin thou wast weak, and by reason of
thy sins thou could not stand upright: so now thy sins being pardoned,
thy sickness healed, and thy former strength restored: rise up from sin,
awake from sleep, and live no more the life of the wicked. Thus then I gather
the scope and drift of our Savior Christ his exhortation to be, to draw the
man healed to true repentance, the acceptable price he must pay to his God for
all his mercies. And the phrase of words, are even the very same both in sound
and sense, that the first part of true repentance is described by unto us in
the old Testament: As in Esaias. 1.16. Wash you, make you clean, take away the
evil of your works from before mine eyes, cease to do evil. And Psalm.
34.15. Eschew evil. And again, Esaias 55. verse. 7. Let the wicked forsake his
ways. And in Iere. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness. And in
Ezech. 16.61. Remember thy ways, and be ashamed. And Iere. 4.4. Break up your
fallow ground, circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and be no more
stiffenecked. And in the new Testament for the same purpose are these words
used: Crucify the old Adam, Colloss. 3.5. Two parts of true repentance.
mortify the earthly affections, etc. For whereas there are two parts of true
repentance: the first called a killing, the second a quickening; the first a
dying, the second a renewing; the first a forsaking, the second an embracing;
the first a casting off, the second a putting on. And to conclude, the first a
ceasing from sin, the second a continuance in care of a good conscience, the
man is here exhorted by our Savior Christ to true repentance, by killing the
old Adam, dying to his iniquities, casting off the unfruitful works of
darkness, and never sinning as he has done before, Ephesians. 5.11.
which is the former part of true repentance. For this is the first degree of
repentance to salvation, that the sinner forsake his former follies, which
before he has frequented, renounce his former life wherein before he lived,
and frame his whole doing to the rule of righteousness, which before were out
of frame. So that I may conclude, where there is no forsaking, no removing, nor
better framing, there is never brought forth any thing, but fained,
hypocritical, and pharisaicall repentance. Hence out of all this which has
been delivered, may it first be said to the man healed, and in him to all in
general who have tasted and inioyed in abundance the sweet mercies of God, in
the mediator of the new Testament Christ Jesus: and especially to you my
countrymen, who cannot deny but Gods mercies have bin multiplied upon you in
most sweet manner, Apply it to yourselues.
even like unto the dew of Hermon that fell upon the hill of Sion, and watered
the dry earth that gaped for it: that for the man, he was like the t^^e that
was thoroughly dunged, and manured about: and of ourselves it may be said; what
could the Lord have done more for us his vineyard, then already he has done,
seating it in a fruitful hill, hedging it, gathering out the stones of it, and
planting it with the best plants, building a tower in the midst, Look to thy
self well, seeing this is thy case.
and making a winepresse therein? That therefore to the man Christ said in
effect: this is my last year of my dunging and manuring, either cease from thy
folly, and offend me no more, or else look for nothing but hewing down with
the axe of my judgments, and to be burn up for ever. But happy man, and
thrice happy, so healed by Christ in his body: for it wrought in him ever after
the saving health of his soul. And to you my beloved neighbors, let me in the
behalf of our gracious God cry, that the matter and case on his part, going so
with you as it does, either now or never bring forth fruits worthy amendment
of life: you that have hitherto been awake, but not with wine; Our wicked and
damnable course enforce our effectual calling.
dead, when you seemed to live; Atheists, aliants, and strangers from the
commonwealth of Israel, stopping your ears at the voice of the crier,
senseless at the stroke of Gods hammer, persecuting those that prayed for you,
contemning those that gave you wholesome counsel: and finally, you that all
your lives long hitherto have sported and solaced your selves with sin, as
Sampson with Dalilah, shake off your sin, awake from sleep, and stand
upright, open your ears, and circumcise your hearts, and let the Lords voice
enter into your souls, crying: work as in the day, hear as from the Lord,
and walk as in his presence: to whom let us all make answer with a sweet
resounding echo thus: Thy voice, thy call, Happy are we if we hear aright.
thy law, thy lore, and eke thy praise will we bear, obey, extol, and
magnify all the days of our life being here on the earth. This if we do,
then happy shall we be: stand fast for aye, and a parcel of the Lords vineyard
beloved for ever: but if we do not, but delay the time of our repentance, as
we have done: oh alas, I must and will tell you what he will then do unto us
sinful, wicked, and careless contemners of his graces, even take away his
hedge from us, break down his wall, lay us waste, A fearful afterclap.
and neither plant, prime, cut, nor dig us any more: and then mark what
woeful sequel thereupon shall follow: we shall be trodden down, eaten up, and
destroyed by the wild bore out of the forest: and no good shall then grow
amongst us, but brambles and briars, tokens of his wrath: as in Adma and Zeboim.

Again, as this exhortation serves to the man that never tasted of repentance
before, that now without delay he turn unto the Lord, cease from his sin,
and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life: so likewise it may serve,
and be in place of a loving and pithie exhortation to the protestant, It
serves as an exhortation to all protestants of our country. Ioh. 11. Mark
our happy case on Gods behalf. Ephesians. 2.
and professor of Christianity in these our days, whose case on Gods behalf
is like to Mary Magdalens, out of whom went seven devils: like to Lazarus, who
was raised from death to life, after four days rotting in his grave: like to
the Ephesians, quickened, raised up, made new, and brought to sit in heavenly
places, by the blood of Christ, from aliants and strangers to the commo^-wealth
of Israel, without hope, without God in the world: yea of forreners and
strangers, made citizens with the Saints, and of the househ^^d of faith. And to
conclude on Gods behalf, like to the untoward and trewantlike scholars, of
whom the author to the Hebrews makes mention, who were lightened, tasted of
the heavenly gift, Heb. 6.3.4.5.6.7.
and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, casted of the good word of God, and
of the power of the world to come. The professors I say on Gods behalf, being
in as happy a case as Magdalen: grace offered from God the father, by his
son Christ, to dispell and drive back Satan, and dispossess them of many
devils, as comfortable a case as Lazarus was in, called by the sounding
ministry of Gods word, out of the pit and grave of their sins, where they
have not lain almost four days, as Lazarus: but by an inueterate custom of
sin, all their days rotting therein, yet at last made to hear this
powerful voice, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, etc. And
to conclude, of no people made a beloved people; of aliants from the common
wealth of Israel, made owners and heirs thereof by grace; and of servants by
nature, made sons unto God, by adoption in Christ Jesus. But these professors
of the Gospel, so gracious on Gods behalf, who has laid out himself, and
his mercies wholly in his son Christ unto them all: yet in regard of
themselves, and the courses of their lives, not unlike the foolish Galathians,
Gal. 3.1.
who did for a time run well, but in the end obeyed not the truth, loved their
Apostle so dearly, Gal. 4.15.
that they would have plucked their eyes out of their heads to have done him
good: yet after a time harkening to false Apostles, they accounted him their
utter enemy, Verse. 16.
be;cause he told them the truth. These at the first publishing of the
Gospel were very fervent, accompting it sweet: but after some trials for the
same laid upon them, they fainted, adiudging themselves unable to undergo the
burden. And to conclude, though they begun in the spirit, yet Paul was afraid
of them, that they would altogether end in the flesh. Yea, fitly may many of
our Christians at this day, be compared with the protestants against whom Peter
wrote, who promised unto others liberty, 2. Pet. 2.20.
and yet were themselves the servants of corruption: who after they had escaped
from the filthiness of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord, and of the
Savior Jesus Christ, were yet again tangled therein. And to conclude, as I
compared them to the Ephesians before, in regard of the multitude of Gods
mercies offered them: so now may I again fitly resemble them to the same
Ephesians, but not in the same sense as before, being now comparable with them
for carelesnes, Apocal. 2.4.
coldness, and luke-warmenes in Gods service. For unto the Ephesians Angel or
pastor, John the Divine was commanded to write diverse things: amongst which,
this for one, that the Ephesians had forsaken their first love.

Thus then the case going with us all that profess the Gospel, so happily, so
comfortably on Gods behalf, even raised up to sit in spiritual places with
Christ Jesus: and so dangerously and so doubtfully on our own parts, amongst
many, in regard of their sensual, carnal and careless carriage of
themselves, in the midst of a sinful and crooked generation: this duty of
the sick man's deliverance, laid down and described in our text here by
Christ, may serve very fitly for us all, and be continually applied of every
one of us, and still sounding in our ears, as though Christ were calling upon,
or conferring with us, saying: Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more.

Ye that were dead in your sins has Christ quickened: Mark well o my brethren.
ye that were strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in
you, because of the hardness of your hearts, has he illuminated and opened the
eyes of your understanding, that ye may see and discern of things that differ
one from another. Yea unto you all that profess the Gospel let me speak:
Behold, beho]d, ye that were deaffe do hear, Blessed be God for it.
ye that were lame do go, ye that were dumb do speak, ye that were leprous
are cleansed: and ye poor souls whom Satan once ouerruled, keeping you in
darkness, popery and superstition, to you, to you I say is the Gospel
preached, the happy news of salvation sent, and the kingdom and glorious
throne of Christ Jesus erected amongst you. But me think I hear some say,
that the man to whom these words were first uttered by Christ, The secure
reasoning of many.
had cause and great cause to put in practice this wholesome counsel: for he
was made whole, not only in soul, and the parts thereof, but also in his
body, when he never expected any recovery: but as for us, or as for me,
although the spiritual blessings we feel and perceive: yet for bodily
healing, or preserving from dangers, wherein can we find it? O my beloved,
behold further, and ye shall see what mercies the Lord has magnified toward
you, in regard of corporal health, or bodily deliverances.

First, it is not unknown what devises Satan by his ministers, An answer unto
it.
has used both foreign and domestical, for the subversion of our gracious
prince, (the stay of our safety, and the staff of our strength, next under
God) the invasion and possession of our Realm by forrenners: and from all
these, behold we are made whole, and both the deviser and the devises brought
to naught. For other deliverances corporal, as from famine, the pestilence,
the running issues, and the burning fever, whereof most parts of our land have
tasted, I spare to speak: because we are so lately made whole, or delivered
from them, and do conclude my answer of the objection, with Paul the Apostle
to the Romans: If God spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to
death: how shall he not with him give us all other things also needful for us?
Nay, blessed be God, he has given us them already: so that now hence
follows the duty he requires; of you Magistrates that profess to defend
the Gospel, by the sword of your authority; of you pastors that preach the
Gospel; and of all others that openly profess the Gospel in more zeal, and
forwardnes for outward show, then many others; to you all I say, take heed,
look to your selves, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain: that ye do
not cry Lord, Lord in voice, and deny him in your lives; that ye be not
professors, and no practisers; hearers, but no doers. Sin no more in your
loose lives, as you have done, by dispensing with justice, daubing up the Lords
wall with untempered mortar, rising up early, or sitting up late to drink
strong drink, defiling your bodies by the uncleanness of whoredom, blaspheming
God by swearing, or profaning the Sabbath of the Lord, by following your
worldly businesses: for with these sins I am afraid, many that profess the
Gospel are defiled, whereby justice is perverted, the Lords building hindered,
the godly offended, and occasion of stumbling to the weak ones thereby
administered, and generally by means hereof, the wicked uncircumcised Gentiles,
have taken an occasion of blaspheming the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, as
the wicked by David's offense in his days. Do not account the show of this
world such a silver shrine as you do: do not with one hand receive Christ,
and with the other embrace this evil world with Demas: Kiss not Christ once,
and after with Judas betray him: be not so newfangled this day, as with the
Pharisees to cry, Hosanna, welcome Christ, and to be altered soon after with
the Camelion, crying kill, and crucify him. Let not such unsavory and
unsanctified communication come out of your mouths: as sometime one shall hear
even from those that brag much of the Gospel either concerning worldly
matters, or their vain sportes and pastimes of this life. Do not for a time
affect and love your pastor for his message sake, and after a while to bring
itching ears, that unless he will speak ad placidum, you will persecute him,
and unless he will be a wether-cocke to transform himself fit for your humors:
you will account him an unprofitable watchman: run not too fast for fear you
faint, neither run aside for fear you fall in the ditch: but run so as you
may finish your course with joy: lay your building upon that corner stone, as
you resolve to persevere: begin not in the spirit, and end in the flesh:
remember from whence ye are fallen, even from your first love, and your former
care: repent, and do your first works, ye that know the way of truth, walk
in it, work by it, let word and deed, profession and practice be simul eodem,
and circa eadem: concur together for the advancement of the glorious crown
and kingdom of Christ Jesus. And to conclude, in the bowels of Jesus Christ I
beseech all you my brethren by profession, give no more such a scandale, by
your lewd lives, as you have done, neither to Jew nor Gentile, to those that
are without or within the Church: take the Apostle Paul herein for an example:
walk more warily, that the Gospel on your behalf be not evil spoken of: and
finally dearly beloved, let your light so shine before men and let your
conversation be so honest among the Gentiles, that they seeing your good works
may glorify God our heavenly father in the day of their visitation. And thus
much of the force of these words Sin no more to all that do profess the
Gospel of Christ, not so syncerely as they ought.

It follows now to set down the measure of this duty: Sin no more. viz.
How, and of what manner of strength sinning no more ought to be with the godly:
and here we may not think that the drift of our Savior Christ in laying down
his duty, is to persuade the man healed, or in him any one of the godly: that
he expects in them an immunitie and freedom altogether from sin and the
remnants thereof, and that after our deliverance from dangers, either
spiritual or corporal, we should become so perfect in our profession of
Christianity, Esaias. 64.6.7. Prou. 20.9. Eccles. 7.21. 1. King 8.46.
as that we should be altogether pure from the blots and blemishes of any sin
whatsoever. For the example of the godly of all ages, recorded in the book of
God, testify the contrary: who still feeling in them a rebellious nature,
prone and prompt to sin, do pray continually for strength against the same.
And in all humiliation do prostrate themselves, Psalm. 143.2. and. 130.3. Dan.
9.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.
before Gods tribunal seat, humbly craving the Lord never to enter into
judgment with them for their sins daily committed: using these or the like
speeches: Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for if thou do,
no flesh shall be justified before thee. Again, If thou o Lord mark what is done
amiss, oh who may abide it. The rule of prayer given by our Savior Christ
enforces this point, teaching the godly while they live, ever to pray, forgive
us our debts, Mat. 6.12.
the authority of the scriptures confirms the same in many and sundry other
places, Gal. 5.17.
teaching us to acknowledge and confess, when we have done all that ever we
can, we are unprofitable servants: And that if we would, Luke. 19.
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: so that
hence, 1. John. 1.8.
if any spirit there arise, so foolish as dare affirm, that the Church and the
particular members thereof ought to be a pure and sanctified Church of it
self, and in it self, from all stain and corruption, either in doctrine or
manners, The only perfection in this life is to know our selves imperfect.
Ierom. in epist. Nunquam ad perfectione^ pertingemus, nisi confecto nostro
stadio. Call. in Ephesians.
we are taught what to answer, that we can never be partakers of that total
freedom, and final victory over sin, and the poison thereof, till that
mortality be swallowed up of immortality: and we enjoy the presence of him
that sits upon the throne. The measure then of our sinning no more, that the
Lord requires of his children, as the duty of their deliverance, is the
very same which the Apostle Paul urges to the Romans Let not sin reign in
your mortal bodies that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof: Neither give ye
your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, but give your selves unto
God. Wherein the Apostle wills the Romans to strain and strive, that (being
by Jesus Christ delivered from the bondage of sin, and the slavery of their
spiritual Pharaoh) sin get not the dominion over them again, that it should
not like a merciless tyrant rule over them again, neither that ever their
powers and strengthes should serve to Satan's beck and bend again: but to
labor continually, that sin may die, the old Adam may be slain in them, and a
continual care, and principal study to serve God, should bear the rule, and
have the pre-eminence in them. Calu. in Romans Cap. 6. ver. 12.
Tamet si peccatum in nobis residet, tamen absurdum est, vt ad exercendum suum
regnu^ vigeat: Although sin while we live will have some resiancie with us:
yet is it very absurd and unmeet that it should ouerrule us. Totis viribus
extingue^do in nobis peccato, Bucer. in Romans Cap. 6.
and vitae Dei excitanda insistere debemus: Strive we must with all our
strength, that sin in us, may more and more be lessened, and the spiritual
life of God raised and quickened in us, by Jesus Christ our Lord. This proof of
the Apostle Paul, being so pregnant, for confirming this point of the measure
of our ceasing from sin, and performing obedience to the Lord, I will (as God
shall guide me by his holy spirit) insist a little further in laying down the
reasons and arguments, that the Apostle uses in the two aforesaid verses: That
sin in the godly ought not to rule and reign, and carry them captive after
their conversion, as it did before.

Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. The first argument.
The first argument he alleges to prove that sin ought not to reign in
them, is drawn from the filthiness and power of sin: it is a most filthy
and dangerous matter to suffer sin to rule in you, and to exercise power in
you. But unless you withstand sin with all your strength, and keep
continual watch against him, he will break in upon you, and bind the keeper
of the house: this part is drawn out of these two words, sin reign. The
second argument.
The second reason is drawn from the effect of sin which is death, for it is
sin that causes our bodies to be mortal, as has been proved at large
before: this the Apostle notes in these words, mortal bodies.

The third argument.
The third argument is drawn from the comparison of our worthiness in Christ,
clothed with his righteousness, with the filthiness of unrighteousness. For if
we give our members unto sin, we make them the weapons of unrighteousness, by
means whereof issues nothing from them but that which is unrighteous
altogether, whereas God has created them in Christ to be instruments of
righteousness drawn out of these words: Your members weapons of unrighteousness.

The fourth argument.
The fourth reason is drawn from the comparison of sin and God: viz. of
eternal death and eternal life: for when as the Apostle had said: Give not
your members to sin: he annexeth the contrary and says: But give your
selves wholly to God: And that he may express with what service and endeavor
we ought to addict our selves to God, and his worship, he does not say barely:
Give your members to God: as he forbids them to give them to sin, but he
says: Exhibete vos ipsos vtique totos: Give your whole selves unto God, even
all that ever is in you.

The fifth argument.
The fifth argument is drawn from the precious gift of God, which is bestowed
upon us by Christ. viz. That when as through sin we were dead, now we live
being endowed with the life of God: then why should we not apply our selves and
whole strength, for the continual enjoying of it? especially when as to make a
relapse into sin again is to fall into everlasting death (without Gods great
mercy in Christ) from eternal life, contained in these words, as they that
are alive from the dead.

The sixth and last argument is drawn from the excellency of righteousness: The
sixth argument.
the weapons and defense whereof we make our members, when as we give them unto
God, and dedicate them unto all holiness, the special end, for which they
were given us of the Lord. Now by the due and careful consideration of all
these arguments, the diligent and careful Christian out of this one proof,
shall find himself compassed about with many reasons and sound arguments, all
enforcing this point. After thy deliverances bestowed upon thee by God, Sin
no more: Viz. suffer not sin to make thee his slave no more, to make thee his
carthorse, to rule and reign in thee, to obey his lusts, to give ear to his
inchantements: but having the unclean spirit driven out of thee, entertain
him no more, being escaped from the filthiness of thy sins, fall not into thy
old wont and vomit of sin again, but strive and strain to be lead forward
to perfection. Phil. 3.24. 1. Cor. 9.24. Philip. 3.12.
Follow hard toward the mark: so run, that thou may obtain and comprehend
that, for whose sake also thou art comprehended of Christ Jesus: out of all
which I may infer this conclusion, no striving, no ouerruling, no victory
over our sins we have had: most certainly no convert, no true Christian, no
dutiful man, for his many and great deliverances.

Heretics. Papists. Cath. Coelest. Donat. Perfect. See Call. in Ephesians. 1. ver. 4
Now because the arguments of the Papists Catherans, Caelestins, Donatists, and
vnpure Perfectists, for proving and confirming an absolute obedience to the law
of God, and a total purity from sin, amongst the godly in this life, seem
to the reader at the first view to carry some weight, I will a little more
stand upon the confutation of their objections and the right sense and meaning
of those testimonies of scripture, which they falsely pervert to their own
destruction, and the endangering of many. Ierom. aduersus Pelag. ad Ctesiphon.
And first let me set down what Jerome his judgment is of them in these
words: What greater rashness can there be, then for a man to challenge to
himself, not only to be like, but to be all one with God: which poison has
issued from the impure fountain of the Philosophers: and especially Pythagoras
and Zeno, who affirmed that those which the Graecians call (...), and we
passions: as grief, hope, fear, joy. etc. may be pulled out of man's minds, and
that no string, or root of vices at all, may be remaining in men, through the
exercise of virtue: which is to take man out of man, and for a man being in the
body to be without the body. Thus far Jerome. And the same man a little after
in the same treatise, says very excellently thus: He that always forgets
things past, and longs for things to come, shows that he is not content
with, neither that there is any perfection in this present world. The
adversaries, being by the examples of the diverse falls of the faithful in all
ages: their humble confessions concerning their imperfections: and the
manifold testimonies of the word to this end, so hampered, 1. Objection. See
Call. lib. 2. instit. cap. 7.
that they are grauelled and can go no further: have no refuge, but are
constrained to fly to the almighty power of God: leaving what man can do of
himself, reasoning what is Gods power in man.

between the flesh and the spirit, we may so much the more long for that
blessed life, wherein we shall appear before God, perfectly regenerate and
holy: whereas if God should out of hand renew, and totally sanctify us, the
dignity should not be of so great account with us: but now, by little and
little bringing the same to pass in us, the perfection thereof is so much the
more dear unto us.

Philip. 3.15.
The Scripture (say they) attributes perfection to the godly, saying: As many
of us as are perfect, let us be thus minded.

Paul reckeneth himself amongst the perfect, he speaks not of such a
perfection of faith in us, Call. in Phil. 3.15.
as the Perfectists do imagine: but he speaks there of the perfection of
knowledge, in respect of the only foundation of our salvation Jesus Christ:
when casting away confidence in all things, we rejoice in the only
righteousness of Christ Jesus: and setting all other things aside, to attain
to the fellowship of his sufferings, which may bring us to the blessed
resurrection. So that this proof, which they use as a daunt to drive us from
the truth, may we use as a sword to pearce them through, who withstand so
plain a truth. Secondly, it is true by comparison, vz. If you compare persons
with persons, that there is more virtue and knowledge to be found in one man,
then in another: so the Apostles well instructed in Christ, were called
perfect, in respect of them who being too much set upon ceremonies of the Law,
were pulled asunder from the body it self. So Noah for his life, is said to
have been a just and perfect man in his generation.



Phil. 3.11.
if by any means they may attain to the resurrection of the dead. Which
objection being thus answered, appears manifestly how wicked, and directly
against this sound and wholesome doctrine of the imperfect obedience of the
faithful in this life, is that Canon of the Tridentine Council, Can. 18.
sess. 6. enacting thus: If any man say, that the commandments of God are
impossible to be kept, even of a man justified and under grace, let him be
accursed.

And here for the summary conclusion of this point, I cannot omit the
testimonies of two ancient learned fathers, concerning the premises: August.
contra duas epist. Pelag. lib. 4. c. 10.
Augustine saying thus: With what presumption do they openly gainsay the Lords
prayer, wherein all the members of Christ do cry with a true heart, and daily
voice, forgive us our debts? And a most excellent saying is that of Cyprian,
Cypr. epist. de mortal.
who says: We have a combat with covetousness, with wrath, with ambition: we
have a daily and troublesome wrestling with the corruption of the flesh, and
with the entisements of the world. If covetousness be vanquished, lust rises
up: if lust be suppressed, ambition comes in place: if ambition be
contemned, wrath galleth, pride puffs up, drunkenness allureth, wickedness
cutteth off friendship: and yet it pleases a man to stay long among these
snares of Satan: whereas we ought rather to wish to make haste unto Christ,
where we may be freed from them all.

The last point that I have thought good to note out of these words, Sin no
more, is the private and particular use and application, that every one
partaker of any deliverance, either spiritual or corporal from the Lord,
must make to his own soul, concerning such duty as the Lord requires of him,
which is this: That the words and power of them, should ever sound unto his
own soul, as a summon, to bid him awake, stand up, and walk no more in the
course and ways of his former wickedness, as thus: O thou man, whosoever thou
be, who have tasted most abundantly the sweet mercies of thy God, escaped
many dreadful dangers, passed many perils, the Lord still preserving thee, and
shadowing thee under the wings of his mercy, till they were all ouerpast:
look now to thy self, how thou walk hereafter: not so loosely, negligently
and disobediently, as thou have done before: sin no more in unthankfulness, as
thou have done: sin no more in contemning Gods long, loving, and gracious
visitation: sin no more in profaning the Lords day: sin no more by thy
drunkenness, adultery, Atheism, contempt of Gods word, and many more sins,
wherein thou have been found faulty: let Gods judgments, shaken at thee as a
sword for thy sins, terrify thee: let the same now removed allure thee, ever
hereafter to walk, and work, as in the presence of the Almighty. And thus
may every private soul, now saved from dangers, sound out the alarm of his
continual duty, in manner and form aforesaid: ever laboring and striving,
that the Lords preservation from imminent dangers, may bring forth and breed
in us reformation of life, and mortification of sin reigning in us.

And thus much for the duty of the man delivered: wherein has bin showed at
large, the duty of us all for Gods many and miraculous mercies, whereof we
have of late most abundantly tasted: and which whole point is the subject of
this unworthy treatise.

THE FOVRTH SERMON OF THE DVTIE OF our deliverance: drawn out of the last
words of the text: Least a worse thing come unto thee.
NOw follows the fourth and last part of this treatise, The sum of the
words.
which is the loving and friendly caveat of our Savior Christ to the man
healed: forewarning him of the danger that would ensue, if he did not presently
put in practice the duty of his deliverance, contained in these words of the
text: Least a worse thing come unto thee.

In these words uttered by our Savior Christ to the man healed, is described
the danger this man was in, if he sinned again, even a worse thing to fall
upon him. The Lord in his former sickness had dealt with him like a son: but
if he continue obstinate, and offend again, he will plague him like a wayward
servant. He had visited him with a long sickness, to purge him, that he might
be a profitable pla^t: but if after this purging of the Lord, he still became
unprofitable, he will the next time pluck him up by the roots, and cast him
into the fire. In his former sickness God showed his merciful power, and
powerful mercy in healing him, when he had no hope to be healed: but if he
fall and offend again, the Lord will show his just power, and powerful
justice in condemning him. The danger of a relapse into sin again, after God
has delivered us out of dangers. Heb. 6.6.7.
The man stood therefore in a dangerous case, better he had never been healed,
then sin again: better never to have received the sweet rain and dew of
Gods blessings, then after the receipt of them, to bring forth nothing but
briars and brambles: for so he is nie to cursing. Out of all which I gather
this doctrine, vz: That when for sin God has inflicted sickness, sores, and
grief upon any, and afterward he in mercy has healed the disease, by
remitting the sin, and the party so healed does fall afterward into his
accustomed manner of sinning again: that same party, whosoever he or she be,
is in great danger that God will inflict a greater plague upon him, then ever
he had before. For proof hereof, read Leuit. 26. from the 14. Read Leui. 26.
from verse. 14. to the end of the chap. and Deuteronomy. 28.
verse to the end of the chapter, where the servant of God Moses sets down,
that for the peoples disobedience, and contempt of his laws, God will bring a
consumption, and a burning ague: but if they will not for these things repent,
he will punish them seven times more: if they will not then repent, he will
plague them seven times worse then that. The Prophet Amos rebukes Israel,
that though she was in captivity, yet was she not humbled thereby to forsake
her sins: Amos. 5. verse. 10.11.12.
but rather worse and worse in contemning his Prophet in oppressing the poor,
in perverting judgment, by taking bribes: the Prophet prophesies and tells
them that a worse thing shall come, then ever befell them hitherto: for whereas
they seemed to cry for the day of the Lord, he tells them the day of
vengeance shall fall upon them in stead of the other. Yea one judgment shall
follow after another. Verse. 19.
As if a man did fly from a Lion and a bear, and did meet him, or went into
the house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him: Gods
judgments shall be ready to seize upon him, Pro. 1. verse. 24.
what way soever he turn him. Wisdom tells the wicked, that because she
has stretched out her hand, to correct diverse of her rebellious sons, and
yet they continued wicked, Verse. 28.29.30.
and would none of her correction, lo the next time she will stretch forth her
hand, but not as before: before she stretched and spread abroad both her arms
of mercy, clocking her disobedient children unto her: As the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings: Math. 23.37.
But her second stretching shall be as an Eagle prepared for his pray, to bring
upon them sudden desolation and destruction like a whitewind. Esaias speaking in
the person of the Lord to his rebellious Israel says: Esy. 65.12.
I shall number you to the sword, and all you shall bow down to the slaughter:
because I cried and you did not answer, I spoke and ye did not hear, Ierem.
2.30.
but did evil in my sight. Jeremy complains, that although they were
smitten and corrected, yet all was in vain: And how fearful a thing it is,
after God has given us health or deliverance out of dangers, to offend him
again by our loose life, appears by Pharaoh and his fearful end, Exodus
13.28. Luke. 17.17.
and by that sharp censure Christ gave of the nine leapers by him cleansed,
and yet remained unthankful. Heb. 6.4.
And if it be so dangerous to sin again after the recovery of the health of
the body; much and more dangerous it is for those to fall again, Heb. 10.26.
Mat. 12.45.
whom God has enlightened with the sight of their sins, and knowledge of the
truth, Heb. 6.6.
for they entertain other spirits worse than the former, they crucify again
the son of God, and therefore better had it been for such never to have
known the way of truth, then after they have known it, to profane it, 2.
Pet. 3.13.
by their lewd and wicked practices, least a worse thing come unto thee.

This word (least) does not here signify any uncertainty, as being a thing
proceeding from man, The right sense of the word (least) in this place.
whose promises or threatings are uncertain: but it signifies a thing most
assuredly, that will come to pass, as being a judgment proceeding from the
father of light, Iam. 1.18. Gods judgments are not to be dallied withal.
with whom is no variablenes not shadow of turning. We may not dally with the
threatenings of the Lord here, as Euah did with the commandment in Paradise:
who when the Lord had absolutely threatened death to the^ as soon as ever they
should transgress his commandment; Euah by the subtlety of the serpent is
brought to make a peradventure of that which God absolutely set down, and
says: Genesis 3.3.
Of the fruit of the tree in the midst of the garden, God has said, ye
shall not eat least ye die.

It may be, some now a days may sooth up Gods judgments and threatenings, The
speech of a careless Atheist.
and sooth themselves in their sins and say, tush, to sin is not so great a
danger as it is taken to be, for we see them that most offended, flourish
fair, and stand as well as the best: and besides, his judgments are but
threatened with a peradventure, or perhaps take heed ye catiffes, and thrice
blinded men of the world. For this word (least) signifies thus much: That he
advises them to beware, for if he do not, A bone for such to gnawe upon.
assuredly a worse thing will come upon him. And that Gods judgments threatened
against the wicked, are without any peradventure, as coming from a God not
uncertain what to do; mark what Moses speaks in the person of the Lord: If I
whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.41.42
I will execute vengeance on mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me: I
will make my arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall eat flesh: And David
says: God shall wound the hairie scalpe of such an one as goes on still in
his wickedness. And the author to the Hebrews, having persuaded to holiness
of life, adds the danger, Heb. 12.29.
and says: For our God is even a consuming fire: Again the same author shows
the danger all such are in, as by their continuance in sin (after they have
received the knowledge of the truth) do crucify again the son of God,
adds as a conclusion these words: It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31.
To conclude therefore this point: Gods judgments being threatened against the
wicked for sin, they are inevitable without alteration: unless they
presently put in practice the wholesome counsel of the Apostle Paul to the
Corinthes: What will alter Gods judgments.
aduising them to enter into a serious and sound adiudging of themselves, and
so they should escape the great and fearful judgments of the Lord, 1. Cor.
11.31.32
which was partly begun already in execution amongst them, and partly was
ready to be inflicted upon them. It must be an eye to see Gods judgment, a
heart to feel Gods judgment, a conscience to condemn, and all concurring
together, to prostrate, throw down, and truly to humble the sinful man,
under Gods mighty hand, crying with the prodigal son: O father I have sinned
against heaven and against thee: and am not worthy to be called thy son: I
say it must be, all these wrought most soundly by the work of Gods spirit in
the sinner that must be as a stop to Gods judgments, and a stay of his anger
manifested. Least a worse thing come unto thee, etc. These words may be the
speech of a master to his servant thus: I have taken thee napping twice or
thrice, nay often, and have lovingly admonished thee of it, but if thou plaiest
the like again thou shall smart for all: or of a schoolmaister to his scholar,
whose waggish tricks and great negligence he has often pardoned: but now
threatens the next time shall pay for all. Even so God from time to time
seemed to wink at the sins of this man, What the Lord long forbearing
requires.
yea even at the sins of us all, and like a loving schoolmaster bears a
while with our offenses: but either now cease from sin, learn to do well,
and be a good scholar in Christ's school, or else look thy lord and master,
the Lord Jehovah will take an account for all, and in the end pay thee home.
(Least) imports necessity.
(Least) this word (least) usually in the scriptures imports great necessity
of the matter in hand to be put in speedy execution, as in Jeremy: Ierm. 4.4.
Break up your fallow ground, sow no more among the thorns, be circumcised to
the Lord, and be no more stifnecked, least my wrath break forth and burn like
a fire etc. Psalm. 2.12.
And the Psalmist: Kiss the son least he be angry, and so ye perish
suddenly, if his wrath be kindled, yea but a little etc. And that necessary
admonition of our Savior Christ to his Disciples Watch and pray least ye enter
into temptation. Luke. 22.40.46 Math 26.36. Mar. 14.32.
And last of all, that earnest caveat of the author to the Hebr. to all the
godly Jews, for perseverance in the profession of the Gospel, and practice of
holy days meet for the measure of the grace of God they had received, says
thus: Take heed brethren (least) at any time there be in any of you an evil
heart and unfaithful to depart away from the living God. Heb. 3.12 and verse.
13.
Out of all these aforenamed phrases may be gathered the urgent necessity that
was imposed upon this man healed, presently to put in ure the continual duty
of his deliverance, The urgent necessity of performing duty to the Lord.
and insinuates also unto every one of us, or rather as a continual cry
sounds in our ears. O ye negligent, cool, careless, disobedient, and
scornful people in the North parts of England, who deserving Gods wrath for
your manifold sins are yet now in the multitude of his mercies, An Alarm to
the North parts of England.
freed and delivered from the effect of his wrath, sin no more, least if you
again tempt and provoke the living Lord to anger, he call you to reckon and
give an account for your selves, Heb. 3.9.
and so ye shall never be able to answer one of a thousand. Further in that
our Savior Christ here admonishes the man healed of his daily danger, if
ever after he, do not crucify the old Adam with the lusts thereof: God
ever warns before he plagueth.
we note the loving care and mercy of God, not to bring destruction upon any,
before he has both largly and lovingly forewarned them of the danger, yea he
desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live
according to the rule of the Apostle, Ezech. 18.23.
the Lord is not slack as some men count slacknes, but is patie^t toward us,
would have no man to perish, 2. Pet. 3.9.
but would have all men come to repentance, and all are invited to the marriage
of the Kings son. To conclude therefore this point, Matthew. 22. No cause to
censure the Lord of hard dealing in judgment.
we learn here that all excuse or censuring the Lord of hard dealing in
judgment is removed from the wicked, seeing all of the^ before they undergo the
intolerable burden of his wrath are offered most abunda^tly to drink of his
love.

[A worse thing.] For the consideration of the measure and greatness in some
sort of this punishment, which here is threatened the man if he offend again,
View in particular.
I wish thee diligent and wise reader, to g^ue a glaunce back to the view of
his former sickness, and certainly that will give thee some probable
demo^stration of the measure of his punishment again. Call. in Ioh. Cap. 5.
verse. 14.
It is very likely that his correction was laid upon him in his youth and the
very time, which by nature, yields pleasure to the body, was altogether
painful: Cap. 5. verse. 5.
continuing with him, the space of 38. years, all that while no use of his
body, to minister any comfort. Whereupon I may say with Clauin, Call. cap. ^od.
to every man that considers hereon: Quam grauis fuerit tot annorum poena,
reputa: Weigh well with thy self how painful was the continuance of such a
grievous pain, for the aggravating whereof, this one thing did not a little
work, that when this poor soul so long had been soaked and bathed in his
affliction full 38 years, he grew to be forlorn, forsaken, and helpelesse
altogether in respect of any man: continually many diseased, by help of others
brought to the poole, and so healed, and yet he a distressed soul, pitied of
none, relieved by none, expecting still, some would carry him, but all in vain,
crying for comfort, but comfortless still: so that with Job we may well say,
that he seemed to be even as a butte, or mark that God had set to shoot at,
and to pierce through with the arrows of his anger, and that to man's judgment
hardly a more comfortless sorrow could be laid upon him, and yet lo at last
healed by him, Christ heals when it seems to be past healing.
who ever heals, when all means of healing seemed to fail: this man I say,
is now by Christ admonished to look to the diet of his soul, that he do not
surfeit with sin again, least a sorer plague befall, both body and soul,
(...) befell him before: a sorer will you say how can that be? for in his
former visitation he was comfortless, A glance to his former grief.
helpelesse, and hopeless in regard of man: oh, how then can a worse thing
come unto him, I wish all men as well those that have felt great and grievous
troubles either in body or soul, or both themselves, as also those that have
been eye witnesses, or ear witnesses of their neighbors, or countries great
afflictions: Beware of co^plaining against Gods judgment.
to beware of such like complaints as there: or aggravating their punishments
so greatly, as though God had not in store a greater for them, if they offend
again, and to make all that shall read this, more circumspect in this point,
I will set down the excellent saying of the afore-recited author Calvin
touching this one point: Calvin cap. eod.
Non dubiu^ est, quin sibi horrendas saepe, and prodig^o so^ cruciatus, miseri
homines, improbis suis quaerimonijs accersunt, dum nigant mala sua augeri
posse. Without all question, wicked men do heap upon their own heads, many
great and fearful judgments, Complaining against God hastneth condemnation.
while after a complaining manner they cry out and say, their griefs are so
great, and punishments so intolerable, that God can lay no greater upon them:
let this ever be a warning unto us all, Patience in pains is profitable.
patiently to abide, and willingly to wait for our deliverance out of dangers,
and being delivered, carefully to put in practice the duty that we owe for our
deliverance: least if we do not, a worse thing come unto us.

A worse thing] Two ways especially Christ here threatens to bring a worese
punishment upon him then before, if he offend again. Calvin.
Nullas esse tam atroces and saeuas poenas, quibus non aliquid addere Dominus
possit, quoties visum fuerit. There are no punishments so great laid upon the
wicked, which the Lord Jehovah is not of power to aggrauate and make greater,
whenever the same shall seem good unto him.

vpheld him, as faithful in his promises, laying no more upon him, but as he
gave him strength to bear, and in the midst thereof gave him a comfortable
issue thereout. But lo, the next time that the Lord comes agaianst him, he
will not only by his infinite power, lay upon him a sorer plague: but that also
which is more fearful, he will withdraw from him his loving protection: which
blessed protection, did in his former sickness ever uphold him from perishing.
In his former visitation he dealt like a father, Comparison.
whose tender affection and love to his child, ever overcomes his anger: but
his next visitatio^ (as I said before) shall be in judgment, giving him over to
his own strength, and in the midst of his agony, leaving him to shift for
himself. Which, oh alas, when that comes to pass, he shall never be able
to shelter himself from Satan's tyranny, nor save him, as he was before saved,
from deaths dominion. Hereafter let all mouths be stopped, from murmuring
against their sorrows: or saying, they are so great that God can make them no
greater: seeing two ways have been told you, how the same may be effected. 1
By greater plagues.
The first by his great power, which is without bound or limitation. The
second, 2 By spiritual desertion, and by withdrawing his former protection.
which more fearful is, by spiritual desertion, giving them over to their
own strength, and by withdrawing from them his gracious and fatherly
protection, in the time of their fearful affliction.

The use.
Then let all in general, and particularly all of us my countrymen, make this
particular use, and application hereout, to the benefit of our own souls,
even thoroughly to examine and search, Search the particulars of your late
visitation, both by dearth and the pestilence.
with what sickness, sore, trouble, or danger, we have been afflicted: in what
manner, measure, and how long: and after this, that if extreme was our
affliction, great our danger, and our case utterly remediles, without the sole
salvation and deliverance of him, who is unto his own Church all in all:
surely then to determine for a most certain truth, that hereafter, unles our
Lord and master find us more careful scholars, in learning of his will, and
more obedient sons in doing his commandments: as sure as we breathe, so to
look, that ere it be long, a heavier lode shall be laid upon us, which we shall
hardly disburthe^ us off. If before this, yea even of late, the Lord has
beaten us black and pale, by his severe punishments of dearth and pestilence:
and yet being now healed thereof presently forget our punishments, and God,
that inflicted the^ upon us: Though we forget God in our duty, yet he will not
forget our sins
tremble and fear, for certainly then God will not forget our sins: but if
they hale him on to come against us yet again, take heed that with his third
whip he scourge us not, till blood run down from top to toe: when there shall
be nothing heard, but a fearful noise and lamentation, alas, alas: in which
distress, (which is most fearful) the wicked careless contemners of his
mercies, shall then seek unto him early and late for help. But I make a
question whether they shall find him or no: the shall call upon him, but I am
afraid he will answer in thunder: and the reason does Wisdom tell; Prou.
1.28.29.
because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. The
cause does Jeremy tell: like disobedient children, Ierem. 2.30.
they did not humble themselves under the Lord, when they were corrected. And
surely, if a worse thing, What is the cause if our country be plagued again.
a worse plague come upon our North-parts of this land again, it is because
(as diverse to their grief, have both seen and heard) that many of you, great
towns, great congregations, private families and persons, after your
deliverances, healings, and restoring to your former liberty have not with
Moses and with Deborah, Exodus 15.2. Judge. 5.2.
assembled your selves together, and lift up your voices in praise to the Lord,
and a faithful promise to become ever after careful in his service: which
thing you ought to have done. Much abuse in many places and towns after their
late fearful visitation.
But rather your meetings have bin, and are, to shake hands with your former
sins, and to bid them welcome again amongst you: having for a time been taken
from you, by reason of your affliction. Your songs have not been to praise God,
but rather (as I have heard) in place thereof, profane Enterludes: Piping and
dancing. Lords of misrule and disorder, with many more unlawful sports. Esaias
49.13.
and generally your protestations, not one to cry to another, and all jointly
to sound together, saying: Rejoice O heavens, be joyful O earth, burst forth
into praise O mountains: for God has comforted us his sinful people, and
has had mercy on us his late afflicted ones. Neither (I am afraid) have you
been careful to say with Moses: The Lord is our strength and praise, and he is
become our salvation: he is our God, and we will prepare him a tabernacle: he
is our fathers God, and we will exalt him. And to conclude, whereas many of you
(my beloved countrymen) have been deprived of the enjoying of one another
fellowship, Our meeting again, after a long separation, I am afraid abused.
in the time of your affliction: which now (blessed be the name of God) is
restored to free liberty of fellowship and society one with another: I say, I
am afraid, that your meetings together, after a long and lamentable separation,
has not bin to provoke unto love, and to good works, and to exhort one another
daily, Heb. 10.23. and 3.13.
while it is called to day: but rather in stead of this, the drunkard to
associate himself with his drunken companions, the whoremonger to seek for
his harlot, the vainglorious man for his flatterers, the carnal man for his
confederates, the usurer for his creditors, one wicked man with another, and so
to renew that wicked bond and league of their sin: at all which you ought to
have taken your last farewell, never to have communicated any more with such
unfruitful works of darkness. Ephesians. 5.11.


Shall come unto thee.] Out of this place we may gather this excellent point:
namely, that as the godly bringing forth the pleasant fruits of righteousness in
their lives, Note well the godly go still forward till they come to heaven:
but the wicked still backward till they go down to hell.
have still more and more the sweet mercies of God multiplied upon them, till
they enjoy them in their fulness in the kingdom of glory. Even so the wicked,
that after Gods graces powered down upon them, do still notwithstanding bring
forth nothing, but the weeds and brambles of iniquity, have Gods judgments
still more and more increased against them, till at the length they press them
down to hell. Again, I gather hence this doctrine, Thank our unthankfulness
if more plagues come.
that if evil come upon evil, and punishment upon punishment: we may justly
impute it to our own obstinacy, and wilful rebellion.

Last of all, let this doctrine be the conclusion, both of this point, and this
part of Scripture: Si nil ferulis proficiat erga nos Deus, quibus leniter nos
tanquam teneros ac delicatos filios, humanissimus pater castigat, noua^ and
quasi alienam personam induere cogitur: If God, by his whipping of us, profit
us nothing, wherewithal, like a most kind father he corrects our contumacie
and disobedience: he is enforced to take upon him another habit, and to
manifest himself in another manner, If mercy will not move, judgment will
throw down.
changeing mercy into judgment. And therefore let us ever learn the end of
Gods fatherly correction, to be our daily reformation, and more increasing in
the gifts and graces of the holy spirit: evermore remembering the danger that
will ensue, if daily we do it not, and the sharp censure we shall undergo if
we forget it: even this, that the Almighty Jehovah will, quasi atrocioribus
malleis, with the heavy and insupportable beetles of his judgments, press
down, and utterly bring to desolation all those, quibus mediocris poena nil
profuit, that is, whose hearts were not mollified, and their lives reformed
with the Lords former sweet and comfortable affliction. The conclusion.
Which (my beloved) that the former may ever take place in us, and so escape,
that the latter be never laid upon us, the Lord for his infinite mercies sake
grant us, even for his son Christ's sake, who by his blood shedding has so
dearly ransomed his Church: and unto whom with the Father, and the holy
Spirit, be all glory, majesty, praise, and dominion for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

