DVTIFVLL AND RESPECTIVE CONSIDERATIONS UPON FOUR SEVERAL HEADS OF PROOF AND
TRIAL IN MATTERS OF RELIGION. PROPOSED By the High and Mighty Prince, JAMES
King of Great Britayne, France, and Ireland etc. in his late Book of
Premonition to all Christian Princes, for clearing his Royal Person from the
imputation of Heresy. By a late Minister and Preacher in England.

August. lib. contrae Iudaeos, Pagan. and Arian. cap. 20. You must know (dear
brethren) that true faith, sincere peace, and perpetual salvation is only by
the Catholic faith; for it is not in a corner, but every where all. If any
man depart from it, and deliver himself up to the errors of Heretics, he
shall be judged and condemned as a fugitive bondman. Permissu Superiorum, M.
DC. IX.

THE FOUR HEADS OF JUST TRIAL mentioned by his Majesty of England, as
touching his own Person.
1. THE reuerencing and believing of the Canonical Scriptures, as they ought
to be, and so also the not Canonical.

2. THE admitting of the first three Creeds, of the Apostles, of the Nicen
Council, and of S. Athanasius.

3. THE acknowledging, and accepting the first four general Councels of
Christendom: to wit, of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and of Chalcedon.

4. THE crediting of the Fathers of the first five hundred years after Christ,
either jointly, or severally in points of modern controversies.

Every head is handled by diverse Considerations, as by the sequent Catalogue of
Chapters will appear.

THE GENERAL CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THE Epistle to his Majesty, declaring the motives which the Author had to
write this Treatise. THE FIRST CHAPTER.Containing an entrance into this
Treatise, or Trial, how much it imports to be a Catholic, and no
Heretic. And with how great reason his Majesty endeavors to clear him
self, and his Royal Person from the imputation of heresy. FIVE
CONSIDERATIONS.
1 About the words Catholic, and Heretic, and that they can never agree in
one. 2 Of the dreadful misery of being an Heretic. 3 How a man may
certainly, and without error discern what is Catholic, and what is
Heretical. 4 How out of the premises every man may judge in what state he
stands, for being Heretic or Catholic. 5 The Conclusion of all this whole
Chapter to his Majesty.
THE SECOND CHAPTER,THat treats the first head touched by his Majesty, for
trial of a Christian Catholic, which is, the believing of holy Scriptures.
FOUR CONSIDERATIONS:
1 The believing of Scripture not sufficient to make a man a Catholic. 2 That
Scriptures were not written for many years after the Church began. 3 How to
know what is truly Scripture. 4 How the true sense of Scripture may be tried.
THE THIRD CHAPTER.COncerning the second point, or general head professed by
his Majesty concerning his believing of the three Creeds received by the
Church. THREE CONSIDERATIONS:
1 How the first three Creeds, and why they were ordained: and how greatly they
are to be reverenced. 2 That the Ministers of England believe not wholly, and
entirely the faith of the three Creeds. 3 In what particular articles of the
Creeds English Protestants do not agree with us.
THE FOVRTH CHAPTER,COncerning the approbation and allowance of the first sour
general Councels: which is the third general head of trial offered, and
proposed by his Excellent Majesty of England. THREE CONSIDERATIONS.
1 Why, and how these four first Councels were gathered: and how thereby it
is convinced, that the Church cannot err. 2 Why the Protestants do not, nor
can remedy their divisions by any General, or National Council. 3 Particular
points of differences between these first four General Councels, and the
Protestants of our time, for doctrine and manners.
THE FIFTH CHAPTER:COncerning the admittance, and acceptance of the ancient
Fathers of the first five hundred years after Christ: which is the fourth and
last head of trial offered, and alleged by his Majesty of England. THREE
CONSIDERATIONS.
1 The different esteem, that Catholics, and Protestants do make of ancient
Fathers, when they agree in one. 2 How Catholics, and Protestants do esteem
of the testimonies of particular Fathers. 3 That the Fathers of every age, for
the first five hundred years did make for Catholics, and against Protestants,
in matters now in controversy.
THE SIXTH CHAPTER.Containing a brief contemplation of what hitherto has been
said: with a Conclusion of the whole to his most Excellent Majesty.
TO THE HIGH, AND PVISSANT PRINCE MY DREAD LORD, AND SOVEREIGN JAMES BY THE
GRACE OF GOD, of Great Britayne, France, and Ireland KING etc.
AFTER I had bent my self unto a serious Survey and diligent perusal of your
Majesty's new Book, bearing the inscription of a Preface, or Premonition to
all Christian Princes, diverse were the apprehensions, and impressions it made
in the different faculties of my soul. Reuoluing therefore, and reflecting
upon the premises by a second reuiew, I resolved, and in fine concluded, being
now as it were wonderfully affected, partly with sollace, partly with
solicitude.

2. My solace was to consider, yea sensibly as it were, before the eyes of my
soul, in the impartial glass of my recollectedst understanding, and most
retired judgment, to behold so many rare Princely talents of nature,
literature, and other highly esteemed parts in your Majesty: which as they are
seldom found in such potent Princes so residing habitually in your Royal
breast, as in their proper and peculiar subject, they cannot but minister just
matter of marvelous joy, content, and comfort unto all your liege people, your
loyal, and loving subjects; especially since they are accompanied, and
attended, yea adorned, nay beautifyed with the irradiant luster of that burning
fire of zeal, I mean, an extraordinary fervor in matters of your Religion.
Now if these so rare parts of nature, literature, and zeal (wherewith your
Noble Person is habitually invested) shall be directed by the singer of God his
holy spirit, and the high hand of heaven, unto the sole-sacred, and
soule-sauing knowledge of Catholic Religion (which I verily hope in time to
see, and shall incessantly pray for) they will exceedingly advance his glory,
and gain unto your Majesty an immarcessible, and neuer-fading Crown of
eternity.

3. My spirit also rejoiced within me, my heart exulted for joy, and my
perplexed thoughts retired and reposed themselves in hope, when I took but a
just view of that commendable careful diligence, that pious and religious
industry used by your Majesty in vindieating your noble Person from the least
imputation of herefy, and in removing the very suspicion of such a contagious
and soul quessing leprosy, since that this loud-crying sin, loud-crying in
the ears of heaven, is the greatest crime that can be committed against God,
or his Church, separating betwixt God and man, grace and the soul, dissoluing
the mysteriall De praescript. c. 16. De vnitate Ecclesiae contra Petil.
Donatist. c. 2.
union, and sacramental communion, betwixt the head and the members, Christ
and his spouse, rejecting God for Father, denying the Church for mother, taking
away the very name of a Christian, as ancient Tertullian speaks, depriving
our expectation of all hope and salvation, as S. Augustine that great pillar of
the latin Church notes: a sin, the soul guilt De vnitate Ecclesiae.
whereof, nec sanguine abluitur, nec passione purgatur, to close up the period
with that renowned Martyr S. Cyprian his words.

4. The last, but not the least, nay the greatest cause of my comfort was, when
I really apprehended the candor, serenity, humility, and sincerity of your
Noble heart, in submitting your self, by remitting the trial, and decision of
the foresaid imputation, and suspicion of heresy unto the sacred Canon of holy
Writ, common Creedes, the first four general Councels, and the blessed
Fathers of the first four or five hundred years: to all which upon an assured
(I may rather say a supposed) innocence and integrity of your cause, you
appealed for the final vmpiring, and determining of any point in controversy
betwixt the Catholics and your Majesty. Which impartial and substantial
grounds, as they were very prude^tly, religiously, and with great maturity of
judgment proposed by your Majesty, according to the greatness, and soundnes of
your Judicious Apprehension: so if they shall stand inviolable, and
irreuocable, like to the law of the Medes, and Persians, which could not be
altered, backed by the word and authority of so potent a Prince as your Majesty
is, which may not be revoked, for the word is gone forth from the King; you
shall not only auert, and avoid all sinister imputation, and suspicion
whatsoever from your Royal Person: but withal, you Dan. 6. 17.
shall give a sufficient testimony by public declaration of your Majesty's
gracious disposition for matter of religion. And that if ought have been
exorbitant, extrauagant or irregular in matter of your belief, it is rather to
be ascrybed to your violent education, then anyway to be imputed to your own
voluntary obduration. These things were of wonderful comfort, and exceeding
solace unto me.

5. But in the midst of this sweet repose. whilst my wearied, and perplexed
thoughts seemed to refresh themselves with some kind of promised hope upon the
forsaid premises: behold diverse other points of great anxietie, and
solicitude interposed themselves, nay suddenly interrupted my former solace;
I mean not generally such points of your Majesty's Book, as may concern
other Christian Princes, people, and States, how these things would be taken
amongst them (for in this behalf I might not presume to prejudice your
Maiestyes Grave Wisdom, and I could not but imagine, but that your Majesty
out of the depth of your own Provident Judgment had duly, and prudently
preponderated all such probable ensuing sequeles, and taken far better
counsel then mine could be:) but such as particulerly respected, and by
necessary deduction of a certain inevitable consequence, reflected properly
upon my self. For whereas I had with the greatest deliberation that I could
possibly imagine, grounded upon my own peculiar experience of many years
travail in the sacred volumes of Orthodoxe Antiquity, made before a firm
irreuokable resolution to abandon the Protestant Religion upon invincible
arguments of great solidity, and notorious discovery of execrable blasphemy,
palpable and detestable heresy, against God, his Christ, his Church, his
Saints: building my foundation upon the main rock of Ancient Primitive
Church, Canonical Scripture, truly sensed by them, Creedes and Councels,
digested, collected, established by them; I now descried that your Majesty
intended to ground the clean contrary Plea upon the same heads for
vindication of the protestant Religion from the guilty crime of heresy: the
very intimation whereof enforced me (I confess before the all-seeing judge,
and unto your Sovereign Majesty my supreme terrene Lord next under him) to
look about me, and to enter into a second, and more serious consideration, and
meditation of the foresaid heads again, least I might happily in a matter of
the greatest moment and weightiest consequence in this world, have run awry,
to the everlasting wrack, and ruin of my soul.

6. Now for ought that may concern your Majesty's Royal Person, touching the
imputation of heresy, let that loud-crying sin of open Rebellion against the
sovereignty of heaven rather light upon the enemies of God, his Christ, his
Church, and the enemies of my Sovereign, then upon my Lord the King, whom the
God of Angels make as an Angel of God to discern betwixt heretical novelty,
and Catholic antiquity. In the mean time I find no difficulty, nay I do with
all alacrity and sincerity of soul admit the difference between an Heretic,
and him that gives credit unto Heretics; which S. Augustine admitted in the
behalf of his friend Honoratus, seduced by the Donatists, as your Majesty is
supposed to be misled by Protestants. It is in that excellent Tract of his de
vtilitate credendi, written to his said friend. Si mihi, Honorate, vnum atque
idem videretur esse Haereticus and credens Haereticis homo, tam lingua, quam
stylo in hac causa conquiescendum esse arbitrarer etc. Cum haec ergo ita sunt,
non putaui apud te silendum esse etc. If I were persuaded, O Honoratus, that an
Heretic, and the man who does believe Heretics were all one, and that there
were no difference, I should suppose that I might spare both tongue and pen
in this point. But now since there is no small difference betwixt the two
(forasmuch as he is an heretic in my judgment, who for some temporal
commodity, and especially for renown, and sovereignty, either brings forth
false, and new opinions of himself, or else adhereth unto them that are brought
forth by others: but he that gives credulity to these kind of men is such a
one as is deluded with a certain imagination of verity, and piety:) wherefore
these things being so, I have thought good not to be silent, or to hold my
peace with you, what my judgment is concerning the finding out, and retaining
of truth.

7. We then, that be your Maiestyes Catholic Subjects, dutiful in mind,
though different in judgment, do out of the abundance of our most loyal
affection, and to mitigate matters what may be, until Almighty God of his
infinite goodness shall vouchsafe to put further remedy in your understanding
heart by a more clear revealing of his truth, most cheerfully, and charitably
fasten upon that pious, religious and true distinction of S. Augustine, not
ascribing that hateful name of Heretic unto your Majesty, howsoever you
seem for the present to adhere and patronize such opinions of Protestant
Religion, as we upon contrary grounds of Catholic divinity do hold to be
heresies: but rather we esteem your Majesty for a Prince, that from your
nativity, and tender infancy (after the unfortunate loss of your thirce Noble
Catholic Mother) have been misguyded in matters of Religion by such as had
your Noble Person in their government, whom you have believed, and consequently
have been deceived, imaginatione quadam veritatis, and pietatis illusus, to end
the sentence with S. Augustine his words.

8. And here in all dutiful submission as a true English-harted man and
loyal subject to his Sovereign, I most humbly prostrate my self at your
Majesty's Princely feet, beseeching you, even out of that Royal disposition
and Princely benignity of good nature, wherewith Almighty God has been pleased
plentifully to enrich you: First that you will vouchsafe to hear these points
or heads severally, and soundly debated and discussed by the equal match and
trial of learned men on both sides, either your Maiestyes natural subjects or
strangers, as shall best likeyou, and by no man's persuasion or disswasion to go
back from so Honorable an offer already made unto the whole Christian world:
and secondly not to condemn me of any audacious, or headlong presumption in
this my interprize, tending only to Gods glory, and your own soule-sauing
Honor: Nor yet lastly, in the mean space, to take in evil part, or sinister
sense this my charitable, and well-meaning attempt, of laying some moderate,
and modest Considerations before your judicious, and grave Wisdom. And the
rather I presume to beg this at your Majesty's hands, since I have resolved
to limit my discourse within the lists, and bounds of those four principal
heads, mentioned by your Majesty, and worthy of eternal memory.

9. And if unjust causes now and then, upon due conuincing circumstances, admit
a just defense, then pardon me (dread Sovereign) and give me leave to bring my
most just defense unto so just a cause. I want not reasons of the greatest
weight to induce me. For first my own interest of soul goes therein highly
impawned, and engaged in this very point, as having (amongst other my motives)
made my own resolution for matter of Religion, upon the consideration, and
foundation of these most Catholic grounds, to wit, of Scriptures, Creeds,
Councels, and ancient Fathers) and therefore it imports me not a little
(touching me so nearly) to look them over again, since the everliving
weal, or neuer-dying woe of my soul depends necessarily thereupon. And
secondarily, my loyal duty unto your Majesty, and charity to my native
Countrymen pleads for my defense: and this is such, that it inforceth me to
encounter all kind of difficultyes in the undergoing of this business. For since
upon my second reuiew of the former four grounds, I found that no other
foundation could be laid, no other rule of faith devised by any, no Angel from
heaven teaching the contrary, to be believed. For, quod vnum est, verum est;
and verum, quod nonvariat, according to that most sure and ancient
prescription, I thought my self in all conscience and duty, both before God
and man, obliged to impart the same with your Majesty, being my natural borne
Prince, King, Father, Lord, and Sovereign, and I your dutiful and devoted
Subject.

10. Finally, if that renowned Moralist Plutarch compiled a special Treatise
to instruct a man how he should reap benefit unto himself, even by the
admonitions, and endeauours of his professed enemies: If that perfect pattern
of patience Job (for so the Scripture decyphereth him unto us) pleading his
innocence out of the integrity of his conscience, and appealing unto the
Tribunal of heaven for an impartial doom, insinuates unto us by way of
demand, that he listened unto the counsel of his servant or handmaid,
contending with him: his words as they lie in the English are expostulatory, If
I have refused the counsel of my servant or handmaid contending with me? And
the answer implied, is negative, that he had not, as evidently appears by
his summoning himself to the bar of divine justice: How much rather should
we accept the same from our friends, and how much more so great a Monarch as
your Majesty is, may be pleased to take in good part the dutiful counsel of
such of your loyal Subjects, who from their innermost souls wish all possible
good, even external, internal, and eternal prosperity unto your Majesty,
notwithstanding any malicious clamours, suggestions, detractions, and
calumniations of Adversaries to the contrary; or any difference of judgment on
parts in matters of religion. Wishing and praying with pure hands, and
innocent hearts, lifted up unto Almighty God, that this may be one, and the
self same also in time; that as there is but one God, one faith, one baptism,
and one Lord JESUS CHRIST, which is above all, and in all, and over all: so
there may be but one union, and communion in Catholic Christian Religion:
that is, one Catholic Mother Church for every sinful wandering, and
distressed soul to fly unto for her spiritual repose, that after our
seafaring peregrination we may all arrive safely in the haven of Heaven.

11. To conclude, of this number of subjects do I joyfully profess my self to
be, most sincerely promysing and protesting unto your Majesty by the faith of a
Catholic Christian, the only interest whereby I hope to lay claim to heaven,
that I am in verity and indeed, without all fraud or collusion, even such a
one, as sincerely I have set down my self here to be: that is, neither
Priest nor Jesuit, nor yet of any other Religious Order, but only of the
Order, and Society of the English Ministry, whereof I was made by a Bishop of
your Majesty's Realm, and licenced to preach by public authority for diverse
years together: wherein as I travailed painfully, so I should have continued
constantly, had I not evidently discovered, even in Calvin the first author of
that schism, and in all his followers, nouelty, herefy, blasphemy, instead of
antiquity, verity, piety. And albeit my judgment in Religion, now must needs
be changed from theirs, unless to the eternal perdition of my soul, I should
with a guilty conscience fight against heaven, in fighting against the known
Catholic truth (as I fear me too many of the learneder sort of Protestants
in England do:) yet remain I still, and ever shall, by God his saving grace,
with all dutiful observance toward your Majesty: out of which duty of a
subject, toward his sovereign I shall incessantly power forth my prayers and
tears before the throne of heaven, and implore the God of Truth to lead your
Majesty into all truth: that you may here according to that high place, wherein
God has set you, help to rear up the ruins of the Church militant, that you
may become a glorious member of the triumphant.

12. And now having been longer, and more prolixe in this my Epistle
dedicatory, then at the beginning I had purposed, I shall most humbly
supplicate your said Excellent Majesty to license me for a time to depart from
your Royal Presence, and to turn my speech to the Christian Reader, in
treating of the heads that are to be handled. For so much as it seems not
convenient for me to continue my speech for so long time unto your Majesty's
own Person: but rather with due reverence, declining the same, to lay forth
before the discreet Reader, these things which seem to me to be of most
consideration and ponderation, in the points proposed by your Majesty: whereby
many may be informed, though one be named. And with this I beseech the Highest
ever with his eternal Protection to preserve your Majesty, to his greatest
glory, and the true comfort of your loyal Subjects. So be it.

Amen.
THE FIRST CHAPTER CONTAINING AN ENTRANCE INTO THIS TREATISE, OR TRIAL, How
much it imports to be a Catholic, and no Heretic. AND With how great
reason his Majesty endeavors to clear himself, and his Royal Person from
the imputation of Heresy.
IF this short cut of our transitory pilgrimage here in this vale of misery,
be but a moment whereupon eternity of salvation or damnation does necessarily
Leo seri^. 1. de resurrectione.
depend, according to that of S. Leo the first: Ex qualitate temporalium
actionum differentiae retributionum pendeant aeternarum: from the quality of
temporal actions the diversity of eternal retributions do depend: If Gods
secret judgment toward his, Non in compede, aut in pileo vertitur, sed in
aeternitate, aut poenae, aut salutis, as ancient Tertullian avouches, that is,
if it be not a matter of bondage, or Lib. de paientia c. 4.
liberty, manu-mission, or captivity that comes in question to be discussed
before the heavenly tribunal, but endless pain or interminable glory. If
this neuer-dying life, or everliving death be either awarded or inflicted,
achieued or incurred, according to man's free choice of faith, or infidelity,
Catholic Religion, or Heresy, made here in the Church, or out of the Church
(as every man is a member of the Church militant, or maligna^t) then singular
is the importance, and absolute necessary the decison and knowledge of this one
main question purposely moved to discern, who is the Catholic, and who is
the Heretic, since the premised eternity of weal or woe, bliss or bale, is
promised to the one and threatened to the other.

2. The very consideration of these two weighty precedent circumstances of
eternal glory, or endless pain wrought such an impression in the heart of his
royal Majesty of England, yea such care, and such fear, and such zeal of
clearing himself, to speak in the phrase of the Apostle, that in my
judgment, he thought, that the weighty counsel of Tertullian (worthy of
eternal memory 2. Cor. 7. 11
of every one that has a soul to save) ought to be embraced, and followed of
him, to wit: Cui seueritati declinandae Lib. de patientia.
vel liberalitati inuitandae, tanta obsequij diligentia opus est, quanta sunt
ipsa, quae aut seueritas comminatur, aut liberalitas pollicetur. It is in his
place before cyted, inferred upon those premises which went before, that is,
for avoiding of which severity, and inuiting of which liberality, our obedience
must use such diligence, as the things themselves are of moment, which either
the severity does treaten, or the liberality does promise.

3. Hence proceeds that worthy industry used by his Majesty in clearing
himself from that foul crime of heresy. And hence came that voluntary
confession concerning his Majesty's religion, enforcing him to break forth into
that earnest and serious protestation: viz. I will never be ashamed to render
an account of my profession, and of that hope 1. Petr. 3. 15
that is in me, as the Apostle prescribes: I am such a Catholic Christian,
as believes the three Creeds etc. And then do ensue the His Majesty's
protestation.
four heads before laid down: a sentence containing in it a confession worthy
to be stamped in characters of gould, and to be written with a pen of iron, and
with the point of a Diamond, that it may be everlastingly remembered, and never
buried in ashes of oblivion: and if words Job. 19. 23, 24.
can be witnesses of the mind, the heart must needs be well meaning and sincere,
whence such words proceed. For I will never imagine that of his Majesty which
is to common now adays, vnum in ore promptum, aliud in pectore clausum, Salust.
where words pass as coined to serve the present time, and as they shall make
for the most advantage of the speaker. Oh what great pity were it, that his
Majesty should be misled in matters of that importance, as immediately concern
his eternal salvation, and the souls welfare of all his subjects! especially
since he is, in regard of religion, which under his authority is there
mantayned, to render an account to God, not only for himsefe in particular, but
for all his subjects in general. Such is the burden of all them, who by their
place, and dignity have highest authority over others.

4. Now albeit his Matie does upon some occasion or other, defer the handling
of the Scriptures, and the credit due unto them, unto the fourth and last
place: yet to me it seems most convenient to treat thereof in the first of
this my discourse, according to the dignity and preheminency of the subject it
self. But yet before I enter into the lists of this argument, I have esteemed
it expedient for sundry causes to premise this other Chapter concerning the
name and attributes, nature and circumstances, properties and differences,
prerogatives and domages, of being a Catholic or Heretic: as also to lay
down some way, how to try the same; to which purpose I have thought good to
address certain several Considerations which do ensue in every Chapter.

The first Consideration.
CONCERNING the words Catholic and Heretic these being great words, they
do admit a twofold About the words Catholic and Heretic, and that they can
never agree.
signification: the first is general, and natural; the second more special,
and Ecclesiastical.

6. Touching the general and natural acception of the words, they import as
much as universal, or whole, or choice, or chooser: and howsoever upon the
first view, and superficial insight they appear not to be so greatly opposite
and contrary the one to the other, but that in diverse respects they may agree,
and stand together, (for that both the thing which is whole, or universal may
be chosen, and that which is chosen by election, may in some sense be whole, or
universal:) yet in the special, and Ecclesiastical appropriation of these
words invented by the holy Ghost, and retained and brought into Ecclesiastical
use and Canon by the Christian Church, there is such an extreme opposition, and
irreconciliable hostility, in respect of their contrary natures and effects, as
that nothing amongst Christian men can be more opposite, and contradictory, no
not light and darkness, heaven and hell, Genesis 21. 9. 14.
virtue and vice, salvation and damnation, God and Beliall. For as Isaac and
Ismael, the son of the bondwoman, The implacable hostility between heresy
and Catholic religion.
and the heir of promise could not dwell together in one house: as Jacob and
Esau could not agree together in one womb, but contended together, whereupon
Rebecca complained and expostulated with God: If the matter be even so, why am
I conceived? In one word (to shut up all in a word) as the flesh and the spirit
continually Genesis 26. 22
jar, and are at difference in one and the same man: Even so the Catholic
and the Heretic as another Isaac and Ismael, as another Esau and Jacob, as the
flesh and the spirit, they can never dwell together in Gods house, they can
never agree together in one womb, the womb of the Church: one of them must
be cast out of the door of the Church, the one of them must of necessity serve
the other: so impossible it is that two so contrary the one to the other,
should stand together, such is the implacable hostility and extreme opposition
betwixt them.

7. When Abraham the Father of the faithful (for so the Scriptures style him)
perceived that a breach might happily fall out betwixt him, and his nephew Lot,
upon a dissension already begun betwixt their heards-men, he calls unto
him, consulteth the case, treats, and entreats with him, and to persuade
him to unity, uses Genesis 13. 9. ^
this motive, of all the most perswasiue: Let there be no dissension betwixt
me, and thee, betwixt my heards-men and thy heards-men, for we are brethren
etc. But it fares not thus betwixt the Catholic and the Heretic, no union
can be made, no communion had, no condition of peace to be treated and offered
betwixt them. And if you will have the reason of this, they are no brethren,
nay which is more, they cannot be brethren, for the Catholic in his
spiritual birth has God for his father, and the Church for his mother, whereas
the Heretic has an Hethite to his father, and an Amonite to his mother: that
is Satan is his father, and Schism is his mother: he is a stranger to the
covenant, and a mere alien to the household 4. Regum 9. 18. 19. 22.
of faith. And therefore as Ichu first answered Iehoram his messengers,
demanding of peace, Quid vobis est paci? what have you to do with peace? get
you behind me, follow me etc. And secondly unto Iehoram himself, when he came
in person to meet him, and demanded, Is it peace, Iehu? what peace? whilst the
fornications of thy mother Iezabel, and her witch-crafts are yet in such
abundance? so what peace can the Catholic make with the Heretic, whilst
his heresy worse then the sin of witchcraft, Dogmata noua Dij alieni.
and his spiritual fornications in worshipping of false gods, that is,
intertaining false opinions in religion and dissonant from Catholic faith,
continue: a terrible Deuteronomy. 13.
caveat to all temporizers, that will make a linsey-wolsey Vince^tius
Lyrinensis contra baeres. c. 15.
of all Religion, reconciling Catholic Religion with Protestants heresy,
which is as possible as to unite things most contrary, and deadly iarring. To
these I can give no other counsel, then such as Elias gave to the worshippers
of Baal, when his fiery zeal would admit no division betwixt Idolatrous
superstition, and Gods most pure and undefiled Religion. How long will you halt
betwixt ^. Reg. 18.
two opinions? if Baal be God, follow him, but if God be God, follow him etc.
The application is, if heretical innovation be God his true worship, follow
it, but if Catholic tradition be the only true and soule-sauing religion,
then under eternal pain and hazard of your souls, resolve, halt no longer
betwixt the two, God will either have all or none, he cares not for a heart,
and a heart, a divided heart, and the Church will receive none within her bosom,
nor help to save any with her Sacraments, but such as are her true-borne
children, constantly professing her piety, abandoning all kind of schism and
heresy, and securely resting only and truly within her bosom.

8. And although I do not affirm that all Catholics shall be saved, for that
evil life, and matter of fact, may condemn as well as bad belief, and matter
of faith: yet am I most certain, and I dare pronounce it, that all heretics
so living, and so dying, shall be damned, agreeing with that so often times
reiterated by S. Cyprian: Numquam perueniet ad praemia Christi, qui relinquit
Ecclesiam Christi: De vnitate Eccles. cap. 5.
alienus est, profanus est, hostis est. He shall never aspire to heavenly
glory, that forsakes the Churches verity, and falls away from Christ by
Apostasy: he is a forreyner, he is profane, he is an enemy. And as all
perished without the Arc, and were certainly corporally drowned: so assuredly
all without the Arc of the Church, shall eternally be damned, since the
Scriptures teach us, that this Arc was a lively type of the Church. And as an
Heretic and a Catholic can never be joined together in heaven: so can
never the Catholic and Heretic, Catholic Religion and heresy, in any one
point be conjoined upon earth: this is the uniform, and vnanime (to use his
Majesty's word) consent of all orthodoxe, pious, and religious Deuines.

9. The reason of all the foresaid opposition betwixt a right-beleeuing
Catholic, and a misbelieuing Heretic, is this: the Catholic knows, nay
belieueth it as the groundwork of his faith, that Christ our Savior, having
left the world in respect of his visible presence continues invisible by the
immediate assistance of his holy spirit with his Church, which is Domus Dei,
and Porta Caeli, the house of God, and the Gate of Heaven, as Jacob Genesis 28. 17
spoke of the place of his vision: Columna, and firmamentum veritatis, the
pillar, and foundation of truth. Unto this 1. Tim. 3. 15
Church our Savior reuealeth all his secrets, that concern her salvation,
makes her of his privy Counsel, governs her visibly, first by his own
person, secondly by his Apostles, directs her inuisibly by his immediate
spirit the holy Ghost, and so continues her under visible government, and
invisible direction unto the worlds general consummation, leading her into all
truth: such was his promise made unto her, and here is the performance. And the
reason that the Church is thus near and dear unto Christ, is this, Corpus
est, she is his body, according to that of S. Augustine: Totum quod
annunciatur de Christo, caput and corpus est: Caput est filius Dei viui
vnigenitus, Corpus Ecclesia Matt. 28. 20.
etc. All that can be said, and auerred of Christ is his head, and his body.
The head is the only begotten Son of God, the body is his Church, bone of
his bone, De vnitate Ecclesiae.
and flesh of his flesh: for Christ has two bodies, the one natum ex virgin,
and therefore natural, the other redemptum sanguine, and therefore mystical,
and the later was more dear unto him then the former, for he wholly bestowed
his natural body to redeem his mystical body.

10. The Catholic then knowing this correspondency betwixt Christ and his
Church, belieueth all wholly, and without either choice or addition of his own,
which The Catholic cannot be a chuser but admits that which is delivered.
the said Church universally spread over the world, does propose unto him, as
matter of faith to be believed, containing himself within that most sure and
infallible prescription of Tertullian: Nobis vero nihil ex nostro arbitrio
licet inducere, sed nec eligere quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. It is
not lawful for us to innouate at our pleasure, nor yet may I make choice of
that which another man upon private fancy has added. But as for the Heretic,
non sic ille, non sic, it goes not so with him: for being an Heretic, that
Psalm. 1. 5.
is a chooser, he according to his name and nature (because he will not have
his name for naught) makes choice of what he lists to believe, uses his
own election, sieve ad Tertull. de praescript.
instituendas sieve ad suscipiendas haereses, whether it be to be an author of
Heresy, or a follower, as Tertullian speaks in the place before cyted: and
all this he does according to his own judgment and fancy, ascribing little, or
rather nothing at all to the authority of the Church in any thing that
misliketh his own judgment: so that in conclusion these two men are most
opposite the one to the other.

11. The first clear knowledge that ever the Church had of this peculiar and
Ecclesiastical appropriation of these two words Catholic and Heretic was
from the holy Ghost The 1. Ecclesiastical use of the word Heretic.
inspirer of all truth, as has been formerly noted: and to begin first with
the last, the very first intimation given of that odious and pestiferous
appellation of Heresy or Heretic, was by the Apostles themselves, as namely
S. Paul to the Corinth. There must be heresies, that those who be approved may
be manifested amongst you, which manifestation, Tertull. says is Cor. 11. 1. 9.
meant as well of those, tam qui in persecutionibus steterint, qua^ quiad
haereses exorbitauerint, who have remained constant in persecutions, as they
who have not declined out of the right path to follow heresies. So he. Secondly
the same Apostle in his De praescript. aduers. haer. cap. 4.
Epistle to Titus writes thus: Avoid an Heretical man after one or two
reprehensio^s, knowing that such a one is subverted, and sins, as damned by
his own proper judgment. Id non tam infirmitate, ac ignorantia, quam
spontanea malitia, and de obstinata industria peccat. For so I Tit. 3. 10. 11.
may well expound it, that is, he sins not so much of infirmity and
ignorance, as he does of voluntary malice, and obstinate industry, or else,
eligit sibi in quo damnatur, as Tertullian gives the sense, his own election
makes good his own damnation. And as S. Paul inueighed thus against Heresy,
Iibd. c. 6.
and Heretics, so did S. Peter, as you shall read 2. Pet. 2. branding them for
(...), damnable heresies, and the teachers of them, for such as brought upon
themselves (...), swift damnation: or as it is rendered in another place
immediately following, (...), Ibidem.
and their damnation sleeps not. Can any thing be spoken more terrible to
forwarne us of heresy and heretics then this? Excellent therefore is the
counsel Ibid. v. 31
of Tertullian, wishing us to avoid an heretic, post vnam correptionem non
post disputationem, adeo interdixit disputationem, De praescript. c. 16.
correptionem designans, causam haeretici conueniendi, and hoc vnam, scilicet,
quia non est christianus: ne more Christiani semel and iterum, and sub duobus
aut tribus testibus castigandus videretur: cum ob hoc sit castigandus, propter
quod, non sit cum illo disputandum. After one reprehension, and not after a
disputation, for that the Apostle did therefore forbid disputation, because the
speaking with an Heretic should be for his reprehension, and this only once,
because he is no Christian: least after the manner of a Christian, he should
seem to be chastised once and again and that by two or three witnesses: when
for this cause he is to be chastised, because there is no disputation to be had
with such a one.

12. And although the word Heresy be used two or three times in the Acts of
the Apostles, where the sects of the Act. 5. 17. 15. 5. 24. 14.
Scribes and Pharisees be called Heresies, and though S. Paul himself
(speaking out of the opinion of the Jews) most willingly undergoes the
imputation where Christian Religion was branded with the terms of Sect or
Heresy: yet was not the word taken in such a heinous signification here in
these places, as in the other places of the Apostles before mentioned, for that
of no kind of sin, or sinner, did they ever pronounce so grievous a sentence,
as namely that he was to be fled from, as subverted and damned by his own
judgment; that they brought in damnable Heresies, that they brought upon
themselves swift damnation; and that their damnation slept not, which they
feared not to pronounce, nay they bouldly pronounced of an heretical man, they
bring upon themselves swift damnation. Here is nothing but damnation, and all
to give us a terrible admonition to beware them and avoid them. And thus much I
thought good to say of this dreadful name, for stirring up my former brethren
of the Ministry to beware thereof, but much more to decline the cause and
occasion of the same.

13. As for the word Catholic, it came from heaven, and was first revealed
from the holy Ghost by the mouth of Concerning the word Catholic how eminent
it is.
all the Apostles in their common Creed. For being assembled together to
compose a perfect platform of true and sauing-beliefe, and to keep out
Heresy, whilst they dispersed themselves abroad to sow the sacred seed of
Eua^gelicall verity, they being at this time, and for this purpose assembled,
and their tongues being the pens of a ready writer, when they came unto that
article which concerned the Church, they by the instinct of the neuer-erring
spirit laid down the form thus: Credo in Spiritum Sanctum, Sancta^ Ecclesiam
Catholicam: I believe in the holy Ghost the holy Catholic Church, where they
did not think it sufficient to say they believed the holy Christian Church,
but they thought the word Catholic to be more eminent, significant, and
effectual for the purpose. Neither could this be done without the singular
care, providence and wisdom of that all-seing spirit that undoubtedly inspired
the^ De praescript. cap. 4. 5. 6. etc.
and guided the^. For as Tertull. observes that S. Paul forseeing that
heresies would afterward spring up in the Church, as the weeds usually do
amongst the purest and rankest corn, foretold and forewarned them to come, yea
points out, as it were with the finger to some heresies particulerly: even so
the Apostles foreseeing that all heresies were to shroud themselves under the
names of Christian Churches, Assemblies, and Congregations, they thought it
most convenient for preservation of unity and verity, to set this remarkable
stamp of Catholic upon the Church for the more manifest conuincing and
detecting of all heresy: which badge or cognizance being once set upon the
sleeue of the Church, impossible it was that any Heretic that ever was, is,
or hereafter shall be, can ever fasten upon this title. And since it is more
then apparent that the genuine description of Catholic requires more
particulers and more easy to be discovered, then does the name of Christian in
general: most pertinent, if not necessary, is the imposition of this name upon
Christ's Church for the better excluding and keeping forth of all heretical
and particular Sectaries whatsoever.

14. From these two fountains then of sacred Scripture and common Creed,
originally flowed the knowledge and use of these two words of Catholic and
Heretic, both of them came from heaven, both were particulerly inspired by the
holy Ghost, and breathed into the Church, for her better preservation, as has
been formerly noted: the very consideration whereof, ought effectually to move
us to make great esteem of their knowledge, to intertaine them as we ought, and
that is, highly to reverence, and sincerely to affect the one, since out of the
confines of this, there can be no salvation, as also to detest and fly from the
other, as from a serpent: yea as from Satan that first seducing serpent, since
this brings with it assured damnation.

15. For these and the same causes, the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church
(so much commended by his The Fathers judgments about the words Heretic and
Catholic
Majesty as that he refers himself in matter of Religion to their decision)
as soon as ever these words, and their mysteries were revealed in the Church,
least in time they should be buried in oblivion, did presently with their
pens advance the most high commendations of the one, as the only ordinary
high way to everlasting salvation; as also by many detestations and execrations
depresse the other, as the very path to eternal perdition.

16. Amongst which Worthies and famous Pillars of the Church, the ancient
Father Pacianus (so highly commended by S. Hier. for his holiness above 1200.
years agone) wrote a learned Epistle to one Sempronianus a Nouatian Heretic,
of the excellency of this name Catholic, for that In Catal. Virorum illust.
those heretics (as ours also of this day do) made very little account of
this Name. But the holy Father describes at large how necessary it was for the
holy Ghost to leave unto us this Name, or rather Syr-name, for distinguishing
all faithful Christians from misbelieuers: his words are very effectual for
this purpose. Ego sort ingressus populosam Vrbem hodie (says he) cum
Marcionitas etc. I bechance entering this day into a populous City, and finding
there some called Marcionites, some Apollinarians, some Cataphrigians, some
Nouatians, and others of like Sects, all calling themselves Christians, I did
not know by what Syr-name I should find cut the Congregation of my people,
except by the name of Catholics. So he. And then proceeding further: Certe
non ab homine mutuat^m est, quod per Pacian. Epist. ad Sempr.
tantae saecula non cecidit: Certainly this Name was never taken, or borrowed
of man, that has not fallen or decayed for so many ages. And then he alleges
the authority of Catholic antiquity and universal Church, and namely the
authority of S. Cyprian in particular, for the use of that name, against all
heresies whatsoever, concluding thus Quaere ab haeretico nomine noster populus
hac appellatione diuiditur, cum Catholicus nuncupatur etc. Wherefore our people
is distinguished by this appellation, from all heretical names, when it is
called Catholic: and yet further he says: Christianus mihi nomen est,
Catholicus vero cognemen: me illud nuncupat, istud ostendit, hoc prober, illo
significor. Christian is my name, but Catholic is my Syrname: the first does
name me only, the second does point me out: by the name of Christian I am
fignified only, but by the Syrname of Catholic, I am tried and examined,
whether I be a Christion or no. So he.

17. This was that high account and esteem, wherein that ancient Father of the
Primitive Church, S. Pacianus, held the word Catholic, after that the
Christian Church had appropriated and assumed this distinctiue appellation,
setting it as a most certain badge, or cognizance, upon the breast of the
Church in general, and upon the sleeue of every member of this Church in
particular: and the reason reassumed in the Conclusion, is in effect this:
Appellatio Catholici congregat homogenia, diss^pat heterogenia, that is in
plain terms, this name Catholic makes a conjunction uniting her own, and
it notes a disjunction, separating all Sectaries from her society. And here is
the wisdom of Salamon, even the wisdom of Almighty God 3. Reg. 3. 15. 19.
discerning betwixt the true mother and the false: this is the true and
natural mother of every child of the Church, she will admit no division of her
child, she will have all or none, for Catholic is her name. But to leave S.
Pacianus, and to pass to others, since that the Scripture requires that in
the mouth of two or three witnesses, every Matt. 18. 1^ 2. Cor. 13.
thing should be established, where we may note by the way, that if the
testimony of two or three ordinary witnesses may stint the strife in matter of
controversy, and tend to reconciliation in foro saeculi: how much more then,
the uniform consent of extraordinary witnesses, witnessing judges, and judging
witnesses, greater then all exception, ought to compromise, and finally decide
the question now in hand in foro Caeli, in foro Ecclesiae?

18. These witnesses consenting with Pacianus in the premised point of
Catholic, were all the ancient Fathers, which lived either before, or after
him in the Centuries of Christian religion, within the unity, and bosom of
their mother the Catholic Church: as namely before him S. Cyprian, whom he
expressly mentions, and before him again old Tertullian, one of the most
ancient Fathers of the Latin Church, whom S. Cyprian the martyr so highly
reverenced, and when he would read him, he De praescript. c. 26.
pointed him out thus, Da mihi Magistrum. And after these two, S. Augustine,
who ascribed so much (and that as he thought worthily) unto this name
Catholic, as that he fears not to say, that it was one special motive,
both to draw him to it, and to hold him in the visible universal Church of his
days. Neither does this great Doctor barely affirm it upon his word and
credit (which had been sufficient for us to have believed the same) but he
yields a substantial reason thereof in the words following: Quod non sine
causa inter tam varias haereses, ista Ecclesia sola obtinuit, which very name
Aug. lib. co^tra Fundament. in Epist. c. 4.
of Catholic not without cause, this only Church has obtained among so many
heresies as have sprung up. Again, the same Father positiuely, and boldly
affirms in another place, that the word Catholic was so appropriate to this
Church (ever since the Apostles in their Creed gave that Name unto it) as that
no Conuenticle of Heretics whatsoever, could once fasten upon the Name
themselves, or procure the same to be given unto the^ by others. And hereupon
he concludes, that the very possession of the Name, and common opinion of men,
was a sufficient co^uincing proof against all Adversaries, that this Church
was the true Catholic Church indeed.

19. Hitherto S. Augustine. Now if we descend lower to succeding ages of the
Church, I mean unto those Fathers that lived after S. Augustine his time, we
shall find such harmony in unity, such uniform consent in judgment, touching
the true explication of this name Catholic, as also the very right explication
of that unto the visible universal Church of their days, that we must hence
necessarily infer, that one spirit breathed in all, one and the same spirit
directed all. And here I might produce a whole cloud of witnesses (to speak in
the phrase of the Apostle) as namely S. Damascen Oecumenius, Theophilact, for
the greek; Hebr. 12. 1.
P^lgentius, S. Gregory the great, S. Beda for the latin. But for that I will
not be prolixe, and because I hasten to my second Consideration which is the
very maine Conclusion of all my whole discourse hitherunto, I will knit up all
with that goulden admonition of Vincentius Lyrinensis, an Lib. aduers. haeres.
c. 5.
Author which who so reads, and belieueth, it is impossible, if he will
profess any religion, that he should be ought else but a Roman Catholic: well
his words are these: The counsel and direction of Vincentius Lyrinensis about
being a Catholic.
Let us hold that (says he) which has been believed generally of all, for
that this is truly and properly Catholic, as the very nature, and
signification of the name does import. And then for further explication he
gives a threefold prescription for a more sure, and infallible direction, and
this is universality, Antiquity, and Consent, all which he must, as time and
occasion serves adhere unto, that will be accounted truly Catholic. And yet
in the beginning of his fourth Chapter he illustrates the first Prescription of
Universality, most pertinent for our purpose at this time by way of supposition
and question, moved and answered. His words are these: What then shall a
Catholic Christian do, if any parcel of the Church shall cut it self of
from communion of the universal faith? This is the question moved: the answer
follows: What else (forsooth) should he do, but that he prefer the health
of the whole body, before any one pestilent, and corrupted member thereof?

20. And hereupon I began to enter into a serious Consideration, and a severe
examination of my own Conscience in a secret recollected, and most retired
conference betwixt God and my own soul, touching matters of religion, as they
shall either doom me, or save me at the last day. First I considered, yea and
seriously within my own heart debated, demanding of my self, whether the
Protestants Church and doctrine (whereof I then was a real and formal member,
and Professor) had not cut it self of, yea departed, and separated it self
from the union and communion of the universal faith, and from the saving and
converting Gospel of Christ his Kingdom, which was first to be preached to
all Nations, as Christ Matt. 24. 14.
promised, that it should come to pass before the worlds great destruction,
and general consummation. This was my first demand, and the answer returned
unto me by the Catholic Church of ancient Fathers upon view of The
Consideration and consultation of the writer about his chang in religion.
their doctrine, and comparing it etc. nay by the spirit of God, since it was
promised to be the guider and directour of his Church; I say, the answer
returned, was, that the Protestants Church and doctrine had abandoned both
Catholic name and Catholic faith, and therefore as beams cut of from the
sun, as boughs violently broken of from the tree, and streams and channels
parted, and separated from their original fountain, as S. Cyprian speaks,
they De unit. Eccles.
were to perish, vanish, and come to naught. And now what course remained for
me to take, if I regarded at all the welfare of my soul, but to follow the
sage and weighty counsel of my foresaid author Vincentius Lyrinensis (my
Author indeed being the only means next under God of my Conversion from
heresy to Catholic Religion) and that is, to prefer the health and welfare of
the whole body before any one pestered and infested member thereof. His meaning
in plainer terms is, that in time of Schism and Heresy, or in particular
Countries Apostasy from the Catholic Christian faith and religion, every
Catholic Christian that is already in the Church, must hoouer under the
wings of the Church, by retyring into her lap and bosom, in time of any
danger. And he that is an Heretic, and of an heretical Congregation, and
consequently forth of the Church, must endeavor by all means possible to
become a Catholic by returning again unto the Communion of Catholic
Religion, out of which it is impossible there should be any salvation.

21. This first Consideration I enlarged yet further, extending it by a second
supposition, to wit, if the Protestants Church and doctrine be Catholic
indeed (as they would bear the world in hand it is:) then it has been
generally reaceaued of Christians over all Christendom in that sense, as it is
now in opposition against the Roman Church: then the Protestants can produce
visible Churches of theirs, that have been extant from the Apostles time
downwards hitherto, that have held the self same points of doctrine, the self
same number of Sacraments, and other such differences as now Protestant
Churches have in them from the Roman: the^ according to that most sure
prescription of Tertullian, they can Edere origines De praescript. cap. 32.
Ecclesiarum suarum, euoluere ordinem Episcoporum suorum, Declare the
beginnings of their Church, they can turn over and bring forth an orderly
succession of Bishops running on (as he says) from the very beginning, and
continuing What is required to prove the Protestant Church Catholic
without any interruption to the Apostles time: then can they prove that the
first Bishop that held these differences, was instituted and ordained by some
Apostle, or Apostolical man; for so (says Tertullian) could the Church of the
Smyrneans prove their succession of Bishops from S. Policarpus, ordained by S.
John, and the Church of Rome prove from S. Clement, placed by S. Peter's in one
word, Ibid. c. 32.
then, according to another prescription of Tertullian, can Lib. de praescript.
cap. 21. 22.
they prove that the doctrine of their Church as now it stands in
contradiction with ours, conspireth with the doctrine of the original,
Apostolical, and mother Churches, and that they hold that very doctrine which
the Church received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, and Christ
from God, and that the same has continued by never interrupted succession from
that time to this of theirs. These things if they shall ever be able sou^dly
and substantially to prove on their part: then shall I acknowledge, that they,
and their Religion are Catholic indeed, and that out of their Church there is
no salvation.

22. But if these things have been by them attempted, and could never yet be
proved by them: nay if their affirmative have been disproued by a negative in
all the forenamed notes, marks, prescriptions of the Church, and against
Heretics, as is already too apparently known to the whole Christian world;
then let them at the last upon so manifest a conviction, ingenuously confess,
that the denomination of Heretic, rather then the appellation of Catholuke,
does properly apertaine unto them.

23. And albeit I cannot but understand, that the Heretics of ancient times,
and all modern Sectaries in these our unhappy days both in Germany, France,
Holland, Scotland, and England, do ambitiously affect this renowned name of
Catholic, to have it given unto their heretical Co^gregations: nay, which is
more, howsoever they do fraudulently sometimes cloth themselves in sheep
skins, when surreptitiously they inuest themselves with this high title, and
supreme dignity of a Catholic though in points of doctrine amongst themselves
they be never so much opposite the one to the other, each condemning other for
Heretics, nay damning themselves amongst themselves, and that to the pit of
hell: Yet notwithstanding let the Catholic but pursue them, and arrest them of
sacrilegious Church-theft, for stealing this title, they dare not stand to try
the issue before the Tribunal of the Church, but presently, as guilty, they
fly away, renouncing their stolen title, and so it returns to the right
owner. And is it any marvel, that, maugre their heads, they are enforced to
this restitution, when they are at such opposition amongst themselves, as is
formerly noted? which very opposition it self, setting all other arguments of
the Catholic a part, does evidently show, and demonstratiuely convince unto
their faces, that they cannot be Catholics indeed, because Catholicum vbique
vnum, as the foresaid Father Pacianus notes, that is Catholic in Christian
Religion, which is De unit. Eccles.
every where one and the self same. For as Christ's seamelesse coat was whole,
intyre, and undivided (it is S. Cyprian his comparison, and it is well worthy
our observation) even so must the spouse, and Church of Christ figured by this
coat, be whole, intyre, undivided, and one in it self, and thereupon says S.
Syprian: Possidere non potest indumentum Christi, qui scindit, et diuidit
Ecclesiam Christi: He can Cyprian. de unit. Eccles.
never possess the coat of Christ who renteth and teareth the Church of
Christ.

24. But alas, Catholic Communion, and Catholic Union cannot be found, much
less verified in, and of Protestant religion: not only in those old imagined
times and ages of their supposed Primitive Church, which they ridiculously, and
impudently contra scientiam, contrae conscientiam, do challenge unto
themselves: but neither in these very ages wherein they have peeped out of
Chymerian, nay out of Infernal darkness, and been known to the world by the
names of Protestants, Lutherans, Caluinists, and the like: I say, not in these
times can they show Vbique vnum amongst themselves in main and many articles
of Christian belief. And this I can partly speak upon my own experience had
amongst them for many years, during which time I could never yet (God I take
to witness as righteous Judge) find any two of the^ agreeing together in all
points of faith, and partly I can prove yt by infinite books written by
themselves, wherein they fall together by the ears, discover their own shame
upon their own skirts, Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim,
and both against Judah, that is, Lutherans against Caluinists and Caluinists
against Lutherans, and yet both like Simeon and Leui, Fratres in malo, in the
evil of Schism and Heresy, they can join hands and conspire against
Catholics and Catholic verity. And this convinced my understanding that
Protestants could not be Catholics, and therefore I passed to the other side,
where I found indeed vbtque vnum, every where one, in all points of their
belief throughout the world, together with that universality, antiquity,
consent, and succession, which the foresaid Vincentius Lyrinensis that good old
Monk and Professor of Euangelical Cou^sailes of perfection, that lived in S.
Augustine his time, sets down in the name of the whole Catholic Church in
his time, as the certain signs, marks, and tokens of the true Catholic
Church indeed. And this much shall suffice for this first Consideration, about
the words Catholic and Heretic. Let us pass unto the second.

The second Consideration.
IF the changing of Abraham his name from Abram into Of the dreadful misery,
of being an Heretic.
Abraham was full of mystical consolation, because it confirmed him in the
promise of the Messiah, and for that he should be the father of many nations,
Genes. 17 5. if Jacob his name being turned into Israel, was fraught with
comfort, and that for these two especial reasons, first because he had
prevailed with God, and secondly because he should prevail against men, Genes
32. 28. O then how comfortable, and how amiable, how full of solace and
heavenly delight ought this glorious, and through the whole Christian world
renowned name of Catholic to be unto us, since it confirms us, nay
assures, and seals unto us all Gods promises made unto the Church: it is the
Father of many nations comprehending all true believing Christians within the
lap, and bosom of the Church: it prevails with God, procuring his heavenly
benediction, and never departing without a blessing, and it prevails against
men, distinguishing betwixt wolves and sheep, separating all false worshippers
from the true belieuers.

26. And now as this Name of Catholic began to be unto me most amiable, and
comfortable, containing in it so many privileges and prerogatives, and being
so highly reputed, esteemed and commended by all sacred Antiquity, even from
the Apostles days downwards unto our times though Sempronianus the Nouatian
Heretic objected to the forenamed Father Pacianus, as the Heretics do to us
in these days, that sub Apostois nemo Catholicus vocabatur, no man was called
Catholic under the Apostles: so on the Apud Pacian. Epist. 1.
other side, comparing contraries together, quae iuxta seinuicem posita magis
illucescunt, which being opposite, are the clearer revealed: I considered with
all possible attention, that the Name of Heretic was most dreadful above all
other names upon the earth, as before I have noted at large. And therefore if
ever there were a Cham accursed of his Father, as you shall read there was,
Genes. 9. 25. then the Heretic is this Cham, accursed of God the Father, and
anathematized of the Church his mother. This is Benoni that son of the
mothers sorrow, as Rachael pronounced of Benjamin, the birth of this son
would be the death of his mother, he Genesis 35. 18.
came from her womb, but he will not abide in her bosom: agreeing with that
of the Apostle, Prodierunt ex nobis, Joan. 1. 2. 1^
sed non erant ex nobis: nam si fuissent ex nobis, permansissent nobiscum. Sed
vt manifesti sint quod non sunt omnes ex nobis. They went forth from us, but
they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have remained with
us. But here by they are manifested not to be all of us. And therefore to
express, if it be possible, in a word, the horror of this Name, as the
children of the prophets cried unto Elizcus the prophet after they had tasted
the potage, Mors in olla, vir Dei, mors in olla, death is in the pot, o man of
God, death is in the pot: Eue^ so may I more justly take up this complaint, and
cry out unto every man of God, that is a true member of the Catholic Church,
and that against all Heresy, and the very name Heretic, Mors in nomine, Mors
in nomine, there is nothing but death and destruction, desolation and damnation
in this very Name.

27. And here we shall be enforced, as it were to ponder upon this point
somewhat more at large, and to extend the bonds of this ensuing Consideration,
especially for so much as concerning us so near, as it does, this matter
cannot be but worthy of our weightiest ponderation: and the rather will we the
more deliberately consider of this point, for so much as we hear on the one
side the terrible horror of the said Name, and on the other side we see the
common, and to much used familiaryty thereof in these our unhappy times, later,
and worser days, which are so replenished with all kind of Sects and
Sectaries, as that each one commonly calls the other Heretic, and that with
as great facility, and with as little regard, as if the accustomable practice of
calling Heretic, had taken away the true sense, and real feeling of an
Heretic: or as though he called him good fellow, or witty inuentor of new
opinions, which amongst the Sectaries of our age is rather reputed for a
pleasant jest, and ingenious commendation, then for that which in sober sadness
(setting all Atheistical scoffing and jesting in matters of such moment a
part) it is, to wit, a terrible accusation and dreadful charge of a most high
and Capital crime, committed against God, his Church, his Savior, and all to
the destruction of his own soul.

28. But alas, who does not now adays delight, and esteem himself the more
for his sharpnes of wit, and subtle ingeny, for inuenting, finding out,
devising, framing new positions, new translations, new interpretations, and
that coined and stamped in the shop of his own brain, thereby of set purpose to
impugn, and of desperate malice to withstand some Catholic points of ancient
Churches doctrine. And if you tell him that he must keep him to the tradition
of the Church, deliver that to the sons of the Church which he has uniformly
received from the Fathers of the Church, that he must not remove ancient bands
in matters of belief for fear of a curse, that he must reddere depositum, as
S. Paul charge Timothy, and that with a vehement 1. Tim. 6. 20.
asseueration: and what is that reddere depositu^? that is, as Vincentius
Lyrinensis excellently expounds it, Quod tibi creditum est, non quod a te
inuentum: quod accepisti, non quod excogitasti: 27. Cap. Co^menit. aduers.
haereses.
rem non ingenij, sed doctrinae: non vsurpationis priuatae, sed publicae
traditionis: rem ad te perductam, non a te prolatam: in qua non author esse
debes, sed custos: non institutor, sed sectator: non ducens, sed sequens: that
which is committed unto thee, not any thing invented of thee: that which thou
have received, not devised: a matter of doctrine, not of wit: not of private
usurpation, but of public tradition: a matter brought unto thee, not brought
forth of thee: wherein thou must be no author, but a keeper: no master, but a
scholar: no guider, but a follower. Lastly, tell him that he must content
Vincent. in praf.
himself with being a relator only, not presuming to be an author, otherwise
his position will prove innovation, private invention, erroneous election, and
consequently heresy: I say, tell him all this, and what more you can devise,
and he will laugh at you for your simplicity, in going about to terrify him
with such buggs, and in tying his spirit to any rule of Church Authority, since
the wind blows where it lists etc. which he fanatically applies unto his
spirit, presuming it to be inspired from above. And with that spirit (if you
will believe him upon his bare word) is he so inspired, that he needs no
other direction, no further instruction. And this is all the John, 3. 8.
account that he makes of being a Catholic, or a choosing Heretic. But
reflecting upon the other side of the Roman Religion, which may truly and only
be called Catholic, I experimentally found another kind of reckoning made of
both these words Catholic and Heretic, most highly esteeming the one (as
has been formerly spoken) and fearfully declining the other, as the origin and
offspring of all calamity.

26. And first I found in the common doctrine of their Schools, they assigning
Heresy for one of the three species, D. Thom. 2. 2. quaest. 10. art. 6.
or members of infidelity, opposite to Christian Religion, they hold it to be
the worst, and most heinous of all three, in respect of the extreme and
desperate malice thereof: to wit, that it is in a degree of evil and sin,
worse, and more damnable then either Paganism or Iudaisme, not for that all
heresy denies more parts of Christian doctrine, then do the Pagans or Jews
(for in this the Pagan Heresy is worse the^ Iudaisme or Paganis me.
sins more then a Jew, and a Jew commonly more then an Heretic:) but
because they do corrupt and impugn the Catholic Christian faith, which once
they received, and from which they are now wilfully departed, which implies
more malice then can be ascribed to either Jew or Gentile, that never received
the same: In which respect their sin and damnation is more grievous, say
Catholic Doctors, then is either of the other two. Whereupon is inferred by S.
Thomas, and it is the common opinion, that an Heretic is in worse state then
a Jew, or Gentile, for the life to come.

30. Again, for further aggrauation and exaggeration of the horror of this
Name, and loud-crying sin thereby signified, the Catholic Deuines in a more
particular explication do constantly, and with uniform consent auerre, that an
Heretic discrediting, or not believing as he should, any one article of the
Catholic faith, does loose his whole faith and habit thereof in all the rest.
And the reason hereof is assigned by the School Doctors, for that the chief
motive or formal reason, why a man does Ratio formalis cred^^di.
believe any thing in Christian Religion is, because it is revealed by God, and
propounded by the Church: without which Churches propounding and approving,
nothing can be securely believed. And therefore when an Heretic in any one
article discrediteth, and detracteth from the authority of this Church (which
is necessary, and primary condition in belief) denying it thereby to be an
infallible rule of belief in this one article, he denies the same in all the
rest. As for example, if a man should ask a Protestant, why he belieueth the
Scriptures, and S. Matthews Gospel to be S. Matthews Gospel? he can answer
no otherwise, but that God has revealed the same unto us by the Church, which
propounds these books for Scripture. Here then the proposition of the Church
appertains to the formal reason or cause of belief, as Deuynes do term
it, which if once it be denied or discredited in any one article, as the
Protestants do, when we allege it against them for Purgatory, Prayer for the
dead, Sacrifice, invocation of Saints, and the like: then can it not hold in
the former about Scriptures, or any other An heretic has no divine faith at
all and why.
article, and consequently Heretics have no divine faith at all about
Scripture, or any other article, but are mere Infidels in all; and
consequently shall be damned (say they) not only as choosing Heretics believing
one thing and rejecting the other, but as unbelieving Infidells deuoid of all
faith. Which seemed to me to be a very terrible commination and fearful
distriction: and yet did I see it substantially grounded, and so orderly
deduced, as that I must ingenuously confess, it so convinced my understanding,
and informed my judgment, that I could not do otherwise then give my full
consent unto it. Nor did I possibly see how the same might be any way denied,
or probably with any color of reason impugned. And was there not cause now
that I should look about me, examine the grounds whereupon I stood, seriously
debate with my self of my late resolution, and change made in religion,
weighing and pondering all things with mature deliberation, and serious
meditation?

31. Wherefore retyring my self to the sacred Scriptures, and blessed Fathers
(which according to Vincentius direction, I had ever resolved upon, for the
infallible rule, and Canon of my faith,) to see what they said in this matter,
since that other foundation the^ this can no man lay: I found the same severity
in their assertions and judgments, which argued that the School Doctors had
originally drawn the matters of their doctrine from the most pure fountain.

32. And first I found that the said Heretics and heresies were foretold and
prophesied of by Christ and his Apostles in the Scriptures of God, as namely
that they should enter into the Church immediately after Christ's time, and his
Apostles, and so, that they should continue from time to time, as Matthew. 24. 5.
Joan. 5. 44. 1. Cor. 11. 19. 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. 2. Tim. 2. 17. 18. 2. Pet. 1.
2. 1. Joan. 2. 18. 19. and elsewhere throughout the whole volume of Gods
book: All which as large Commentaries discover unto us the nature, and
condition of Heresies and Heretics. But I will confine my self within
shorter and straiter bounds, and at this time I will especially ponder upon
these three ensuing places, namely Matthew. 7. 15. 16. 3. ^it. 10. and 11. the
Epistle of S. Jude almost throughout the whole Epistle.

33. And first he that spoke as never man spoke, the Wisdom of the Father, and
the souls best Physician that ever was, gives us both a serious admonition,
and a perspicuous Matthew. 7. 15. 16.
description of Heretics: Attendite a f^lsis Prophetis etc. Beware of false
Prophets which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves you shall know them by their fruits. Beware, there is the admonition,
of false Prophets, there is the deception and circumuention, which come unto
you in sheeps clothing, there is their fraudule^t hypocrisy, but inwardly they
are ravening wolves, there is their violent cruelty, you shall know them by
their fruttes, The description of Heretics by Christ our Savior.
there is a manifest discovery of their impiety. Again, Beware, that is, take
heed, look about you, there is imminent peril, and hazard of your souls
hangs over your heads, of false prophets, false deceauers, false Apostles,
Antichrists, Heretics, which come unto you in sheeps clothing, pretending
outwardly to be Angels of light, but inwardly they are ravening wolves,
messengers of Satan, and spirits of darkness, you shall know them by their
fruits, if not by their words, yet by their works, if not by their sayings,
yet by their meaning. Lastly, beware, never was there any more need of
circumspection of false Prophets, I point you to the poison that comes from
the persons which come unto you in sheeps clothing, having nothing in their
mouths but Euangelium Christi, Euangelium Christi, the pure Gospel of
Christ, the pure Gospel of Christ, but inwardly they are ravening wolves,
corrupters of his Gospel, and soule-quellers, devouring the innocent sheep of
Christ: you shall know them by their fruits, for the liberty of their Ghospel
shall argue to their faces the impiety and impurity of their hearts.

34. The text of Scripture is excellently expounded De praescript. c. 4.
both by Tertullian and Vincentius Lyrinensis: And first what is this sheeps
clothing, says Tertull. but the extrinsecall name of a Christian? and what be
these ravening wolves, but deceiptfull aduers. haeres. c. 36.
glosses and spirits inwardlly lurking, and infesting the flock of Christ? who
are these false prophets but false preachers; who are these false Apostles but
adulterous Euangelizators; who are these Antichrists now, and allwaies, but
rebels against Christ, hurting and persecuting the Church with the secret
impiety of their heresy as much as Antichrist shall then do with his open
cruelty and tyranny. So he.

35. Secondly Vincentius goes further, and though he lived twelve hundred
years ago, yet speaks he so particulerly to this point of unmasking heresy,
and heretics, as if he had lived in the very days of Luther, Calvin, and the
Protestants Apostasy, which inforceth me upon an often and scrious meditation
to conclude, that his spirit was inspired, and his pen guided by the immediate
hand, and finger of God. Let us hear him then speak and interpret. What is
this sheep clothing (says he) but the oracles of the prophets, and
Apostles? who be these ravening wolves, but the cruel, virulent, and violent
interpretatio^s of Heretics, who always infest the fouldes of the Church, and
tear in pieces the flock of Christ, by all means that possibly they can? But
that they may deceiptfully steal upon thevnwary sheep, they put of their
wolwish shape, continuing in their woluish cruelty, and they wrap and cover
themselves, with sentences of holy Scriptures, as it were with certain
fleeces, that when any man shall perceive the softnes of their woll, he may not
fear the sharpenes of their teeth. A notable interpretation of Vincentius
Lyrinensis of the place above cyted.
But what says our Savior? You shall know them by their fruits, that is, when
they begin not only to bring, but also to expound the places of Scripture:
nor yet to brag of the^ only, but further to interpret them: then their
bitterness, then their sharpenes, then their madness is perceived: then their
new poison shall be vented forth: then their profane novelties shall be detected:
then shall thou see the hedge and fence to be cut, and broken down: then shall
thou see the ancient meares, and bounds of the Fathers to be translated, and
removed: then Catholic faith shall be violated: then Ecclesiastical doctrine
anihilated, and destroyed. Hither to my Author.

36. And can any thing be spoken more effectually? Or is it possible that men,
or Angels can interpret this place more truly? Are not all Heretics here
unmasked? Are not the Protestants palpably discovered, covering their
heretical faces with the visard of Scriptures, when otherwise they durst not
appear in their woluish and theeuish shapes? If this be not so, or that I
wrong the^ in ought, nay if they be not guilty in their own consciences of
much more, then I can charge them withal, let the just doom of heaven revenge
it upon my soul, and let me never see the face of God, haud ignotaloquor, what
I speak, I speak upon long practice, and experience which I have had amongst
them. And if this be so, then are they of the number of those false Prophets,
concerning whom our Savior gives us admonition here, Beware of false
Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves: you shall know them by their fruits etc. Why, but the Protestants will
plead in general, that they have Scriptures to confirm every assertion of
their Religion. To this I answer in general, that the Devil and all
Heretics had their Scriptures as well as they, as many, and more then they:
but the truth is, sheeps clothing belongs not to wolves, nor Scriptures to
them, their possession of the^ is mere intrusio^ into the^, and therefore
according to that excellent prescription of Tertullian, first they should
prove their right of possession of them, before they so bouldly adventured
upon the interpretation of them: which since they could never yet do, it is
apparent and out of question, that they have no more right unto the Scriptures,
then the Devil himself, and all former Heretics have had unto them.

37. If besides the Scripture they plead the spirit, for this is their other
ground, and these two be all the grounds The excuses of Protestants refuted.
that ever I could perceive they had for their Protesta^ticall Religion: I
answer, this spirit is a spirit of private interpretation, their own proper
invention, and election: it is not the spirit of the Church, it is not the
spirit of the holy Ghost, that breathed these Scriptures, and therefore it is
the spirit of the Devil, and the spirit of all their Gra^dprogenitors ancient
Heretics. And now to cut of with one blow the heads of all pryuate spirits,
let S. Bernard himself speak for me, and strike for me: Nonnulli adesse
putant spiritu^, cumnon adest, suumque sensum prosensu spiritus sequu^tur,
deuiantes: Many think they have the spirit, when they Bern. ser. 17. s^per
Cant.
have it not, and fall into error, following their own sense, for the sense of
the holy Ghost. Dare any man hereafter vaunt of his private spirit? All this,
and much more is implied in the heavenly admonition of our Savior, Beware of
false prophets, and which was my first place of Scripture against Heretics. I
come to the second, which follows thus.

38. The Apostle S. Paul, that trumpet of the Apostles, Preacher of the world,
and discloser of heavenly mysteries, thundereth out a terrible commination
against an Heretic, whereby he insinuates to leave a premonition to all
succeeding posterity to be ware of heresy. And albeit I have touched the place
somewhat in the former Consideration, in disclosing the nature of heresy: yet
here I must return to the same again, for better laying forth the miserable
effects thereof, and the care the said Apostle had to have it eschued. Avoid
(says he) an heretical Tit. 3. 10. 11
man, after the first or second reprehension, knowing that he that is such a
one, is perverted, and sins as damned by his own judgment. S. Paul's
judgment of an Heretic.
Upon which place S. Hierome writes thus: Haeretici sententiam in seipsos
ferunt, suo arbitrio ab Ecclesia recedenies: quae recessio propriae
conscientiae videtur esse damnatio. Heretics give sentence upon themselves,
and are damned upon their own judgment, for that they depart from the Church,
even out of their own self will: and this departure seems to be the
damnation of their own conscience, expressly mentioned by S. Paul. So S.
Hierome. And can there be any thing more terrible, or dreadful then this?
Again, Avoid an Heretic propter periculum, propter consortium, propter 2.
Tim. 2. 17.
poenam, so S. Thomas upon this place. First avoid them in regard of the peril
of infection, serma enim illorum serpit vt cancer. Secondly avoid them in
regard of their fellowship and communion, that you be not wrapped and entangled
in their sin, whilst you seem by your familiarity with them to consent unto
the same. Lastly avoid them propter poenam, even for fear of the punishment of
condemnation, which hangs over their heads: and yet moneatur, let him be
admonished, to see whether he will amend. If he amend not after once or twice
admonition, avoid him, si curari poterit, non est vitandus: si non, dimittend
us est. If he can be healed of his heresy, he is not to be avoided: If he
cannot be cured, he is to be shunned. Hitherto S. Thomas.

39. My third place is out of S. Jude, containing a very dreadful description
of Heretics, yea so terrible that the very consideration thereof were able to
make a man to treamble, lest he should be any way entangled, and infected with
this fearful sin of heresy, either in being an Heretic himself
obstinate and malicious, or in believing them, as being seduced by them. For
after the Apostle had premised the salutation, together with the motive of his
Epistle, which was to beseech them, Supercertare semel iraditae Sanctis fidei,
to stand fast, and fight for the faith once delivered unto the Saints (which
were the first Christians) presently he gives a most serious warning to all
sorts of Christians, of the approach, and intrusion of Heretics:
Subintroierunt enim quidam homines Ep. Iuda^.
etc. There have crept in certain men (says he) prescribed, or prepared from
the beginning unto this terrible judgment, wicked men, who have turned the
grace of God into wantonness etc. And then he thundreth out a terrible
commination against them sa^ying: VVoe be unto them, that have gone in the way
of Cain, and have for reward powered out themselves with the error of Balaam,
and have perished in the contradiction of Chore. So he. And that this
contradiction of Chore against Moses and Aaron (for which he, and his
conspirators were by Gods just wrath swallowed S. Iudes sentence of Heretics.
quick up into hell, the earth opening her mouth and devouring the^)
represented the contradictio^ of all Heretics against the Catholic Church
and Governors thereof, no man that has any insight into Deuinity can deny:
and therefore our Apostle S. Jude (who alludeth and compares betwixt them)
denounces Gods vengeance yet further against them: Quibus procella tenebrarum
seruata est in aternum: for whom a tempest of darkness (or of torments in
darkness) is reserved for all eternity. And this being so, will any one call
another heretic in jest? Or is there any cry me so dreadful as this?

40. But if we pass from the Apostles and Scriptures them selves unto the
succeeding Primitive Church, and withal hold their judgment, sense, and
feeling concerning Heresy; we shall find, that all of the^, without exception
of any one, had this very spirit of detesting, anathematizing, flying, and
avoiding Heretics above all other sinners and malefactors upon earth: yea
whereas toward others never so great, greieuous, and heyncus offenders, we
are exhorted, willed, and joined to be benign, sweet, meek, compassionate and
the like: The detestation of heretics and heresies by ancient Fathers.
the clean contrary is counseled unto us against Heretics, to wit, not to
salute them, not to eat or drink with them, not to receive them into our
houses, not to converse with them, but to fly them, abhor them, detest and
avoid them, as pests and plagues, and poisoned serpents, infecting us with the
inuenomed poison of hell, as damned souls, already upon earth damned by the
guilt of their own conscience, and by the irreuokable 2. John 1. 10. 11.
sentence of divine Justice, as before we have signified. And that which is
most worthy our observation, such servants of God as were otherwise most
compassionate, nay whose bowels burned with compassion within them, toward the
greatest and grievous sinners (as for example we read in that notable story of
S. John the Evangelist, who ran up and down the mountains again and again
after the first relapse to gain a young man that was a thief, as S. Hierome
and other Church stories witness:) yet these self same men were so severe
against the enemies of Gods truth, that they never could so much as endure the
very sight and conversation of an Heretic. And so we have not only S. John
counsailing us not to salute, or converse with an Heretic, but also the said
Apostle De Scriptor. Eccle. in Joan.
practizing the same, even in his own person, in his heroical factes,
whenever any just occasion was offered. For S. Irenaeus (who lived in the
next age after him and recounted it upon the relation of S. Policarpe that
lived with S. John, and happily might be present when the thing was done)
records that S. John being in the City of Ephesus, Lib. 3. aduers. haeces.
cap. 3.
at a common bath, whither many did resort, and understanding that an Heretic
of his time named Cerinthus was within the bath, he instantly departed again,
would not enter into that bath with him, who had departed out of the Church
from him, could not be persuaded to stay any while there, affirming that he
doubted lest the very foundation of those bathes would fall down, where such
an enemy of God was present, who had as much as in him lay, ruinated the very
foundation of Christian Religion, denying the divinity of the Son of God. A
notable example of this great Apostle left to all posterity, giving them a
sufficient caveat, even by his own person and example for avoiding of Heresy
and heretical company.

41. And the same Irenaeus in the very same place before cited, registreth this
story of S. Policarpe himself, to wit how he rejected and defied an Heretic
named Marcion, that met with him, and spoke unto him, calling the said Marcion,
Primogenitum Diaboli, the first begotten of the Devil: Irenaeus ibidem.
and then the Author ends his narration with this most grave, and memorable
Conclusion, saying: So great fear had the Apostles, and Disciples, not to
communicate in any one word, with any of those, that have adulterated, and
corrupted the truth, even as S. Paul says: Avoid an heretical man after one
reprehension knowing that such a fellow is perverted, and damned of himself. So
S. Irenaeus.

42. And truly this one point ministered unto me store of matter, and
exceedingly enlarged my meditation, to consider on the one part, how careful,
and not only careful, but fearful these ancient Fathers, and Apostles were
(as Irenaeus testifies) to admit any conversation, or to enter into
communication with Heretics, flying them as mo^sters, serpents, and Devils
upon earth, and starting, affrighted as it were, with the bare name of Heresy,
and Heretic: and on the other side, that now in our days the name, and thing
it self is grown to be so common and familiar, as that we seem to have no
sense, or feeling thereof: so senseless and benumbed are we in our spiritual
understanding. But this proceeds from a supine negligence and careless
inconsideration; for such as seriously ponder, and earnestly debate the matter
more deeply, do apprehend far otherwise thereof, especially such as are
addicted to the reading of ancient Fathers, the surest refuge, and pillars for
a resolved soul to rely upon for true direction in religion, in these
miserable days of Schism, Heresy, and Apostasy: Nulla (says the old holy
martyr S. Cyprian) cum talibus commercia copulentur, nulla etc. And let noe
Cyprian l. 3. cp. 1.
traffic, or conversation be joined with such men, noe banquets be made, no
speech had, but let us be as separate from them, as they are separated
fugitives from the Church.

43. And after this Father again, that Atlas of his age, and great Saint S.
Athanasius, writing the life of S. Antony the Monk, does set down the
opinion, and feeling of them both in this point. S. Antony (says he) did so
detest Heretics, as that he told all men, that they must not so much as come
near them, alleging the authority of S. Paul for the same, who often, and
seriously talking of Heretics, does inculcate these words: Et hos Athanasin
vita Antonii.
deuita, and these you must avoid. And yet my author goes further in this
relation of S. Antony, adding this, that when the said holy man was at the
point of death, ready to breath out his soul into the hands of his Creator,
whom he had with all fidelity and severity so faithfully served, practicing
over and above the precepts of the law, Christ's high counsels of perfection,
he exhorted the standers by, especially and above all other things, to beware
of Heretics, and Schifmatikes, and to avoid their poison, Meumque, says The
senerity of S, Cypria^ S. Athanas. and S. Antony in avoiding Heretics.
he, circacos edium sectamini. Seitisipsi, quod nullus mihi, ne pacificus
quidem sermo, cum eis vnquam fuerit. And do you imitate my hatred toward
them. For your selves can bear me witness, that I had never so much as any
peaceable speech with them. This was S. Antony his resolution in this point,
and this was his last charge that this dying Saint left unto his living friends.

44. And of the same spirit, and judgment were all other Saints, and holy
Fathers ensuing, that euerliued, and dyed in the union, and communion of the
Catholic Church, and namely S. Leo the Great, first of that name, a most
compassionate man other ways, as by his charitable works of piety well
appeared: yet in this point of Heresy he was so inflamed with the zeal of God
his true Religion, so rigorous and severe against the enemies of God his truth,
that he burst forth into this vehement exclamation against them: Viperea
Haereticorum vitate colloquia, nihil nobis commune sit cum eis, qui Catholicae
aduersantes fidei solo Leo ser. 18. de passions Christicap. 4.
nomine sunt Christiani. Do you avoid the viperous and serpentine speeches, and
conferences of Heretics, and have you nothing at all to do with them, that
being adversaries unto Catholic faith, are only Christians in name. So S.
Leo. And in this point, that Heretics be not Christians, That Heretics are
no Christians.
but only in name and appellation, he has commonly all the ancient Fathers
concurring with him, with uniform consent, as namely S. Irenaeus, S. Cyprian
and Tertullian before mentioned, which Fathers do evidently prove Lib. 2.
aduers. haereses cap. 9.
that Heretics are worse then Heathens, Pagans, or Infidels. This argument is
handled in like manner by S. Chrysostom, and that largely in his 50. Homily ad
populum Antiochenum, and by S. Augustine in his 21. Book de Ciuitate Dei cap.
25. and by many other Fathers after them: the reason whereof is set down by S.
Thomas in the beginning of this second Consideration.

45. Upon these grounds then, reasons, causes, and contemplations the whole
stream, and rank of Ancient Fathers do with full consent concur in this one
point, and do inculcate the same often in their writings, to wit, that it is
impossible for an Heretic excluded from the Catholic Church to be saved, or
to avoid everlasting damnation, and perdition of body and soul, though he
should That Heretics by no good works can be saved.
live morally never so well, give never so great alms, do never so many good
works, suffer never so much by the loss of his goods, country, liberty, or
life it self. Which point is oftentimes inculcated, reiterated, and repeated
by that renowned Martyr S. Cyprian in that worthy Tract of his de Vnitate
Ecclesiae: as, Nunquam perueniet ad praemiu^ Christi qui scindit, aut diuidit
Ecclesiam Christi: he shall never participate of heavenly felicity, that makes
a rent, and breach in the Church of Christ, by the crime of heresy. Again the
same Author, in another place, to argue his assured confidence of this point,
adds, and denounces further: Macula ista nec sanguine abluitur, this blot of
heresy, or separating De vnitate Ecclesiae.
himself from the Church of Christ, cannot be washed away with blood;
inexpiabilis culpa, nec passione purgatur: It is a fault so inexpiable, that it
cannot be purged by death it self. Nay he goes yet further and says: Non
erit fidei corona, sed perfidiae poena: Such sufferings or death it self
Ibidem.
shall not be unto them any crown or reward of their faith and right believing,
but a punishment of their perfidiousnes, and false dealing.

46. Conform to S. Cyprian is S. Chrysostom, who in his 11. Homily upon the
Epistle to the Ephesians repeateth and justifies the former words, used by S.
Cyprian, which may well be called his last doom that he passed upon Heretics.
And the same is confirmed by S. Pacianus before mentioned in his second Epistle
to Sempronianus a Nouatia^ Heretic. Aug. l. 1. de ser. Dom in monte c. 4. et
ep. 24. ad Donat. presb. and l. 4. de bapt. contra Donat. c. 17. et tract. 6.
in Eua^g. loa^. et l. 2. cont. Petil. c. 98. et l. 1. cont. Gaude^t. c. 33. et
alibi.
And after these S. Augustine himself (whose places I have noted in the
margent) does so fully, clearly, and with such effectual words treat, and
auerre the same, as that it were labor lost and time misspent to add any more
in confirmation thereof.

47. And now that I may come to the vpshot of all which is the sum and
substance of what has hitherto been spoken in this Consideration; my
principal conclusion thereof is this, to wit, that the greatest misery and
calamity that may possibly be imagined in this life, to light upon any, and the
greatest dereliction, I mean departure of Gods saving grace or punishment,
that Almighty God for his sins can possibly lay upon a Christian man, is to
leave him so far unto himself, and to his own choice and election, as to
suffer him to become an Heretic, or to admit any participation or
communication with Heretics. And surely if God ever punished sin with sin,
as you shall read he did, Romans 1. 24. which is that fearful falling into the
hands of God: then surely is sin punished with sin in this fearful sin
of Heresy. Which premises being granted, as they cannot be denied, had not his
Matie of England then great reason (trow you) to endeavor so diligently and
prudently as he does, to clear himself of that foul imputation, and to put
of that abominable and damnable Name of an Heretic? And Heresy the greatest
sin of all other.
have not his Catholic subjects of England the greatest motive and reason that
possibly may be, to stand and suffer so costantly as they do, for avoiding of
all participation with Heretics, or with that Religion which in their opinion
grounded upon the Churches resolution, is flat heresy? Which being seriously
considered of his said Matie, and deeply and duly weighed (as the weighty
importance of the matter craves at his hands) in his understanding heart: It
may first be hoped (for which hope sake we lift up hands and hearts, prayers
and tears, sighs and groans unto the Highest) that he will himself out of his
Christian piety, separate from his Royal Person all liking of Heresies, as
far as the same is separated from God and from his Church. And secondly, it
may be presumed (for why should we ever despair, our cause being so just) that
out of his Royal Clemency, and Princely Equity, especially upon a conscionable
view of our Innocence, that he will deliver us from the great rigor of
persecution, which we suffer for that cause. And this we verily hope his
Majesty will the rather do, for that we follow but the dictamen of our own
Consciences, guided by infallible grounds, which here are partly opened, and
will appear more fully in the sequel of this discourse.

The third Consideration.
IF then the issue, and vpshot of all that is premised in How a man may
discern between Catholic religion and Heresy.
the two precedent Considerations (to reassume and recapitulate the sum of
both in a word) be in effect but this, that the riches and honor of being a
Catholic on the one side (to use the words of S. Augustine) be so inestimable:
and that on the other side the disreputation, misery, imminent danger, and most
certain damnation in being an Heretic to be so intolerable, and
insupportable on the other: Aug. de verb. Apost. sermon. 1.
it is more then probable, yea infallible, as most consona^t unto the
all-sauing mercy, and just dooming equity of Almighty God, the most righteous
Judge of all the world, that he has designed, yea as one of the last legacies
of his Testament bequeathed unto us, some eminent, and evident way, that by
better direction, and most certain prescription of the same, we may come to
know, and discern what is truly Catholic religion, and what heretical
innovation. And albeit this may in part be understood by that which already
has been treated: yet shall it be made more perspicuous, by that which is to be
handled in the ensuing Consideration.

49. For first since the knowledge of these things (as being of the greatest
weight in the world) does so highly import our soules-weale, or woe
everlasting; it follows consequently, that Christ our Savior had not
sufficiently provided for our safty in that behalf (which can be no less then
open blasphemy against Heavens Majesty, accusing the Wisdom of the Father of
imprudency, as Calvin blasphemously does of ignorance) if he had not left, In
Comme^tar. in 24. Matt. v. 36.
and commended unto us some certain, known, and infallible way, as a sure
thread to direct our judgments aright to the knowledge of these things. For if no
man can arrive to the designed port, the haven of heaven, and there be saved,
but he that is really a Catholic: nor any escape the souls shipwreck upon
the seas of this world, and vndoubred damnation, that is formally an Heretic,
or partaker of heresy (according to that of Tertullian: Quihabent co^sortium
praedicationis, habeant etiam necesse est consortium damnationis De praescrip.
c. 34.
they that with heretical preachers hold communion, must of necessity
participate with their damnation:) to what purpose then was it, that Christ
should leave his throne in heaven, descend from his Fathers bosom into the
wo^b of the euer-blessed Virgin, inuest there his glorious Deity with the
weakness and frailty of our mortality, teach, preach, expose him self to all
the world, injuries, miseries, extremities: and lastly why should be so
plentifully out of so many several places of his body, as there were several
wounds in the same, shed his most precious blood for the sins of the world,
and redemption of mankind, if after all this done and suffered for man, he
should have left him no certain means or infallible way, for his obteyning
the fruits thereof, by discerning between heresy, and Catholic religion?

50. Furthermore since heresy (as all ancient, and modern Orthodoxe Deuines
notify) is nothing else but to choose, or make choice, that is yet more plainly,
to adhere obstinately to a man's own private opinion, and proper election, when
soever different points of religion are proposed unto him: if the^ there be not
some perspicuous and apparent rule and reason left by Christ to convince unto
each The necessity of clear and universal rule in matters of belief.
man's conscience, and understanding, or at least to make a sufficient
conviction, which is truth, and which is not, which is Heresy, and which is
Verity, which to be embraced, and which is to be abandoned; I say, if this way,
rule, and reason be not most clearly left in the Church whereby a man may
guide him self, then why may not a man make his proper choice, and use that
benefit of his own election in spiritual matters, which God has bestowed
upon him in moral and civil affairs, permitting therein a choice to his free
will? Why may he not choose, or be a chooser (which in our sense and the
Churches acception and appropriation of the word imports an Heretic)
without so greiuous, and damnable a sin as Heresy is by us already disclosed
to be? Why should a man be damned by his own judgment, be left inexcusable,
for that no plea of pretended ignorance will serve his turn, since being such
a chooser, or heretical man, as S. Paul calls him, and brandeth him for, he
cannot say Nemo corripuit, as S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, Theophilact, and
Oecumenius jointly expound the place? For if the means, and way of conviction,
and decision be not infallible, it should seem that man may make his choice:
but this particular choice, and election, out of a man's own head, and private
judgment (which makes a choosier or Heretical man) is severely prohibited, and
condemned; and that by the judgment of S. Paul, as you have heard at large: and
therefore it must follow by force and of necessary and inevitable consequence,
that Almighty God out of the depth of his mercy, wisdom, equity, and piety
has left unto us some evident, universal, certain, and infallible way for
deciding of all doubts, and controversies in Religion. For so he promised, when
Isay prophesied thus, saying: Isa. 38.
That at the coming of Christ, there shall be a holy path, and a way, and it
shall be unto you a direct way, so as fools may not err therein. Thus he
prophesied. And is there any doubt, that he performed it? Has he promised, and
shall not he make it good? Has he spoke it, and shall he alter the thing that
is gone out of his lips? Atheism, Heresy, and Infidelity may Number. 23. 19.
question it: but all religion, piety, and Christianity will undoubtedly
believe the same.

51. Wherefore this ground being presupposed and granted as a chief principle
in Christian Religion, that there How this general rule may be found out
is some such way left unto us, whither we must have recourse in all doubtful
causes and controversies of Religion: the Question then is betwixt the
Protestants and those of the Catholic Roman Religion, where, and what this
way is, how we may come to the notice of it, and in what manner it is to be
followed, after it is once found out. The Protestant commonly of what Sect or
faction soever he be, auerreth, that the written word of Canonical Scripture
is this infallible way and directory-guid: and this he does not, in my
conscience, so much for any honor and reverence that he bears unto the
oracles of Gods sacred Writ (as he would falsely bear the world in hand he
does:) but only upon an heretical intent, that he may avoid thereby the
judgment of the Church. And no marvel, for, Qui male agit, odit lucem, the
guilt of his Joan. 3. 20.
Heresy flies the censure of the Church. Some others do add, that when the
Canon of Scripture is not perspicuous, and obuious unto every man, then for
explication of the word they may inquire of the spirit of God, which inspireth
each man, and that will instruct him, and lead him unto all truth. But now this
falsely supposed and imaginary spirit, can be no infallible rule of direction.
For The way of every man's private spirit
that S. John has given us a Caveat touching these false spirits. Beloved,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God, for many
false Prophets are gone sorth into the world. And was not this the common
trick of all condemned Heretics and heresies? Did they not all of them plead
the spirit of God, against the lively authority and speaking voice of the
Church? Does not the whole rank of ancient Fathers that wrote against the^,
thunder out that terrible comminatio^, threatening a fearful woe and vengeance
unto all private, lying, and deceyuing spirits: Vae illis qui sequuntur
spiritum suum: Woe be unto them that follow their own spirit? Lastly have not
all ancient Heresies and Heretics, Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians etc. been
unjustly condemned, and therefore must not their heresies be raked out of the
ashes of Hell again, and set fresh footing in the Church, if the rule of
interpreting Scripture be each man his private spirit? It cannot be denied, for
that all of them vaunted of the spirit, as the Sectaries do at this day. Well
then the conclusion is, that this vaunting of the spirit, is nothing else, but
a horrible belying, and presumptuous blaspheming of the spirit of God, making
that spirit of united verity, a spirit of distracted heresy: And therefore this
their private spirit can be no rule to direct them any longer. And so much of
this way, in following every man his own spirit.

52. And now for the former way of following Canonical Scriptures, for this
only rule and sure direction, though this be ever to be granted, as most true,
that the holy Scriptures breathed by the instinct of the spirit be divine, and
of infallible truth and direction, when they are by the Church both known to be
Scriptures, and rightly interpreted by the assistance of the spirit in the
Churches voice and sense: yet forasmuch as the Scriptures sublimity fitteth not
with every mean, and ordinary capacity (for the most part of people are
unlearned, and cannot read, or understand what they read, much less those
learned tongues wherein the Scriptures were originally written:) It follows
evidently that the Scriptures alone, can be no sure, universal, and infallible
way for the discerning of Catholic Religion, and discovering of heresy. Or
at least wise this rule is not general to all, as it ought to be: for as much,
as all must have sufficient means left for their salvation.

53. But here me thinks I hear the Protestant object, that howsoever the
Scripture is no way for the ignorant and unlearned: yet is it the only rule,
and Canon of faith unto Whether only scripture be the infallible way.
the skillful and learned: and that whereas the Canon of the Scripture is
perfect, and is of it self alone sufficient enough for all points, what
needs the authority of Ecclesiastical interpretation to be added unto this
Canon? To this I answer, and first this way we now speak of, must be a way
for all, semita, via, and via sancta: a path, a way, and holy way; yea such a
way if we believe Almighty God, speaking by the mouth of Isay: Stulti non
errent per eam, the most ignorant and unlearned cannot mistake it. For that
Christ the way of all has left this way unto all, and that after Isa. 35. 8.
his Incarnation and Passion, for to that time the prophet Isay alludeth: and
therefore the Scripture excluding the Ignorant for want of tongues and other
learning, and the greatest part of it being written before the said Christ's
Incarnation and passion, cannot be this way. Secondly I answer, that as the
Scripture alone cannot be the way unto the unlearned, no more can it be the
rule unto the learned, for that not only fools, but such as thought themselves
both learned and wise, have erred by that way of Scripture alone, and their
private spirit to help them: and hereof we have as many lively testimonies and
examples, as there have been learned heretics in the Church, who thinking
themselves wise and learned, and yet pretending Scriptures, have run awry, so
dangerous a way is this way of the Scriptures, without the guide of the Church
to walk in. Thirdly and lastly, touching the sufficiency of holy Canon without
any addition of Ecclesiastical Interpretation, I answer, this objection (which
is the maine position and foundation for all the Protestants Heresies at this
day) is as ancient as twelve hundred years ago, and it is proposed by
Vincentius Lyrinensis in the person of the Heretics of his time, and answered
thus: To sacred Cano^ (says he) Cont. haer cap. 2.
the Ecclesiastical Interpretation must be added, because in regard of the
Scriptures sublimity all men expound it not in one and the self same sense,
but this man and that man do diversely interpret the self same places of
Scripture, that in a manner how many men there be, so many senses may be
wrested from it. For Nouatian expounds Scripture one way, Photinus, Sabellius,
Donatus, Arius another way etc. And therefore in regard of the manifold turnings
and windings of several error and heresy, it is very needful, that the line
of Prophetical and Apostolical Interpretation be directed, according to the
rule of Ecclesiastical and Catholic interpretation. Hitherto Vincentius
Lyrinensis.

54. And what (I pray you) are all our material contentions with the
Sectaries, and their own capital dissentions amongst themselves, falling by
the ears, and damning each other to the pit of hell (let them pretend never so
great brotherhood to cozen the world) but about the Scriptures, and the true
sense thereof? to wit, which are to be received into Canon, and how they are to
be interpreted, according to the intent, and purpose of the holy Ghost, wherein
all Heretics have upon their own wilful election run out of the way, as all
the ancient Fathers do continually charg them: Scripturis pugnantes (as they
complain) contra Scripturas: they abuse Gods word August. tract. 18. in Ioa^.
and lib 7. in Genesis ad lit^. cap 9.
against himself: And, Scripturis bonis non been vtentes: the Scriptures are
with them as a sword in a mad man's hand, they turn it against themselves,
making that unto them a savor of death, unto death, which is given them by God
to become a savor of life, unto life, as S. Paul professed himself and all
true Pastors of the Church to 2. Cor. 2. 16.
be. For do not Heretics receive some Scriptures, and reject others? And those
that they do receive, do they not turn them and wind them, add to them, and
detract from them of purpose to pervert them for their purpose Do they not
expound them according to their own fancy and brain? De praescript. cap. 17.
This was Tertullian his complaint against the Heretics of his time above
fourteen hundred years ago. And yet more sully to cur point in hand the same
Father shows that it is but lost labor and vexation of mind, to enter into
conflict with an Heretic by Scripture, saying: Congressio Scripturarum cum
Haereticis nihil preficiat, nisi plane, vt Ibidem.
aut stomachi quis ineat eu^^sicuem, aut cerebri. The conflict about Scriptures
with an Herericke, serves to no other purpose, unless it be to ouerturne a
man's stomach or his brains. Again, to the same purpose he demands. Quid
premouebis exercitatissme Scripturarum, cum si quid descnderis, negetur, si
Ibidem.
quidnegaueris, desendetur: and tu quidem nihil perdis, nisi vocem in
contentione; nihil consequeris, nisi bilem de blasphematione. What shall thou
gain, albeit thou be most ready, and expert in Labor lost to deal with
Heretics by only Scripture.
the Scripture, for so much as if thou defend any thing, it will be denied, and
if thou deny any thing, it will be affirmed: and thou truly for thy part
leesest nothing, but spendest thy voice in contention, and shall gain nothing,
but choler by his blaspheming, And then afterward he flatly concludes again
against them. Wherefore (says he) there is no appealing to the Scriptures,
neither is the Cap. 20.
combat to be placed in the^, wherein there is either no victory at all or very
uncertain, or at least wise not any certain can be hoped for, Frgo non ad
Scripturas prouecandum est, nec in his constituendum certamen, in quibus aut
nulla, aut incerta, aut parum certa est victoria. So he.

55. This was Tertullian his judgment touching Scriptures, cited by the
Heretics in his time. And does not this prescription serve against the
Sectaries of our days? Well then I may conclude with Tertullian his sense,
that this way of remitting each man and woman to only Scriptures for
certificatio^ of their faith, and that promiscuously without an interpreter,
can be no certain or possible way, evident rule, or Canon of faith. Now if the
Heretic being thus pressed and followed upon, that his ground of Scripture
alone be enforced, for avoiding of all inconveniences and absurdities, to
adioyne and admit an Interpreter; then the question plainly is, who this
Interpreter shall be, and of what faction in Religion; for of what Sect soever
he be, to that side will he wrest, and draw the interpretation of Scripture: Et
tunc (says Tertullian) tantum De praescript. c. 17.
veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, quantum est corruptor stylus. And then will
an adulterous sense of the Scriptures as much brabble against the truth, as he
that corrupts the text it self: whereof he alleges this reason for it. Holy
Writ is so fruitful to serve for each matter and point, that comes in
question, as nothing seems to an Heretic so vain if it please his fancy,
but that it may be proved from thence: neither do I hazard ought to say, that
the very Scriptures them selves are so ordered by the will of God, that they
minister store of matter unto Heretics, when I read in Scripture, oportet
haereses esse, there must be heresies, which cannot be without Scriptures. And
this Ibid. c. 39.
is my former Author his judgment of the Scriptures wrested and perverted by
several Heretics in his days, for maintenance of their several heresies.
Which being so, here is neither certainty, nor generality, nor facility, nor
perspicuity, nor infallibility in this way of the Scripture barely and nakedly
proposed of it self alone: neither can it ever be inferred by any seeming
probable conclusion, that the Scripture alone is this infallible way, which we
do further illustrate by this familiar example obuious unto every man's capacity.

56. If some rude, and unlearned countrymen, repayring up to the Metropolitan
City of the kingdom to prosecute some suites in law, touching a Farm or
house, or matter of less moment: yt these men, I say, after conference had
with their learned counsel, should receive no other answer nor comfort, nor
direction of them for further managing of their suites, but be remitted by them
unto the body of the law it self, without any Judge or Counsailour, they being
of themselves not able either to read or understand the law, much less to
apply it to their A perspicuous example.
proper cases, and peculiar suites; would not every reasonable and conscionable
man condemn these lawyers? And had not the poor Cou^treymen themselves, being
undone by this means in their worldly estates, just cause to complain, and
cry out against the falsehood, and treachery of their Cou^sailours? And yet
behold here in a suit of of suits, and matter of greatest moment and importance
in the world, not in a title or trial of a Farm, or house, but concerning our
interest and right of inheritance unto the heavenly mansion, we are this way
worse then thus (since the matter is of far greater importance) abused,
deluded, betrayed: we are promiscuously sent, learned, unlearned men, women,
young, old, to the body of the Scripture and mystical volume of God his sacred,
and seauen-fold-sealed book, as S. John speaks of the Revelation, Apocal. 5.
1. we must seek, search, confer, compare, expound, interpret, every man must
there be a chooser, every woman an expositor, and every creature must be his
own caruer: all must presume of the spirit, that they cannot err, all presume
to be taught immediately from God, without the ministry of the Church: Sola
Scripturarum arsest (says S. Hierome against Heretics of his time) quam omnes
sibi ve^dicant: hanc garrula anus hanc delirus senex, ha^c sophista verbosus,
hanc vniuersi praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequam discunt etc. Only the art
of Scripture is it, In Epist. ad Paulin. Presb.
which every one challenges to himself: this the prating old wife, this the
doting old man, this the babbling Sophist, this all of them together presume to
know, and teach, and tear in pieces, before they learn it. So he. Presumption
of Heretics in the Scriptures.
And this is all the way, and ground, prescription, direction, rule, and line,
that our heretical Sectaries can affoard us for the guiding of our souls, and
the grounding of our faith. Will any man therefore hereafter, that has but the
least care, or that can intertaine but one thought, either of the present of
future wellfarre of his soul, rely upon such false guides and blind teachers,
since this ground of Scripture alone sensed by a private spirit, was, is, and
ever shall be the common ground, nay rather desperate shift, and refuge of all
condemned heresies and heretics, and that purposely, that they may avoid the
censure and tribunal of the Church?

57. There follows then the way indeed appointed by God, revealed by the
Holy Ghost, designed by Christ The only true way of judging by the Church.
and proposed by the Catholics, and Catholic Church, and this is the sure,
easy, evident, general, and infallible way indeed, which is the universal
known Catholic Church in every age, which is perspicuous and notorious easy
to be found, for that it cannot be hidden: it is compared by holy Scripture to
a City placed upon a hill as S. Augustine in diverse prolixe Treatises of his
does evidently Aug. in psalm. 44. et 47. and l. 2. cont. Petil. c. 32. and de
unit. Eccl. c. 14. and in Epist. Ioa^. tract. 1. and 2. in Breuic. collat. 3.
diei, c. 4.
demonstrate: it is a light upon a candlestick, it lighteneth all through the
Egiptian darkness of this worlds schism and heresy, and leads their souls
into the way of truth: it is that pillar of fire, that leads all Gods chosen
people through the vast, and roaring wilderness, yea and all the nights
darkness of this world, unto the promised land of Canaan, I mean the heavenly
Jerusalem: it is generally also figured by the dew that fell upon the floor,
as well as upon the fleece, when Gedeon required the miracle to be doubled,
which was a mystical representation of the Jewish Synagogue, and Christian
Congregation, implying also that the dew of Gods truth and saving grace should
at last pass Matt. 5. 14 Ibidem 15. Exodus 13. 12.
from the fleece of the Jews to the floor of the Gentiles, and all to teach us
that this Catholic Christian Church should extend to all, serve for all,
learned, unlearned, young Iud. 6. 37. 38. 39. 40.
old, high, low, great, small, for that all sorts, sexes, ages and conditions
of people may repair unto her, receive her doctrine, admit her instructions,
and directions by the continual successions of her Bishops, Pastors, and
teachers of every age. And finally this way is a most sure, certain, and
infallible rule, for that Christ has expressly assured and promised us, that he
will be continually with this Church unto the worlds end, that he would send
the holy Ghost to instruct, direct, and induce this Church in omnem veritatem,
into all truth, and suggerit vobis omnia, quae dixere vobis, and it shall
suggest unto you all that I will from heaven speak, or notify unto you. It was
Christ his promise unto his Apostles, and in their persons unto his Church for
ever. And lastly the gates of hell (which are the gates of error, and
heresies) shall never prevail against this Matt. 16. 18.
Church.

58. This then (to exclude all by-pathes, and blind ways of Heretics) is the
way indeed: this is that rule of faith as Tertullian speaks, instituted by
Christ, and it is such a rule and so certain, that Nullas habet apud nos
quaestiones, nisi quaes haereses inserunt, and quae haereticos saciunt: no
questions are De praesctipt. c. 14
so much as moved with us, concerning this rule, but such as heresies cause,
and which very questions moved concerning the Church, do cause and breed
heretics.

59. This Church being once published by our Savior, and the promises he had
made unto her being once diuulged; what followed, but that all men presently
that had any care of the salvation of their souls, flocked unto her, began to
lay handfast and houldfast on this way, and to have recourse in all doubts and
controversies, unto the common known Catholic Church of their age, for
explication, and final decision thereof? So shall you read Act. 15, 6. that the
Apostles immediately after the Ascension The authority of the primitive Church.
of our Savior assembled the Church together for the detiding of that great
doubt, that then arose in the Church, to wit, whether the observation of the
old law of Moses should be joined necessary with the new law of Christ, and
because they would leave a pattern for all succeeding ages to follow, they
determined the matter; and themselves, I mean the Apostles and Prelates of
that first age, decided the doubt by those high words of authority taken from
the foresaid commission of our Savior, Visum est spiritui Sa^to, Ibid. v. 28.
and Nobis, it seems good unto the holy Ghost, and us: for the Church and the
true spirit of the holy Ghost go inseparably Matt. 28. 20.
together, in regard of Christ his promise made unto the Church: so that the
holy Ghost ever keeps his residence in her, guides her, governs her,
directs her, and sits as President in all her consultations and
asse^blyes; and therefore this vmpiring, and determining form of speech has
ever since been used, in the lawful succession of the said visible Church,
until our days, and will be frequented still, especially in general
Councels, even unto the worlds end, to put a firm period, and full conclusion
unto all controversies that come in question. And the reason is, for that the
same authority, and assistance of the holy Ghost, which that first Church had
for directing of men's souls unto their salvation, the very self same and none
other, has the visible Catholic Church of our age, and has had in all ages,
and shall have in all to come: Verum enim non variat: It is an ancient
prescription and no more ancient then true: Gods gifts and graces conferred
upon his Church are without repentance, the holy Ghost is ever one and the
self same spirit of truth in Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and
other succeding Pastors and Doctors: and Christ his promise was, not for one
age only, he shed not his precious blood for those of his age alone, but for
all, all were alike near unto him, all were alike dear unto him: he took our
nature in general, to save mankind in general, and therefore the care he had
for one age of the Church the same he had for all succeeding ages of the same,
as well for the last, as for the first, and this care of his continues so long
as the sun and the moon endures.

60. This remittance then, and reference unto the Authority of the Church
originally proceeded from the Apostles themselves, was continually perpetuated
by all succeeding ages of the Catholic Church, and therefore as S. Paul in a
controversy of lesser importance, writing to the Corinthians about women being
veyled in the Church, says to shut up the door to all further contention,
that, If 2 Cor. 11. 16
any man will seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor yet the
Church of God (repressing the contentious man as you see with the Authority and
Custom of the Church:) so did all subsequent Fathers of the orthodox Church,
whether it were in the private writings or in the worlds grand Parliament in
General Counsels, in all their conflicts with Heretics, they ever used to
repel, and repress them by one, and the self same means, and that was with
the authority of the known Catholic Church. And look what sentence they
pronounced against the^ for their contumacy, see what censure they inflicted
upon them for their heresy, it remained good against them, and irreuocable: it
was ratyfied as the law of the Medes and Persians, which could not be altered,
their authority Dan. 6. 15.
was grounded immediately upon those words of Verity, What soever you bynd on
earth shall be bound in heaven, and the Tribunal of heaven confirmed the
authority of the Church Mat. 16. 19
upon earth, nay stands expecting what is done by it upon earth, such is the
mystical dependency betwixt the one and the other; such is the mutual
correspondency betwixt the head, and his members, Christ and his Church. Dare
then any man hereafter oppose his private spirit against the authority of this
Church? Or will he impudently presume to prefer his own conceit, and
opinion before her public tradition?

61. Ancient S. Irenaeus (who was in manner (...) Apostolorum, for he lived in
the very next age after them) writing against the heresies of his days, and
having first declared how the primitive Church was visibly planted by Christ,
and his Apostles, and how it was continued to his time, does then pourtraict
out unto us, and discourse at large of the authority, sufficiency, treasury,
tradition, and absolute perfection of this Church, for the repelling of all
heresy, and delivering of all truth: his words are Iren. lib. 3. cont. haeres.
cap. 4.
these. Tantae igitur ostensiones cum haec sint etc. Whereas these things which
I have said, are so great demonstrations of the truth, we must not yet seek
the truth from others A notable testimony of S. Iren. for the authority of the
Visible Church.
which is easily taken from the Church: whereas the Apostles did most fully lay
up in her, all things belonging to the truth, as in a certain rich
treasure-house: so as every man that will, may take from thence the liquor or
sustenance of life, for that is the intrance unto life everlasting (to believe
the Church:) and all others that fly this way are thieves and murderers, and
therefore we must avoid them that are such, but with great diligence we must
affect those things, that are of the Church, and from her take the tradition of
truth. And truly if our contention were but about some small question in
Religion: yet ought not we to have recourse unto the most ancient Churches,
wherein the Apostles had once been conversant and so take from them that which
is certain and clear for deciding of the question? And what if the Apostles
had left unto us no Scriptures at all, had it not been needful notwithstanding
to follow the order of tradition, which they have left unto us, to whom they
(to wit the Apostles) had committed those Churches?

62. Thus far S. Irenaeus, which I have of purpose chosen to cite more at
large, for that it is sufficient alone to disclose his judgment, and the
Judgment of that first age next after the Apostles, how far the authority of
the visible universal Church then stretched, and was esteemed for, especially
for clearing, soluing, and deciding of all doubts that possibly could arise in
religion. And the reason there rendered by the same Father, is this: She is the
storehouse wherein Christ's merits, and the Churches treasure is laid up: She
is the way of life, whereby we may come to eternal life, and escape
everlasting death: that all are thieves, yea murderers of souls, that do
impugn her, or seek other ways of trial then her, and her tradition from
hand to hand: That this tradition is sufficient, though there were no
Scripture: That from her, and her alone, the truth is to be taken, and not else
To what trial the ancient Fathers provoked the heretics of their time.
where: That by her, and her authority alone, all doubts and questions are to
be so ued, and decided. Can any thing be spoken more effectual then this? Or
is there any more plain, easy, evident, and universal direction? Can any rule
be more probable and infallible, then the rule of the Church? And to this do
agree both my foresaid Author in many other places of his works, as also all
that succeeded him, and took the like enterprise in hand of writing, and
prescribing against Heretics, as Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S.
Athanasius, Epiphanius, Theodoret, S. Hierome S. Leo, Vincentius Lyrinensis in
his goulden book against the profane innouations of the Heretics of his
time, and diverse others, which to avoid prolixity I omit: all these do
principally, and really provoke, and challenge all the Heretics of their time
unto this only and sure way of the Catholic Church in their days, for the
trial of the truth, and for discerning what is truly Catholic and what is
Heretical: their several sentences are to prolixe to be contained within the
strict precinctes and narrow bounds of my brief intended Confiderations,

63. And now to put a period to this my third Consideration, least it exceed a
due proportion, the vpshot is this. For as much then as this visible Christian
Church, begun and founded by our Savior under the Apostles, was a visible
Church, made, and consisting of visible men, governed by visible Pastors, has
visibly descended from age to age through the centuries of the Church by all
lawful, and ordinary succession of Bishops (which Tertullian Videsupr,
required of the Heretics of his time, as they would avoid the blot of heresy)
that have lineally come down to our days. Secondly, for as much as the
authority of his Church was esteemed in every age, to be the same (for
infallible direction) that it was in the former first ages, through the
assurance of Christ his promise to that effect. And lastly for as much, as the
whole universal Church of the fiftee^th age has in a general Counsel
examined, decyded, condemned the doctrine of the Protestants for heresy in more
then an hundred maine points by name, and has accursed, and anathematized The
issue of this Consideration.
both them, and all their participants to the pit of hell, and that according
to the very self same grounds, whereby the ancient Fathers did use to curse,
and anathematize all old heresies, and Heretics in former times: these
things, when I considered with more attention and made a general reflection
thereon, a sudden fear and care, astonished, yea as it were, overwhelmed me,
for that my everlasting salvation depending upon this point, I had been so
negligent in examining the premises. And now I plainly saw, as in a perfect
glass of most impartial judgment, that unless I could imagine with my self
(as diverse others fanatically do) that Christ's promise had failed, and that
the first visible Christian and Catholic Church founded by him, and spread
over the whole world had failed, vanished, and perished, as being overcome by
helgates, and over grown with the weeds of error and heresy; I could never
have any hope of salvation, as long as I continued in the Protestant Religion.
And this was the issue of that Consideration.

The fourth Consideration.
THERE remains now a fourth consideration, the subject whereof (which
notwithstanding perhaps is How out of the premises every man may judge in what
state he stands, for being Heretic, or Catholic.
of greatest importance of all the rest) is this, to wit, how out of the
premises a man may probably collect, nay necessarily conclude, whose opinions
be Catholic, and whose Heretical, and thereupon may reflect upon himself in
what state or condition he stands betwixt both as either affected to the one,
or interessed in the other. And albeit this has been partly discovered by
that which has been spoken in the first Consideration, touching the name
Catholic, that signifies Universal and whole, and not a part or singularity
in opinions by choice of a man's own will and judgment (for so Heretic does
signify as has been laid forth in the second Consideration:) yet shall it be
made more manifest by the particular practice of the things themselves, when
the name shall pass into nature, and appellation be turned into application.
And first to speak to the point in a word, the Catholic admits all wholly,
and intierly. without addition, or detraction, which the known Catholic
Church proposes to be believed of her sons, as she has it revealed unto her
from God her Father. But as for the Heretic, and the chooser, tamqua^ Dominus
propryiuris, as he that will take his own swing, though it be in Schism and
heresy, he making himself judge over all, I mean God, the Scripturs and the
Church, admits some, and rejects the rest, as it pleases his private
fancy, or displeases his peevish judgment: he neither respects the authority
of the Church nor regardes his own obedience due thereunto: his ground is
either Scriptures falsely by him interpreted, or a private lying spirit (such as
Micheas the Lords true Prophet prophesied to be in the false Prophets of Baal)
wherein he is deluded, or other arguments of reason and nature against 3. Reg.
22.
faith and the God of nature. And thus he is bewitched and perverted, contrary
to all true, and only saving Catholic grounds, contrary to that sure,
certain, and infallible way of trial, which erst while we treated of in the
third Consideration, and purpose now by Gods holy assistance to make use of all
in this.

65. Some men I find to intertaine this concepit, that English Protestants and
Roman Catholics may live in their several professions of Religion, and be
saved together and much more they are of opinion, that all Protestants of
different professions and Sects, as Lutherans and Sacramentaries, and much
more the different sorts of one and the self same sect, as Caluinists in
England, distinguished by the names of Molles and Rigidi, moderate
Protestants, Whether men may be saved in distere^t Religions
and fervent Puritans. And the reasons for this their opinion, are first of
doctrine, for that every one of their differences do not make heresies: or if
they do, yet not so grievous heresies as the Fathers of the Primative Church
condemned and anathematized: they mean such heresies as impugned the persons
of the B. Trinity, the Natures of Christ, God and Man, the Incarnation, and
Passion, and the like; and consequently though those ancient heresies were
damnable: yet are not those of our days (plead the Protestants) but that both
parts living well, may be saved, as his Matie in this his Premonition to
Princes does testify, that his noble Mother sent him word not long before her
Martyrdom by the Master of her Household, a Scottish Gentleman yet living,
that his Matie might persist in his Premonit. page 34.
Protestant Religion, and yet do well enough, if he lived virtuously, and
governed accordingly.

66. But surely, how far the credit of that master of Household, being a
Protestant (as I hear he then was, M. Meluin.
and now is) may extend it self to be believed, against the mistress and
highest Lady of that Household, in a matter of that quality and consequence, I
know not: yet certain I am of this, that the opinion (that a man may be so
saved) is most false and absurd in it self, and very unlikely also to proceed
from her Maties wise, and religious heart, who with that opinion might have made
herself a Protestant, and thereby have escaped the greatest part of her
troubles, and perhaps also have avoided the violent stroke of the Axe, which
is well known to have been urged upon her, especially in respect of her
Religion, and of the fear that was conceived, least in time she might come to
the Crown and defend the same (I mean her Religion) with public authority.

67. And now whosoever it was (wherein I remit my self to his Matie, as most
interessed therein, both in Honor, body and soul, as her only Child and heir
and chiefest Jewel in the world) evident it is, the opinion cannot stand (as
now has been said) either in reason or religion, and may be presumed to
proceed from such as have little care of any religion at all; only they would
live quietly, enjoy their sensuality, pass the time without any trouble or
scruple or repugnant conscience for any thing Secret Atheism
touching religion, or that whole subject. And this (if I take not my aim
amiss) comes very near to the point of secret Atheism.

68. S. Augustine records the like opinion of many in his days, who thought
it did not materially import them, whether they were Donatists, or Catholics,
so as they professed the Christian faith. Multi (says he) nihil interesse Aug.
epist 48. ad Vincent.
credentes, in qua quisque part Christianus sit, ideo permanebant in part
Donati, quia ibi nati erant etc. Many believing that it concerned them not in
what side or part each man were a Christian (so he were a Christian) therefore
they remained on the party or faction of Donatus the Heretic for that they
were borne therein. But S. Augustine vehemently confuteth this false,
pestilent, and indulgent persuasion as well in the place here cyted as in many
other places of his works, confidently teaching, and auerring that a man is
made an Heretic by houlding any one error obstinately against the Church,
and consequently damned also. In Ecclesia Christi (says he) qui morbidum
aliquid prauumque sapiunt, si correcti, vt sanum rectumque sapiant, resistunt
Aug. l. 18. de ciu. Dei cap. 5^.
contumaciter, Haeretici fiunt, and for as exeuntes, habentur inimici. Those who
in the Church of Christ are infected with corrupt and naughty opinions, if
being admonished to believe wholesome and true doctrine, they kick against it
with contumacy, then do they become Heretics, and going forth of the Church,
are held for enemies. So he. And with the same severity holds he in his book
of heresies, entitled, Ad Quod-vult-Deum, that the believing of any one heresy
condemned already by the Church, or to be condemned, if rising afterward, is
sufficient to make the belieuer and obstinate defender no Christian Catholic,
and consequently an Heretic, and so impossible to be saved.

69. To this opinion subscribeth S. Cyprian, who showing that every least
heresy or schism is able to damn a man, that adhereth unto it, writes
expressly thus: Beatus Ioannes Apostolus, nec ipse vllam haeresim aut schisma
discreuit: sed Lib. 1. epist. epist. 1. ad Magn.
vniuersos qui ex Ecclesia exijssent, Antichristos appellauit. S. John the
Apostle himself did not put any difference or exception of any heresy or
schism at all: but called them Antichrists, whosoever were gone forth of the
Church for any heresy or schism whatsoever.

70. And yet this point is pressed further by many other holy fathers, yea
strained to every heresy, were it but in one word or syllable. And this was
the opinion of Hierom. l. 3. Apol. aduersus Ruff. post. medium.
S. Hierome. His words are these: Propter vnum verbum, aut duo, quae contraria
essent fidei, multas haereses eiectas esse ab Ecclesia: we shall read that many
heresies have been cast out of the Church for one or two words, that were
contrary to the received faith.

71. To this purpose conduces that of S. Basil registered by Theodoret, to
wit, that a good man ought to loose his life if need require for the defense
of one only syllable, pro Basil. apud Theod. l. 4. bist. c. 17.
desensione vnius syllabae diuinorum dogmatum. The reason whereof is touched as
well by S. Athanasius in his Creed, where he says, That he shall most
certainly be damned that houldeth not entirely and inuiolably the whole
Catholic faith; as also by Nazianzen, when he says, That heresy consists
sometimes in one word. Nazianze^ tract. de fide Ruff. interpret no^ long ab
initio.
His words are these: Nothing can be more perilcus then Heretics, who
running wholly over all, do notuill standing in some one word, as by a drop of
poison, infect the sincere and simple faith of our Savior, coming down by
Apostolical tradition. This was the judgment of Antiquity: so severe Censurers
were all those holy Fathers of the least dram of Heresy.

72. Thus then you apparently see, that for making of an error or heresy
damnable it is not required of absolute necessity, that it deny some thing of
the blessed Trinity directly, or some maine article of the Creed etc. as many
of the first old heresies did, when the doctrine thereof was not so well
explaned, as now it is, though this be a desperate shift of the Protestant, and
most miserable evasion, and yet it will not serve his turn, he being guilty of
heresy in all those high points, yea and of misbeliefe almost in every article
of the Creed: for that, as before has been touched in the third
Consideration, the greatness of the sin of heresy depends more of malice,
and malignity What sort of heresy is more damnable.
of the sinner, then of the material object, about which the Heretic erreth;
for that he sins of obstinacy, and contumacy by his own choice, and
therefore is said by S. Paul to be damned by his own judgment, quia eligit
sibi in quo damnatur, says Tertullian, he chooses to himself wherein to be
damned: or else as S. Leo does more Leo tract. cont. Eutich.
largely give the gloss; Propria pertinacia perit, and sua a Christo discedit
in sania, qui eam impietatem, per quam multos ante se scit perusse, sectatur,
and religiosum atque Catholicum putat id, quod sanctoru^ Patrum iudicio
damnatum esse constat. That is, he perishes by his own pertinacity, and
through his own peculiar madness departs from Christ, who imbraceth that
impiety which he knows has been the destruction of many, houlding that for
religious and Catholic, which manifestly appears to be condemned by uniform
judgment of ancient Fathers. So blessed Leo expou^ds the place: the reason
follows, for that such a one preferring himself by pride and vanity before
the whole visible and Catholic Church, he chooses to hold that which his
own judgment, and fancy does lead him unto. Whence it may come to pass, that
one man erring with less pride, and obstinacy about some points of the
blessed Trinity, may sin less damnably, then another that erreth in points
of lesser moment, but with more malice, as about the doctrine of the
Sacraments, or other points of the like nature. And the reason thereof is, for
that this second erreth with more obstinacy, and malice (which corroborateth
the very essence of heresy) then the first, though both of these men being out
of the Church, must be damned, but yet with different measure of punishment.

73. This fearful Conclusion then of damnation standing a foot and remaining
in full force to be inflicted upon all kind of Heretics: we are now, and next
to consider, whether the Protestants opinions at this day wherein they differ
from the Catholics, be truly heresy, being compared with the Roman faith and
Religion: and secondly we are to discuss, whether the different sorts, sects,
and professions of the said Protestant religion, among themselves, especially
the principal, as Lutherans and Sacramentaries in Germany, be heresies to the
other: and the like of Puritans and Protestants in England, all originally
rising from Martin Luther: I say we are to consider, whether all these several
heads, be Heretics indeed, the one to the other, or may be saved together,
each man dying in his own Religion.

74. To proceed then in order unto the examination of the particulers. And
first that Protestant Religion in many great points throughout the main corpse
of controversies now in hand, is truly heresy to those of the Roman That
Protestants opinions are truly heresies.
faith and Catholic Religion: this point being so clear needs no further
dispute, for as much as the Protestants do openly avouch above an hundred
positions, against the same Roman Catholic Church, defending the same with
obstinate resolution. And the late general Council of Trent (where the
flower, piety, and learning of the whole Catholic Christian world under one
spreame Pastor, and infallible conduct of God his holy Spirit were assembled)
has discussed, examined according to ancient grounds of holy Fathers,
discovered for Heretical, and thereupon has anathematized 125. points by
name, and that in so many different Canons enacted, concerning the Sacraments
only, and the controversy of Justification: Besides all the rest, I say, the
case being thus clear against them, and their conviction so manifest, there
needs no further dispute. For if by S. Augustine his judgment, even now
alleged, and other Fathers of greatest learning and credit in the Church, one
only erroneous proposition, or assertion held with obstinacy against the
doctrine of the known Christian Church, be convinced for a point of heresy,
and held for a matter of most certain damnation to the houlder, for that it
casts a man out of the said Church (out of which is no salvation) what is to
be inferred where so many condemned assertions are held against the known
Church, and authority thereof?

75. To the second also, to wit, whether Lutherans and Sacramentaries (who made
the first division of Protestants, whilst Luther himself was yet alive) be
truly and properly Heretics, the one to the other, and consequently that the
salvation of one is the damnation of the other, were it possible that any
Sectary could be saved: This is with as great facility proved as the former,
and that first by the testimony of Martin Luther himself, the original
Author of all these later Sects: and then by the mutual, and concurring
consent of all the Lutheran Doctors, Pastors, and Prelates that succeeded him.

76. First I say, it is well known that Luther himself ever reputed the
Sacramentaries (that comprehend both Zuinglians and Caluinists) for da^mnable,
and intolerable Heretics. Let his own testification often reiterated, and
seriously aggrauated in diverse of his books be a sufficient confirmation of
this. His first serious Censure denounced against them all, is this: Haereticos
serio censemus, and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei Zuinglianos, Sacramentarios omnes,
qui negant Christi Luther. in art. ad Louaniens.
Corpus, and Sanguinem ore carnali sumi in Venerabili Eucharistia: We do
seriously censure for Heretics, and Aliens from the Church of God the
Zuinglians, and all other Sacramentaries, who do deny that Christ's sacred
body, and Luther condemns all Zuinglia^s and Caluinistes for heretics.
blood is received by our carnal mouth in the Venerable Eucharist. Can any
thing be spoken more clearly, or determined more effectually then this? Or can
any Caluinist with any face hereafter exempt himself from out of the number of
them that are accursed, and condemned by their own grand Progenitour?

77. The same in effect he has in his Epistle ad Iacobum Presbyterum Ecclesiae
Bremensis: his words are these: All Sacramentaries that deny the Real
Presence are Heretics, and for such to be avoided. And yet in a third place
(least any man should think he had altered his judgment) de Coena Domini, of
the supper of the Lord, he condemned by name for damned Heretics, the very
first Authors of Sacramentary doctrine, to wit, Carolostadius, Oecolampadius,
and Zuinglius, (and questionles Calvin had never escaped his singers, as sly an
Heretic as he was, had he been then either of name, or note:) well his final
and irreuokable doom (for it was denounced against the^ in his decrepit age)
was this: Ego tamquam alterum pedem iam habens in sepulchro etc. I being now
old, and having as it were one foot in my grave, do yet carry this testimony
and glory with me to the tribunal of Jesus Christ, that with all my heart I
have condemned, as enemies of the Sacrament, Carolostadius, Zuinglius, and
Oecolampadius, and all their disciples and followers, and have avoided their
company, and have no familiarity with them, either by letters, writings,
words, or deeds, as the Lord has commanded not to have with Heretics.Thus
much of Luther himself.

78. And now if we should prosecute the several judgments and Censures of all
others the most learned Lutherans, against Sacramentaries in this matter of
heresy, and namely against Caluinistes, who were of no reckoning in Luthers
days, for that their new heresy was but then a hatching, there would be no
end; and I should rather fill a large volume, then co^teine my self with in
the precincts of my brief intended Considerations. Let one or two of the
principal serve for all. Matthias Illyricus a great Lutheran Superintendent of
Saxony, and one of those four that compiled the lying Centuries, does in a
certain book, entitled, Desensio Consessionis Martinistarum, (or Luther
anorum) censure Caluinistarum Lyturgiam, the Lyturgy or service of the
Caluinists, not only for heretical, but to be Sacrilegious also: Et proh dolor
(says he) innumeras animas aeterno exitio inuoluere: And to inuolue (alas)
innumerable souls with everlasting perdition.

79. Franciscus Stancarus also, no mean Author, one of the Lutheran side,
writing to the King of Polonia in his days, pronounces confidently of all
those new professors under Calvin in Geneua, that they were Publici and
manifesti haeretici, notorious and manifest Heretics. And yet as though this
were little, the same Author in his book de Trinitate, prescribes this Caveat
to the Christian Reader, concerning Calvin (and would to God it were as well
remembered and practiced in the Universities of England, where young Deuines are
for the most part poisoned with the drugges and dregs of Caluins doctrine (my
heart bleedeth to think of it) before they can taste of the pure liquor of
Beware of John Calvin.
antiquity:) well the admonition is this: Cave Christian Lector etc. Beware
Christian Reader of the books of John Calvin especially in the articles of
Trinity, of the Incarnation, of the Mediator, of Baptism, of Predestination
etc. for that they do contain most impious, and blasphemous doctrine. So he.
Whereby is understood, not only the censure of the Lutheran Church, concerning
the Caluinists The Caluinists condemned for heretics by the Lutherans.
doctrine, but also in what articles the difference betwixt them does
principally consist: and these are neither few in number, nor mean in nature,
as you see, confirmed by the particular exceptions. Which articles are
reiterated by other Lutheran writers, as namely by Albertus Grauerus in his
book, entitled, The war of John Calvin with Jesus Christ, which book was
set forth in the year of our The war of John Calvin with Jesus Christ.
Redemption 1598. wherein he shows, that the Articles whereby the Lutherans do
chiefly differ from the Caluinists heretical doctrine, are of the person of
Christ, of the Supper of our Lord, of Baptism, and of Predestination. And
Iacobus Halbruneir another Lutheran Doctor, published an other book the same
year before, to prove Caluinisme to be heresy: and to the former articles of
Albertus, he adds other two, wherein Lutherans and Caluinists do deeply
dissent, which are, de Maiestate Christi, and Ministerio Verbi; whereby he
makes it evident, that Caluinists are truly and properly Heretics to
Lutherans. And this for the second point.

80. Yt rests now, that I come unto the third rank of English Protestants,
and Puritans, which are two different sects of Caluins doctrine which are found
together in no state or Kingdom perhaps of Christendom, but only in England.
And although some Protestant writers for dissembling their own divisions, when
they deal with Of the dissension and disagreement of Protestants and Puritans,
and whether they be he resies one to the other.
Catholics, will needs (forsooth) acknowledge them for brethren, as not
differing from them in any substantial point of Doctrine: yet in all their
other writings, either against them, or of them, they disclose plainly what
they think of each other, holding them both for Schismatics and Heretics, in
respect of their Protestant Church. Which being presumed by them (as they must
needs presume) to be the only true Catholic Church: it must needs follow,
that Puritans, who from their innermost souls detest the same and the
communion thereof, as Antichristian, must needs be Sectaries, nay Heretics
to that Church. And this is consonant to the doctrine of these Scriptures, and
most conformable to the opinion of ancient Fathers, as is before copiously in
the precedent Considerations asseuered.

82. For confirmation of which dissension capital, and real hostility,
between our Puritans and Protestants in sundry main points of their Religion,
I might here allege and produce infinite authorityes, and innumerable
arguments, if I should not surcharge my Treatise. The two books yet extant
printed by public authority, in one and the self same year, I mean the
Survey of the holy pretended Discipline, compiled, as it is thought, by him
that is now arrived to the highest pitch of Ecclesiastical dignity in that
Kingdom: and the other, bearing the inscription of dangerous Positions,
ascribed to Doctor Sutcliffe, both of them receiving press at London by John
Wolf, Anno Dom. 1593. do sufficiently notify unto the world, how
reconciliable the Puritan position is with the Protestant Religion, and that in
sundry Articles of great weight and moment. And amongst many others (which to
avoid prelixity I purposly omit) the titles of the 22. and 23. Chapters of the
Survey are these: That they (to wit the Puritans) do take from Christian
Princes, and ascribe unto their pretended regiment, the supreme and immediate
authority under Christ in causes Ecclesiastical, and in the oppugning theros
do join with the Papists. Whereupon I infer, that if this spiritual
Supremacy be any substantial point of doctrine amongst the Protestants, then
the obstinate repugnance thereof by the Puritans must needs be Schism and
Heresy.

82. I pretermit diverse other books whereof I have been an eye witness, how
purposely, and directly they treat of these matters, as namely the Answer of
the Vicechancelor and Doctors of Oxford unto the petition of a 1000. Puritans,
Anno Dom. 1603. wherein it is plainly convinced, that the Puritans hold their
platform of Ecclesiastical Answer page 20.
government, of the government of Christ upon earth, for a thing of no less
importance, then is the Gospel of Jesus Christ. They hold it further for an
essential part of their said Gospel, for a matter of faith, to be received
upon pain of damnation, for an essential mark of the true Church, without
the which the Protestants Church is no Church, their faith no faith, their
Gospel noe Gospel etc. And to conform to that which M. Rogers writes in
his Preface to the Bishops Articles, where he testifies that the Puritans do
hold their platform, differing from the Protestants, to be a special part of
the Gospel, yea the very Gospel it self, and to be of such importance, as
if every hair of their heads were a life, they ought to affoard them all in
defense thereof. So they. And in sober sadness, supposing their principles to be
true, have they not great reason, for that their differences be in so maine and
very substantial points, if we refere them to their heads, whereof there is
extant a very substantial declaration and conviction (as to me it seems) in
the Preface of the Catholic Divine in his answer to Sir Edward Cooks fifth
part of Reports, whither I refer the ingenous, and judicious Reader for
further perusal of this point: for there it is showed, and irrefragably,
against all impugners thereof, proved, how essential and substantial
difference of doctrine there is about the origin The different origin of
Ecclesiastical power in the Protestant, Puritan and Catholic Church.
of Ecclesiastical power, and authority between the Protestants, Puritans,
and Catholics of England; the one, that is the Protestant, ascribing it to
their temporal Prince; the other challenging it, as most properly pertaining
to their private Conuenticles and Assemblies: the last and third to the
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, the consequence whereof is this, that
whosoever of the three parties have the right in this point, there only is the
true Church, there alone is the true Ecclesiastiall Authority of preaching,
teaching, or dayning Ministers, administering Sacraments, exercising Censures,
and Jurisdiction, binding or loosing, remitting or retaining sins, and the
like etc. And for the other two Churches, they do remain as secular and
profane Congregations, without any vital spirit of Ecclesiastical power at
all. Let them then contend never so much about the keys of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: yet the plain truth is, they shall never be able to open or shut
the gates of heaven, unto their own friends, or against their enemies.

83. And for as much as the Puritans also in their plea, do persuade themselves
to have the right on their side, Barorwes book etc. Perpetual government of
the Church.
they must needs infer the other consequence against the Protestant Church,
houlding it to be no Church, as the foresaid answer of Oxford Doctors page 15.
does confess that the Brownists do ancrre against the^, saying: The Brownists
do confidently reproach us, that our Church is no Church, our Sacraments no
Sacraments, our Prince and people Infidells, as not being baptized at all, our
Christian Congregations profane multitudes etc. Thus write they, animated as
say these Answerers, by the Millenary Puritan Petitioners, whereby it may be
probably presumed, that they also, to wit, the said thousand Petitioners (in
most points at least) are of the same opinion.

84. These things being so, as no man of modesty can deny, my demand is; how
can these men, differing in so main a point, be of the same Church? Or how can
any man of the meanest understanding, so he have any capacity at all, imagine
how these and the Protestants can be saved together? Nay truly the book
entitled, The picture of a Puritan, licenced to come forth by authority Anno
1605. containing a comparison of the opinions of the Anabaptists in Germany
with those The Puritans excommunicated as schismatickes and Heretics by the
Protestants.
of the Puritans in England, in Dialogue wise, between an English man and a
German: this book, I say does pregnantly prove, that the Protestants do hold
the Puritans, not only for Schismatickes and Sectaries, but for Heretics
also, as the Anabaptists are: yea the Author holds them far worse then the
Anabaptists: Your Ana baptists (says he) come not near to our Puritans, in
pride and contempt etc. And then he proceeds in comparing and paralleling
them as well in their opinions, and use of Sacraments, as in many other points
of Religion with the said Anabaptists most damned heretics, as all English
Protestants themselves generally acknowledge them to be: yea this Author called
O. O. Emanuel aggrauates the point so much against them, that he compares them
with Jews and other such like Infidells. And every where throughout his whole
discourse, detecteth and censureth them for obstinate, and wicked Sectaries.
And finally to wast no more labor in a matter so clear, I find them ipso
sacto excommunicated by many Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical of the
Bishops and Protestant Church of England; Constitut. Can. 4. 56. Can. 7. 8.
Can. 9. 10. and 12.
as namely for impugning their Church, as also the Rites and Ceremonies
established in the said Church; for denying the authority of their Archbishops,
Bishops, their consecrating and ordering of the inferior Clergy, for denying
of Deanes and Collegiate Churches, for being Authors of Schism, and
separating themselves as Schismatickes, for maynteyning of Constitutions made
in Conuenticles, and the like.

75. And to conclude, every where almost throughout the same Constitutions,
they are sharply censured for Sectaries and Schismatics: which censure
proceeding from the Protestant Church with so full a stroke of authority must
of necessity in their own judgment deprive the others of all means of
salvation in that Church, they standing out with pertinacy against the same, as
they do: and consequently this doom must needs fall upon one of their
heads, that the Protestants, and they can in no case be saved together.

The fifth Consideration, With the Conclusion of this whole Chapter to his
Majesty.
NOW therefore to return with all humble obedience and loyalty unto your
Matie, containing my self within all due, and just bounds of duty, fidelity,
observance, obedience, subjection, and submission, which either the law of God,
of Nature, of Nations, Reason, Religion, or of my own native Country can
require of a subject toward his Dread Sovereign: I do even from my innermost,
and hartiest affections, implore this one thing of your said Excellency, and
must ever persist to beg it at your Highness hands; to wit that after these
foresaid premised Considerations to the Reader, your own Princely Person would
deigne to condescend to enter into some serious Consideration, and mature
deliberation, and that with some earnest attention, within the secret closet of
your own most wise, judicious, and understanding heart, what is, and may be the
great consequence of all this that has been hither so generally discoursed
of, in the main body of the whole: as also to weigh and ponder the weight and
importance of each particular treated, and inferred in their several passages.

87. And first, may it please your Highness to lay together, English
Protestants do not make one part often of those Christians which co^de^ne the
for heretics.
and compare the several parts, and distinct pertyes of different Professions
in Religion, all dissenting from the English Protestant Church, and doctrine
therein established, as before has been sufficiently proved. The instances we
bring for a plenary, and particular confirmation, are these: As first the ROMAN
Catholics which possess the greatest part of Europe. Secondly, the Lutherans
professing throughout Saxony, Denmark, Suecia, and some other States in
Germany. Thirdly the Sacramentaries, Zuinglians, and rigid Caluinists, termed
by us for their moteferue^t supposed zeal, Puritans, and these be dispersed
throughout Suitzerland, Sauoy, Germany, Hungary, France, Holland, and Scotland,
and some parts of England. All these, I say, conioined together, and compared
only with the English Parliament Protestants, do make often parts of
Christendom nine at the least: which proportion, or rather disproportion, as
indeed it is, especially in Religion, when I seriously consider, and weigh it
in the even and impartial balance of an indifferent judgment, I can in all
duty do no less, but most humbly propose unto the Christian Prudency and
Religious Piety of your Matie, to consider of what importance this is, in
regard of life everlasting, that nine parts of ten should hold the English
Protestant religion for damnable heresy, by which your Matie expects to
receive an eternal and neuersading crown of glory, awarded by Almighty God
the most righteous judge of all the world.

88. If in a sumptuous, and Royal banquet prepared of purpose to intertaine
the person of a King, or potent Monarch, there were never so many pleasing and
alluring dishes, never such great store of delicate viandes, fetched from the
sea, or provided by land, never so great appetite in the Princely party
invited, if often learned Physicians that were then present, attending upon the
person of this Prince to consult, and provide for his bodily health and
welfare, nine of them should confidently avouch upon their learning and
judgment, nay life it self Two important Considerations.
that all those daynties, and pleasing dishes were infected with the drugges of
some mortal, and deadly-killing poison, some one dish only excepted, which
they could not also well discover; I think it would make the party invited to
look about him, to stay himself, and examine well the matter, before he would
desperately adventure to please his palate. Or if in a great suite of law,
concerning the interest to a Princely inheritance pretended by the plaintiff,
it should be either by Parliament or under the great Seal, or by some other
Statute enacted, yea, and without fail executed, that if the plaintiff failed
in his suite, being either driven to non-suite, or overcome in his suite, that
then he should undergo extreme misery, be exposed to infinite calamities, most
certaynely incur everlasting bondage and slavery; though some one lawyer of
ten that were of his counsel, should animate, and give him all the
encouragement that possibly he could, to proceed in his suite: yet if the nine
other of equal worth and weight with him should be of contrary opinion,
dissuade him from the suite, assuring him upon their learning, that he would be
cast in the same, yea and condemned, if he proceeded therein, would not this
man now begin to consider more seriously of his suite intended? Of his right
pretended? Would he not view over, and over his writings? examine all his
evidences again and again, least in aspiring to be made for ever, he chance
for ever to be undone? Eue^ so the case stands in the point we have in hand.
Here is a royal banquet provided for your Princely Majesty, here is a Princely
inheritance indeed, an incorruptible Diadem of glory, prepared for your
Excellency: this banquet is not to continue for an hundred and fourscore
days, as that of Assuerus did, to set forth the majesty of an earthly Hester.
1.
Monarch, but it endures for ever and ever, throughout all eternity, to
disclose the honor, and power, and glory and riches of the heavenly Diety, and
divine Omnipotency: the food of this banquet is neither earthly nor material,
but heavenly and spiritual, Agnus occisus ab origin mundi: It is the lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, that is to be set and served on this
table, nay, Deus est qui nobis 1. Cor. 15 28.
futurus est omnia in ommbus: It is Almighty God himself, who will then, as S.
Paul teaches, become unto us all in all, that is all in the eye for our
vision, and all in the taste for our refection, and all in the touch for our
fruition, all in the ear of our consolation, and all in our smell for
delectation; in a word, all in the senses of our body, and all in the faculties
of our soul, Deus omnia in omnibus, for our plenary perfection.

89. Besides this banquet, there is a Princely Inheritance, and an
incorruptible Crown of glory prepared for your Matie, and this Crown so far
excels all earthly Crowns, as immortal exceeds mortal, incorruptible
corruptible; in a word, as far as God excels man, and a thing infinite
surmounteth a thing finite, betwixt all which there can be no proportion: and
is there not cause now, that your Matie should beware of the poison of Heresy
that kills both body and soul? And will not your zealous and religious Heart
hereafter peruse over all forged writings, and never cease searching, until
you have found the evidences of the Catholic Church, whereby your Matie can
only lay claim to this Crown of immortality.

90. And this is all that we your Maiestyes humble subjects, and servants do in
our daily sighs, tears, and prayers to Almighty God beg at his hands; to
wit, that our gracious God would of his merciful goodness, vouchsafe so to
inspire your Princely heart with the principal spirit, that you may once at the
least come to make this reflection upon the course that you are in now,
concerning Religion. Then should you easily discover the frauds and impostures
of the Protestant cause: Then should you disclose the poisoned. and inuenomed
druggs of their erroneous opinions, whereby they would insect both the body, and
the soul of your Princely Person (suspecting no guile, fearing no such
treachery) and that to your everlasting destruction. Lastly then should you
desery how false, and counterfeit their evidences are, concerning Religion, and
that they can never hold plea for the foresaid Princely inheritance, whereunto
your Noble Person is interessed.

91. Your Majesty was borne amongst the Protestants, as S. Augustine
compassionately complained of diverse borne amongst the Donatists, and thereby
you could not but receive that impression, that was infused, and instilled into
you by your first educators, and thereby you have been made (as I trust) rather
credens Haereticis, then Haereticus, as the same Father said of his friend
Honoratus. Your Majesty is earnest now against the Catholic Roman faith, and
professors thereof, and so was I my self too once, and so was S. Augustine,
whilst he was a Manichean, and so was that great Apostle S. Paul, persuading
himself no doubt, that he ought, yea that he should do God good service,
persecuting that Act. 26. 9.
way of Christian profession, until God had opened his eyes, and enlightened
his mind to see the erroneous course, wherein he then was.

92. And now may it please your Matie to consider of this one reason, which
though it be the last, yet is it not the least, viz. that so many of your
Maties loyal Subjects, men of considerable birth, worth, and quality, yea and
some of them such, that have spent much precious time, and have been content to
exhaust their Patrimonies in your Noble Universities, and all in the pursuit
of learning and truth of Christian Religion: these men, I say, having now just
reason to expect some preferment with other their equals, after their long
wearisome labors and endeauours, would not so suddenly change their minds, as
they do daily in this point of Religion, forgo all future hopes and fortunes,
abandon Country, kith and kin, expose themselves to all temporal
difficulties and losses, The daily conversion of so many learned men in England.
and that without constraint of any, even voluntarily: and after all this to be
ready to shed their blond, and sacrifice their innocent lives for their
Resolution made, concerning Religion: all which they could never do, were it
not that a higher hand than human, even the hand of heaven leads them into
the bosom of the Church; were it not upon the force, and efficacy of evident
truth, when it pleases almighty God so to inlighten their understanding, as in
the midst and thickest of the darkness of heresy, to show them the only and
alone saving Catholic Truth and Church, as also to frame their wills, and
inflame their affections, to yield all obedience thereunto, notwithstanding any
obstacles whatsoever.

93. Alas (my dread Sovereign) what is Rome to us English men that we should
so mind it? Or the Church of Rome that we should much affect it? Or the Pope of
Rome that we should so highly honor him? were it not that Rome ever was, is,
and shall be the Chair of S. Peter: the present faith of Rome the former faith
of S. Peter: were it not that this converted our Island, this Church first
planted the Christian faith in our Island, this Bishop from time to time
repaired, renewed, and continued the decaying faith in our Island: In a word,
were it not that all that separate themselves from this head and origin of
unity in the Christian Church, are as beams cut of from the sun, as boughs
violently broken down from the tree, as Cyprian. l. de unit. Eccles.
channels and streams divided from their fountain, which must needs dry up,
wither and consume to nothing. This is the sole cause my Liege Lord, that Rome
is so near and dear unto us: the Bishop of Rome so honored by us: the faith
of Rome so received of us. This is (may it please your Matie) the only cause of
our sudden change, and constant resolution in Region.

94. And in all this we have not justly offended the King our Sovereign: let
heavens Tribunal be witness of our innocence, and we must against all
detractions, and calumniations of our unjust adversaries plead yt also before
your Matie. And this same change in like manner will I hope, and pray for, in
your Majesty; and with this hope will I for this time again dutifully depart
from your Highness, and pass to the Christian Reader to examine now in
particular the four heads most Prudently, and Religiously proposed, and
resolved upon by your Matie. The God of Solomon inspire into your Princely
breast the wisdom of Solomon, and make your Matie as an Angel of god, that
you may discern betwixt the right hand and the left, the right and the wrong,
Catholic Religion, and Heretical innovation: that you may be able to put a
difference betwixt those of your Subjects that serve God, and such as fear him
not.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, THAT TREATS THE FIRST HEAD TOVCHED BY THE KINGS MAJESTY,
for try all of a Christian Catholic: which is, the believing of holy
Scriptures.
AMONGST those principal grounds seriously acknowledged, and confide^tly, yet
religiously auerred by his Excellent Matie of England, for testifying, and
conuincing himself to be a Christian Catholic King and no Heretic, the
first in place, and order of method, if we duly respect the inestimable weight
of the divine, and heavenly subject, was zealously asseuered by his Royal
Person in these very words following, to wit: As for the Scriptures, no man
doubts I will believe them: but even for the Apocrypha, Premonit. page 36.
I hold them in the same account that the Ancients did. Which pious assertion
of his Matie I for my part believe with all my heart, and be it ever far from
me to imagine otherwise of my Sovereign, in intertayning any the least sinister
opinion or suspicion, but that He gives his full consent and assent unto all
God his sacred Writ, which He esteems to be Canonical Scriptures, and that
He reuerenceth in like manner the other (as here he says) distinguishing them
by the names of Apocripha, as writings compiled by good, and holy men, but yet
for such, as are secundae lectionis or ordinis and not Canonical, or
sufficient (for so are his Majesty's Premonit. page 36.
words) whereupon alone to ground any article of faith, except it be confirmed
by some other place of Canonical Scripture. So his Majesty does piousty, I
doubt not, and with great discretion in his sense auerre.

2. But yet I must ingenuously confess, that employing my self somewhat
seriously in my private meditatio^s and most secret silence, about this
subject, many difficulties occurred, and diverse were the Considerations that
presented themselves unto me, as my mind began to be somewhat earnesty bent
about this business: and these I have thought good to impart unto the Christian
Reader in this place, as they ensue.

The first Consideration.
AND first, if this were all, and that on Scriptures behalf there were no more
to be required to prove, and make a man a Christian Catholic, but a frank
and ingenious The believing of Scriptures not sufficient to make a man a
Catholic.
acknowledgement to assent unto, and to believe all those Scriptures which we
deem for Canonical in our opinion, and for the sense to judge it agreeable
and correspondent to our own private imaginations: I say, if this were all, all
controversies of Religion betwixt all parties never so opposite and different
in opinion might easily (no doubt) surcease, and speedily without either
further delay or difficulty, be accorded, for that all sides and parties do
freely and voluntarily offer to profess this point, and that as I verily
think from their hearts.

4. But (alas) this is neither all, nor any sound part of all: all is but we
deem, and we judge this is Scripture, and this is the sense: here is nothing
in all, but that which marreth all, and that in the very maine point which
should make all, and that is proper choice, private election, which we know by
that which has been formerly treated, and sufficiently proved, must needs be
heresy, and consequently this main ground of Scripture it self thus from our
selves taken, and thus laid for avoiding of heresy, opens the very main gap
unto all heresy. And yet I must here (though now with no small grief, and
vexation of spirit, I do remember it,) liberally acknowledge, that for some
years together (when I framed Religion in the shop of my own brain, proper
invention, and private glosses, as An example of the Authors case himself.
all Sectaries usually do) I was so heartily affected, sincerely (as I thought)
delighted, yea as it were ravished with this alluring consideration, and best
pleasing persuasion of Sacred Scriptures alone, whose sole authority I seemed
to my self then to follow, and no other humane or terrene motive whatsoever,
no not so much as once reflecting back upon the authority of the Church
(whence as I received the Scriptures themselves, so much more ought I to have
received the sense) as I thought my self more then half in heaven, when God
knows I was ready to tumble into the pit of hell, thinking this way of the
Scriptures alone of all other ways, the most infallible, and so certain, as
that I could not possibly err thereby.

5. And being in this peremptory presuming vein, and strain of Scriptures, to
add as it were fuel unto the fire of this my strong conceipted imagination, I
often times remembered, and with wonderful admiration repeated, yea reiterated
again and again that animous, courageous heroical sentence and speech of
Apostolical, and Prophetical fortitude (as to me it then seemed) of Luther
himself, who alleging Scriptures for his cause, and contemning all other
proofs, thus triumphantly insulted over King Henuy the eight: Hic sto, hic
sedeo, hic glorior, hic triumpho, Luther. l. cont. Rege^ Angliae. f. 342. tom.
1.
hic insulto etc. Here I stand, here I sit, here I do glory, here I do triumph,
here I do insult over Papists, Thomists, Henricistes, and Sophistes, and all
the gates of hell, much more over the sayings of men, be they never so holy.
The stra^g presu^ptuous speech of Luther.
God his word is above all: the divine Matie makes for me: so as I pass not
if a thousand Augustines, a thousand Cyprians, and a thousand King Henry's
Churches should stand against me. God cannot err, nor deceive, but Augustines
and Cyprians may err, and have erred. So he.

6. And truly this bold kind of free speech affected me very much as then,
for that it seemed to me simply to proceed out of the exceeding great
confidence of his cause, and me thought that I felt and perceived some part,
and measure of the same spirit in my self at that time, which brought me also
to this peremptory resolution, to wit, that whatsoever I spoke forth of
Scriptures, or could make but the least show of words and warrant for out of
Gods holy book, that must needs be true, certain and infallible, in the very
self same sense that I speak it, and could not possibly, no not by men, or
Angels be controlled. The same spirit also did I observe in many others of my
brethren of the English Ministry, who in like manner, and some of them with
great zeal, grounded themselves upon Scriptures, even as I did; which
concurrence in opinion did not a little confirm me in this my own headstrong
imagination.

7. But afterward upon better insight of matters many occurrences, and
circumstances of no small importance for the shaking and ruinating of this
false and tottering foundation, interposed themselves to the view of my
understanding: and these greatly calmed this fervor of mine and abated the
edge of my appetite unto the bare letter of the Scripture, and my own
Commentaries thereupon.

8. For first I found, that even Luther himself, that did thus confidently
triumph upon alleging of Scripture against Luther not ever believed by us,
although he cite the Scriptures
all ancient Fathers, Thomists, Sophists, Henricistes, and the like, is not
admitted nor followed by our English Church, in many of his maine positions of
Religion, though we of England did, and do hold him for a great Saint, a
flying Angel, one that had Primitias spiritus the prime spirit of the new
Protestant Gospel: whereupon I have heard some that have presumed in their
popular pulpit declamations, amidst their own Sectaries to inuest him with the
title of a fifth Evangelist: I say, he is not believed by us, though he cite
never so many Scriptures, and never so confidently in sundry weighty positions
and controversies now in hand, as namely about the Real presence wherein he
most of all pretended, yea and had indeed founded himself upon clear and
evident Scriptures. And is it any marvel, when heresy departing from unity,
must needs breed variety, and cause diversity between the Sect-maister and
the Sectaries? the Father of innovation and the followers? the author of
Schism and the mantainers? the inuentors of novelties and the imbracers
thereof? Let us hear what old Tertullian says to the same above 1400. years
ago, when heresies were yet but young and as it were in their infancy. Mentior
(says he) si non etiam aregulis suis variant inter se, dum vnusquisque proinde
suo arbitrio modulatur quae accepit, quemadmodum de suo arbitrio eadem
composuit De praescript. cap. 42.
ille qui tradit. Agnoscit naturam suam, and originis suae morem prosectus rei.
Idem licuit Valentinianis, quod Valentino, idem Marcionitis, quod Marcioni de
abitrio suo fidem innouare. Denique penitus inspectae haereses omnes in multis
cum Auctoribus suis dissentientes deprehenduntur. I am deceived, if they do not
yet differ from their own rules amongst themselves, whilst every man therefore
tuneth the things which he received after his own fashion, as the author
delivered them according to his fancy. The issue of the thing agniseth her
nature and argues the manner of her origin. The same is lawful for the
Valentinians, that was lawful for Valentinus, and for the Marcionites, that
was lawful for Marcion to bring in an innovation in Religion at their
pleasure. To conclude, all heresies being thoroughly looked into, are found in
many things to dissent from the first Authors and broachers of them. Hitherto
Tertullian. Can any more effectually prescription be made, then this, against
the Heretics of our days? Do they not seem to express and present the
conditions and qualities of their ancient progenitors and forerunners? This
then was my first cogitation, that albeit our English Protestants did well
allow and admire that insolency in Luther of pressing Scriptures never so madly
understood, against Catholics: yet when he urged never so clear Scriptures
against themselves, and their opinions, they reject and contemn both him and
his Scriptures.

9. Secondly, I considered that when the Devil tempted Christ he came not
without his Scriptum est, he had the Word for his warrant, and therefore the
less I meruailed Abuse of Scriptures by Heretics.
that all Sectaries and Heretics, from the very first foundation of Christan
Religion, had principally founded themselves, and their heresies upon pretense
of Scripture, as may appear by the several works of all the ancient Fathers,
that confuted them: Frequentes sunt in citandis Scripturis (says Tertullian:)
they are frequent in citing Scriptures. They run over the Law, Psalms,
Prophets, Ghospells, Epistles and the residue of holy Scripture with great
facility (says Vincentius Lyrinensis) and even in compitis and conuiuijs, in
market places and banquets, amongst their own Sectaries, amongst strangers,
privately, publicly in Cont. haer. cap. 35. See the place, it is well worth the
reading.
their books, in sermons, will they be full of Scriptures: Nihil vmquam pene
de suo proserunt, quod non etiam Scripture verbis adumbrare conentur: they
bring nothing in manner of their own, which they shadow not and cloak with
some Scripture or other, (not unlike our London Dames, and the wives of other
great Towns and Cytties at this day. I had almost added Shrewsbury.) Omnes
tument etc. all of them swell with pride, all of them promise knowledge, they
are perfect Catechistes before they can their alphabet, Ipsae mulieres De
praescript. c. 4.
hereticae quam procaces, quae audeant docere, contendere, etc. their very
heretical women how saucy, and malepert they are, which dare teach, contend
etc. So Tertullian. And then further as S. Nazianzen before alleged well
notes, these heretical Scripturians running over all the corpse of sacred
Writ, nay galloping over the whole field of the Scriptures, as though the whole
were but a horserase, they do here and there, vno verbo vel altero, tamquam
veneni gutt a inficiunt, with a word or two (of false exposition) as with a
drop of poison, infect the whole, perverting the true faith of Christ by their
false sense of the Scripture, and that to their own damnation, and damnation
of their followers, as the Apostle S. Peter does signify.

10. Thirdly, I considered that not only the ancient Heretics, but also the
modern Schismatickes and Sectaries of our time, did by the one and the same
spirit appeal to the tribunal of Scriptures, and that both generally against
Controversies grow endless by appealing only to Scriptures
those of the Roman belief, and particulerly among themselves, the one against
the other, as Lutherans against Sacramentaries, and Sacramentaries against
Anabaptists, and those against these, and every Sectary against his fellow, and
all directly against God, his Church, and his Truth. And though each Sectary
profess to allege Scripture, and pretends neither to build upon the sands
nor upon the shore of private fancy, or his own unstable judgment, but upon
the main rock of God his word: yet Heresies grow on all sides, and thereupon
controversies become endless and interminable. I remember not long since, that
lighting upon a little book of the Anabaptists, I fell upon thirty places of
plain Scripture, and every one of these places seemed by the externe letter,
to make perspicuously for the aforsaid Anabaptists, and their heresies, which
yet in England we do condemn, and consequently do hold all those places of
Scriptures to be misalledged, abused, and falsely interpreted by them, be they
never so many, seem they never so plain or pregnant.

11. But here I would demand of any ingenious Protestant how the Anabaptist
can ever be convinced of his heresies by any grounds of Protestant Religion?
Will the Protestant appeal him to the Scripture? The Anabaptist can produce
more texts, and allege more plentiful places of Scripture, then he can. Will
he refer the interpretation of the places cyted on both sides to the spirit?
The Anabaptist presently presumes and braggeth of a greater measure of the
spirit then he. Will the Protestant accuse his spirit, as erroneous, and
author of a wrong interpretation, as 3. Reg. 22. 20. 21. 22. 23
Micheas truly charged the false Prophets of Iezabel, when he could them that
Satan had offered unto Almighry God, that he would go forth, and be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all Achabs false prophets? Then will he reply again, as
Zidkiah did, And when departed the spirit of the Lord from me to Ib. v. 24.
speak in thee? Will he convent him before the Consistory, and sribunall of
the Protestant Church, and Bishops thereof, as diverse have been, and were burned
by them? The Anabaptist presently complayneth, and in this very justly, that,
it is no indifferent kind of trial to be judge in their own cause. Finally
will the Protestant remit it to the vmpiring of any other present Church, or be
content that all Controversies betwixt them shall fall to the decision of the
Fathers? The Anabaptist kicketh against that, and cutteth of all means of
trial with this text of Scripture, Spiritualis ^. Cor. 2. 25.
homo omnia dijudicat, and ipse a nemine iudicatur. The spiritual man judges
all things, and needs not to be judged of any. Thus we see even amongst
Sectaries themselves, Controversies grow endless by Scriptures, though all
pretend to believe Scriptures, and plentifully to cite the same.

12. Moreover where the Puritans actio^ in England swaicth most, as very
usually in good towns and great cities it does: there shall you find all their
Preachers of this humor, they have nothing in their mouths but the Gospel
of Christ, the Gospel of Christ, the pure Word of the Lord, as though their
false and corrupted Geneuia^ Translation were either part of the Gospel or
Word of God. And they seem so far forth to confide to their English
translation, as that they affect to allege Scriptures only, putting one upon
the neck of an other, disdayning as it were to quote any Father or ancient
writer for interpretation of Scriptures or confirmation of their doctrine,
esteeming their own expositions, though never so vain and impertinent, to be
firm grounds for building any thing thereon, as out of the Scriptures.

13. And here I remember that not many months past perusing privately with my
self the foresaid book of O. O. Emanuel, written by a Protestant against the
Puritans Scriptures ridiculously alleged by the Puritan.
he among other things discovers unto the German, with whom he makes his
Dialogue, some 15. several places of Scripture, so falsely, and impertinently
alleged by Puritan writers, that the German is enforced to conclude, Thus I
see already how ridiculous they are. And verily he that shall read the places
alleged, and weigh them with any judgment, will confess that they are
ridiculously applied indeed, and yet with their followers all must be
Scriptures which they speak, and the pure word of God uttered by the instinct
of the spirit, be it never so fantastically or fanatically applied.

14. Well then, to come to the Conclusion, when I saw, and considered all
this, and had weighed the same, with that indifferency of judgment that I
possibly could, as, in a matter so much impotting my soul, it stood me upon; I
began first to suspect this spirit of Luther, that auerred so confidently his
assurance of the Scriptures, and true understanding thereof, against a thousand
Cyprians, a thousand Augustines, having no other ground thereof, then his own
particular persuasion to that effect: which persuasion notwithstanding was, and
is in many points, held and proved to be erroneous, by such as followed his
breach, and namely by the Church of England: in which I saw many that rejected
him, to be as confident in their own persuasion, and to auerre for Scriptures,
and the true Word of God, whatsoever themselves did found out of the Bible in
their own sense, and consequently I did infer, as a most certain sequel,
that this profession of admitting, believing or following Scriptures, each man
out of his own sense and judgment, without any certain rule, band, or limit
of exposition, cannot be sufficient to prove a man a Christian Catholic, and
no Heretic, for that it may open the way to be an Heretic, if his choice of
interpretation be erreneous. And thus much of this first Consideration. There
follows the second.

The second Consideration.
WHEN Almighty God of his infinite goodness and mercy, after that immeasurable
space of eternity, wherein the Blessed Trinity had reigned, and gloryously That
Scriptures were not written for many years after their Church began.
triumphed without any creatures, condescended to make a world, and to create
man, and consequently vouchsafed thereby to institute a visible society,
company, or Church upon earth, to acknowledge, serve, and honor him leaving
unto them sufficient directions whereby they might accomplish their service to
him, and thereby to arrive to the haven of happiness: the same most wise God
governed the said Church for more then two thousand years, without any written
word, that is now extant. And after this large space, when it pleased the
Divine Majesty, that the history of the worlds creation, man's propagation etc.
should be committed to writing for the benefit of succeeding posterity, he
stirred up that great governor of his people, and Prophet Moses, enabled him
with a great measure of his principal, and prophetical spirit, inspired him,
and then appointed him to compyle those famous books commonly called in Greek
Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible, to wit, Genesis the book of
creation, Exodus the book of their departure out of Egypt, Leuiticus the book
of Priests and Sacrifices, Numeri the book of numbering the people, and
Deuteronomy the book of the laws repetition.

16. In like manner the same God, whose pleasure was ever to be with the sons
of men, houlding the high hand of his divine providence over his Church,
inspired likewise and appointed others also after the example of Moses, holy
men, to compose and write other books afterward upon diverse, and sundry
occasions offered, as in the old Tement may be seen. But yet we shall not
find, that any of those books of Moses, or any of the rest, that were written
by the other Authors were digested, and collected in manner, and method of
orderly institutions, as in all other arts, and sciences is wont to be done,
but rather by peecemeale, and by parts as occasion fell out, the Authors thereof
principally intending an historical narration, rather then any exact
doctrinall instruction: and the reason is this, for that the ordinary
institution, and instruction of How Scriptures were first. written.
every man how he ought to believe, live, fear, and serve God, was for all
this time (before the law written) to be taken only from the Church by
traditions of Fathers to their children: and after the said law was written,
also every man, and woman was not remitted promiscuously, hand over head, to
the reading of those books: but he was sent to take his instruction, and
institution from the ordinary Superiors, Doctors, Governors of that Church and
these were to expound the law unto him. For which direction, and tradition we
find this warrant and commanding, yea prescribing authority, Ask thy Fathers,
and Deuteronomy.. 2. 7.
they will tell thee, thy elders, and they will declare unto thee. Again, The
lipes of the Priest preserve knowledge. And yet in a third place I know that
Abraham will demand and teach his sons, and househould, Genesis 18. 19.
that they walk in my ways etc.

17. And now to come from the law to the Gospel, from Moses unto Christ, and
so to proceed orderly with the history of the Church: as God is no changling,
but ever like himself, even so the beginning, proceeding, establishing of the
new Christian faith, and Church, was not much unlike, if not altogether
resembling the former. For first this Church was planted by our Savior at
Jerusalem and speedily by the industrious ministry of the holy Apostles,
assisted by the instinct of the holy Ghost, spread over the face of the earth:
and yet neither the Church, nor the Apostles, the principal pillars of the
Church, had as at this time any written instruction or methodicall institution
delivered unto them, concerning their teaching, preaching, or believing, except
only the articles of the Creed, delivered by tradition in the Church, as will
appear in the subsequent Considerations. Secondly, the institution that they
had, they received it by instruction from our Savior his mouth, and from the
immediate instinct, suggestion and inspiration of the holy Ghost; who was
promised by Christ himself (who could not lie, nor deceive) to assist the
Church continually unto the worlds end: and by this institution, and
inspiration alone Matt. 23. 20.
they taught, and converted both Jews, and Gentiles, instituted Churches,
establishing laws and orders of life by word of mouth, and tradition only from
hand to hand before any thing of the new testament was committed to writing.
And this was the condition of the Church for some years, and that in the
infancy and purity of Christian Religion, as the Protestant must perforce
confess. Thirdly, when the Wisdom of heaven thought it expedient, that
something should be written, the first thing committed unto writing in the new
Testament, was the Gospel of S. Matthew, and this was collected, and digested
in that very order, as it is now presented to the Church, and that some eight
years after the ascension of our Savior: then the Gospel of S. Mark some
five years after that: and then that of S. Luke written twelve years after
the former, wherein diverse things omitted in the other Gospel of are
recorded. And last of all was written the Gospel of S. John, containing in it
many great, and important matters, which are not found in any of the rest: and
this was not written of 66. years after the first visible Christian Church was
planted, and established by the coming of the holy Ghost.

18. And now as all the rest were written upon particular The Church continued
many years without written Scriptures
occasions, so especially was this famous Gospel of S. John, which is the
very key, opening the door unto the understanding of all the rest, and
particulerly upon the occasion of Ebion, and Cerinthus their heresy, which
impugned the Divinity of the Son of God. Whereupon I do infer, that for
that which concerns the new Testament, the Church was for diverse years
without any Scriptures at all: and for 66. years (which is the age of a man)
the points related by S. John more then were uttered in the other Ghospells
(which are many and most important) were received and believed in the Church by
tradition only. And now for Conclusion of all, I would demand but one thing
of the Protestants, that make such show of appealing unto Scriptures, and the
Primitive Apostolical Church: and this was demanded above 1400. years ago by
S. Irenaus before cyted, who lived in the very next Iren. lib. 3. cont. har.
cap. 4.
age after the Apostles upon the very like occasion: Sineque Apostoli
Scripturas reliquissent nobis etc. If the Apostles had left unto us no
Scriptures at all, yet ought not we to follow that order of tradition, which
they left to those to whom they committed their Churches? So that holy Bishop
and Martyr: especially ought we not to follow that order of tradition, since
the true worship of God, and the saving doctrine of the Gospel of Christ
continued for 2000. years in the time of the law, and for many other years in
the days of the Gospel; and that in the breast of the Church, to be delivered
by tradition only without the help of any word written?

19. Whereby we cannot but discern, and must acknowledge that Scriptures or the
written word of God, were not so absolute necessary for the revealing of God
his will unto man kind, and the continuing of man in that saving knowledge of
him: but that his Divine Majesty might have propagated, and preserved his
doctrine, and man in the truth by tradition only of word of mouth, without any
Scriptures at all, if it had so pleased him, as he did for many ages and
generations together, both before the first great diluge by water, in the
days of our first Patriarchs, until Abraba^ his time, whom he chose for the
head of his people: as also afterward when he directed the same people by
like tradition, as well in Egypt, where they remained in most cruel bondage
for 400. years, as else where, before Moses wrote his forenamed books. And
the like he might have done with Christians to the worlds great general
consummation and last inundation by a flood of fire (according to S. Irenaeus
his sentence) if he had listed, as having instituted a more orderly, exact, and
authorized Church; yea, and having endued it with greater privileges,
according to the perfection of the new law, above the old, then he had done
unto the former of the Jews. Whereupon it must needs follow by force of
necessary consequence, that the tradition of this Church, and pure authority
thereof, both in propounding Scriptures unto us, and discerning the same which
are truly Scriptures, and which are not, as also for delivering unto us the
true sense, and meaning thereof in their interpretation, and exposition, is much
more to be respected by us then was that of the Jews. Forasmuch as Christ our
Savior promised the continual assistance of his spirit unto this Church, and
that in such measure, as that it should alone be able to withstand all the
infernal power of Satan, and the gates of hell, idest, the very entrance of
all kind of error, or herely into it whatsoever.

20. These then, that never so solemnly and never so How Heretics do handle
Scripturs.
confidently profess that they for their parts do believe, and follow the
Scriptures, without due reference, or respect to the Church, for so much as all
Sectaries, and Heretikcs, that are no Catholic Christians do profess the
same, as has been already evidently showed, that is to say, they will openly
bear the world in hand, that they build their whole Religion upon the maine
foundation of the Scriptures: whereas notwithstanding it is out of question that
they rather build upon their own idle heads and fanaticall spirits; for so much
as they deduce their acknowledgement of Scriptures, and the interpretation
thereof from their own brain, sense, and private fancy, and not from any more
stable authority at all.

21. This is made evident, and perspicuous, if we exnmine any the least sect,
or sectary in the world, or compare many of sundry sects together, for that
every one of them, though as opposite among themselves, as heaven and hell,
light and darkness, God and Beliall: yet will all pretend to build upon God his
word, all will appeal unto Scriptures, the Lutheran, Caluiuist, Anabaptist,
Brownist, Protestant, and every other sectary: but when you tie them to the
point, bring them to the examination of the Scriptures, question them
concerning these two particulers, to wit, which is Scripture, and how it is to
be understood, then do they appear in the lively colors of Heretics, then
do they discover their own heretical fancies to be both all, and the chief
grounds, that ever they had to build their religion upon, as by the ensuing
Considerations will better appear in both the heads before touched.

The third Consideration.
IF the Oracle of the Prophets, and Apostles, the divine Writ, I mean so
called, because the holy Scriptures were written by the ministry of
Prophetical, and Apostolical men, be in their own nature of that sublime
excellency, and transcendent eminency, as has been formerly How to know what
is truly Scripture.
decyphered and discovered unto us: If the authority of the said sacred Writ be
not humane, but divine, not the word of any mortal man, nor proceeding from any
earthly spirit, but the word of the immortal God, breathed no^ his heavenly
spirit: and consequently, if it be not in it self most holy, sacred, sure,
certain, and of infallible truth; then let us assuredly know, that as on the
one side, it is a capital crime of sacrilege to decree any thing for
Scripture which is not, or to intrude any humane writing into the participation
or association of Gods Divine word: so it is a sin no less damnable on the
other side to call rashly into question, or to disauthorize any part, or
parcel of that which is Scripture indeed, or to deny thereunto the honor due
to divine and sacred Writ: and therefore it highly imports us as well in the
one as in the other to manage our selves with all humility, sobriety, modesty,
and circumspection, in a matter so weighty as the Scripture is, and so nearly
concerning the eternal salvation or damnation of our souls.

23. Now then if the point stands thus, it behooves us indeed (if in any
other matter, then especially in this) to use all careful and exact diligence,
that we may find out that certain rule, and infallible direction before
mentioned, that by the immediate guidance thereof we may most certainly
attain unto this, to wit, to know, what is truly Scripture and what is not:
and if ever this were necessary, then much more in these later and worser
days, and times of schism and heresy, when as no small controversies are
stirred up about the same.

24. For whereas so many dangerous Sects, and heresies of perdition (to speak
in the phrase of the holy Ghost) The place is above cited.
are raised up from hell in these our unfortunate times (unfortunate indeed in
respect or them,) and that within the compass of one age, since one luxurious
Luther opened the first gappe to the general detection; all which schisms,
and heresies (as before has been notifyed) covertly shroud themselves under
the name and pretensed veil of Scripture: the first contention, and now most
necessary question How to know what is Scripture and what is not.
to be discussed with them, is what books of the Bible or parts thereof are
truly Scripture, and what are to be wiped away, and to be cut offro^ the
sacred Cano^ of holy writ: and all to this end, that we may undoubtedly, know
upon what grounds we may stand safely, in citing authorities from thence.

25. Furthermore, forasmuch as all the books of the sacred Bible, Gods holy
volume, have commonly, and ancie^tly hitherto been divided into these three
orders or ranks: the first into such as were never called into question by
Catholic Apud Trenaeu^ l. 1. c. 20. 22. 29. A pud Aug. l. 32. co^t. Faust. c.
2. and l. 334 cap. 3.
men though there never wanted heretics calling themselves Christians, and
reformed Christians, as the Protestants do at this day, that impugned the same,
as the Basilidims, and the Marcionists, rejecting the old Testament, as
indicted by an evil God, and Faustus Manichaeus contemning all the four
Ghospelles, as written by impostors.

26. The second into such books, as albeit some men did for some time doubt,
whether they were Canonical or not; yet afterward they are received into
Canon by the whole Church: that is, held for divine books, written by the
spirit of God, and of such infallible truth, as they may be a Canon or rule, or
sure direction unto our infirmity, for any thing that is found in them. For so
S. Augustine, from the Etimology of the word describes the meaning of the word
Canonical, being applied as a fit Epethete unto the Scriptures.

27. The third order is into such books, which notwithstanding they go
ordinary in the common Bibles, and contain in them many good moral
instructions of piety, and were sometimes by some particular men esteemed for
essential parts of the Scripture: yet were they never so accounted by the
universal Church, and therefore they are called Apecrypha, that is hidden or
obscure, for that their authority was never received, or published generally in
the Church, and for such are reckoned the third and fourth of Esdras, the
Appendix of the book of Job, the book of Hieremy, entitled Pastor, the
prayer of King Manasses, and finally the 151. Psalm.

28. I say now, this tripartite division of holy Writ, being thus generally
admitted, and received by all orthodoxe Deuines, does it not concern every man
that is careful of his souls salvation, to inquire diligently after the
pursuit and knowledge of these things, especially in this general sommoning,
and appealing of all unto the Scriptures for the final decision of all
Controversies?

29. And now to speak something to the point concerning these three ranks and
orders of books. The third What books are now in Controversy.
of these is generally rejected by all, as well Catholics as Protestants: the
first is admitted by all. All the question then is concerning the second, and
this comprehends sundry books both of the old and new Testament, as of
Hester, Baruch, certain parcelles of Daniel, the books of Tobias, Judith,
Sapientia, Ecclesiasticus, and the first and second of Machabees out of the
old Testament, and certain parts of the Gospel of S. Mark, S. Luke, and S.
John, with the Epistles of S. James, S. Jude, the 2. of S. Peter, the 2. and 3.
of S. John, and the Apocalypse out of the new. All these I say are received by
those of the Roman Religion for Canonical Scriptures, in the sense before
defined out of S. Augustine: that is to say, for holy and divine books,
written by the finger of Almighty God, by the ministry of those who were
Pens of a ready writer, and consequently these of the second rank, were of
no less authority, nor infallible verity, then those of the first order, for
that in things immediately, and a like proceeding from God his spirit, there can
not be less or more truth, but all are of equal credit, and so equally to be
received, honored, esteemed, and believed. And thus much for the Catholics,
who for a infallible ground, and assured direction in this matter follow not
any private erring spirit, but the neuer-deceiuing authority of the Church;
which Church and spouse of Christ being guided by the spirit of God, according
to the promise of Christ her bridegroom, has from all ancient time in former
ages, in her Counsels, Synodes, and Ecclesiastical Decrees, notified,
declared, determined, and established the authority of these foresaid books of
the second rue for infallible and Canonical: that is to say, declared them to
be such, and ever have been such, to wit, of most certain and infallible
truth, though sometimes and amongst some men there have been doubt thereof. And
this is the manner of the Church to declare what is Scripture, but not to make
it.

30. But as for the Protestants, I find such diversity and contrariety, such
opposition, and contradiction among them, that they seem unto me as me^ in
tangled, shall I say, nay perplexed, and distracted, not knowing what to do,
or whither to fly, or which way to turn them in this great business of
discerning, and admitting Scriptures. And surely the reason of all this misery
arises from themselves alone: Perditio tua ex te, it was spoken of Israells
transgression, but never more truly verified, the^ of heretical innovation:
Hos. 13.
for that these miserable deceived, and deceiving souls leaving the high rode
of the Churches prescription, can never possibly attain unto any infallible
direction, one following one thing, and another another, and that in this maine
point of the Scriptures importance, Quot capita, tot sententia, every man will
be a chooser, every one will show himself an Heretic: whence it comes to
pass, that Gods word is wretchedly abused, blasphemed, rejected Protestants
follow their own choice or election in admitting or rejecting Scriptures.
by some, rent and torn in pieces by others, and that which on God his part
was ordained, and prepared for them to be a savor of life, unto life,
becomes by their misusage of it a savor of death, unto death: and to speak
all in a word, through the fault of their own perverse will concurring, and
God his most righteous judgment following them hard at the heels, it comes
to pass, that, 2. Cor. 2 15. 16.
that word which was given as a pillar of fire to direct, and lighten them into
all verity, is turned into a pillar of smoke, so darkening and infatuating
their understanding, that they rush headlong into all kind of heresy.

31. This being well peceiued by his Majesty of England, according to that
notable apprehension of his Noble Nature, he, as it were out of a pious,
zealous, and Religious disposition (though wrongly missed by some timeseruing,
and Statizing Theologue, who is somewhat to near unto his Royal Person)
writes as in part before you have heard, concerning the Scriptures, and it is
in effect as follows: As for the Scriptures, no man doubts, I will
Premonit. page 36.
believe them. But even for the Apocrypha, I hold them in the same account
that the Ancients did: they are still printed and bound with our Bibles, and
publicly read in our Churches, I reverence them as writings of holy and good
men, but since they are not found in the Canon, we account them to be secundae
lectionis or ordinis (which is Bellarmines own distinction) and therefore not
sufficient, whereupon alone to ground any article of faith, except it be
confirmed by some other place of Canonical Scripture. Thus writes his
Majesty, out of a good meaning no doubt, and therefore great pity it is, that
so Virtuous and Religious a Heart should err, or conceit amiss. But who shall
determine, whether these Scriptures here called Apocrypha (which are those of
the second order before mentioned) be Canonical Scriptures or not? Herelyeth
the substance of the question. His Matie here, upon the suggestion of his
Domestical Ministers of England, says no: but the ancient Church of
Christendom says yea, as does also the present: and her judgment being in
this case above all earthly authority, is to strike the stroke betwixt God, and
man. Let the word of my Sovereign in all otherthings stand as the strong
mountain, that may not be removed, and as the law of the Medes and Persians,
which could never be altered; only let not my lord the King be displeased with
his servant, and Dan. 6. 15.
subject in this, if his word may not stand, but must of necessity fall to the
ground: as being countermaunded by the word of God, that cannot, nor will not
be disauthorized by the word of any mortal man.

32. It was suggested to his Matie (but sinister was the information) that
Cardinal Bellarmine in his first book de Verbo Dei, cap. 4. held the former
distinction of secundae lectionis or ordinis, and that in his Majesty's sense:
but it is nothing so, in the sense that here is set down by his Majesty, to
wit, that this second order of books, are of less authority then the first.
For albeit Bellarmine does (as before has been said) divide all the books
that are in the Bible into three ranks or orders, first into such as were never
called in question by any Catholic men: Secondly into such as notwithstanding
sometimes have been doubted of by some, yet were afterward admitted by the
whole universal Church: And thirdly and lastly, into Apocrypha: Bellarm
division of the books of Scripture.
yet does he not either call those books of the second order Apocrypha, or
secundae lectionis, as here is set down, nor yet secundi ordinis in his
Majesty's sense, as though they were less to be believed, and of less
authority then those of the first rank; but rather he auerreth the quite
contrary, that they are all of one and the self same authority. And therefore
whosoever he was that suggested this place of Bellarmine unto his Matie, he
dealt not well and sincerly therein with his Prince, and he is bound by the law
of conscience, and by the law of a subject toward his Sovereign to
acknowledge his error; were it of malice, or of ignorance committed, and
humbly prostrate upon his knees, to crave pardon for this abusing of his Lord,
and ever after to beware how he presume to whisper any such untruth palpable,
and notorious falsehood into the ears of his dread Lord and King.

33. But now forasmuch as this point of denying the infallible authority and
irrefragable credit of any the least book, part, or parcel of Scripture, is
so heinous, and temerarious a sin as before we have touched; yea, and that
committed against the Blessed spirit, that breathed them all, and streamed
these pure waters of life from one and the same living, and life-giuing
fountain: Let us in the name of God, in timore and tremore, even with fear,
and trembling, since the horror of the sin committed requires this at our
hands, examine a little in what a dangerous, nay damnable state the Protestants
of our days do stand in, about their disauthorizing of Scriptures, not in
blotting out one book alone, but in wiping out many together from the number
of the sincere Canon: and let us further consider in what a gaze, and maze they
stand, being uncertain of their ground also, what they ought to believe,
hold, or determine, after they have lost the sure and stable-staying anchor of
the Churches authority in this behalf.

34. As for example, the Catholics do believe all A sufficient Prescription
for authorizing these books for Divine Scripture being 1200 years ago.
those books before mentioned, which are secundi ordinis in Bellarmine, both
the old and new Testament, to be Canonical Scriptures of infallible truth:
and the reason is drawn from the Church, for that she in her ancient Cou^cells
has admitted the same for such, at least wise since the 47. Canon of the third
Council of Carthage was enacted, wherein S. Augustine himself was present, and
subscribed to the said Canon, which Canon auerreth them to be books of true
Canonical Scriptures: amongst which for example goes the Epistle to the
Hebrews: and of this, my purpose is at this present to make some particular
Consideration, for that the time (within whose limyts I am straited) will not
easily permit me to treat of all.

35. This Epistle then is believed of the Catholics, to be a true part of
Canonical Scripture, and written by S. Paul as well as the rest, for that it
was so received by the Church in old time, as namely in the Council of
Laodicea, the 59. Canon. And after that again in the third Council Touching
the Epistle of S. Paul to the He. brewes.
of Carthage before mentioned, and cyted in diverse other Counsels, and namely
in the first Nicene (whose authority his Matie of England offers to stand
unto) in the first Ephesine, and of that of Chalcedon, in all the grand
Parlaments of the worlds General Counsels it was received, and acknowledged
as the genuine Epistle of S. Paul. But now in these our unhappy times matters
be raked into Controversies again, and that after the whole Church has in
diverse Synods established the thing: and every sort of Sectaries will needs
adhere to their own brayn-sicke fancyes, and will prefer their own private
opinion before the public determination and resolution of the Church. Amongst
all others, as the Captain and ringleader of the rest vpstarts, Martin Luther
(but it was after he had broken vow, and cloister, and married a Nun) takes
upon him to censure the matter in his Prologue to that Epistle, reuersing, as
erroneous, the grave and infallible judgment of so many General Counsels
directed by the spirit of God; his words be these: This Epistle (says Luther)
was neither written by S. Paul, nor by any other Apostle, and it contains in
it some things contrary to the Evangelical and Apostolical doctrine. This
was Luthers heady and giddy censure of this admirable parcel of holy Writ.
Will any man hereafter so desperately cast away himself in crediting him, who
thus discrediteth Gods word?

36. With Luther in this point conspire all the learned Lutherans about the
disauthorizing of this holy Writ, and namely Ioannes Brentius in his Confession
of Wittemberg, cap. de sacra Scriptura, and the four Magdeburgian good
fellows in their first loud-lying Century, the 2. book, the fourth Chapter,
Col. 55. and that audacious, and impudent Examyner, and Censurer of all the
learning, and learned men of the whole Christian world, I mean Martinus
Kemni^ius in his examen of the 4. Session of that famous Council of Trent: And
upon this these men adventure all their souls. Will any man suffer himself
any longer to be deceived by such pure reformers, nay rather impure impostors?
But John Calvin the next succeeding reformer of these Reformers being to
begin a new fect of his own head, he thought it most convenient to oppose
himself against the Lutherans in this point, and therefore in his first
Institutions printed in the year of our Lord 1554. cap. 8.. 216. he proves
that the Lutherans do err in this point in houlding it not to be an
Apostolical Epistle: yet he will not affirm that it was written by S. Paul,
but rather perhaps by Bannaby, or Luke, as may appear in the same
Institutions, Chap. 10.. 83. and Chap 16.. 25. Upon which scruple raised by How
Calvin opposes himself to Luther and yet agrees not with the Catholics.
M. Calvin, the Caluinian Ministers at a certain Conuenticle of theirs, held
at Poysy in France in the year 1562. do in the third article of their
Confession, set down this Epistle to the Hebrews to be divine Scripture: but
yet incerti authoris, they leave the author of it to be doubtful. And this is
a subtle trick peculiar to Calvin his invention, to wit, to differ from other
Protestants, and yet not fully to agree with the Catholics, but to have
something singular to himself, as you see in this controversy, and it might be
proved in many other.

37. And here now I would demand, upon what warrant in the world does John
Calvin, and his Sectaries contradict, and oppose themselves against Luther, and
his followers in this point? Certain it is, he agrees not with the
Catholics at a^l: and it seems then, nay it is more then certain he
follows a several way, and strain by himself, and has no ground, or guide
therein but his own will, judgment, choice, and election.

38. The like dispute I might propose about other books, or parts of
Scriptures, and namely concerning the Epistle of S. James and the Apocalypse:
the former whereof is rejected both by Luther, and all the forenamed Lutheran
writers, Brentius, Kemnitius, and the Magdeburgians; all these avouch it to be
no Scripture: but yet it is asserted, and asscuered by Calvin and the
Caluinists for genuine, and undoubted Scripture. The second, which is that
mystical book of the Revelation composed by that high-soaring, and
Egale-winged John, S. John syrnamed the Divine this book, though it be in like
manner discredited, and Why the Apocalips rejected by Luther is accepted of
Calvin and Caluinists
disauthorized from Canon by Luther, and most of his followers, as namely by
Brentius and Kemnitius in the places before alleged; yet is the same book
eagerly defended against them by Calvin and his followers, and good reason have
they in their judgment for it, forasmuch as thence they take upon them to
demonstrate the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Whore of Babylon, in regard of
the seven hilled City, and I know not upon what imaginations besides. And
this Consideration may be presumed to have been an especial motive unto those
chief Lutherans the Magdeburgians, causing them to forsake both their Father
Luther, and their Lutheran brethren in this cause, and to concur, and
conioyne themselves with Calvin, and the Caluinists in defense of the Apocalypse.

39. And yet I do not perceive how his Majesty's assertion here about these
books, does not rather agree with the Lutherans then with the Caluinistes, for
so much as he holds all those books for Apocrypha and no Canonical
Scripture, which are named by Bellarmine to be secundiordinis: in which second
order (as before has been declared) the Cardinal comprehends also these
Epistles, to wit, the Epistles to the Hebrews, that of S. James, and the
Apocalypse and consequently it is necessarily deduced, and inferred upon his
Maiestyes words and discourse, that he houldeth these for no Canonical
Scriptures. And this is contrary unto Calvin, and unto the Church of England,
and unto his Majesty himself: for he avouches them to be Scriptures, and so
upon my knowledge does the present Church of England. And lastly his Majesty's
so long standing upon the Apocalypse in this his Premonition, does well show
that he esteems it for Scripture: and this contradiction also must light upon
him, who against knowledge and conscience (if he has either) wrongfully
suggested the place of Bellarmine unto his Matie.

40. But my maine Conclusion of all is this, that nothing can be certain, as
here it is sufficiently proved, The conclusion of this Consideration
when a man once departs from the Authority of the Church (for this is a
certain rule unto all, and such a rule as is authorized by God himself:) for
then every man may make and unmake Scripture at their pleasure, and upon their
own peril. But sure I am, that he can neither give, nor take away divine
authority from the Scriptures. And if you say, that neither the Church can do
this, I demand first, who art thou that comparest thy self with the whole
Church? I grant it to be true, but yet let me tell thee this withal, that
though the Church cannot give divine authority to any writing which from the
beginning was not truly Scripture, nor take away the same from any part of
that, which from the very beginning was Scripture: yet may the Church declare
what books were written by Prophetical or Apostolical men, as before has
been said, and consequently by the finger of the holy Ghost, and so were
Canonical Scriptures, and of infallible truth: and this might the Church know
partly by tradition (others not knowing the same, might without suspicion of
heresy doubt of their authority before the said declaration of the Church) and
partly also by the ever guiding assistance of the holy Ghost in her Synodes,
when any such weighty matters, for direction of the whole Church, were treated:
in which Counsels the said Church after due inquisition made, and invocation
of the holy Ghost (as her common custom is) might no less conclude, and bind
all with Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and Nobis, then did they of the first
Council in the Acts of the Apostles, which no private man has authority to
do, though Luther and Calvin presumed to determine the same.

The fourth Consideration.
THE brief sum of all hitherto treated of in this second Chapter concerning
the Scriptures, is in effect How the true sense of Scripture may be tried.
thus much: first, every believing and appealing unto Scriptures, is not
sufficient to prove a man a Christian Catholic, for that each Sectary does
offer this. Secondly, that tradition without Scriptures might have continued as
sufficient for instruction, if God had so pleased, according 1.
to that of S. Irenaeus before cited: and this is proved for that both the
Church under the law, and under the 2.
Gospel, were instituted and ordained by tradition without Scriptures, as
appears by the very time of the writing of the Scriptures, both of the old
and new Testament after that the Church was first planted. Thirdly the written
3.
Scriptures are distinguished and discerned what is Scripture, and what not,
what Canonical, and what Apocrypha, and that by tradition, and this is all
about the letter of the Scripture only. There rests yet the greatest 4.
point of all, and of most importance behind, and this is, how true Scriptures
are to be rightly sensed and interpreted. For if that of Tertullian be true in
the 17. Chapter of his Prescriptions, Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus,
quantum and corruptor stylus: A false gloss marreth the truth, as much as a
naughty text. Or that of S. Hierome: Nec putemus in verbis Hier. c. 3. in
epist. ad Ephesians.
Scripturarum esse Euangelium sedin sensu, non in superficie, sed in medulla,
non in sermonum foliis, sed in radice rationis. Neither let us think, that the
Gospel rests in the words of the Scriptures, not in the sense of the
Scriptures, not in the rind or barky letter of the words, but in the marrow of
the meaning, not in the wordy leaves, but in the root Aug. in psalm. 140. praef.
prope initiu^.
of reason, by a right understanding thereof. Or that of S. Augustine to the
same effect: Si in Scripturis fanctis profunda sunt mysteria, quae ad hoc
absconduntur, ne vilescant, ad hoc quaeruntur, vt exerceant, ad hoc aperiuntur,
vt pas^ant: if there be profound mysteries in holy writ, which are therefore
hid that they become not vile, therefore sought after, that men may be
exercised, and set on work, therefore disclosed, that they may feed. Lastly,
Si mare sit diuina scriptura, habens in se sensus Lib. 3. Ep. epist. 19.
Constant.
prosundos, altitudinem Propheticorum aenigmatum, as S. Ambrose auerreth: If
divine Scripture be a sea, containing in it bottomless depth of profound senses,
that is, the depth of prophetical riddles, questions and predictions etc. Si
machera etc. as the same author has it: If it be a sword with a sharp and
cutting edge, oh then how warily ought we Ambros. l. 3. c. 3. in Lucem.
to walk in this way of sensing Scriptures? Quae nihil aliud est nisi Epistola
quaedam omnipotentis Dei ad creaturam suam, as S. Gregory speaks; which is
nothing else but a certain Epistle Lib. 4. Epist. regist. epist. 40.
of the omnipotent God unto his own creature.

42. If a subject should either maliciously, or negligently misinterprete the
letter of his Prince, and that in a matter of some great moment, should he
escape severe punishment? And shall the treacherous heretic who wilfully The
danger of rash using or abusing the Scriptures.
and maliciously upon his own perverse choice depraueth corrupts, and
misinterpreteth the Scriptures, the letter, Epistle, and proper handwriting of
his God, escape deserved condemnation? Grande periculum est in Ecclesia loqui,
ne forte interpretatione peruersa, de Euangelio Christi, hominis fiat
Euangelium, aut, quod peius est, Diaboli. So S. Hierome. It is no small In
Co^mentar. ad Galat. 2.
hazard to speak in the Church, least happily the Gospel of Christ, become
the Gospel of man, or that which is worse, the Gospel of the Devil, and
all by a perverse, and naughty interpretation. Is the Scripture a bottomless
sea, and is there no danger of drowning, nay damning in hell, if men be to
busy with it to abuse it? Is the Scripture a sword, as S. Ambrose resembles
it, or a twoedged sword, for so S. Paul to the Hebrews compares it; and is
there no danger of cutting, and wounding, and killing by this sword, if it be
unwarily handled? Scriptura sancta (says S. Ambrose) attento animo legenda, ne
quis has cum legerit, Lib. 3. in Luca^ c. 3. prope fine^ lib. and cap.
quasi puer macheram tractare per injantiam fortiora arma nesciret, magique
vulnus ex imprudentia, quam salutem ex lectione sentiret. Infirmos enim tela
sua vulnerant: nec potest been vti armis, qui ea far non nouerit. Sacred
Scripture must be heedfully read, least any man that reads them be unskillful
to handle these stronger weapons, as a child, by reason of his infancy,
skilleth not how to handle a sword, and consequently rather receaueth and
incurreth the wound of damnation through his imprudency, abusing them, then the
help of salvation by the right reading of them. For the weak are wounded by
their own weapons: neither can he use weapons well, who knows not to weild
them.

43. It is excellently observed by Theophilact, and it is the common
observation of all the Fathers, that when the Apostles curiouslly inquired
(nondum enim ex Alto Spiritu sancto repleti, for as yet the holy Ghost was come
upon none of them) afterthe knowledge of the day, and hour of judgment, when
the time precisely should be, occultat Christus, non ignorant diem, he hides
the day, he is not ignorant of the day (let Calvin, and his sectaries
blaspheme, as long as they will against the knowledge of Christ's sacred
humanity:) and the reason rendered of this, Ne cognitio diei iudicij tanquam
machera etc. Least the knowledge of the day of judgment (revealed by Christ
unto his Apostles) should prove a sword put into a childs hand. Thus then you
see both by all former examples, and especially by this last of the Apostles
themselves, what a dangerous way the path of the Scriptures is to walk in, if
we be not warily guided therein. For as by the native, and genuine
interpretation of Gods sacred Epistle (as S. Gregory styles holy Writ) men
are directed aright through the sourges of the seas of this world, to ariue
securely at the haven of salvation: even so by the erroneous, and false
exposition of the same Scripture, men are deceiptfully misguided, and
wrongfully lead, as it were blind-folded, into the brakes, and briers of
pestiferous, and pernicious heresies, to the everlasting damnation both of the
beginners, and followers.

44. S. Paul calls the Scripture the savor of life unto life, and the savor
of death unto death; which as it is true in that place, in respect of the
saving of some, and the perishing of others: so it is most true in regard of
the right sensing of it by the sons of the Catholic Church, who follow
Catholic interpretation, and the wrong interpreting of it by others, as are
out of the Church, and adhere unto false exposition, and heretical innovation.

45. Tertullian of opinion, that the Scriptures themselves are so disposed by
the will of God, that they should Cap. 39. praescript.
minister matter unto Heretics: his reason is, because he reads in
Scripture, that there must be Heretics which without Scriptures could not be,
and yet his meaning is not, that the Scriptures are the cause thereof. Christ's
prophetical prediction, was no cause of Judas treason, but rather man's
temerarious presumption upon Gods word, and The cause of Heresies.
precipitate intrusion into his book, by erroneous and false conceipted
opinion, is the true cause of all error and heresy.

46. S. Augustine writing to Consentius, does excellently discover the cause of
heresy in these words: Omnes Haeretici Scriptur as sibt videntur scrutari, cum
suos potius scrutentur errores; and per hoc, non quod eas contemnant, sed quod
eas non intelligant, Haeretici fiant. All heretics to seem to themselves to
follow Scriptures when in very deed, they rather follow their own errors; and
hereby it comes to pass, that they are made heretics, not for that they
contemn the Scriptures, but for that they understand them not.

47. But here me thinks, I hear the Heretics object The heretical objection
that the Scripture is easy and open, answered.
(as I have heard them often, whilst I did frequent their heretical
Conuenticles, and Sermons) that the Scriptures are easy to be understood: That
the Word is near us, not far from us: That it is a lantern unto our stepps,
and a light unto our paths. And thus will they fly through the law, and the
psalms, the Prophets, and Apostles, as Vincentius notes of the Heretics of
his time, to prove the facility of the Scriptures. To this I answer, Psalm. 1* 8.
and grant it to be true in respect of sundry passages of holy Cont. haer. cap.
35.
Writ, where the lamb may wade as well, as the Elephant may swymme; yet that
other places of Scripture are hard, intricate, mystical, and very apt to be
mistaken, besides many proofs, and those most pregnant that might be brought
out of the Scriptures and Fathers, the experience of our unfortunate days does
most clearly euince.

48. For otherwise how comes it to pass, that all Christendom is in an
uproar about the exposition of Scriptures? How grow so many contentions amongst
the learned at this day? Why have we so desperate, and obstinate heresies,
grounded (as the heretics think) upon such apparent, and pregnant places of
Scripture, as that the Authors thereof (being deceived themselves, and
deceiving others by the Scriptures) will rather desperately choose to loose
their lives, and their souls together, then to forgo, and abjure their
opinions in matter of religion, which once by the least apparent show of
Scripture, they have begun to defend: These men though never so learned,
never so wise, never so morally virtuous, yet are they deceived. Shall I say by
Scripture? nay rather they wilfully by their own heretical choice against the
known interpretation of Catholic Church, Roman Church, ancient Church, abuse
the Scriptures, and so are deceived, entangled, blindfolded: and this they
could never be brought unto, if the Scriptures were so easy that a private
spirit might interpret without the public spirit, and interpretation of the
Church. And to this S. Augustine alludeth, saying: Multis and multiplicibus
obscuritatibus, and ambiguitatibus decipiuntur, qui temere legunt Scripturas,
Aug. l. 1. de doctrina Christiana cap. 6.
aliud pro alto sentientes. They which do rashly read Scriptures, are deceived
with many and sundry obscurityes, and ambiguities, taking one sense for
another: which would not be if all were easy in the holy Scriptures as all
Sectaries do pretend.

49. The understanding then, and true sense of the Scriptures is the very main
point which imports and importuneth us for our salvation: and in seeking out
this, if ever by seeking we mean to find it, we must first abandon our own
judgment, and particular election, and embrace the common and public judgment
of Christ his Church: This is the interpreter of the Scriptures, this is the
controller and guider of all certain and sure exposition: Expetitque hic
sensus certae interpretationis gubernaculum, to cite the whole sentence out of
Tertullian; this sense requires the De praescript. c. 9.
stay of a sure interpretation: and this is only that which can make a man a
true Catholic Christian.

50. S. Augustine amongst those manifould co^flicts which he had with the
Manichees, concerning the Catholic Church and her authority, openly and
ingenuously professed S. August. would not have believed the Gospel but for
the authority of the Church.
unto the said Manichees, that he would not have believed the Gospel, if the
authority of the Catholic Church did not move him thereunto. Whence I do
observe, that if we receive the Gospel upon the credit of the Church, for
that the Gospel would not be believed to be the Gospel, unless the
authority of the Church did tell us that it were the Gospel: then follows
it necessarily (for the argument is drawn amaiore ad minus) that much more
should we depend and rely upon the Church, and take from her the true sense,
meaning, and exposition of the Gospel, from whom we have believed and
received that it is the Gospel: and therefore says the same Father to his
friend Honoratns: Multo facilius mihi persuaderem, Christo non esse credendum,
quam de illo quidquam, nisi ab his, per quos credidissem, esse credendum. I
should much more easily persuade my self, that we ought not to believe in
Christ at all, then that any thing were to be learned concerning him, of any
man, but only of those whom I was taught to believe in Christ. Can any thing be
spoken more effectually for the Authority of the Church, since this is the sole
cause of his believing the Gospel? This is the only motive of his embracing
the faith of Christ?

51. But now whether Protestants do follow this trade, and way of true
Catholicisme in their sensing, and understanding of Scriptures, that is not
hard to discover. For when we come to particular controversies, and to join
issue together, and that they and their adversaries do allege Scriptures, and
expound the same; then does it The difference between Catholics and
Protestants in gathering the sense of Scripture.
appear, as clear as the sun, who follows a private interpretation, and
who adhereth to the true Catholic Churches exposition. For the Roman
Catholic first desyring to find out the truth, and then willing to embrace
nothing but the truth, reflecteth upon the former interpretation of ancient
Church, when the present controversy was not yet in hand; and consequently when
the exposition cannot be so much as in any semblable reason suspected to be
wrested, or wrongly interpreted by men of those ages (who neither feared, nor
favored any party) but must needs be according to the common meaning and
sense of the Church in those ancient times: and this interpretation (which the
Protestants also in some of their better humors do admit for good) the
Catholic follows; and upon this, as upon the rock of God his word, truly
sensed by the Church, he stays himself, and builds his religion.

52. Now the Protestant being guilty in his conscience, and knowing well, that
antiquity detesteth, and has already anathematized his heresy, he by all
means possible, by vociferatio^s and exclamations seeks to extenuate the
authority of this Church (much like to the thief or malefactor, who arested by
the law to abide the trial of the same, begins to rail, and exclaim
against his lawful ludge, and jurors:) and then in his imagination he
deuiseth certain Chymera's and Idea's of his Church in former times, in the
air, of his own brain, which lineally, says he (but God knows how, for he
knows not) descended unto Luther, and Calvin etc. And from these people
partly, and partly from himself frames the Protestant his exposition of
Scripture, and upon this foundation buildeeh he all his religion of his own
device.

53. And albeit all Fathers do not allwaies agree in one and the self same
sense, and exposition of Scripture (for that there may be be diverse senses of
one and the self same place of Scripture, as before you have heard at large:)
yet does the holy Ghost so rune, and strike upon the stringes, the tongues and
pens, I mean of these ancient Wortnies of the Church, that all the variety,
that ever I could find yet amongst them, sounded forth a heavenly harmony, and
neither iarred, not yet was dissonant from Scripturs verity, or faiths Analogy:
so far is the Churches unity from all contrariety. And verily this diversity
of antiquity in the execution of Scriptures without all repugnancy, or any
contrariety, was no small motive unto me to embrace the present Roman
Catholic Religion (which all so I found in them) for I could not but
conclude, that as one spirit breathing out these Scriptures, intended all these
senses: so the same spirit guided all. And therefore no marvel, that neither
the ages, wherein such Fathers lived, nor any succeeding Century of the Church
reprehended their expositions. For the wisdom of the spirit ever continued in
the Church, and thereby they know that such variety breeded no contrariety;
whilst one Father sensed the Scripture literally another Allegorically, and
another mystically, or Anagogically; but yet all to a pious sense, and with no
obstinate proteruity, or animosity against that which the Church did hold or
determine for truest.

54. And now to come unto some particular exposition or Scripture by the
Fathers, let us instance in the age of S. Augustines positions of the church
S. Augustine, for the Protestants are wont to grant that the true Church
flourished in his time, and his Majesty also condescendeth to extend the trial
of Controversies to his time, and somewhat further. The same Father writing of
this Church (we have formerly mentioned) proved the Aug. l. 2. cont. Petil. c.
33. and lib. devnit. Eccles. c. 14.
same first to be visible, and obuious unto every man's eyes, against the
assertion of the Protestants inuisibility of the Church: and this he confirms
out of the words of our Savior, registered by the Evangelist Matthew. 5. A City
upon a hill cannot be hidden: that is to say, the Church cannot be invisible:
which is many times repeated by the same Father Aug. in ep loan. tract. 2.
to this effect As also forth of those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 18. In
sole posuit tabernaculum suum, he put his tabernacle in the sun: that is, he
placed his Church in the sight of the world, to be seen of all men.

55. In like manner the same Father applies, and expounds those words of
Christ Matthew. 5 about the That it ^ visible.
Candle placed on the Candlestick, to signify the visibility of the Catholic
Church; crying out against them, Qui contra lucernam in candelabro
positamoculos claudant, who wilfully Aug. ibib.
shut their eyes against the candle placed on the candlestick: Qui tammagnam
montem non vident, who cannot see so great a hill, as the Church is. And lastly
for conclusion of all, he gives his censure of them in these words: Quid
amplius sum dicturus quam caecos esse? What shall I say more of them, but that
they are blnd? Thus did S. Augustine interpret, and apply these Scriptures, and
many more to this purpose, as you shall read throughout his whole Tract de
Vnitate Ecclesiae contra Petilianum, andels where.

56. And the same S. Augustine to prove that this Catholic visible Church
does not consist of the good and elect only (which is another erroneous
position of Protestant Religion, and proved largely by S. Augustine, to have
been That it consists of good and bad.
the heresy of the Donatists, and Pelagians their brethren) but of good and
bad together unto the worlds end: and for confirmation thereof he does
produce, and interpret those Parables used by our Savior Matthew. 3. to wit, of
the good corn, and chafe in the floor, and of the net cast into the sea that
brought up both good, and bad fish; and lastly of the weeds, and good corn,
commanded to be permitted to grow together. Upon which place S. Leo the first
gives the gloss thus: In extremo iudicio sunt quaedam vrenda flammis sunt
alia condenda horreis: In the last judgment, some things are to be burned with
the flames of damnation, other things are to be gathered into Gods granary.
All these places, and many more, both S. Augustine, S. Leo, and many of the
Fathers do interpret of the good and bad, that are promiscuously mixed in the
Church together. Do our Protestants follow these expositions?

57. Thirdly my foresaid Author goes yet further, for proving of a third
assertion, as contrary to the Protestants, as they are opposite unto truth, to
wit, that That it cannot fail or perish.
this public, and visible Church (granted once by Protestants themselves to
have been the true Church) could never fail, or ever fall away to the worlds
end. For proving of which assertion, he alleges sundry passages of holy Writ,
far different for interpretation, from the Protestants sense. His words be:
That Church (says he) that was once of all Nations (he means the Catholic)
is it not now? Aug. co^c. 2 in psalm. ^01.
Has it perished? They say so, that are not in her. O impudent voice! Is not
she, because thou art not in her? This abominable and detestable voice full of
presumption and falsity, sustained by no truth, illuminated by no wisdom,
seasoned with no salt, vain, temerarious, precipitate, and pernicious is
prevented, and refuted by the holy Ghost etc. And then does he cite several
places of Scripture, to prove, that (notwithstanding all exposition, and
contradiction of Heretics) that the said visible Church bring once collected
of all Nations, and placed upon the open hill, and mount of this world, and
conspicuous unto the eyes of al could never possibly vanish away again, or
fall from Christ, as Protestants do falsely charge the Mother Roman Church: and
consequently, they would never agree to expound these Scriptures as S.
Augustine did. But whom shall we rather believe? Whether is a Luther or a
Calvin, or S. Augustine to be followed? Or which Church, his, or this of the
Protestants is likest to go near the truth, and to light upon the true meaning
of the holy Ghost in expou^ding these Scriptures? For certain I am, their
expositions vary, and are repugnant one to the other.

58. And in this manner might I proceed in disclosing this great Doctor, and
famous pillar of the Church S. Austine his judgment, for the exposition of
Scriptures, concerning S. August fully agreeing with the opinion of the modern
Catholics.
all controversies (or the most of them) between the Catholics and the
Protestants at this day, wherein the said Father is no less perspicuous, and
copious, then as if being an eyewitness, and an eare-witnesse of all points
now controuerted, he had written in these very days of sirife amongst us. And
either this is, or I know not what can be a manifest demonstration, that the
holy Ghost guided the pen of this worthy Doctor, to tax and prescribe against
the manifould heresies of our times. As for example, touching the doctrine of
Purgatory (whom Doctor Field out of a fanaticall spirit, and spirit of heresy
surchargeth, and falsely traduceth of heresy) what writer of this time can
deliver, and set down his opinion more resolutely, then he does his, proving
the same irrefragably, both by the allegation and exposition of sundry passages
of holy Scripture, as namely by those words of our Savior, Matthew. 12. It
shall not be remitted unto him, either Aug. l. 21. deciuit c. 13. and l. 6.
cont. Iuiia^. cap. 5.
in this life, or in the next. Whereupon this great Doctor infers, that some
sins are remitted in the next, and consequently, there must be a Purgatory.
And so that place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 3. (Every man's work shall be tried by the
fire, of what sort it is,) S. Augustine does also apply to prove the same
purging fire to remain for some sins, or bad works in the In Psalm. 31.
prope init. Enchir. c. 67. and 68. and l. de fid. and oper. c. 25. l. 21. de
Ciuit. Dei c. 21. and 26.
next life. And these expositions of Scripture confirming Purgatory, delivered
by S. Augustine, and oftentimes reiterated in his works, were never
reprehended by any as false, nor the Father taxed, as teaching any erroneous
doctrine dissonant from the doctrine, and belief of the Catholic Church
(which doubtless he could never have escaped, had his assertion of Purgatory
been erroneous, living in the age of S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and other learned
Fathers, who wanted neither learning, nor zeal, to have both matched him, and
confuted him, had he swarued in ought from sound faith, and the doctrine of
their present Church:) and consequently Purgatory was then held for no error
or heresy. And the like I might abundantly prove in many other points, both
out of S. Augustine, and sundry other of like antiquity, learning, and sanctity.

59. Finally the conclusion of all this main Chapter, and Treatise of sacred
Scriptures, must of necessity fall out to be this: that not all believing of
Scriptures, nor appealing The conclusion of this chapter and consideration.
unto Scripture, nor sensing of Scriptures, nor presuming of the spirit, is
sufficient to make a man a Christian Catholic, for that as has been formerly
noted forth of S. Bernard, many men presume of Gods spirit, when it is not, but
their own spirit, or rather the spirit of Satan, and consequently take, or
rather mistake their own spirits expositions, for the interpretation of the
holy Ghost. Again, some when they err in expounding Scriptures, are
notwithstanding of opinion, that they follow Scriptures, when indeed they
follow their own errors. So S. Augustine observes.

60. Thirdly, others by a perverse interpretation make of Christ's Gospel ma^s
Gospel, or that which is worse the Devils Gospel, as S. Hierome notes:
and yet all these with the Devil, and all former heretics pretend to urge,
and build upon Scripture. But no marvel, if all these appeal unto Scriptures
upon a false confidence, thinking that the word of God makes for them, when it
makes against them. For let these Scripturians be but marked, let them be
unmasked, that is, as Vincentius Lyrinensis Vincent. cont. haer. cap. 36.
excellenly delivers the observation against them, let not only their
sayings, but their meanings, not their words but their senses of Scripture be
noted, then their bitterness shall be detected, their madness disclosed, their A
notable speech of Vincentius Lyrinensis.
new poison vented forth, their profane novelties revealed: then the hedge
shall be cut, then the bounds of Fathers shall be translated, then Catholic
faith shall be violated, and the Churches position cancelled. Hitherto
Vincentius.

61. The only way then to make a man a true Christian Catholic indeed, if all
ancient rules and Canons of the Church fail not, is first to admit, and
reverence that for Scripture, which the universal Catholic Church has by
lineall descent of tradition delivered, and commended unto us for Scripture,
and that after all doubts, and controversies discussed about the same; and not
that which Luther or Calvin (who could make and unmake Scripture at their
pleasure) or our own private spirit shall conceit to be Scripture: and
secondly for the sense and true meaning of the Scripture (if we have any care
of that, or imagine that it does import us at all) we are no less to stand to
the judgment of the said Church, for the exposition and interpretation thereof,
then we did before, for the delivering of Scripture unto us. And so much for
this Chapter.

THE THIRD CHAPTER, CONCERNING THE SECOND POINT OR GENERAL HEAD PROFESSED BY
HIS MAJESTY: Concerning his believing of the three Creeds, received by the
CHVRCH.
AS the former offer so constantly auerred by his Matie of England, concerning
the believing of all Canonical Scriptures, was a sign and liberal token of a
Religious inclination, Zealous affection, and Pious disposition (as before has
been intimated and related:) even so, no less Religious, Zealous, and Pious,
is this assertion also here so co^fidently asseuered by his Highness, touching
the acceptance, and admittance of the Three ancient Creeds, and that in the
very same sense, as the ancient Fathers and Counsels that made them, did
understand them. For these are his Maties very words, which I have thought good
here to relate, wishing them to remain upon an everlasting, and
time-out-wearing Record. And that for these two principal reasons: first that
I may not vnduti^ully forget to defer, and bring the just descrued honor,
and the most highly respected commendation unto my Sovereign Lord the King,
most due to his Grace for this his Confession (which also out of a true
Subjects love, and loyalty toward his Prince, I could sincerely wish, might
never by any the least cloud of error in his Royal understanding be eclipsed
or obscured:) and secondly for that I trust my former brethren of the
Protestanticall Church of England will either now at last stand to their
grounds of Creeds, Counsels, Fathers, Scriptures, voluntarily chosen by the
Lord, and Head of their Church, that hitherto upon my knowledge would never be
confined within the lists, and limyts of any even trial: or else that my Lord
the King will easily out of the depth of his judicious Understanding, unmask
and discover these men for such as they be, even wolves in sheeps clothing,
false Ghospellers, Antichrists, deceauers, seducers, impostors. And now to come
to the words themselves, as they are substantially couched together in his
Maties Book of Premonition, they are laid down as follows.

2. And now for the point of Heretic, I will never (says he) be ashamed to
render an account of my profession, and that hope that is in me, as the Apostle
prescribes. I am such a CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN as belieueth the three Creedes,
that of the Apostles, that of the Prem. p 3^.
Council of Nyce, and that of Athanasius; the two later being Paraphrases to
the former: and I believe them in that sense, as the Ancient-Fathers, and
Counsels that made them, did understand them. To which three Creedes all the
Ministers of England do subscribe at their Ordination. And I also acknowledge
for Orthodoxall those other His Majesty's honorable offer.
forms of Creeds, that either were devised by Councels, or Particular Fathers
against such particular Heresies, as most reigned in their times. Hitherto
extend the words of his Majesty. And can any thing be spoken more honorably
then this? This form of Confession punctually, and so substantially delivered
by his Highness, I can never sufficiently commend: for that this is so far
from sauouring of any spice of Heresy, as that here is nothing else, but true
Catholic Divinity. For what can be more required, for more full supplement of
a Catholic Christian man's Confession, then to believe the three Creedes in
the very self same sense, as the holy Apostles, ancient Fathers, and general
Counsels did understand them? And now if the Ministers of England (that do
subscribe unto them in their Ordination) would keep and confine themselves
within that sense, which the ancient Christian Church did both constantly and
religiously hold, and would not of their own fancy presume to add any other
new gloss, or private interpretation of their own brain: the world should
never have seen, and heard such breaches and tumultes, such vproares, and
outcries, such inundations, and innouations, and all about Religion, as now
there are.

3. But the truth is, as S. Augustine affirms: Quod fieri potest, vt integra
quis teneat verba Symboli, and tamen non recte credat Aug. l. 3. de bapt. co^t
Donat. cap. 15.
de omnibus Symboli articulis. A man may hold and profess all the words of
the Creed (he means the Apostles Creed) and yet not have a true belief of
all the articles of the said Creed. Nay S. Augustine in his book de fide and
Symbolo, goes yet further, saying: Sub ipsis paucis verbis in Symbolo
constitutis plerique haeretici venena sua occultare conati sunt. Most part of
Heretics have gone about, and endeavored under these few words of the
Apostolical Creed, to cover their poisoned heresies. So as the believing of
these Creeds in general (they containing but Capita credendorum, Universal
heads of things to be believed) is not sufficient to make a man a Christian
Catholic, except also we give our firm asse^t unto all the particulers that
necessarily may be reduced, or deduced from those general heads. For better
explication whereof I have thought it convenient in this place to address
certain Considerations that here ensue.

The first Consideration.
AS the skillful, and careful Physician imployeth noe less industry, sparing
neither Counsel in physic, How the first three Creeds and why they were
ordained, and how greatly they are to be reuere^ced.
nor prescription in diet, for the conseruing, and continuing of the bodily
health of his patient, until he have brought him to former health, and full
strength, then he did bestow pains, and travail in recovering him of his
infirmity, and raising him from the bed of his malady: even so the Apostles, as
so many sovereign souls best physicians, most painefully and diligently
watched over the souls of men, their sick patients, to vphould and continue
them in Christian piety, and Catholic verity, as well as they had cured them
of their spiritual leprosy, and raised their souls which had long lain sick
upon the bed The cause of ordayning the Apostles Creed.
of heathenish infidelity; and all, that they might recover full strength in
saving and believing faith, and grow to be perfect and whole men in Christ
Jesus. And here you have the occasion, motive, drift, reason, and intention of
Christ's holy Apostles in compiling the perfect platform of wholesome faith and
Christian belief, I mean this methodicall, and Apostolical form of Creed,
which inuolueth in it either explicit, or implicit, in plain words, or
necessary supply, whatsoever belongs to the object of our faith. And therefore
says S. Augustine: Sancti Apostoli certam regulam fidei tradiderunt, quam
secundum numerum Apostolorum Aug. ser. 181. de te^p.
etc. The holy Apostles did deliver a certain rule of faith, which rule being
comprehended in twelve sentences according to the number of the 12. Apostles,
was called by them (by a Greek word and borrowed metaphor) Symbolum, a
Symbol, or collation of many things together. And their intention (as is
before intimated) was, that by this Symbol, sign, and sum of Christian
faith, and doctrine, Catholicae fidei veritas ab haereticae prauitatis
falsitate discernatur (as Vincentius Lyrinensis speaks of his goulden rule of
faith delivered unto him from all his ancestors) that Cap. 2. co^t. haereses.
the truth of Catholic faith and verity, might be discerned from the falsehood
of heretical prauity: This have our ancestors left us by tradition. And for
the first in stitution of it, it was in this sort, as the history of Antiquity,
the very life of memory, has by writing registered, and commended it unto us.

5. After the glorious visible Ascension of our Savior from the lowest pitch,
and vale of the earths misery, into the highest top of heaven, and bosom of
his Fathers eternity, this being terminus ad que^, as well as it was terminus a
quo, in that great motion of heaven, Christ's Incarnation and man's Redemption,
the place whither he ascended, as it was the place whence he descended,
according to that: Exiui a Patre, veni in mundum: relinquo mundum, vado ad
Patrem: I say after this Ascension, and descension of the holy Ghost in the
visible shapes of fiery tongues upon the Apostles, in abling them, and
qualifying them with the tongues of nations for the converting of nations, then
the Apostles being ready to separate themselves, and to depart into all parts
of the earth to preach the Gospel for the conversion of the whole world, they
did compose, and lay down a perfect platform of their future preaching, and
others believing, by devising a certain squared rule, and Canon of faith: and
that not so much for their own direction (being so assisted with the inward
inspiration of the spirit, that they could not possibly err in their doctrine,
though their teaching was ever to be conform unto these heads) as for the
Christian Churches instruction, and premunitio^, that by having recourse unto
these general heads of faith, commended unto them by the true Apostles, they
might more easily discern, and avoid the heretical doctrine of all false
disciples. Wherefore the Apostles being assembled together, and met as it
were the second time in Council being each of them severally replenished with
the holy Ghost, and all of them jointly directed by the self same neuer-erring
spirit, who was both now, and ever in such assemblies as these, to sit as
President in the Church: I say, being thus prepared, every one proposed as he
believed, and all being put together in the vpshot, did make the shot, or
symbol of a breife, yet entire methodicall sum of Christian doctrine,
including all points of faith, either to be preached afterward by the
Apostles, or to be believed by their disciples. And this sum did the Apostles
themselves appoint to be delivered by tradition, or from hand to hand unto
every one that believed, ad directionem, ad distinctionem, both for a direction
unto that which they were to preach, and others were to believe; as also to
discern and put a difference betwixt all faithful Christians, and
misbelieuing Infidels.

6. Thus S. Augustine (whose sense I have kept, though I have somewhat dilated
upon his words) relates the matter, which before him had been recorded by
Ruffinus, Vbi supra sermon. 181. de temp.
in the Exposition of this Creed: so that S. Augustine borrows not only
sense, but the self same words also for the most part are taken from Ruffinus.
And further the said Ruffinus does add another signification of the word
Symbol, besides a collation, or contribution of many things unto Signification
of the word Symbol or Creed.
one, saying, that it signifies also a sign or badge, whereby one sort of
soldiers are distinguished from others. And in this acception also of the
word, it consorteth well to our present purpose, that by this brief sum of
Doctrine as by a badge, or cognizance, true Catholic Christian men may be
distinguished here from Infidels, and Heretics, since after death there is
such an external distinction, and separation to be made. And for this purpose
at the beginning this Creed served, but afterward charity, and the love of
God, and Christian piety decaying, and the malice of men exceedingly
multiplying upon the earth, this breife, and plain sum would not serve the
turn, against infernal, and heretical subtility, for that, as S. Augustine
before has well observed sundry sorts of Heretics presumed to shrewd their
heresies under the articles of this Creed, perverting also the meaning, and
misunderstanding as well the words thereof as the sense: so as in fine, the
bare, and outward profession of believing this Creed became at last, to be no
certain argument of proving a man to be a true Christian Catholic, except
other due conuincing circumstances concurred, as we have before showed of the
Canonical Scriptures themselves.

7. Furthermore the Fathers and Doctors of the Church do jointly affirm, and
expressly S. Augustine in the place before cyted, that albeit the words be few,
and brief of this Creed: yet are they so substantial, punctual, and
material, as that they contain the full and entyre sum of whatsoever is to
be believed by us: his words be these: The great substance of the Apostolical
Creed.
Quicquid praefiguratum est in Patriarchis, quicquid denunciatum in Scripturis,
quicquid praedictum in Prophetis, de Deo ingeni^o, vel ex Deo in Deum nato etc.
Whatsoever was prefigured in the Patriarchs, whatsoever was denounced in the
Scriptures, whatsoever was foretold in the Prophets, either of God the Father
unbegotten, or of God the Son begotten, or God the holy Ghost, or of
receiving any Sacrament, or of the death of our Lord, or of the mystery of his
Resurrection, all this is briefly contained in this Creed: so that the
observation hence deduced must needs be this, that albeit in the bare words of
the Creed many things belonging to faith, are not literal, and syllabically
expressed: yet were they employed, comprehended, and intended by the Apostles:
and namely, and particularly about the admitting of Sacraments, of their
nature, number, necessity, efficacy, manner of administration, and the like (as
S. Augustine does here expound) which yet in the words are not expressed, but
were locked up with in the sacred breast and closet of the Church, as in the
safest treasury, there to be expounded, dilated, amplified more largely, and
particulerly unto the faithful, as either the Churches necessity requiring, or
heretical pertinacy, and importunity oppugning, should at any time, or
occasion require: which exposition of the Church as the soundest Commentary
upon the Creed, he that in all humility of judgment and opinion, submits not
him self to believe and obey, cannot be truly said to believe this Creed,
notwithstanding he should protest and confess openly ten thousand times, that
he admits all the words and every syllable thereof.

8. It is also to be considered, that it is most worthy of a Christian man his
observation, especially, if he has either care, or make any conscience to
preserve himself The Apostolical Creed no Scripture and yet necessary to be
believed.
sound in the faith, and thereby to save his soul; that albeit, the ancient
Fathers do with uniform verdict affirm that these articles of the
Apostolical Creed, were set down by the holy Apostles, replenished and
directed with no small measure of the holy Ghost, as now has been observed (I
will not stand to discuss at this present, whether every several article of
the twelve which it conteyneth, were set dowue by several Apostles, though
diverse grave, and ancient Fathers do affirm it:) yet were these articles never
held for Canonical Scripture, no nor yet are they at this day, either by
Catholic or Protestant. And if any man reply, that they are consonant unto
Scriptures, and may be thence deduced, I deny not that, only I say this is
nothing to argue that authority that they have obtained in the Church, since
that all other writings of orthodox men are both consonant unto Scriptures, and
to be deduced from them, and yet they are not held in that esteem, as the
Creed: but my consequence that hereupon I infer, is this, that something must
be granted of necessity besides Canonical Scriptures to have been necessarily
believed in the Christian Catholic Church, and that by tradition only;
without any other foundaation, and that from the very beginning of Christian
Religion.

9. This appears by the former words of S. Augustine, that this Creed came
down along through the Ce^turies of the Church by tradition, and Ruffinus says
in his exposition of this Creed: Idcirco haec nonscripta funt chartulis, atque
membranis Ruff. in Symbolum
etc. and therefore did the Apostles deliver these things not written in paper
and parchment, but to be retained in men's hearts, to the end it might be
certain, that no man should by reading have the same, for that writings are
accustomed to come also into the hands of Infidels, as well as Christians, but
that it should be sufficient to have learned the same from the tradition of the
Apostles. And this is the reason that Ruffinus gives of the tradition of the
Creed.

10. The very same has S. Hierome: his words are clear. In Symbolo fidei,
and spei nostrae (says he) non scribitur in chartis, and atramento, sed in
tabulis cordis carnalibus etc. In the Creed that contains our faith and hope,
which being delivered by tradition from the Apostles, is not written The force
of tradition in the Church.
in paper and ink, but in the fleshly tables of our hearts etc. And all this
does evidently convince unto the judgment of any understanding man, that these
articles of the Apostolic Creed were delivered by word of mouth unto
Christians, and the Church was put in trust with them to teach them unto her
children before that any Scripture of the new Testament was committed to
writing, and that many things of great moment about the mysteries of Christian
Religion were left to be understood, and expounded therein, and that according
to the wisdom, learning, and judgment of the whole Catholic Church,
especially concerning Sacraments, which are not expressed. And this is the
cause why S. Augustine, and other Fathers before him do often reiterate, and
frequently use that impsoving kind of speech, Norum fideles, the faithful do
know, what belongs unto these matters, which purposely they did not reveal
unto the ears of new Christians, least infidels might take any advantage
thereby to the disadvantage of the Church. So as my conclusion of this must of
necessity hold correspondence with that former conclusion touching the
argument of Scriptures, to wit: whosoever he be, that never so openly, and
plainly professes that he does accept, admit, and believe this Creed of the
Apostles, but refuses the understanding thereof, expounded by the Church, and
delivered in her sense, he belieueth it not at all to salvation: neither shall
it avail him any more to admit the words and not receive the sense, then if at
once, and altogether he rejected both words and sense.

11. And here may some demand: But where now shall we be sure to find this
exposition of the Church, esspecially A question solued where the voice of the
Church may be found.
in these distracted times of schism, when so many several Sects plead for
the Church, crying out according to Christ his Prophetical prediction, Here is
Christ, and there is Christ, here is the Church, and there is the pure
Chospell, here is the word truly preached, and there are the Sacraments
sincerely administered etc? To this I answer, we shall easily come by this
orthodox exposition of the Creed, if we have recourse unto the public doctrine
of the Church delivered from age to age, even until our time throughout every
Century of the Church: and this Church is ever visible, unless it be unto
such, as are blind, as S. Augustine has already observed.

12. S. Ambrose in his time remitted us unto the Church of Rome (the supreme
Pastor whereof was then Siricius) for our direction herein. Credatur Symbolum
Apostolorum (says he) quod Ecclesia Rom ana intemeratum semper custodit, and
seruat. Let faith be given to the Apostles Creed, which the Roman Church has
ever kept, and preserved inuiolated; and yet was this upon the very point of
400. years after Christ his Ascension. So as in that time, and in this great
Saint, and Doctors judgment, the Roman Church was then the best, and surest
direction to know the true contents, and meaning of this Apostolic Creed, and
consequently if our English ministry, who at their Ordination do subscribe unto
this Creed, would follow also the same direction, for the true understanding,
and sense thereof, all matters would quickly be reconciled, and controversies
accorded: but in default of this, and for that pride, and self will, has so
be witched the minds of many, that they cannot in humility stoop down their
private censures, unto the public judgment of the Church, it comes to
pass, that this great discord and difference (that now is) raygneth betwixt
Catholics and Protestants, and amongst Protestants themselves, concerning the
exposition thereof. And this shall appear in part in the next ensuing
Consideration of this Chapter. But yet before we enter into the other
Consideration, we shall speak a word or two of the other Creedes, mentioned
here by his Majesty.

13. The other Creedes then, are the Nieene (concluded De fide ad Gratian.
as S. Ambrose notes with the suffrages of 318. renowned Fathers, alluding to
the just number of Abraham's soldiers when he rescued Lot) and of S.
Athanasius. And these were written upon occasion of heresies afterward
arising, and impugning some fundamental point, and consequently The creed of
the counsel of Nice and of S. Athanasius.
were but explications of the former, as his Majesty does learnedly, and
excellently observe: and therefore these do principally depend thereon. This is
evident, if we reflect a little upon the principal subject of the 2. Creedes:
for do not they both expound, and unfold that high and obstruse mystery of the
Godhead of Christ, his identity, and equality of substance, power, and glory
with God his Father? witness those words added and used in the Council of
Nice, about 310. years after Christ: Deum Conc. Nicen. l. 4. p. 565. edit.
Venet.
de Deo, Lumen de Lumine, Deum verum de Deo vero, genitum non factum,
consubstantialem Patri: God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten not made, being consubstantiall to the Father etc. Witness S.
Athanasius his Creed that was made by him in Rome for Confession of his faith
some 15. years after that again, wherein there is found that exact manner of
speech, distinguishing the persons of the Blessed Trinity: Qualis Pater, talis
Filius, talis Spiritus Sanctus: Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and
such is the holy Ghost: and then he sets down more particulerly, the
distinctiue appellations and peculiar proprieties belonging unto every person:
as the Father unbegotten, the Son begotten of the Father, the holy Ghost
proceeding; as much, as if in plain terms he had said, the Father
distinguished with this personal propriety of begetting a Son is a Father,
and no Son: the Son distinguished with his personal propriety of being
begotten, is a Son and not a Father: the holy Ghost distinguished by his
personal propriety of proceeding, is an holy Ghost, and neither Father nor
Son.

14. By all which we see the exceeding great authority of the Church in
determining these different manners of speech, in disclosing this ineffable and
inutterable mystery of the Trinity, which are not found at all, totidem verbis,
in the Scriptures, and therefore were denied by the Scripturian Heretics (for
as learned Hosius notes, and it is the observation of S. Ambrose, against one
only article of our Saviors consubstantiality with his Father, they alleged
50. places of Scripture:) I mean the Arians, who Ambros. de fide. Hos. de
expresso Dei verbo
did bear great sway, and insinuated themselves into the favor of the
Emperors, for the better supporting of their damnable heresies, as the
Protestants do creep into the favor of our King at this day, for the
vphoulding of their errors, and therefore great pity it was, that the
Protestants and Arians had not lived in one age together, that they might have
joined hands each one with another, who do so near resemble each one the other
in their behavior and manner of proceeding.

15. Well then, we see that the former mysteries of the Diety and Trinity
could be determined by no other power and authority upon earth, then by that
supreme power of the Church, for that express warrant of Scripture there was
none in their pretense: for many of these words that are now used, and
frequented by the Church in the explication of these Creedes, were not then in
use, but invented and applied afterwads by the Church, according to the present
necessity. And yet notwithstanding have they been so acknowledged, and
received ever since by all Christendom, that the authority of the Church in
that behalf determining and expounding, has stood inviolable: and such as
have not admitted the same, have ever been reputed, and accounted for wicked,
and damned Heretics. And this is to be noted with attention, as before I have
partly touched in general, that albeit the Council of Nice, representing the
whole Christian Church of that age, did not, nor could not make any new article
of belief, that was not true before, but only did more fully, and plainly
explane, and declare such things, as the impudency, and importunity of
Heretics called into doubt and question: so did not the said Council
explayne all that belonged to the divine persons, for they left at Credo in
Spiritum sanctum, I believe in the holy Ghost, and there brake of, not
unfolding any thing particulerly The great authority left in the Church for
deciding Controversies.
touching the procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son (about
which there was afterward so great strife and contention, and is to this day,
with the later obstinate Greeks, affirming the same Person to proceed only
from the Father, and not from the Son) but left that by Gods providence to be
expounded afterward by other Counsels, when that point should be called into
question, and so it was. So that it is more then evident unto every one, that
will not wilfully shut his eyes against the clear sun shine of truth, that
there is left continual power in the Church to explayne and determine with
authority, and that irrefragable, and irresistable, any doubt never so weighty,
about the Persons of the Trinity, or any other article of belief, or any other
high point of divine mystery, that shall arise among Christians, and that unto
the worlds last ending: and every one under pain of damnable obedience against
Christ's spouse, and the holy spirit the director thereof, is bound to submit,
and captiuate his judgment, and understanding thereto, and not to stand in
contention against the same. And thus much of these three Creedes in general,
how they are to be reverenced: now let us descend unto the several articles,
and positions thereof in particular.

The second Consideration.
Now succeeds our second Consideration, about the examining of certain
particulers of these three That the Ministers of England believe notwholy and
entirely, the faith of the 3. Creeds.
Creedes, how they are received and believed. You have heard before how the
Ministers of the Church of England do subscribe unto the same at their
Ordination. Now let us examine, whether this English Clergy, notwithstanding
all their subscription thereunto, do indeed truly believe them, and expound
them in the self same sense, interpretation, and meaning, as the General
Counsels, and ancient Fathers that collected them, meant them, as they do
persuade his Matie they do. A man would think, that so solemn an Oath taken
before an Ecclesiastical Judge, at the Tribunal of the Church, and that for
preservation of Religion, and conseruaaion of the integrity of ancient faith
laid down in ancient Creedes, and general Counsels, should religiously bynd
before God and men, people of their quality and condition: but behold heresy
that neither fears God, nor reuetenceth man, observes no band at all, but
draws every thing to every man's particular judgment, and censure: and
therefore it does little avail the ministers of the Church of England to
reverence, and receive the words of the Creed, whilst they reject the Churches
sense, and true meaning of the same, to swear unto them in words by
subscription at their Ordinatio^, but to forswear them in deeds by a
perverse, and sinister interpretation, and exposition. And this God willing
shall be made good against them in the subsequent Considerations, directed, and
addressed for this especial purpose.

17. First then it is set down, and denounced in the Creed of S. Athanasius,
read every sunday in the English Church by order of the communion book, that,
VVhosouer No salvation without believing the whole Catholic says entirely.
does not believe wholly, and inuiolably the Catholic faith, shall without
doubt perish everlastingly. By which Catholic faith, he understands the
whole Catholic faith, and every article or point thereof, not only of those
articles which he there sets down principally against the Arians, and other
heresies (as did also the Council of Nice) for that otherways some man might
object, and say that the ninth article of the Apostles Creed, I believe in the
holy Catholic Church, the Co^mumo^ of Saints (which S. Athanasius me^tioneth
not) were no article of belief, and that a man may be saved without the faith
thereof: especially for so much, as the said article, with the other three next
ensuing, to wit, I believe the remission of sins, the Resurrection of the
flesh and Life everlasting, together with the fifth article, he descended into
hell (all which are permitted by the Nicen Creed) do not belong to the
integrity of the whole Catholic faith, which were an Heathenish absurdity to
imagine.

18. S. Athanasius then, as also that ancient Orthodox Council of Nice, albeit
they set down, and expounded those articles in their Creedes, which the
Churches necessity instantly required to be explayned in those times against
the heresies which then most infested, and troubled the Church: yet were they
jointly ever of this opinion and belief, that whosoever did not believe all
and every point of the whole Catholic faith, and that firmiter, fideliterque,
that is both firmly, and faithfully (as S. Athanasius his words are) shall
most certainly be damned everlastingly. And conform unto this, I have showed
before in the first Chapter of this book, the uniform consenting severity of
all antiquity, that any the least heresy, or error defended obstinately, and
with pertinacity against the Church, be it but one sentence, word, fillable,
nay letter, is sufficient to cast a man out of the bosom of the Churches
unity, into heretical prauity and Diabolical nouelty, and consequently to
bring a man unto everlasting perdition and destruction, both of body and soul.
And this we have already proved by the vnanime verdict of S. Athanasius, S.
Basil, S. Nazianzen, S. Hierome, S. Augustine and others: which S. Augustine
in the very closing period of his book of heresies, directed to Quod-vult
Deus, pronounces bouldly, and denounces confidently against all heretics
and heresy, that whosoever does hold any one of these heresies registered in
that book of his, or any other that should spring up afterward, he cannot be
a Catholic Christian, and consequently cannot be saved, for that he houldeth
not the whole Catholic faith entirely and inuiolably.

19. And now to descend from the general to the Protestants do not receive the
whole faith, but mingled with many heresies.
special, and to make just proof of all the former accusations and
imputations laid upon the Clergy of England, first the Ministers of that Church
do stiffly hold sundry of those heresies, which S. Augustine has recorded for
heresies, and as condemned of the Church in his time in that book of his
before cited.

20. And for example, it cannot be gainesaid, but they deny all external
Sacrifice, and Prayer for the dead with the Heretic Aerius: this is one
heresy, and a capital one too, if we do believe S. Augustine. Secondly the
Protestants fall into another heresy of Aerius, for they deny, Statua
solenniter celebranda esse ieiunia sed cum quisque voluerit ieiunandum, ne
videatur esse sub lege: that solemn fasts appointed by the Church were not to
be observed, but that every man should fast, when he would, least he may seem
to be under the law: These are the words of S. Augustine out of Epiphanius: and
is not this the very speech of our Ministers, and Preachers of England at this
day? Nay I have heard some of them my self proceed so earnestly in their
railing humor against this sacred, and Angelical abstinence, that they have
not sticked to condemn the holy time of Lent, as Popish, and superstitious,
tending quite to the overthrow of man's health and bodily constitution: and
therefore, that the authors thereof (said they) wanted wisdom and discretion,
for instituting it in such a time of the year as the spring is, when man his
body requires the best and purest nutriments.

20. Thirdly, there is also recorded by S. Augustine, haeres. 69. the heresy of
the Donatists, that affirmed, that the Universal Church was wholly corrupted,
and perished, except only amongst their followers. And do not the Protestants
to avoid the judgment of the Church utter the same contumelious slander at
this day, condemning all others to justify themselves?

21. Again do not the Protestants fall into the heresy of the Iouinianists (as
it is registered by the same S. Augustine, haeres. 88.) that held the equality
of sins, and did equal marriage with Virginity? And thereupon was the cause
Diverse ancient Heresies held now by Protestants.
(says S. Augustine) that diverse sacred Virgins consecrated to God, by the
holy and lawful vow of sacred single life, left their profession and married.
And is not this also practiced and defended by protestants at this day? do they
not deny all Evangelical Counsels of perfection, deluding Scriptures, and
rejecting Fathers, though never so many, never so pregnant for proving, and
conuincing of this? Witness a Treatise lately published by a former M Hu^frey
Liech
Minister of your Church in defense of the doctrine of Evangelical Counsels
not long since preached by him in the University of Oxford.

22. I pretermit the heresy of the Manichees that denied Free Will, and of the
Nouatians, who would not grant that Priests had authority in the Church to
remit sins. All which ancient heresies (with many more which I purposely
omit) being held in like manner in some degree or other, yea defended with
great resolution by our English Ministers, they cannot be accounted to believe
entirely and inuiolably the Catholic faith, and Creeds, which condemn all
these for heresies.

23. And furthermore if besides this, we will but consider the variety and
multiplicity of other new sects of these our days, with which our English
Ministers do participate, and make open profession to communicate, as with
their brethren: we shall diserne clearly, that they cannot so much as pretend
to hold the sincere integrity of one only faith. And the reason is, for that
they have ever hitherto admitted for brethren, and men of one faith, the
Lutherans for example, who expressly condemn them for heretics, and profess
in the open ears of the world themselves to dissent really from them in diverse
weighty, and capital points, as touching the Real Presence, the person of
Christ, Justification, freewill, the law, the Gospel, and many other more of
like nature, as by their own books, and writings does appear. And how then
may they be said to agree with the sense, and meaning of S. Athanasius his
Creed, which pronounces damnation against all such, as do not faithfully, and
firmly hold the whole entyre Catholic faith, without any violation, in any
one article at all? And so let us pass unto the two other Creedes, to wit,
unto that of the Council of Nyce, and the Apostlicall.

24. In the Nicene Creed, for the better, and further explication of Christ his
Godhead, and equality with his Father, against the Arian heresy, there are
certain words purposely devised, and set down by the said Council, and they
be these that follow: Deum de Deo, Lumen de lumine, Deum verum de Deo vero etc.
That is, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God, begotten, not made,
being of one substance with the Father etc. By all which words, the meaning of
the sacred Counsel is not only to prove the About the Nicene Creed.
Equality of Godhead, betwixt the Father and the Son, most blasphemously
impugned, and denied by the Arians but further to illustrate the very identity
of essence immediately, soly, and wholly communicated from the Father unto the
Son, in his eternal generation: and therefore do those thrice blessed Fathers
call Christ Lumen de Lumine, to intimate thus much unto our understanding, for
the better comprehending of that mystery, that as a light imports his whole,
full, and perfect light unto another, and yet retayneth the whole in it self:
even so in that mystical and inscrutable generation of God the Son begotten
of God the Father, the Father as a light imparteth unto the Son, as a another
Light (in regard of his distinctiue Personal substance) his whole light, that
is, his whole entyre nature, essence, substance and Godhead, without section,
division, motion, mutation, or alteration in the Father (according to that of
S. Nazianzen prescribing against a certain curious Heretic too busy in this
point, (...), Cast away thy fluxions, thy divisions, and sections, let the
generation of God be reverenced with silence) and yet the Father retains the
whole in himself. This form and manner of speech so materially and
methodically set down by this great Council, and that doubtless by the
immediate instinct and apparent assistance of the holy Ghost, against so great
enemies of the sacred Person and Divinity of our Savior as the Passim in
Epist. ad Polonos. and l. cont. Gentilem.
Arians were, M. Ihon Calvin falling into the old vain of his Arianizing humor
(as Doctor Hunnius proves) does utterly mislike and condemn, and presuming to
censure it thus: Improprie ac dure dictum esse in Symbolo, Filium dei esse Deum
de Deo, Lumen de Lumen etc. that it is improperly, and hardly spoken in the
Creed, that the Son of God is God of God, Light of Light, very God of very
God, begotten, not made, consubstantiall to the Father etc. affirming moreover
Christum esse (...), that is, that Christ is God of himself, and not God of
God the Father. But may not I say (and have therein the whole Christian world
to bear me out) Catholice dictum a Patribus, haeretice mutatum a Caluino, that
it was Catholickly spoken by the Fathers, and heretically changed by John
Calvin?

25. And though here his disciples will go about to free 2. lib. de Christ. c.
19.
their master by urging Cardinal Bellarmine his defense for him, in a
certain place of his works, wherein he excuses the said Calvin in some part of
his meaning and sense: yet poor, and miserable is the defense, for that the
Cardinal expressly condemns the manner of Calvin his speech, as Calvin his
Autotheisme heretical.
heretical, and intolerably proud: and it is heretical (says he) quia pugnat
cum Scripturis, because it contradicts the Scriptures: it is intolerably
proud, quia pugnat cum Concilijs, cum Patribus, it impugneth general Councels,
and resists the uniform consent of all pious, and religious Antiquity. Thus
the Cardinal: to whom I remit the judicious Reader for more ample and learned
proof of the same.

The third Consideration.
OUR third and last Consideration of this present Chapter In what particular
article of the Creed English Protestants do not agree with us.
shall insist upon sundry articles of the Apostles Creed in particular, wherein
the Ministers of England (that make a profession, and that by subscription to
admit the whole Creed as it lies) do notwithstanding differ from the sense,
interpretation, and exposition of ancient Church: and to exemplify some
particular article, the fifth Article is, Descendit ad inferos: Christ
descended into hell, which the ancient Fathers did understand literally, as it
lies (for so all the articles of the Creed are literally to be expounded) to
wit that our Savior Christ after the consummation of our Redemption by the
precious blood of his passion, leaving his body in the Sepulcher, he descended
victoriously like a triumphant conqueror of death, Satan, and all the power
of hell, with his soul into the lower parts of the earth; showing and
exhibiting himself thereby a conqueror of death, and delivering from thence
diverse prisoners, and namely the souls of the ancient Fathers, Patriarchs, and
Prophets, who ardently expected his coming to open unto them the gates of
heaven according to that in the Hymn of Te Deum (which is in words
acknowledged by the Church of England) When thou had overcome the sharpnes
of death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.

27. Thus the ancient Church understood this article, as may be easily proved
by vnamine consent of all Antiquity, that expounded it so. For first the fourth
Council About Christ's desce^ding into hell.
of Toledo cap. 1. and the Lateran gathered under Innocentius the third expound
the Article so, as appears by their words, plain to that purpose: Descendit
ad inferos, vt animas quae illic tenebantur erueret: Christ descended into hell
that he might deliver the souls which were detayned there.

28. Secondly, Thaddeus one of Christ's 70. Disciples, who as he lived in the
very time of the Apostles, so was it most like, nay it could not be otherways,
but he knew the Apostolical sense of this article, and yet he (as Eusebius
records) delivers the sense thus, Descendit ad inferos, and disrupit
maceriem, quam in saeculo nemo disruperat: qui descendit quidem solus, ascendit
autem cum grandi multitudine. Christ descended Lib. 1. hist. cap. vlt.
into hell, and brake down the partitio^-wall, which no man had broken from the
foundation of the world, who indeed descended alone, but ascended with a great
multitude: which being supposed, then have you the testimony of one of Christ's
holy disciples, and no doubt inspired with the spirit of God for warrant of
this doctrine

29. With Thaddaus agrees Ignatius, another great Saint and Martyr, that lived
immediately after the Apostles, and had conversation with some of them.
Descendit solus (says In epist. ad Trallian.
the same Father) ascendit cum grandi multitudine. Christ descended into hell
alone, but he ascended with a great multitude. With these two so ancient so
Apostolical men accords Justinius Martyr an ancient and renowned Author, in
the self same age next after the Apostles, who in his conference or dispute
cum Triphone Iudaeo (for so is his Dialogue entitled) complayneth of the
impiety of the Jews, for razing forth the testimony of Hieremy, where our Lord
is said to descend to hell, vt liberaret mortuos suos, that he might deliver
his dead thence.

30. And now with these three, does all antiquity consent: to wit, S. Irenaeus
in his fifth book, toward the end, Clemens lib. 6. stromatum, Origin in his
15. homily upon Genesis, his 2. book against Celsus, and 5. book upon the
Romans, Eusebius lib. 4. demonst. Euang. cap. 12. S. Cyril of Jerusalem
Cateches. 4. Descendit ad inferos, vt iustos inde liberaret: Christ descended
into hell, that he might deliver his just from thence; S. Athanasius de
Incarnatione, and in diverse other places of his works; S. Basil upon the 14.
Psalm, and 48. S. Gregory Nissen in his first Oration de resurrectione
Christi; S. Gregory Nazianzen oratione 2. de Paschate; Epiphanius in Ancor. S.
Cyril de recta fide ad Theodosium, and Theodoret upon the 15. Psalm.

31. To these Greek Fathers I may add these latin: Tertullian in his book de
anima cap. 31. 32. Hyppolitus the Martyr in oratione de Antichristo, S. Cyprian
in his sermon de unction Chrismatis; S. Hilary upon the Psalm 138. and in his
10. book de Trinitate Philastrius de haeresibus, cap. de descensu Christi ad
inferos: Gaudentius tract. 6. de Exodus Prudentius him. 9. and 10. S. Ambrose de
fide cap. 3. and de mysterio Paschae cap. 4. and cap. 10. upon the Romans, and
4. to the Ephesians, 3. of Eccles. and upon the 9. Chap. of Zachary: Ruffinus
upon his exposition of the Creed; S. Augustine Epist. 47. ad Dardanum, the
first question, and infinite other places of his works: S. Leo sermon the
first de resurrectione: Fulgentim lib. 3. ad Thrasimundum, cap. 23. Vigilius
the Martyr in his book against Eutiches: Arator the subdeaco^ in his first
book upon the Acts, the 2. chapter: S. Gregory in the 13. book of his
Morales, cap. 20. and 21. upon the Psalm De profundis: Beda in his third book
upon Job, the 7. chapter: All these, and many others may be alleged as all
consenting about the litterall meaning of this Article.

32. And yet do the Protestants of our unhappy time differ from all these in
the understanding of this Article of Christ his descent into hell, though they
do profess to admit the whole Creed. And amongst the rest, the very words of
this Article of the Creed: for some of them, by descending into hell,
understand that he descended into his sepulcher: this is the opinion of Bucer,
that was Regius Professor Bucer. in cap. 27. Matthew.
and public reader of Divinity in Cambridge in King Edward the sixth his days:
and the same houldeth Beza in his Commentary upon the second Chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles. And Calvin himself misliketh not this interpretation in
his commentary upon the 15. Psalm, where he interprets these words (Thou
shall not leave my soul in hell) thus: Thou shall not leave my soul in the
grave or sepuscher: But how improbable an interpretation this is, each man of
common reason will discern. For who ever heard, that souls were shut up in
sepulchers?

33. But M. Calvin after his fashion persisteth not long in in this, but nath
another more solemn interpretation in Caluins horrible opinion about the
article of Christ's descensio^ into hell. Call. 2. inst. c. 16. 6. 8. 9. 10. 11.
12.
his second book of Institutions, and in diverse other books of his, and the
exposition is this, that Christ did suffer the very self same pains of hell
it self, and all the torments of the damned, in his soul upon the Cross, as
fear, despair, distrust, horror, and the like, by apprehending God his
heavenly Father to be angry with him. And in this Calvin is so confident, that
he fears not to go further, and to blaspheme and say, that without this his
corporal death had been to no purpose: Nihil actum erat (says he) si
corporea tantum morte desunctus fuisset Christus. Nothing had been Item in
Catechismo paruo. ite^ psych. item in harmo. Euangelica cap. 27. Math.
effected, if Christ had only dyed a corporal death. And so according to this
interpretation of Calvin, Christ's bodily death on the Cross did not deliver
us, without these pains of Christ's soul: and yet, says he, the soul went
not down locally to any place of punishment (for this does he not only deride,
saying there is no such place, but especially does he hold it for a fable as
presently we shall see:) but rather endured, as he affirms, and suffered the
2. Inst. cap. 16.. 10.
pains of hell, and of the damned, as is before said. But the truth is, this
is a blasphemous speech, and quite overthrows the whole mystery of our
Redemption. For let us search the Scriptures from the Alpha to the Omega, from
the beginning of Genesis, or book of Creation, to the end of that mystical
book of S. John's Revelation, and we shall not only find not any the like
speech to this, but the clean contrary in infinite places, all and every where
ascribing the whole mystery of our Redemption to Christ his precious bloodshed,
and bodily passion. And unto this will every indifferent Protestant easily
subscribe and yeald.

34. And now touching his contemptuous censuring of all antiquity in the point
of Limbus Patrum (which was the place where the souls of the ancient Fathers,
and Patriarchs remained and were detayned, until Christ's Resurrection:) Haec
fabula de Limbo Patrum (says he) ad quos 2. Instit. c. 16.. 9.
libera^dos Christum descendisse narrant; tametsi magnos habeat auctores, nihil
tamen aliud quam fabula est. This fable of Limbus Patrum, or prison of the
Fathers, for whose deliverance they recount Christ to have descended, albeit it
has great authors, that make for it, yet is it naught else but a fable.

35. And who be these authors whom M. Calvin both accompteth great, and yet
rejects, but those principally, whom before we have named, pillars of the
Church in the primitive ages? And did ever any man since the first foundation
of Christian Religion speak so of all the light learning, piety, devotion, and
Religion of all the whole Christian world together, this one wretched impostor
excepted?

36. Thus then we see, that Calvin, though in words he admit this article of
the Creed: yet he dissented from A story of the contention of English Ministers
about the descent of Christ into hell.
all antiquity in the exposition thereof. Now as for the Church of England what
they hold therein, it is hard to say, though many, and sore conflicts there
has been amongst Ministers and Preachers of my quality for many years
together, about the exposition of the article, He descended into hell. Only
two memorable things I call to mind that passed there in my time in diverse
parts of that Kingdom, and all about the exposition of that article, which
here I have thought good, historically as it were, to interlace. The first was
in manner as follows. It happened, that some dozen years since, I light by
chance upon a certain Exercise (for so the brethren call it) held by a
certain number of Ministers of the purer strain (as usually these kind of
Exercises are.) The town (where this meeting of Ministers was) is called
Maxfield, in the very uttermost skirt, and confines of Cheshire, and the text
then, and there treated upon by the brethren, was the Psalmists Prophetical
prediction of Christ's descensio^ into hell, as it is mentioned Psalm. 15. v. 8.
and repeated again Act. 2. v. 27. Quonia^ non Psalm. 15.
relinques animam meam in inferno: Because thou shall not leave my soul in
hell. And the place is very pregnant, for proving the point. The bench being
set, the Ministers each in time, and order spoke (but God knows how few wise
and true words were spoken amongst them:) The first starts up, and expounds it
of Christ his suffering upon the Cross: a second understands it of the Grave:
a third extended it to Christ his sufferings of hell torments in soul: and the
fourth yet added, and interpreted it of Christ's being in the state of the dead.
The Moderator (for such a one they have in all their Exercises) he as wise as
the rest instead of mending all, he marreth all: for he commends all,
approves all, and receives all, and then falls out into a wonderful
admiration of the diversity of the gifts of the spirit, that every one of his
fellow laborers in the Gospel, should have his several exposition, and yet
all to agree, and all to be intended by the holy Church. But this is just
according to Tertullian his prescription: Nihil interest haereticis, licet
diuersa tractantibus, dum Tertul. de praescript.
ad vnius veritatis expugnationem conspirent: it imports not amongst
heretics, though so many men be of so many minds, whilst they can conspire to
impugn one truth. And do not so many several, and erroneous expositions,
banded against one true meaning of the article, forcibly make good this
prescription, and note of Tertullian?

37. And for my part, as then so now, I am of absolute opinion, that if all my
brethren, and their Moderator with them had been as far out of the town, as
they were every one of them from the truth of the text, and meaning of the holy
Ghost, in that place, they would never more have returned, either to wives or
Cures, or made such an other fanaticall exposition, tending only to the
overthrow of the Article.

38. But yet my second observation goes far beyond all this, and for the
nouelty, and absurdity of the exposition it deserves to be registered in the
record of eternal memory, that all the world may take notice of the palpable
blindness of heresy: and it is of diverse stipendary Preachers, who as they
severally succeeded one the other in a very eminent place of that Kingdom: so
they diversely expounded the article: one of them expounded it of hell torments
in Caluins sense: a second succeding, of the grave, in Beza his meaning: the
third and last, because he would be sure to prove himself an heretic,
addidit de suo, he found out such an exposition, as was never heard of before,
unless it were by one Jacob, a turbulent and Schismatic spirit that opposed
himself against the Bishop of Winchester (impar congressus, I say no more)
touching this article. His exposition in plain words was this: Christ
descended into hell that is says he, he ascended into heaven, A strange and
ridiculous exposition of the Article Desce^dit ad inferos.
and this he thought he proved substantially out of the Greek words (...),
which said he, signifies no more, the^ that Christ went (...), that is, said
he, to an invisible place, and this must be proportioned according to the
dignity of the person, and consequently must be heaven. For what place can be
fit for the Son of God being thus in the state of the dead, but heaven? And
so as before, his conclusion for a full and perfect exposition of this article
was, he descended into hell, that is, he ascended into heaven. And is not this
(as Luther merrily gibeth at the Canonical exposition of, Hoc est corpus meum)
as if a man taking upon him to interpret this text, God created heaven and
earth, should interpret it thus, acroked staff was made a kite, or the cuccow
did eat up the kitling bones and all? For certain I am, there is as much truth
and correspondency betwixt the one, as the other. Oh miserable Preachers! o
thrice miserable people, that thus suffer their eyes to be put out, and their
souls to be deluded, beguiled, and betrayed by such heretical impostors!

39. And now to proceed forward, and to see what the Church of England does
hold in this point, M. Thomas Rogers Minister of Horninger and Chaplain to
the Lord of Canterbury, having taken upon him to set forth in print of late,
The faith, doctrine, and religion prosessed and protected in England (for so
are his words) in 36. articles agreed upon (as he says) by the Bishops and
Clergy of England, when he comes unto this article, he seems not to know
what to say, for having laid forth this article of Christ's descent into hell he
has these words: That Christ went down into hell (says Tho. Rogers in his
39. articles page 15. 16. etc.
he) all sound Christians both in former times, and now living do acknowledge:
howbeit in the interpretation of the article, there is not that consent that
were to be wished. And so after he has set down diverse opinions of others,
forgetting to put down his own, he passes and posteth the matter over in
such sort, as that no man can tell what they of England do hold, or what it is
that is agreed upon by the Bishops, or whether they hold any thing at all,
though in the title of The Church of England adversary to many of her own: for
many hold that Christ descended not into hell at all.
his book he does promise to set down 39. Articles uniformly agreed upon by
the said Bishops and Clergy: belike he found no concord or agreement in this
behalf, only he recounteth the adverse opinions which he holds for opposite
erours, and adversaries to the truth, and then going on futher he says: But
until we know the native and undoubted sense of this article, and mystery of
Christian Religion, we persist adversaries unto them that say that Christ
descended not into hell at all, or that Christ descended into the place of
everlasting torments or endured in soul the pains of damned spirits etc.
which opinions you have heard now to have been partly of Calvin, partly of
other Protestants: so as with them the Church of England holds not, nor yet
with the Papists, says he, for that presently he adds for an opposite error
unto them, That Christ in soul went down into Limbo lake, to fetch from
thence Thaddaeus Ignatius, Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus, and all antiquity are
dreaming Papists in M. Rogers definitive opinion.
the souls of our forefathers, which souls (says he) before Christ's death,
as Papists dreme, were shut up in the close prison of hell. Now then to reflect
upon the premises, and out of them to infer the conclusion, the illation must
needs be this: Though all parts do in words admit this article of Christ his
descent into hell: yet do they greatly differ in the sense and the ministers of
England as it seems, have no certain faith therein at all, neither do they
ascribe so much assistance of the holy Ghost to their Church (which the true
Church could never want (as to be able to explain the native, and undoubted
sense of this article, and Mystery of Christian Religion to use M. Rogers
words: so as their belief herein is only negative (as their whole Religion)
is which is to believe, that all others are deceived besides themselves and yet
do they affirm nothing in particular. And let this suffice for this article.

40. Let us now a little cast about, and take a view of the ninth article in
order, as the Creed naturally brancheth it, and it is this: Credo Sanctam
Ecclesiam Catholicam etc. I believe the holy Catholic Church: the words of
this article are agreed upon, on all parts, but the senses framed Credo
Ecclesiam Catholicam.
thereupon and believed of different Christians, are most different, and
repugnant. For first those of the Roman, and truly Catholic Religion do
according to the exposition of ancient Fathers (which is a most certain, and
infallible rule of their faith) understand by this Catholic Church, that
visible Congregation of the first believing The visible beginning of the
Catholic Church.
Christians gathered together in Jerusalem at the time of our blessed Savior
his Ascension, at which assembly the holy Apostles themselves (who made this
article) were present, together with the Blessed Virgin Mother of God, and
other holy men and women, upon whom the holy Ghost descended, enlightened
them, and inflaming them to preach the name of Christ, and further
establishing, and confirming them in the truth, encouraging them to go
forwards manfully without fear of any opposite humane power, and promising
them, that the power of Christ, and assistance of the same holy Ghost should be
with them, and the directors of them, unto the worlds end, to preserve this
Church and holy Congregation in all necessities and extremities, so that the
gates of hell, and damnable error should never prevail against it.

41. Moreover the said Catholic Christians did ever understand this Church to
be called holy, in respect both of the great sanctity of her doctrine, and the
holiness of many of her children, who besides the precepts of the law, as S.
Gregory speaks, nay over, and above the precepts of the law, as S. Basil,
and S. Chyrsostome jointly speak Lib. 25. in ob. c. 24. 5.
should endeavor, etiam praecepta legis perfectiori virtute transcendere, to
transcend the precepts of the law, by deuouting themselves unto the observation
of Christ his high Counsayles of Evangelical perfection.

42. Also this Church is called holy, for the immediate and perpetuated
assistance of the holy Ghost, inspiring her inwardly, directing her outwardly,
and especially for the means of sanctification conuaied unto her through the
conducts of her Sacraments, as chiefest and most holy instruments to that
effect, conferring grace for our assistance in the performing of all good
works, whereof none can be partakers to salvation out of this Church.

43. This Church is also called Catholic, for the reasons before set down in
the first Chapter and first Consideration; to wit, that it is universally
spread over the world by the ministry of the Apostles in the very beginning,
and so has hitherto continued still, and ever shall to the worlds end: and
further it has these signs and marks to be known by, and to be
distinguished from all heretical Congregations whatsoever, to wit, Antiquity,
Universality, Union, and Succession by descent of Bishops. And finally for full
complement, it has that communion of Saints, both by union in faith, and
communion of Sacraments, which no other Schismatic Co^uenticle or heretical
congregation has: and out of this communion there can be no possibility of
life, or salvation. Vincent. Lyrinensis aduersus hareses c. 3. Tertull. de
praescript. cap. 32.
All this, and much more (which here I am constrained to omit) do those of the
Roman Religion understand by this article, I believe in the holy Catholic
Church, the communion of Saints: and it would require a whole volume to set
down the several sentences, discourses, and authorities of ancient Fathers,
that jointly concur in this exposition, and explanation.

44. But now on the other side, if we cast our eyes upon the state of the
English Clergy, we shall find that The Protestantly meaning about this 9.
article.
howsoever they do admit the same in words, yea, and subscribe thereunto in
their Ordination (for that they teach their Rligion to follow their State, as
their State brought in their Religion:) yet exceeding great is the difference,
and large are their consciences in understanding the same, as may appear in
part out of the 19. article, published by M. Rogers, as agreed upon by our
English Bishops, concerning the Church: about which he has seven several
propositions, first agreeing in some of them, somewhat with the Catholics, and
they have learned it from the Catholic Religion, and as their usual practice
is; and then making their own choice, to dissent, and disagree at their
pleasure, as the inured custom of all Heretics has ever been.

45. His first proposition then is this: There is a Church 1.
of Christ not only invisible, but also visible, whereto supposing him to
understand of the true Catholic Church, (for otherwise he says nothing) we
do also agree, as their Bishops Later propositions of the Protestats about the
Church.
in like manner may be supposed to do: and yet can I speak this upon my own
knowledge, that it is against the common known tenent and practice of their
Academicall Schools: for there the question is amongst the most forward
Protestants, An Ecclesia sit inuisibilis, whether the true Church be invisible;
and yet is held affirmitiuely, to wit, Rogers ar. 19. page 86.
that it is invisible, and not visible to manseies, for the visibility of the
Church tends to flat Popery, which they cannot endure.

46. His second proposition is, That there is but one Church; 2.
which we affirm also, and they from us have learned so to speak: and yet I
do not see how the Protestant, Puritan, and other Sectaries, Lutherans, and
Sacramentaries can make one Church, they differing so fundame^tally amongst
themselves, and in such weighty points of faith and religion, as they do.

47. His third assertion is; The visible Church is a Catholic Church: 3.
M. Rogers would have said, or at least wise should have said, that the
Catholic is a visible Church: and the reason is, for that all visible
Churches, are not Catholic, but all Catholic Churches are visible. And what
was the reason of this his incongruity of speech I do not see, unless he meant
thereby to steal the name of Catholic unto every visible Congregation of
Sectaries, which is clearly overthrown by the definition, and large
explication of the word Catholic, set down in the first Chapter.

48. His fourth proposition is: The word of God was, and 4.
for time is before the Church: which being understood of the Scripture, or
written Word (for otherwise it is nothing to our purpose,) it contains in it
a senseles, and gross absurdity, for thereupon it would follow, that before
Moses time, the first writer of the Bible (which was more then two thousand
years after the creation of man) God had no Church, because there was extant
no written Word or Scripture, which were very ridiculous to affirm. But the
only refuge that I can possibly perceive that M. Rogers has left him to make
good his fourth assertion in proouing the word of God more ancient then the
Church, is to fly to the unwritten word: but this will not serve his turn
neither, since we have only in this place to do with the litterall, or written
word of God, begu^ne by Moses the first pen man of the holy Ghost, and so
successively upon sundry occasions continued.

49. M. Rogers his first proposition is, That the marks, 5. Marks of the
Church.
and tokens of their visible Church, are the due, and true administration of
the Word, and Sacraments: but these marks are not admitted by the
Catholics, but worthily rejected, for that they are as hard, and obscure to
find out, and as much controuerted as the thing it self whereof they should be
marks: for that all parts, yea all sects, and heresies do pretend to have
due and true administration of the word, and Sacraments, and it is as hard a
matter to determine this controversy as the other, viz. to find out, which is
the true Church. But the Marks of Antiquity, Universality, Unity, and
Succession before mentioned, and given by Catholics (for such were
Tertullians 1400. years ago, when he wrote that excellent book of
Prescriptions, and Vincentius Lyrinensis 1200. years since, to take away your
late imputation, and denomination of Papist unto Catholics) are so clear,
and evident in themselves, that presently they will distinguish betwixt one
Church and another, betwixt Roman Catholics and all heretical Sectaries. And
albeit some Sectaries being pressed therewith, will pretend to have these
marks in their Church, and will set a good face upon the matter, and challenge
them also, yet are these words out before they be aware: for the matter being
so evident against them, they presently give over their claim, they are
content to hold hands of, running to other obscure marks (the common Plea of
all condemned Heretics) of the due and true administration of the Word and
Sacraments, when God wotteth they have neither Word nor Sacrament, according to
the Catholic integrity and sincerity.

50. M. Rogers sixth proposition about the Church is: That the visible Church
(to wit the true and Catholic Church) 6.
may, and has from time to time erred both in doctrine and conversation: which
assertion the Catholic in his sense does hold for so blasphemous, and absurd,
yea ridiculous also, as nothing can be more. For if this be true, that the true
visible Catholic Church spread over the whole Christian world, can err, and
induce into error, then is there no surety, or certainty in the world, no not
in the promises of Christ, and his Apostles, who assured us the contrary.

51. But let us take a view of M. Rogers proofs out of Scripture for
confirming this his sixth assertion, which Ridiculous proofs that the Church
may err
surely are so fantastical and impertinent for any consequence to be drawn
from them, so absurd in reason, and ridiculous in religion, that no man of
judgment, or conscience can read them without indignation, and laughter, as by
the view will appear. For thus he sets them down in his own words, only
I will add the inference upon every probation out of Scriptures. His first
place is: Take heed, Matthew. 24. 4. therefore the Church may err. Believe it
not, Matthew. 23. 26. therefore the Church may err. Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisyes, and of the leaven of Herod, Mar. 8. 15. therefore the Church may
err. Many shall be deceived, yea the very elect, were it possible, Matthew. 24.
11. therefore the Church may err. Shall he find faith upon the earth, Luc. 18.
8. therefore the Church may err. We know in part, 1, Cor. 13. 12. therefore
the Church may err. Beware of Dogs, therefore the Church may err, Beware of
evil works, beware of concision, Philip. 3. v. 2. therefore the Church may
err. God shall send them strong illusions, that they should believe lies. 2 Thessalonians. 9. 10. therefore the Church may err. And is not this a sound proof out
of the Scriptures?

52. These are those clear texts, that M. Rogers brings forth to prove, that
the universal Christian visible Catholic Church (for that only we now treat
of) may be deceived, and has erred, determining matters of doctrine: and yet
as you see, here is not one word that is spoken, or may be applied to the said
universal Catholic Church, but only caueats given to the Church, to beware
of particular deceauers, Heretics, Pharisees, Herod, and the like. And
consequently these places are so idly urged, and so absurdly applied by the
Author, that I should wast time in spending any more labor about perusing
them any further. Only one of his places, I will but touch in one word. Many
(says Christ) shall be deceived, yea the very elect, if it were possible: out
of which place, for the overthrowing of M. Rogers proposition, and inferring
the clean contrary assertion, I reason thus, and let Tribunal Syllogismi
vmpire betwixt us both, which is the better, and fitter consequence deduced out
of this place: if it be impossible that the elect shall be deceived, though
many be deceived, then the Church comprehending the elect, as a part of her,
cannot be beceiued: sed verum primum, for truth it self has spoken it, (and
this is the true meaning of those words, if it were possible etc.) ergo and
secundum. The like consequence I would infer out of all the rest, but the
places are so absurdly, and against all common sense and reason urged, that
they are not longer to be stood upon.

53. The like miserable course, or rather more pitiful (if possibly it may be)
does he take to prove the second part of his proposition, which is, that the
said Catholic visible Church may err in determining matters of life, and
manners (for that is the question, and not his idle word of erring in
conversation.) And first he does alleag the words of Christ, Iniquity shall be
increased, and the love of many shall wax could, Matthew. 24. 12. therefore the
Church may err in determining matters of life, and manners. Secondly he cites
that of S. Paul, Restore etc, least thou also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1. therefore
the Church may err in determining matters of life, and manners. Thirdly, I do
not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I:
if I do that which I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that
dwells in me, Romans 7. 19. 20. therefore the Church may err in determining
matters of life, and manners. Fourthly, There is a fight even in the best men,
and members of Christ, Romans 7. 23, therefore the Church may err in determining
matters belonging to life, and manners: for this must be his conclusion out of
every one of these places, as his former of doctrine was out of the other. And
are not these goodly arguments to prove his assertion? His assertion (as you
have often heard) was, that the visible Catholic Church might err in
determining matters belonging to manners, to wit in defining and finally
determining, this is good, that is bad, this is lawful, that unlawful, and
the like; and he comes in with his misapplied texts, to prove that particular
men may have infirmities in them, and fight of their passions, or
concupiscence. Does he not hit the nail on the head think you?

54. But now lastly let us come to his seventh, and last exposition upon this
article of the Creed. The Church of Rome (says he) has most shamefully erred
in life, Ceremonies, and matters of says, this he should have proved,
according Rogers p. 96.
as he undertakes in other articles from the warrant of divine Writ, but here
he leaves Gods word, and runs to Poets that say, Roma mares etc. Rome
loves boys: as who would say, that this horrible, and execrable sin (if it
be, or have been in Rome) is not also in other Cities of the world, or as if
this alone were sufficient to prove his purpose, if he could show, that there
were many lewd livers in Rome. The thing he ought to prove is this, that the
whole Church of Rome (that is to say, the Catholic Roman Church, spread over
the whole world, acknowledging Rome for the chief head, and member thereof)
had erred from her public decrees set forth to be delivered throughout the
whole Church, either for position of faith or direction of manners: for this
only is the point in controversy and not whether any man have lived loosely in
Rome, or any Popes have been naughty men, or may be hereafter. So as for the
point controuerted, he brings not one word of proof, and all that he has
scraped together of spiteful slanders, and contumelious reproaches against
diverse Popes, and other Prelates of that City, as in consequence of argument,
they are nothing to the purpose, nor can make any inference at all against the
matter in question, so are they in fact, proved by diverse Catholic Authors
to be shameful lies, contrary to the testimony Lib. de Po^t. a cap. 8. ad
finem vsque ad cap. 15.
of the best, and most Authentical authors, that have written, whereof the
reader may see effectual proofs in Bellarmine, and others that do answer
those slanders against Rome.

55. Now then we see how out of this one article of the Apostles Creed (which
all parts do admit) what different doctrine there is drawn by different
expositions: and I might show the same in sundry other articles, as namely in
that which ensues immediately after, Credo remissionem peccatorum: I believe
the remission of sins: which article those of the Roman faith do understand
accordingly as the ancient Fathers do, and this is not only of the remission of
sins by our Savior his passion, and grace thereby merited to this effect,
but also of the ordinary means left by our said Savior in the Church for
ordinary remission of sins, and namely by faith and baptism, for such as
enter first into the Church, and the holy Sacrament of Penance, which is
(according as ancient Fathers do call it) secu^da tabula post nausragium, the
second table of the soul after baptismes ship wrack, for such as sin after
baptism, and other Sacraments: all which Sacraments, and other means to this
effect do work their effects in the power, and virtue of the said passion of
our Savior. So houldeth the Catholic. But the Protestant that comes forth
with a not imputation, says, that this remission of sins consists only in
this that they are not imputed, and consequently draws a far other sense
upon this article; so as I must perforce conclude with that which often has
been said, and repeated, that it is not sufficient to admit these Creeds in
words as the Ministers of England are said to do in their Ordination, but the
true sense, and meaning is especially to be stood upon: which meaning being
far dissonant from the understanding of the known Catholic Church (as
lately we have showed) their orall and verbal admission of the said Creeds
cannot be sufficient to make them Christian Catholics, or deliver them from
the imputation of being Heretics: for that this very choice and election which
they do make of particular senses, and interpretations of the Articles of these
Creeds, opposite unto our former rules, and Considerations before set down at
large, properly and effectually convince them to be heretics indeed. And so
much of this matter for the present,

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER, CONCERNING THE APPROBATION, AND ALLOWANCE OF THE FOUR
GENERAL COVNCELS: Which is the third general head of trial offered and
proposed by his Excellent Majesty of England.
AS in the former two grounds of believing Canonical Scriptures, and admitting
the three usual Creedes, and that only upon the Churches public tradition,
his Matie has given forth a declaration unto the whole Christian World of his
confident persuasion of being a Christian Catholic, and no Heretic: even so
in this third general head, I mean in the admitting and receiving of the
four first General Counsels, his Royal Grace has not only continued, and
perseuered in the former declaration of his good intention and persuasion, but
has further, and much more ratified and confirmed the same, as appears by
these his words, where he writes: I reverence and admit (says he) the four
first general Counsels as Catholic and Orthodoxe: And the said General
Counsels are Premonit. page 35.
acknowledged by our Acts of Parliament, and received for orthodoxe by our
Church. In which words, though I must ingenuously confess, that I cannot
retain the least scruple, or doubt of the sincerity and candor of his
Majesty's meaning, but that according to his Noble apprehension, and the
information given him by his Doctors, he does indeed for his Princely part, and
Person, reverence, and admit the four first General Councels, and will be
ready like a pious meaning Prince to receive all the particular points of faith
concluded therein, when they shall be discovered unto him: Yet since this
Parlamentary admission of Counsels is the^ ground of all, and must prove the
admitting, and rejecting of them, either good or bad, on the Church of Englands
behalf, my first demand shall be but this: What has lay parliaments to do with
Religion? What business make they with the Counsels of the Church? Who designed
unto them this authority, to alter, chop, and change Religion at their
pleasure? Upon what ground do they admit some Counsels, and reject others?
Especially having excluded from Parlamentall suffrage all their Catholic
Bishops, and Clergy men, as it is evident they did (the thing remaining yet
registered upon Authentical record, and fresh in the memories of many now
living) when at the first and second lay Parlaments, in the first year of the
late Queen, they banished Catholic Religion out of the land.

2. But supposing these four Councels to be admitted, and received (if we
consider how these Councels indeed are acknowledged by our Acts of Parliament,
how reverenced, and in what manner received for Catholic, and Orthodoxe by
our English Congregation at this day) we shall be fo far from justifying the
Protestant Parlamentary admission of these Councels, or any other of their
actions whatsoever, though never so outwardly veiled, and covered with a
colorable show of piety, as that in How the Parlame^t and Church of England do
admit the first four General Councels.
very deed we shall discover naught else, throughout the passages of their whole
proceedinges but fraud, imposture, collusion, dissimulation, hypocrisy, and
heresy: Which to make good against them in the particular carriage, and
passage of this present business of Counsels, let us but leave the barky rind,
and outward cork, and enter into the inward marrow and substance: that is, let
us give no credit to their words, but look into their deeds, and we shall
easily discern, yea the matter will disclose it self. For to set their words
aside, whom we have ever found contrary in their deeds, if the Church of
England do sincerely embrace, and receive for Catholic, and Orthodoxe these
four first general Counsels which did resemble, comprehend, and present the
whole Primitive Church for more then four hundred, and fifty years together
after Christ, then must it follow, if they mean as they say, and that their
words shall not prove wind, that the English Church, and our lay Parlaments
must acknowledge and admit also that doctrine for Catholic, and Orthodoxe,
which without impeachment, controllement, or contradiction of any, can be
substantially proved to have been taught, and held in this visible universal
Church, whereof these four Councelles collectiuely represented the whole body
for all that time. Which foresaid doctrine that both it, and every point thereof
passed for so many ages uncontrolled, this one reason may suffice to prove
instead of all; for that the said doctrines should otherwise have been noted,
espied out, reprehended, and censured by some of these Counsels, else had they
not done their duties, neither had they been so vigilant for the good of the
whole body: as they ought to have been; if having condemned some heresies (as
they did) they had winked at others. Which once to imagine of an Ambrose, an
Augustine, and a Hierome for the latin Church, a Basil, a Chrysostom, and an
Athanasius for the Greek, nay to suppose it, and that confidently, though most
impudently of all the great Saints, and learned Doctors in the world together,
this cannot be no less then senseless absurdity, gross stupidity, yea
heathenish impiety, when as the least of these, which I have named, was for
learning able to have resisted the whole Christian world, and for their zeal
would have spared none, in a point of error or heresy: as I may instance and
prove by Tertullian, Origin, and S. Cyprian: were any of these, though never so
great, by the rest spared? Were any former merits, though never so many
respected, if once they presumed to innouate the least error whatsoever? And
therefore to strike at the point I aim at in the period of the Conclusion,
does the English Church, and Parliament admit all the doctrines that were taught
in the Church, and that continued without the impeachment of any,
notwithstanding all the zealous, and vigilant Pastors in the Church? I think
it will make great difficulty: and let it reject them, or any of them, there
needs no more to prove that Church to be heretical: let it admit them, it
proves it self by departure from them, and their doctrines to be Apostaticall,
for that it houldeth not the same points of faith, with these four first
Counsels, which it makes show to receive and embrace. In a word, let it admit
them, or reject them, they shall never be able to wipe away the blot, and
blemish, imputation, and innovation of damnable error from their Church. For
better understanding whereof, as also of some other particulers thereto
belonging, and hereupon necessarily depending, I have thought good to decipher
out these ensuing Considerations.

The first Consideration.
MY first Consideration (which I promise, as the very Why and how these four
first Councels were gathered, and how thereby it is convinced that the church
cannot err.
groundwork, and foundation of all the rest) must of necessity be this, that
the Parliament, and Church of England admitting these four first general
Counsels of Nyce, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon for Orthodoxe, and
truly Catholic (as representing in their Bishops the complete, and entyre
body of the Catholic Church in their several ages) must needs acknowledge
in like manner, that for these first four hundred and fifty years (or rather
five hundred, for that it is not probable, nay possible, that within the
compass of fifty years, the same should now fail which had already by
virtue of Christ his promise continued four hundred and fifty years) the Vide
Aug. de unit. Eccles. in pluribus locis.
true Catholic Church of Christ, consisted not only of the elect, and
consequently was invisible, but of good and bad, and thereupon was visible,
under visible heads. And this was figured by the Parables of the net that
caught both good and bad fish, and by the field that brought forth good corn,
and weeds. And further, that this visible external Church in those days was
the very same, whereof Christ's words were to be understood, when he gave this
in charge to one upon occasion, and supposal of Mat. 18. 15 16. 17. 18. 1. Tim.
3. 15.
a complaint made against his brother, which if he succeeded not, then, Dic
Ecclesiae, tell the Church: as also that other of S. Paul that the Church is
Columna, and firmamentum veritatis, the Pillar, and foundation of truth: so as,
if a man in those days would have had any controversy in Religion debated, and
resolved, if he would have known what Scriptures the Apostles, and Evangelists
had committed unto the custody of the Church for Canonical, and Authentical:
and further if he desired to know which they were, how they might be known
from counterfeit, how they might be truly sensed, and rightly understood, what
and how many Sacraments were left by Christ unto his Church, which they were,
what were their effects and operations, how they were to be administered, and
such other like. And if he were a Jew, or Gentill, that thus demanded,
questioning these doubts, and would upon the resolution thereof become a
Christian, but being unlearned, would be instructed in all these cases, and the
like he was to have made his repair, and recourse unto this external visible
Church, and to have stood in all points whatsoever, unto her final
determination, decision, direction, instruction, and perpetual government in
all these first five ages, without malepart repugnancy, or obstinate reply, if
he ever intended to be saved. And if upon any animosity, or peruicacity any man
were cast out of that Church in all that time either for interpreting
Scriptures in his own sense, according to a private spirit, or for perverting
or innouating de nouo, de suo, of his own head or brain, in any the least
point of faith, and mystery of Christian religion, as the Protestants do both,
his damnation was by all held and concluded for certain, except he repented,
and listened, yea and obeyed the voice of the Church his mother, that sought to
reclaine him: for that the authority of this Church was ever held for God his
highest tribunal upon earth, and therefore irrefragable, since the tribunal of
heaven stands expecting what is here done by the Church upon earth, being
ever ready to loose, or bynd, to deliver over unto Satan, or to release from
the bands of sin, error, and heresy, according unto the former passed
doom, and sentence of the Church, as among other Fathers, S. John Chrysostom
in his books of Chrysostom. l. 3. de sacerdot.
Preisthood does very well declare.

4. And now to come unto these Councels, and Council of Nice assembled anno.
327.
to speak particulerly of every one of them, as they lie in order. The
Council of Nice was gathered together somewhat more then three hundred years
after Christ: and the occasion of this first great Ecclesiastical Assembly of
all the world met together by their Bishops in this general Council, was for
the censuring and suppressing of two capital, and damnable heresies, that then
invaded, and infested the Church of Christ. The first was the heresy of the
Arians, and this impugned, nay flatly denied the second Person, his identity of
essence, to wit, the Son his equality of substance, and hodhead with the
Father, granting him to be (...), like unto the Father, but denying him to be
(...), of the same substance with the Father, which was the faith and belief
of the Catholic Church in those days.

5. The second heresy, was the heresy of the Quartadecimans, concerning the
celebrating of Easter Day, of which heresy to speak any thing in particular at
this time I intend not, since it is not to my present purpose; only I refer the
reader unto the author of the Three Conuersions of England, where this point is
both substantially, and punctually discussed. The main point whereof I am to
treat in this place, is to intimate unto the Reader, how both these heresies of
the Arians, and the heretical Quartadecimans were determined, censured, and
anathematized by the authority of this sovereign and supreme Ecclesiastical
Tribunal, I mean the first General Council of Nice, which consisted (as S.
Ambrose observes, alluding to the just number De fide ad Gratian.
of Abraham his soldiers) of three hundred and eighteen Bishops gathered from
all parts of Christendom. And this was the first General Council that could
be Assembled until that time, in respect of the most bloody and cruel
persecutions, that had continued for the greatest part of the prcedentages.

6. And here we are to observe, that albeit that three other Provincial
national Counsels are recorded to have been celebrated before this of Nice,
and after that of the Apostles Act. 15. to wit, one at Rome of 60. Bishops
against Nouatus, under Decius the cruel Emperor, and Cornelius the martyred
Pope, another at Ancyra in Galatia under Dioclesian, the third at Neocaesarea
under Constantines Father, and Pope Anno. 252
Melchiades according to Prateolus his account: yet this Council Anno. 308
of Nyce was the first great, and glorious Ecclesiastical tribunal, which was
publicly erected in the Christian Adno. 311.
Church for all Nations to repair unto, after the first planting of the faith
of Christ.

7. The second general Council was that of Constantinople somewhat more then
fifty years after, in the year of The second general Council of
Constantinople, an. 383.
our Lord 383. and it consisted of an hundred and fifty Bishops, gathered
together against Macedonius Patriarch of Constantinople, who openly denied and
blasphemed against the divinity of the holy Ghost: for which damnable heresy of
his, both he, and all that partaked with his heretical faction, were
condemned, censured, and cast out of the Church, and delivered over to Satan,
for that they blasphemed against the third sacred Person of the blessed
Trinity. And this second, great, and general Council was held under Gratian,
and Theodosius Emperors, and under Damasus then Bishop of Rome.

8. The third General Council was that which was The third general Council
of Ephesus Ann. 434.
assembled at Ephesus almost other fifty years after that again, in the year
of our Lords incarnation 434. This Council consisted of two hundred Bishops,
gathered aagainst another Archbishop of Constantinople named Nestorius but an
Arch-hereticke: and it was held under the Emperor Theodosius, and Pope
Celestinus. This Nestorius (as Vincentius Lyrinensis in his goulden tract
against heresies, and 17. chapter describes his heresy) whilst he made show of
distinguishing two natures in Christ, he suddenly brought in two persons, and
by an execrable impiety thereby made two Christ's, the one God, the other man,
the one begotten of God the Father, the other borne of the Virgin his mother,
and therefore he did further auerre, that holy Mary was not to be called, (...),
but (...), the mother of God, but the mother of Christ, because (forsooth) that
Christ which was God, was not borne of her, but the Christ which was
man.Hitherto my Author. And for this damnable heresy was Nestorius condemned
by this third Council, and worthily cast out of the Catholic Church: howbeit
I must confess, that I cannot see, how Calvin and Beza upon the point of
Christ's incarnation and hypostaticall union with diverse others Protestants
following the^, Lib. 1. Inst. c. 13.. 9. 23. 24.
can possibly avoid this old condemned heresy, but that Nestorianisme must
follow, as a necessary consequence of the doctrine which they deliver upon the
point of Christ's incarnation, and union.

9. The fourth general Council was that of Chalcedon, and this was some
twenty years and vpwardes after the The 4. general Council was that of
Calcedo^ 20. years after.
foresaid counsel of Ephesus, in which Council there were assembled six
hundred and thirty Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs. This great assembly
was gathered against on Eutiches an Archimandrite, or Abbot of Constantinople
in like manner, who so confounded the natures in Christ, that he absolutely
denied, that there were two distinct natures in him. For which monstrous
opinion of his, differing from the Canon of Catholic faith, he was condemned,
together with his fautor, and partener of his heretical faction, I mean
Dioscorus Archbishop of Alexandria, as was Nestorius another Archbishop before
him for houlding two persons in Christ. And this famous and through the whole
Christian world renowned Council was assebled and held under Martian that then
swayed the Empire, and S. Leo the first then Bishop of the Apostlicall Sea of
Rome.

10. And now to make use in general of that which has been spoken concerning
the four Councels by some particular application, and illation: the inference
must needs be this, that if the Church of England do indeed admit, and
reverence these four first General Councelles (as it should seem his Majesty
is of opinion it does, and their Acts of Parliament confirm the same) then does
it follow by necessary, and inevitable consequence (though the conclusion
overthrow a main ground of Protestanticall Religion) that they must needs
(will they, nil they) grant the Catholic Church not only to have been
visible at this time, but also to have been in great splendour, and
magnificence; otherwise how could it possibly be, that fix hundred, and thirty
Bishops could assemble, and meet so readily together, and all these for the
most part out of the Eastern parts of Christendom only, to speak nothing of
the west.

11. Furthermore, for as much as our English Church in admitting these
Councels, and that in the greatest Consistory of the Kingdom, the high Court
of Parliament, does thereby acknowledge, and condescend unto: that this
external visible Church, consisting of good, and bad is Christ's true Church,
endued with all the privileges above mentioned of Ecclesiastical power,
piety, purity, sanctity and the rest; I would ask first, how this so visible a
Church, so conspicuous for majesty, so illustrious for sanctity, An evident
declaration that the whole Church cannot err.
so adorned and beautified with all sorts of heavenly grace, and eclestiall
verity, should or could afterward grow to be invisible, be spoiled of her
dignity, bereaved of her authority, be robbed of her sanctity, and loose all
her graces and verity? Or how of the spouse of Christ is it possible, that she
should become the enemy of Christ? of the Church of God, the Sinagogue of
Satan? Protestants principles may imagine this, but this over throws the
very principles of all Christian Religion. For how can the later be preserved
inuiolably, if the former be so unstable? Or from whom can we suck the pure
milk of Christian Religion, or receive the stronger food of the high mysteries
of Divinity, if it be not from the breasts of the Church? If it be not from the
hand of our mothers learning, wisdom, and tradition? And now to follow this
heathenish and irreligious principle of the Protestants a little further: if
the Church, I mean the former mentioned visible Catholic Church of these
general Counsels; if this I say have thus fallen by false doctrine (as the
Protestants imagine) then this Apostasy, and defection must either begin
first from all, or from one, or from a few only. To the parts then: if from
all, how is it possible, that so great a body, nay Christ's own body mystical
(for so S. Augustine calls it) founded by the blood of Christ, propagated by
the mynistery of the Apostles, watered continually with the blood of many
millions of Martyrs, and dispersed over the visible face of the whole world, I
say and demand, how is it possible, that this Church should be corrupted all
at once, and that by willing corruption of affection, and judgment?

12. But if this defection vainly and ydlely supposed by the Protestants did
begin either from one, or arise from a few private men, contrary to the main
current of the Churches doctrine, and tradition, which had continued, and
lineally succeeded in the Centuries of the Church from Christ's time to the
Council of Chalcedon; then would no doubt the Prelates of the Church (which
now were in possession of the Ecclesiastical keys, and practice of the power,
and authority of the same, by censuring and condemning Archbishops, Abbots, and
Patriarchs as has been seen) have resisted and severally punished these
supposed noueltyes and new fangles in religion. And truly albeit we should set
aside the promise, and providence of our blessed Savior for co^seruing this
his Church which he had bought with so great a pricc, as his own precious
blood, and brought unto such eminent greatness, at this very time of the
Council of Chalcedon, which was more then four hundred years after his
Ascension: yet in all humane reason (setting the light of religion apart) it
cannot be so much as imagined, how such a body, Christ his body with such a
vigilant Senate, and head over it, should by secret stealth, or little, and
little, be infected, corrupted, poisoned and consumed (as their phrase is) with
Popery, heresy, superstition, or innovation, and all without sense, or feeling,
resisting and complaining, or any record left thereof in Author of Antiquity?
And yet if we will give credit unto the Protestants, and suffer their religion
to set the least footing in the Church, we must against all sense, reason,
faith, and religion imagine and believe all this, and much more, to wit, that
such, and so potent a body, so fortified with defenses by our Savior, was so
stolen away from it self, and from God also, as that it was lost, perverted,
corrupted, conquered by the gates of hell, made Babylon, the seat of
Antichrist, and City of Satan, before any man was aware of it: and are not
these positions of Protestants monstrous Paradoxes, strange Idea's and
Chymera's which no man of perfect sense can believe?

13. I read in the ancient Fathers, that were enlightened with so great a
measure of Gods, holy spirit, very earnest reprehensions, and severe inuectiues
against the absurdity of these imaginations. Let S. Augustine (one that was
wont to be full of reverence in some of the Protestants mouths) speak for
all. Illa Ecclesia (says he) quae fuit omnium gentium, iam non est? periji?
Hoc dicunt qui in illa non sunt. Aug. in Psalm. 101
o impudentem vocem! illa non est quia tu in illa non es. Vide ne tu ideo non
sis: nam illa erit, etiamsi tu non sis: That Church which was propagated, and
spread over the world, consisting S. Aug. excellent speech of the perpetuity of
the Church.
of all nations (as now at the time of Chalcedon) is it now no more? Is she
perished, or vanished away? So say those, that are not in her. O impudent
voice! Is not she, because thou art not in her? See lest therefore thou be not,
for she will be, though thou be not.

14. Thus S. Augustine in his days argued against the Donatists, who said then
just, as our Protestants do now, when they were pressed with the authority of
the Catholic visible Church, that indeed, that had been for a time the true
Church, but that afterward it perished, it failed, and fell into Apostasy:
Apostatauit, perijt, it did apostatate and perish, except only in the people,
who only in their own judgment made the true Church indeed.

15. And can any thing in the world be more like then this to our case? Do not
the Protestants, and the Donatists so conspire together that a man cannot
distinguish them by their voice? The Protestants acknowledges the whole body
of the Christian Catholic Church, under these four Counsels, for the space
almost of five hundred years together: neither can he chose but confess
(since the point has been so often extorted from him) the outward luster,
Hierarchy, Government, and Authority thereof. But if you ask him five hundred
years after, then he will answer with the Donatist, suit, and non est: it was
the true Church, but it is not now, or at least wise not in that perfection of
authority, as then it was. And if you demand of him five hundred years after
that again about the time, that Luther sprang up, he will not stick flatly to
blaspheme with the same Donatist, Apostatauit, perijt, it has fallen into
Apostasy, it has perished: which speech you have heard S. Augustine before
call, impudentem vocem, an impudent voice, but presently after in the very same
place, he terms it by far worse Epithetons, as blasphemous to the holy
Ghost, which though I have touched before, yet will I repeat it here again,
for the better impression of it in our memory: and the greater detestatio^ of
the like sin.

16. Hanc vocem (says he) abominabilem and detestabilem, praesumptionis and
falsitatis plenam, nulla veritate suffultam, nulla sapientia illuminatam, nullo
sale conditam, vanam, temerariam, praecipitem, perniciosamp raeuidit Spiritus
Dei. The spirit of God (in the 101. Psalm) did forsee this abominable, and
detestable voice (of some that should say that the Catholic visible Church
had perished, and fallen into Apostasy) a speech full of presumption and
falsehood, sustained with no truth, enlightened with no wisdom, seasoned with
no salt, a vain, temerarious, headlong, and pernicious speech. So S.
Augustine. And then further some few lines after, the same Father brings in
the said visible Church of his age to expostulate with those furious and
frantic Donatists in this manner: Quid est quod, nescio, qui recedentes a me,
murmurant contra me? quid est quod perditi etc. What is the cause, I know not,
why certain people that go forth of me do murmr against me? What is the
cause why certain lost fellows do contend and say, that I am perished? For
this is their saying that I was (the true Church) but am not now etc. The
Scriptures (say they) have been fulfilled, for that all nations have believed,
but the Church has Apostated and perished, throughout the world etc. When we
urge the promise of Christ, Behold I am with you unto the Matthew. 29. ^0.
consummation of the world, here they say that Christ promised to be with the
Church until the end of the world, for that he did foresee that they (the
faction of Donatus) should arise, and continue the true Church upon earth. So.
S. Augustine of, and to the Donatists. And surely nothing can occur, and be
represented unto our understanding, more conform, and answerable unto the
sense, judgment, voice, agreement, and speech of the Sectaries of these our
times, concerning their false imputations, and most unjust calumniations
against the present Roman Church.

17. Now if this grave, and holy Father S. Augustine one of the chiefest
pillars of the latin Church in his days, speaking in the voice, and sense of
the said universal Catholic Application of S. Augustins speeches unto our
Sectaries
Church in his age, does so grievously and dreadfully censure this speech, and
blasphemous slander of the Apostasy of the visible Church (so triuiall, and
familiar unto Protestants now adays) as that he calls it impudent,
abominable, detestable, presumptuous, false, foolish, rash, temeratious, and
pernicious, as you have heard: If he condemn even to the lowermost pit of
hell, all those that frequent the same, calling, and accompting them for
perditos, lost, and damned people, recedentes ab Ecclesia, Apostated from the
Church, upon a false surmise of their own foolish fancy, supposing that the
Church it self has Apostated, or may fall into Apostasy, what shall we say of
Protestants that do the same, and stand in the very same case?

18. But here it may be, perhaps, some man will reply, that S. Augustine in the
place before cyted, says not, that the visible Church cannot Apostate or
perish, but that it had not so done, and fallen away in his time, when the
Donatists did falsely impute the same unto it: but that it might err and fall
away from truth in time to come, that S. Augustine does not deny.

19. To this I answer, that albeit S. Augustine, totidem verbis, do not say in
so many words, the Church in time to come may not Apostatate: yet in pure
force of argument, and true substance of matter he does affirm it, in that he
alleges against the Donatists, and urges to convince the^, the very promise
of our Savior, made unto his Disciples, and in their persons unto the Church
for ever. Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque in consummationem saeculi: Behold I am
with you unto the consummation of the world: which promise holds for all
times in S. Augustine his judgment even until the worlds general
consummation: and therefore the same Father in another place writing upon
another Psalm, having first showed how the Church is the City builded upon an
hill, he further adds: Sedforte ista Ciuitas, quae mundum tenuit vniuersum,
aliquando euertetur. Absit: Deus enim fundauit eam in aeternum. Si ergo Deus
fundauit Aug. in psalm. 47.
eam in aeternum, quid times ne cadat? But happily this City, that has
possessed the whole world, shall in time to come be overthrown. God forbid:
for God has founded the same for ever (as the Psalmist speaks:) If therefore
God has founded the same for ever, why do thou fear least this foundation
may fall? Which very point S. Augustine repeateth again in his first book de
Symbolo, and the fifth Chapter, to show his constant and unvariable resolution
in this matter of the Church.

20. And here I might allege Father upon Father, Greek upon Latin, and
produce so many testimonies of the ancient Worthies and ancient Fathers, as
might suffice to fill a large volume, and all of them tending directly to That
the Church shall never Apostatate.
this effect, to wit, that the visible Church planted by our Savior (he being
the foundation stone) and by his Apostles, and spread over the face of the
whole earth, shall never perish, or Apostatate from Christ, by any the least
damnable error, or heresy unto the end of the world, and Christ his second
coming unto judgment. And to prove this they do all of them allege and bring
many pregnant and evident places of Scriptures.

21. As for example, these two here urged by S. Augustine, as also that plain
text uttered by way of promise unto his disciples, Matthew. 16. by our Savior,
portae inferorum non praeualebunt aduersus eam. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against this Church: and on this place S. Chrysostom dilateth
himself much, as be by occasion treats upon the 148. Psalm, and in an
homily made at that time when he was to be expelled from Constantinople, he
inferred these words, upon that place: Quod si non credis verbo, and rebus,
ipsis operibus creed: if you will not believe Christ's words, the things
themselves here spoken, believe his works? How many Tyrants have gone about to
impugn the Church etc. Where are they that went about these things. Quomodo
impurissime Diabole, Ecclesia^te putas posse deijcere. How do thou think,
thou most impure Devil, that thou can overthrow the Church etc. Which demand
this blessed Father would never have urged unto the wicked spirit, if the
Devil might have replied, that in time to come he should be able to overthrow
it, by sowing the tares of ignorance, error and heresy in it. And now that S.
Chrysostom mea^t of the external visible Church, it is more then evident, by
the insta^ces that he brings of the horrible, and inhumane persecution,
raised, and stirred up by infidels, and heretical Emperors against the same
most holy Church.

22. And S. Cyprian, that ancient, and renowned Martyr, De unit. Eccles.
treating of this argument, sounds forth this Eulogy in praise of the Church:
Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi, incorruptaest, pudica est, domum vnam
nouit, vnius cubiculi sanctitatem casto pudore custodit. The spouse of Christ
cannot be adulterated, she is unspotted, she is chaste, she knows one house,
she keeps the sanctity of one chamber, one bed, and that with a chaste
shamefastnes, and love. So S. Cyprian, in that excellent Tract of his devnitate
Ecclesiae; which Tract alone, though it be but a very short one, yet is it
sufficient to be the bane of all heresies, and to keep any man desirous of
truth within the bosom of Catholic unity.

23. With S. Cyprian agrees S. Hilary, writing to the The invincible strength
of the Church.
same effect in express words, affirming: Hoc Ecclesiae proprium est, vt tum
vincat cum laeditur, tum intelligatur, cum arguitur, tum obtmeat, cum
deseritur. This is peculiar unto the Church, that when she is hurt, by
persecutions, then she wins, and overcomes, when she is reprehended by
heretics, then is she perceived, that is to say, when she is misconceiued,
she makes her self in her doctrine to be better understood, by declaration of
matters called into question, when she is forsaken (either by rebellious
children, that go out from her, or by Gods permission exercising her by
tribulation) then does she obtain the victory, and gloriously triumph. So as
here you see, that they spoke not only of the Church of their time, but of all
other ensuing ages that it cannot perish or be corrupted. And with these agree
S. Ambrose, saying: Haec ergo nauis Ecclesia est, quae si quotidie saeculum
istud tamquam aliquod pelagus sortitur insestum, numquam eliditur ad saxum,
numquam mergitur adprofundum. So speaks S. Ambrose in his book entitled de
Salomone, the 4. chapter, that is to say. This ship therefore of the Apostles,
that was tossed upon the seas of this world as the true Church of Christ, which
albeit it do daily find, and feel the world to be troblesome unto it, as a
certain tempestuous, and stormy sea, yet does it never dash and split in
pieces, by striking against any rock, nor yet is it ever driven and drowned to
the bottom. All which privileges could not be verified of the said Church, if
it were possible, that the spouse of Christ could become a harlot, or fall away
from Christ, by intertayning any damnable error, or heresy.

24. And as S. Ambrose, so speaks S. Hierome in his commentary upon the
fourth chapter of Isay: his words be these: Super petram sundatur Ecclesia,
nulla tempestate concutitur, nullo turbine ventisque subuertitur. The Church
being founded upon a rock, is sh^uered with no tempest, is overwhelmed and
overthrown by no fury, and violence of winds whatsoever. And the same holy
Father in another place putting a real distinction betwixt the Synogogue of
the Jews, and the Christian Church, but especially betwixt the promises of God
made unto both, assumeth the speech of Christ, and speaks to the Jews in the
person of our Savior, Linquetur domus vestra deserta: your house, your Church,
your Synagogue shall be left desolate, and empty unto you. Matthew. 23.
But as for the Christian Church (says he) aeternam habebit possessionem, for
that Christ promised unto his disciples, behold I will be with you, or as
other Readings have it, I am with you to the consummation of the world. And the
same speeches are reassumed, and reiterated by him in his Commentaries upon the
ninth of the Prophet Amos, and upon the 28. of the Gospel of S. Matthew.

25. And here I might tire out both the reader, and my self also, with
alleging the vnamine consent of all the ancient Fathers, to prove, that the
visible Catholic Church of their days could never perish, Apostatate, or
fall away from Christ to the end of the world, in regard of Christ his promise
made unto it, and yet the contrary heretical tenent is a common received
doctrine in the Protestants schools in this last, and worst age of the world.
For do not the Protestants, pro aris, and focis, as though it were a matter of
the life or death of their Religion (as in very deed it is no less) stiffly and
peremptorily defend that the visible Church that held these four general
Counsels which are admitted by his Matie and the Church and Parliament of
England, and fourteen other no less General, from that of Chalcedon to the
last of Trent: this Church, say I, descending by succession of Christian
people, and by lawful and Ecclesiastical ordination of Prelates, Pastors, and
Bishops for government of the same, has after the aforesaid Council of
Chalcedon, by little and little (say the Protestants) Apostated from Christ,
and his true doctrine, and has left their room and place for Protestants to
enter and supply their defects. And this is just like the allegations and
pretenses of the Donatists in S. Augustines time. And no marvel that
Protestants and Donatists thus conspire against the true Church, for surely the
right of the Donatists is as good to lay claim thereunto, as the interest of
the Protestants, for ought that I can see to the contrary. And let this suffice
for my first Consideration.

The second Consideration.
MY second Consideration concerning this present subject of the four first
General Counsels received by the Protestants lay Parliament, as is already
premised, Why Protestants do not, nor can remedy their divisions by any
General or National Council.
shall be this; that for as much as this Ecclesiastical devise and invention of
calling general Councels, and this spiritual authority in erecting this great
consistory and supreme tribunal of the Church, for the deciding, and
determining of all doubts, and controversies that may possibly arise therein,
either by the friends, or rather enemies of the Church, must be presumed to
have come peculiarly, and proceeded originally from the holy Ghost: partly for
that the first form, origin, and practice thereof was prescribed by the
Apostles themselves, as you shall read Act. 15. according to that which we have
formerly noted, and partly, and especially in regard of the infallible
assistance of the said holy Ghost, that euer-blessed and never erring spirit of
truth, testified by the words of high, and sovereign commanding authority,
used by the Apostles in that first Councels decree: visum est Spiritu Sancto,
and nobis: it seems good to the holy Ghost, and us: why (I say) this being
so, have the Protestants in our days (having now almost had a full age, since
their defection from Catholic Roman Religion) never as yet called a general
Council amongst themselves, to repair their own breaches, reconcile their
own emnities, determine and decide their own controversies, which (as before
I have showed) are both many and weighty, implacable, and irreconciliable?
Truly it seems unto me, that if they had been of the same spirit, with the
ancient Apostolic Church, that gathered these four first general Councels,
to hold all in one union and communion; nay if they had not been led, or
rather misled with a contrary spirit of schism, heresy and division, they
would have trodden in the steeps of these ancient Fathers, and have imitated
them in applying the sovereign remedies of general Counsels for curing the
wounds of their own homebred divisions, and damnable dissentions: at least
wise they would, without fail, in a whole age have called some one, forasmuch
as the ancient Church gathered, and assembled four within the compass of one
age, and an half: and the Protestant Princes; and people do bound, and border
nearer together, then did the Christians in former times; which were in a
manner dispersed here and there, far and near over the whole face of the
earth.

27. If reply be made, that then there was but one Emperor to affoard his
Imperial consent for the assembling of the Synod, and now since the division
of the Empire into many Dukedomes, Princedomes, Kingdoms, and free States,
there be many particular Princes, whose wills, and judgments can more hardly
be agreed, whose assents are with greater difficulty to be required, and
obtained: I answer, this evasion is but a mere collusion, and therefore must
not be suffered to pass without due reprehension. For since the forsaid
division of the Christian world into several Kingdoms and states, many
general Council have been called, and gathered amongst Catholics, as before
has been showed, yea, and that in the midst of tumults, vproares, and
garboyles in the temporal estates of the Christian world; and this a man of
common sense, and reason may comprehend, and imagine to have byna greater let,
and impediment unto the gathering of General Counsels, then any encumbrance,
and inconvenience that the Protestants surmise or pretend. But the truth is,
heresy, and schism originally grounded upon proper election, Protestants can
abide parley and treaty neither with Catholics nor among themselves.
private invention, stubborn selfwill, and proud conceipted judgment,
together with obstinacy against the Churches authority: this, I say can never
abide that exact discussion which a general Council does require. For how can
the Protestants thus divided as they are, and knowing the weakness of their
own cause, endure parley and treaty, either with the Catholics, whom they
account adversaries, or among themselves with their own Sectaries?

28. Not with Catholics, as may be seen by examples of ancient heretics,
condemned in these 4. first General Counsels, to wit, the Arians in the
first, the Macedonians in the second, the Nestorians in the third, and the
Eutichians in the fourth, who fled what they could those Counsels, appealing
only to Scriptures, whereof there is one notable example amongst many others in
the last of these four Counsels, I mean that of Chalcedon, wherein the
Archimandrite, and Archereticke Eutiches being sent unto, with Notaries from
this grave and learned Council, to yield an account to the Council of his
heretical opinion, held of one only nature in Christ after his Incarnation,
he first bethought him of this evasion, to say that he would agree, and
subscribe to the expositions of the Fathers that had sat in the Nicen
Council, and that of Ephesus: but this was but mere collusion, for thereby he
only meant most craftily, and heretically to euade, and fly both the other two
Counsels of Constantinople, that had already dealt against him, and condemned
him, as also this of Chalcedon that was now gathered against him, to hear his
cause, and to be his judge.

29. But yet secondly, for fear that he might yield also to far in this, he
added presently an exposition, saying: Si vere aliquid contingat eos in
aliquibus dictis, aut falli, aut Vide Conc. Calced. act. 3. p. 163. edit Venet.
errasse, hoc neque; se vette reprehendere, neque subscribere: solas autem
Scripturas scrutari tamquam firmiores sanctorum Patrum expositionibus. If not
withstanding it had happened, that the said Fathers of the Nicen and Ephesine
Counsels had been deceived, and erred in many of their sayings, then would he
neither reprehend the same for modesties sake, nor yet subscribe thereunto: but
that he for his part would attend himself wholly unto the Scriptures alone, as
being more firm, and sure, then the expositions of any Fathers whatsoever. And
is not this spoken like a Protestant?

30. Thirdly, when he had repeated, and urged again his blasphemous heresy of
one only nature in Christ, in presence of those grave and reverend Prelates,
that were The terginersation of the heretic Eutiches fully represe^ting the
Protestants
sent by the whole Synod to take his confession; and further when he had read
unto them a book compiled Apologetically for defense of the same heresy, he
then told them openly, and plainly, that this was his faith, according unto
the Scriptures, and as for the other (to wit the Catholic assertion) that
Christ consisted of two natures, divine, and humane, united in one person, he
said flatly, Neque se didicisse in expositionil us sanctorum Patrum, neque
subscriberevelle, sicontigerit ab aliquo ei tale aliquid legi: quia diuina
Scripturae meliores sunt Patrum doctrinis. That he had neither learned any such
assertion in the expositions of the holy Fathers (he means the blessed
Fathers of the Nicene and Ephesine Counsels) nor yet would he, for his part,
admit, and embrace it, if any such thing should happen to be read unto him out
of their writings: and his reason was that, which is so commonly urged by
Protestants, for that the divine Scriptures are better then the doctrines of
all Fathers: the which though it be true in it self, yet was his meaning to
deceive thereby, as you see, thinking by this fair glosle and goodly pretense
of Scripture to have avoided, and escaped the tribunal, and censure of the
Catholic Church in that time: but the Council condemned his opinion, and
person, notwithstanding his shifting euasions to the contrary.

31. And truly, the very Consideration of this particular (I mean the
conformity of spirits in this old heretic and diverse of the new Protestants
that cry out with sull, and open mouth to have all things in General
Counsels tried by Scriptures alone) left in me a very great impression: and
the matter it self seemed unto me very considerable, and worthy of all
diligent attention. For I patticulerly reflected upon that sentence of Calvin,
wherein in my poor judgment, and opinion, I rightly compared the two
Arch-heretickes together: and whether I wrong Calvin, let his own words
witness, and his best favorites, Lib. 4. Just. cap. 9.. 1^.
and sectarirs defend their Master from speaking like an heretic, I mean
like Eutiches. Nulla (says he) nos Conciliorunt, Patrum, Episcoporum nomina
impedire debent, quo minus omnes omnium spirituum ad diuini verbi regulam
exigamus, and verbo Domini examinemus, number ex Deo sunt. We are not to pass
for Councels, Fathers, Bishops, it is not in naming of all or any one of them
can bar us from examining all kind of spirits, according unto the squared
rule of Gods word, and we may call them unto account, and sift them by the word
of the Lord, whether they are of God, or no. So far he.

32. And here also I remembered that I had seen the conditions required by the
Protestants of Germany, when as they were invited to come unto the Council of
Trent, at the very first gathering thereof: and the said conditions were
published in a several book which did bear this Inscription, Causae cur
Electores Principes etc. The causes why the Electors Princes, and other
addicted to the Confession of Augusta, do not come to the Council of Trent:
Vide resp. Gaspar. Villapa^di ad bas causas.
For iustifiing of which causes eight conditions are required by them to be
observed in that Council, whereof the fourth is, That the decisions be made in
all Controversies only out of Scriptures, and not out of Ecclesiastical
Canons, or traditions: the fifth is, That decisions be again made, not
according to the plurality of voices, or suffrages, but according unto the
norme, and rule of Gods Protestants shifts to avoid coming to Councels.
word. But what this norme, or rule is, they expound not, but do leave it, as
they found it still to be contended about. Whereunto if we adioyne two other
conditions of theirs, which are the last, to wit, that the Protestant Ministers
may give voices equally with Bishops, in deciding of all questions, and that if
they should not be able to defend their cause, yet not only their persons
should be secure, but their cause also not to be condemned for heresy: These I
say, if we add as the later unto the former, we shall plainly discern that
they had not so much as the least thought to stand unto that Council at all,
but to their own heads: and by these to their own unreasonable conditions,
and unconscionable, to make their controversies and heresies endless, and
indeterminable. For if every man, or at least every Minister has authority to
determine out of Gods word, when will there be an end?

33. And here you see the small, or rather no hope that is of agreement betwixt
Protestants, and Catholics by way of General Counsels, and that the
Protestants reserving themselves only to Scripture, for the decision of
matters, and not admitting general Counsels, and Fathers to be vmpiring
judges of the sense, and meaning thereof, they tread first into the steps, and
rake into the sacrilegious ashes of all former ancient condemned heretics,
even for this very point condemned by the Church in many of her general
Counsels: and secondly by such conditions they make themselves sure, and
secure from being condemned in such sort, as that they will yeald thereunto. And
the self same fundamental reason, or rather desperate refuge, and evasion of
theirs, in profaning and abusing this sacred Sanctuary of Scripture by their
profane spirits, and unhallowed glosses, houldeth also for their never
agreeing amongst themselves, by Meetings Conferences, Colloquies, Disputations,
Synods or Counsels: for that the Lutherans and Sacramentaries, whether
Zuinglians or Caluinists (for of these two only I mean to speak at this time)
standing upon this resolute principle on all hands, that nothing is to be
determined but by Scripture, and then each one interpreting that Scripture
differently from the other, and acknowledging no judge on neither party, how is
it possible, that they should ever come to any end of determination?

34. And this will evidently appear if we cast our eyes upon those
Conuenticles, Meetings, Conferences, Synods, Councels and Colloquies held
betwixt these reforming brethren for the space of threescore years together,
to wit, from the year 1530. unto the year 1590. which are set forth Stan.
Resc. l. 1. de Atheism. etc
by Stanislaus Rescius Ambassador unto the King of Polonia at Naples upon the
year 1596. and which do amount to above threescore Synods, and Councils and
Meetings, held at Smalcaldium, Frankesord, Constance, Tygure, VVittemberge,
Berna, Ratisbone, Spire, Norimberge, Lipsia, Worms, Luneburge, Maulnbourne,
Petricouia, Varadine, Gratz, Brunswicke, Dresda, Alba Iulia, Cracouia, and
diverse other places: all these and many more, if we look into with an
indifferent eye, we shall ever find The Protestants disagreeme^to in their
meetings.
that they were so far from concluding any peace in religion, or reconciling
of their Controversies by these Synodes, and Counsels, as that they departed
far greater enemies, and more disagreeing in their opinions, then when they
first met: witness their departure at one meeting of theirs above mentioned,
when they would neither give nor take dextras fraternitatis, nor dextras
humanitatis, fellowship of fraternity, nor fellowship of humanity, which is a
token that they have not the spirit of vnio^, nor any means left them to come
unto it, and consequently, that the example, and president of these first four
general Counsels, that determined with authority and uniform judgment the
controversies of their times over all the world, do prejudice all together,
and condemn the Protestants of our age, and do convince, that they are not of
their spirit, or religion: and that neither General, National, Provincial,
or particular Counsels, Synods, Tertul. de praescript. Aug. l. 3. cont. epist.
Parmen. c. 4. and ser. 11 de verb. Domini etc.
or Meetings can bring themselves to any concord, or agreement together,
especially division, and dissension being a note (as it is ascribed by all
ancient Fathers) peculiar unto heretics, that they were always
irreconciliable, and divided amongst themselves. And this was the effect of my
second consideration.

The third Consideration.
MY third Consideration was, that by reading these Counsels, I did not only
find a complete Hierarchy, Particular points of differences between these 4.
general Councels, and the Protestants of our time for doctrine and manners.
and Ecclesiastical regiment of the Catholic Church to be observed in those
former ancient times, consisting of Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, and
Prelates governing the said Church, conform to that of the Catholics of our
days, and wholly different from the Protestants Churches, which they call
reformed (though in my judgment they may more truly be called deformed in that
they have taken away all such Hierarchy of Bishops, except only a small glimpse
thereof reserved in England for a show:) but in many other particular points
also I plainly perceived their senses, opinions, and judgments to be far
dissonant from these of our Protestants, whether we regard their practice for
conversation, and reformation of our manners, or respect their doctrine for
instruction, and information of our judgments, whereof God assisting, I shall
lay forth some few brief and punctual, observations, purposely pretermitting
infinite others that may be gathered out of the foresaid four general
Counsels.

36. In the first of the four, I mean Nicen, and the 3. Canon thereof, these
words represented themselves unto my view: Omnibus modis interdixit Sancta
Synodus, vt neque Episcopo, neque Presbytero, neque Diacono, neque vlli
Clericorum omnino licere habere secum mulierem extraneam, nisi fortemater, aut
soror, aut auia, aut amita, vel matertera sit: in his namque personis, and
harum similibus omnis quae ex mulieribus est suspitio declinatur: qui aliter
praeter haec agitpericlitetur de Clero suo. The holy Synod does forbid by all
means, and determines it to be unlawful for any Bishop, Priest, Deacon, or
any other of the Clergy to have any externe woman with them, except perhaps it
be their mother, sister, grandmother, or aunt by father, or mothers side: for
in these all suspicion that may arise about dwelling with women is declyned:
and he that shall do contrary to this, shall leese his Clergy. Thus that first,
and famous Council decreed, ratified, and enacted for the Angelical
continency of the Clergy in those days.

37. And the true meaning of this holy Council is according to the plain
purport of the words as they are set down in the Canon, to wit, that Clergy
men could not marry after they were of the Clergy at least, nor yet use their
wives that they had married before, it seems more then evident by the plain
words of the Counsel: for if it had been lawful to have had a wife in the
house, the Council would not have omitted the same, but would first of all
other have excepted the wife, when it names mother, sister, aunt, and
grandmother.

38. Besides this, the Provincial Council of Neocaesarea, that was held not
above some four of five years before this Nicence Council (and of which
Council some of the same Bishops also sat in the said Counsel of Nice)
decrees the matter in the very first Canon, in these words, Conc. Neocaes.
can. 1. an. 316.
which are extant in three different translations. Presbyter si vxorem duxerit,
ordine suo moueatur: si autem sornicatus suerit, aut adulterium commiserit,
penitus extruaatur, and ad poenitentiam deducatur. The decree of the Counsel of
Nice and Neocaesaraea against the Marriage of Priests.
If a Priest do marry a wife, let him be removed from his order of Preisthood,
and if he commit adultery or fornication, let him be utterly thurst out and
brought to penance. And this Canon was confirmed afterward again, in the
sixth general Council at Constantinople, commonly called in Trullo, almost
toure hundred years after that of Nice, and in the mean space between those
two general Counsels, there ensued diverse other Provincial, or National
that confirmed the same, as that of Eliberis, Ann. 711.
Anno Dom. 3 2 5. Can. 33. Arelatense the second, Cap. 2. and 3. Carthaginense
the third, Anno 397. wherein S. Augustine was present and subscribed Cap. 17.
And Carthaginense the Basil. epist. 1. ad Amphi. c. 3. Epiphan. hares. 59.
fifth Anno 400. c. 3. Andogauense (as Baronius records) Anno 453. Tolet an
the second, Cap. 3. Anno 5 3 1. and many others, all commonly founding
themselves (as diverse ancient Fathers S. Basil, Epiphanius, and many others do)
upon this Canon of the Nicen Council, which yet as I think, our Bishops, and
Ministers of England will not accept of. For I am certain their practice of
wiuing is contrary to this Canon of Nice, not withstanding their outward show,
and pretense of admitting these four first Counsels*

39. And albeit I know they have here a certain shift The answer unto Caluins
objection about Paphnutius.
taught them by M. Calvin out of the speech of Paphnutius, who stood up in the
Council of Nice against a decree, that the said Council would have made
against the use of wives in the Clergy that had been married before they were
Clergy men: yet does this help them very little. For first Paphnutius only
meant that Clergy men should not be barred from the company of their wives
which they had taken unto them before they were of the Clergy, but he does not
grant that they should take wives after they were made Clergy me^, nay that,
with the whole Council he forbids, and condemns; but the English Church
permits marrying also after they be Clergy men. Thus you see, supposing this
a true story of Paphnutius, it rather makes against them* then for them. But
Bellarmine does prove by most evident arguments, and reasons, and namely by the
authorities of Epiphanius, S. Hierome, Ruffinus, and diverse others, that the
narration of Socrates, and Zozomenus in this point of Paphnutius (as in many
other stories that they recount) is nottrue.

40. Another place I noted out of the 14. Canon of the said Council of Nice,
whose words are these. Peruenit ad sanctam Another Canon of the Council of
Nice about the Real presence.
Synodum, quod in nonnullis locis and Ciuitatibus Diaconi dant Presbyteris
Eucharistiam, quod neque Canon neque consuetudo tradidit, vt qui offerendi
potestinem non habent, ijs qui offerunt, dent Corpus Christi. It is come unto
the knowledge of this holy Synod, that in diverse places, and Cittyes, Deacons do
give the Eucharist unto Priests; which neither the Canon of the Church, nor
custom has delivered, that those that have not power to offer (Sacrifice)
should give the body of Christ to those that do offer the same. In which words
though they be but few, yet sundry weighty things are signified, which make
directly against the Protestants and Protestant Religion. As first that the
Eucharist was reserved in those days for the present uses of such as should
have need, when there was no Priest to say mass, and in such like necessities
of the Church, Deacons that had authority to administer the said Sacrament to
others, and might do it lawfully, did presume also to do it unto Priests, as
when they were sick, and upon such other like occasions: and this they could
not have done, except the Eucharist were kept, and reserved: forasmuch as here
it is expressly said, that they could not offer, or say Mass.

41. Secondly we may see here how much is ascribed unto the Canon, and
Ecclesiastical custom; in so much as the whole Council does argue negatiuely
thereof, for so much as neither Canon nor custom has delivered this use of
the Deacon, therefore it was an abuse: how much more would they have argued
affirmatively from the authority of Ecclesiastical Canon, and custom, had
there been any to the contrary.

42. Thirdly the Eucharist is here called Corpus Christi, the body of Christ:
it is insinuated also, that it is a true, and real sacrifice, in that it is
said, that the Priest has potestate^ offerendi, power of offering the same,
and the deacons have not, which cannot stand with the Protestants opinion of a
spiritual, and metaphorical Sacrifice of thanksgiving only: for certainly
this kind of Sacrifice' Deaco^s may offer as will as Priests, and consequently
this Canon also seems nothing to agree with the doctrine of our English
communion: as neither do many others, which to avoid prolixity I willingly over
pass.

43. Out of the second Council, to wit the first of Constantinople held under
Pope Damasus in S. Hiercmes time, I saw many things most worthy of due
observation: but those words of the seventh Canon concerning the receiving
repentant heretics into the Church I reflected upon with some diligence, as
showing the Churches manner of proceeding in those days. Arianos quide^ et
Macedoni anos etc. recipimus, dantes libellos, and omne^ haresim
anathematizantes, quae non sentit, vt Sancta Dei Catholica, and Apostolica
Ecclesia, etc. We do receive (says the Canon) such as have been Arians,
Macedonians, Sabatians, Nouatians, and the like, when they offer and give up
unto us the supplications, accursing therein all heresies which does not
believe as the holy Catholic, and Apostolical Church of God does: and we
receive the^ signed, and anointed first with holy chrisme, both in their
foreheads, their eyes, their noses, their mouths and their ears, and when we
sign them we do say signaculum doni Spiritus sancti, this is the sign of the
gift of the holy Ghost etc. All these (I say) that desire to be admitted unto
the true faith, we do receive them, as Grecians etc. And in the first day we
make them Christians, the second day Catechumenes, A Canon of the second
Counsel much making against Protestants.
and then thirdly we do exorcize, and adjure them, ter simul in faciem eorum,
and aures insufflando, breathing three times, one after an other on their face
and ears, and so we catechize, consecrate, and cure them, ordayning that they
live a great while in our Churches and hear the Scriptures, and then we do
baptize them. So enacteth that ancient Canon concluded by an hundred and fifty
Bishops. And now whether this antiquity be more observed, or better resembled
by the Protestant, or Roman Church, I leave the point to every man to consider
of; for intending breuity. I mean not to prosecute matters at large, but only
to point at these two things by the way, that may show conformity, or deformity
between that ancient Church, and the Protestant, or Catholic Roman Church at
this day.

44. Out of the third Council held at Ephesus in the year of our Lord God 42
8. sundry weighty points occurred, and represented themselves worthy of
observation, albeit all of them be over long here to be recited. And first I
remembered the manner of proceeding, and condemning of Nestorius the
Arch-hereticke, as it is most faithfully recorded Vince^tius Lyrine^sis his
relation of the Counsel of Ephesus.
by Vincentius Lyrinensis in the very bginning of the second part of his
Commonitorium the 42. chapter: and it is laid down by him (who lived in the
very time of the Council, and for ought we know might be present there at) in
this manner. This council of Ephesus discussing and reasoning touching the
establishing of some rule of faith, least any profane nouelty, like to the
Armenian treachery might creep into this Council, all the Catholic Bishops
and Priests thither assembled (which were almost 200.) concluded, and agreed
upon this, as best, and most Catholic, to wit, that the opinions, and
judgments of the holy Fathers should be brought forth before the Council, such
Fathers, as had been either martyrs, or Consessors or at least constant
Catholic Priests, and according unto their joint consent, and vnamine decree,
the point then controuerted betwixt Nestorius, and S. Cyrill should be decided,
and finally determined. This was the rule, and Canon of faith first enacted:
and according unto this Nestorius as contrary to Catholic verity was
condemned for an Heretic, and blessed S. Cyrill was judged consonant unto
antiquity. So Vincentius. And now will the Church of England that makes show
of receiving this Council stand to this rule, and canon of faith, about the
examining of doctrine by the Fathers enacted, and put in practice by this
Council against Nestorius? And will they submit all their judgments unto the
assembly of Fathers, as this council did?

45. My second observation out of this Council was this, that when great
stirs, and troubles were expected by the pious, and religious Emperors
Theodosius and Valentinianus, by the reason of the great concurse of people of
all sorts unto that place, especially many favorites of Nestorius the
Archbishop of Constantinople, against whom this Council was gathred, it seemed
necessary unto the said Emperors to send thither an Earl of their Court named
Candidianus, who should represent their persons, for seeing peace, and good
order kept: but yet with express protestation, that it belonged not unto them,
Co^c. Ephesians. tom. 1. cap. 22. in epist. Imperat.
nor any other secular man to have any dealing in Ecclesiastical causes in
that Council. And this was the thing which I observed which now follows.
Candidianum (say they) praeclarissimum religiosorum domesticorum Comitem ad
sacram pestram Synodum abire iussimus, sed ea lege and condition vt tum
quaestionibus and controuersiis, quae circa fidei dogmata incidunt, nihil
quicquam commune habeat. Nefas est enim qui sanctissimorum Episcoporum numero,
and catalogo adseriptus non est, illum Ecclesiastitis negotijs, and
consultationibus sese immiscere. We have commanded the most honorable Count
Candidian, one of our religious family, to go unto your holy Synod, but with
this charge, and condition, that he have nothing at all to do with any
questions of controversies, that fall out about Secular men may not meddle in
Ecclesiastical consultations.
matters of faith, for that it is not lawful for him that is not a Bishop to
meddle with Ecclesiastical affairs or consultations. So those two Emperors:
which conuinceth sufficiently that they hold not themselves for heads of the
Church, nor judges in Ecclesiastical, matters but inferior unto Bishops in
that behalf. And will the Church of England admitting this Council, admit
this also?

46. But now as on the one side the religious Emperors disclaymed from this
Ecclesiastical authority over the Council: so I find that Celestinus then
Bishop of Rome did acknowledge the same to appertain unto him: and it was by
the whole Council, without either opposition, or contradiction granted unto
him. For first he being not able to be present himself, he designed and
deputed S. Cyrill Archbishop of Alexandria to be his substitute, as appears
by his own letter, read, and approved in the Council: his words are these:
Quamobrem nostrae Sedis auctoritate Co^c. Ephesians. tom. 1. c. 16
ascita, nostraque vice and loco, cum potes^tae vsus eiusmodi non absque
exquisita seueritate sententiam exequeris etc. Wherefore you taking the
authority of our Sea upon you, and using our room, and place with the power
thereto belonging, shall execute with punctual severity the sentence given
against Nestorius, to wit, of excommunication, and deposition. And that if he
do not revoke his heresy, within ten days after this our admonition given unto
him, that you presently provide the Church of Constantinople of another Bishop,
and let him know, that he is by all manner of ways cut of from our body. So he.

47. Thus wrote Pope Celestinus from Rome where he had held a particular
Council, and condemned the heresy of Nestorius in the West, before the
Council of Ephesus was gathered in the East: in which Coucell of Ephesus he
not being able to be present, as is aforesaid, designed his authority to S.
Cyril, as well for presiding in the same Council, as also for executing the
sentence of condemnation: which proceedings of Celestinus are recounted
afterward again by the said Council, and approved in a general letter which
the whole Council wrote unto the Con. Ephesians. tom. 2. c. 17
two Emperors, which begins, Vestram, Christianissimi Reges etc.

48. But this is confirmed yet further, for that the said holy Father
Celestinus sent from Rome three other Legates, to join with S. Cyrill in that
legation for the presidence of the Council, whereof two were Bishops,
Proiectus and Arcadius, the third a Priest only, called Philip, who always
being admitted for Legates in the Council, did firm, and subscribe their names
after S. Cyrill before the other Patriarchs of Jerusalem, and the rest: yea
when the two Bishop-Legates were absent from the Council upon any ocasion,
this Philip, though but a Priest, did subscribe next after S. Cyrill, as may
appear in the Council it self, Tomo The Supremacy of the Pope of Rome
confirmed by the council of Ephesus.
2. cap. 13. And moreover at his first coming and appearance in the Council,
he used this speech: Gratias agamus Sanctae venerandaeque huic Synodo quod
literis Celestini Sanctissimi, Beatissimique Papae vobis recitatis, sanctae
Ecclesiae membra, sanctis vestrisvocibuspijque preconijs sancto vestro Capiti
vos exhibueritis. Non enim ignara est vestra Beatitudo totius fidei,
ceterorumque omnium Apostolorum Caput beatum Petrum Apostolum extitisse etc. We
yield thanks unto this holy and venerable Synod, that upon the reading of the
letters of our most holy, and most blessed Pope Celestine, you have exhibited
and showed your selves by your holy applause, and praises as holy members of
the Church under your holy head. For your Beatitude is not ignorant that S.
Peter was head of the whole Christian faith, and of all the rest of the
Apostles etc. This, and much more spoke he to this effect (which I pretermit
for breuities sake) in the assembly of all those great Bishops, that were
present: and yet not one of all those zealous and learned Bishops opposed
himself against his usurped Supremacy (as the heretics slander it:) a point
very considerable, and remarkable in my opinion, and far different from the
grounds of Protestant religion.

49. Out of the 4. Council gathered at Chalcedon under The Counsel of
Chalcedo^.
the authority of Pope Leo the first, surnamed the Great (a man of singular
holiness, wonderful learning, famous for miracles, renowned through the whole
Christian world) about this Council, I say, I might produce many things of
great ponderation, especially, about the said Supremacy of the Sea of Rome,
professed, challenged, practiced most evidently, as may appear in that
Council. For first Lucentius Legate, and one of the three sent from S. Leo in
that Council, uttered freely these words: Iudicij sui ipsum (nempe Dioscorum)
necesse est reddere rationem: quia cum Co^c. Calc. act. 1.
nec personam iudicandi haberet, subrepsit, and Synodum ausus est facere sine
auctoritate Sedis Apostolicae, quod rite numquam factum est, nec licuit.
Dioscorus must needs render an account of his judgment, because when he was
not personally invested with any lawful power of judging and vmpiring, he
crept and stole in, and durst gather a Synod without authority of the Sea
Apostolic, which was never rightly, nor could be lawfully done.

50. And Paschasius another Legate, in the same Council, adds: Sed de his,
esse regulas Ecclesiasticas, and Patrum instituta: Ibidem.
But of these things (he means the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome) there
are Ecclesiastical Canons, and decrees of Fathers. So far he.

51. Secondly I observed, that every where almost throughout this Counsel,
Pope Leo is there styled, Vniuersalis Act. 2. in libel. Theodor. Ischir Sopho^.
etc
Episcopus, et Patriarcha Magnae Romae; universal Bishop, and Patriarch of the
great city of Rome. Also he is called vniuersalis Ecclesiae Episcopus, Bishop
of the universal Church. And again in the same third action, it is said to one
of Pope Leo his Legates: Ibid. in subscript. co^t. Dioscoru^.
Nu^c vestra Sanctitas primatu^ tenet Sa^ctissimi Leonis etc. Now your Holiness
has the Primacy of most holy Leo: and yet again, Petimus Vestram Sanctitatem,
qui habes, magis autem qui habetis locum sanctissimi Papae Leonis promulgare in
eum, and regulis insitam contra cum proferre sententiam. We do request your
Holiness, which have (or rather who have, for they were three Legates, to wit,
Paschasius, Lucentius, and Caelius Bonifacius) that you will in the place of
most holy Pope Leo promulgate against him, and pronounce the sentence, that is
contained in the Canons. And afterward when they came to subscribe against
Dioscorus, for his condemnation, first of all the foresaid three Legates of S.
Leo do subscribe in these words: Paschasius Episcopus Ecclesiae Lylibetanae
vice Beatissimi Conc. Calc. act. 3. tom. 2. p. 252. edit. Venet.
atque Apostolici vniuersalis Ecclesiae Papae vrbis Romae Leonis sanctae Synodo
praesidens, in Dioscoridamnationem consensu vniuersalis Concilij subscripsi. I
Paschasius Bishop of Lylibaeum (in Sicilia) in behalf or steed of the most
blessed, and Apostolical Pope of the universal Church, and City of Rome Pope
Leo, presiding over this holy Synod, have subscribed, by consent of the
universal Counsel to the condemnation of Dioscorus. So he. And after him
subscribed immediately the other two Roman Legates: and then again the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, and the rest, and the same is repeated,
and observed in many other places, as particulerly in the 4. and sixth actions,
where the Bishops names, and Bishops are recorded, being above six hundred, as
has been said: my conclusion of all is this: and will the Protestants allow
this for sound doctrine, when they take upon them to receive this Council,
with the rest?

52. But besides this point of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in this
Council, I fell upon sundry other things, that enforced me to reflect upon
them, as namely in the Canons themselves. The 16. Canon has these Marriage of
Monks and Nu^ns forbidden by this Council.
words: Virginem quae se Domino Deo dedicauit, similiter and Monachos, non
licere matrimonio coniungi. Si autem hoc secisse inuentifuerint sint
exco^municati etc. It is not lawful for a virgin that has dedicated her self
to God, as neither for Monks to marry. And if by chance they should be found to
have done so, let the^ be excommunicated. And is this current doctrine in
England? Or is this received together with the Counsel?

53. Another point, that I cast my eyes, and bent my mind somewhat seriously
upon, was the 24. Canon of the same foresaid Council: and it lies thus: Quae
semel voluntate Episcopi consecrata sunt monasteria, and res ad ^as pertinentes
seruari ipsis Monasterijs decreuimus, neque vlterius ea posse fieri saecularia
habitacula: qui vero permiserint haec fieri, subiaceant his condemnationibus,
quae per Canones constitutae sunt. The monasteries that are once consecrated by
the will of the Bishop, must perpetually remain monasteries, and all things
belonging to the same, we have decreed that they be preserved to the use of the
said monasteries, and that they cannot any more be made seculer habitations:
and that they which shall permit such things to be done, shall undergo the
condemnations that are appointed to be inflicted according to the Canons. So
that Canon. And this seems also to me very hard to stand with the Doctrine,
and modern practice of England, where monasteries are turned into seculer
uses, without the fear of the threat here set down by the spirit, and
authority of this general Council, as every one will confess. Wherefore here
also we must imagine that albeit the Church of England and Parliament do admit
this Council; yet will they not easily yeald to obey the commandment of
restoring the Monastical lands and houses unto those religions uses again,
whereunto they were instituted: and so it seems that they will remain with
the name, and curse of the Council. Let us pass over to the last head of his
Majesty's offer.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER, CONCERNING THE ADMITTANCE, AND ACCEPTANCE OF THE ANCIENT
FATHERS OF the first five hundred years after Christ, which is the fourth and
last head of Trial offered, and alleged by his Majesty of England.
HAVING discoursed at large, of the three general heads, to wit, Scriptures,
Creedes, Counsels, in the three precedent Chapters; we are now according to
order, and method, both offered unto us, and accepted of us, to treat of the
last general head, in this subsequent Chapter. And the subject we have how in
hand, is touching the high esteem, credit, and authority, to be given to the
ancient Fathers, unto which his Matie does appeal in this last place saying
thus: I do reverence the ancient Fathers, as much, and more Prem. p. 35.
then the Jesuits do: and as much as themselves ever craved. For what ever the
Fathers of the first four hundred years, did with an vnanime consent agree
upon, to be believed, as a necessary point of salvation, I either will believe
it also, or at least will be humbly silent, not taking upon me to condemn the
same. But for every private Father his opinion, it byndes not my conscience,
more then Bellarmines, every one of the Fathers usually contradicting others. I
will therefore in that case, follow S. Augustine his rule in judging their
opinions, as I shall Aug. l. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 31.
find them agree with the Scriptures: what I find agreeable thereunto, I will
embrace: what is otherwise, I will with their reverence reject. So the King.
And that his Majesty for his part, has also a good meaning in this (as far
as his education, and instruction can possibly permit) and further, that he is
persuaded, that he speaks, and means like a good Catholic, and orthodox
Christian, I do with all diligence, and due respect of loyal duty unto his
Royal grace endeavor to persuade myself.

2. And yet nevertheless, it is more then evident, and apparent, yea obuious
unto the eye of any discreet indifferent, judicious, and understanding man,
that his Excellent Grace has been notoriously abused, and very sinisterly, an
erroneously informed in sundry passages of this point, and main head,
concerning the reverence, respect, and authority due to the Fathers of Gods
Church and that by such Statizing, and temporizing Ministers, that being no
longer able to sustain their weak, and false cause, quaeipsissimo suo ruit
pondere, would derive the shame, A complaint against the Ministers of England
for misinforming his Majesty.
blame, and burden of their now present tottering Religion upon the person of
his Princely Majesty, engaging him thus, in their heretical quarrel, and
therefore they suggest from time to time such particulers out of every
general, as serve rather for their own sinister respects, then either for the
prevention of error, or decision of truth, or preservation of the honor, and
sovereign reputation of his Princely Person: whence it comes to pass, that
they impressionate his Princely heart with their own particular humorous
passions, exagitate his grace with their odious, and malicious calumniations,
bent against the upright, and the innocent: in a word, they rather auert his
affection from ancient Catholic verity, and pervert his judgment, by their
erroneous fancy, and late vpstart nouelty, then lay forth the plain, and
simple truth unto his Majesty, (though they profess themselves to be Ministers
of simple truth) either in sound substance, or sincere circumstance. And this
God willing we shall discover by many particular passages in this present
business and point of ancient Fathers, that we have now in hand.

3. And first to proceed in order, and to begin with the accusation, and
imputation laid upon the lesuits, for that they are here charged, according to
that which has been suggested unto his Majesty (for I will never lay this
imputation, and false accusation upon his Princely Person,) that they do not
reverence the authority of the ancient Fathers indeed, not so much, as his
Majesty does, who says here, as you have heard, That when the Fathers of the
first sour hundred years do with an vnanime consent agree upon any thing to be
believed, as a necessary point of salvation, his Highness will believe it also,
or at least will be humbly silent, and not condemn the same. But he that will
peruse and read over the learned, and manifould laborious volumes of the
Jesuits, shall find the^ to go much further in this point, teaching, and
constantly asseuering with Vincentius Lyrineusis, and with the joint agreement
of antiquity, that the vnanime consent of Fathers upon any point, makes it an
infallible truth. Quod Patres, and Doctores (says Gregorius de Valentia)
vnanimi consensu circa religionem Vale^t. l. 8. Ana. c. 8.
tradunt, infallibiliter verum est. Whatsoever the Fathers, and Doctors
deliver with one consent about religion, that is infallibly true. And the same
do hold all other Jesuits, which also Vincentius Lyrinensis (more then a
thousand years before them) does confirm in these words, Hos ergo in
Ecclesia Dei diuinitus per tempora, and loca dispensatos, quisquis in sensu
Catholici dogmatis vnum aliquid in Christo sentientes contempserit, non hominem
contemnit, sed Deum. These therefore (he means the ancient Fathers, and
Doctors of the Lib. con. hareses.
Church) given, and granted by God throughout all ages, and places, whosoever
shall contemn them, agreeing upon any one point in Christ, in the sense of
Catholic Doctrine, he contemns not man, but God.

4. And this is grounded, and proved (as the said Valentia notes) upon that
discourse of S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. where he shows how Christ ascending into
heaven, left his Church furnished, and fenced with all kind of necessary
furniture for her present instruction, future direction, and perpetual
prescruation, as with Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, and
this unto the worlds end. And the reason of this is that, which the foresaid
Author observes out of the Apostle himself, Vt non circumferamur omni vento
Doctrinae, that we should not be carried hither, and thither, and tossed up and
down with every blast of Doctrine.

5. And finally he confirms the same, by showing that this great absurdity
would otherwise follow, that if the whole consent of Fathers may err, then
may they induce the whole Church to err, yea enforce her thereunto, for that
the Church is bound to follow, and believe the vnamine consent of her Pastors,
Doctors, Governors, and teachers, and that throughout all ages of the Church.

6. This is the doctrine, which I find amongst the Jesuits, concerning the
account, and reckoning, that is to be made of the uniform, and vnamine consent
of Fathers. For with Gregory de Valentia (as now I have said) do agree The
opinion of Jesuits about the authority of the Fathers.
all the most eminent, and principal writers of that Society, as for example
Doctor Petru Canis^us in his later Catechism, Cap. 11. Cardinal Bellarmine in
his fourth book de verbo Dei, cap. 9. Vasquez. tom. 1. in primam part. Disp.
12. Cap. 1. Maldonatus in 6. Joan. Tolet upon the 6. Chapter of S. John, and
many others, which as I take it is a great deal more then here is granted by
Protestants unto the Fathers; since there is no more yet promised, and
professed, then either to believe them, or to be humbly silent, and not
condemn them.

7. Further I find, that the Jesuits were never so strict with the Fathers, as
to restrain their credit, and authority to the first four, or five hundred
years only, and consequently to accept some, and reject others, and all at
their proper pleasure, as the Protestants do; but that they think the same
spirit of truth, and the same assistance of the holy Ghost descended also to
the Fathers of the succeeding ages, and shall do unto the end of the world.

8. Nor do I find them any where to affirm, that every one of the Fathers do
usually contradict others; Nor yet were they ever of this erroneous, and
dangerous opinion, that it is lawful for each particular man to arrogate that
liberty, and authority over the Fathers, as where he finds them to agree with
the Scripturs, there to believe them, and where otherwise in his opinion, there
with their reverence to reject them: for that this would come to the same issue
before mentioned, to wit, that every man's private judgment, should be his own
rule; and then would it consequently follow, that, quot homines, tot
sententiae, we should have as many controversies touching the exposition of
the Fathers, as we have already about the interpretation of the Scriptures. And
who sees not, whereunto this secretly tends, even to leave nothing sound,
stable, and certain in religion, which must be needs at last the overthrow of
all religion.

9. And now if it be lawful for every private spirit, and particular man to
judge, when Fathers do allege A consequence of great inconvenience.
Scriptures, whether they do allege them rightly to the purpose, or no, then
arises another question interminable, whether in all liklihood of reason, it
be probable that that private man should understand the Scriptures better then
that Father, or ancient Doctor?

10. And as for the rule of S. Augustine suggested unto his Matie by our
English Ministers for patronizing of this point, and reducing of all, both
Scriptures and Fathers, unto the examine of a private spirit, I have diligently
perused the place, as it lies in his second book against Cresconius, Cap. 31.
and 32. and upon an exact survey of the place, I find that S. Augustine gives
no such general rule or warrant, for particular men to judge of the Fathers
writings, and citations of Scriptures used by them, but only in the case, and
cause of S. Cyprian, that had held contrary unto the whole Church, viz. that
men coming from heresy were to be rebaptized; whose Epistles also were urged
by Cresconius the Donatist against S. Augustine, tamquam firmamenta Canonicae
veritatis, as grounds of Canonical truth (to use S. Augustine his words:) I
say upon these premises, the said Father answers thus unto the authority of
S. Cyprian objected, that in a manifest point of heresy (for so was the
opinion, and yet S. Cyprian was no heretik, since he never defended it with
obstinacy against the Church, but in all his opinions submitted himself to the
judgment of the Church:) Nos nullam Cypriano sacimus iniuriam, cum eius
quaslibet literas a Canonica diuinarum Scripturarum auctoritate distinguimus.
We do no injury unto Cyprian, when we do distinguish any of his Epistles from
the Canonical authority of divine Scriptures.

11. And afterward again having named the Epistles which Cresconius urged, he
proceeded thus: Ego huius Epistolae auctoritate non teneor etc. I am not bound
to admit the authority of this Epistle; for that I do not hold the Epistles of
Cyprian as Canonical, but do consider them by the Scriptures which are
Canonical etc. Finally after a long praise How S. Augustine did not admit the
authority of S. Cypria^ in a particular case.
of S. Cyprian, of his wit, eloquence, charity and martyrdom, S. Augustine
concludes, that notwithstanding all this, yet for that in this point, he
dissented from the residue of the doctors, and Pastors of the Church, he
refused to follow him: his words are these. Hoc quod aliter sapuit non acipio,
non accipio, inquam, quod de baptizandis and Schismaticis Beatus Cyprianus
sensit, quod hoc Ecclesia non accepit, pro quae Beatus Cyprianus sanguinem
sudit. This that S. Cyprian held differently from others (though not
obstinately) I do not admit, I do not admit, I say, that which blessed Cyprian
did hold about the rebaptizing of heretics, and Schismatickes: and I do not
admit it, for that the Church does not admit it, for which Church blessed S.
Cyprian did shed his blood.

12. So then we see, that this which S. Augustine here instanceth, and speaks
of comparing, and trying S. Cyprian his Epistles by the Scriptures, is no
general case, nor common rule, nor warrant, that every particler man may do
the same, to the writers of every particular Doctor. For first S. Augustine
himself that made this examine of Scriptures was a great and learned Doctor,
yea one of the greatest that ever the Church of God had, and consequently was
personally invested with some more Ecclesiastical authority then every
ordinary protestant Minister. Secondly, he perceived right well that the
opinion of S. Cyprian was much like the religion of the Protestants at this
day, to wit, new, and dissonant from Scriptures, and different from the
uniform consent of Doctors, expounding those Scriptures, not received by the
Catholic Church: nay, and that which is above all, condemned by the Church.
Thirdly S. Augustine did not presume upon his own authority, to condemn S.
Cyprians opinion, as dissonant from the Scriptures, for that in this case, the
Authority of S. Cyprian might seem to have been, as good as the authorty of S.
Augustine, especially having sealed the Gospel with his blood, which the
other, though a great Saint, had not done, nor was put unto. But S. Augustine
found S. Cyprian his opinion dissenting from the true Scriptures exposition, as
it was carried along by the most holy tradition of Catholic Church: and so is
S. Augustine to be understood: for Scripture, and Church, ever go together in
the ancient Fathers, and they never understand the one, without the other. All
which circumstances are of exceeding weight, and importance in this case: about
which notwithstanding, I have thought it convenient as before, so here to lay
forth some further, and particular Considerations.

The first Consideration.
FIRST then touching the different esteem, which The different esteem that
Catholics and Protestants do make of ancient Fathers when they agre^ in one.
Roman Catholics and professing Protestants, do hold of vnanime consent of
Ancient Fathers in matters of Religion, which is the first point here touched,
and therefore of us, in the first place to be discussed: I considered yet
further what I had read in S. Augustine, concerning this point: which holy
Saint and great Doctor, though (as now in part we have showed) he does always
postpone what authority of ancient Fathers soever to the Canonical Scriptures,
and all particular opinions of some one, or few, unto the consent of the
greater part, but especially unto the judgment of the Church: yet was the same
Father so respective in all his writings to conserve the reverence, and just
deserved reputation of these great Saints, and servants of God, and renowned
pillars of the Catholic Church ever most due unto them for the expounding of
those Scriptures, as he did never urge any thing more ernestly or eagerly
against heretics, then their authority for exposition of sacred Writ, which
he knew to be naturally hateful unto the^ who were inuentors of nouelty, and
enemies to antiquity and false interpreters of Scriptures, which all sectaries
are, as was defined, and determined in the second general Council held at
Ephesus against the Heretic Nestorius.

14. And therefore says the said S. Augustine unto Julian Aug. l. 2. co^.
Julian. Pelag. ver. sus finem.
the Pelagian Heretic: Probauimus Catholicorum authoritate sanctorum, qui and
hoc asserunt etc. We have proved this now by the authority of the Catholic
Saints, that do affirm it against you: and they are such men and so great in
the Catholic says, which is spread over the world, vt vestra fragilis, and
argutula nouitas solo illorum conteratur auctoritate, that your vain, and
subtle nouelty is crushed wholly by their only authority. And then again:
Auctoritate primitus eorum vestra est contumacia comprimenda: First of all your
contumacy is to be repressed, or beaten down by their authority, he means
the ancient Fathers. And this was the principal S. Augustines opinion for the
esteem of the Fathers.
way, that S. Augustine took with them, though all these Heretics, as
forerunners of the Protestants were very frequent in citing of Scriptures, as
fast as any other Heretics.

15. But S. Augustine will have the true meaning of holy Scriptures to be
sought out, by the interpretations of ancient Fathers, and so do his words
flatly prove. Tuns Aug. l. 3. ^ypo.
(says he) limes sanae fidei defenditur quando termini, quos posuerunt sancti
Patres non transseruntur a nobis, imo obseruantur, and defensantur. Then the
limit of sound says (to wit the Canon of Scriptures) defended by us, when we
do not change, and alter the bounds thereof, placed by the holy Fathers, but
rather do observe, and defend the same, that is, we do follow their
interpretations, and ancient expositions.

16. And further yet reasoning of this matter, in his second book de nuptijs
and concupiscentia, to the Count or Earl Valerius, I mean concerning the
sincere expositions of the Lib. 2. de nuptiis and concupis. Cap. 29.
ancient Fathers to be preferred before the Nouella^ts, he says: Quid dicam de
ipsis sacrarum liter arum tractatoribus, qui in Catholica Ecclesia floruerunt:
quomodo haec non conati sunt in alios sensus vertere, quoniani stabiles erant
in antiquissima, and robustissima fide, non autem nouitio mouebantur errore.
What shall I say of the expositors themselves of Sacred Scriptures, which have
flourished in the Catholic Church, how they never attempted to turn these
places alleged into other senses then from antiquity they had received them,
for that they were most firm, and stable in the most ancient, and strong
says, and were nothing moved with late hatched error. So he.

17. And for confirmation of this, having alleged the examples both of S.
Cyprian, and S. Ambrose: showing, and proving out of them that original sin
was in Infants, Scoffs of Pelagia^ heretics against ancient Ceremonies of
Baptism.
and that for remedy, and removing thereof, they were baptized in the
Catholic Church with the old Ceremonies of exorcismes, and exufflations, the
Pelagian heretic that not only denied, but scoffed at these things calling the
use thereof Manicheisme, was answered by S. August. thus: Hosiste audiat dicere
Manichaeos, and antiquissimam Ecclesiae traditionem isto nefario crimine
aspergat, qua exor^izantur, vt dixi, and exufflantur paruuli etc. Let him dare
to call those two Fathers Manicheans, and let him lay the same wicked crime of
Manicheisme upon the most ancient tradition of the Church by which tradition
Infants, as before I have said, are exorcized, and breathed on, at their
baptism, that by these means they may be translated from the power of
darkness of the Devil, and his Angels, unto the Kingdom of Aug. ibid.
Christ. So S. Augustine: who added presently, that albeit he was scorned at
for this by heretics: yet such was his resolution, that he burst forth into
these words following: Nos paratiores sumus cumistis viris, and cum Ecclesia
Christi in huiu^ fidei antiquitate frmati, quaelibet maledicta, and contumelas
perpeti, quam Pelagiani cuiuslibet eloquij praedicatione laudari. We are more
ready (says he) with these Fathers, and with the Church of God, rooted in the
antiquity of this says, to suffer, and Protestants become Pelagians. in
deriding ancient Ceremonies.
abide all kind of reproaches and contumelies, then to be exalted with the
praises of any Pelagian eloquence whatsoever. And does not this fall just upon
the neck of al our modern Protestants? Do they not scorn, deride, and jest as
much at these two ancient Ceremonies of Exorcisme, and Exufflation, as ever the
Pelagian Heretics did?

18. With what face then, can they challenge S. Augustine to be theirs? Nay is
not Pelagius, and his rank of heretics fitter for their society, since they
do so iu^p, and conspyre together, and that against S. Augustine, and the
Catholic Doctors? Nay I find S. Augustine to go yet much further in taking
upon him the patronizing of the reverend rank of holy Fathers against profane
heretics, though some of those ancient Worthies whom he commends lived
either in his own time, or not very long before him: for that eyting their
Doctrine against Julian the Pelagian, that made so light account of them, and
scoffed at them, he expostulated thus: Numquid Iraeneus, Cyprianus, Reti^ius,
Aug. l. 2. co^t Julian. Pelagiau.
Olympius, Hilarious, Gregorius, Basilius, Ambrosius, and Ioannes Chrysostomus,
de plebe a fece sellulariorum, sicut Tulliane iocaris? etc. Are Iraeneus,
Cyprian, and the rest here named of the lower house, or have they vulgar seats
in your Parliament as out of your Tullian eloquence you do scoff? Are they
raised up for envy of you? Are they young souldiars, or auditory scholars? Are
they shipmen, Tauerners, Hosts, Cooks, Butchers,? Are they dissolute young
men, made of Apostata monks etc.? Whom you by your scoffing vrbanity, or
rather vanity do exagitate, vilify, condemn, and contemn?

19. Thus wrote S. Augustine, that holy Saint and great Doctor in Gods Church
against the malepert sauciness of that heretic, that so little regarded, and
so basely accounted of the ancient Doctors. And having alleged their
authorities, he makes this inference of honor, and reverence on their
behalf: Talibus post Apostolos Sancta Ecclesia plantatoribus; rigatoribus,
adificatoribus, Pastoribus, nutritoribus, creuit; ideo prophanas voces vestrae
nouitatis expauit. Under such planters (after the Apostles) under such
waterers, builders, Pastors, and nourishers as these were, and are, has the
Church grown up, and did tremble at the profane voices of your novelties. And
a little after, repeating again for honors cause, the very same Fathers, with
addition only of two more of his time, to wit, Pope Innocentius the first, and
S. Hierome, he accompteth their testimony, and of such others as held
communion, and participation with them, to be the very speaking voice, and
lively oracle of the whole Church: and that it was plain madness in the
heretic to make so small account of them. Nay, he further resolved, and with
mature deliberation concluded that the dogma ticall faith, and belief of all
these Fathers, conspiring and agreeing together in one, was to be defended
against him, and against all other, such like heretics as he was, no other
ways, then Christ's Gospel was to be defended against Infidels. His words are
these.

20. Aduersus hanc autem miserabilem, quam deus auertat, insaniam, sic
respondendum video libris tuis, vt fides queque aduersus te How contemptible
the authority of heretics was to S. Augustine in respect of the ancient
Fathers.
desendatur istorum, sicut contra impios, and Christiprofessos inimicos, etiam
ipsum defendetur Euangelium. Against this miserable desperate madness of thine,
which God turn from thee, I do see, that I must so answer to thy books, that
the faith of these Fathers be defended against thee, as the very Gospel it
self of Christ, is to be defended against impious men, and as against the very
professed enemies of Christ. So he. And yet in another place pressing again
the authority of the said Fathers, he does entreat his adversary Julian to
believe these holy Fathers, and by them to be made friends with him, yea to be
reconciled unto him, and to the Catholic Church, from which he stood as yet
separate. And is not this the very same offer we make to the Protestants at
this day? And then S. Augustine going on forwards in ratifiing their authority
saddeth presently for further corroboration of the Doctrine, and tradition of
antiquity: Quod credunt, credo, quod tenent, teneo, quod Lib. 2. co^t. Julian.
circamed.
docent, doceo, quod praedicant, praedico, istis creed and mihi credes,
acquiesce istis, and quiesces a me etc. What these fathers do believe, I do
believe; what they hold, I hold; what they teach, I teach; what they preach,
I preach; yeald unto these, and you will yeald unto me; have peace with these,
and you will have peace with me. And last of all (says he) If you will not by
them be made friends with me, at least wise, be not you by me made enemy unto
them (a goulden sentence) and then he goes forward saying: shall Pelagius, and
Celestinus (the Authors of your heresy) be of such authority with you, that
you for their society will leave the fellowship, and company of so many, and so
great Doctors of the Catholic faith and Church, dispersed from East to West,
from North to South, and those both ancient, and near unto our age, partly
dead, and yet partly living? So he.

21. Which speech of S. Augustine does seem unto me so fitly, and properly to
touch, and concern the Protestants of our days, who for the love of Luther
and Calvin (Authors of their novelties) do forgo all the Doctors of the
Catholic Church, not only ancient, but modern also, as that nothing in my
judgment can be produced of nearer affinity, to hold greater correspondency,
or be more like, or more semblable.

22. Neither yet does S. Augustine determine only, that the Doctors of the
Church are absolutely the best witnesses, and judges in matters of Controversy
that arise and spring up after their days, but together with his authority,
which had been alone sufficient, he yealedeth a very substantial, and
conuincing reason for the same; and it is this: that the Fathers could not be
partial judges of such causes, as came into Controversy after their deaths,
for that they gave forth their verdict, and judgment before any controversy was
stirred, or moved about the same. And thus much do his words import as they
follow.

23. Tunc de ista causa iudicauerunt (says S. Augustine) quando cosnemo dicere
potest perperam quicquam, vel aduersari, velsauere Aug. l. 2. co^t. Julian.
propefine^.
potuisse. Nondum enim extiteratis etc. The Fathers did judge of this cause at
that time, when no man can say, that they did wrongfully favor or disfavor
any party. For that you (Pelagians) were not then in the world, with whom we
might have contention about this question etc. They did not attend unto any
friendship, either with us, or with you; they did not exercise amity, or emnity
with either of us; they were angry neither with you nor with us; neither yet
had they commiseration toward any of An excellent reason of S. Augustine.
our parts; that which they found in the Church, they held; that which they
learned they taught; that which they recyued and learned from their Fathers by
tradition, they taught and left unto their children. We did not as yet plead
with you before these Judges, and yet by them was our case decided, and
determined: nor you, nor we were known unto them, and yet do we out of their
works produce their sentences against you: We had as yet no strife with you,
nor pleaded any cause, and yet have we conquered you by their verdicts.
Hitherto are the words of S. Augustine.

24. Which when I had considered, and pondered well with my self, as also
reflected upon all S. Augustine his former sentences, compared them all
together, and conferred them with the state of our present time, and manners
of men therein; I seemed to behold, as in a clear glass, before the eyes of
my understanding, the very person and self same cause of S, Augustine, to be
in the Catholic writers of our days: as contrariwise also that of the
Pelagians, and of other old heretics to be in the Protestants, the one and
the other making like account of the ancient Fathers. I mean the Catholics
esteeming them highly, and standing to their judgment: the others rejecting
them, where they make against them; which as it has been sufficiently proved
before; so might I here adioyne also many other proofs thereof, if I would
spend more time in alleging their sentences. Let M. VVhitakers assertion
speak for all, who of this matter writes thus: If you argue from the witness
of men, be they never so learned and ancient, we yield no more to their words
in cause of says and religion, then we perceive to be agreeable to Scripture.
Neither think you your self to have proved any thing, although you bring
against us the whole consent and swarm of Fathers, except that which they say,
be justified, not by the voice of men, but of God himself.

The second Consideration.
AS my first consideration was wholly conversant about the just deserved credit
of ancient Fathers, agreing to geather in general, either in the full voice of
all, How Catholics and Protestants do esteem of the testimonies of particular
Fathers.
or in the greatest part and consent of them: so was my second employed about
the same credit, and authority of particular Fathers, either one, or two, or
more, auerring any thing, which was not reprehended by others in matters of
religion. About which point, I saw less ascribed in his Maties Book unto
their promerited estimation, then Catholics do hold in their Orthodox
assertions, and much less, then I my self had purposely read, and observed in
the former mentioned holy Father S. Augustine concerning that point. For as his
Majesty yealded less to the common consent of Doctors (which must of necessity
make the visible Catholic Church, if ever Christ left behind him any Church
at all to continue) when he writes, that he would either believe them, or at
least wise would be humbly silent, and not condemn them, as before has been
showed: So in this very second point of particular Fathers, I find it thus
written by his Majesty.

26. But for every private Fathers opinion (says he) it binds not my
conscience more then Bellarmines: every one of the Fathers usually
co^tradicting of others The first part of which sentence, to wit, that every
private opinion of every Father, binds not a man's conscience in matter of
religion, is so clear, that it needs no proof at all: for it cannot be
denied. For if the opinion be indeed private, then is it not truly Catholic,
and consequently being not the opinion of the true Church, it binds no man.

27. But for the later period of the sentence, being wholly derogatory from the
credit of Antiquity, that is to say, that every one of the Fathers do usually
contradict others in matters concerning religion, this must needs presubpose
to have some favorable interpretation affoarded it, to free it from open
iniuring, and wronging of the Fathers: and so my hope is, that this is the
meaning of his Excellent Matie, to wit, that these contradictions supposed to
be a among the Fathers, are only diversities of judgment in matters, that are
not determinately de fide, or that do not concern any articles of belief, but
either such matters as S. Augustine says, that may without breach of union or
charity be diversely disputed of amongst Catholic Aug. l. 1. co^t. Julian.
Pelag. cap. 2.
men, or else, when diverse Fathers do give diverse senses of Scripture, some the
literal, others the allegorical, and all true, all intended by the holy
Ghost, as we have formerly noted. Now the rule, that we must here observe,
concerning these points, wherein consent of Fathers, is, and must necessarily
be had, is that which Vincentius Lyrinensis (an Author that I can never
sufficiently commend) has excellently laid down in his 37. Chapter contra
haereses: his words are these: Antiqua Patrum consentio Sanctorum non in
omnibus diuinae legis quaestionibus, sed solum in fidei regula magno nobis
studio, and inuestiganda, and sequenda est. The ancient consent of holy
Fathers, is with great care, and study to be both searched out, and followed of
us, not in all their questionings of holy Writ, but only in the rule of faith.

28. And unto this S. Augustine alludeth, where he writes thus: Alia sunt, in
quibus interse aliquando etiam doctissimi, atque optimi regulae Catholicae
defensores salua fidei compage non consonant, and alius alio de vna re melius
aliquid dicit and verius. There are Lib. 1. cont. Julian Pelag. cap. 2.
some things wherein sometimes the most learned, and the best defenders of the
Catholic rule do not agree amongst themselves, but one speaks better, and
more truly then another of the self same thing: but yet without breach of the
link of faith.

29. But forasmuch as particular Fathers do often times set down, and deliver
the public belief of the Church, and not any private opinions, though they
seem to speak privately, and not in name of the whole Church, when they
mention this, or that point, concerning religion, some certain rule, or note
for our better direction, and Thesurest rule how to judge of particular Fathers
opinions or assertions about matters of faith.
distinction must be set down: and the surest rule to discern how far forth
private Fathers opinions, ought to be esteemed, or may bind a man in
conscience, is, for a man to consider uprightly in the impartial judgment
betwixt God, and his own conscience, whether that opinion of his if he be but
one, or theirs, if they be many, have been withstood or gainesaid, contradicted
or impugned by any other Father, or Fathers, Synod, or Council, Provincial,
General, or National of the same, or other precedent, or subsequent ages. For
if this cannot be made good against any one particular Fathers opinion, then
may it more then probably be inferred, that for so much, as this particular
Father, was generally reputed for a Catholic Doctor in his time, never
reprehended, taxed, noted, condemned for this opinion, as false, doubtful, or
erroneous: it must needs be (I say) necessarily inferred and concluded, that,
that very opinion of his was the opinion, judgment and doctrine also of the
Catholic Church in the age, and time wherein he lived, and of which he
himself, was then a Father and Doctor. For if this were not so, it cannot be
so much as with any probability imagined, that this Father could have taught
this opinion in his days, or diuulged it, in his writings unto posterity
without some note, or memory of controlment, or taxation of the same, either
whilst he lived, or after his death.

30. And hereby it follows, that albeit this Doctrine should have but one, or
two ancient Fathers, that do expressly mention it in their days (other Fathers
of the same time either not having occasion to speak thereof, or else busied,
and encumbered about other as weighty points:) yet were this alone sufficient to
make us understand, that in their days, that mention the same, the forsaid
opinion of that Father, or Fathers was held for Catholic Doctrine, and
throughout the universal Church: for that otherwise without all doubt, it
would the^, or afterward have been When any private Father did err he was
presently noted by others.
descried and censured by the careful, and vigilant watchmen of Gods Church.
Neither can any instance, as I imagine, be given to the contrary: for that from
the very first infancy of Christianity unto our days, it cannot be showed,
that any Father, or Doctor, though otherwise never so renowned for wit, and
learning, piety, or sanctity, did ever begin any new doctrine, or erroneous
opinion different from the Catholic belief, but that presently the same was
excepted against by others. And this is more then evident in the particular
cases, and slippes of Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Lactamius, and other ancient
Fathers of the Church: and yet when any of these transgressed the ancient
bounds, innouating any thing from the received faith, they were all of them
excepted, and cried out against, noted, and taxed for such their private, and
erroneous opinions, as dissenting from public union, and Catholic Communion.

31. Neither does any man in my judgment explain this point better then S.
Augustine himself and therefore, as I served my self principally of him in
the precede^t Consideration, so do I mean also in this. For as on the one
side, when many Fathers do agree in their opinion against one, or few (as in
the case of S. Cyprian about the rebaptizing of heretics yt fell out) the
greater part is there to be preferred before the less, as the said Father does
often affirm: so notwithstanding when no such opposition, and contradiction is
of the mayor part, S. Augustine himself makes high, and singular account of
every private Fathers opinion, as namely when he extolleth the authority O. S.
Aug. l. 3. de bapt. co^tra Donatist. c. 4. l. 2. con^. Crescon^^. cap. 32.
Hilarious against lulian, saving: Ecclesiae Catholicae aduersus haereticos
acerrimum desensorem venerandum quis ignorant Hilarium Episcopum Gallum? Who is
ignorant, or who does not know that earnest defendour of the Catholic Church
against Heretics venerable Hilary the French Bishop?

32. And then again of S. Amrbose: Audi alium excellentem Dei dispensatorem,
quem veneror, vt Patrem, in Christo enim Aug. lib. 1 contr. Iulin. cap. 2.
Jesus per Euangelium me genuit, Beatum loquor Ambrosium. Harken unto another
excellent steward of Gods house, whom I do reverence as my Father, for in
Christ Jesus he begot me by the Gospel, I mean blessed S. Ambrose. And then
of a third also to wit S. Gregory Nazianzen, he gives this commendation, or
rather by an interrogation would enforce his adversary unto an admiration of
this great Saint and learned Divine: An tibi parua in vno Gregorio Episcoporum
Orientalium videtur authoritas? Does it seem unto thee a small authority, that
is in one only Gregory Nazianzen amongst the Eastern Bishops? And then
follows the reason, which truly is very well worth the marking.

33. Est quidem (says he) tanta persona, vt neque ille hoc nisi One Doctors
opinion the doctrine of the Church.
ex fide Christiana omnibus notissima diceret, neque illi eum tam clarum
haberent, atque venerandum, nisi hoc ab illo dictum ex regula notissimae
veritatis agnoscerent. He is truly so great a person, as neither would he
speak in this matter as he does, but out of the most known manifest Christian
faith, nor would men hold him for so excellent, and venerable, except they did
know, that what he said, he spoke out of the rule of most known truth. Thus S.
Augustine.

34. And in these his words consists the whole substance of this my
Consideration about private Fathers, to wit, that S. Gregory Nazianze^ syrnamed
Theologus, the divine, for his admirable, and profound knowledge in the
greatest mysteries of Divinity, though he had been but one in that matter
against Julian (as he was not but accompanied with many, as has been made
clear in the former Consideration:) yet so great was the authority of his
person in the Church, as that neither he would have said as he did, but out of
the common sense of the Church in his time, nor should he ever have been held
for a famous, nor venerable a Doctor, renowned throughout the Christian world,
but that the Church was sure, that he would affirm nothing, hold nothing,
publish nothing, but out of the common rule, and infallible Canon of the most
known truth: for that otherwise, he should even to his face have been
contradicted by other Doctors, and Fathers his equals, and compeeres, that
lived with him, or ensued after him. So as we see, that particular Fathers
sayings, and opinions when they are not gaynesaid by others, or reprehended, or
condemned by the Church, they are not so lightly to be respected, or rejected
as Protestants do both ordinarily teach, and practice. But the maine point to
be waighed, and considered is this, to wit, to know in what times they were
written, upon what occasion, of what credit, or authority the Father is,
whether other do write the same, and accord with him, whether any exception
have been taken against it, and then by whom, and when, and how it stood in
the Church, either as justified, or condemned, and many other such like
material circumstances by me before touched: for that sometimes it may fall
out, yea, and often times does (as now we have in part showed, and might do
much more at large) that particular Fathers opinions, and assertions not
contradicted nor yet on the other side agreed upon in express terms by the
mayor part of Fathers in their writings (though otherwise believed, and
received by them in the faith, and belief of the Church) may make a very
strong argument, that the Church did then believe it, especially if the same
were so understood also by the general consent of the Fathers following in the
subsequent age, and Church: and consequently it may bind every man his
conscience to give more credit thereunto, then Protestants incredulity will
allow. And this shall suffice for my second Consideration.

The third Consideration.
HItherto have we treated of the Fathers, showing first, what credit we ought
to affoard, and yeald unto their joint consent, when in any point of doctrine,
they agree in That the Fathers of every age for the first 500. years did make
for catholics and against Protestants in matters now in co^trouersy.
one* and that is, sine scrupulo, sine vlla dubitatione, as Vincentius
speaks, without any further question, contradiction or opposition most
faithfully to believe them and embrace their judgment, as the lively oracles
of God, and the whole speaking voice of Catholic Church in the mouth of her
Doctors and Pastors. Which if you consider it well, is a great deal more then
the alternatiue allowed unto them by Protestants, which is either to believe
them, or to be humbly silent without condemning them, as though the Protestant
were at his liberty in every thing to make his choice: which as we have heard
in the first Chapter is no less the^ heresy: and as though the renouncing, and
forsaking of Cap. 4. and 42. co^t. haereses.
them, let it be promised with never so much silence, and reverence, were not
on the Protestants part a sufficient co^demning of them. And this for that
point.

36. There remains yet behind the chief, and principal point of all others
in this present business and matter we have now in hand to be handled, and to be
especially considered of, which is this, to wit, to know whether the ancient
Fathers of the first five hundred years after Christ (for so far does his
Majesty's offer in the last edition of this his English Premonition extend it
self) do make for Protestants, or for us: which point though to discuss at
large throughout all the controversies would both require, and fill a very
large volume, and consequently far surpass the bounds of my intended
breuity: yet shall Iendeauour in this last Consideration to give a sufficient
glimpse of the truth therein, in very few words, for any indifferent Reader,
that will stand attent, and judge according unto reason, the more by the less.

37. For first in general it may be here seen, by that which his Matie lays
forth, that the Protestants do deal diffidenter, distrustfully on their own
behalf with the Fathers authority. For they do first limit their years within
the compass of four hundred in the first English edition, and then of five
hundred years in the next, and last of all they call it back again unto four
hundred in the Latin edition, which argues that they know not well upon what
ground, nor where, nor when they stay themselves, being still afraid, least
that they grant to much unto the^ (as indeed whatsoever they grant unto them it
is to much on their behalfes, since that whatsoever they grant, it makes
directly against the^) which would not be, if their friendship with them, or
hope in them, were confident, or any at all.

38. Secondly, they restrain their credit yet more, when they do not promise
absolutely to believe the consent of Fathers, but only they promise silence,
and when they say they will believe the Fathers of those first ages, when with
one vnanyme consent they shall agree upon any thing to be believed, as a
necessary point of salvation: which seldom falls out in matters, especially
now in controversy, for that they being busied in other matters as before has
been touched, either of writing Apologyes during the times of persecution, or
in converting, and instructing the new converted Christians, or in confuting
other heretics, and heresies, it must needs be a rare case to find all the
Fathers agree together with one consent (except it were in a general
Council) and to determine that this or that point was a matter of faith, and
article of belief.

39. Neither is it absolutely necessary to the purpose that they should do so,
for that our principal scope, and drift being to seek, and trace out from
time to time by testimony of the Fathers in every age, where the true
Catholic Church went, and whether the Protestants, or our Church at this day
have more resemblance unto her, there Diverse things may lead us to discern the
true Church, though they be not articles of necessary belief
be diverse other arguments, and probable conjectures to seek out the same
(atleast wise probably) then only articles of belief, agreed upon by vnanime
consent. As for example sundry Ceremonies used in baptism, and other
Sacraments, as Exorcismes, Exsufflations, Christening, and the like mentioned
by S. Augustine and by diverse other ancient Fathers, as also the use of the
Cross, Tapers, Candles, reuerencing of holy Relics, and kneeling before
Pictures, Images and Crucifixes, and other rites testified by the whole Senate
of Christian antiquity, which though they be not by the said Fathers commended
and delivered as articles of our faith: yet these being practiced by the
Primitive Church (which is granted to be the true Church) and compared to the
customs of Protestants, and us, in our Churches, will easily disclose, which
of the two, they or we, do more imitate, or impugn the true Church of
antiquity. But contenting our selves at this time with the only mentioning of
them by the way, we will make a short, and brief passage or rather step
throughout the foresaid four, or five hundred years limited unto us: and this
God willing we will do, not by citing, but laying down the Fathers authorities
themselves in particular, for it would be over long (as before has been said)
but rather by producing such witnesses who being of most credit with our
adversaries cannot be well mistrusted, or discredited, to wit, the
Magdeburgians Centuries, who have in every age diligently, though partially
examined the same, and how substantial a proof this is of Catholic religion
by the very confession and concession of their greatest adversaries, I appeal
for judgment unto the discreet, and indifferent Reader.

The first Age.
40. And as for the first hundred years after Christ his glorious Incarnation,
which is deputed generally unto Christ, and his Apostles age, as the chief
Doctors, and Fathers that governed the Church, and instructed the people in
that time, I will take only the note of one position Centur. prima lib. 2. cap.
4.
or article of faith, which the said Magdeburgians do gather out of all writers
of that age, as agreed upon against the Protestants by the teachers of that
age, and continued ever after throughout all subsequent ages: and this is
concerning the Real Presence of the true body, and blood of our Savior in the
Supper of our Lord, commonly called the Eucharist: which point, the ancient
Fathers, against all heretical, and Protestantical tropes and figures, do
prove abundantly out of the Ghospels themselves, out of the Acts of the
Apostles, out of the Epistles of S. Paul, out of the consent of the whole
Church in that first age, and ever after: to wit, that the words of Christ do
evidently contain the same, being properly, and literally to be understood,
as they are to be, and not by any figure, or trope, as the Zuinglians,
Caluinists and all other Sects of Sacramentaries do faythlesly imagine.

41. This first prescription then of this important article of faith, the
Magdeburgians do find to be for us against 1. About the Real Presence.
all our English Protestants, as well in the very first age under Christ, and
his Apostles, as in all other successiue times, for that in every age they
prove this diligently out of the consent of all Fathers, and Doctors of that
age, to wit, that Christ his true body is really present in the blessed
Sacrament, by the very power, and virtue of Christ his own words, used by the
Priest in consecration. And if any heretic demand a reason of this admirable
transmutation, I can give him no other, then that which S. Augustine gives in
the like miraculous case, it is in his third Epistle ad Volusianum, and it is
such a one, as will suffice any right believing Christian, if he will not
continue an heretic, or an Infidel. Hic si ratio quaeritur, non erit
mirabile; si exemplum poscatur, non erit singular: demus Deum aliquid posse,
quod nos fateamur inuestigari non posse: in talibus enim rebus tota ratio sacti
est potentia facientis. Here, if a reason be sought for, it is not wonderful:
if an example be demanded, it is not singular: let us grant, that God can do
some thing, which we must confess we cannot search out: for in such matters as
these be, the whole reason of the deed, is the power of the doer. And is not
this one substantial point of Popery, as our Protestants brand it, proved for
us, by their own friends?

42. But as for other points of our Religion in controversy, betwixt us, and
the Protestants, though the Magdeburgians would not willingly grant them to be
so ancient as the first age (which we notwithstanding do prove abundantly in
handling of every controversy) yet do they, will they, nill they, grant
sundry of them to have begun, and crept in presently after the Apostles in
the second age, and so continued, and increased in number in the third, fourth,
fifth and sixth, when all the whole Christian world went clear with us: that is
to say, all the doctrine of such, as were chief Doctors, and Fathers for their
learning, and piety in those times, and ages, as here shall appear by a just
view of that which here briefly I purpose to set down.

The second Age.
43. In the second age immediately after the Apostles, the Magdeburgians do
grant the very principal Fathers of Magdebur. Cent. 2. c. 4 page 55. 56. 57.
etc.
that age to make for us, not only in the foresaid article of the Real
Presence against Sacramentaries, but also in sundry other points now in
controversy against the Protestants. And first concerning Free Will remaining
in man after his 2. About Free will.
fall, for proof whereof they cite S. Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 72. contra hareses,
and that with great indignation, and reprehension, saying: that he wresteth the
words of the Prophets, as also of Christ our Savior, and S. Paul, Multa
Prophetarum, Christi, and Pauli detorquet. And the words which they reprehend
in S. Irenaeus are these: Prophetae and Apostoli hortabantur homines iustitiam
agere, bonum quoque operari, quia in nobis sit hoc. The Prophets, and Apostles
did exhort men to do justice, and to work good works, for that this is in our
power. And is not this a great offense in S. Irenaeus to speak so like a
Papist?

44. They accuse also other Fathers of the same age for like fault, as Justinius
Martyr (if it be his book) in his answer unto the hundred and third question,
ad Orthodoxos, and Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 2. stromatum, saying of this
latter: Clemens liberum arbitrium vbique asserit. Clement does every where
defend free will. And finally they give this censure of all that age: Nullus
fere doctrinae locus est, qui tam cito obscurari coeperit, atque hic de libero
arbitrio. There is no piece of Doctrine that began to be darkened so soon as
this of free will: which darkning is nothing else with them, but the Catholic
sense of that doctrine, which now also we hold, to wit, that albeit man his
free will was greatly 3. The Doctrine of good works.
wounded by Adams fall, yet was it not so extinguished but that nature being
relieved by the holy assistance of Christ's grace, and not otherwise, the
free will of man may cooperate, in doing of good works, which was also these
holy Fathers meanings.

45. The like the said Magdeburgians do complain of the article of good works
and perfection of life, to wit, that this doctine also began to be darkened
in this age: so as according unto them, the candle lightened by our Savior, and
his Apostles, and set upon the goulden candlestick of the Church dured but a
little while.

46. Furthermore, they cite also that saying of S. Clement, lib. 5. stromatum,
which angreth them very much: Gratia seruamur, sed non absque bonis operibus.
We are saved by Grace, but not without good works. Et lib. 6. stromatum: Quando
audierimus, fides tua te saluum fecit, non accepimus eum dicere absolute cos
saluos suturos, qui quomodocunque crediderint, nisi facta quoque fuerint
consecuta. Whenever we shall hear those words of our Savior (unto the
Cananaean) thy faith has saved thee, we do not understand, that he said
absolutely, that they shall be saved, whosoever believe in any sort, except
good deeds do also follow. And is this ought else but Catholic doctrine, to
wit, that faith must go before, and good works follow. And is not this the
self same doctrine which S. Paul teaches, saying, that the saving faith is,
fides quae per charitatem operatur, the faith which works by charity in us.

47. Moreover concerning the law, that it does not 4. Whether the Commandments
be impossible.
command impossible things, but that with the assistance of Christ's grace
Christian men may observe the Commandments, this the Magdeburgians do censure
for erroneous doctrine also in the Fathers of this second age, namely in
Justinius Martyr resp. ad Orthodoxos 103. who proves it out of the example of
S. Paul himself, and of Zachary and Elizabeth, that were both of them just,
and S. Irenaeus teaches the said doctrine lib. 4. c. 30. and Clemens lib. 2.
stromatum, being all Fathers of this second age, which doctrine is confirmed
afterward by all the Fathers of subsequent ages. And yet do the good fellow
Magdeburgians condemn the same with great resolution out of a Maxim of
Aristotle most foolishly and wickedly applied, saying: Dato vno inconuenienti,
sequi solent infinita. One inconvenience being granted by these Fathers, to
wit, the doctrine of free will, infinite other inconveniences are wont to
follow. Which speech of the Fathers, though it be inco^modious unto the
Magdeburgians, and for such set down by them, yet are the words plain for
the Catholic Doctrine now held by the Roman Church in that behalf.

48. But yet further concerning the external usual sacrifice of Christians
then accustomed to be offered on the 5. External sacrifice of Christians.
Altar, the same Magdeburgians are much troubled about certain speeches of S.
Ignatius, and S. Irenaeus. The first has these words in his Epistle ad
Smyrnenses: Non lice sine Episcopo neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare:
It is not lawful without the Bishop to make oblation, or offer Sacrifice. And
the like words they cite out of S. Irenaeus 4. cap. 32. saying of him: Satis
videtur loqui incommode, cum ait noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam
Ecclesia ab Apostolis accijiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. Irenaeus (say
they) seems to speak inco^modiously enough when he says, that Christ did
teach a new oblatio^ of a new Testament, which the Church receiving from the
Apostles does offer unto God, throughout the whole world: So they of the
external Christian sacrifice of those days checked and condemned the Fathers
of that first age after the Apostles.

49. About traditions in like manner, rites, and Cerimonyes, they complain in
this age, as they did of other 6. About traditions.
points before, to wit, that Doctrina de liberate christiana non-nihil coepit
obseurari, that the Doctrine of Christian liberty began not a little to be
darkened with rites, and Ceremonies in this age also, and succreuit (say they)
paulatim error de traditionibus necessario obseruandis: and the error of
necessary observation of traditions did by little, and little grow up, whereof
they give an example out of S. Ignatius his epistle ad Philadelphios, where he
says: Dies festos nolite inhonor are, Quadragesimam vero nolite pro nihilo
habere: imitationem enim cominet Dei conuersationis, hebdomadam etiam Passionis
nolite despicere. Quarta vero, and sexta feria ieiunate, reliquias pauperibus
porrigentes. Do not dishonor holy days, do not neglect Lent, for it
co^teyneth in it the imitation of Christ his conversation, who is our God: Do
not despise the Passion week, do you fast upon wensdayes, and fry days, and
that which is left of your meat, give it unto the poor. And this is the
darkness which the Magdeburgians do observe, or rather this is the light which
those Angels of darkness, and instruments of Satan would darken in the
Apostolical writings of S. Ignatius, and other Ancients of this very next age
after the Apostles, contrary unto their carnal, and Evangelical liberty,
which their first luxurious Apostata and Cloysterbreaker Luther set abroach.

50. The same Magdeburgians do cite a plain sentence out of S. Irenaeus lib.
3. Cap. 3. whereby he proves the Primacy of the Church of Rome, to wit, for
her more powerable principality, The primacy of the church of Rome.
it is of necessity, that all Churches should come unto her, that is to say,
all faithful people, from all parts of the world; for that in her has been
conserved ever the tradition of the Apostles. Which plain sentence the
Magdeburgians do endeavor to delude by diverse shifts. As first, that it
seems to savor of nouelty: then, that this sentence is found say they, in
the copies that now are extant of Irenaeus, as though there were other not
extant, that had it not. Thirdly they do interpret Irenaeus his meaning, that
he understands only by tradition, written Doctrine. But by this we may see,
how they are encumbered with the writings of Fathers, even in this very first
age after the Apostles, when these, and all other the like doctrines of
Christian Catholic Religion were sealed with the fast shedding blood of her
Martyrs, and Doctors.

51. Another point also offends them much, which is the excellency and great
merit of Martyrdom, which 8. Excellency and merit of martyrdom.
the Fathers of this age do in all their writings exalt. De Martyrio (say they)
nimis honorifice sentire coeperunt. The Fathers of this age began to think too
gloriously of Martyrdom (belike these same good fellows never meant that
their finger should ache for Christ, or Christian religion) and then they say of
holy S. Ignatius, that constant Martyr, Ignatius in epistolis valde periculose
loquitur de martyrij merito. Ignatius in many of his epistles does speak very
dangerously of the merit of martyrdom. Also they do check the same Saint, and
holy Martyr for that in his epistle unto the Romans, when he was going unto
martyrdom, and to be devoured of wild beasts in the Amphitheater of Rome he
cries out: Sinite me, vt bestiarum esca sim, per quam possim Christum
promereri. Suffer me that I may be the food of beasts, and thereby promerit to
enjoy God himself. And what so great peril is there I pray you in this
doctrine? For that throughout the whole Fpistle it appears, that he ascribed
unto Christ his grace all the fortitude which he expected for this combat, and
consequently all his merit of enjoying God proceeded principally from the said
grace of his Master. And so do the Catholics at this day hold in the
doctrine of merit, if malice, and envy could suffer the Protestants to see it,
and acknowledge it.

52. But they are very angry with him for frequent using of another phrase, in
three distinct Epistles, to wit, 9. Intercession of Saints.
to those of Antioch, of Ephesus, and to Policarpe: Pro animabus vestris ego
afficiar, quando Christum meruero adipisci. I shall be come (an intercessor)
for your souls, when I shall deserve to obtain the fruition of Christ. In
which words as you see, is not only express mention made of the singular merit
of martyrdom, but also insinuated the intercession of martyrs departed unto
the next life, for their friends left behind them upon earth, as having not
aspired unto the heavenly bliss.

53. And finally, not to go any further, they quarrel also with the said
Ignatius, about the merit, and praise of 10. About the state of Virginity.
Virginity (as diverse heretical Caluinists have lately done in Oxford:) Ex
Ignatij Epistolis apparet (say they) homines iam tum paulo impensius coepisse
amare and venerari Virginitatis statum: it appears out of Ignatius his
Epistles, that even then men began more earnestly to love, and reverence the
state of Virginity: wherefore they give sundry examples, as namely in his
Epistle ad Antichenos: Virgins videant cui se consecrarint, let Virgins
consider, unto whom they have consecrated themseleues: and in his Epistle ad
Tharsenses: Eas quae in Virginitate sunt, honorate, sicut sacras Christi.
Honor those that live in Virginity, as the sacred of Christ. So excellent an
opinion had this holy Father and martyr in those first days of the primitive
Church concerning the state of Virginity, so little esteemed now by Protestants.

54. All these points of controversy then betwixt us, and the Protestants at
this day, to wit, of Free Will, good works, possibility of the commandments,
external Christian sacrifice, tradition, and rites, the Primacy of the Church
of Rome, merit of Martyrdom, and state of Virginity, to pretermit sundry other
articles as ouerlong to be handled, here we see, to have been avouched by the
principal Fathers of the second age, and that in our defense against the
Protestants.

55. And howsoever the Magdeburgians go about to discredit these Doctrines
together with their Authors, calling The conclusion of this age.
them, incommodas opiniones, naeuos, stipulas, and errores patrum; incommodious
opinions, blots, stubble, and errors in the Fathers: yet seems this only
reason, and Consideration to be sufficient to convince them of heretical
insolency, in their condemning these Fathers, for that it cannot be showed (and
if it can, let the Protestant speak) that the said Fathers were ever taxed, or
condemned for these Doctrines by the Church, or other Doctors of that age, or
of any age afterward for the space of fourteen or fifteen hundred years
together, until Luthers profane and unclean spirit brake forth of the
Cloister, and made way for heretical insolency to bark against orthodoxall
antiquity. And this shall suffice for this second age. Let us now pass to see
how conform, and agreeable the third age was unto the second, for by this
lineall, and personal descent of Doctors and Centuries we shall evidently, and
infallibly discover how in all times, ages, and persons, the business, and
doctrine of the Church was still carried by tradition, from hand to hand.

The third Age.
56. Concerning this third age, wherein were Doctors, Tertullian, Origin,
Dionysius Alexandrinus, Cyprianus, Methodius, and many others (which for
breuities sake I am enforced to pretermit) the Magdeburgians do begin with
this Preface, both complaining, and taxing, Quo longius ab Apostolorum aetate
recessum est, eoplus stipularum doctrinae puritate accessit. The further of,
that we go from the age of the Apostles, the more chafe did grow into the
purity of doctrine. And yet you see, we have gone, but one age from thence, for
the last was the first after the Apostles, and this is the second: and in the
last you have heard what chafe they complained of. But now we shall see that
they complain not only of the same points of chafe reiterated and confirmed
again by the Fathers of this age, to wit about free will, and good works,
perfection of life, possibility of Commandments, Sacrifice, Tradition, rytes,
11. Inuo catio^ of Angels.
Supremacy, merit of martyrdom, and Virginity (for all these heads they do
show in their several titles of doctrine to have been continued, repeated, and
confirmed again by the Fathers of this age:) but furthermore they do also
show, and complain of other articles explayned by the Fathers of this third
age, in behoof of the modern Catholic religion, much more abundantly then
before. As for example, they show that it was an opinion of this Magd. ce^t. 3.
c. 4. p. 75 76. and deinceps.
age, Angelosinuocandos esse, that Angels are to be prayed unto, according
unto the doctrine of Origin, who sets down also a certain form of
praying, and inuocating upon Angels, to wit, Veni Angele, suscipe sermon
conuer sum ab errore pristino etc. Come Angel and receive him that is
converted Hom. 1. in Ezechiele^.
from his error by the word preached. Neither was this ever reprehended in
Origin, or numbered amongst his errors, and consequently this may be presumed
to have been the form of praying in the public Church at that day, according
to the rule before set down, touching the authority of particular Fathers.

57. Touching the article of Justification, which is an other head besides those
9. or 10. before mentioned, the Magdeburgians 12. Justification by good works.
write thus of the Fathers of this age: Iustitiam coram Deo operibus
tribueru^t: They did attribute to good works their justice before God: which if
you read in the places of the Fathers by them mentioned, and alleged, you
shall easily discern it to be the very same doctrine that Catholics do hold
at this day, though misreported, slandered and abused by heretical
calumniation. For that the said Fathers do hold nothing else, but that this
justice by them mentioned does proceed from the grace of Christ, as from the
principal original concurrent and concomitant cause thereof, though yet not
excluding the cooperation of man's will stirred up and strengthened by that grace.

58. Next to this they handle De bonis operibus, of good works, and the merit
thereof, which Chapter they begin thus: Magis quam superiori saeculo, Doctores
huius aetatis etc. 13. The merit of good works.
The Doctors of this (third) age did decline more from the true doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, about the merit of good works, the^ did the Doctors
of the precedent age. And here I would entreat the ingenuous, and judicious
Reader to consider what kind of accusation this is, and the rather, for that
they are not abashed, for the making good of this accusation to cite diverse
places out of Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and others, that do plainly auerre
the merit of good works reprehended by them. And as for S. Cyprian, they
allege this place out of him in his sermon de Eleemosyna: Peccata post
baptismum commissa, eleemosyna and bonis operibus extingui. That sins
committed after baptism, are extinguished by alms and good works: for which
they say, that he alleges three places of Scripture. First that of Toby the
4. Sins are purged by alms and faith. The second is out of Ecclesiasticus
the 3. As water does extinguish fire, so does alms sin. The third is the
speech of Christ: Behold thou Scriptures and Fathers rejected together when
they fit not the Protestant fancy.
art made whole, take heed that thou sin no more, lest some worse thing do
happen unto thee. Notwithstanding all which Scriptures, and the venerable
authority of that blessed Martyr S. Cyprian in expounding them, the
Magdeburgians do condemn the sentence, with all the Scriptures, as erroneous:
so as it avails not Fathers to allege Scriptures, when they do not interpret
them as the Protestant would have them.

59. As for the Article of Penance, they begin with 14. About pe^nance Magd.
ce^t. 3. c. 4. p. 81.
it thus: Plaerique huius saeculi Scriptores doctrina^ de poenitentia mire
deprana^t. The most part of the writers of this age (and do you note the most
part) do wonderfully deprave, and pervert the doctrine of Penance. And the
reason is, for that they make mention of satisfaction in doing of penance. For
proof whereof they cite diverse places out of Tertullian, Origin, and S.
Cyprian. As for example: How much time (says Origin homil. 3. in lib. Iudicum)
thou have spent in offending of God, so much spend in humbling thee unto God,
and satisfacito Deo, and do satisfaction to God. And S. Cyprian lib. 1. epist.
3. Peccata ablue, and redime satisfactionibus: wash of, and redeem thy sins
by satisfaction. And in the third book of his Epistles, and 14. epistle he
says: Lapsos auxilio martyrum apud Dominum adiuuari posse. S. Cyprian is of
opinion, that such as fall into sin, may be helped with God by the
intercession of Martyrs. Here then besides satisfaction is intercession of
Martyrs.

60. In the article of baptism, they take up, and reprehend S. Cyprian
sharply, for writing thus in his first book 15. Blessing of the water of
baptism.
of Epistles, the 12 Epistle: Oportet mundari and sanctificari prius aqua a
sacerdote etc. The water of baptism must be purified, and sanctified by the
Priest, that he which is baptized, may have his sins washed away. Where S.
Cyprian (say the Magdeburgians) dares to avouch that he which baptizeth,
conferreth the holy Ghost, and does inwardly sanctify him that is baptized. A
very great absurdity (forsooth) if you mark it, especially if you confer it
with their Protestanticall opinion, that hold the Sacrament of Baptism to
wash only the external man, and not the internal.

61. The same Magdeburgians also accuse the same Saint Cyprian for that lib. 1.
Epist. 12. he speaks dangerously 16. Chrisme and holy unction in baptism.
(as they call it) of Chrisme and holy unction in baptism: Vngi quoque necesse
est eum qui baptizatus sit, vt accepto chrismate, id est, unction, esse vnctus
Dei, and habere in se Christi gratiam possit. It is necessary for him to be
anointed, that is baptized, to the end that having received the holy chrisme
or unction, he may be anointed of God, and have the grace of Christ in him.

62. Furthermore they do reprehend the said S. Cyprian for that he writes
primo libro Epist. epist. 3. Eucharist. in altari sa^ctificatur: The Eucharist
is sanctified upon the Altar. And lib. 1. epist. 3. they reprehend him for
saying: Sacerdotes sanctificare calicem: that Priests do sanctify the cup. And
again, for writing thus: Sacerdotum vice Christi sungi, and Deo Patri
sacrificium offerre. That the Priest performs the office of Christ, and
offers sacrifice to God the Father. And diverse other such speeches, as well
out of Tertullian, and S. Martial in epistola ad Burdegalenses, do displease
them.

63. In the controversy of Prayer unto Saints their first words are these.
Videas in Doctorum huius saeculi scriptis, non obscura vestigia inuocationis
Sanctoru^. You may see in the writings 17. Prayer unto Saints.
of the Doctors of this age, manifest signs of prayer unto Saints: for you
have, say they, the form set down in Origin a little before the end of his
second book upon Job: Obeate Job, or a pro nobis miseris. O Blessed Job pray
for us afflicted. Non obscure etiam sentit Cyprianus (say they) Martyrs, and
Sanctos defunctos pro viuentibus orare, Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 1. in fine. That
is; S. Cyprian is plainly of opinion, that Martyrs and Saints after their
death, and dissolution do pray for those that remain behind them on earth
alive.

64. I pretermit many other points, but especially those eight or nine heads
which I touched in the precedent age, whereof much more might be spoken here, as
namely of Primacy of the Church of Rome, for auerring of which, they greatly
stomach, and reprehend Tertullian, and S. Cyprian, saying? Tertullianus non
sine errore sentire videtur, libro de pudicitia, claues soli Petro commissas,
and Ecclesiam super ipsum extructam esse. Tertullian erroneously seems to
think that the keys were only given by Christ, unto S. Peter, and that upon
him the Church was builded. And then they do cite five several places out of
S. Cyprian: they might have cyted many more, and all antiquity with him as
concurring with Tertullian in this his opinion. And further they do conclude
thus: Alibi vero passim Cyprianus dicit, super Petrum Ecclesiam fundatam esse.
Cyprian does ordinarily in other places affirm the Church to be sounded upon
Peter, as lib. 1. epist. 3. lib. 4. epist. 9. tract. 2. de habitu virginum,
sermon. 3. de bono patientiae, and epist ad Quirinum.

65. And the same has Origin (say they) tract. 5. in Matthew. in these words:
Petrus per promissionem meruit fieri Ecclesiae fundamentum Et homil. 17. super
Lucam; Petrum vocat Apostoloru^ Principem: Peter by the promise of Christ,
deserved to be made the foundation of the Church. And again in his 17. homily
upon Luke, Origin calls S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles. Thus the
Magdeburgians are forced to show the Fathers of this age to be against
themselves.

66. And now by this the prudent reader may judge, what a volume I might make
up, if I should here recyte all the authorities which in this kind the
Magdeburgians Cent. 3. c. 4 p. 85. 86.
do allege, for confirmation of the general heads touched in the foregoing
age, and the other here adjoined. For thus they begin the articles of
martyrdom, and merit thereof. Martyrium immodice extulerunt omnes huius
aetatis Doctores. All the Doctors (and it is worth the marking, that they say
all (of this age do extol martyrdom immoderately. And in like manner they
begin their Article of chastity thus: Sicut and in superioris saeculi
historia, it a and hic inuenies nimium praedicari, and extolli continentiam. As
in the history of the former age, so here shall you find continency to be over
much commended, and extolled. And thus much for these so many, and so several
points, as before has been touched.

67. Now let us add one article, or head more of Roman Catholic Doctrine
discovered by the same Magdeburgians Ce^t. 3. c. 4. page 85.
in the Fathers of this third age, not hitherto handled: to wit, the article of
Purgatory. For thus they write: Semina Purgatoris in aliquot locis apud
Originem subinde sparsa videas. You 18. The doctrine of Purgatory.
may see here and there the seeds of Purgatory sowed in certain places of
Origin his works, as homily the 2. in Psalm. 36. and homil. 3. in cumdem. and
homil. 8. in Leuiticum, and homil. 12. in Ezechielem, and in libro primo contra
Celsum, and lib. 1. (...) cap. 6. And albeit the Magdeburgians do call this but
a strong imagination of Origin: yet I do consider this, that amongst so many
opinions reprehended and condemned, in Origin by the Fathers of the subsequent
ages, yet none did ever reprehend this his opinion of Purgatory, as an error
of his, but rather followed Origin them selves, houlding the same, as a
Catholic truth: so as now the other heads of Roman Catholic Doctrine, held
by the chief Fathers, and Doctors of two precedent ages, to wit, about
free will, perfection of life, possibility of the commandments, tradition,
and rites, Supremacy of the Pope of Rome, merit of Martyrdom, state of
Virginity, and the like, here in this age, the same heads are not only
confirmed, and ratified, but as many more disclosed, as Prayers unto Angels,
Justification by works, Penance, and satisfaction, intercession of Martyrs
for sinners in this life, sa^ctifying the water of baptism by the Priest,
necessity, and efficacy of holy chrisme, sanctification of the holy Eucharist
upon Aultars, the form of invocation of Angels, and Saints, Purgatory, and
diverse other such like points, which are at this day controuersed, I here for
breuity sake do pass over, hastening unto the fourth age.

The fourth Age.
68. The fourth age of Christ beginning from the year 400. had for chief
Fathers of the Greek Church S. Cyril of Jerusalem, S. Ephraim, S. Basil, S.
Epiphanius, S. Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nissen, and many others, as also the
chief Doctors of the Latin Church were S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, Prudentius,
Philastrius, Ruffinus, and others: In which age two principal points are to be
considered here for our purpose. First whether all the former Catholic
opinions, that were discovered in the second, and third precedent ages, to be
then held by the Church, and Fathers thereof, were now confirmed also in this
fourth age: and secondly whether any other points be further insinuated, and
inculcated touching the same doctrine.

69. And as for the first, it is evident, that the lower we descend from the
Apostles time, the greater confirmation, and illustration upon occasion of
heretical opposition, shall we find of the same articles. As for example, the
Magdeburgians have a Chapter De coena Domini, Cet. 4. c. 4. page 242.
of the Lords supper, wherein they do prove, out of Gregory Nazianzen,
Eusebius, Ambrosius, Hieronymus, Hilarious, Arnobius, Basilius, Epiphanius, and
diverse other Fathers and Doctors of this age, the Real Presence of Christ in
the said supper: which they hold to have been truly, and Catholickely
defended by them. Then passing over unto the other heads, which lie in
controversy between us, they do show to be held also, but (as they say)
erroneously by the chief Fathers of this fourth age, no less then by those of
the former ages. And then beginning with the article of Free will, they say:
Patres omnes huius fere aetatis, de libero arbitrio confuse loquuntur. All the
Fathers of this age do speak in a sort confusedly of Free will: but howsoever
the Fathers speak confusedly, certain it is, that the Magdeburgians speak
and censure falsely, and heretically, according to their old wont.

70. And yet presently after they make mention of Lactantius, Athanasius,
Basilius, Nazianzen, Epiphanius. S. Hierome and S. Gregory, men who speak as
plainly, and distinctly thereof, as men may do, and as it may possibly be
imagined, Hiero^. ep. ad Demetriadem.
and not confusedly. Let us hear S. Hierome speaking in steed of all: Omni
aetati (says he) omnique personae libertas arbitrij relicta est. Non cogo, non
impero, sed propono palmam, ostendo praemia: tuum est eligere, si volueris in
agone, and certamine coronari. Liberty of free will is left unto every age, and
unto all persons. God says, I do not force, I do not command, but I do
propose unto thee the crown, and do show thee the rewards: it is thy part to
choose, if thou will win the crown in the fight, and conflict. So he.

71. And the very same point of doctrine is often times by him reassumed,
reiterated, and urged, in inciting men to embrace the doctrine of Evangelical
Counsels, where he uses the self same words in many places of of his
works. The said Magdeburgians do allege most plain, and clear places and
sentences forth of Lactantius Nilus, Chromatius, Ephraim, and S. Hierome, who
teach plainly that man is not justified by only faith: Non sufficit murum
habere fidei, nisi ipsa fides bonis operibus confirmetur. It is not (says Lib.
8. co^. in Isaiam.
S. Hierome) sufficient, to have the wall of faith, except that faith be
confirmed with good works.

72. And as for the merit of good works, the Magdeburgians do openly confess
that both the said Lactantius, S. Gregory Nyssen, Hilarious, Nazianzen, S.
Ambrose, Theophilus Alexandrinus, Ephraim, and others, all Fathers of this age,
do openly defend the same. Whereupon they (I mean the Magdeburgians) conclude
in these words: I am cogitet pius Ce^t. 4 cap. 4. p. 293.
Lector, quam procul haec aetas in hoc articulo a doctrina Apostolorum
desciuerit. Now let the godly Reader consider how far this age departed from
the doctrine of the Apostles, in this article of good works. But I would
think it more reason to exhort, yea, and to beseech the Reader, even as he
has care of the everlasting welfare, and salvation of his soul, to consider
seriously, and indifferently, setting all kind of prejudice apart, whether it
be not more likely, that so many learned, and holy Fathers, that lived with so
great admiration of their virtue, learning, piety in this age, should know what
agreed with the Apostles Doctrine, and what agreed not, as well, or (as a man
would imagine) somewhat better, then these four quarrelling Companions the
Magdeburgians, I mean Illyricus, VVigandus, Iudex, and Faber, for these four
do only subscribe their dedicatory Epistle to Queen Elizabeth upon the year
1560.

73. S. Bernards rule, and prescription of Antiquity was this: Quanto
viciniores aduentui Saluatoris, tanto mysterium salutis pleniut perceperunt.
The nearer the holy Fathers were unto Christ his incarnation, the more fully
received, and perceived they the mystery of our redemption. And yet these four
good fellows do thus presume to censure the most reverend, and learned ancient
Fathers, as you see.

74. And on this fashion these men go forwards in setting down all the 18. or
19. heads of doctrine before mentioned, as held by the Fathers of this fourth
age, to wit Penance, satisfaction, invocation of Saints, citing above a dozen
Fathers of this age for the same, of traditions, about Virginity, monastical
life, and the like, wherein they do so check condemn, and contemn the said
holy Fathers, as passes all modesty: and must needs be a token of manifest
heresy.

75. S. Ambrose (say they) in his second book ad Marcellinam, nimis insolenter
pronunciat de virginum meritis: Ambrose does pronounce to insolently of the
merit of virginity. The like, and worse they speak of S. Ephraim, and S.
Athanasius, Cent. 4. p. 301.
for that they write of Monks, and namely S. Ephraim, that they are perfecti
pugnatores, paradisi amoenitatem ante oculos habentes, perfect fighters that
have before their eyes the sweetness of paradise. These men cry out against
this, Quid potest monstrosius dici contra meritum Christi? What can be spoken
more monstrously against the merit of Christ?

76. And for that S. Ambrose sermon. 6. de Margarita, has these words:
Whosoever therefore does honor Martyrs, does honor Christ, and he that
contemns Saints, contemns the Lord of Saints (which is conform to the
Gospel) the Magdeburgians complain crying out: I am cogitet pius lector
quant tetra suntista. Let the godly Reader consider, how horrible these things
are. The godly Reader has considered, and he finds nothing delivered by these
Fathers, but the holy Catholic doctrine. And as for your exclamations, they
are but the barkinges of Vigilantius, or rather, as S. Hierome more fitly
calls him, Dormitantius, and other ancient condemned heretics, against the
holy relics of Saints, and Martyrs, revived and renewed by you again, raked
out of the ashes of hell, and hellish heresy.

77. And finally not to be tedious in going forwards with a copious enumeration
of the foresaid articles, I do only admonish the Reader, for the last article
mentioned of Purgatory, how they do produce three Fathers more of this age that
held the same, to wit, Lactantius, Prudentius, and S. Hierome, as they might
have done many more: and they add unto the said former number diverse other
articles, which the Fathers of this age do teach, as of the particular rules of
religious people now in use, De memorijs Martyrum, of celebrating the memories
of Martyrs in Churches, and Altars erected and set up in their honor: De signo
Crucis, of the external use of the sign of the Cross and miracles that
thereby have happened, whereof Prudentius, hymno ante somnum, writes thus in
commendation of the Cross, and the benefit that redoundeth by using this
laudable Christian cerimony: Crux pellit omne crimen etc. the sign of the
Cross keeps of all sin from us. And S. Ephraim lib. de poenit. cap. 3.
aduifeth us thus: Pingamus in ianuis, ac in frontibus nostris etc. Let us paynt
the sign of the Cross in our gates, in our foreheades, in our mouth, in our
Breasts etc. and many other such sayings of holy Fathers of this age.

78. Wherefore to conclude, we see that this fourth age agrees with the former
three in all points of doctrine held for Catholic, throughout the whole
Christian world at this day. And as the Fathers of this age do consent with
their predecessors, so shall we see them not dissent from their successors, as
shall appear by the next ensuing ages. And if this be not a sufficient
demonstration of the true Roman Catholic Church, and of her doctrine,
confirmed by all records of antiquity, even by the confession of our
aduerfaries the Magdeburgians: then let the English Protestants answer unto
this evidence, and give a better if they can. But we shall pass further yet to
make an insight into two other ages that ensue.

The fifth and sixth Ages.
79. There follow the fifth and sixth age, whereof the former is received here
by his Majesty in the second edition of his English Premonition, though in the
first, the first 400. years were only allowed, as has been said, and the
later was comprehended in M. Jewel his challenge at S. Paul's Cross, who
promised there openly to allow any of the Fathers, or Counsels, that could be
brought within the first six hundred years. But this public declamation was
but a vain ostentation of the challenger, and this large offer was also
restrained, and revoked afterward by others, both at Paul's Cross, and in
either of the Universities: in so much that Doctor Humphrey, in Oxford in a
funeral speech, made of the said M. Jewel by the former D. Humphrey, did not
for bear to tax him openly of inconsideration, for his so large, and liberal
offer of Fathers for six hundred years, to decide all controversies.

10. But here in this our affair, and business we have now in hand, we have
thought good to join both these ages together, for that in them both the like
descent of doctrine, one after the other is still to be found, the latter
repeating, and confirming the former. And for proof of this point, I shall
need to go no further, then to the confession, and concession of our Cent. 5.
c. 4 p. 501. 502. etc.
adversaries themselves the Magdeburgians: for there they show, for example in
the first Century, first of Freewill, to wit, that albeit the Doctors of this
age, interdum been, and sane, videantur loqui, tandem tamen liberum arbitrium
in rebus spiritualib us etiam statuunt. Albeit the Fathers sometimes speak
well, and soundly, yet at length they affirm, that man has free will, even in
spiritual things. And then they begin with S. Chrysostom, alleging many
plain places out of his works at large, saying: Chrysostomus passim liberi
arbitrij patronum agit. S. Chrysostom does every where play the advocate for
free will. From S. Chrysostom, they pass unto S. Augustine, and from S.
Augustine, to S. Cyril, and from them to Theodoret, Hesichius, Thalassius,
Faustus, Marcus Eremita, and Ioannes Cassianus, all Fathers and Doctors of this
fifth age: and the same they do in the sixth age, alleging many places out of
S. Gregory the first, as also out of Euodius, Olympiodorus, and others.

81. Then pass they unto the article of Justification, showing that the
Fathers of these ages did not ascribe Justification unto only faith, but
required also works, for which they allege large sentences out of S.
Chrysostom, S. Cyril, S. Augustine, though more contractedly, and out of S.
Leo the Great, who offends them much by saying, recta fide and bonis operibus
peruenitur ad regnum Dei: by right faith and good works, we come to the
Kingdom of God. And from him they pass to S. Prosper, Hesichius, Sedulius,
Primasius, Theodulus, all of the forenamed Fathers houlding the same erroneous
opinion, as it pleases their Maisterships to call it, for that works are by
them ever joined with faith: and that in the last judgment Christ shall
question with them, not so much, what they have believed, as what they have
practiced.

82. And the same do they in the next hundred years after, alleging for it
the writings of Cassiodorus, Olympiodorus, Andraeas Hierosolymitanus: and above
all, and more largely they allege above a dozen places out of S. Gregory the
Great, who says: Vita aeterna ex piae vitae actionibus comparatur. Life
everlasting in the next world Gregor. in 1. Reg. c. 1.
is prepared, and gotten by pyous actions in this life.

83. From this article they skip unto another of the Cent. 5. page 506.
excellency and merit of good works, which article they begin thus: Nimium
haec aetas bonis operibus adscripsit. This fifth age did ascribe to much unto
the good works of men, which they declare largely, first out of Chrysostom
his writings, saying that he was immodicus Encomiastes bonorum operum, an
immoderate commender of good works. And from him they pass unto S. Augustine,
shaking him also by the sleeue, and taking him up for halting, and saying:
Augustinus etiam nimium interdum operibus tribuit. Augustine also attributes
some tims too much to good works. Then they pass unto Pope Leo, and show the
same excess out of him. And from these they come unto S. Prosper, to
Saluianus, to Maximus, to Salonius, to Thalassius, to Theodulus, to Eucherius,
to Paulinus and some others, all Doctors and Fathers of this fifth age.

84. And then in the sixth age, following the same methood, under their article
de bonis operibus, they reprehend, for ascribing to much thereunto, S. Gregory
the great, Euodius, Cassiodorus, Olympiodorus, Fortunatus, and Iustus, Fathers
of the Church, and doctors of those days.

85. There follows the article of Penance wherewith they begin thus:
Consessioni, ieiuniijs, and alijs ritibus nimium vendicat Chrysostomus.
Chrysostom does ascribe to much unto Confession, fasting, and other rytes of
penance. And of the same errors do they condemn Hesichius, for that lib. 2.
in cap. 6. Leuit. he says, that true penance does consist in fasting,
watching, haire-clothes, tears, prayers, and almes-deedes. The same error
they ascribe to Maximus, Ioannes Cassianus, Eucherius, Doctors of this fifth
age. And in the sixth Century they lay the same imputation upon Cassiodorus, and
S. Gregory, especially chiding him for that he says, Poenitentiam agere, est
perpetrata mala plangere, and plangerda non perpetrare. This is to do penance,
to moan and bewail our sins we have committed, and not to commit again
things Hom. 34. in Euang.
worthy of bewayling. What can be spoken more divinely by this heavenly Doctor?
And would a man judge these men to be Christians, daring thus to open their
mouths, and publicly to blaspheme?

86. I might pass further to allege much more out of these Magdeburgian
Centuriators, which they produce out of every age, most manifestly against
themselves, and their own cause, with this only fond confidence, that all
authority, and credit of the venerable testimonies of the ancient Fathers are
shifted of, by saying only, that they are incommodious opinions, blots,
stubble, and errors of the Fathers: as though the very gleanings The Fathers
injuriously handled by the Magdeburgians
of the Fathers were not better then their whole vintage? and these blots and
stubble, and falsely supposed errors, were not to be preferred before their
best truth? But who told these good fellows that these were errors? What
Church ever held them so? What General Council ever concluded them so? Nay
what one Father, or one ancient writer (the grand heretics their ancient
predecessors excepted) did once open his mouth, to speak against either all,
or any one of these doctrines? If they can disprove any one of these doctrines,
according to any one of the forenamed challenges, Church Counsels, one Father,
or many, we do faithfully promise to renounce them all as stubble, and errors,
as they speak. But if none of these things can be made good against any one,
the least and weakest supposed doctrine, then must these doctrines as hitherto
they have stood in the Church for Orthodoxe: so must they hereafter continue
Catholic, and they themselves for confessing the Fathers to hold them, and
we withal urging antiquity, that do deny consent of Fathers in any point of
doctrine generally received by the Church in their days, can be no less then
great, and rash presumption.

87. And yet for full conclusion, I must advertise the Reader, to note this one
point, which in my judgment is very remarkable: for these Magdeburgians do
The conclusion.
scarcely allege one place of ten of these that are to be found in the
Fathers works themselves, for proof of the Roman Catholic Religion, as
every man may easily discern, if he please to read the Catholic writers,
that make profession purposely to allege the places of ancient Fathers, as
namely Canisius in his large, Catechism, Cardinal Bellarmine, throughout all
his works Cardinal Baronius, Coccius in his Thesaurus Catholicus, and others:
but yet these that the Magdeburgians please to cite, are sufficient to daunt
the English Protestant his confidence in the ancient Fathers, since that they
alone of themselves confute, and confound both him, and his religion. With what
face then can the English Protestants vaunt, that the ancient Fathers are for
him? And further, these few places of many that might be heaped together, may,
as I hope, suffice to give his Excellent Majesty our Sovereign, satisfaction,
or at leastwise sufficient light by these, to pass further, and to seek more
sound information of the true faith, and belief of the ancient Fathers of the
first five hundred years, which his said Majesty most Royally offers to
follow. For opening the window unto which light, I have thought it my bounden
duty, both before God, and man, to take this small labor, and to lay these few
heads of Considerations before the eyes of his Highness most wise Judgment, and
understanding.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER, CONTAINING A BRIEF CONTEMPLATION of what has been
hitherto said: with the Conclusion of the whole to his most Excellent Majesty.
AND now having handled these points at some more length then at the beginning
I had purposed, I hope the benignity and Clemency of his Majesty will take in
good part, that leaving the Reader, I do return unto him again, as unto my
most dearly beloved reverenced, and dread Sovereign, to lay before the eyes of
his Prudent Consideration the sum of that which hitherto has been
considered of.

2. First then the point of being a true Catholic according unto the name,
and nature of the word, is of such importance, necessity, and consequence (as
has been showed in the first Chapter) that no riches in this world no wealth,
no treasure, no state, no power, no policy, no human felicity may be compared
with it, as rightly S. Augustine does intimate. And for that your Majesty's
eternal weal, after the brief, and transitory passage of this life depends
thereof, I cannot but most humbly, most heartily, and most dutifully, falling
prostrate at your feet, beseech you to give some serious attendance, and
Importance of being a Catholic.
attention to this high, and main point of everlasting salvation, to seek out
what is truly Catholic, both in the Church (for whose Epitheton the Name was
first by the Apostles invented:) as also in particular men, who is a true
Catholic, and who follows the rule, which the Name describes: to wit, he
that in Christian Religion follows universality, and not singularity, the
whole, and not a part, ancienty, and nouelty, that which has been delivered
and conserved from time to time, and not invented, framed, and set sorth in
later times.

3. And for that on the other side heresy is the opposite, and contradictory
unto Catholic Religion, for that it makes choice of a part to it self, and
thereby is held to be the highest sin in the sight of Almighty god that is, or
can be committed upon earth, for that it overthrows the very foundation of
faith, under pretense to establish The horror of heresy.
and reform faith: My desire is so ardent in this point that your Matie should
enter into due consideration thereof, as almighty God bears wirnesse unto my
soul, and spirit, that nothing in this life stands more near my heart,
considering the eternity of the next world, the immutable weal, or woe thereof,
the vae, or euge that each man is to receive, as well Princes as others: and
that these earthly Princedomes will seem but shadows at that day, and not
worthy one hour of that glory, or misery, that is to be gotten or lost by
Catholic Religion, or heresy in this life. And this is my first contemplation,
and I shall pray Almighty God, that it may be also your Majesty's.

4. The second is about those four ways proposed by your Majesty for auerring
Catholicisme, and clearing from heresy, which are the admitting, and believing
of all Canonical Scriptures, the receiving of the three Creedes, the approving
the four first Counsels, and the acceptance of the Ancient Fathers of the
first four, or five hundred years. In all which, if with the admitting in
words, there be also a The 4. heads proposed.
true Catholic sense, no doubt, but they do make a man to be a Catholic,
and do condemn heresy. But the importance of all stands in the exposition,
for to believe the Scriptures in the sense that I think best my self, or to
acknowledge them for Canonical, or not Canonical, as I, or some few with me
of later times shall please to prescribe, or to admit the three Creedes with
that exposition of the articles, as I, and mine shall best allow; or the first
four Counsels in some things, and not in other; or the first four hundred
years of Fathers, so far forth as they in my censure do agree with
Scriptures, is to reduce all to my own judgment: a thing most opposite to
Catholicisme, and proper to heresy, as we have at large declared.

5. Wherefore upon my knees I do most humbly supplicate your Majesty to
consider well of this, and especially of the last point, concerning the ancient
Fathers, which does in effect co^taine all the rest: for that these men
delivered unto us the Scriptures, together with the true understanding thereof,
according to the sense of the Church in their days: these men delivered unto
us the three Creedes, the first as from the Apostles, the other as from the
Church, the third as from a private man, but yet approved by the Church: these
men delivered unto us the first four general Counsels, wherein diverse of
themselves sat as Judges, and Bishops, and had voyees, and suffrages in the
same: these men were they that examined the controversies, determined the
Catholic doctrine, condemned heresies, an athematized heretics, and cleared
the coasts of all these wicked, and turbulent encumbrances, which seditious,
and headstrong spirits had raised in the Christian world, by their contentions.

6. And finally these were they, whom our Savior Christ did use as sannes to
winnow his corn, and to purge the flore of his Church, separating the chafe
from the wheat, and eroneous doctrine from the truth, wherein they were so
zealous, and diligent laborers, as not the least weed could spring up in this
field of the Church, but that these careful good watchmen, and faithful
gardeners, did presently note, and pursue the same, until it was either rooted
out, or condemned by the Church, and thereby as branches cut of from the body of
the vine, suffered to wither away, and to consume of themselves. For proof The
great profit received by the ancient Fathers.
whereof, we may allege as many examples, as there have been different
heresies, and heretics in the Christian Church, for the space of fifteen
hundred years, which albeit they ruffled much, and mightily for the time, and
had often great Princes, Kings, Emperors, and Potentates to favor, and
patronize them (as the Protestants have now your Matie:) yet are they so
consumed in time, and by virtue of the holy Ghost, as the very names of many of
them are now scarce remembered, and much less their arguments, reasons,
proofs, and Scriptures which they brought for the same: and were it not that
in these Fathers books (who were their enemies) some mention is made thereof,
we should scarce know that there had bin such men in the world.

7. But on the contrary side, the Church that condemned these men, and the
Fathers, and Doctors living therein remained ever both then, and after,
victorious, and shall do to the worlds end: and still by succession, and
continuatio^ the same Church has come down from age to age, and one age
giving testimony to another of the purity of the said Church by razing out
these evil humors from the body.

8. And now your Majesty having seen by the former discourse how many points
of old condemned heresies have been revived, and renewed again by the
Protestants of our time: and that contrariwise almost twenty several positions
about principal points of controversy held by the said Protestants to be
Papisticall, are asserted by the said ancient Fathers, as Catholic in their
days, even from the first age after the Apostles, with repetition, and
confirmation of the same in the subsequent ages, by the chief Doctors that
lived therein: and that the said positions, or assertions were never noted, or
censured by the The dangerous estate of believing the Protestants in England.
Church for erroneous, heretical, or scandalous: This I say, is, and ought to
be your Majesty's prudence and love of your everlasting good, so weighty an
argument, and motive, as nothing more. For alas, dread Sovereign, if the
sentence of S. Paul be just, and true, that an heretical man is damned by his
own judgment, and if that of S. Augustine before cited be not false, that
whosoever houldeth any one of those eighty three heresies, which he recites in
his book to Quod-vult-Deus, or any other whatsoever which shall spring up
hereafter, cannot be a Christian Catholic, and consequently must needs be an
heretic: Alas I say (my dread Sovereign) and alas again, in what eternal
danger does your Princely soul consist, in that, by the evil curre^t of the
time, and temerarious course of such as you give credit unto, your Matie is
drawn to hold, and defend, not only sundry of those positions, which S.
Augustine, and before him S. Epiphamus, do recount for condemned heresies by
the Church in their days, but many other also: yea all the opposite
propositions to the Catholic assertions before mentioned out of the ancient
Fathers, as namely, about Free Will, Justification, good works, invocation of
Saints, real Presence, Primacy of the Church of Rome, and the like.

9. And truly to have such a grand Inquest, or rather Parliament of Peers to
bear witness against a soul, for conuincement of heresy at the day of
Judgment, as the ranks of these Fathers are in all the first, and purest ages
of Christian religion, makes my soul to tremble, even in thinking of it. For
if the cause were temporal, and that there went therein but only the interest
of your Maties temporal, and terrene Kingdom, yet were the case frightfull,
to see so many great lawyers and Judges upon the one side so resolute as the
Fathers show themselves to be. But now for so much as the matter concerns an
everlasting and heavenly Kingdom, and sentence irreuocable in it self, never
alterable, or to be changed, and of such inflexible severity, as no respect, no
regard, no difference of Prince, Potentate, or people is to be held, it makes
the Consideration more hideous and dreadful.

10. And it may further be added to this Consideration, that in this public
trial about this point of Protestant Religion, your Matie is not only to have
this venerable rank of foreign Fathers and Doctors for adversaries therein,
but so many domestical also, as have been Catholics within all your Realms
for these thousand years at least, I mean Bishops, Pastors, and Governors of
those flocks, together with the flocks that were once subjects of your
Ancestors: nay all your Majesty's Ancestors themselves, which are of most
consideration, I mean above two hundred Kings of both Crowns that have gone
before you, and together with the descent of their Noble Blood left also in
their inheritance of Catholic Religion, as of their Kingdoms, to be defended
by your Majesty: which no doubt had been most Nobly performed, if the A strange
pitiful case happened to his Majesty.
strangest case, that ever perhaps fell out in the world had not happened to
hinder it; and such a one as all posterity may, and will wonder at: and this
is, that being violently deprived at once, as it were, in your cradle of both
your Parents, who should, and would have instilled to your tender ears, the
most honorable inheritance of Catholic religion, the opposite and contrary
fects were in place thereof powered into your Majesty's Noble Breast, by such as
had been Authors or instruments of both their ruynes, and meant no doubt also
to be of your Majesty, if they should not find you pliable to their designs,
for ouerturning of that Religion whereof they were enemies.

11. This then is the case, most dread Sovereign, notorious to the whole
Christian world. And further that if your Maiestyes noble Grandmother Regent of
Scotland had not been vexed, and turmoyled with rebellions, tossed and tumbled,
wearied out and brought to despair by the first Scottish, and English
Ghospellers: if your Noble Father and Grandfather had not been horribly
murdered, if your renowned mother had not been pursued, taken, cast into
prison, driven out of her Realm, and finally made violently away in terra
aliena: if all these things (I say) had not been done, your Matie by all
likelihood had never been a Protestant. And shall we think, that of such
Diabolical premises, there could ensue any good conclusions, or any godly, or
wholesome effect of so abominable causes.

12. I deny not but that the inscrutable wisdom, and providence of almighty
God does often times draw out How God co^curreth with the actions of evil men,
but not with their intentio^s.
of the counsels and actions of evil men good effects, as out of the
wickedness of the Jews, and Gentiles, that pursued, and murdered our Savior, he
wrought the salvation of the world, but never does he this according to the
cou^sailes, and purposes of the wicked: that is to say, these effects are
never intended by the wicked. As for example, that the redemption of mankind or
salvation of the world was never intended by the Jews, or Gentiles that
persecuted our Savior, and procured his blessed passion.

13. But here in our case, the matter falls out quite contrary, for that the
chief, and prime intention of those wicked, whom I have mentioned, was to
effectuate this very point, that now we see brought to pass, to reuolue that
crown, expel Catholic Religion, pull down Monasteries and Churches, drive
out, or destroy the The mark aimed at by the first Ghospellers in Scotland
concerning his Majesty.
Princes that then governed, as also their issue, if they should leave any, or
else getting the same into their hands (the better thereby to have Title of
governing in the infants name) to preserve it so long, as it might stand
commodious for them, and after to dispose thereof as time should tell them to be
best. But their chiefest aim of all was unto that, which out of an infants
education they might probably hope for, and now have arrived unto: which is,
that during the time of that education, they might perhaps so inchaunt the mind
of the young Prince, so change his judgment, and affection, from the judgment
and affection of his said parents and other progenitors, as when he should come
to the years of understanding to discern the merits of men's actions, and
affections toward him, he should approve for good all that was done to his
highest hurt, to wit, in matter of Religion, appertayning to his everlasting
salvation, to the ruin and destruction of his parents, to the revolution of
his Kingdom, and the like. And shall we think, that God would ever concur
with such men, to such designements? God has permitted the^ for our sins,
and for the sins of thousands else, that have perished, and are to perish
thereby: but any concourse of his to such men's intentions, no pious mind can
yield unto.

14. For if this should be granted, that God did concur with the actions of
these seditious men, in drawing his Maties infancy by so turbule^t and wicked
means, from the union of that faith and religion, which all his parents and
predecessors professed for so many ages together: then must it follow, that
the same God never concurred with the other (I mean his noble Ancestors) by
whom notwithstanding he did work, and achieue, throughout all those ages, so
many notorious works of Christian piety, as perhaps by no Nation more. And to
think, that all this notwithstanding, they lived out of his favor, deprived
of true faith, infected with erroneous doctrine, deceived with false
Sacraments, were no members of his true Church, but rather cast out from his
face, and delivered over to the delusion, scorn and power of Satan, were no
doubt temerarious impiety to imagine or affirm.

15. Wherefore most Noble, and renowned Prince, The Epilogue of all.
and Sovereign, I do not only, out of the dutiful zeal of a loving devoted
subject, exhibit this humble Petition to your Majesty, but also on the behalf
of our Savior Jesus Christ entreat, that it may please your Highness, if not to
entertain, and cherish, yet not to persecute that Religion, wherein your
Ancestors have lived so honorably and piously, for that this would be to
persecute them in their religion. And your Maties Princely nature, I know, Of
persecution and Persecutor.
cannot but abhor the hateful name of persecution, and violent proceeding,
as well knowing out of your own great Prudence, that nothing is more durable,
or more subject to hatred, and malediction in the world, especially the cause
being so universal and common to so many other great Princes, and some of them
the nearest of your Royal blood, as all men see it is.

16. But the very fundame^tall reason indeed is, that this Catholic Religion
is no nouelty, or innouatio^, but that whereunto your Majesty's realms were
first converted from Paganism, when they were made Christian, and whereunto
they yielded their obedience, promised subjection, submitted the regiment of
their souls, professed co^stancy therein to the worlds end. And now then in
any justice can they be punished for houlding that which was so solemnly
sown, rooted, and so generally admitted, so long, and faithfully contiued, so
firmly grounded, so delivered, and so commended by our Fathers to this their
posterity? If all our great Grandfathers, and ancient Predecessors were alive
again, might they not as lawfully be pursued, and persecuted for their
religion, as we are now for the same? If they should look upon the Churches,
which themselves builded, to the honor of Christ for divine service, and
especially for the use of the public Sacrifice, used throughout Christendom
at that day, and should see the same not only taken away, but penal Statutes
also made against the fame, by imprisonment, vexatio^, payme^ts of money and
other tribulations, would they not complain of great injustice done unto them:
in that so sharp persecution should be laid upon their children, for keeping
their depositum, or pledge received, as the Apostle says, and for observing
their fidelity both to God, and them?

17. Wherefore most noble Prince, let this be as far from your action or
permission, as it is from your Royal Inclination, and disposition to be a
persecutor of those that stand only in defense of their consciences: and these
not framed upon wilful fancy, as all those of Sectaries and Innouators are,
but necessarily laid upon them by obligation of religion, left unto them by
tradition of Gods whole Church, and by the Church of England in those days.,
as a principal member thereof, whose Communion in religion, if these men do
break, and leave now, for what cause soever, either of fear, flattery,
ambition, worldy favors, and preferments, perils, or persecutions: then must
they consequently break of for ever that eternal band: and lincke of being
saved together, or ever enjoying more the one the other in the next life: for
that no association can be for eternity in the life to come, but by observing
one, and the self same religion in this world. Which cogitation does strongly
work with your Highness Catholic subjects: and they do heartily pray our
Savior Jesus, that it may no less work with your Majesty in like manner.

FINIS.

