(...) The first chapitre / how the church ought to be honored and loved
capitulo primo How prelates and people ought to live chastely capo. ij How they
ought to teache and govern their subgettis and to give almesses capitulo iij
How men of the church out to preche and say truth cao. iiij How they ought
testudye and to learn the holy scripture v The third book speaks of the lords
temporell. Which ought to be pyetous and mercyful capitulo pumo How they ought
to be of good life and of good manners cao. ij How they ought not to be covetous
ne auarcyous capo. iij How the princes ought to keep Justice and mayntene it
iiij How princes ought to be debonayr and humble capo. v How they ought to be
sobre and chaste capitulo vj wherein the princes ought temploye them capo. vij
How princes ought to govern them capitulo viij
The fourth book speaks
Of the state of the comynalte of the people capitulo primo Of the state of
pouerte which ought to be agreeable capo. ij Of the state of old age wherein a
man out to be virtuous iij Of the state of young people and how they should
govern them iiij Of the state of maryane. and how it out to be mayntened v How
wymmen ought to be governed capitulo vi How virginite and maydenhede out to be
mayntened cao. vii Of the state of wymmen wydowes capitulo viij How servants
out to be mayntened in their service ix How they that been of evil life dyen ylle
capitulo x How fader and mother ought to teache their children capo. xj How
children owen obeyssau^ce and honor to their parents xij Of the state of
marchaunts capitulo xiij Of the state of pylgryms capitulo xiiij How dedely
sins desyren death capitulo xv
The fyfthe book speaks wherefore no man ought to gloryfye him self
First how the life is short and lastyth but a while capo. j How this present
life ought little to be praised capo. ij How no man ought to doubt ne fere death
capo. iij Of ensamples by which it ought not to be doubted capo. iiij How to
think on death is a thing much prouffytable cao. v How none ought to be
curyous of his sepulture capo. vj The last chappytre speaks how a man ought to
think on the last Judgment and day of dome capitulo vij
Explicit tabula
The first party of this book whereof the first chapter speaks of Pride
Capitulo primo
Every proud person would compare him self to god in so much as they gloryfye
them self in the goods that they have. Of which things the glory is due
pryncypally to god. And it is a great abusion when the creature takes pride in
him self for the goods that god has sent him / for which goods he ought to
be the more humble toward god / and the better to know and to serve him
devoutly Therefore says the prophet that god resysteth against the proud folk
which ben fallen vylaynsly. Emonge whom the first was lucyfer / which for
his pride fyl fro heaven to hell and all they that consented to his sin.
Semblably our first fader Adam for the mesprysion of disobeyssau^ce to god /
and obeyed to the serpent saying. that he should be as god. and ete of the
fruit which was to him fo^boden / therefore he was put out of paradys / as it
apperyth in the book of genesis. Furthermore Agar the chamberyer of sara was
right proud against her maystresse by cause of a child that she had by Abraham.
But fynably she was put out for her pride and her child also / and nothing
was given to her at departing but a little bread and water. as it apperyth in
the xvj chapter of genesis. Also we read how the pride of nembroth and of many
other was a great part cause of many euyllis and of the deuysyon of the world
as it apperyth in the book aforsayd / For after Noes flood were the geants
which by their pride entreprysed the assault against heaven. and edyffyed the
toure of babylon. And therefore they were divided in to many la^gages in such
wise that none understood other as it apperith in the xi chapter of genesis.
And as me seems pride sourdeth but only of folly / For who so well knows him
self. if he be evil. he has cause of great humylyte / For all sin is shame
and seruytude / And if he be good. he has cause also of great humylite for the
grace that god has done to him. in so much that he is good and agreeable to
god. and to have humylite admonesteth us the pnnycion that we read of them that
were proud / for we read how pharao was so proud that he said. he wist not
who was god of Israel. and that he set nout ne held not of him. as it
appears in the v chapter of exode but fynably he was punysshed and drowned in
the reed see and all his. Furthermore we read how Amon for his pride would be
honored of all men. And was much angry against Mardocheus a man so named by
cause that he would not worship him. But fynably the said amon was honged on a
galowes which he had ordained and made ready for to have hanged o^ the said
mardocheus and the children of Israel as it appears in the third chapter of
hester. Further more abymelech for his pride did to slay him self. for by cause
that a woman had smyten him. he called one his squire. and bad him to slay him
to the end that it be not said. that a woman has slain him. as it apperyth in
the ix chapter of Iudyth. Read we not also how Balthazar was slain for his
pride* And Nabugodonosor was cast down fro his syege. and turned in to a dombe
be as it apperith in the v chapter of danyel. Anthiochus also for his pride
was gretely punysshed of god. and smyton with a disease of which he might
never be heled. as it apperith in the second book of Machabees. And generally
al proud men at last have be overthrown. Read we not how the pride of
Nychanor was descomfyt and brought to naught as it apperyth in the first book
of Machabees the viij chapter / And Absalon which would have taken the Royame
fro his fader / was he not vysaynously slain as it apperith in the second book
of kings the xv chapter. who made Pheton to fall but his pride. For he would
govern the carte against the counceyl of his fader Phoebus. And therefore he
fylle dyshonourably as Ouyde recounteth in his first book of Methamorphaseos /
wherefore was the sone of Dedalus drowned. but by cause he would flee over high
against the techyng of his fader as ouyde recou^trth / and david was gretely
punysshed by cause that he nombred the people which were subgette to him / as it
apperith in the ij book of kings in the xxiij chapter. Hewde also which was
ryt proud was smyton of thangel as it appears in the book of thactes of the
appostles. And therefore our lord Ihesu christ would show to his discyples that
pride dysplaysed him. he repreued them by cause they glorified them / in saying
to Ihesu christ. Sir in thy name so^me ben to us subgettes. and then Ihu christ
for to withdraw them fro their pride. he aledged to them thystorye aforsayd of
the angel lucycer which fyl fro heaven. to the end that they should take thereby
example as it appyereth in the x chapter of saint Luc And me seems that for
to flee fro pride we have suffysaunt ensamples in that which is tofore said /
But yet above this it is good to be considered how pride is not al only noyeng
to the creature. but also his opposyte / that is to wete humylite is ^ght
playsau^t and agreeable to god and to the world. and like as pride overthrows
the creature. right so humylite enhau^ceth and lift him up toward god. Therefore
says the prophet that the virgyne Marie plesed god by cause of her humylite.
and david which was leest emonge his brethern. was enhaunsed above them all
as it apperith in the first book of kings. the xvj chapter. Furthermore
Salamon had the royame af^r his fader / and nevertheless he was less and more
young than his brother Adonias as it appears the iij book of kings the xxiij
chapter. Manasses also which was less and younger than effraym his brother
had the benyson tofore him as it appieryth the xxxviij chapter of genesis and
generally humylite and mekenes of heart makes the creature to come to honor.
And pride by rayson overthrows him in the end / and is to god emonge al other
sins most dysplaysau^t / and is punysshed most /

How pride blyndeth the understanding of the creature capo. ij
MAn for pride knows no thing of his myserye ne h^s fraylnesse. and weneth
to be more parfyght than he is. And this witnesses the prophet saying. that
when a man is in pride he leseth his understanding and knowleche. And is like a
be which has none understanding / by which it appears that a man which
will bycome wise ought to be humble. and to know him self without wenyng that
he be that. which he is not. And to this purpoos recounteth saint gregory in
his dyalogue the first book the xv chapitre. How Constancius was so humble that
he loved more them that despised him than them that honored him. And there came
a man that desired much for to see him for the great reno^mee of him and also
for the good that was spoken of him. And fynably wha^ lx saw him he began to
say by manner of wondryng O Constancius I had supposed that thou had ben a
great man strong and parfyght. and of synguler faco^n / but now I see clearly
that is nothing so of the. Then Constancius began to give laue^ unto god. In
saying I praise god and thank him of that which he has given to the so good
sight and so clear knowleche of me / For reryly thou art only he that has well
byholden me and Iuged clearly all the truth of me. and therefore says Saint
Austyn in his first omclye upon the gospel of saint Johan. very humylyte or
mekenes is no thing to g^^^che ne murmr ne to despise any other. but to
yield thankynges to god of all that he sends / And the same he recounteth
that there was sometime of a rethorycien demanded. which was the princypal
commandment in rethoryque. which ansuerd that it was well for to pronounce. And
if he had been so demanded an hundred times. he would as often so have ansuerd
Semblably says saint Austyn if thou demanndest of me which is the pryncypal
commandment in all the law of mankind. I ansner to the / that it is to
observe mekenes and humylyte / And as often as thou shall so demand of me / So
often shall I so ansuer the / For humilite suffers no point of error ne
thentendement thereof. but engenders science and knowledge of truth / And to
this purpoos says Ancelme in the xxviij chapter of his symylitudes that
humylyte has vij degrees. The first is to know well him self. The second is
sorrow for his sin. The third is to confess his sin / The fourth is to
knowleche that he is a sinner and enclyned to do evil The fyfthe is for to
despise all him self The sixthe is gladly for tendure vylanye. The seventh is
to rejoice of his humylite / And thus it appears that humylyte enge^dreth very
knowledge. And therefore saint Bernard in his book of the degrees of humylyte
says / that humylite is none other thing but a virtue which makes a man
verily to know him self and to despise him. And for to have the same
admonesteth us saint austyn in the xv omelye upon the gospel of saint Johan. we
have says he an ensaumple of great humylite in our savior Ihesu Christ the
which for to save and hele us would desce^de fro heaven and become^ lytyl. And
therefore if thou will not ensue and follow thy humble servant at lest. thou
ought to follow thyn humble master and lord Ihesu Christ the which says
thus to us. learn ye of me my children for to become meke and debonayr. For
such one am I humble and meke of heart which is wrycon in the xj chapter of
Saint mathewe / This lesson that god has showed to us is the rem playre that
we ought to take in him and in his deeds as says saint Jerome in his epistle
lxxxvij. More over we read in scripture how ambico^n and will to domyne. has
be sometime cause of many euylles. and has done so much that many have gretely
erred and fallen grievously in right enyl sin. Ne read we not how Athalie for
the great desire for to maystrye and regne did do slay all the seed of kings
/ as it appears in the first book of Machabees the xv chaptre / Roboas also
for couetyse to regne did many euylles. and reigned right evil as it appears in
the third book of kings the xiij chapter. Semblably Abymalech reigned right
malicyously. and procured so much by his fre^des that he was chosen king. but
fynably he slew his own brethern as it appears the xix chapter of Iudicu^.
Read we not also how Alquius for the desire that he had to be great priest of
the law murmured against him that was as it appears in the first book of
machabees the vij chapter / Also it appears how ambico^n has caused many
euyls And in deed we read how Jason for to be great priest of the law promised
to the king Anthiocus. CCC.lxix marc of silver / And sent menelaus unto him
for to be his moyen and do his message. Nevertheless menelaus did so that he
gate thoffyce for him self. as it appears in the second book of kings the
fourth chapter. wherefore it appears how Ambicion engenders symonye / After
we read in the third book of kings the xviij chapter how Iabin slew his lord
for to regne after him. but he regued not but only vij days. Tholomeus also
by his ambico^n falsely ocupyed the royam of Alexandre Nevertheless it happed
that he deyed the third day after. that he was king / as it appears in the
first book of machabees the xv chapter. Adomas also said not he by his
ambicion / I shall regne after my fader / and yet it happed the contrary as it
appears in the third look of kings the first chapter. For which things we
may conclude how pride and ambicion maken a man to bycome blind / and to lose
entendement and understanding. and by conseque^t do many sins and euyllis /

How humylite makes a man know him self Capo. iij
When a man is humble / then he knows that of him self he has nothing but
fraylnes pouerte. and myserye And therefore says thappostle in the ij epistle at
Corynthyens warnyng us saying my friends preue your self / my friends know
your self. And saint austyn in spekyng allone to god says. lord give me grace
to know the and to know my self. For if I know my self. I know well that I
ne am but ashes and rottynnes. And therefore Abraham as it appears in the xviij
chapter of genesis says / Alas how dar I speak to god / I that am but duste
and ashes. And to this purpoos saint Bernard in his xxxvj omelye upon the
cantycles says I will examyne my soul and know my self like as rayson will.
For there is none so nyhe me as I am to my self. And therefore in old time was
wryton on the yate of the temple these words that follow. well to know him
self is the yate of heaven / as Macrobee reherceth in his first book / and
Policraticus in his third book the second chapter recyteth how sometime there
was herd a wys fro heaven which said that every man out to know him self. and
the same says Iuuenal and witnesses that the said wys said gnoto solidos
which is to say know thy self / And saint austyn in the fourth book of the
trynyte the first chapter says. I praise them that know the heaven and the
earth and that study in sciences humayn But I praise more them that know them
self / and that well consydere their fraylte and pouerte / Alas says saint
bernard in the book aforsaid Pride deceyueth the creature and lies to a man in
making him or understand that / which he is not / and kryngeth a man unto
that. that he wene that his vices ben virtues / and to this purpoos says saint
gregory in his moralytes the xxxj book that the synnar weneth that his
obstynacion be constau^ce / and that his folysshe dread be humylite his
auauntrye he weneth be largess / and his slouthe he calls prudence. and his
Importunite he names dyligence. and thus he weneth that his sins ben
virtues. And therefore a man that will live holyly ought to examyne him self /
and by reason wisely to chastyse him self as hughe counceylleth in his book of
the cloystre of the soul / and the prophet ysaye in his xlvi chapter in
saying to the synnar pesynners advise you. examyne your hertes and your
thoughts. Thus did a much wise prophet named Sixius. the which every day he
examyned him self how he had lived and how he had thanked god of the good that
he had received / and how of his sin he had reprened and chastysed him self /
As seneke reherceth in his third book of ire / Semblably thus we ought to do to
she nde. that in knowing our self we have cause to meke and to humble our self
toward god. and then all virtue shall engendre in us / For humylite is of al
virtues foundement and rote. For the which humylyte to have / we have many
good and notable examples / As of David the which gretely meked and humbled
him self. and humbly salewed the ark of god as it apperith in the second book
of kings the xvi chapter. The which David also received humbly Nathan the
messager of god as it apperith in the chapter after. And fynably Dauyd seeing
that god would destroy his people as it apperyth in the same book the xxiiij
chapter began to weep and accused him self saying. I am he that have sinned
take vengeance on me and not on the people. and fynably he gate mercy. we ought
also to remember of the humylite of the iij kings that honored and adoured
the sweet child Jhesus / as rehereeth Saint Mathewe in the second chapter of
his gospel. the which humylite was agreeable to god. we read semblably of Achas
notwithstondyng that he was right evil. Nevertheless when he herd the pain
that he ought to have he humbled him self tofore god / and gate mercy as it is
wryton in the iij book of kings the vj chapitre / And Roboas by humylite gate
mercy of god not wythstondyng that he was right cruel as it apperith in the ij
book of Paralipomenon the xij chapter / Ezechias also by his humylite gate
that god in his time took no vengeance as it apperith in the book aforesaid the
xxij chapter. Nabugodonosor also by his humylite gate ageyn his restitution.
For he that had been destitute fro his Royame and was bycomen a dombe best by
cause of his pride. was by his humylite restored in his former astate as
witnesses danyel in his third chapter. Semblably mari^ Magdalene humbled her
self to the feet of Ihesu christ in w^pyng and wypyng his feet with her heeris.
and by the same she gate remyssyon of all her sins. Also we read how the
cite of Nynyue should have been destroyed. But by humulyte and penance they gate
grace as Jonas reherceth in his iij chapytrr. By the which things it apperith
how humylite geteth mercy / And in deed Jacob by humble spekyng appeased his
brother Esau which was angry with him / and would have slain him as so^me say
/ As the hystorye appears in genesis the xxxi chapter / wherefore also lost
Roboas part of his royame but by proud spekyng and ouerth wartly as we read
in the third book of kings the xij chapter / we read also how the tweyne
companyes each of fyfty which came by pride to ^elye were destroyed by fire /
but the third company of fyfty was kept by his humylite as it apperith in the
fourth book of kings the first chapter. By which it apperith euydently that
pride is displaysau^t to god and the proud men were sometime right gretely
pugnysshed. But by humylite the creature may well get grace and pardon of god
Also we read how the woman of Chananee by humble spekyng gate health for her
daughter as reherceth saint Mathewe in his xv chapter / And to this humylite
we have example by saint John baptyste which lived in deserte in right great
penance and very humylite / and said him self to be unworthy to touch the
latchet of the shoo of Ihesu Christ. And he was clad with a camels scyn as saint
matthew reherceth in his third chapter and by cause of this humylite he was
enhaunced above al other and called more than a prophet. Semblably helye was
of ryt humble life. and therefore god enhaunced him right gretely / and was the
first prophet for whom god began to show miracles as it appears in the
fourth book of kings. the first the ix / xiiij. and the xvij chapytres /
Moreover the children of Israel were reprised by holofernes. But fynably they
humbled them self / and were saved as it apperith the x chapter of Judith. And
generally by humylite the creature may get of god that which he has need of.
for which humylite to have. much prouffyteth it a man to well behold and
know him self as it is said in the beginning of this present chapter /

How humylite is agreeable to god and to the world capo. iiij
HVmylite is much playsant to god and to the world / For she witnesses of
thomage that the creature owes to do to his creator naturelly. every good man
hates pride / wherefore it follows that he loves humylite / And verily we see
in deed that a proud man may have no friend and the reason is this. For he may
not suffer that another be like to him / but he will surmounte every man / and
so gaynsayeth all amytye. For as Arystotle says iu the ix chapter of the
Ethyques. Amytie or frendshyp requires semblau^ce and sum equalite between
them that so owen to love. alas pride divided heaven pride also makes many
wars in the world. For will and desire to regne makes often many great
bataylles. and sometime without cause put many men to death. Therefore the wise man
ought to humble his heart for to be loved of god. and after of the world / And
of so much as the creature has more of good and wealth / and less of
aduersite. of so much he ought the more to humble him self and not tabyde the
time of necessyte wha^ he shall by force be humbled / Therefore says Aristotle
that more it auaylleth him that humbles him self by his owen will than to him
that is humbled by force. And therefore Seneke in his epistle to lucille lxx.
says thus. bring thy self to low and little astate without to enhaunce thy
self / to the end that fortune make not the to fall foo hye to low. Say not
the naturyens that the lion does no harm to a man that humbles him self to
him. and wild bore does no harm to a man that is leyde on therthe / And
therefore a man owes by right to humble him self for tesche we peril. And to
this purpoos we read how dydymus in his epistle said to alyxandre. know thou
for truth that god is ready to do to the much good. so that thou be not
deceived by thy pride. by which it apperyth that pride empecheth wit and
aduys. and makes a man to live without peace of conscience. For hates and
noyses be founded in pride. as in the rote of al enemyte / And to this purpoos
sayen the naturyens that the thondres. lyghtnynges and the great wyndes ben
caused of sum erthely things which ascend ^^^tylly up above by the rays
of the soune / and more hyer than they ought to do. But nature which may not
suffer them sends them again down / and in like wise causen the things
abouesayd / Se^blably is it of a proud man which is much ^oo^^ful and full of
noyses. by cause that be mounteth more hye than he ought or should. and in deed
he falls lower than he would for he may endure nothing of the world. necesse
not to despise other. Therefore says Prudence in his book of subgection of
vices / that humylite adressth a man. and makes his life more in a moyen in all
his operations and tesche we oultrage. Therefore reherceth valere in his fourth
book that sith that another Valere had be much great at Rome. he put him self
freely in a right little astate / and left al pompes and al worldly things. and
me seems that al proud people ought to advise them upon the hystoryes and
ancient examples the wyche show how humylite enhaunceth the people / and pride
overthrows them. Read we not how saul kept nete / and Dauyd sheep / and
after were kings. Constantyn also was right pour when he took to his wife
helayne / and after was chosen Emperor By which it appears that the humbles
have been enhaunsed but of the proud folk what shall we say. I pray the
byholde what is bycome of the puyssance of new which fysshed with nets of
gold / where is the puyssau^ce of pharao. where is the mighty cite of Troy
which was so renomed / where is babylone that was so made iu heyght. Certeynly
all is come to nout / For pride may not long endure. What auaylleth then
pride which the world so much loves / what is bycome of Arphaxat the proud
king. he was all vanysshed away as smoke. what is bycome of Agryppe and Iulyen
that were so mighty. Fortune has taken away fro them all that she had given
them / he is a fool that trusts in her. but peraue^ture thou shall say /
that thou may well trust in thy wit / and in thyn hauoyr. where as is thy
great puyssaunce. Alas I pray the. wylt thou adresse the and consydere that no
man out to glorifye ne set his heart in his sapyence ne in his wysedom And
hereof have thou example of salamon the wise man which afterward was deceived so
much that he adoured ydolles / and Architofel the wise counceyllour of dauyd
fynably he henge him self / And the wise cathon. slew not him self. and
democritus also. And therefore it is great folly for a man to gloryfye him self
in his wit and connyng / more over what auaylleth the if thou be fair / For
Absalon was fair / nevertheless he was hanged on a tree. And tholyfau^t for all
the beaulte of his yuorye and his teeth is often put to death. The gamaleo^ is
much fair in his life. but he is right foul in his death. what auaylleth then
the beaulte of this world. Thus every person may see and well apperceyne. that
there is no thing in this world whereof we ought to have pride for to gloryfye
our self. And this considered the king of perce seeing his people and his
kynghtes wept saying / Alas I see a right fair company But it is pity / seen
that in short time they shall be but earth / In like wise recounteth saint
Iherome. that there is no thing of the world that endures For we read that
Ionynyan did great pain for to bycome a king. but he deyed the same day that
he should have be made king of the royame of Perce. and Valentyne that was so
rich. was by bledyng at the mouth deed and quenchyd. And his sone gracyen was
betrayed of his owen people and slayu by one his enemy / Then it is but
lytyl glory to seygnourye and to have ryclxsses. and the same said the king
agryppe / which is tofore named. the which in deyeng cried with an high wys.
Alas my good people set nothing by having of ryclxsses. For me that am your
lord ye may see deye right pourely. And therefore Orace in his epystles says.
that there is nothing that better apperteyneth to a man than lowlynes or little
thing. For to a little thing apperteyneth little. That is to wete humylite / the
which makes agreeable to god and to the world as tofore is said.

How the creature ought humbly to obey to god capitulo v
THe scripture says that obeyssannce pleseth more unto god / than does
sacrefyse. And hereof we have example of our first fader Adam which used his
owen propre will and left the commandment of our lord Ihesu christ. which
god had given him / And therefore he fyl in to great pouerte and in to many
myseryes. as witnesses Saint Augustyn in his xv omelye upon the gospel of
Saint John / It is also well reason that the servant obey to his master /
And consequently the creature to god / And to this purpoos recounteth valerye
in his second book how of old^ time the knights obeyed to the princes upon
pain of death / By much more strong reason we ought to obey to god with al
our might. For as says the scripture we ought more to obey to god than to men
And if we obey us to men / that ought to be for the love of god. Thus
counceylleth us thappostle. And certeynly much good is fallen to them. that
have humbly obeyed god. And to this purpoos recounteth Saint gregory in his
dyalogue the first book the seventh chapter how saint benet had a dysciple
whom he commanded that he should re^ne upon the water. whom he obeyed and was
saved fro peril. Then saint ^enet demanded him if he had any fere of the
watrr. And he ansuerd him that he had apperceyued no water / And then saint
Benet thanked god for as much as he had seen thus miracle for the obedyence of
his discyple. Saint gregory also reherseth of a religyous man which at
commandment of his abbotte every day by iij year watered a piece of wode al
dreye which was set in the earth / And yet he must fetch the water a mile
f^rre And by cause of the merit of his obeyssance the third year the said t^^e
flourysshed. and this hystorye reherceth Cassiam the first look of his
collaco^ns in which he recounteth also how the dysciple of a right old man at
his commandment would remeue a right great toche / and aduysed him not if he
myt do it or not. For it suffysed him to obey his master after his power /
By the which things it appears how obedience is agreeable to god. for the
which to have. we have example in nature / as sayen the naturye^s. The bestes
obeyen to the lion as to their king / And dar not pass the cercle that the
lion makes with his taylle. Se^blably the bees that maken honey obey to their
king / and the Cranes also. And in nature we see many things semblable. More
over in holy scripture we have to this purpoos many examples. And verily we
read how Noe obeyed right expressly to god as it apperith in the vij. chapter
of genesis. And therefore he was saved / fro the flood. Semblably the children of
Israel for their obedyence were kept of god as it apperyth in the ix chapter
of the book of nombres. Thappostles also lightly obeyeden to god in so much
that they followed him at first calling as recyteth saint Matthew in his iiij
chapter / And therefore above al people ben they enhaunced in the church / and
also in heaven. Semblably Abraham obeyed to god in so much that he would have
sacrefyed his owen sone and smyten of his heed at commandment of god as it
apperyth in the xxij chapter of genesis. And therefore god promised to abraham
that of his seed should be born the savior of the world. Therefore we ought more
to obey to god than to man. as it is tofore said. And according to this we
have ensaumple of Mathathias which ansuerd to the messager of the king
Anthiocus saying. that if all obeyed to the king Anthiocus. yet he would not
obey to him but to god. as it is wryton in the book of machabees the second
chapter. we read also of the seven brethern / that had lever to deye than to
ete flesh forboden. against the commandment of god. not wythsto^dyng the king
commanded it to them. whereby it apperith that they ought to be repreued that
excuse them of the evil that they do for their maistres that so command
them. For such is of no value. by cause they ought first obey the
commandment of god. as says Saint Petre in the v chapter of thaetes of
thappostles. More over for to obey / ought to enclyne us the example of the
virgyne Marie. the which obeyed to the words of the aungel in saying. Loo the
handmayde of god. late it come to me as it shall plese him. and after thy word /
we read also how david not wythstondyng that he was king obeyed to his fader /
as it apperyth the first book of kings the vij chapter / And young Thobie
said to his fader that he was ready to obey to him / And cornchus centurio was
ready tobeye to him / whom god had ordeyued to be prelate and maystre. as it
apperyth the tenth chapter of thactes of thappostles / Also we read how the
regabytes drank no wyn ne had no howses / for to obey to their fader / As
Ieremye recites in his third chapter. By which things it apperith how
obedyence was observed of the Auucient people and that they that dysobeyed were
pugnysshed of god / as it apperyth of the children of Israel. the which were
overthrown ^n bataylle / for so much as they did against the will of god. and
entered not in to the land of promyssion which they desired as it apperith the
xxiiij chapitre of the book of nombres / Jonas also was thrown in the sea. by
cause he dysobeyed to do that god had commanded him / as it she weth in the
third chapter of Jonas. and therefore we ought to obey to god fyrs / and after
to other creatures. if we will esche we peril and playse Ihesu Christ as says
saint bernard upon cantycles / The man is not worthy to have any good if he
know not ne obey god. and saint gregory in his omely says. that he out to be
most humble toward god and most enclyned to serve him. that has received
most goods of him / and if he do otherwise the goods that he has received
shall be encreasyug of his pain at the day of Judgment. This witnesses hughe
the viij chapter of the book of the Ark of Noah. And for to have cause to
remember the god that god has done to us we have many examples in holy
scripture. Read we not how Jacob after that god had sent to him many goods.he
said / Sir I thank the for the good that thou have done to me. Of which I
much remember. as it is showed in the xxij chapter of genesis. / Semblably
did David as it apperith in the second book of kings the vij chapter. And
Danyel said. lord thy name be preysed and blessed for the good that thou have
done to me / as it apperyth in the second chaptyre of danyel / Semblably the
appostle Saint Poul in his epystles right often and contynuelly preyseth and
thanketh god as it is showed in the first chapter of his epistle to the
romans / Read we not also how the children of Israel songen in loouyng and
praysyng god by cause he had delyuerd them fro seruytude. and that they had
passed without peril the reed see. as it apperyth in the xv chapter of Exode.
Semblably the three children that god delyuerd fro the fournays blessed god
right swetely and deuoutely as it is wryton the third chapter of danyel. by
the which things it apperyth how every man ought to humble him self toward
god and to yield to him thankynges of the goods that he has received / And to
this purpoos Seneke in his four score and one epistle to Lucylle says to a man
unkind. no man ought to say no thing. Then we ought to take ensaumple of the
children of Israel. the which after their vyctorye of Syraza offreden unto god
many yeftes in their sacryfyse.as it apperyth the one and twenty chapter of
the book of nombres / And after that they had had the vyctorye of Syrasa and
Delbore they began to sing in preysyng as it apperyth in the fourth chapter
of Iudyth Semblably when they had had vyctorye by Judas the Machabee against
Thimothean. they began to sing and praise god as it apperyth in the second
book of Machabees the tenth chapter. Methynketh that they be right much to be
repreuyd that remember not the goods that god has done for them / and that
wers is after the mesure that god gives to them most good. they become most
haultayn and the more proud / they dygne not to take ensample at the good
creatures / the which some time loved god the more. by cause of the goods that
he gat to them / Also we read how Anne loved god. and thanked god of the grace
that she had to have a child as it apperyth in the first book of kings the
second chapter / And when the vyrgyue marye had conceived our lord Ihesu
christ. she began for to magnefye god in saying / Magnificat anima meadominum /
That is to say my foul magnefyeth god / as reherceth to us Saint Luc in his
first chapter / And zacharias when his sone was born / that is to were Saint
Johan baptyste. then be began to say / Blessed be the lord god of Israel.
which has vysited and has redemyd his people Nevertheless sum there be that
take heed to none other thing but to have good without taking head fro whens
^ixy ^ome. And therefore fynably their goods perysshe / and come to an evil
port and yet not in their time. Nevertheless fynably their heirs been pryued
fro them for thyngratytude. and not remembryng fro whens they camTherfore ought
every man to byholde and take heed of that which he has received fo god. and
so much the more serve him devoutly, and love him. and not only to god but
also unto his neighbor him ought emembre the benefayttes and goods that he
has had of him / And hereof we hane ensaumple of thobye which offryd right
many great yeftes to the Aungel that had heled his fader and had delyuerd him
foo the devil. and kept him foo the fysshe that would have devoured him / He
supposed that the Aungel had been a man. and therefore he offryd to him part of
his goods / as it apperyth the xiij chapter of Thobie. And also Dauyd
semblably. humbly thanked them that had served him as it apperyth in the ij
book of kings (...) chapter. Helyas raised the sone of the wydowe which had
done much good to him / as it apperith in the third book of kings the xvij
chapter. And generally al men of renom me and of good life have remembered the
goods that they have received. And they that do otherwise be approved as
people unworthy to have good. the which may be compared to the boutelyer
servant of Phaxa^^. the which anon had forgoten the good that Joseph had
done to him in prison as it apperyth in the forty chapter of genesis. And to
them whom Dauyd had done much good. which put them in pain for to deliver
him in to the hand of Saul his mortal enemy. Saul also had received many good
things of Dauyd. and nevertheless he would have slain him as it is wryton in
the first book of kings the xvij chapter / And Absalon poursewed his fader
Dauyd. which had done to him much good / For he had pardonned him of the death
of his brother and had kept him fro banysshement. O what ingratytude and what
trayson of the sone to the fader. which is showed in the second book of kings
the xv chapter Of this Ingratitude or unkindness ben many entatched in doing
evil to them that have done to them good. or to their successors. Thus did the
king Ioab / the which forgate thamy tie of Ioga the priest of the law. For he
slew zacharye his sone. as it is wryton in the book of Paralipomenon the
xxiiij chapter. / And Amon the proud procured the death of the children of
Israel / which hadden done to him much good and seruyees / as it apperyth in
the second book of kings the tenth chapter. O Ingratytude thou forgetest
benefayttes and make a man unworthy to have good. And therefore of unkind
people god complayneth him in the first chapter of ysaye the prophet in
saying. I have nourysshed children and enhaunced them. and they have despised
me. And he^^of have we many hystoryes of them that have despised god after that
they received good of him.

Read we not also how our lord Ihesu Christ delyuerd some time the children of
Israel from the hands and seruytude of pharao. and after they forsook god and
worshypped calves of gold as it apperyth the vj chapter of the book of
nombres To which children of Israel god of heaven sent Manna in deserte. And
yet nevertheless they murmured as it apperyth in the book aforesaid the xv
chapter / we read also how god enhaunsed sometime Iheroboam. and made him lord
of x trybus / And nevertheless this was he that wythdrewe the people fro the
service of god. For it is so wryton in the third book of kings the xij
chapter. Ananias also by the helps of god surmounted his enemies / Nevertheless
after he forsook god and worshypped thydolles. as it is wryton in the second
book of paralypomenon the xxv chapter. and therefore the wise man ought to
advise him well of the goods that he has received. and ought swetely to
remember them as it is tofore wryton.

How pacyence is the second virtue. and it ought for to be had capitulo v^
THe souerayn moyen for to surmounte his enemy / is to have pacieuce. And
therefore says plato / that the rote of all phylosophye and of all sapyence
is pacyence / And to this purpos Seneke in his vj epistle to Lncylle says. we
ought says he gladly to endure aduersytees / For by Impacyence we do none
other thing but to weye our evil and make it gretter / And in deed the wise
men were right pacient As Syllen the which fond first the laws. and was
much wise and right pacient as recou^teth valerius in his vij book and
episenre set nothing by any sorrow that might hap to him as reherceth
terquilian in his apologetique and quyntilian in his x cause says that pain
is no thing. but if it be to him that endures it against his will. And if a
man endures it gladly / then he maystryeth fortune. as says prudence in his
book of the subgection of sins / And Lucan in his third book says that
patience enjoys in aduersyte. and makes a man to come to great good in so
much that no man may grieve ne noye him / In like wise says macrobe in the
book of saturnelles in which he recounteth how Augustus the Emperor was right
pacient. not witsta^dyng that there was said to him many vylonyes / And valere
in his fourth book recyteth how Siracusan was right pacient when denis the
tyrant put him out of his contree / And it happed for to have recomforte he
went to the hows of Theodore and abode right long at the yate. The which
thing seeing Siracusan he said to his fellow / Alas I ought to have good
pacyence For I have made in time passed many other to abide at my gate /
Semblably every man ought to think / when there comes to him any aduersyte
that it is by cause of his sin / For by cause of our sins we ought gladly
to endure and have patience. And in deed patience awaketh a man and makes him
often to get wrtues. and to bycome good / As wit nesseth valere in his third
book of Alexandeidos. Alas we see how many for to recouure health endure many
pains. and receive often bitter medecynes. Then by more strenger trason we
ought to endure aduersytees for to get virtues and for to hele the soul / and
therefore says Cathon that he may not by his puyssau^ce surmou^te aduersyte but
he help him with pacyence / and to this purpoos we have example of socratrs
the which sometime was right pacyent. in such wise that none might anger him /
as cassian says in his book of collacions / and saint Iherome in his first
book against Ionynyan / recou^teth how Socrates had ij wives the which were to
him full grievous and full angry / and did him much harm. but all way he had
patience. and took it al in gree. and said that pacyence made no force of
tormentyng ne to suffer harm / semblably we have many examples of many
persons the which were right pacient. Read we not how Isaac was right pacyent
when his fader would have smyton of his heed for to have sacrefyed him. as it is
read in the xxij chapter of genesis. And Joseph was right pacient in the
persecucion of his brethern when they sold him as it apperith the xxxvij
capytre of genesis / and david was much pacient when his sone absalon
pursiewed him. as it is wryton in the ij book of kings the xvj chapter. and
thobye endured much patiently the Iniuryes that his wife did to him and his
friends as it is writon the second chapter of thobye / verily patience is the
very maistresse of al aduersyte. and is the virtue by which a man may
furmounte fortune. And more over we read that by pacyence many have gotten much
good. and by it have eschewed many euylles / Ne read we not how gedeon by his
pacyence and his humble spekyng repeasyd the children of Effraym as it apperith
in the book of Iuggis. the viij chapter. Semblably the fair and sweet spekyng
of Abygayl repeased dauyd when he was angry against Nabal her husbond as it
apperith in the first book of kings the xvj chapter. But Roboas by his
Impacience and rude spekyng lost his dygnyte and his seygnontye. as it
appears in the iij book of kings the xij chapter. Alas what auaylleth
Impacience / but if it be for to encreace words. but by patience we may get
vyctorye of our enemies.

How Ire and hate noye and grieve the creature capo. vij
AS Seneque says. Ire troubles the understanding of the creatures. And
therefore it should be their prouffyt for to byholde and take heed of them self.
For as Seneque says if an yrous man byhelde him self. he should have pity of
him self as who says that Ire or wrath gives afflyctio^ to him that is angry.
and to this purpoos tullius in the process that he made for martell says that
ire is ancient in counceyl. And epycure says that Ire acustomed makes a man
to come out of his wit. And burdius says that Ire does more harm to him
that is a^gry than to another. Then out every man ^eschewe ire. For as says
cathon Ire engenders dyscorde and all enemytye and causes reason to perysshe.
in the second book of eneydos. Therefore says thibulle that they were much
horrible that first fond wars / many ben deed euylly. and Ire has so much
done that many in despayr have slain them self. Recounteth not valere in his
ix book how othus which after was named darius was right cruel and much Irous
in so much. that he did do slay many good men / and contryued many engynes
terryble for to make men to dye but fynably the cruelte came upon him self. For
reason would that he that is cruel should by cruelte be cast out and pugnysshed.
therefore it is good to consydere what harm comes of ire. and as me seems it
is none other thing but a spyce of rage / thus says seneque in his first book
of clemence / Nevertheless I will not repreue the ire of good men. the which ben
wrooth wha^ they seen harm done. For the prophet says a man may be wroth for
harm and ill that he sees done without sin. And certain we read how Moses
was angry against the people by causethey kept the manna against the
commandment of god as it apperyth the xvij chapter of Exode. And also he was
angry when he saw the people worship the calf in so much that he brake the
cables of the co^mandementes in castyng them down as it is wryton the xxij
chapter of Exode. And Neemias was angry against them that did usure as it
appears the xv chapitre of neemye. by which it apperith that it is no fault
ne sin to be angry for doing of enyl / And in deed Saint Augustyn says that
god is angry against the synnars in punysshyng them. And to this purpoos we read
how god was angry against Salamon by cause of his ydolatrye / as it apperyth in
the fourth book of kings the x chapter. and for semblable reason he was angry
against the children of Israel / and put them in the hand of Azael their enemy.
as it apperyth the iiij book of kings the x chapter / Semblably for ydolatrye
god was angry against Ioab. and against his capytayn. as it is wryton the second
book of paralopomenon the xxiiij chapter / we read also how god was angry
against the children of Israel because they did fornycacion with the daughters
of Moab as it apperyth the xxv chapter of the book of nombres / by which
things it apperyth how god is angry sometime against the (...). But that is not
Ire named ne Impacience which troubles the spe^ite and the entendement which
empecheth and (...) many good things. and makes a man to come to many
Inconuenyen^^s. Ne recounteth not Valere in his ix book of the cruelte of a
Judge which made a bulle of brass / and had ordained that the euyldoers should
be closed therein. and there should deye by famyne. the which thing seeing
Hanybal / he condemned the same Judge to deye the same death / to the which he
had condemned other. And nevertheless hanybal was also right cruel / in so
much that he made a bridge of the bodies of the romans which he had slain /
upon which he and his people passed over the river of golle. but at the last the
said hanybal was overthrown of his adversaries / For cruelte by reason must be
cruelly served. And therefore no man ought to be cruel ne to be Ireful ne bear
wrath in his heart. For the Ire tormenteth the Irous. and brings him to such
a point that he can not ne may not consent to reason / Alas what auaylleth me
if I hate my neighbor. seen that in such estate I may not playse god. sith I
love not him whom I ought to lone. and also I may have no pardon ne foryeuenes
if I forgive not other. Read we not how Iepte made pees with the galady^^s in
so much that he faught for them / Not wythstondyng that they had done to him
many euylles and much harm as it appears the vj chapter of Iudicum / David
in like wise would not slay y^obeth his enemy. And in deed he did do slay the ij
theuye that presented to him the head of his enemy as it apperith the ij book
of kings the iiij chapter / wherefore it apperith that no man out to hane Ire
in his heart ne bear wrath But the devil which is prince of all deuysion by
diverse manners engenders the stryues and noyses / For so^me hate all their
neighbors. and sum hate by envy other / Such was the hate of the brethern
of Joseph / whom they sold as it is wryt^n in the xxix chapter of genesis.
wherefore hated the egipciens the children of Israel. but by cause they becam
great and multeplyed as it is wryton the third chapter of Exode And Saul
wherefore hated he dauyd. but for as much that he saw that he was wise and
much loved of the people. as it apperyth the first book of kings the xvj
chapter / And the fend by dyuerce manners sows dyscorde and Ire. but be that
is wise ought to bear no wrath. but desire weel and good to every man /

How no man out to strive ne engendre noyses cap viij
By stryf may come no good. but it engenders noyses. which oftymes may not
well be appeased. And therefore Chaton says ^to his sone. my sone thou ought
to flee noyses and stryues. For much people have had harm by spekyng but by
being still and not to speak few or none have had any harm. And to this
purpoos says Iuuenal in his iiij book that stryuyng langage beryth venym in
him self and corrupts good manners and empessheth and lets frendshyp. And
me seems that who that may have pees by his little spekyng or being stylle.
has not gretely cause to speak. For for to speak well is a great maystrye. but
for to be stylle and say little is no great pain / and oftymes scileuce causes
to have pees. And this witnesses Ouyde in his book of the art of love. More
over by reason it well appears that contencion ne stryf is noothyng worth / For
if thou strive for to sustain troth and bounte. it is no great wysedom. For
troth and bounte sustain them self. And therefore it suffyseth to understand
without any thing to strive. For who that vndersto^deth truth and will not
consence thereto. by his stryf he shall not change his purpoos. And if thou
stryne for falsehed and for evil / the sin is much great. and so lesest thou
thy pain for of so much as thou the more stryuest. of so much thy falsehede
more clearly shows / And this witnesses a phylosophre named exenophon And
Seneke in his first epistle to lucylle says that a man should not strive against
a fool. And to a wise man for to strive it is a folly / For the wise man hates
noise and stryf. and empessheth the pees of hertes and consciences / Therefore
says the wise man that fair and sweet spekyng makes a man to have p^es and
friends. Then is good to inquire fro whens comen the noyses and stryues. and
me seems that they be often engendered of pride. For we read how Amalech made
war against the children of Israel. for fere that he had to lose his
seygnourye / as it apperyth in the xvij chapter of Exode. and som^yme the
noyses comen by Impacience. and by fyers words as it is above said. by which
it apperyth that no thing or little to speak is souerayn moyen for to have pees
and flee noyses. Also we read how Saul dyssymyled of them that myssayed or
spaken evil of him as it apperyth the first book of kings the x chapter / And
Thobie said not a word to his wife when she said many iniuryes to him as it
apperith the second and the iij chapter of thobie / In like wise out the wise
man to do in heryng without any stryuyng.

Here follows the third virtue / which is abstynence / and how one ought to
live sobrely capitulo ix
GLotonnye is cause of many euylles and sins / and engenders many maladyes
bodyly and ghoostly. And therefore says tullius in his first rethorique that
attemperau^ce is none other thing but by rayson to maystrye the flessh and all
corrupt desire. And saint Ambrose says that attemperaunce is a virtue which
rules a man in that. which he ought to to / And therefore the ancient men
lived right sobrely / And to this purpoos recounteth Egelle in his first book /
how Socra^^s was right sobre al his life. the which socrates said. that the
people ought not live for to ete. but to ete for to live. and lactence in his
book of very odoracion says that the poets calleden glotonnye bestyalite. For
a man being a gloton lives without reason and without rule. And therefore
seneque in his book of iiij virtues says that men should ete without
replection. and drink without dronkenesse. For glotonnye makes a man lightly
to fall in to lecherye / and to this purpoos recounteth saint Jerome against
Ionynyan. how galyen said that a man may not surely live. but if he live
sobrely. the which thing is very truth / not only to the body. but also to
the soul / And therefore socrates ete not but one time of the day when the son
went down as recounteth agelle in the book aforsayd. And Bocee in the second
book of consolacyon says that nature is content with little thing / as who
should say that nature requires sobrenes and abstynence. and to this purpoos
recounteth valere in his second book and says that the ancient old men lived
right sobrely to the end that they should be chaste / in so much that the women
of Rome drank no wyn for the same cause / And agelle in his book aforesaid
recyteth ^ow the romans lived right sobrely and syngulerly at souper. for
then they ete little or naught. More over didimus in writing to Alysaunder
says that the people of his contreye were right / sobre and took no refection
but after reason and after the necessyte of nature. And concluded fynably that
they of the said country had comunely no maladyes. ne used none other medecyne
but of sobrenes and of abstyne^ce. By the which things it apperyth / to live
sobrely is a thing much prouffy table to the soul and to the body-and by
sobrenes the body has health. and the soul lives without sin. And therefore
says Lucan that a man ought to accustom him to give to nature attemperaunce.
and for to attempre his norysshyng. the which ought to be without oultrage.
and without drunkenness. For glotonnye is not allone. but has al way many
sins with him. and certeynly by glotonnye a man leseth his wit and
understanding. and shows often his secret folly / glo^^^nye makes a man old
/ and sone to become loothely and soul. And by dronkenes many stryues and
noyses sourden and comen / and makes a man to be like a dombe be / For as
gaulter says in his first book of alexandeidos. dronkenshyp is the sepulcre of
rayson. And Ouyde in his second book of remedy of love says / that
dronkenshyp buryeth the courage and will of a man. For by dronkenes a man
bycometh as deed and is of all points not able to do well. And therefore each of
us out dylige^tly teschewe glotonye / for that is the vice by the which the
fend ouercometh a man and warryth against him. for of this sin he tempted our
first fader Adam. by which fynably he was put out of paradys. as it apperyth
the iij chapter of genesis. Semblably he would have tempted our savior Ihesu
christ saying to him / if thou be the sone of god. make of these stones breed.
as it is writon the iij chapter of the gospel of saint Matthew / More over
glotonnye makes a man leche^ous. And hereof we have example of loath. the which
by dronkenesse defowled and brought his owen two daughters with child. as it
is wryton for ix chapter of genesis / Glotonnye also makes a man dishonored
/ And hereof we have example by Noe. the which in his dronkenes lay shamefully
on the ground and showed his members of nature. by which he was scorned of
his sone Cham as it is written in the viij chapter of genesis. Alas by
gloto^nye the children of Israel were sometime tempted and gretely deceived as
it apperyth the xvj chapter of exode. And by glotonnye Esau sold his
patrymonye as it apperyth the xxv chapter of genesis. Read we not more over
how Ionathas was condemned to death. for as much as he ete a little honey against
the commandment of his fader as is wryton the first book of kings the xiiij
chapter / By which it apperyth that glo^onnye has (...) much harm. And
certainly we read that the phylystees were slain in etyng and drynkyng. For the
hows fyl upon hem as it apperyth the xvij chapter of Iudicu^. Semblably hit
happed to the children of Job as it apperyth the first chapter of Job. How was
holofernes the strong geant slain. but in his dru^kenesse. for Judith slew
him wha^ he was drunk as it is wryton the x chapter of Iudyth. How was simon
slain and his children but in etyng and drynkyng as it apperyth the first book
of machabees the xv chapter. And naman after that he had eten gretely and
Ioyously / he was after (...) cylyed as it is wreton the ix chapter of hester
Then me seems that glotonnye is a sin chargeable and causyng a man to do
many euylles.

How abstynence is cause of much good capo. x
By abstynence reason ouercometh the flesh / And takes away all supfluyte /
And the virtues ben engendered ^ norysshed. And to this purpoos we read how
dyo^ene which was a wise phylosophre despised habondaunce of vytayiles and al
supfluytees / As valere recyteth in his iiij book. And therefore in wit and in
patience. he was right renomed and gretely preysed. And as bernard says in his
micro^^sme. Abstynence nouryssheth the wit / and glotonnye des^^^oyeth it /
and therefore sometime all they that would come to great good lyueden sobrely as
it apperyth in many places of holy scripture / And certeynly we read how god
commanded sometime to the children of Israel. that they should live sobrely /
and that they should keep them fro etyng of diverse metes as it apperyth in the
ij chapter of the book of leuytes: we read also how moses fasted xl days to
the end that god would give and grant to him the comune law wreton. as it
apperith in the second chapter of exode / Semblably Helye lived right sobrely
to the end that he might prophetyse the more wisely. And in deed the Aungel
brought to him bread and water. and crows two times in the day brought to him
flesh. as it apperyth in the third book of kings the xvij chapter. wherefore
it appears how the fendes which ben vnderstonden by the crows desyren a man
to glotonnye and replection of his flesh / but the angellys will that a man be
sobre and rule him by abstynence. More over we read how god showed to danyel
many vysions. the which lived right sobrely. as it appears the ix chapter of
Danyel Semblably Anne served god in fasting and in prayers / and therefore she
prophesied of Ihesu christ right wisely as says saint Luc in his second
chapter / And therefore sometime they that deuoutely were consacred did by
abstynence syngulerly diverse things. which might not be done in dronkenes /
as it is wryton the vi chapter of the book of nombres. we read also how saint
Johan baptyst ete only honey sokles as saint Matthew writes in his third
chapter. And therefore he was enhaunced above al prophets. But now the time is
^omen that glotonnye regneth. And therefore reason warreth against the flessh and
ouercometh it in so much that lecherye is much comune in this world For the
nouryture of lecherye is glofonye and dronke^nesse. but we ought to consydere
how by abstynence we should eschew many euylles. and to get great graces of
god. and to this purpoos we re^e how the king iosaphath had sometime vyctorye by
cause he fasted / and preched to other that they should fast / as it apperith
in the ij book of paralapome non the xix chapter. Semblably we read how the
children of Israel were two times dyscomfyt of the children of bemamyn but
after they fasted. and god gaf to them the vyctorye as it apperyth the second
book of Iudicu^. Semblably the children of Israel were dyscomfyte by the
phylistees in so much that they bare a way the ark of god. but after the
children of Israel began to weep and fast. and therefore god gaf to them
vyctorye. as it apperith the first book of kings the iiij and vij chapitre.
and therefore says thobye / that prayer is good. when it is accompanied with
fasting / we read that esdras preched penance to the people that would demand
pardon of god. as it apperyth in the fourth chapitre of Esd^as / we read also
how achab gate grace of god for to fast as it apperyth iu the second book of
kings the first chapter / and semblably we read of the cite of Nynyue the ij
chapter of Jonas. By the which things it apperyth how we ought to live
sobrely for to get grace and virtues / for as Arystotle says in his xiij book
of bestes / It is not prouffytable thing for one to fat him self. For
ouermoche fat nes makes a man suddenly to deye. as witnesses Constantyn /
which thing is very true / and not only to the body. but also the soul.
For glotonye fatteth a man and makes him to sin and fynably to deye euylly.
whereby it appears how abstynence is canse of much good.

Here follows the iiij virtue which is chastyte. / And first how we ought to
live chastely capitulo ^j
^En ought to live chastely / For chastyte makes a man to live like augellys /
and causes their life honest. and therefore Dydymus said to Alexander that the
people of his contre lyueden chastely. and not ouely by virtues but also by
honneste / But it is pity of lecherye which is on this day so comune. and
causes people to goo out of the way / and to languysshe in sin and in
dyssolute life. Alas they ought to take heed to thau^cyent people. And to this
purpoos recou^teth saint Jerome in his book against Ionynyen. how Plato chaas
for to dwell in a vylage in the feldes named Achadenne which was far fro
Athenes and fro all other cytees. to this end that he might esche we lecherye
and live chastely. And Terculyen recyteth how democryte pulled out the eyes of
his heed to the end that he should see no wymmen / the which he might not
byholde without sin / whereby it apperyth that chas^yte ought to be had / And
also men ought tesche we wantown regardes and beholdynges. and therefore the
pyc^oryens of old time chaas the deserts and places solytarye for teschewe
lecherye and to the^de they should not see the vanytees of the world. And
therefore says the gospel if thyn eye is evil or causes the to do evil thou
ought to take him out and cast it a way fro the. Alas worldly and flesshly
byholdynges and regardes have made of old time many folks to overthrow. Read
we not how the men in byholdyng the wymmen were moeued to lecherye. and therefore
god punysshed them by Noes flode as it apperith the vi chapter of genesis. And
the maistresse of Joseph in beholding him was moeued to sin. Se^blably dauyd
in byholdyng a woman which wesshed her self. was moeued to lecherye. and for
taccomplisshe his sin he slew her husbond as it apperith in the ij book of
kings / who deceived holofernes. but the beaulte of Iudyth. as it apperith the
xiij chapter of Iudyth. and who deceived the ij old Iuges which desired to
have susanne. but their falls byholdynges as it apperith the iij chapter of
danyel wherefore it apperith that who that will live chastely he ought to torn his
sight and regard fro wymmen which myt enclyne his will to sin. and therefore
says quy^^telye^ in his first cause that al our lecherye is cause of our
folyssh beholding and regard and seneque in his book of remedies says that
the eyes ben messagers of al vices. and to this purpoos recou^teth valere in
his fourth book / how sometime in rome was a right fair young man named spurcyn.
the which for his beaulte the wymmen desyreden him to sin / but when he
apperceyued the cause he cut and made his vysage al foul and lothely saying
that he had lever to be foul than by his beaulte he should cause other to sin
by this ensau^ple out they to take heed that been fair and semely More over the
chastyte of the ancient people is good to recou^te and to this purpoos saint
Austyn in his first book of the cite of god recyteth how mark surnamed
marcelle was ryt chaste and in deed when he took the cite of Syracuse. he fond
there many fair wymmen and well arrayed. but he commanded to all his people that
none should be so hardy to touch them / For so to do it should be against
thestate of good chyualrye And Valere in his fourth book recounteth how Scypyon
in the age of xxiiij year took the cite of cartage. And there was a ryt fair
maid which was presented to him to do with his playsyr. but he would not. For
in so doing it should be shame to true chyualrye And therefore he made her to be
delyuerd to him that should be her husbond which was prysonner / and that never
had touched her. and by cause of the same fair maid he forgaf him his raunson
and made him free / for certain as me seems this was a feat of a noble knight
/ And for this cause fro then forthon he had always the grace of the world
and of al knights but thus do not now the nobles of this present time. the
which wene they have done a fair and a great feat when they have rauysshed and
defouled a fair maiden / but in my Judgment it is a vile and foul feat of a
knight. They ought to remember of Incresse the myrrour of al chastyte. of whom
recounteth Valere in his vj book / How tarquyn the sone of Tarquyn the proud
took by force the said lucresse. and accomplisshed his foul will the which
lucresse on the morn called to her all her friends. and recounted to them the
vylanye that was done to her and tofore them she slew her self. and by cause
thereof Tarquyn lost his seignorye / and then cessed the^perours at rome /
for the romans sayden / that they had no need of a lord that made such oult
/ rages. well it is troth that of this sin been cause bawdes both men and
wymmen / the which estudye both night and day how they may make and treat to
cause other to do as they do or have done in time passed. the which resemble
to wymmen of duche land of whom Valere recounteth in the book before said. how
they prayeden Marius that he would give to them leave for to goo and speak to the
maidens that serueden the goddess vesta / and they made them strong to make
them enclyne and consent to the sin of lecherye. but by cause that they
faylled of their entente. as despayred they henge al them self. And in truth
that is the salayre that bylongeth to such people.

How lecherye causes many euylles to happene capo. xij
^Echerye is enemy to al virtues and to al good. and therefore says boece in
his book of consolacion that he is happy that lives without lecherye / for
lecherye is a sweet maladye and brings a man to death without apperceyuyng as
witnesses valere in his iiij book / which recyteth how Sophonydes in his old
age said to one which demanded him if he were any thing lecherous. he ansuerd
I pray the speak to me of other things. for me seems that I have had great
vyctorye when I may eschew lecherye by old age. for by lecherye all euilles
comen to a creature. and al good things ben thereby forgoten / Alas what was
cause of the destruction of the people of sychem. was it not the deuiolacion of
dyna daughter of Jacob the which would goo see the daunces and she was
rauysshed as it apperith in the book of genesis the xxiiij chapter / we read
also how lx.M. were slain by cause of the lechery co^mysed in the wife of the
leuyte as it is wryton the xx chapter of Iudicu^. and Amon was slain of
absalon his brother by cause he had defoylled thamar his suster. as it apperi^h
the ij book of kings the xj chapter. Abuer for his lecherye knew the
concubines of his fader ysboseth / but sone after they were both slain as it
is wryton the ij book of kings the iij and iiij chapter. what was cause of
Noes flode but lecherye / what was cause of the destruction of sodom and
gomorre but unnatural lecherye as it is wryton in the book of genesis / who
caused Joseph to be enprisoned but the lecherye of his maistresse. and therefore
he is wise that escheweth this sin. For who that will live chastely / he ought
tesche we the company of wymmen. and consydere that by wymme^ were deceived
the wise salamon. the strong sa^pson the great holofernes. the prophet david /
the phylosophre arystotle. the poet virgyle. and many other wise men. and
therefore I will no more blame the wymmen than the men. but for this I will say who
will be chaste out teschewe the company of wymmen. For for to sin nature is
sone enclyned and lytly accorded. for teschewe fulgence enseigneth and techeth
us in the ij book of his micrologies in saying. that lecherye is much foul and
above other dyshoneste / and is not aduenau^t to a creature that will have
honor and worship. And certainly Scipion the noble knight hated so much this
sin / that he deffended in h^^ contre bordellis and al dyshonest places / But
it is great pity that now all the world is full of places of such vsages / and
young and old people the most part give them comunely to lecherye / but they
ought to consydere. this which Ouyde says in his vij book of methamorphoseos.
which says that lecherye makes a man to brenne in him self. and the
versyfyour says that the love of a woman affeblyssheth the body / mynyssheth
the rychesses / makes a fair man to become foul. and at last brings a man
to naught / And saint Iherome in his book against Ionynyan says the love of a
woman makes a man to forgete reason / and to become a fool. it lets and
hurts good cou^ceyl / will not suffer a man to study / and makes him to
think al folly. by such love a man troubles him self. and at last hates
his body and his life / and seneke in his declara^ons in his first book says.
that it is an hard death / that lecherye procures for lecherye makes to lose
tyme-honour. and al goods. and therefore in his xxiiij epistle to lucylle says.
keep the well. that lecherye be not in the / for a lecherous man is as a thing
al lost / and certainly in old time the lecherous people were gretely
pugnyss^xd / For as recyteth valere in his vj book. a man that of old time
mysdyde in his manage ought to lose his eyes / and aft^r the old law a woman
should be stoned to death. wherefore it apperith that this sin was right
dysplaysaunt unto them of ancient time / for of it comes many euylles and
harms as it is tofore said.

Here follows the v virtue. that is to wete benyuolence and is against the
sin of envy capitulo xiij
EMonge al other sins the least excusable is the sin of envy. by cause she
has no cause of her malice in so much the body and of the soul / and the
man is not worthy to live the which by necligence slepeth in his sin and
dies in pouerte. for not wythstondyng that pouerte is good when it is (...)
luntarye. Nevertheless he is much to be repreued. the which by his slouthe and
neclygence is pour and miserable. by which it apperyth that dyligence is
much to be preysed that remembers both the body and the soul. and therefore
says the prophet I have slepte. and after I am awaked. by which he gives us
to understand how we out to be dyligent. and awake our self for to prouffyte
in well. And therefore the appostle in writing to Thimothee says. Awake thy
self that slepest. and god shall enlnmyne the with his grace. For for the
slepars and them that been necligent is not heuene o^deyned. but for them that been dyligent for to do well as long as they live in this present world. And to
this dyligence ought much (...) us many ancient hystoryes / by the which it
appears how neclygence has be cause of many euylles and Inconuements: Read we
not how david was in his hows idle: and then he was tempted of the sin of
lecherye / in so much that he accomplysshed a right g^te dishonor. as it
apperyth the ij book of kings the v chapy^re / and therefore says Ouyde in his
first book of remedy that ydlenes and neclygence ben the nou^ces of the sin
of lecherye: And quyntylien says that sin naturelly commands a man to be
idle. And therefore Chaton said resonably to his sone / keep the well that thou be
not necligent ne slepye / For long rest nouryssheth sin and vices. And to
this purpoos we have many ^ystoryes. how in slepyng many euylles ben happed /
Read we not how Thobie in slepyng wa^ blind and lost his sight / as it
apperith the second chapitre of Thobye / ysboseth lost his ^^yame in slepyng as
it apperyth the ij book of kings the iiij chapter. Sampson in slepyng in the
law of his wife lost his heeres. taken and enchayned. and fynably lost his
life. as it appears the xvj chapter of Iudicu^ And therefore says the wise man
iu his vj chapter. Thou Neclygent awake the. for thou may not long sleep.
as who said / the life is short / And therefore we read how Jacob repreued his
children of neclygence. as it apperyth the xxiiij chapitre of genesis. And our
savior Ihesu christ repreuyd his dyscyples of necligence in saying / ye have
not mow wake an hour with me as says saint Matthew in his xxviij chapter by
which it appears how necligence is much to be repreuyd To this purpoos we
read how they that sewe the good seed by gonnen to sleep. And then came the
enemy that sewe the evil seed. that is to say the cockyl as says Saint Matthew
in his xiij chapter. by which is given to us for to understand that we out
to wake if we will prouffyte in our good works / the which ben vnderstonden by
the good seed. For as the gospel of saint Matthew says in his xv chapter. the
v maidens that slepte were not received in to heaven. But the five that waked
were received in. by which it apperyth that we ought to wake / that is to wete
to entende to good works and to do well. for verily they sleep / the which
without repentance abide stylle in their sin. Ne read we not how the
Natu^e^s say that the venyme of a serpent named Aspyde is of such condycion.
that he makes the man that drynketh it to sleep. and in slepyng to deye / Of
such condycion is the sin of neclygence / for it makes a man to sleep by
neclygence / and in slepyng is man often dampened. For by deffaulte of a man well
to advise him self. oftymes he deyeth right euylly / To this purpoos says
Ouyde in his first book of Methamorphoseos how Argus had an.C. eyes. And
nevertheless mercurye by the sown of his floyte brought him a sleep and then
in slepyng made a cow to be taken fro him named yo. the which Iubyter had
delyuerd to him in keeping. and by cause of his neclygence. Argus tofore said
was slain and lost. Semblably there be many that have an hundred eyes. for
they see ryt clear and have good wit and understanding / And nevertheless
mercurye. that is to say the world often brings them a sleep And thenue their
cow. that is to say their flesh is lost / by which fynably man is right
often dampened and dies myserably. but so^me may say that they should be dyligent
if they were waked and solicyted for to do well. To this purpoos I ansuer that
there is no synnar so great but if he be al obstynat. but that he has
sometime remorse of conscience that waketh him and admonesteth for to rise fro
sin. And to this thou have experience sometime in thy self / when reason
causes the sometime to syghe and to have dysplaysyr of thyn evil life. Then
thy conscience Iuggeth the and dampneth the. when thou say alas I have done
and commysed such evil and such sin / it despleaseth me thus me seems that
this conscience that thus awaketh us may be lykened to the mustelle / of wh^m
recou^teth the naturyens. that if a man sleep iu a shadow place. in which
there be a serpente. then the mustelle awaketh the man to the end that the
serpent hurt him not ne grieve him Thus does reason and conscience which often
awaketh us. But many there be the which abide not in a good purpoos or in a
good thought wha^ their conscience has awaked them the which done as did
Vyrgyle. the which slew the Fly that prycked him in his forhede and a woke
him by his prye king / And nevertheless vyrgyle had be slain of the serpente
which was by him if he had not beu waked. And then it dysplaysed him of that
which he had slain the fly. that had done to him so much good. By which it
appears that the good thoutes which a wake and stir us to do well. we out
not to slay ne forgete them. but we out dyligently to awake to do well for
teschewe the peril of the serpent. that is to were of the fend our enemy
which always purchaceth our death /

Here follows the vij virtue the which is lyberalyte. and that is against the
sin of auaryce capitulo xv
Lyberalyte is the moyen for to get friends for to live in good suffysaunce.
For the light lasseth not. by cause it lyghteth over all the house. In like wise
the goods of a lyberall man lassen not by that which many have part thereof /
And this witnesses dydymus in writing to Alysaundre. the which Alysaunder
gate many royames more by lyberalyte than by strength / And to this purpoos
says boece in his jj book of consolacion / that the goods ben happy. the
which done good to much people. And cassyodore in his xiiij epistle says that
a man ought gladly to give. For lyberalyte causes not the good to be less /
For not wythstondyng that a man have the less for the time or while /
Nevertheless that less suffyseth him as well as the more. or else he were not
lyberal. and sith that a man has suffysaunce after the yefte as before. it
follows that he is as rich as before well is truth that many say that they be
lyberal. the which ben not / for suppose that they give. Nevertheless it is
sometime folyly and oultragyously. and oultrage ought not to be approuued.
Then lyberal suffyseth not only to give. but him byhoueth by reason and
wisely to dystribute his goods. And this witnesses chaton saying to his sone
/ take heed and see to whom thou gyuest. and not only to whom but also thou
ought to byholde how much / wha^ and how. And to this purpoos speaks tulle
in his first book of offices in saying. that a man ought to give to him that
has need without hope of vaynglorye or having any other benefayt / And the
yeuar ought to take heed if he be worthy to whom he gives / as enseyneth
macrobe in his book of satur ^elles. but comunely men give to them that be not
worthy and to them that have no need. As witnesses Tere^ce and marcyal. but
they that so done / in so doing have no merytr ^e grace toward god / So every
man ought to be aduysed that will verily be large and lyberal. and byholde the
manner of gyuyng and the circumstaunces. And syngulerly if his yefte ought to be
agreeable to god / him byhoueth that his largess come of a parfyght heart. For
as varoo says iu his sentences the yefte is more agreeable after thaffeccyon of
the yeuar than after the gretenes of the yefte. And hereof we have an example in
the gospel of saint Luc. And also Saint Iherome recites in the prologue of the
bible saying. that more was acceptable toward god thoffrynge of the pour
wydowe which offryd but a ferthyng. than was the yefte of the rich king
cresus which was right rich and king of Lyde. the which offryd great yeftes
and many marks of gold and sylner / and the reason was this. for the pour
woman presented hiryefte by more great devotion than did the said king / Seen
that she gaf all that she had. but the king aforesaid after his yefte abode
rich and mighty. By which it apperyth that more does good affection. than
does the gretenes of the oblacyon. More over we read how many by lybecalyte
have go^^u great reno^me and great seygnourye. And to this purpoos says the
hystorye of Alexander / that Alexander conquered many wyames more by his
franchyse and lyberalyte / than he did by his strength. And was so much
lyberal / that the servants of his enemies came for to dwell with him. and
left their lords and their kings for to serve him. Semblably we re^e of
Salamon how he was right lyberal as it apperyth the iij book of kings the
second chapter. Se^blably the king Cyros was much lyberal. For he sent again
in to Iherusalem she vessels of gold the which his fader Nabugodonor had taken
a way as recyteth Esdras in his first book. we read also how Thobye offered
much largely to thangel Raphael of his good / whom he had supposed to have
been a man as it apperyth the xij chapter of Thobye. Also we read how the
king Assuere was right lyberall. when he gaf half his wyame to hester. as it
apperyth the fyfthe chapter of the book of hester / By the which hystoryes it
appears how many sometime were right renomed for their lyberalyte. But Auaryce
has made many men to be dyffamed and fall in to many In^^uenye^ts / as shall
be showed in the chapter that follows /

How Auaryce brings a man to an evil haven / and causes him to live in
myserye capitulo xvj
BY Auaryce a man coueyteth the goods of another. And oftymes appropreth them
to him self rudely. and he him self of such goods as he has dar not help
him self for all way he is aferde that his good shall faylle him. And thus
thauaricyous man lives al way in myserye. for suppose that he has much good
/ nevertheless he is right pour. sith by his couetyse he will not there with
help him self / Thus then ought the wise man esche we couetyse. Caym offered
to god the werst fruytes of therthe. and therefore his oblacyon was not
agreeable to god. And then seeing Chaym that thoblacyon of Abel his brother
was agreeable to god. by cause whereof he was moeued with wrath and envy and
slew his brother before said as it apperyth in the book of genesis. by auaryce
Judas betrayed his lord and our savior Ihesu christ and fynably despayred and
henge him self. More over dalida by cause of couetyse and for money that was
given to her bytrayed her poop^e husoond Sampson / And nevertheless she showed
tofore to sampson signs of ryt great love as it apperyth the xviij chapter of
Judicu^. By the which hystoryes it appears how Auaryce brings a man often to
perdycion. O Couetyse thou made stryf between Abraham and Loath as recou^teth
the book of genesis / for by cause of their richesses they myt not dwell to
gyder / By auaryce the children of Samuel maden many evil Iugementes as it
apper^th the first book of kings. who causes falsely to witness against
Naboth but couetyse as it apperith the third book of kings / who was cause of
the false witness of the knights that kept the sepulcre / but couetyse For by
cause of certain money that they had. they wytnessyd falsely saying that the
dysciples of Ihesu Christ had stolen away the body of Ihesu christ. As
witnesses saint Matthew in his xxviij chapter / who caused Achor to deye but
courtyse as it apperith the vij chapter of Iosue. wherefore would david have
slain nabal / but by cause that Nabal was over auarycious as it apperyth in the
first book of kings the v chapter. wherefore was Semey conde^pned to death. but
for his couetyse that he did depart fro Iherusalem against the commandment of
his fader / as it is wryton in the iij book of kings the ij chapter. and the
evil rich man wherefore was he dampened but for his auaryce. for he refused to
pour Lazare the cro^mes of his bread as receyteth saint luc in his xvj
chapter. Certainly auaryce has caused many men to perysshe and consent to
many sins and Inconuenyents / for menelaus unworthy. was by money pourueyed
to be priest of the law as it apperith in the ij look of machabees the v
chapter / and the prestes of the law sometime for their couetyse suffreden and
endureden to selle oxen and sheep in the temple and other marchau^dyses / as
recyteth saint Matthew in his xiij chapter. we read also how Ananye and saph^re
fyl in to many Inconuenyentes by cause of their couetyse. as it apperyth the v
chapter of thactes of the appostles. Then me seems that every man that will
live holyly out to have suffysaunce of the goods that god has sent to him
without to set his heart on worldly goods. For as saluste says in his
Catylynarye / Auaryce empessheth truth and wysdom. and engenders pride and
cruelte. Auaryce empess^eth good study. and brings a man in to vanytres /
and goods which be not establysshed / And to this purpoos says Seneque in
his epystylle to Lucylle lxxiij. Auaryce makes a man a fool. For a man
coueytous always desires that. which be has not. and that which he has / he
woteth not if it be his. For he is always aferde to lose it. and that good shall
faylle him. And therefore valere in his (...) book says. that Auaryce is as a
swolo we that may not be filled and makes many men to deye tuyl / And in deed
he recounteth how there was a man named septiminus seeing that he was in paryll
if the sea but if he threw over board part of his richesse in to the sea /
nevertheless he had lever deye with his rychessys than cast a part a way / and
live and reteyne the remenaunte / By which it shows that couetyse makes a
man right folysshe and not understanding wysedom. for a covetous man often times
takes oppynyon that he had lever deye than lose his good. And to this purpoos
recounteth Helmande how sometime Hanybal assyeged a castle in which were three
hundred men closed which had nothing to ete but rattes and myes. and it happed
that one emonge them being much auaricious took a mows. and not withstondyng
that he was ny^e deed for hungre / he sold to another the mows for.CC. pens by
which it happed that the said auarycyous man deyed with all his money. and that
other lived and was delyuerd fro death / Then ought a man to advise and
consydere that the goods be not made ne ordained but for to serve man / And
therefore he ought not to love / but for so much as he has uecessyte or need /
and then he ought to use them sobrely in thankyng god which is of al goods
the well and fontayne.

How thestate of pouerte is much agreeable to god cap^. xvij
POuerte is none other thing but very suffysau^ce with out to desire any
other thing than that which god sends to a creature / And this pouerte is
called pouerte of spyryte. the which god approves in the gospel saying / that
blessed be they that be pour of spyryte that is to wete to will. And me
seems after the scryptures / the ancient faders had pouerte / And syngulerly
they that were loved of god and called to good and worship Read we not how
Jacob was a pastor or a shepeherd and kept the sheep and going about the
contreye. and slepte in the feldes and leyde a stone under his head like a
pelowe as it appears the xxxviij chapter of genesis. Semblably we read that
Moses kept the sheep of a man named Iethro as it apperyth the third chapter
of exode. and nevertheless was after ordained to be governor of the people. we
read also how saul was content to have one servant and sought the asses of
his fader / and not the horses for to ride on. And nevertheless he was ordained
king as it apperith the first book of kings the xxiiij chapitre. and of Dauyd
semblably we read how he kept the pastures. when he was called for to be king.
as it is read the first book of kings the xvj chapter. by which hystoryes
it appears clearly how thestate of pouerte is to god agreeable / and in deed
Ihesu christ has given to us of pouerte example. For he was born of a pour
mother and nourysshed of a pour man. that is to wete of Joseph. leyde in a
pour bed / wrapped with pour cloutes and clothes / of pour parents offered
in to the temple / naked crucyfyed. and by strangers buried and l^yd in the
sepulcre / by the which things Ihesu christ shows to us. that no man out
despise pouerte. for Ihesu Christ says in the gospel that who that will be
parfyght. he ought to renounce al worldly goods. and give them to the pour
people and follow me as recyteth Saint Matthew in his xvij chapter. and to this
purpoos we re^e how thauncyent phylosophres sayden. that more rich is the
pour man if he have suffysaunce / than ne is he that is coueytous though he
have great habonda^ce of goods And the same witnesses seneque in saying. that
dyogenes was more rich which had no worldly goods / than Alysaunder which
was lord of all the world for alysau^der had not so much good that he might
give. As dyogenes myt and would reffuse. Of which Dyogenes Ualerius recyteth in
his fourth book. how he refused the yeftes which Dyonyse the Tyrant sent him
/ And it happed that Dyogenes on a time wesshed his herbys that he should put in
his pot and ete. And that seeing Aristipus. which tofore had been his fellow
and said unto him in this manner. O Dyogenes if thou would flatre Denis /
thou sholdest not be in this pouerte. And then Dyogenes ansnerd to him if
thou would endure the pouerte that I endure. and ete and pyke thy wortes as I
do. thou sholdest not be a flaterer as thou art. Of the same diogenes
recou^teth saint Jerome in his book against Ionynyen how for all robes. he had
but a litel mantel lyned for tesche we cold. And instead of a celyer / he had
but a little sachet / And instead of an horse he had a staf or a bourdon. And
was lodged in a tonne at the yate of the Cite / the which tonne after the
wind it turned for to esche we cold. And on a time he seeing a child that
drank water in his hand / and he threw a way a little cup that he had / in
saying that him out to suffyse for to drink out of the vessel that nature had
given to him / that is to wete his hand / By which it apperyth that spyrituel
pouerte / and very suffysaunce were sometime in the wise men. as was dyogenes
and many other. And to this purpoos we read how Epicurius the phylosophre said
that there is no thing so much worth as Ioyouse pouerte. And Orace in his
epystles says. In pouerte out not to be dysplaysaunce. sith a man have
suffysaunce for his life For none other thing may all the goods of the world
give to a man. And therefore says Cathon to his sone / seen that nature has
made the naked. thou ought gladly and with a good will endure pouerte and
flee oultrage. For nature shall not faylle the in thy necessyte / And thou
shall be rich. if thou have suffysaunce / as witnesses geffrey in his poetrye
and many other. More over the wise man ought to consydere and advise that no
thing is worth to a man oultrage ne ouermoche habundaunce. Is not Anthiochus
deed and comen to nout of whom recouteth valerye in his ix book how well he
bring king of Surrye he made his horses to be arrayed and adoubed with gold /
And them to be shoed with naylles of gold / And in his kechyne all the
vessellis were of gold and silver. but all he lost soro wfully / For he
desired to take away fro his people more. than to do Justice / what is become
of the po^npe of the wife of Neron which made her horses semblably to be shoed
with gold / and made chariottes to be led tofore hit full of gold and silver.
Certeynly al is comen to naught. and the rich men so much more myserably ben
comen to their death as they loved more curyously their rychesses. and therefore
recou^tith dydymus. how the people of his contre lived pourely and without
curyosite / for vanyte makes men to perysshe and to forgete god which is
cause of all goods. and like as the O^^ faunt is deceived when he trusts to
the tree to which he leneth. Right so the rich people be deceived when they
trust ^ their rychesses. for when the day comes of their most gret^
necessyte. Nothing auaylle them their rychesses for to have ^^ uen / and to
that auaylleth pouerte and suffysau^ce / Alas it were good to consydere how
fortune has no certain abydyng. for as says Julius celsus in his iiij book.
Fortune has enha^^ed many men to rychesses. for to overthrow them
vylaynously. And to this purpoos hildebert in spekyng of his banysshement said.
I was that other day rich and blessed of friends. but fortune which had given
al to me / has taken al fr^ me. and she that la whed on me. now constrayneth
me to weep and Ouyde in his book de tristibus says. I was a little whytryche
and honored / and now I am without cause ba^nysshed b^ dishonor. Thus I see
that fortune has no sure Amytye n frendshyp / and therefore says boece in his
second book of consolaon that more auaylleth fortune adverse which chastyseth
man. than does worldly fortune the which blyndeth a man maynt^neth him in his
sin. for who that is pour he ma not fall. but the rich man is in peril
for to fall in to gre^ sro w. and if thou wylt wit what is she / boece says
that ^ grettest mal^rete that is. is after great happynes to fall in myserye
and wretchydnes / as did al^biades. the which wfyrst right rich. and after
right unhappy as valere says in ^ vj book / Semblably he recou^teth how denis
Siracusan (...) right rich and a right great lord. but fynably he became so
po^ that for to get his living. he taught the lesson and held so (...)
children of Corinth^e. Thus then he is right e^ aduysed that in fortune
trusts. But a man ought to affye him self in well doing / For that is the
richesse that helps a man in his necessyte. But presently mankind is so
blinded that he retcheth of no thing but of worldly goods. the which ^^ght to
take example of the ancient wise men. of whom we read that they set nothing
of worldly goods or little. and this purpoos recou^teth valerye in his viij
book how anax^goras left his possessions for to goo estudye in strange
con^^es / and when he returned he saw that his possessions were eserted /
then he said. I might not have been saved if my posessions had not perisshed.
as who would say that richesses ben ^yenst salvation. Semblably he recou^teth of
a philosopher na^ed socrates / the which threw al his richesses in the sea.
in ^yeng that he had lieuer that his richesses were lost than he ^hold lose
him self / Se^blably he recou^teth of a wise man na^ed styllon the which lost
al his goods by fire. and then one ^mau^ded him. if he were not angry and
wroth for the loss of ^is goods. the which ansuerd that he had nothing lost.
and that ^^ had upon him al his goods. that is to we^e science and ver^es / as
if he said that the goods of fortune were not his. ^y which it apperith that
he is wise that despyseth the goo^s of fortune. as witnesses Epedocles / And
prosper in his ^ok named Epigramaton says that the courage of a coue^^us man
shall never have rest. for the worldly goods may ^^t satysfye their heart / but
engenders and makes more the ^^uetyse and the desire of the creature and to
this purpoos recou^^^h Ouyde / how polydorus by his couetyse slew the sone of
^amus for to have the rychesses that were delyuerd him for ^^ouerne therewith
the child aforsayd. but hecuba mother of (...) ^ayd sone with her complyces
apperceyued the said trayso^ (...) came to polidorus in faynyng that they would
give him (...). but hecuba and her fellows slew him and strangled him (...)
was reason that couetyse that had made him to slay (...) should be cause and
moyen of his death. whereby it (...) how pouerte is good / and couetyse evil and
holds a man in thought and in peril of heart and of conscience.

Thus ends the first book
Here follows the second book the which speaks of thestate of the people of
the church and of the clerks.
First how the church ought to be honored and loved. and had in worship and
in reverence capitulo primo
THe church is as the mother of al christian people. and in the same is given
fraunchyse and lyberte / by cause it should be the more in reverence / For her
spouse and head is ihesu crist savior of all the world / and to this purpoos
we read in the first book of thystorye tripartyte / how Costantyn when he was
made christian loved so much god and the church / that he did do ^ere in all
the places where he went a tabernacle made in the ^ourme of a church / and had
with him priests and clerks which served god right devoutly / he bare also
on his right side the sign of the cross. for that was the baner by the which
god sent him vyctorye. and in deed he should have a bataylle and in his sleep
the aungel showed to him how he should have vyctorye by the sign of the cross.
Semblably we read in the book aforesaid how the emperor theodosi^ was fynably
obeyssant to the church. Not withstondyng he had be tofore much rygorous to
the church. and thystorye says how the said theodosius did do slay vij.M. men
in the cite of thessalonue. by caus^ they had stoned to death his offy^ers.
After which feat the said theodosius returned to melane / weny^g to have entered
as (...) ben accnstomed in to the church / Then saint Ambrose came against
him which was Archebysshop of the san^ place. and said to him. O Emperor goo
thy way. For in to this church thou shall not enter / seen that thou art
(...) of blood / and art not worthy for to behold god ne see him Then
Theodosius obeyed him and weeping departed but by cause the ^este of Crystemas
approuched he sent one of his servants named Ruffyn to saint Ambrose for to
get grace. But nothing auaylled his request. And this seeing Theodosius came
in his propre person to saint Ambrose weeping and requyryng pardon on his
knees. and then saint Ambrose took him to grace. and after he did much good
and had many vyctoryes. by which it apperith how the church ought to be
honored / And to this purpoos recounteth valere in his iij book the xj
chapter. How Julius Cezar defended to his people. that none should be so hardy
to do any evil or harm to the temples / And for this cause he was so
vyctoryous by ij year that never man had vyctorye against him / But after he was
many times dyscomfyt after he had defoilled the temple named delphyque. As
recounteth Policrate in his vj book the vij chapter. And he says more over
that chyualrye out to keep the church. to Inpugne the heretykes. to honor
the priests / to deffende the pour. and tappease stryf and debates /
Semblably Egesippus recounteth how pompeus did never harm to temples ne to
chyrches / and therefore alexander was to him much gracyous. and pardo^ned to
him his mesprisyon / by which it is euydently showed to us how the church out
to be kept and hononred / And to this purpoos says vegece in his iiij book of
chyualrye the iiij chapter. how the knights ought to swear loyalte. First to
god. secondly to their prince More over thou ought to know that the church
ought to (...) frau^chysed / For it is sygured by the ark of noah. in which
^ere saved al they that were therein as it apperyth the seventh ^hapytre of
genesis. Semblably all ought to be free in the ^hyrche / And in deed we read
in the hystoryes of the romans ^at one named macelizet deyed a foul death by
cause he had de^^yled the church. we read also of one named Equyla how he
^stroyed all ytalye* And then the pope named Leon said ^hym that he should
leave his cruelte. The which ansuerd that ^ym seemed that he saw a fair old man
which held in his hand a knyf whereof he was sore aferde and durst not dysobe^
And this sygnefyeth to us. how every creature out to dre^ the church and to
obey it in all right and reason.

How the people of the church and syngulerly the prelate^ ought to live
chastely and virtuously capitulo ^
Saint Jerome in one of his epystles says that the prelate ought to have no
concubyne: For his espouse is the church. And therefore in the law of Canon.
it is deffended that prelates should hold no wymmen in their howses. but if
they be under age and out of al suspecyon. And to this purpoos we read of saint
austyn / how he would not dwell with his owen sister. for tesche we suspeco^n
of evil spekyng. More our^ saint Gregory in his dyalogue the vij chapter
recyteth (...) a prelate named Audrien was much tempted with a woman of
religyon by cause she dwelled with him. By which it apperyth that men of the
church ought to flee the conuers^^ on of wymmen / not only for tesche we the
sin / but also for tesche we all evil suspecion* and therefore says saint
Iherome in his xliij epistle. that thestate of prelacion is much worthy And
for so much a prelate ought more to keep him. that h^ do no thing by which
his estate be sclaundred / and the prelat is not ordained for to have delyces /
but also for tenseyne and govern the people / and the hyer that he is enhaunced
the mo^ humble he ought to be. For as saint Austyn says in his (...) book of
the cite of god the xix chapter. he is not very prela^ that secheth not but
his prouffyt. and nothing for his sub^gettis. Semblably says saint Gregory in
his xxj book (...) hy^ moralles that the prelates been ordained not only for
(...) receive. but prycipally for to serve god. and for to enclyne the sub
gettes semblably to do / and therefore says hughe / that non^ ought be ordained
a prelate. but if he be of good life and honnest conversation. and to this
purpoos says the scripture in (...) (...) xxviij chapter / that the prelates
ought to be made of people showing example of good life / For the sheep ought
not to ^e put to the keeping of wulues. That is to were to them that ^^maunde
not but the prouffyt of the prelacion. and not the la^our tha^ apperteyneth
thereto. but the time is comen the which ^saye prophesied in his third chapter
/ saying that the prince and the princes and the prelates ben of the condycion
of children. the which will lyuen without thought. And zacharye in his xj
chapter says that the prelate that thinks not of the governance of the
people is right as an ydolle which serves of nothing / And it is a great
abusyon when the prelate is not dylygent to adresse and teache the people as it
apperyth ^n the book of xij abusious. and hughe says in his book of
sacramentis. that the prelates beren the cooche in signefyaunce of an herdman
or pastor. And the ring that he has on his hand sygnefyeth that the church
is their espouse / and the tunyque sygnefyeth clennesse / the gyrdle chastyte.
the stole patience. and the chesuble charity / and therefore the prelates oughten
to be good wise and virtuous. and that is necessary for their estate / as
says saint gregory in his pastoral the first book the first chapter. But
saint bernard in spekyng of prelates in his fourth book to Eugene the pope.
says I meruaylle me and am abashed for what cause many bishops and prelates
committee the go^erneme^t of their people to suffragans and to other / but the
^ychesses and receytes they committee not to other so that they kno^e not
thacompt thereof. And nevertheless they be more ordey^ed for the spirituel
governance. than they be for the temporel ^oodes* as hughe says in the second
book of the sacramentis / For the crown that men of the church bear
sygnefyeth that xy ought to have the heart and affection to the spiritualte /
and not (...) the temporalte / And therefore of old time the virtuous men
^ffuseden the bysshopryches. by cause they knew well that it (...) great labor
to a prelate for to do his deuoyr and duete. And (...) this purpoos we read of
saint Ambrose how he reffused the archebysshopryche of Melan / Not withstondyng
he was ele^ by comune assent. and to the end that he should not be constrained to
receive the said benefyce. he did do come in to his house wymmen dyssolute /
wenyng by that moyen. he to be put from the said prelacion / Nevertheless the
truth was known. and he must needs obey. of saint gregoire we read also*
that wha^ he was chosen to be pope. he fled. but by the moyen of the holy
ghoost he was fou^den and received to be pope* Semblably we read in a book
named paradys how a noble man named marsius cut of his fyste to the end that
he would not be prelate. to which he was chosen / we read also of an holy man
named Annonius how he was chosen bishop / and therefore he cut of his right
ere secretly. and then he said to them that had chosen him. ye see well that
I may not be bishop / For I am not able. the which ansuerd that he suffysed
to them. and they had lever to have a good man than a fair man. More over in
thystorye trypertyte the iij book we read of a religyous monk which was
chosen and called for to be bishop. the which demanded delay and time for
taduyse him. and prayed to god and required him that he would aledge and deliver
him fro this charge. And thystorye says that in prayeng he deyed and rendered
to god his spyrite / By the which hystoryes it appears how prelacyon is much
payneful to them that will do their (...). And therefore no man ought to be a
prelate. but if he be wise. virtuous / and of right good manners and life /

How the prelates ought tenseyne and govern their subgettis. and to give
almesses to the pour capitulo iij
THe prelate is as the head which ought to adresse the other members. And to
this purpoos we read of moses ^^w he loved right derely his people. and did
great pain to chastyse and rule them. And how be it that god promised to him
that he should give to him more gretter people to govern. Nevertheless he said
that it suffysed him that which he had And more would he not as it apperith the
xxxiij chapter of Exode / we read also that for the love that he had to his
people. he desired that every man should be holy and a prophet as it apperyth
the xj chapter of the book of Numeri. we read also how he recomforted the
people when he was dyscouraged in saying. Abasshe ne fere you not for god shall
defend you / as it is writon in exode the xiiij chapitre. Semblably helyachym
^omtyme priest of the law recomforted the people against holofernes. as it is
wryton in Iudyth the iiij chapter / Saint poul also in his epistle to
thephesiens the vj chapitre says. my friends reconforte you in god and in his
puyssauuce. By the which things it appears how the prelates ought tenseyne
and reconforte the people / To this purpoos says saint austyn in his i^ book
of the cite of god. that the prelate ought to remember alleway his people at his
heart. For his office is for to enduce hem to do well. And saint Ambrose says in
his pastoralles that the prelate ought tesche we al heresye and all evil
doctrine / For the pryncipal of their vocacyon is for to defend the faith in
the which all the church is founded / More over the prelate ought to socoure
the pour after his puyssaunce / for the goods of the church be the goods of
the pour people. And to this purpoos Saint gregory writing to Nepocian says
that the people of the church ought not to take of their benefyces no more but
to live only honestly without pomp ne curyosytres / And the surplus they
ought to dystrybute there. where as they see is need and necessyte. and if they
do otherwise they do sacrylege. that is to say they be thieves of the goods of
the church / And that more is he says. that he that has of his patrymonye
ynowh for to live with* he out to take nothing of the goods of the church.
and if he take otherwise it is sacrylege. And for so much saint austyn in one
of his sermons in the hermytes in spekyng of him self says* I that am bishop
ought well to take heed that the goods of the church (...) not given to them
that been rich. For it is the patrymonye of the pour people. And I thank god
of that he has given me grace till now / not to give any thing to the rich.
but only to the pour. And in deed I have parents and kynnesmen which often
demand of me / the so^me by flaterye. the other by menaces the goods of my
church. but I shall have conseyence in gyuyng to them / sith they have whereof
to live. By which it appears that the prelates ought to give to the pour and
hereof we have example of Heliseus the prophet. the which did do dystrybute
the loves of breed to the children of the prophets as it is writon in the
fourth book of kings the fourth chapter. And of Saint Austyn him self we read
how at his death he made no testament / by cause by his life he had given all
to the pour people.

How the people of the church oughten to preche and to say the truth of the
faith capitulo iiij
By predycacion the church is sustained and the faith enhaunced and the people
converted / And hereof we have many examples. how of Aawn the which preached
sometime to the people the word of god. And therefore the people byleued in god
and put them to serve god as it is wryton in Exode the iiij chapter. Semblably
we read in the book of the acts of thappostles the fourth chapter how the
church was multeplyed and made great by the predycacion of thappostles. and in
deed Saint Poul and saint bernabe by their predycacyon converted many as it
apperyth in the said book the xiij chapter / And therefore the people of the
church / and syngulerly the relygyous ought to preche the truth / And to
this purpoos we read in the second book of thystorye tripartyte the viij
chapter / how a good man by his predycacyon converted many mescreaunts to
whom he said* my friends be ye not curyous of worldly so^n^es and humayne /
the which conteyne but fallaces and ^auytees but have ye heart to the faith and
to the holy gospel the which conteyneth nothing but truth. But thou shall
say. that thou art no clerk for to preche* To that I ansuer to the and say
that if thou art good in thyn affection. the holy ghoost shall admynystre to the
good words and prouffytable. And to this purpoos we read in the book aforesaid
how sometime a right great philosopher which was a mescreant dysputed against
our faith. And that seeing an old good man which knew no ^ettre came to him
for to convert him / And the holy ghoost admynystred to him such words that
he converted to the faith the said philosopher. And therefore says the
scripture that the word of the prechour of veryte and truth: is the word of
the holy ghoost. Truth it is that the predycacion is much prouffytable when
the prechour is of good life as says saint Gregory in his morallis in the xxx
book. And if the p^^dycaciou prouffyteth nothing. it is for the deffaulte of
the prechour which is of evil life* or of the herar which has none affection.
Nevertheless as says Ihesu Christ in the gospel. the word of god ought to be
preached. For it may not be al lost like as the seed which is thrown in the
way / the which if it bring forth no fruit. at lest the birds of heaven
e^^ it who caused the cite of Nynyue to be converted but the predycacyon of
Jonas the prophet. as it apperyth in the third chapter of Jonas. who
converted ynde but the predicacion of saint Thomas / who converted Samarye but
the predycacyon of Saint Phylippe. But sum there be like unto the Jews
which stopped their ^rys when saint Stephen preached / and other mocked Saint
Poul when he preched as it apperith in the book of the acts of thappostles.
They be of the condycyon of the serpent the which is named aspis / the which
stops his eerys to the end that he may here nothing / And who that drynketh
of his venym he slepeth and so slepyng dies. Many in like wise which will not
here truth deye in their sy^^e without having ^uy repentance. More over me
seems that many ben angry when in prechyng their sins ben repreuyd And
then they wene that men speak of them syngulerly. the which otherwhyle ben
deceived / For the holy ghoost admynystreth often to the prechours many things
which they have not thought tofore / And to this purpoos recyteth saint Austyn
in his vj book of confessyons. how on a time he preched / And to his sermon
came by adventure one named Alippius the which was a player of dyse and much
enclyned to vayn occupacions. Then Saint Austyn began to preche against such
vanytres / and that seeing Alippius he supposed that Saint Austyn had spoken of
him only. And after the sermon he demanded of saint Austyn wherefore he had
so spoken against him. the which ansuerd. that the holy ghoost had done it.
for he knew not ne wist not that he was such one / And then the said
Alippius repented him and left all vanytres / Semblably also saint austyn by
such a manner converted a manichean by the words that he said at the table. by
which it appears. how it is much prouffytable to here the truth and
prechyng of the word of god.

How men of the church ought to estudye and to learn singulerly the holy
scripture capitulo v
FOr to estudye is a thing much prouffytable and couenable to men of the
church. And Aristipus ansuerd to one which demanded what it auaylled to
study. That a man by his estudye lived the more surely. and could the better
eschew many Inconuenyencis / And therefore Boece in his book of the dysciplyne
of soolers says / that no man may become a master / but if he have science
and virtues / and for that cause the ancient men alleway studied. as
recou^teth valere in his viij book the vij chapter. and in deed thou may see
how a man being clerk is much eased in estudyeng being allone For he wot well
wherein he may occupye him self / But the ygnoraunt that can not understand
what he redeth / wot not what to do. but if he be in company to here
vanyt^es and lewd langages as men ygnoraunt. the which repute them self half
lost if they find not such as they may speak to and hold them fel^ wshyp at
all times. But a clerk that can she dye is right Joyous and at his ease when
he is solytarye and out of such company that been idle and ygnoraunt / and
therefore a man ought to learn so^me thing and syngulerly in his yongthe for
the rod boweth while it is grene. And certain a man has gladly playsyr in
such things as he has been accustomed in his yongthe: Truth it is that thou
ought pryncypally and first estudye in holy scripture and in that which is
necessary to thy salvation. For as says Saint Austyn in the second book de
doctrina xp^iana. All the good and weel that is in other sciences. shall one
find first and princypally in diuiny be or theologye / which is the mother of
all wit and of all knowleche / And therefore thou ought to despise all
scyences which ben contrary to holy scripture. For as auerrois says upon the
third book of methaphisyque. They that been accustomed to here and to learn
fables ben much enclyned to learn fall senes for truth. and they wene that
there is nothing but that in which they be nourysshed. And I am much
abashed of many! folk of the church / the which ben idle and lerue
noothynge. For which cause they be founden in many Inconnenyences. For a man
naturally would be occupied / and when he knows not what to do by cause of
ygnorau^ce / then he employeth him in plays dysordynat and in many sins.
and all this comes oftymes by cause of ygnorau^ce. More over a man ought to
be well aduysed that the understanding which is given to him to employe it well /
by which he knows the dyfference between him and beeflys. be not evil
bestowed reemployed. Then it is a great shame wha^ a man that may amend him
/ nourissheth him in ignorance. and maynteneth him as a brute be Thou may
say to me that all may not (...) derkes / And to that I ausuere the. that they
which eusie^^ the life Actyf / may by that manner escuse them / But as to men
of the chyrhe. me seems that they may not well excuse them / For they have
time and season enough for to estudye and to get connyng and science. And if
they employed the time for to study / the which they employe in vanytres.
they should be clerks And should have more Joy and playfir in their estudye /
than they have in vanytees / the which they mayntene / And of this matter /
thou may see the first book / m which thou shall find many things which
ben to this same purpoos /

Hr^e follows the iij book the which speaks of the stat^ of lords temporell
/ and of all chyualrye /
The first chapter treats how princes oughten to be pyetous and merciful
capo. ^mo
APrynce wythont pity puts his seygnorye in peril / And does not as a
naturel lord / but as a cruel tyrannt / And he ought to remember the condi^^nn
of thauncyent princes / For we read how pity ma^^th kings and princes to live
in surete / And to this purpos recites valere in his fyfthe book how
Marcelli^us took the cite of Syracuse. But when he saw how the prisoners wept
he began to weep. Semblably we read in the same book / how Cezar seeing the
head of his enemy mortal Pompeus. he was much sorry. And had great pity. we
read also how Cezar seeing that Cathon his aduersarye had slain him self. he
was therefore mothe troubled. And in deed he gaf to his thyldernalle the goodis
of their fader Cathon. and loved them And defended them right diligeutly. More
our. valere recounteth in the ^^ke aforsaid the v chapter how pompens did to
the king of Armenye the which was his enemy / and desmyssed of his estate.
But wha^ he saw that the said king was much sorouful then he had great pity
of him in so much that he remysed him in to his first estate And crowned him
in restoring to him all his Royame / by the which historyes hit apperith how
the princes oughten to be pietous. For as ysydore says in his iij book de
summo bono / The Judge that is vengeable. is not wortly to Judge ne to have
seygnorie. And to this purpoos recounteth seneke in his first took of ire. how
sometime a Judge by his cruelte caused three knights to deye which were
Innocents. And thistorye says how to one of these three knights he said /
thou shall deye by cause thou have not brought thy felawe with the. For I
doubt that thou haste slain him. Then he commanded to one of his knights /
that he should wrthout taryeng put that knight to death. but anon after came the
felaw of the same knight that was dampened. And then returned the knight
which was comman^ded tosle the said knight and said to the prince that he
should revoke his sentence. who as a tyran^t ansuerde. that all (...) should be
deed / For he said that the first should deye by cause (...) was dampened ones
to the death. and that he ought not to change his sentence. And to the second
knight he said / that he should also deye by cause he was cause of the
dampnaco^n of his felawe / And to the third he said that he should deye. by
cause he had not prestly put the first knight to death like as he had commanded /
And me seems by this historye it appears that cruelte is to a prince gretely
peryllous / And therefore sa^^h Seneque. that it is great force. And noble
chyualrye to con^ne foryene / and therefore there is nothing more necessary tha^
to be pyetous and endyned to mercy / And to this purpoos in his book of
clemence the fyfte chapter he recyteth of a vengeable man / The which all his
life had taken vengeance of all his enemies. But on a time it happed that he
might not adue^ge him of his enemy. For he was much mighty / then he
dema^nded of his wife how he might adue^ge him. The which ansuerd saying / Fair
friend ye have ever unto now all way taken vengeance of all men. and now ye
see that ye must cha^nge your manner. Then I counseylle you that ye essaye
if pity and mercy shall do you as much good. as vengeance has done / For me
seems that ye may not adueuge you on every man. But ye may well do to e^y
man pardon And pity. so I counseylle you take the way of pity and to leave
vengeance. By which counseyll this man becam pyetous and apperceyued clerly.
that it avaylle^h. nothing to a man that will aduenge him on all thing / And
therefore says Seneque in the book aforsaid the x chapter that the kings and
the princes owe^ to be pietons. For the king of the ^ees that make honey have
no prick of their nature. in signefya^nce that such should be their kings /
And in the iiij chapter he says that the prince that will ensiewe god / ought
to be much pietous. to the end that god be to him mercyful / Moreover Solinus
rehereeth how Cezar conquerde moo contrees by pity than by strength and force.
And valere in the book aforsayd says that Alexander seeing one of his knights
to have cold descended fro his siege and set him therein. And of Tytus we
read / that he would not aduenge him of them that myssayd of him and spacke
enyll as it apperith in thystorye of Troy. we read also how saint Ambrose
commanded to the^dose / that he should never give sentence against a man that
was his enemy. to the end that he should not have cause to Judge over favorably
for him self /

How the princes ought to be of good manners capo. ij
SOlinus says i^ his xj book the iiij chapter the prince ought to be meure.
sage / and of right good life. and certainly the Anncyent fadres byhelde more
bounte. than the no noblesse or the Richesse. And to this purpoos recounteth
valere in his iiij book the in chapitre how Actylius was a labourer of the
land. And nevertheless for his bounte he was called for to be emperor of Rome.
And saint Austyn in his v book of the cite of god the xviij chapter recyteth
how one quyncyus which was a simple labourer was semblably called for to be of
the counsyel of Rome / And whau he saw that he had served ynowh / and that by
his counseyl Rome had had many vyctoryes then he returned to his first
estate. Then me seems that the princes oughten more to take heed to bounte
tha^ to worldly goods / and to this purpoos we read how the Romans set
nothing but of the^ that were virtuous. and veryli the Romans refuseden yeftes
And all things that might peruerte Instyce / and acordyug herto reconnteth
pompeus in his xviij book how king pyrrus sent to Rome one his servant named
chyneas for to conferme the peace between him and the Romans And bare great
yeftes and richesses with him. but he fond not a man in Rome that would receive
his yeftes / Then me seems that princes and lords oughten more to be
dylygent to have virtues than Richesses / And to this purpoos saint Austyn i^
his fyfthe book of the cite of god the xiiij chapter aledgeth Cathon the
which said that the common well of Rome had conquered moo goods by the bounte
of the counseyllours than by strength. And to this same purpos he recyteth of
Scypion. the which said that the Roiame shall never be in welthe. in which
be^ no good manners and in whom the princes be^ not virtuous. wherefore saint
Austin says if the Romans be deceived it is not for defaute of walls. but
for deffanlte of manners and more harm has doo^ to the^ the ardeur of their
couetise that the fire has doo^ which has be^ put i^ their co^treyes by
their ad^saryes. and there fore says saluste / that Rome shall but lytyl endure.
For coueytyle wa^^yth all. and lecherye bre^neth all. More oner Orace says in
one of his dytees. that a prince evil manerd causes the co^treye for to
perysshe. For as Claudya^ says. the people gladly follow the prince and does
as he does. and therefore if he be evil yt is gretperyll for all his
subiettys. and there fore seneque in his hondryd epistle i^ spekyng to Alexandre
said. O Alexander. thou have ouercomen thyn adversaries and conquered many
lordshyppes and royames Thou have enterprysed the governance of all Roya^mes /
and neuertheeles thou art he that have not co^ne govern thy soul ne thy body
which is much little / Thus then ought a prince to fore all thing get to
him good manners for to give good example to all them that been in his
governance. and for taduyse the better this purpoos it is good to reherce the
co^dyco^ns and the Inco^uenyeuces of enyl princes Ne Read we not how Ezechyas
commanded that Ieremye the prophet should be slain. as it is is wreto^ i^
Iheremie the xxxviij chapitre. And Pylate falseli dampened Ihu^ Christ as yt
apperyth the xix chapytre^ of saint John^ / who fynably deyde myserably. More
over manasses made the people to err. And was cause of many euyllys and vices /
And therefore he was pugnysshed. And Roboas was to his people over rygorous and
sharp / And therefore he lost ten trybus and his seynorye as yt apperyth the
iij book of kings Saul also was an evil pryn^^. and therefore god would that
the fortune of bataylles shold^ contrary to him. as yt is wreton the first
book of kings. Then every prince ought to get good manners. if he wylholde
his seynorye to the prouffyt of his soul /

How princes ought not to be covetous ne anarycious capytulo iij
THe prince ought to be the head the which ought to adresse all the members.
and not to coueyte the goods of his subgettys. and there is no thing, in the
world to a prince so couenable as is lyberalyte / By which he may get him
friends And conquer. Like as the wise man says in his proverbs the xix
chapter / And to this purpoos recou^teth. Polycrate in his iij book the xxiiij
chapter how Tytus was right lyberal / And therefore he was much byloued. And
certainly he was much sorrowful that day / that he had no thing given. And
said that a prince ought to reffuse no demauude. when he may resonably do it /
for as boece says in his first book of consolacion the v chapter. largess
makes the princes noble. And therefore says seneque in his book of oultrageous
couetyse. and repreueth the king Antygonus by cause he was covetous. and
verily when one demanded of him any yefte. he would not grant it. and excused
him in saying that it was oultragyously demanded. And when one demanded of
him a little yefte / he reffused it also in sayeug / that it apperteyned not to
a king to give so little a yefte. and by this moyen he gaf no thing And
therefore his flelycyte was not great. But al coutrarye did king Alexander of
whom recou^teth seneke in his first book of benefyces / how he gaf a cite to
one which demanded of him alms / For he says that a great lord in gyuyng
ought to consydere. what and to whom. and wherefore he gives in especial if the
yefte be great. For otherwise it is not lyberalyte / but prodigalite which is
as much to say / as folysshe and oultrageous dyspence. And therefore says
Tullius in his first book of offices the xvij chapter that largess ought to
be done ordynatly and resonably and not by auauntrye or vain glory / for
after such largesses. a man bycometh comynly rauynous for to have power to
mayntene his folyssh largess accustomed / Truth it is that much people
faylle more by couetyse than they do by fool largess. And alleway there is
no thing so evil syttyng to a prince. as is couetyse. For the other vy^^s
gryeue not so much the people and the subgettes. as thauaryce of a prince /
the which ought to be as the stomak which dystributeth the mete that it
receives to all the members and reteyneth no thing to it self. but only the
nourysshyng. And when it does otherwise that is to wete whau it retryneth the
mete aboue^ his necessyte. then it bycometh sekelew and maladyous by
replection. and brings a man in to a dropsye. and then the stomak swells.
and all the members wexen feeble and of no power. and all the evil comes by
cause that it dystributeth not the mete that it had received. Semblably is it
of a covetous prince / the which makes the contreye to p^rysshe / and the
members to come to naught. when he dystrebuteth not the goods. the which he
has received to them that been in suffraunce or necessyte / and to this purpoos
we read how the romans were gretely lyberal and large. wherefore they becam
great. and much puyssau^t. of whom recounteth Valere in his v book the first
chapter. how they of Cartage sent to the Romans. great fynau^ce for the
rechate of so^me pryso^ners that they held. Then the romans delyuerd the
prysonners. and reffuseden their fynaunces. for it is more fair and noble to
give than to receive. and by cause thereof. They of Cartage gauen good renommee
and fame to the romans through out all the world. Semblably valere in his vj
book recyteth how Alexander reffused the yeftes of Darius the which offered to
him an hundred. M. marc of gold with that he would take his daughter in marriage.
And then one of his servants named promenon said to alexander. that the
fynau^ce were good to be received. To whom Alexander ansuerd. that it is more
worth to be governed by fraunchyse than by couetyse / but the time is now comen
that many princes ben gretely covetous and the covetous princes resemblen to
Castor the which destroyed a man utterly all / when he took war against him /
as Solinus says in his iij book the xxxv chapter. Semblably don they that
destroy their subgettis by tyranny / the which shall be semblably pugnysshed
of god. for as Job says in his xxxv chapter. Acursed be they the which by
Auaryce assemblen great tresours by evil getyng / For the time shall come that
god shall enhaunce the pour people. And the Tyrau^tes shall have enough to do to
curse the time that ever the^ gate tresours. and to this purpoos recounteth
Peter Damya^ how saint Andrew and saint gregory gauen great afflictiou to ^
knight which had taken away from a pour wydowe a party of her good and
catayll. For as the wise man says in ecclesiastique in his xxiij chapter. he
that makes to god sa^efyse of the substance of the pour folk / resembles
and is like v him that sleeth the sone to fore the fader. And I have much
neruaylle why one man destroys another seen that the beesrs of one condycion
and of one lykenes eteth not the one that other / like as Aristotle says in
his vj book of beestes. and that more is beestis ben over the men pyetous. and
to this purpoos we read in thystoryes of the romans how ij wulues nouryssheden
a child named Remus. the which was given to the beestis for to devour / But
after he was king and foundour of Rome / by the more strong reason a man
onght to be pyetous of his semblable. And the prince ought not to deserte his
subgettes / but ought to take example of Thiberius. of whom we read in the
chronicles. how his offyciers counceylled him that he should ordeyne subsydies
and trybutes upon his people. the which ansuerd a good shepherde ought not to
devour his sheep. but to nourysshe and to keep them.

How the princes oughten to mayntene and keep Justice capitulo. iiij
THe princes ben pryncypally ordained for to mayntrne and keep Justice. And
therefore they leave the estate and weacyon when they do not right to every man.
and thus for to do they may take example of the wise men of athenes / of whom
recou^teth Valere in his vj book the v chapter. how Themys^des said to them.
that he would conquer and put in subgection be contre of greece. seen that they
had the might so to do / the which ansuerd that a good and a noble man out
not by cause of his prouffyt do against Justice. Semblably the said Va^re in
his v book recyteth how Carridius Cirus that is to wete a man so sometime named
seeing how many noyses deuysyons were emonge the counseyllours of Rome / wherefore
he did do make a law / that no man should enter in to the co ^^ceyl with his
swerd for teschewe Inconuenye^ces that myg^ ensiewe. but it happed that he
coming fro a far contreye. entered in to the cou^ceyl with his swerd gyrd
about him. the^n the counseyllours demanded of him why he brake his law the
which him self had ordained and decreed. Then withou saying any word he took
his sword and set the point to him breast / and lened thereon saying that he
had lever deye than break Justice without punycion. and how well that no man
ought to procure his owen death / Nevertheless it appears by the sai^ hystoryes.
how thauncyent fadres were much amerous and dyligent to keep Justice / And to
this purpoos saint Austyn in his third book of the cite of god the xix
chapter. recou^teth how the counseyllours and Iuges of rome were much pour
as it apperith of one named Lucius Valerianus / the which lived not but of the
alms of the people / by cause of the greece pouerte that he was in / and other
by cause they would receive no yeftes / to the end that they should not be
e^clyned to do any thing more to the favor of the party. than of Justice /
and for that ought a prince more to lone Justice than rychesses and yeftes /
And to this puypoos says saint austyn in the book aforesaid how one named
quyncius was a labourer of the land when he was called to be due of the cite /
and nevertheless he bring due he mayntened him symply and humbly to show that
the princes be not ordained pryncipally for to get richesses / but for to
mayntene Iustyre / and herto we have many examples of the ancients / of whom
we read how they did Justice. of them self and of their propre children. As
Valere reherceth in his v book / the which recyteth how Brutus condemned his
ij sons by right great pugnycion. by cause they labored to bring again
Tarquyn to Rome which was banysshed and much contrary to the common well /
Many other also condemned their parents and friends saying that Justice ought
to be (...) by reason. And a Judge ought not to do all that he may / but (...)
that he ought to do. and also it apperteyneth not to a prince (...) co^stitute
ne ordeyne Iuges. but if he know them for good (...) wise. For these ben the
ij condycions without which the Judge may not well ne ryghtfully Inge. But now
in these ^ayes the Juges ben ordained more for favor of blood or for ^eftes*
than for wit or bounte that they have. Then me seems that they ought to
take example to an hystorye / the which ^elmandus reher^eth / the which says
that there was sometime an emperor named Helius the which reigned much long
in so much that he bycame so ancient and old that he might not govern
thempyre. Then the people and the counceyl prayed him that he would renounce
thempyre to his sone. The which ansuerd that it ought enough to suffyse to him
to have reigned in his time and that he would not that his son^ should have it to
his prouffyt. but a man that would do Justice And therefore he said. I pray you
that ye seek a wise man that shall mow and conne govern you / and take no
regard to me ne to my sone*

How the princes ought to be soft and humble cap^. v
THe prince is as the heed the which is set most hy^e by nature / And yet
alleway it is the part of the body in which appears most his humylite / For
we see that in humblyng and mekyng him self / a man dyscouerth and enclyneth
his head. This then it is a sign that the prince which is named the head
ought to have in him self humylite. And the princes ought to consydere. how al
their predecessors ben deed and comen to naught. and to this purpoos we read
how a phylosophre named Golonus in spekyng to Alexander said / O Alexander all the world suffysed not to the when thou lyuedest. and now vj fret of earth
suffyse for to burye the. More over quyntynus recyteth how a right old man and
ballyd said to Alexander / See well to. what thou do. For me seems that thou
wylt mount over hye. but take good head when thou shall be so mounted. that
thon suffer not thy self to fal^e over foull. The which Alexander could not so
wisely take heed to him self. but that he was enpoyso^ned in his yong^^e and
the flower of all his days. And therefore says the wise man in his v chapter
/ what auayllen the pompes and the rychesses of the world / seen that they
pass and vanysshe away as does the shadow. Then a much fool is the
prince the which in his puyssaunce transytorye glorifyeth him self. and yt
they considered well their estate / they shall find that their seignoryes
conteynen more trouble and thought / than playsaunce or deduyt. And to this
purpoos recounteth Valere in his vij book. how sometime they would have crowned a
king but he made great delay tofore or he would receive the crown and gaf his
rayson in saying that a new royame bears with him new thought. By which it
apperith how the princes have no cause to glorefye them self of their
lordshyppes. and they ought to take example in Iulyus Cezar of whom we read in
the book of fyctions phylosophyke: how he was much humble in spekyng to his
knights and servants. and was as ready to serve them. as he was to receive
their service / truth it is that one of his knights right ancient on a time
emonge the other / was condemned by the counceyl of Rome to right great pain
and domages / And then he came to cezar for to require aid. the which at
first said that he should assign to him a right good advocate for to plete his
cause. To whom the knight said. O Cezar thou know well that in the bataylle
of Ayse I had none advocate for to help the. but I went my self in propre
person as it appears by my wou^des the which ben yet apparaunt by cause of
the same. Then Julius descended from his syege in saying. that the pryn^e is
also well ordained to socoure his knights. as the knights ben to soconre the
prince / Then is the prince much to be reprehended when he settyth by
nothing but by ^ym self / And wha^ him seems that all the world ought to
serve hi^ / such pride makes a prince like a breast. and to forgete his
condyco^ and ^ys birthe. and how be it that men ought alleway obey princes
nevertheless they onght not therefore be proud of their seignourye. For they and
all their chyualrye within a litil while shall be deed and torued you to Ashes
and dust / and a cordyng herto reherceth saint Jerome in his epistle Cxix. And
valere also the same in his last book. how the king of perses was in a
montayue. and beheld his noble and pnissan^t chyualrye and wept saying. Alas
within an C year all this chyualrye schal be but a little ashes and duste /
and as me seems few pryn^es consydere their death But almoost there is none but
he thi^keth how he may bycome more mighty and more great. And all this does
and causes their pride and their false couetyse. They ought to take example of
Ihesu christ the which fled in the montayne when he saw that the people came
to him for to make him king. as says saint John^ in his vj chapter / And
upon the same saint John^ grysostome in his vj omelie says that Ihu^ christ
scheweth to us by that he fled. how we ought to flee mondanyt^e and and all
vain glory. And to this purpoos we read how vaspasya^ would not receive
thempyre And said he was Indygne and not worthy not wythsto^di^g that his
knights would that he should be Emperor in any wise / But now in this present
time we see all thopposyte and contrary. ffor the prnyces entende with their
power to conquer new seygnouryes and lordshyppys. And yt is a manner of
tyra^nie. the which makes naturelly his master doubtous and ferdfull / For
the tyrannt has all way fere and dread to lose that which he has evil
gotten / The tyranntes l^n also comu^li lytyl byloued of their subgettys. and
therefore they live i^ great doubt. To this purpoos we read how denis (...)
tyrant durst not do shave his ^erde for fere that he had of sleeyng And in deed
he burnt the heeres of his berde / as Tullius rehereeth iu his vij book of
offices the vij chapter. Se^blably he recyteth how a tyran^t named Sergius for
semblable cause doubted that his wife should slay him by night. And in deed he
did do espy if she had any knyf or other thing to do it / And nevertheless
in the end he was slain by her. More over valere recounteth how the king
Masinissa by cause of his tyranny trusted not to his people. And therefore he
made his body to be kept by dogs by the which hystoryes it app^rith how
tyranny makes the princes f^rdful and doubtous. the which tyranny comes of
pride / That is to wete wha^ the prince is not content And has not suffysau^ce
in his estate / And when he would alleway mouute more hye /

How the prince ought alleway to be sobre and chaast cap^. vj
GLoutonnye And lecherye affeblysshen the body and taken fro a man all the
will to do well. And in deed then shall see how the gloton by his dronknes
speaks folysshly. And shows his secret often / Then ought the princes to
be ashamed. the which demannde no thing but wyn and mete. and holden long
dyners. and yet more long soupers. For of times in beuerages. And dyssoluco^ns
they mayntene them self all the night or the grettest part thereof. And who
that these days will find glotonnye / he may well goo to the court of d^^erse
princes. And there thou shall find. that all for the most part they do
none other thing but drink and the / sauf a lytyl while they be in ydlenes and
in plays dyssolute. and therefore Socrates the philosophre despised the life of
the people of the court / and of all them that follow the halles And great
dyners / To whom speaks Seneke in one his epistle. O ye miserable people that
do no^e other thing but drink and et*. hit is damage that ye have soul and
understanding / sith that ye only think on your body. And for somoche vyrgyle
in his first book of En^ydos repreueth dydo by cause she held her long at
dinner. what shall we say of them ^hene^ of whom ysaye says in his vij
chapyter / The which have not leyzer to sleep by cause they would rise erly in
the morn for to make them self drunk. They be like to them. of whom seneke
speaks in his lxxxxvij epistle. the which ^a^ and night drink alleway and
ete. sauf a lytyl while that they sleep. And it is good to wete that then
they dreme that they drink and ete / For gladly men dreme of that which they
do by day / Then ought the princes to flee and eschew glotonnye. and ought
to have in their court mesure. ordynannce / and all honneste. But thou shall
find there now none order but fylthe and foul table clothes / And me^ which
say them self to be honest. but they run to the table shouyng And puttyng
away each other / And they resemble not men but hogs and swyne going to their
trough / in foul etyng and there shall thou here no word spoken of god ne say
no graces ne benedicte* but dyssolute words. oaths and sweryng / and all
dyshoneste shall thou there see regnyng* and if this were in war it should not
be over great meruaylle. Bu in time of peace to mayntene such a life / it is not
a life / but it is death. and right glotonnye / the which engenders lecherye /
like as says valere / And also experyence shows the same / the which is
right e^yl syttyng in princes / and geuerally in all chynalrye / And as to me
Irepute Impossyble that a man lecherous and amero^ folyssly of wymmen may be
wise and kuyghtly / ^ecounteth not vegece in his iij book of Chyualrye. how the
noble knight scipion thaffrycanut would never abuse him self with wymmen how
fair so ever they were / as it apperith of the fair maid which he refused and
restored her to her husto^ de. we read also how Octauiau seeing Cleopater a
right fair ^irgyne / how be it that he was somewhat enclyned to her love
^euertheles he would in no wise abuse her. lykeas policrate says in his iij
book the vij chapter. Semblably we read how hanybal. Gayus Julius Cezar / and
Cathon lyuedeu right sobrely and chastely as it apperyth in the v book of
policrate the vj chapter* Thus then ought the princes to consydere ho w that
folyssh love of wymmen destroyed the strength of Sampson / The wit of
Salamon and the bounte of / David* And therefore may never prince long endure /
that sets all his entenco^n to lecherye. like as says saint Jerome in his
xxxiiij epistle / And to this purpos Egesipp^ in his first book in spekyng of
one named Antonye said to themperonr know thou that Antonye is vaynquysshid*
but that is not by the. but this has done Cleopatre. whom he has so
folysshly loved / For he had lever be vaynqnysshid with her / than to
vaynquyssh^ without her / Then ought e^y Chyualro^ man to take heed and see
well to that he be not lost by lecherye Troth it is that be names him self
Amorous. But when I adnyse me well he may be named maleuro^ that is unhappy. For
it is great myserye for to have thought to mayntene a woman. For then his
hody he destroys his strength perysshith. his sight wastes / h^s wit
mynyssheth / his life shorteth. his health enpeyreth / And his courage for to
do well gooth away and his good fame and renomee. And when he weneth to be
happy by cause he has found a fair woman / than he has lo^ him self by cause
of his inordynat love. which is that he loves the woman more than him self.
And so it happeth often that he is much deceived when he weneth to be byloued
singulerly / that is to wete be that maynteneth diverse and many wymmen / For
he ought to know that never woman loved snche a man long. how well that she
shows sembla^nt for to love him but her hope is for to have his gold and his
silver. I put caas that it were otherwise. And that there were love between
both parties / yet may none otherwise be (...) right unhappy. the which for
love of the (...) and leueth thesta^e (...) by what moy^n his auncetres have
conquered their goods ^ud honors /

How the princes ought to employe and dispose (...) ^elf cap^. vi^
THe Princes ought to be example of honor And of good life. and to employe and
dispose them self in good wer^es and feats. for to be cause that their
snbgettis do semblably / And it is a great shame if a prince that should be a
capytayne of knights be called a player of dyse. and every knight ought to
know that by playeng of dyse or other games semblable may nothing be gotten
ryghtfuly ne Justly. but all that is gotten by that moye^ is to the dampnaco^n
of his soul and hurtyng of his couscyence. By such games the name of god is
sworn and forsworn and despised / A man loses his time and his rest often. And
when he should think how he should gouuerne his people. than he studyeth to
begyle his felawe and win his money. And to this purpoos we read in polycrate
how a knight named Clysson Arrived in the country of Corynthe for to treat
allya^nce with the lords of the country. the which he fond playeng at
dyse. and he this seeing departed. and said he would have none allya^uce with
players of dyse For players of dyse be^ co^ynly light i^ courage^. and cha^nge
often their purpoos as does the fortu^e of dyse* and ben ready for (...)
promise. to swear. and also be^ full of couetyse. and by consequent ben enclyned
to rapyne and theft / And therefore says seue^^ in his proverbs. that he that
knows most of such plays / knows most of evil As who should say. that
in such games is no thing but evil And sin. Then is it a great ^ame tath
chyualrye be euployed in such games. For such ^^ayes make a man to lose his
(...) and cousentyng. For I put ^aas. that which they have be^n ^^^fte /
Nevertheless all they that play for avarice and cou^^ se ben in their heart
Rauynous. And therefore saint Aus^^ says in his iiij book of the cite of god
the xvj chapitre / how wise woman dremed that it should be good to forbede and
de^^ de all the games and plays that been in pr^uidyce of the ^^myn well. But
I will not say but that the princes and (...) knights may play And dysporte
them with sum ho^ play / For as seneque says in his book of tranquyllyte
sometime the philosophers took disportes as it apperith of Socrates and of
Chaton. For as the cord which is allewaye (...) or stratched / sometime
breketh / Right so a man wyt^^^ rest may not long persevere. And hereof we
have experyen^^ of the lands and feldes / that men let rest for to bear fru^
the better / And a man speaks. For to wake the better aft^^ slight so ne more
ne less a man may honestly disporte for t^^ better to entende to that he ought
to do. And hereof we ha^^an example of Saint John^ Eu^gelyst. of whom Cassy^
recounteth in his vij book of collaco^ns / how he on a time disported with a
partrych. And that seeing a young man go^y^^ by the way beryng a bow in his
hand said that he meru^^ led that he played so like a man of the world / and
was of ^^ ^oly life Then saint John^ ansuerde in demanndyng of hy^ whe^fore
his bow was not always bended. To whom he^^snerde / that if his bow were
always bente / that it should not ^o strong for to cast forth the Arowe /
Semblably said se^^ John^ is it of the body of a man / which may not alleway
(...) ^ore. And therefore he ought to have sum Alegement. (...) which it
apperith. how honest plays ought no man to (...) so they be taken in time and
in place. and after the condici^^ of the person / But plays dyssolute oughten
to be repren^^ and evil plays. the which often ben of couetyse. suspecion^^
and of many evil vsages* and much idle angages /

How kynghtes ought to govern them self / capo. viij
I Knight ought to be a man emonge a thousand good and honorable corageo^ of
heart. true in his deeds. mighty and ^yse hardy. and prduent. and ready to
dyffende the right of his con^ey. and of them to whom he is bound to serve /
and also of them whom he has the gouerna^nce. And as Geffrey says in his
etrye. usage makes a maistre. and the excersite makes a ma^dy and habyle in
his feats and deeds as the greeks sayen their proverbs. and as Tullius
recyteth in his question^s tusilanes in his first book / And therefore the
knights oughten (...) excersyse and accustom them in feats of Arms. and
ough^ not to be idle in sechyng and following their playsir and ease ^ such
wise. that they essaye not almost at no time to here the ^ates ne pain of
chyualrye / I suppose if a search should be man bow many knights know their
horses well. and their drses them / and have their harnoys and abyllemeuts of
war edy. I toowe there should not many be founden without lack of ^iche as
they ought to have. More over the knights ought (...) be true and hold that
they promise / And to this purpoos re^ounteth valere in his v book how a knight
of Rome named ^^ius promised to hanybal certain money for the Raunson ^f
certain prysonners romans that he held. so that he would ^syuer them. and
then hanybal gea^ted to him his dema^nde / and rabi^ came to Rome. and
recounted to the Romans his promise (...) the Romans woldenot pay that
which he had promised and that seeing Fabyus / he sold his heritage. and
held his ^^omyse to hanybal / And therefore polycratus in his vj book ^^e fyfte
chapyter says that a knight to fore all things is ^^unde to keep his oath and
that which he promytteth. and therefore ^prynces maken the knights to swear by
their oath / that ^y should hold and mayntene loyalte and truth / in signefy /
^ee / That it ought to be a great furete of the oath of knight / to keep and
mayntene the church. And so to do of old ty^^ they promised and presented
to the temple their swerdes in^nefyance that they promised loyaulte. First to
god the ^che is prince of all chyualrye. After a knight ought not^ly trust in
his strength / bnt ought to be wise and subtyl^ believe good counseyl. For
vlixes surmounted the strong ^cules by his wit / and not by his strength.
And the (...) mayns couquerden the world more by their wysedom / (...) by any
other thing as polycrate says the vij Chapter of ^ vj book / And Pompeius in
his xj book recyteth of Alexa^^der how his fader left to him lytyl Chyualrye.
but he w^wyse and well learned / And thefor he conquered all the wo^^ by wit of
Chyualrye / And to this purpos Egesippus his v book alleges Tytus. which
says that in Chyual^^wytte and good advise were more necessary than strength
body. More over a knight in his feats of arms ought ^ to be p^sumptuus ne
despise ou much his ad^sarye. for as ca^^ says. it happeth often that the
feeble desco^fyteth the strong and the^^ till. the great as. david surmou^ted
golye. and thou ought / know that the victory comes not of the man but
pri^cypaly / god as it apperith in the first book of machabees the iij chaptre.
and therefore a knight ought not to gloryfie him self and to the purpoos we read
how moses gate victorys not by stre^gthe b^ in prayng god and in lyftyng his
hands to heaven. as is wret^^ / the book of exode the xvij chapter. and of
theodose in thistoryesthe Romans we read. how he seeing that his enemies we
more strong tha^ he was. he prayde to god in taking the (...) of the cross by
which he gate victory and therefore anncyer wha^ they made bataylle. the
priest of the law went to fore ^^ chyualrye in praye^g god. as it apperith in
the book of deutro^^ my the xx chapitre. and therefore says the prophet that a
man ou^ not to trust princypaly in the vygour of his legs ne in ^ strength
of his horse. but in the grace of god. More ouer^ knight ought not entrepryse
bataylle but if it be by good (...) d^^ght good cause / And to this purpoos
says swetonius his second book that Augustus cezar entreprysed no ba^le / but
if it were for teschew right great dom^age / and ther^^^ says saint Austyn in
his fyfthe book of the cite of god the ^ij chapter. that a bataylle ought not
to be made / but for ^^t great necessyte. And therefore auncyently the people
requy^^ god that he would show unto them if they had right or ^^^or ellis if
they had done any thing against him. wherefore y ought to have bataylle. For
their said. and it is truth that ^^y that love god and have good cause.
fynably they shall have crorye of their enemies. as it apperith in the book of
leuytes ^xxvj chapter. But it is great Inco^uenyence when the ba^ ^slles ben
made by tyranny / and by cause of couetyse / For the mine proverb says. sin
noyeth. and therefore me seems that sonably many knights have much suffered.
For many ty^es. they have made enterpryses. not with good cause and ^^ght but
by pride and by cause of their couoytyse And it is ^rde that they should happen
wel-seen that they goo to bataylle ot with their propre good / but with goods
evil gotten / and in going they rob the pour people. and them in their ^ven
contreye. And they that so do. ben not worthy to noble ne called knights but
they be of the condition of ty^ntes. of whom polycrate speaks in his iiij
book / that to (...) a tyra^nt should be a Just thing. And Tullyus in his book
offices the vij chapter says / that for to slay a tyra^t is a ^^nge honest
For we see that a man cutteth a way the me^^e that is cause of the dystructio^
of the other / But thon may mau^de how the tyra^nt may be known. To this
ausuereth crystotle in his viij book of ethyques saying thatbyt wene king and
a tyra^nt is a great difference / For the king secheth ^sireth the common weel /
and the tyrant seeks his owen prout^^ the suppression of the people. and
therefore tyranny is seyg^^ye vyolent and oultrageous / and therefore it may not
long ^^dure / And thus says ^ot in his xv chapter / And be (...) we have
seen many examples of so^me tyrants which he lost their seygnorye all or a
great part /

Here follows the fourth book. the which speaks of^ state of the comynalte /
and of the people /
First it trateth of Rich men. and how they ought to glorysye in their
rychesses capytulo pru
THe men comen of god and not of the creature. A therefore the loouyng and
preysyng ought to be gyn first and pryncypaly to god. And the rich man ought
to ^^sydere That which the wise man says in his xv book pronerbes. which
says that he that follows avarice h^ no pees of conscence. And in his xxviij
chapter he s^^ that he that hates avarice enlongeth his days and his to And
therefore to have rychesses it not all way most prouf^^table / For Rychesses
often empessix and letoen the getyn of virtues and therefore the Anncyent men
d^sireden mo^^vertues And good renommee than they did rychsses or be^^uoyr. As
it apperith by scypyon / the which brought m^ the subgection of the Rommayns
all auffryque. of which Romans he demanded For his salayre no more / (...) be
named in his surname Auffrycan in memory of cl^^sayd vyctorye / as valere
recyteth in his iij book. And of ^^^counceyllours of Rome we read that they
were so pour. the it byhoued the senate to nourysshe their children. THe
recoer^deth also of thiberyon how he said. That better is worth ^ tursour of
suffysannce. Than of chyuance and richeses. An in deed many times he reffused
great tresours that were ^ him presented. More over in his fourth book he
recounte^ of marcus tullius how he was an exemplayre of right go life. and
might have had mo rychesses but he would not. A^ he dutillyd in a lytyl hows And
held a lytyl estate / And as so that many essayeden for to see if they might
cha^nge ^ will. And to him presenteden great fynannces. To who ^he said. goo
ye your way with all your rychesses. For ^y ben your charge and your
perdico^n. we read also in the ^^nd book of fyctions phylosophyke. how the
king of Ce^e named Artagougles used not in his estate but vayssell earth / For
his fader had been a potter. And therefore he said ^^at for any fortune noman
ought to forgete his genyture / and better it is and more worth to encreace in
good manners ^^an in great estate. By which historyes it apperith how the ^^che
men ought not to gloryfye them self in their rychesses / and to this purpoos
says thappostle in his epistle to Tymo^^e. that he that loves rychesses. at
last he shall not do his ^^ffyt. And the rich man ought to considere how he
is mor^^l / For fynably him behooves to leave all / So then he (...) not wise
that sets his heart and his trust in temporell ^^d transytorye chyuannce
and goods. as says saint Gre^ory in his xviij book of morallis. And to the
same purpos ^^ynt Austyn in a sermon of the words of god says. that ^^thyng
is worth to the / thaugh thy cofre be full of richesse / (...) thou have no
thing of good in thy conscience / what auay^^th to have richesses if thou have
no goodness in thy self / that auaylleth to a man that has the use of much
good. and he him self is subgette by sin to the fend / Therefore ^yde a wise
phylosophre named Salon / that no rich man (...) happy. that is to wete when
he is auaricyus. And this counts valere in his vij book the second chapter.
More ^^er the rich man ought to considere. That many ben becomen ^^ure. as
Cassus which was right rich But after he was ^roure. that all men scorned
him And had him in derysi^^^. And one named Cassus was so great at Rome. that
he ^^as called the Patron Senate but fynably he was deed and by ^^styce
condemned shamefully. and therefore says Seneque in ^^ book of puruea^nce that
(...). For the man is in great peril / that no thing knows / ne it endure /
And of such condico^n ben often the rich men / the w^che will have in all caas
their playsyr /

Here follows thestate of pouerte / how he ought to content capitulo ij
Saint James says in his first chapter. God in ^^^ world here has chose the
pour folk. whom also ^ enha^nceth often and co^mynly as says the prophet
david. and ou^^uyour says. that blessid be^ the pour of spirit. That is to
^^te the^. that been not in their hertes coueytous. For lytyl is ponte worth
without forth if the heart hue not suflysan^ce / A^ to this purpoos we have
also diverse examples / as of dye ^^genes the wise phylosophre. the which
setted nothing ^ worldly gods / and Seneke this book of puruca^nce says the
demetrius threw all his rychesses i^ to the sea saying that ^^ were noyous
and grievous. and in his book of tra^quyllice he recou^n^ of a philosopher the
which by fortune lost all the good that he had. and he seei^g this. he
thankyd Ioyously fortune ^^yeng that he was aledged and easyd of great pain
and more re^bect dysposed to do well. More oner saint Jerome i^ his xxx
epistle reherceth how crates which was of the cite of (...) was sometime much
rich. But he renou^ced all i^ saying. the^ it was much hard to get
rychesses. and that it is bett to le^ she rychesses than by rychesses to be
lost: there fore said Fa^bricius that he wao rich not by great richesse. but
by ver^suffysau^ce like as valere says in his iiij book the iij chapy^^tre /
And in semblable oppynyon was zeuon the phylosoph like as agelyus recounteth /
And therefore Thobye said^^ his sone / My sone we Irde a pour life / But and we
dr^^de god we shall have good ynowh / this is wrecon in ^ iiii capytre / And
therefore says Seneke in his second epis^ ^at is when a man is content with
his suffysau^ce. the whi suffysau^ce makes a man more rich than does great
chy nce and good / For as says saint Austyn. there is no thing it makes a man
so Ioyouse as does suffysau^ce in pouerte ^^d to this accords an hystorye of
saint Austyn which he^^erceth in his book of confessions i^ spekyng of him
self. and ^th that on a time he saw a pour man passing by in his ^^uerte
much Ioyously / whereof he much merueylled. And ^nne he said to his felaws.
Alas my friends we labor in ^yn and in getyng richesses for to live surely
and Ioyously or ye see this poureman which much passes us. and is men long
since. to that we demand and seche. And this hi^rye was to fore the conversion
of saint Austyn / Moreover the holy scripture thou sha^lt find how Moses kept
sheep / ^ it apperith the iij book of Exode / and the prophet helye was so
^ure / that he dema^nded a lytil bread and water of a wydowe ^ it apperith in
the third book of kynghes. And thappostles ^nounced all / And in deed saint
peter said of him self. that ^had neither gold ne seluer. And we read of Saul.
that he ^^epte the asses of his fader. And david was a sheepherde. and
euertheles after they were kings. Then me seems that ^ponerte every man
ought to have good pacyenee. and he is ^oche rich that lives in suffysau^ce.
that is to wete. content ^^^h that he has /

Of the state of old age / and how men ought to be good and retuous capitulo
iij^.
AFter the age of a man he ought to be the more ripe and aduysed and by
thexperyences that he has seen he ought to the more wise of manners / And
therefore seneke in his ix ^stle thankyd and preysed his old age / by cause
that thereby he (...) many euyllis and sins. And saint Ambrose in his first
(...) for tensie we the same in the process of their life For Senek^^ says in
his book of manners every person does that gladly that which he has learned
to do in his youtghe and Aristotle (...) his book of Ethiques says that it is
a thing naturel to take playfance and delectaco^n in that thing / the which
he has beaccustomed to do in his chyldhode and youghte and therefore the w^^se
man ni the xj capytre of ecclesiastes speaks to a young man^ says thus youge
man advise the to dyspose thy herb in goo^ works For like as he ought no
thing to repe that has no thing sowe^. right so i^ old age he shall find
nothing good b^ that he has accustomed to do in his yougthe. And therefore
ought the young people to keep the^ well fro evil company to which is often
cause of the destruction and perdico^n of young fol^ke and it is hard for a
young man to be good / wha^ he conuersed with people of enyl life And to this
purpoos says tulle in hi^ second book of offices. that Children ought to be
nourysshe^ with good folk and honest. And ought to duelle with them
contynuelly And then by cause of the good people / he shall ^ ashamed for to
do evil. For they shall be a ferde for to be repreuyd. and consequently they
shall be a shamed to be reprehended They also that have the gouerna^nce of the
young people ough^ not to cesse to reperue and chastyse them. And then is a
man well dysposed to receive chastysement when he is young. And not harded ne
made tude to do harm. And therefore saint A^ ^lme in his book of symylitudes
compares Infancye or chyldehode to wax which is soft / and is dysposed to
receive such prynte as men will. The child also resembles to the rode when it
boweth lightly. it is wounden as men will. Then owe^ the fader and Mother to
have right great aduys upon the ^^nerna^ce of their children as it shall be said
here after. The ch^^dren also owen to their parents and to their maistres to
obey^ in folowyug ^saac. the which obeyed in such wise to his fader that he
was all ready to receive the death at his comandem^ as it apperith the xxij
chapter of genesis. and yet he was at the time of the age of xxxij year. And
of david we read how he was obeyssant to his fader / as it apperith the first
book of kings / And Ihu^ Christ him self in his yougth was obeyssa^nt (...)
his parents / as says saint luc in his secund chapter / well ^s truth that
many by cause of their yougthe wene to be excu^ed of all their euyllis that
they do. the which ben much de^eyued / For sith they have wit and
understanding. they ben (...) be repreuyd and they shall be pugnysshid of god if
they do duy^ uyll. And hereof we have example of the sons of hely. the ^hiche
were right grievously pugnysshyd by cause they lyue^en after their will in
delyces / as it apperith the first book of ^ynges. we read also of the ij
children. which god made to be ^euoured by the wulues. by cause they soorned
and mocqued (...) prophet helyzee as it apperith the iiij book of kings.
More^uer the young people gloryfye them self in their beaulte. why (...) be
much deceived / For as Aristotle says / if a man had (...) eyeu of a ly^x and
that he might see through his body. he should (...) in him self and in every
creature much fylthe and ordnre And such there be that wene that they be right
fair. And if ^^xy saw them self. they should well know that they be right
^ull. For they have nothing fair sauf the skyn withoutforth ^ore over they
gloryfye in their age / and have hope for to live ^onge. and they consydere not
that as soon deyeth the young man ^s does the old. And that more is we see that
the young men eyes most comynly. For they be more full of oultrages and son^er
fall in to the sekenesses of hasty death. And thus nature ^ath no certain term
of living. Therefore no young man ne ^oman ought not for hope of long life to
take any hardy^es for to do evil. For for to live or not to live. the sin ^
^ uyl shall be pugnysshed And hope is cause often to live evil in (...) time of
old age /

^Of thestate of marriage how it ought to be go^^ned capo. v
Marriage is ordained for to have lygnage. and for to love each other. And
therefore thappostle saint poul in his fy^the chapitre admonesteth the wedded men
saying ye men lo^^ your wives as Ihu^s Christ loves his church. And to this
purpoos valere in his iiij book the v chapter recyteth how (...) man named
graceus lonyd his wife named Corneylle (...) much that he would deye for to get
the health of his wife. he (...) counts also how Cuplacius herd say that his
wife wa^d^ed^ And then he smote him self in the breast with a kny^ and
required to be with her. drowned or burnt / as at (...) time was the custo^me
to do when the people were deed. An^ how be it that noman ought so to do /
Nevertheless by (...) said hystoryes / it appears how men ought to love their
wyues^ Semblably also the wymmen owen to love their hus^bondes / And hereof we
have example as valere recounteth (...) his book aforfaid. how Iulia the
daughter of Cezar seeing (...) of her husbond spotted with blood was so
troubled that for sorrow and henynes / her child that she had within^ her belly
was destroyed^ For she had supposed that her husbond had been deed. or that he
had received so^me vylonnye whose name was Pompee the gra^ut / After he recyteth
of the daughter of Cathon named Porcia seeing her husbond brutns to b^ slain /
she demanded a knyf to slay her self also / And by cause that none would delyue
to her no knyf. she took brennyng cooles. and put them in her monthe and ete
them done in such wise that she deyde by a right merueyllo^ manner / Semblably
be recounteth of the wife of king metridatus which followed him in all places
where he went. were it in bataylles or else where. And certainly she kytte of
her heeris. and arrayed her like a man. for to have the better oportunyte for to
follow him in all places. And how be it for to do in like wise / it is no^ of
congruyte ne of necessite. yet by the said hystoryes it apper^^^ how marriage
ought to be had in great love. And to the sam^ purpoos recyteth valerius in his
vj book the vij chapitre. (...) ^ulpi^a a kept her husbond in a lytyl place
right secretly. Not withstondyng she wyf^ well that she should be deed if her
husbo^d were found with her. whom they songht to put to death. And ^t is good
to know how in marriage after the doctors. th^e ^hynges ought to be / that is
to wete faith. loyalte / lygnage and ^acrament / By faith and loyalte is given
to understood that neither of the parties married ought not to trespace with
his ^^dy but to keep it to his party / For as thapostle faith in (...) first
epistle to the Corynthyeus / the body of the man is by ^ngyng to the wife. And
the body of the wife to the man. that ^s to understand in marriage / And as
saint Ambrose says in ^is exameron. god made eve of the side of Adam / in
signefy^^ce that in marriage a man and woman ought to be all one ^ody one self
thing. And me seems that the party that for^ayteth his marriage / does a
yenst the law of nature / For ^he storke has such forfayture in abhomynaco^n
of storkes to ^^ee him or her that so forfayteth. like as Alexander recou^teth
in his book of nature of birds. And me seems it is a great abhomynacion to
see in many maryages so lytyl faith and loyalte as now is. But I believe that
one of the causes emonge the other is. that the marriage be not duly maad. but
for money. or other evil cause. Then it is no merueylle that the marriage
continue not well sith the begynuyng therefore the king lygurgis would and
ordeyued in his Roya^me that the virgynes and maidens should be wedded without
to have gold or silver to the end that the marriage should not be made by
couetyse. like as pompeus recyteth in his iij book / And valere in his vij book
the first chapter recyteth how one dema^nded some ^ym of a philosopher named
themystodes how and to whom (...) should marye his daughter. that is to wete to
a pour man (...) to a rich. The which ansuerde. that he ought not to
dema^n^e pouerte ne richesse. but the bounte and the virtues of the m^^ ^ore
over in marriage there lies right great aduys. and not ^^ly for parentage / but
also for to Mayntene it / And to this purpoos speaks Theofraste dystyple of
Arystole / in his book that he made of marriage in which he says. that a man
ought more to behold the bounte of the woman than the beaulte. and if thou
dema^nde which is better to take a fair woman or a foul he ausuerde. that it
is an hard thing to keep a fair woman the which many men desire. And it is a
great pain ^^ love the foul one which many despise. alleway if she be good
the goodness shall keep her beaulte. And if she be not fair. (...) is none hard
thing to love her that is of right good will. for naturally and resonably more
ought the bounte to be praised tha^ the beaulte / More over in marriage is much
to be suffered. sin^gulerly if both parties be not wise. For men ben often
suspecyonno^ of their wives / Therefore ought a woman to be sy^ple and good. and
not only of her body. but also of her maynt^^ and manners / For in spekyng. in
beholding. ne in conuersa^^ she ought not do any thing. by which any other
might think or Judge in her any evil / And it happeth often that by they
folyssh mayntene and manners / the wym^en make their hus^boudes to mysdeme and
evil of believe. Many also seeing they manner folyssh and suspco^nno^. pain
them self to deceive th^^ wenyng that they be of evil disposico^n by cause of
their wan^^ and folysshe manner / And oftyme it happeth that such one ^ taken
with her net / the which she never thought it should ha^^ pen / And all this
evil comes by the false sembla^ntes An^ countenances that many wym^en maken:
The men also tha purpose to marye oughten to advise and behold the condyco^ of
her that they desire to have to wife. But many ben deceyue^ by cause they take
them in the age of xij year or there about. an^ then what they be / noman may
wete ne know. For as (...) proverb says / how sees a child. sees no thing
/ Als in maryeng him self. one ought to here many speak For lou^ and carnal
affeceyon blyndeth the understanding. and make^^ a man favorable to Judge. when
he is surprysed of such (...) therefore a man ought to believe more another than
him so

How the wym^en ought to govern them self capo. vj
A woman ought to have resonably two condico^ns. that is to wit / shame of
repreef / and dread of disobeyeng of her party. For then a woman is lost.
and dissolute when she has in her neither dread ne shame / And it is a thing
much to be repreued to see wym^en hardy / dissolute / and ready to do many
euyllis. Snche ben they the which by their manners foul and dissolute. and by
their lechero^ beholdynges draw men to do evil of whom speaks saint Jerome
in his epistle Cviij / And says that many wym^en ben like to thydolles the
which drawn the people of the world to the fend. Sem^lably ben they that
poppe them self and make them to seem fair for to bring other to sin / And
it is great merueylle how they presume to deffeate and altere that which god
has made / and much lewd is the woman the which weneth to make ^er more
fair than god has made her. And it is a great presumpco^n to defface the
paynture of god / for to make the paynture / as says saint Ambrose in his
exameron / and to this purpoos. Guyllem in the book of his book of the
universal world recyteth how two wym^en sometime were riyht c^ryou se for to
make them so fair. and to kembe them so it happed that the one deyde / the
which after apperyd to her felaw. wha^ she arrayed and kembed her self and said
to her / my friend advise the / For I am dampened for my curiosytees the which
I used and mayntened when I was with the. And me seems that such curiosytees
ben by cause of lecherye and of dissoluco^^ ^arnall / Then onght all wym^en
take example of the good ^lde and au^cyent wym^en / of whom reco^unteth valere
in his ^ij book the vj chapter. how many wym^en had lever to have ^yed than to
be deffouled / and he reherceth how the maro^ners ^ke a woman a greek by cause
to sin with her / And (...) ^eyng that. sprange in to the sea and drowned her
self. And ther^^r she was much preysed of the greeks and reputed for a sayn^^
More over he recyteth of a woman that slew her daughter / because that Apy^
would have deffouled her. and said that she had lever have her daughter slain
than she should live and be dissolute. Semblably saint Ambrose in his book of
vyrgynyte the in chapter recyteth how a maid called Pelage in thaage of xv
year was ^auysshed in the contre of Anthyoche / the which seeing she might not
escape / sprange in to a River / For she had lever deye a vyrgyne than to line
corrupt. By the which hystoryes it apperith that thauncyent wymmen were much
chaste and contynente. Truth it is that they ought not to slay ne to drown
thhem self bnt if it were by the commandment and Inspiracion of god / like as
saint Austyn says in his first book of the cite of god the xxv chapter. For
she sin lies not in the body but in the will / And how be it that they might
not keep the body against them. Nevertheless they had power not to consent. And
keep their will f^o corrupcy^n. like as he witnessith in the book aforsayd the
xvj chapter. And not withstondyng all these theynges aforsayd ^^ is it truth
that they deserved honor And great preysyng ^^ so much that they loved
contynence and chastyte / And ^ this purpoos feynt Jerome in his book against
Ionynya^ recyteth how the wife of Actilius was so chaste. that ne^man touched
her sauf her husbond only / And on a time ^ happed that a man said to her
husbonde that his mouth sta^^e And when he came home he blamed his wife by cause
she had not warned him thereof / for to have found remedy therefore / The
which ansuerde / that she had supposed That every man had be of that condycion
/ By which it apperid that she never had kyssed any other man But for to come
to have chastyte. it suffyseth not to ^^ ^hewe the touchynges. But also
sobrenesse is gretely requred in wymmen /

How virgynyte ought to be mayntened capo.
Vyrgynyte is in him self right honorable / and makes men and wym^en to
resemble and be like unto Aungellis. and they that be^ in such estate ought to
mayntene it right dilygently For it is much hard to keep / co^sideryd humayne
fraylnes. the which is all way enclyned unto syn^e / but if it be kept and
chastysed by reason. and it is good to co^sydere how thauncyent and old people
loved ^gynyte and mayde^hed long to fore the christian faith. as it apperith by
that we read in a little book intytuled of ^gynyte / in which we read that
many wym^en of rome had lever deye than lose their mayde^hed. and specially of
the two d^ughters of sedaza / That is to wete of a good woman so named which
were deffouled and enforced by ij youge me^. the which were lodged in their
house under the title of ghestes or pylgryms. and this seeing the ij daughters
for desplaysyr hurt and ^yffygured them self with their owen knyues. semblably
for yke caas we read how the maid called thebana for desplaysyr that she had
by cause she was deffouled and enforced fynably she ^ut to death him that
defoylled her and her self also. And how be it that such occysious be not
approuued. ne^theles by the said historyes it apperith how thau^cye^ts
desirede^ and preysede^ ^gynyte For who will well co^sidere. to live after the
flessh is a thing ^bhomynable and to god dysplaysan^t. as thappostle faith in
his pystle to the Romans the viij chapitre. saying that they while live after
the flesh may not well playse god Truth it is ^^at virgynte only suffyseth
not. For a boue that them by^^^th to entende to good works / and to this
purpoos speaks ^ynt Ambrose to demetrye in his epistle lxxxvij / saying ^at a
virgyne and a maid ought to be stylle and simple. and ^lowe ho^neste company.
And ought not to be vacabo^nd ^^ ^myng about / but the most part of time
ought to keep her home in following the blessed virgyne Marie^ which was ^one
in her house / when thangele salewed her / More over the ^age of a maid ought
to be prudent. attempred and right short without habundau^ce of words. In her
manner and maynt^^^ she ought to be shamefast. and in all her deeds and fra^es
meke and humble. For by humylyte the blessed virgyne was most pryncypally
agreeable to god / As witnesses the holy scripture / More oner saint Jerome in
his epistle lxxxix. in spekyng to a good mo^ for her doughter^ said that she
ought so do that her daughter should be alleway dylygent and besy for to work.
For in ydlenes comynly virgyuyte and maydenhed is lost and vanysshyth. And the
maidens ought to consydere how virgynyte is such a tresonr that if it be
lost. it is irrecuperable / And therefore they ought dylygently keep it / To
this purpoos saint Ambrose in his second book of virgynyte recyteth how in
Anthyoche was a maid right fair and much desired. And fynably by force was
brought to the bordel^ And when she saw her there. she began to weep and to
pray god saying. O good lord which of old time gave to virgynes puyssance
and strength to surmou^te and overcome the will of m^^^uche sauf to keep and
defend me. After this prayer came to her a knight. the which gaf to her his
gown / to the end that (...) might escape in thabyte of a man. and in deed she
so escaped. and ^^ knight instead of her abode there in her habyte. then
came an^ there knght and entered in to the same place for to co^myse his ^oulu^^e
wenyng to have fou^de^ the said maid / and he seeing tha he was a man in
habyte of a woman. made him to be co^de^pne^ to the death / pnttyng on him the
syn^e which is not to be said and fynably was condemned to the death. and this
seeing the say^ maid presented her self to deye for him. in saying that for
saving of her ^gynyte he ought not to deye / but the knight ^ade that he had
lever deye. tha^ to see one so good a maid put^ death / And fynably both
tweyne were dely^d to the deth^^ (...) well doing / were martred / By these
examples and many ot^ it apperith how au^cyently ^gynyte was much preysed and
(...). in so much that the mayde^s that co^sentede^ to their de^elyng were
stoned to death as it apperith in deutronomye the ^ chapter / By which things
it apperith how maydenhede of him self agreeable / not only to the world but
also to god pryncypally. And as touching this we have example of our first
parents Adam and Eve / the which as long as they were in paradys they kept
vyrgynyte /

Howwydo whede ought to be kept holyly capo. viij
WEdowhede is thestate the which suceedeth to marriage and ought to be
mayntened in great humylyte. in great deuoco^n. in simple habyte. in
pylgremages. and other good ^^edes / For in wedowhede ought the vanytres of the
world to be renou^ced / And for her party pray to the end that the love that
has been in marriage / be remembered and recorded in wedowhede. For it is a sign
of lytyl love and of lytyl tronthe (...) marriage when after that the ij parties
have long lived to gydre. after the death of one of the parties that other
succedeth / And abandonneth her to the world in vanytees and in deduytes / And
how be it that wydowes marye not them self I will not counseylle them the
contrary. and singulerly when he parties have duellyd to gydre long. or the
most part of heyr life. And truth it is that saint Jerome approves not he
second esponsaylles / but if ^^er have be right good cause in heyr yougth.
Alleway he concludes that it is better tesche we ynne by marriage. than to
sin in wydowhed /

How serua^utes ought to mayntene them in their seruyse capo. ix^.
SErua^ntes in their seruyses oughte^ to have dy^^se condico^ns and in especyal
they ought to hane vj condico^ns First they owe to honor their maistre.
secondly they owe to (...) faythfulnes Thirdly truth. fourtly obeyssan^ce.
Fyft^ly ^ugence. and fynably they ought to have patience in works. and (...)
touching the first condyco^n we read in the second book of ^^ges. how Ioab not
withsto^dyng that he had victory of the enemies of his maystre. nevertheless he
would that his maystre had thonour. and would not take the cite until his maystre
was come. and as to the second co^dico^n that is to wete of faythfulnes of
serua^ntes valere re^yteth in his iij book the vij chapitre how Anthonye took
one of the servants of cezar his enemy. to who (...) he said that he must
leave cezar for evermore or ellis deye And sometime by menaces and sometime by
promesses he payned him that he should say that he would forsake and renon^^ his
maystre. And nevertheless the serua^nt said alleway. That neither for good ne
for evil that he could do to him he should never forsake ne love cezar. In like
wise he recy^^th of one of the servants of Cezar. the which pompeus might
never induce him to his service / As touching to truth. it is certain. that a
seruan^t being a liar deceyueth his master. And may be cause of many harms by
false reports. For a lyeng tongue like venym empoysonneth the hows. and all
the duellars therein / More over the servants owen obeyssance like as says
thappostle in his epistle to the ephesiens the vj chapter in saying / ye
seruan^tes obey you to your maistres in fere and dread. and in symplesse of
heart. And it is not sufycient only to obey / but more over it is necessary
that the serruannt be dyligent / And to this purpoos says seneque in his iij
book of benefyces the xiiij chapter. that dilygence is much syttyng in
seruanntes / And in deed he recomendeth the dyligence of that seruannt that
served his maystre in prison the which as dyscomforted demanded to drink
poison / To whom the seruannt desyryng to obey not for any evil that he would
to him but by ardannt desire that he had to do that dyligently which his
master commanded him / it happed that by hastynes to obey him wenyng to have
given to him the pot of poison / he gaaf to him the pot of medecyne / ^ by
cause of this hasty dyligence his master was saved yet also the servants
oughten in their affairs and works to have pacyence / And for their masters
to endure pain And to this purpoos valere recyteth in his vj book the viij
chasee andpitre of the seruan^t of papinion how he herd say that som^e were
deputed to slay their maistre / And he prayed his maystre that he would chan^ge
with him his gown and hode. to the^ de. that he would be slain rather than his
master. if the caas so required. and in deed he would deye for his master he
recyteth also of the seruante of Aucyus how for his maystre he eudnred
Innumerable pains / It apperith then how servants oughten to have the six
condyco^ns aforsayd /

How they that leden evil life owen to deye evil capo. x^.
GOd is a true Judge. And Iugeth every man Justly. whefor it follows / that
he that ledyth an evil life. must deye an evil death. And hereof we have many
examples in this present time. For the lytyl time that I have lived. I have
none remembrance that an evil man has deyed a good death. Truth it is that by
an enyl man I mean not every man that is a sinner. but I understand him to be
an evil man. that lives contynuelly in sin / And in doing werse and werse
withont repentanuce. and without will to amend him / More over. if we read
thystoryes of time passed / we shall fyude clearly how they that have lived evil
/ ben also horrybly deed / how was caym deed which slew his brother / was he
not slain of lameth which was blind and saw nothing. And nevertheless he
slew him in huntyng. as it apperith in the book of genesis More over pharao
the king of Egypt which caused to doowne the young children of the Jews /
how deyde he. Certainly he was drowned in the read see and all his people as is
apperith the xxiiij chapter of Exode. we read also how zebee and Salmana
slewen the brethern of Gedeon / but after Gedeon slew them / as it apperith
the viij chapter of the book of Iuges / Semblably Abymelech that slew lxx
brethern upon one stone / was after slain of a woman as it apprith the ix
chapter of the book aforsayd / And generelly a man that sleeth a man ought to
dye an evil death. Read we not how the young man that said he had slain Saul.
was afterward slain by the com^andament of david. as it apperith the second
book of kings the first chapter. Semblably we read that the thieves that
slewen ys^seth camen to david for to make to him feste / but david condemned
them to death. Therefore ought they to be well aduysed that do wrong to other.
and make them to deye without cause. For by thexamples aforsayd it apperith
clearly how homycides owen to dye an evil death. Semblably they that been
tyrannts and that greuen the people And the pour Innocents oughten right well
to be aduysed For it is reason that they deye an evil death And to this purpoos
we read how sysara which was a right cruel tyrannt was fynably slain of a
woman as it apperith the iiij chapitre of the book of Judges. and Saul which
was a right great tyrannt and persecutour of david. after he slew him self
with his propre knyf as it apperith the first book of kings the last chapter.
And Benedab which was so cruel fynably was byheded by one of his serun^tes by
the co^ma^dem^t of god / as it is wreton the iiij book of kings the vij
chapter / Then by these examples oughten the princes and the lords take heed / the which by their tyrannyes done many euyllis to their subgettis / And
by their cruelnesse make many men to deye. by venegeance for to have their
good. For certainly their evil life by right requires an evil death /

How the parents and in especyal the fader and mother oughten diligenly think
on their children capo. xjo.
THe parents and singulerly fader and mother oughten besyly to thynken on their
children. And to do pain by good doctrine and by good techynges that they be
by good doctrine instruct And taught ingood manners For as Aristotle says in
his viij book of ethyques. the fader is to his sone cause of his nouryssyng and
cause of his discyplyne by the which words it suffyseth not only that the
fader be cause of his children by generaco^n. but more over he ought to
nourysshe and teache them. And to the same purpoos says the wise man in the
book of ecclesiastyke the vij chapter. Si filij tibi sunt erudi illos / That
is to say if thou have children / thou ought to teache them. And in the
proverbs says the wise man the xxiij chapter. Noli subcrahere a puero
disciplina^ That is to say that thou ought to take heed that thou empesshe
ne let not the child fro his doctrine and his techyng / And to this purpoos
says thappostle in his epistle to the hebrews the xij chapter. Quis inquit
filius. quem non corripiet pater / q^ d. nullus / That is to say. who is that
son who me the fader shall not correct / as who says none. For thappostle
says that every tader ought to correct his sone. and herto acoordeth that
which polycrate recyteth in his vj book the iiij chapter saying / that the
Emperor Octauyan made his sons to be taught and texcersyse feats chyualrous.
And his daughters he made to be taught to work wulle. to that end that they
might live by their labor in caas that fortune faylled them / and tullius in
his questions tusculanes recyteth how the king lygurgis taught his youg
children for tendure evil and harm. and to know the good. For the children
ensiewe gladly and follow the doctrine that is given to them in their yougthe.
like as Seneke says in his first book of Ire. Therefore says thappostle to
theplesyens the vj chapter. Educas illos. S. filios in disciplina et
correctione dn^i / That is to say that they that have children ought to
enseyne and / teache them by disciplyne and by good correction entendyng to
good. And to this purpos we read the first book of kings how hely was right
grievously pugnysshyd by canse he chastysed not well his children / And therefore
says Tnllius in his first book of offices the xxxvij chapter. that the best
heritage that fader and mother may leave to their children. that is that they be
garnysshed of good manners. of virtues / and of good custo^mes /

How children own obeyssan^ce and honor to their parents capo. xij^.
THe children / that is to wete sons and doughtres owen tobeye to their
parents like as the thappostle says to the Ephesiens the vj chapter. Filij
obedite parentibus vr^is That is to say. ye children obey ye unto your
parents. and the wise man says in his ecclesiastique. who that honors his
fader. shall live the longer life. More o^ the children ought to love parfyghtly
their fader and mother. and in need socoure them like as scipion did. the
which put him self in peril of death for to save his fader / And also Eneas
for to deliver his fader passed by the myddys of his enemies. For nature
endyned hem so to do. More o^ of this love we have examples in Nature / For as
says saint Ambrose in his exameron the vomelye / The storkes ben of such
condico^n that they socoure their parents when they ben anucyent and old. And
recouere them with thyr wings and feathers. and supporte them in fleyng And
also admynystre to them their noureture. and their necessite. And to this
purpoos says valere in his v book the iiij chapitre / that the first law
nature is to love the parents. And recyteth of the good daughter. the which
seeing her mother in prison and condemned to death e^y day she vysyted her. and
with her owue milk nourysshed her / Then was the geayler much admerueylled.
how the said mother lived so long. seen that he admynystred no thing to her. ne
her daughter also. For the Iayler had not suffered her other wise to enter to
her mother then the Iayler an a time espied how the daughter gaf coher mother
to souke on her breasts. and recounted it to the Judge of the contre. the
which seeing the love and bounte of the daughter. pardoned the mother / and
delyuerd her to her daughter for the bounte of her^ Mere over valere recyteth
of the good dough^ the which nourysshyd her fader in his great old age with
her milk. also he recyteth of Cressus / the which was dombe and might not
speak. and it so happed that persian would have slain his fader / and he payned
him to speak / and wept by cause he might not speak and say it to his fader.
And thystorye says that for his bounte. langage was give to him / And therefore
says valere. Quicquid optima reru^ est natura. que pietatis est magistra /
That is to say / that nature is a right good thing / the which is maystresse
of pity. Also he recyteth of cornelian the which was bannysshed fro Rome / And
fynably he conquered the seignorye of Rome / vulques enemy of Rome came against
the Romans with right great puissance / for to venge him of his banysshement.
and that seeing the Romans they sent to him his mother the which dwelled in
Rome / for to pray him that he would forbere for her sake. the which seeing his
mother. was anon appeased and obeyed to the prayer of her. in sayng. that more
has done the love of my mother / than has done the strength of the romans.
For as Aristotle says Dijs. magistris. et parentibus. non possimus red^^re ad
condignu^ / That is to say that noman may yield ne render to god. to his
maystre / ne to his parents like byenfait as he has received / And to this
purpoos speaks Rauenne saying. that like as the son without benies or rays
shyneth not and the well or fontayne without rennyng taryeth. Tree without
bra^uches wereth dreye. and a body without members roteth / In like wise a
child without love of fader and mod^r is none child / but of the nombre of
them the which is w^^ton in the gospel. Vos ex patre diabolo estis / That is
to say ye be children of the devil your fader. For the children of the devil
can not obey ne have love ne charity. but the children of god ben of contrary
condico^n And hereof we have an example of Ihu^ christ. of whom is wreton in.
the gospel of seyn^ luc the second chapyter. Erat autem subdit^ illis / That
is to say that Ihu^ christ was subget to his parents /

Of thestate of Marchanntes capo. xiij^.
MArcha^ndyse ought faithfully to be governed and mayntened without fraud and
without usure. For other wise it is not marchandyse. but it is deceyte^
falshede. and evil. And therefore it is wreton in exode the xij chapter. Nec
vsura opprimes proximu^ tuu^ / that is to say that noman ought to oppress his
neighbor by usure. and like sentence is wreton in leuiticu^ the xxvj chapter
/ and the prophet says that they shall be with him. that lene not their money
to usure. and that love truth. that myssaye not of other. and that live
without doing evil to other. To this purpoos speaks saint Ambrose in his in
book of offices. and adressyth his words to marchan^ts saying / wherefore
conuertest thou thyn engyne to fraud / wherefore desyrest thou hur^e to thyn
neyhbours. wherefore desyrest thou famyue / or wherefore desyrest thou skarcete
or. wherefore espiest thou the time of derthe or scelerite / certes thou say.
thou art subtyl thy self. but this to do / or to desire is no subtylt^^ but
shrewdenes and evil. And that which thou call pour^ean^ce is fraud
couetyse and usure. More over saint John^ Grysostome upon the gospel of saint
matthew in his vomelye says that there is no thing more foul ne more cruel /
that is the usurer / the which secheth alleway his own prosperyte In
thaduersyte of other / And tullius in his first book of questions tustulanes
compares the usurer to the homycyde / For like thomycyde takes away the life.
So doo^ the usurers taken a way the substan^ce fro the pour people / Then
ought the marcha^ntes to take more head to faythfulnes and truth. than to
habunda^nce For the goods evil gotten ben witness of the perdyco^n of the
soul of him that has evil gotten them. and it suffyseth not in marchandyse
teschewe usure / but more over to mayntene truth in weight and in mesure. and
in all other things that apperteynen to marchandyse. For as the wise man
says in his proverbs the xx chapitre. god has in abhomynacyon evil weight
and balau^ces fraudously used / And saint Matthew in his gospel the vj chapter
says that god shall Iustefye the balau^ce and the weight deceyuable. and them
that been rich by their sins and lesynges. And shall yield thereof reason. An^d
there for it was com^anded in the old law as it is wreton in leuiticn^. the
xix chapitre. that all marchandyse should be made truly in weight and in mesure
/ busshels and quarters. and in all other things semblably. And every
merchant ought to know that by the moyen of fraud they may not were rich /
seen that their conquest by such moyen is not ouly to them self. but it is the
charge of the soul as said is. And the evil marchantes ben semblable to fenyx
the which assembleth all his buchettis and styc^is in the hye montayne / and
fynably the fire enflam^eth them. and the fenix is burnt in the myddis of them
In like wise the untrue marchantes. assemble^ the rychesses evil gotten in the
montayne of their pride. And fynably brenne by couetyse in myddle of their
goods. Also by cause that it is said that in marchandyse ought loyaulte and
truth to be mayntened. but som^e may demand if it be of necessyte / that
the marchannt sellar say to the byer all the defaultes that he knows in
that thing which he will selle / This question was made anncyently between
dyogenes and Antipater his discyple / And by mauer of dysputaco^n said
dyogenes. that him seemed it should be folly in the merchant to blame his
marchandyse. And antipater said it is no folly. but it was faith fulues and
loyaulte. For otherwise he should deceive his neyhbour. And shortly this
dysputacon recyteth tullius in his in book of offices the xij chapter. and in
ansueryng to this questyo^ lx says that diogenes defends vtylite. And
Antypater maynteneth honest / and by cause that hon^este is more worth than
prouffyt or vtylite. consequently it follows that the marcha^t ought not to
hyde ne couere the deffaulte of his marchandyse / For as the wise man says in
ecclesiastyke the xxxj chapit^^ the marchan^tes oughten to treat their
marcha^dyse in adressyng each other in truth and in faythfulnes /

Of the state of pylgremages capo. xiiij
THis present life is a right pylgremage. For as the pilgrim gooth alleway
without rest in any place long whereof is made menco^n. In like wise the life
of a man (...) not long in this world / and has nothing of assuran^ce / and
this wituesseth to us thappostle saying. that we have here (...) cite permanent
ne abydyng / Truth it is that they be not pylgryms / that of this world maken
their paradys / the which oughten to consydere. how abraham by the
com^andament of god departed fro his country and went and duellyd in a
strange country. And then^e god gaf to him his blessyng / as it apperith in
the book of genesis the xij chapter. by this example is signefyed to us how
not withsto^dyng That we be in this world here bodily / nevertheless in esperyte
we ought to god above by good works / and for to mayntene good life. And to
this pylgremage we be called For like as we see that the tree transporteth fro
short to hye by his growyng. In like wise a man that transporteth his heart
fro this world. in to the other grows more lightly in good life and in
virtues. And to this purpoos said Ihu^ christ that noman is accept for a
prophet in his owen contreye. so then every man ought to god in to a
stran^ge contreye. and it is none other thing to say but that in this world
which is onr country ben none other but pylgryms prouffytyng fro good to good
/ and fro virtue to virtue the which ought not to cesse to goo ne to prouffyte
/ till that they be at term desired / that is to wit in heuene. More over we
ought to advise how the pylgryms acompten and reken every day with their
hoostes. In like wise we ought / every day to advise and take heed how we live
and pay to god our debtes in knowlechyng our trespaces. As did an Au^cyent
wise man named septimus. of whom recyteth seneke in his in book of Ire. how
every day he acounted and took head of how much his life was empeyred or
amended And also it is good to co^sydere / how and how long the life of a
person endures And how it lasseth and shorteth / be it in slepyug or wakyng
all way our life lasseth / And nothing proffyteth to us the time passed. but in
that we have done well and gotten virtues in the grace of god. Therefore says
maximian. that the time draws after him all things mortal / And as the
heaven torneth / semblably our life renneth after it without cessyng and without
restyng / For such is the nature of the death of a creature. And to this purpos
and philosopher named secundus demands what it is of a man. And he ansuerth
that be is none other thing but a fantase that sone passes a way. And he says
afterward that a man is the vessel of death. a pilgrim without rest. host of
the earth / And worms mete. Then ought every man upon this sayng advise him
/ and much humble him self of what estate he be of. For princes / kings /
prelates. bourgeys. and merchants and generally all people ben of short life.
and all of mortal condico^n / And therefore says plynyus in his vj book. that
not wythstondyng that a man be most parfyght. among all mortal creatures.
Nevertheless his life is most miserable / most dangerous / and subgette to most
grettest thought / For nature gyneth to bestes horns to defend them. hyde and
here for their vesture / felyng to nourysshe them wings for the flee. and also
of other necessytees for pourneau^ce to all beestes. but a man is born naked
without felyng without strength. without vesture. without knowleche / And
without defense / Our life then has right lytyl begyn^yng. And the
contynua^nce endures right grievously. For after the mesure that the knowleche
comes. the thought grows and encreaceth. And the man wexeth the more
melancolyo^. that has in his condyco^n more very and parfyght knowleche. For
if a man lives in myserye. then he wexeth melancolyo^ by cause of his
necessyte. And if the man be in prosperity. Then his Joy shall be much
lytyl. if he consydere / how his fortune shall not endure long / For as valere
says in his ix book. Man's life is a course much lytyl and hard to pass /
For in the way is none other thing but pouerte and myserye. And if there be any
good or well. he is all way in peril of fortune adverse. or of natural death.
and boece in his iij book of consolaco^n. in spekyng to the rich man says
thus. thou wylt be preysed and renomed above other. but advise the in what
peril thou art / For the death approaches to the / And in thy fortune is no
surete / And therefore says maximia^. O life humayne that thou art miserable /
For thou art alleway in peril of death / thou art without ^urete / thou art
nothing stable. and fynably in spekyng of him self says. Alas where ben bycome
the goods of time passed / Instead of lawhyuge now I weep / my Joy is turned
in to heaviness. Then is it f^lye for a man to affye and trust in fortune.
ne in the life humayne. For naturally all dema^nde ^yne. More over late us
inquire and demand where ben they bycomen that have lived so playsan^ly in
this world. And me seems that the great. myddle and little / death has put in
his ^^bgecto^n. is not Octauian deed / and Cressus which were so rich /
Salamo^ the wise. Sampson the st^roge. David the loyal / Holofernes the grean^t
/ and all other Puissan^t conquerours. has not death desconfyted them / By
which it apperith that the life is uncertain / short. and miserable / And
therefore noman ought in his life have great faith ne hope. For the death comes
comynly / when a man weneth to regne most hye and long in his great puyssan^ce
and strength /

How all dedely sins desyren the death capo. xv
DEdely synue makes a man to deye. seen that the auncyents were pylgryms / and
to this purpoos we read how plato went on pilgrimage in to egypt for to learn
the scy^uce of Astrologye / as Policrate says in his in book. And pictogoras
for to learn truth went in to ynde. and after was in egypt and in
babylon^e. as recyteth Polycrate in his iij book. The children also of abraham
were iiij Cpilgryms And after was given to them the land of promyssyon. By the
which things that we ought to live as pylgryms / if we will come unto
perfection. Truth it is. that he is not a pilgrim. that all way has his
heart on the contre that he comes tw / And to this purpos we read how a man
sometime dema^anded of socrates / why his pylgremages prouffyted no thing to him
/ the which ansuerde to him / that the cause was for as much / as not
wythstondyng that his body went / nevertheless his heart remeuyd not / whereby
it apperith that the pylgremages ought not to be done only with the body. but
with the lxrte and with good will / And as touching to the pylgremage of the
soul. it is inpossible to do it well. but if the heart be dispoylled of
worldly affections / For the sins letten the pilgrym to do well. For as we
see that great burdens. great heaviness of body. great fattens / great age. and
great sickness let ten the pilgrim to do his pylgremage. In like wise the
burden of Couetyse / the heaviness of our slouthe / the fatuesse of our delytes.
and the old age of our sins letten our pylgremage and our saluaco^n also /
For all these things letten us to goo and accomplysshe our pylgremage /

Here follows the v book. the which treats of death. and how noman ought to
gloryfye him of his estate
First it speaks how the life is short / and ot lityl enduryng capo. primo
Job says that a man is of short life / the which is full of myserye and
pouerte. For like as the flo^r vanyssheth away. and as the shadow flees fro
place to place. Right so the life of a man passes shortly and right lightly. By
which it appears that noman ought to gloryfye him self of his tr^yteth
eusebt^ in his chronicles. how many have slain them self for cause of the
anoyan^ce of this p^sent life. as he that sle we him for pain that he had of
the fe^^ ^rtayne. and lu^sse also because she reputed her self disho^oured and
truth is it that no ^so ne ought to slay him self as says saint Austyn in
his book of the cite of god. and rep^ueth them that have slain them self. as
they that be^ aforsayd named. ne^theles by the said hystories it a^^er^th how
this present life is much ennoyo^. and not only to them that be in ad^site. but
also to every good creature which desires parfyghtly heuene is this life
noyo^. see^ that this corporal life is but greuo^ to them that desire e^lastyng
life. and by ^sequ^^t (...) deserves death bodyly that syn^eth mortally. but
many there be^ that set no thing of many sp^^es. not withstondyng they be
greuo^ and weyghty. and yet they ought to be aduysed and co^^y^^^ how sometime
many have be slain and deed by cause of sy^e that they daily com^yse and also
right comynly s^ede we not that because of lecherye that god made all the
world to dye by the flood. Exepte noe his wife. and his children. as it is
wre^on to the book of genesis the vij chapitre. wherefore were srayn (...)
people of the trybe of bemamyn. but for the leche^e which was com^ysed in the
wife of the leuyte. as it appe^th in the ij chapitre of Iudicu^. and many other
also were euylly put to death / as I have rehereed in the second book in the
chapitre of luxury More ou we read in holy scripture how many sometime were
slain and deed by cause of dy^ce sins. the which be^ on this day small and
light reputed / Ne read we not how sometime who someuer blesphemed god / he was
stoned to does of the people as it apperith the xxiij chapter of the book of
leuyticum. Alas on this day the name of god is blasphemed without dread or fere
of his punyco^n / and as saint Austyn says. many be^ hardy to trespace by
cause that god delayeth their puny^o^n. But the time shall come that the pain
shall be somoche more greno^ / As the delay shall be more long we read also
that Golyas blasfemed the name of god. But david which was then a child
slew him with his own swerd as it apperith thee first book of kings the xvij
chapitre. More over we read how many were sometime ded by cause of inobedyence /
and other by cause of murmr / and many other by cause of Rauyne or of ne
chygence / and nevertheless. the time is now in which the creatures humayne
set but little for to obey god. Murmr. and detraction regneth in these
days in the world / and to all manner sins the people ben all enclyned.
Then we ought to be aduysed how sometime many deyed and were slain for cause
of such sins as we daily do and use And to this purpoos we read how the
children of Aaron were brent and denoured of the fire by cause they offered of
the fire in the temple against the will of god as it apperith the and chapitre
of leuyticu^ wherefore swolowed the earth chore dathan and abyron. but for as
much as they murmured against moses as it appe^^th the xvj chapitre of the
book of nombres. wherefore was herod smeto^ and slain of his enemies. but for he
would appropre to him self the louynges of god as it apperith the xij chapitre
of the acts of thappostles / wherefore was anamas and sapphire stoned to death.
but for as much as they fraudele^tly took away the goods which were ordained
to the service of god. as it apperith in the same book the (...) chapitre /
Olord god if thou now punysshest semblably them that trespace. I believe that
there should be much few syn^ers. and that many should much dread god. which
now daily do evil But as the scripture says. god suffers syn^ers to live to
the^de that they con^te them fro their sins / and when they live long /
without conuertyng them self. so much more ben they heavy / and of their
neclygence so much gretely shall they be pugnysshyd Truth it is that som^e
folyssh people say oftymes. that they live long by cause they be shre wysshe
and evil. and also they have an hope to length their life / by cause they be
evil and shrewes by evil dooyug But that is a folysshe hope For they ought to
consy^^re and byholde the folyssh thoughts / And that for such hope they
deserve the death and ben Indigue And un worthy to have the time / in which
they may amend them. they ought also to right well advise them how the same
god that pugnysshyd the Ann^cyent people which were in the old time. the same
self god without any help may at all times pugnysshe them if it please him And
when he forbereth of his grace. it is for to advise us the better. It is a
great unkindness for to do the werse / for to wene to live the more lenger^
and thereby to length his life / O ingratitude or vukynd^nesse / thou art cause
that many lose their graces. which god grannteth to them that would amend
them. Therefore ought every man know and remember the grace that god has done
to them / when he has suffered them long to live. For after the mesure the life
is more long. the sins ben the more great / when a man lives without
correctyo^. and without ame^deme^t. Alas we ought to cousydere how for every
sin we deseruedeth. as it is to fore said. wherefore deyde he^p. but by cause
^e was neclyge^t for to chastyse his children as it apperith the first book of
kings the x chapter. wherefore was absalo^ slain. but for his pride. wha^ he
would have ocupied the ^eyame of his fad / as it apperith the ij book of kings
the xviij chapter. we read also how balthazar was right evil and therefore he
deyed an evil death. as danyel recyteth in his vj chapter / wherefore did
archicofel ha^ge him self. but by cause that he was in despayr by cause of the false con^seyl that he did against david as it is wreto^ the ij book of kings
the xvij chapitre also they that falsely witnessed against danyel were not they
devoured of the lions. wherefore were they horrybly slain that wytnessed falsely
against susan^e. but by cause they falsely accused her. Therefore they that
vnresonably syn^e / they deserve death as it is aforsayd

How no man ought to doubt ne fere the death capo. iijo.
GOd sane them that love him and serve him / For in the gospel he promyseth
that they shall never perysshe. To this purpoos faith the proohete. Just and
true me^ shall live perdurably. and shall florysshe as a palm. By reason also
they that goo the right way shullen arryue at a good port / They then that
lyuen Justly shall deye of a good death Truth it is that we read som^e
historyes apocryfats and not approved. the which sayen that sometime many good
heremytes lyueden all their lives holyly. And nevertheless in the end by vayn
glory or for other sin they deyde not well. But saving the reverence of them
that have wreton such historyes / as me seems they be not tree we / but
contryued / For it may not be that god suf^reth not a man to mespryse ne to
sin at the point of death. which all his life has lived and served him
devoutly. But it might so be that many have showed all their lives to be good
and devout / which were nothing so / the which deyde evil and no good death
/ and that is no merueylle For ypocry sye is a sin that well deserves to
deye an evil death. But of them that be good without fayntyse / I may not
believe such historyes / For the good life. deserves a good death. and to this
purpos we have many examples autentikes and approved. by the which it apperith
/ how the good people deyde well and holyly Read we not how moses singular
serun^t of our lord right worthyly / and by the com^andement of god. And the
scripture says that god buried him as it apperith in the book of deutronomye /
Semblably we read how helye the prophet was right gloryously lift up in to
paradys. for he being nygh his does there appiered a carte and horse clear as
fire de^oendyng fro heaven. which took him and transported him in to paradys
terrestre / As it apperith the iiij book of kings / how deyde also Job the
good and pacyent / Certayuly we read that after the torments and trybulacon^s.
which he endured without sin / And suffered much pacyently he lived C xl
year / and deyde well and holyly / Also saint Poul said I desire the death for
to be with Ihu^ christ / Truth it is that his desire presupposed the will of
god. For other wise ought none to desire. it. and how be it that many love
this life and the world also / to be founded in folly ne in evil aduys / for as
thappostle says we have here in this world no cite perdurable. but we ought
to inquire and get the cite of heuene. by which it apperith that many be
deceived that alleway would live here. For they desire that which may not be
naturally / Thyre desire also gayn^^yen to their saluaco^n. and therefore says
terena^ in his iiij book that people of great courage haten this life. and
doubt nothing the death. and therefore thou ought not to procure thy death ne
ab^redge thy life unduly / But thou ought desire the life to come in such
wise that this life be not to the as a paradys in thyn heart or as thy last
trust. And take heed to the ^lepha^^ the which when he slepeth. leneth to a
tree. and then comen the hunters which cutten the tree. and so the olyphaiit
falls (...) taken and slain / In like wise it happeth to then (...) trust in
this present life. for the time shall come that their (...) te shall all be lost.
and also they shall see. that it is a lytyl thy^^ of the life of this world / and
me seems that it were good that a man should remember fro the day of his birth
unto the day of his death / he should find that the day of his death should be
me^e worthy tha^ the day of his birth / for a man is born in syn^e ^ if he
will he may deye in grace. the day of his birth is the (...) of his entree in
to myserye. trybulaco^n. and in afflyxio^n. but that the death is more worthy it
apperith. for a man is born all ygnorant and without knowleche. but at his
death / then comynly a man knows god and him self / then is that the day
that (...) has most very repentance. wherefore it apperith that the day of the
death is more happy comynly tha^ the day of his birth. and there fore many wise
me^ have redeyued the death Ioyous^y. and to th^s purpoos said mercurye to a man
I would said he if it playsed god that I were quyte ont of this world. to the^de
that my soul were lift up above in to heuene. and certainly we read how plato
made sometime a new book named phedro^ in which he preueth and shows how a
reasonable soul ought aff this life to have heuene. the which book empedocles
studied much (...) and when he apperceyued that the soul was ordained for to
have such a good the^n he despised much this life / and mounted upon an hye
wall / For which he fylle for to short his life for to get and have heaven /
and how be it that his oppynyon is not good ne approved. nevertheless by the
said historye it apperith that he that ente^deth to have heuene. ought lytyl to
preyse his life /

How yet noman ought to doubt the death capo. iiij
I It apperith yet by seneke in his book of remedies of fortune. in which he
says. that it is folly to deed that which comes of nature. and that one may
not eschew. And therefore in his vj book of questyons naturell. he him self s^y^h
that the wise man ought not to doubt the death. ne the things also by which
he may deye by honor. For the knights ought not to fere ne doubt bataylle
founded by right and in reason. And the wise man ought not to hyde the truth
/ supposed that therein be peril of death / And to this purpos says varro in
his sentences / That he is a fool that doubts the death For he takes two
pains for one / That is to wete the death. and the dread which may no thing
prouffyte to him but encrece his pain / And therefore says seneke in his iij
book of questyons naturell / It is a lytyl thing says he of the life of a man.
But it is a great thing when a man may and can despise his life / For then shall
he be sure in see and on land in ba^ayll / And in all peryllis / Then ought
every man to desire to deye without dread as a fore is. said. Now would god
that the rich me^ of this world would take heed herto. for then should they
lytyl doubt the death. and lytyl love their goods seen they must needs leave
all / and therefore says seneke in one of his epi^tles wherefore wepest thou. wha^
the byhoueth. and must needs dye. for as much fool is he that would live all
the time to come. as he to whom it d^splayseth by cause he has not lived all
the time passyd and to this purpoos recou^teth valere in his vj book how the
king lazuriat^ did do crucyfye a man named theodore. by cause he had repreued
him of certain evil ^^s that he had done / And then theodre being on the
cross said. I had as leef said he deye on hye on the cross. as to deye low
on the earth And therefore says lucan in his viij book. that no man ought to
doubt the death. seen that it is the last pain and the end of all mystrye.
Of which death speaks a philosopher named secundus One demands what thing is
death and he ansuerd and says that it is the dread of rich men / The desire of
pour men / The Joy of wise men. And the end of pain / And Macrobe in his
first book of the dreme of scypion / says that weary phylosophye is to think
on the death Truth it is that there be ij manners of death / And the one death is
named the death of the soul. when it is without virtues. and that death ought
every man much to doubt. for it makes the soul Indygne and un worthy of all
good. that other death is said corporell the which no wise man ought to doubt
and to this purpoos says seneke. that it is a thing much miserable not for to
know to deye. and they that can not deye. be^ they that ne^ dispose them for
to deye. but in deed they have a folyssh hope to live always. Against them
speaks the se^te^ce saying that the death is the desire of wise me^. recytyng
how one named zenomanus purcha^ed his own death. wenyng the bettre for to live
after his life. and how be it that noma^ ought semblably to doo^ Nei^theles it
apperith by that noman ought to doubt the death / and to this purpoos recyteth
zenohon how Cyrus deyde sayng. My friends and my children. when I shall be deed.
wene ye not that I god in to a new country. for mine heart has alleway ben in
that other world. and for somoche wha^ I shall be deed I shall be al le way in
the country in which I was to fore. by the which historye apperith. how the
wise me^ ought alleway to have their hertes on the other world. therefore says
quitilian^ in his iiij to be it is a thing much desyro^ to come for to see day
and the hour. that a man is given and dely^d to his maker. and prosper in his
book Epigramanton says / that after the death shall be Joy without end / light
without derknes / will all one / hell the without maladye. Joy without ennoye
or greua^nce. And therefore men ought lytyl to dread the death /

How to think on the death is a thing much prouffytable capo. v^.
THe wase man in the xxxvin chapitre of ecclesiastike / says remember the of
the last days. that is to say of thy death. and thou shall never sin. For a
man that thinks he must needs deye. has a dread to trespace and do a mys
and sets lytyl by the world and by him self. And also he is all cooled of
the vanytees and of all worldly plasan^ces / And to this purpoos tullius in his
first book of his questions tusculanes alleges socrates. the which says
that the life of philosophres is for to think on the death. Semblably says
platon as recounteth Alephareus in his book of the dyuysyon of philosophye.
Seneke also in his xvj epistle says that a man bycometh frank and free by
thynkyng of the death. For that causes to asche we sin. of which comes all
servitude. and aunciently and of old time wha^ themperours were crowned it was
demanded of them in what place they would be buried and then they assygned
the place of their buryeng / and this custom was ordyned to the^de that they
should remember their death for tesche we pride / as it is recounted in the life
of saint Iohu^ the Amener. Saint gregore in his ix book of moralles says that
when a man is tempted. the souerayn remedy is to think on the death / And in
his xxj book he has the same purpoos geuyng an example of them that saylled on
the sea. the which left plays. and esbatements when they saw the tempest of
the sea come. Semblably is it of them that thynken on the death Truth it is
that by this thynkyng no man ought to anger him self. but he ought well to
advise him. For they that been angry ben they that ouermoche louen this world
And the other do not so. but reioysse as it is aforsaid / More over thou
ought to know that to think on the death makes a man humble. For the death
shall make us all egall. And there shall be no difference between the pour and
the rich when the body shall be roten and asshen / as witnesses seneke in his
epistle lxxxv. To this purpos says the wise man in his book of ecclesiastyke
the v chapter / All naked I am born. and all naked I shall return in to
therthe. Then me seems that it should be a much prouffytable thing. the
consideraco^n of the does by the which a man bycometh humble and knows his
fragylite. And certainly who that would well think how the life is short. And how
the death is nyghe. be should be much dylygent to do well. For the time shall
come that a man shall not mow do well. And to this purpoos says thappostle in
his last chapter ad galathas / late us do well as long as we may And sith
we have the time and season. as who would say / that the time shall come. that
we shall not mow do well / That is to were after the death. And to this purpoos
we read an hystorye of a young man the which consyderyng that all we must
need deye. he entered in to religyon for tamende his life. whereof his fader was
much sorouful and angry / And came to him for entreat him to return to the
world / the which ansuerd that gladly he would recorne. with that he would cha^n
ge one of the custo^mes of the country. Then the fader ansuer de / that he
would chan^ge gladly the costome / seen that he had right great piussan^ce in
the country. And desired to wete what custom it was. And the sone said to his
fader that ye would take a way this custom^e. that is to were that no young people
deye / but only the old. For ye know well that the custom^e of your country
is that the youg people deye as well as the old And therefore I am entered in the
religyon / For I wore never when I shall dey. The which word consyderyng. The
fader departed all confused / and left his sone duellyng in religyon / the
which sone had much well consideryd the word of Ihu^ tryst saying. wake he
and advise you well. For ye know not the hour when god shall come and call
you. as recyteth saint Matthew in his iiij chapitre. And me seems that our
present life may be compared to a Royame. of which recounteth valere. how
sometime was a Royame. the which every year made a new king. And as long as
the year dured. the king was mayntened in great astate and in great richesses.
Bnt as soon as the year was passed. he was despoylled all naked / and ba^nysshed
ont of the Royame. And for his salayre they gaaf to him but an egg only. And
it happed that there was one king emonge the other. which aduysed him that in
the year that he should be king. he should send of his rychesses ynowh in to a
stran^ge contrry for to live in time coming. and for to mayntene his estate /
sith he should be banysshyd by the manner aforsaid / we ought then take example
of this king for to do well as long as welyue. For the time shall come when we
shall be banysshed ont of this world / and all naked sent hens Tixnne we ought
in the time of our life to make puruean^ce of good works. And send them in to
a stra^nge country. that is to say / in to heuene / There ought we to make our
tresour as Ihu^ christ admonesteth us. that we should make our tresour in the
heuene. For there is no manner of peril ne of thieves ne of persecu^ours. ne of
thing that may grieve. So then ought every man acquyre and get the Royame of
heaven / and that to do we should make dylygence / if we think and remember.
how in short time us byhoueth to deye /

How noman ought to be curyous of his scpulture capo. vo.
SEpulture curyor^ may be signefya^nce of pride and of vanyte. And singulerly
wha^ a man in his life do make and ordeyne it curyonsly / And takes therein
vayn glory. and vayn playsir. And in so dooyng he puts his soul in great
peril. And if thou say. that thou dooyst it only to the end that the people
pray for the / when they shall see thy portrayture / Thereto I ansuere to the.
that in my life I have seen many sepultures but I have not apperceyed that the
people is moved to deuoco^n / or to pray to god by cause of them / but I have
well seen much people behold advise. and Iangle by cause of such sepultures.
And me seems it is nothing aduenan^t. ne apperteyneth not to a synful creature
to have a sep ulture so curyous ne so enhannced / as many men have / For I
suppose that it is more to their dampnaco^n / than to thyr saluaco^n. All way
I say not but thou may in sum manner ordeyne for thy self a sepulture
acordyng to the seat that it ap^^teyneth to the / But keep the well / that
thou therein take no pride. For more syttyng should it be that such goods were
employed to shryne the bodies of saints. the which thou have employed to a
sepulture for the which art a syancer. and unworthy to be enhaunsed above
therthe hallowed. And to this purpos speaks saint Anstyn in his book of them
that be passed out of this world. How the glorious saints of the heuene hane
not retched of their sepultures. For som^e have be brent / som^e drowned /
other byheded. and other delyuerd to hounds and to beestis / And certainly the
sepulture served more to disporte of them that live than it does to the
preysyng of god. reproufyt of the^ that be deed like as witnesses saint austyn
m his book of the cite of god the xi ij chapter. And to the same purpoos we
read in the second book of vicas patram. how some time a good man saw an evil
man much honorably buried. and had a right curyo^ sepulture / And he sa we a
good man thrown in to the field and eten of bestes. wherefore this said good man
was angry / Then an angel aperid to this man that was angryand said to him.
My friend be nothing angry. For the curyous sepulture is for payment of the
evil man if he have in his living done any good / But the good man which was
eten of the hounds is hoolly rewarded in heuene. by which it apperith. that
the curyosite of seputures is not prouffytable. and certainly we read how
dyogenes commanded that after his death. his body should be delyuerd to the
birds and to bestes to ete. And when it was demanded the reason wherefore. he
ansuerde that the bestes after his death should do to him none harm / thaugh
they tare and despieced all his body And it should do great good to the bestes
to take of him their nature. and it is better so to do than do put it in
therthe for to rote. Also Tullius recou^teth in his first book of questions tul
enlanes. And semblably he recyteth how one demanded a philosophre named
Azagouas in what place he would that his body should be buried The which ansuerd
that he was content of all the places of the world. we read also how a tryan^t
menaced a philosopher named theodre. that he would deliver his body to the
bestes / the which ansuerd that after his death he retched nothing of any
sepulcre ne of such vanytes. As seneke recounteth the xviij chapter of the
book of tranquylite of courage. And pompeius in his iij book recyteth how the
king lir^irgis coma^nded that after his death he should be thrown in to the sea
/ Aunciently also many men would that their bodies should be eten / And
certainly saint Jerome in his book against Ionynyen / recyteth how the people
called messagiers had a custom to ete their parents. For it was better as they
said that they should ete them than the worms / And how be it that it is a
cuyl oppynyon. Nevertheless by the things abouesayd it appierith how the
au^cyent people were nothing curyous of their sepultures. truth it is a thing
reasonable for to require that is body be burryed in plaee hallowed / For sometime
the prayers that be said in hallowed places ben right prouffytable And to this
purpoos saint Austyn in his book of them that be passed out of this world
recyteth how a good woman did do burye her sone in the church of a martyr. in
hope that the presence of the martyr shall be much prouffytable to the soul of
her sone. And in deed by the prayers of the martyr his soul was much alleged
of his pain and was anon saved. As fyuably was shewede to the said good
woman. By which it apperith that how be it that curiosyte of sepulture be but
lytyl necessary / Nevertheless hallowed place is for to be demanded reasonable.
And therefore som^e au^cyents were much dylygent for to be buried in place
reasonable. Read we not how Abraham right diligently bought a field for to burye
therein his wife For he would not that she were buried in any earth but in his
owen as it apperith the xxij chapter of genesis. And Jacob required his sone
Joseph that he might be buried with his parents / as it apperith the xliiij
chapter of genesis. And of Moses we read. how when he passed out of egypt.
he transported the bones of Joseph in to the land of promyssson for to leye
them with his parents as it apperith in Exode the xiiij chapter / and know
thou that not only thou ought to think of thy sepulture. but also it is a
thing much reasonable for to burye the bodies of the pour people. and hereof we
read how the an^gel much recom^ended thobye by cause he was so much dylygent
for to burye and bring in earth / the bodies of the deed people as it apperith
in the first and second chapytres of his book. And semblably ought much to be
preysed Joseph a Nychodemus which were dylygent for to burye the body of Ihu^
christ as it apperith the xxvij chapter of saint Matthew. by which things
thou may well apperceyue / how for to burye other / thou ought to be right
dylygent and attendan^t / But of thyn own sepulture thou ought to take
lytyl head and not be curyous /

How a person ought to think on the day of dome cap.o. vij
If thou think on the Judgment fynall. thou shall be much afferd for to dod
evil as it is shewede to us by experyence of much people. that left to do
evil for free of Justice. And if thou dema^nde of me when shall be the day of
Ingement / I ansuere to the as does saint Austyn in his sermon that he made of
the Innocents. the which ansuerth to the same questyo^ sayengthat the day of
dome shall be. as who says now. or anon. For as thappostle says in a moment
and at one stroke shall thangel sown the trompe. and all shall arise and come
to the Judgment. There shall be much abashed they that shall be in sin For
nothing shall auaylle then to weep. ne none shall mow do thing that may
prouffyte to his saluaco^n The prayers of saints shall not then mow help
the. therefore thou ought whylest thou here lyuest wisely to advise the for
then thou shall see thy fayt and thy sentence to fore thyn eyes there shall be
thyn enymyes that shall accnse the / and shall dema^nde the. To whom thou shall
be delyuerd without remyssion for e^ more. And hughe says in his book of the
Ark of noah the viij chapter / that the elements and all creatures that have
don to the service shall demand Justice of the / The earth shall say I have
born the / I have nourysshyd the. The water shall say I have refresshed the and
have conforted the. and in like wise all creatures shall reproach the of their
benefaytes. in saying that they never served the but to the end that thon
sh^lcest serve god / whom thou have not served. And therefore we demannde reason
of the. as of him that has evil known the goods that god has done for him.
But thou may say that the day of Judgment shall not come yet in a great time.
And there to I ansuere the and say that the tokenes and signs of the day of
dome ben almost accomplysshyd. ne see we not how lecherye regneth. the which
sometime was cause of noes flood and of the perdyco^n of the world. and me
seems that lecherye semblably may give to us cause to doubt that the day of
dome be nyghe / For in marriage is lytyl loyalte or truth. In people of the
church lytyl chastyte. of whom speaks thappostle in his epistle to the
ephesiens saying. that lecherous people shall have no part in the Royame of
heuene / More I ansuere to the and say that many other signs ben
accomplysshyd. For the son and the Moon have lost their clerenes / And the
sternes ben fallen fro heaven / And there is none other thing to speak of but it
is come. For the church which ought to ly^hte all the world like as the
son / is now in these days derked. and in many manners entatched with vices.
And the moon. that is to wete the seygnorye temporell is now in this time
eclypsed and full of pride and of tyranny / And the sterres. that ^s to say
the clerks the prechours and the counceyllours ben fallen from heuene / For
they have left to say truth for tensye we and follow flaterye / By which
it apperith that the signs and tokenes of the day of dome and last Judgment
ben ynowh accomplysshyd. And if thou dema^nde me if Antecryst be come / I
ansuere to the that whether he be come or not come Nevertheless many be living
that do the works of Antecryst. and that may well be called his disciples /
For they ben false dissymplers and evil procrytes. and of such men antecryst
shall be / truth it is that som^e may say that the day of dome may be known
naturelly / to whom I ansuere. that it is nothing so. For god has not showed
it to man ne to an^gel. as it apperith in the book of thactes of thappostles /
and the same Witnesses saint Austyn in the first verse of the vij psalms. but
not withstondyng that in following som^e auctorytres and reasons may in this
matter som^e thing be said without to determyne any thing / For god is he only
that may determyne the day and hour of the Judgment as it playseth him Then
it should seem fro the beginning that the world shield fynysshein the end of
som^e thousands of years / And for as much as it is vj M vj Cxxxv year sith
the world was begone. therefore there lacks yet iij Exl year or theraboute
unto the day of dome And that it be so I afferme not ne say. but som^e
auctorytres speken of tho^sandes of years in spekyng of the day of Judgment.
And certainly the prophet david says that a thousand year ben to fore thyn
eyes as the last day. like as he would say that the world shall fynyssshe upon
the end of som^e thousand of years / More over saint John^ in his apocalypse
the xx chapter says. that sathanas shall be bond a Myere unto the end of the
world. and the prophet helye sath that the world shall dure vj Myere in
acountyng fro the time that he lived. and placo thimeon. says that the world
shall be renewed within xx Myere / By which things it apperith as if seemed at
the beginning that the world ought to fynysshe within the end of som^e
thousands of years. More over lauteutique says in his vij book the xxxj
chapter that the world shall endure vj Myere. And Albimazar in his second book
of conjunctions in the viij defference says that the tokenes of the world
chau^gen after the mutaco^n of Saturn And singulerly when he has made ten
reuoluco^ns the which amounte to iij C year or theraboute. whereof we have
som^e experyence. For after x. reuoluco^ns of saturn came Alexander. and the
Royam^e of perse was cestroyed. And x. reuoluco^ns after came Ihu^ christ which
took our humanyte and brought the new law to the world And x reuoluco^ns
after came Meny which contryued against tix paynems a new law And. x.
reuoluco^ns after came mahomet the contryner of a false law / And x.
reuoluco^ns after came Charlemayne which conquered thempyre / And x. reuoluso^ns
after came godefroy of boylone which conquered the holy and / And thus sum may
say that by such mutaco^n as land is / That they may know by astrologye the
deffyn^^^^ment of the world / But I am not of that oppynyon. for god knows it
only. And in this matere ought nothing to be affermed. like as saint Austyn
says in his second book of the cite of god the second chapter. After me
seems that how be it that thou know the day of Judgment / and suppose that it
shall not be in long time / Therefore as it not but that thou ought to dread
it as much. as it should be right shortly. For the day of thy death. the which
shall be right short / shall be the day of thy Judgment. seen that in the same
hour shall all be done with the / And never shall the sentence be changed / And
it is no doubt that if thou deye in evil estate in that hour / (...)


