A DISPVTATION OF THE CHVRCH, Wherein the old Religion is maintained.

V. M. C. F. E.

Ierem. 6.16. Ask of the old paths, which is the good way, and walk in it:
and you shall find refreshing for your souls.

LAVDA BILE NOMEN DOMINI


AT DOWAY, By MARCK WYON, at the golden Phaenix, 1629.

TO MY FRINDS IN ENGLAND.
DEAR FRINDS
I have understood of your troubles, and do take comfort in your constancy.
Your cause is clear: your religion that, which the son of God has taught.
In former time no other was in England. So much you know by the Histories and
Chronicles of the country; so you have been told by your parents, who saw the
profession of it, with their own eyes; so your ancestors do testify by their
wills and graves. Your Churches there, were built for the exercise of it; as
you can prove by the general form of them, by the crosses and pictures, by
the altars made for Mass. Ever since the conversion of the country from
Paganism by Saint Augustine and his fellows, monks, it has been there,
till of late: and S. Augustine brought it from Rome, where it had been common
from the time of S. Peeter; and S. Peeter learned it of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Those that are learned, if they will look into the Ecclesiastical History,
which diverse, and of late the worthy Cardinal Caesar Baronius, have compiled,
may see there (looking upwards to the Apostles time) this Religion descending
thorough all ages, in sacred esteem ever; the preachers, gods trumpets,
proclaiming it; the general counsels making room; the martyrs testifying the
truth of it with their blood; the light of miracles accompanying it all the
way; and worlds of people waiting on. The Society of those that profess it,
is the Church; and is diffused over the World, and Catholic: it is that
Church which in your Creed you do believe. This is the spouse of the son of
God, the woman clad with the sun, manifest unto all (that wilfully do not
shut their eyes) by her antiquity, clear succession, universality: and the
twelue-fold Apostolical glory does crown her head, or beginning. She has
been opposed by diverse Heresies, but still got the victory, bringing forth
Saints to Jesus Christ in the labor of persecution.

You know the counsel of the Scripture, Son, coming to the service of God,
prepare thy soul to temptation, and the affirmation of the Apostle is
general, All those that will live godly shall suffer persecut^on. The state of
the Church here is militant, and those are to be crowned that overcome. The
way to heaven is full of crosses: mockeries, stripes, and the sword, help us
on. This way those are gone, of whom the world was not worthy: afflic^ed,
needy, in distress. This way our blessed Sau^our went, who was here
contemned, scourgel, crucified. It is the King of Heavens high way. Our head
is gone before, all blood, and so entered into bliss: the Apostles, the
Martyrs, the Confesso^s; old Simeon too, and little Agnes, are gone after him
with their crosses: and we are bid, if will live eternally, to take up each of
us one, and follow.

To take the spoil of your goods with joy is to enbrace and kiss your cross.
There is no deliberation when I must leave gold or god: no comparison betwixt a
diamond in a gold ring, and the deity in eternity. O my dear frinds! you
have each of you a Jewel within your selves, richer then all the eye can see
without, fairer then the sun it self, and far above all the disposition of
the stars. The usurers Idol, gold, waxes pale, if you compare it, to the
burning sparkles of the chrysolite. In your Jewel you may see heaven and
earth, in the compass of the understanding. It has engraven in it the image
of allmighty God; and is, for nature next an angel, by grace companion with
him; as being to bear a part in the heavenly quire, and there without
astonishment to sing allelluia with those thousand thousand glorious
queristers, if the fault be not yours.

The Soul, having free will, had once lost it self; you may, by the means
taken to recover it, know the worth. The son of God, came from heaven down
to look it, and redeemed it with that which is better then the world, his
life. Those infinite wrongs which he suffered from men of all sorts; those
innumerable stripes which he received from the soldiers, whose cruelty made
him all a wound, the bitter passion of the cross, which no words are able to
express, was all for our redemption, for the soul. If you loose it now
again, you wrong his love, you deprive him of his right, you move his father
(whose angry looks are burning fire) to reueng. It is horrible to fall into
the hands of the living God. The pillars of heaven do tremble and dread at his
beck. He has measured the water with his fiste, and pondered the heavens with
a spanne. He looks on the earth, and makes it to tremble; touches the
mountains, and they smoke. If you keep it well, he will make it a heaven,
wherein he, with the father, and the holy Ghost, will dwell, forever. And your
bodies he will invest with ornaments of glory and immortallity, and place each
of you in a throne with himself in the court of heaven, where all are kings.
You shall dwell in the celestial Jerusalem, whose street is all of pure gold,
and walls, precious stone; where God is the Temple, and the light.

These things God has promised unto those who serve him, wherefore above all,
have a care of your religion. Your soul is your Jewel, and Religion is the
Jewel of your soul. Keep these well, and you shall be happy, though
persecution leave you nothing else. Each of you may have a common wealth, a
kingdom, within your selves if you please. No State more happy, no government
more sweet, then that is, where love commands, and virtues do obey. Let
Charity be Queen in your soul: and the Virtues, will all b^ there. Let men
see the streingth of your fait^ in your constancy, and the sanctity of it in
the candor of your conversation. Give all men the^r due: to whom tribute,
tribute; to whom Fear, Fe^re; to whom honor, honor. In your acti^ns be
circumspect, as it becomes Christians, who believe the eyes of God and Angels
are o^ them still: and, that each action is inrowled exactly, to be read and
censured, in the day of doom.

Lo^ke often on the lives of Saints, and by their example learn how you are to
carry your selves in your difficulties: you will do things with more ease,
when you see them do^ne before you: those were men^s we are. Be not afraid of
persecution. The prot^ction of allmighty God is more then a wall of br^sse:
they who trust in him are safe: mountains in ci^cuite of the holy city, and
our Lord round about his people. Nothing ca^ rob us of our souls, unless we
will: and if that be saved, we shall have all that God has, for we shall have
him. Our time in this world is but short: the sun runs it over with
infinite speed: and the post of nature is on the way (how near God only
knows) to give us notice of a dissolution, wherein, each of us being as it
were divided, one half is rendered to the earth to feed worms; the other,
carried away to the tribunal to hear a sentence of eternity. Happy are those
who prizing God solidly above all, and adhering to him as the fountain of all
good; take this journey with full resignation of their spirit, and die in the
Church's arms.

I send you this book, desiring you to p^ruse it. I would have willingly come
my self to have taken part with you, but employments tie^ me here. In my
youth, when I had lost my best frind, whose soul rest in peace, I lost a
great deal of my time: and, it seems, almighty God has so disposed of me,
that I must now repair the loss. If you find the thing less acc^unte then
you might have expected, you know^ my excuse. When two employments do meet^ in
a narrow understanding, and that but poorly lodged both do suffer. Those who
labored in ^epairing the walls of Jerusalem, whilst they did work with one
hand, were forced, in the other to take a sword. I fight but with one hand. The
faults and imperfections here, are mine; in the resolution the Catholic
world does agree: and you have the prayers of them all as long as you keep
your selves in their communion. You have also the prayers of all the Saints in
heaven, the communion of the Church reaching thither. And our Savior there
does mediate unto his Father in your behalf. You have God an advocate unto God,
the Son to the Father; do not fear: but serve him carefully, and he will
multiply his blessings on you: and (if we spend the few days of our
peregrination well) will bring us all in the end in to our country Heaven, to
the Church of the first borne, to the company of many thousands of Angels,
where there is perpetual Jubilee, where God is all in all. Then death shall be
no more, nor moorning, nor sorrow. There shall be no more hunger nor thirst;
neither shall the su^ne fall upon you, nor any heat* and God vv^l wipe away
all tears from your eyes. Fare ^ou well. And let us resign our selves wholl^
to the blessed will of God, and pray each for other that we may be saved.

Yours by manifold obligation^ F. E.


THe Ques^^on. Where a man is to seek Instruction in matte^ of Religion? The
Answer. In the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome. This resolu^^on is
here declared in three Propositions. 1. The Catholic Church, is assisted by
the Holy Ghost, to all ^^uth. the third Book. 2. And, is that which is in
Comm^^ion with the Sea of Rome. the second Book. 3. Not the ^ompany of
Protestants. the first Book.

The Bo^ke is so little it needs not an Index, in place of o^e, take this
direction;

God. li^. 2. cap. 4. Incarnation of the second Person. Ibid His Church
foretold. lib. 2. cap. 1. Raised and pr^pagated. lib. 2. cap. 5. Visibile.
lib. 2. ca. 1. and lib 3. ca. 1. 2. 6. Continued till now. lib. 2. cap. 2. and
3. The Holy Ghost assisting in it. lib. 3. cap. 1. to all Truth. 2.
fundamental and not fundamental. c. 3. The written Doctrine. lib. 4. cap. 5.
The Unwritten. ^^b. 4. cap. 10. Particular points of her doctrine pr^ued by
text of Scripture. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Her I^teriour Sanctity lib. 3. cap. 5. Exterior act of di^ine worship.
lib. 4. cap. 9. Transubsta^tiation in the Mass. cap. 8. Flesh and blood
reallie in the Sa^rament. cap. 6. and by Antiquity so believed. cap. 7. In the
Church, Priests; and a chief Pastor lib. 1. cap. 6. S. Peeter above the rest
of the Apostles, and Pastor of the Church. lib. 4. ca. 1. The Pope, his
Successor, and above other Bishops. cap. 2. President in general Counsels.
cap. 3. Counsels. lib. 2. cap. 3. and 7. assisted in proposing. lib. 3. c. 2.
3 4. and lib 4 cap. 10. Who a Catholic. lib. 2. c. 6. and lib. 3. cap. 4.
Resolution of Faith. Ibid. and. li. 3. cap. 4. and 5.

Answer to Objections made against, Universality. lib. 2. cap. 7. Sanctity.
lib. 3. cap. 5. Visibilitie. lib. 3. cap. 6. Succession and Unity lib. 2. ca.
7. and lib. 3. cap. 4. Infallibility. lib. 3. cap 5. and 7. And against our
Doctrine. lib. 1. cap. 4. and 5. and lib. 4. thoroughout.

The Protestants are not able to prove their Religion by Scripture. lib. 1.
cap. 4. 5. 6. nor by Antiquity. cap. 3. They should render account of
Predecessors agreeing in all points with them. lib. 3. c. 4. but cannot. lib.
1. cap. 2. the Waldenses neither were Protestants, nor had continual
Succession of their Church from the Apostles. lib. 1. cap. 1.

The young Reader may omit the ^. 5. and 6. Chapters of the first Book.

To him that has ministered the occasion of this book.
TO one, of the two papers which you had from me long ago, you have shaped, as
it seems, a kind of answer; yet not an answer neither, for you send him
that would have one, to look it in other men that are in print. For my part, I
was not willing at the sight of yours (which I espied by mere chance, and
never saw but once) to be made an April fool, and therefore would not be so
far at your command. Yet to declare that I was not satisfied, Presumed the
chief question, out of which the rest are easily resolved; and disputed it
more at large: putting down the conclusions together with their grounds; and
maintaining them against that which your self, or your abettors have objected.
I endeavored to do this briefly; but it so fared with me in this intellectual
business, as it does with such as breed: the child in the nativity is much
bigger then at the conception: the matter I speak of here, has an inward
inclination to dilate it self, and whilst I was writing, the discourse proved
a book. Where upon, being withal desirous to impart it to my frinds, I
determined to multiply my coppies by the print, when I could spare money to
discharge it. As I was expecting that opportunity, another occasion, arising
out of the late persecution, solicited me, to let it, without more delay, come
abroad: and I have yielded thereunto, though not without diffitcultie. I will
not address the thing particularly against you, partly because I dispute also
against others, with whom I have exchanged some papers as I did with you, and
am willing (if it may be) to be heard where they are: partly because your
discourse was not a direct answer to that I sent: and a posting direction of
half a sheet of paper, had been as much, as in way of reply, it could deserve
from me, or any other. You had handled the matter so, that indeed, I doubed
whether I were the man you meant by the name there put down: you knew me by
another; and whether I had ever used that, I could not then readily call to
mind. You will say peradventure, that a circumstance tied your tongue. This may
be: and therefore, bearing respect that way too, I will discover you no
further, but leave you at your liberty: though otherwise, being out of the
Kingdom, I might be more open then I am. You have infinitely wronged your own
soul, in offering to draw men from the communion the Church: and to lead
them into heresies, opposite directly to the word of God, and accursed by the
holy Ghost. Trouble not your self any further to dress up old shifts, that
have been worn out long ago. If you cannot prove your cause positiuely (as
none ever yet could, or will do as long as God is truth) hold your peace. The
more you maintain heresy, the deeper a lodging you bespeake your self in
hell. That you may escape that gulphe, I show you here S. Peeters Ship
fairly under sail toward eternity: and will reach you my hand, if you will
come into it.

F. E.

APPROBATIO.
EGo infrascriptus S. T. Facultatis Parisiensis Doctor, testor me legisse
tractatum hunc inscriptum A Disputation of the Church, hoc est, Disputatio de
Ecclesia, in libros quatuor partitum Authore F. E. in quo nihil inueni vel
contra fidem Catholicam Romanam, vel contra bonos mores; sed econtra, eandem
fidem Catholicam dilucide probatam, confirmatam and propugnatam, and horum
temporum haereses solid ac clare confutatas. In cuius rei testimonium
praesentibus subscripsi.

17. Maij An. 1629. ANT. CHAMPNEVS.

VIsa hac attestatione Doctoris Sorbonici, censeo idem opus vtiliter excudi
posse.

Actum Duaci die 28. Maij. 1629. GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theologiae Doctor and
regius ordinariusque Professor, Duacensis Academiae Cancellarius, and in eadem
Academia librorum Censor.

COurteous Reader, I have been forced to use a Printer who understood not the
language, therefore wonder not if thou find here errous in the print; as
division of syllables, transposition of letters, ill pointing, etc. In mending
one fault sometimes he made another; and I had not leisure to look nicely to
him. If any doubt occur in the reading, be pleased to have recourse to this
place, where the chiefest errors are amended. The lesser, committed by
mistaking the letters; or omitting, or adding, where the sense is not changed;
I will not speak of: because he who cannot in reading supply such defects, is
not able by himself, to make use of the discourse.

Page 51. l. 17. cup. page 52. l. 4. cup. p. 90. l. 19. sight. p. 96. l.
28. the kingdom. p. 105. l. vlt. the temple. p. 121. marg. In Oper. S. Leonis.
p. 127. l. 16. and Eutichians; after. p. 146. l. 18. we are. p. 151. l. 13.
then. p. 155. 19. save. p. 185. l. 20. word. p. 137. l. 15. near. p. 195. l.
13. sons. p. 206. l. 6. abettors. p. 237. l. 24. proceed. p. 235. l. 7. is
not. p. 239. l. 25 in Israel. p. 283. marg. fact. And. p. 298. l. 10.
reprehend; and his making others by his example to Iudaize, was. p. 300. l. 16.
in our. p. 340. l. 7. of nature. p. 344. l. 6. tripping. p. 347. marg.
vnitatis. p. 359. l. 16. judgment. The. p. 367. l. 3. therefore. p. 376. l. 14.
it is a. p. 403. l. 8. of all. l. 22. thy. p. 405. marg. l. 6. 4. p. 410. l.
15. omit. very. p. 412. l. 27. and p. 413. l. 1. 2. it. wrong charact. p. 416.
l. 12. is. p. 424. l. 4. hold. p. 430. l. 7. a living victime. p. 433. marg.
omit, Origin etc. p. 435. l. 32. if you believe the. p. 441. l. 4. testimony of
S. Cypr. vnperf. The leaves at the top, are ill numbered: but I follow them
as they are. Some, of those English authors which I have cited, I had not by
me, and therefore was forced to cite them out of others: and out of latin, so
that I may have missed to give the same words, but have kept the sense.

p. 129. l. 28. an. 680. Fathers 289.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE WANT OF EVIDENCE for the continual Visibilitie and
Existence of the Protestant Religion and Church.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Declaring that unto Catholics demau^ding evidence of the
Protestant succession and visible existence at all times in the world since the
Apostles, no satisfaction is given by recourse to the Waldenses and such as
they were.
IT were good in the beginning for the greater perspicuitie of my discourse, to
define the thing Protestant, whereof I am to speak in this book: but Martine
Luther and John Calvin your Apostles, and authors of your sect or religion as
you call it, so detested each others doctrine when they were alive, that they
cannot yet endure one definition being dead. In regard of this I was once about
to leave out the Lutheran party which in England is of less note, and to suit
our English with a definition for their turn: but this was loathsome to the
Puritan who by noe means can abide to be shut up with the Parlamentarian
within the same terms. It seemed therefore not amiss (neglecting all private
differences) to content my self with that wherein they assented, and to make a
general notion of the Protestant in common. This I thought was easy and might
serve well enough. But eieing the substance of Protestancie nearer to take
measure of the thing, whereby my definition might be fit, I found noe constant
being, but uncertainty in the essence of it. This substance being as you say
points fundamental: and these, more or less as every Spirit will: which
Spirit is diverse not in the multitude only, but in the same man many times.

The Moon was abroad in the could frosty nights without cloethes, and her
mother pitying her spoke to Mercury (as the tale is told) for a coat:
Mercury taking measure when she was full, a fortnight after or thereabouts
brought the garment but found her changed, and the coat a great deal to
big. Home he went again to cut it, and returning then it was to little, and
with all his skill he could never make it fit: the Moon being some times
thick, some times slender in the wast: sometimes horned, sometimes round.
Wheruppo^ he despaired of the work and gave it over. A hard task it were for
a painter to represent Proteus in a picture, but it is harder far to make a
definition of your Church: her essence or substance does ever vary, and is
sometimes greater, sometimes less; never constantly the same. Yet because I
am to speak of it, and without some kind of notion this cannot well be, I take
here a Protestant for a man of the religion (so you call it) now current in
England: and the Protestant Church, I take, for a company of such men.

3. Now that you cannot prove by good evidence, the CONTINVAL SVCCESSION or
existence of this company, this religion, this Church, at all times ever since
the Apostles until this day, it is by long experience very manifest. Ever
since Luther and Calvin did begin to spread their doctrine, it has been
demanded: and your men have endeavored to make answer, having examined to
this end and purpose, all Books and monumentes that are extant: and yet, after
infinite inquisition, noe such evidence can be found. Sometimes indeed you name
some men of diverse Sects and Religions, in which kind Illyricus has labored
hard: but when he comes to the thing expected, that is, to prove they were of
your religion, there he leaves you; whereas it is this only which is expected
from a Scholar, for every prating fellow can affirm what he list. It were not
hard for an unknown vpstart, to lay claim to a very noble Petegree, and
great Dominions, but without evidence he will not be admitted, and believed.
It is EVIDENCE that we look for; show the Proof of that you say.

4. Being urged again and again with this, you name in fine the poor Beggars
of Lions, of Waldo their author, called Waldenses: wherein you do merely spend
time and cozen simple people. You know that your own men rejected their
communion, and it has been told you often, Protest. Apol.
they agreed not with you: The matters of your difference have been named and
are noted in your own authors, and the thing I demanded, was your proof, See
Prot. Apol. trac. 2. c. 2. sec. 3 and R. Chalced. de essent. prot. relig. lib.
2. cap. 5.
your evidence: where is it? where is your proof that the Waldenses, who lived
before Luther, (for of them only I inquire) were of the Religion now curra^t
among you? and, where is the Catalogue of their Continual Succession, ever
since the Apostl'es time? and, Evidence of their Communion with Nations, and of
the public profession of that Religion, in all the world? These things I did
expect: this Catalogue I must see; or, the demand of continual Succession,
will rest ever unsatisfied, as it has done hitherto.

5. Those men dissented from you in the point of Errant in eo quod non credunt
solam fidem absque operibus iustificare: Lutherus in Colloq. Germ. c. de Suerm.
Coc. t. 1. l. 8. a. 4. De imputata iustitia nihil norunt. Luth. ibid.
Justification, Vide R. Chal. de essen. rel. prot. c. 6.
which is the ground and foundation of Protesta^cie: and, held the real
Confess. Bohem. a. 13. and Calvin says of their Confession, Formulam
Confessionis amplecti, quae sine discrimine, in vnum fasciculum damnationis
omnes in voluit, qui pracise non fat^ntur panem esse prasentissime Christi
corpus (hic recitamus eorum verba) an fas sit Christiano homini, videritis, nos
certe non putamus. Epist. 244.
presence, in our sense: wherefore they were not yours. Secondly, they held
sundry damnable opinions, which you dare not approve: as, that he which is in
mortal sin, Illyric. in Catal. test. de VVald. ex Syl. and Rain. Ite^que
Anto. and Guide. de Wall. dogm. Aeneas Sylu. Hist. Bohem. Luxemb. in Paup. de
Ludg. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Cor. 7.
falls out of all dignity thereby, whether it be Ecclesiastical or Civil,
and therefore is not to be obayed: that lay men and women may eonsecrate and
preach: that every good layman is a Priest, that the Apostles were lay men:
that clergy men should have no possessions. They condemned Marriage, (a manifest
Heresy:) Judgment to blood, and oaths. Thirdly your own men refused their
communion, as you know by Came. de Eccl. in Bohem. etc. p. 273.
Camerarius, Morg. tract. de Eccl. p. 79. and 124.
Morgernstern, Calu. Ep. 278.
Calvin, Melanc. in Consilijs par. 2. page 152.
Melancthon, Schlus. Catal. tom. 3. p. 188. And see Jewel, Pantaleon and
Osiander of the Albigenses, cited prot. Apol. Sec. cit.
Schlusselburg, and others; and charge them with maintayning obstinately gross
errors, and Heresy. Fourthly, they had no Hierarchy, having amongst them no
Bishops, Fox acts. mo^ p. 628. Sim. Voyo^ Cata. p. 132 Osiand. Epitom. and
their own tenet, supra.
nor Priests, but al being lay people: and therefore could not be the Church of
God. Fifthly, Waldo a Merchant of Lions, and an unlearned lay man, who lived an.
1170. was the first and chief of that Sect: so that, they failed in the point
of Antiquity, and Continual Succession ever since the Apostles, which is the
thing whereunto you were to answer: And, will never do, till you put down
some in every age, and bring unquestionable Evidence for them, which will never
be.

6. If (notwithstanding the contrary judgment of your men) you will join to
their Church, and maintain the Succession of your Church by them, Heb. 5. v.
4. Romans 10. v. 15. Confess. Bohem. a. 13. Caluinianos VValdensiu^ Co^fessionem
d^prauasse ostendit Conrad. Schlussel. Theol. Calu. li. 2. art. 6.
who could not ordain you Priests and Bishops, having themselves none; nor
teach, being themselves unsent: you must prove cleerele, first that they had
lawful vocation and ordination: Secondly that they held not the forsaid
errors and Heresies, or you must admit that you hold them also: Thirdly that
they did agree with you in all other points; particularly descending to each.
As in the manner of the real presence; the Bohemian Confession does say they
did not, but that they understood the words properly as we do. Luth. supra
cit. R. Chalc. sup. cit. Haud scio an vsquam diu public suam fidem sint
prosessi, etc. praeterquam in Bohemia, and in quadam valle in radicibus Alpiu^.
Illyr. de VValdens. supra. Epiphan. haeres. 61. August. haeresi 40.
that they held justification by faith, as you: Luther says they knew it not:
yet this is the soul, and foundation of Protestancie, in the judgment, and by
the confession of your own men. And, so you must on to the rest, where you
will find many of your own who will co^tradict you to your face. Fourthly, you
must bring proof that those men were in the world before Waldo: and that of
them there was a continual succession ever since the days of the Apostles. I
speak not of those Heretics called Apostolici whereof S. Epiphanius and S.
Augustine speak, though they condemned also marriage, and having of
possessions, and therefore held in part the forenamed heresies, that is two of
them, but I speak of the Waldensis: I demand good proof and evidence that
such men were existent in the world ever since Christ ascended. And I will not
account it satisfaction if you tell me they say so, for I believe neither them
nor you, but demand proof. Bring forth your monumentes, and read us the
names of their Bishops, or some of them at least: for there were such among
them if theires were the Church, Act. 20.2^ Ephesians. 4.11.13. Ephesians. 4.12.
since Gods Church is governed by Bishopes, there were Pastors in it ever, if
that were the mystical body of Christ; for Christ appointed such till all
meet. Edantorigines Ecclesiaru^ suaru^; euolua^t ordinem Episcoporum suorum,
ita per Successiones ab enitio decurientem, vt primus ille Episcopus a^q^e ex
Apostolis vel Apostolicis viris, qui tame^ cu^ Apostolis per^euerauerint,
habuerit auctorem and antecessore^. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae. Apostolicae sensus
suos deferunt. Tert. Praescript. c. 32.
And you must not ask them, for they will show you none but lay persons. Let
us know what Councelles they have kept, and where; what Nations they have
converted unto Christ, and by whom, what Saints and Martyrs have been among
them, what Churches they have erected, what Heretics they have condemned and
where and how; and with what Nations and Princes they have communicated: and
bring good Evidence to prove it. If this be the true Church, conceal her not,
God is not ashamed of his Church; if these people be the company of holy
ones, let us see their actions and good works. If there were a continual
succession of such men, let us see their monuments, otherwise we have noe
reason to believe that there were indeed any such, in the time betwixt Waldo
and our Saviors ascension, which are more then a thousand years. If you will
have us believe there were such all that time, bring your proof. Let us know
I say (and should repeat this question often, least you wittinglie do forget
it) where they were from time to time, what they did, who were of their
communion, or took notice at least of the^ as frindes or foes, what writers
they had, what Bishops, what Councels, and this from age to age, till you come
to the Apostles days. The question is clear, the matter is of fact, the thing
of moment: You have been searching these hundred years, all papers, and
libraries, and scrowles: where is your answer, where is your evidence?

6. If this were all done, which will be done when time runs backward, and
when every thing whatsoever any minister for a shift can desire or imagine, may
be found every where, there would remain yet a further task, and that were to
show, that this religion of the Waldenses, 2. Book. 1. Chapter
were universal in regard of place or Nations. But I need not urge further,
for you are grauelled in the very first. If you should offer to name Hus or
Wickleffe, I would proceed after the same manner with either of them, and
demand proof of their continual succession, ever since our Savior Christ
did ascend, and of their communion with Nations to verify the Prophecies of
the Old Testament, and our Saviors intention in the New: and of their
agreement with you in all points. I would demand evidence of all this, of
VVickleffe, of Hus, or of you for the^: and desire to see the face of that
Church, her Acts and Monumentes, her VVriters, her Pastors, etc. And this with
great reason before I believe it, and embrace the communion of it, and venture
my soul in it: because, that which I demand is hitherto unknown, not to me
only, but to all the whole world.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. That no satisfaction is given by recourse to our Church.
7. THe nakedness of your cause appearing manifestly thorough the beggarie of
the Waldensis, you would hide your selves feign in our Church, and therefore
flinging of that poor shift as insufficient, you say next that your
succession has been continued by us. But you may not rest here. The thing
which we demand is a continual succession of Protestants, that is, of men
professing the religion now current in England. Bring your evidence that in
every age there were some of these men. We are not of your religion, we have
openly condemned it as heretical in the Council of Trent: and you do
persecute ours in England, condemning many points, of faith which we believe:
so that if you take us to continue you to the primitive Church and to the
Apostles, this continuation is not Protestant: whereas a Protestant continuation
is the thing we demand. Go not to fast; but consider well what here we
have in hand: I demand a continual succession of men of your Religion, not of
ours: you are to give account of your own predecessors, not of mine: of
Protestants, not of Papists. You must show your own Cards, and not mine, if
do mean to win the game. We do frequent the Mass, believe unbloody
Sacrifice, adore the sacred Host, pray to Saints, worship Angels, believe a
Purgatory, pray for the dead, honor Images. We lay open our consciences to
our Priests, and acknowledge in them power to Absolve us, and a divine precept,
obliging us to Confess. We believe that our Savior does impart unto the
reconciled, power to redeem, by good and penal works, the temporal pain due
to sin, and that the Church has power, by way of Indulgence, to release it:
We believe Traditions, Merit, Justification by works, Observation of the
commandments, and works of Supererogation, Vows; and a fuller Canon of the
Scripture then you do. In our Hierarchy we have Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, and others: all which in substance you have not; but an outward
appeara^ce only. We acknowledge in the Pope a superiority over the other
Bishops in the Church: in General approved Counsels, an Infallibility: and
in each Member of our Community, an Obligation of conformity in judgment to
the judgment and Decrees of these Counsels. In these, and such other things,
essential to our Religion, we are distinct from you, and therefore it is
childish, to name us for men of your Religion.

It is true that you pretend to believe some things which we do; as the
Trinity, and Incarnation, and some parts of Scripture: Nevertheless, in other
things within the compass of divine faith and religion, we are distinct, as
by the premises it does appear. All Heretics that ever were, believed
somethings with the Church, but that sufficed not to make them of the same
Religion with it, or among themselves. Jews believe somethings which
Christians do, so do the Turks, and the Naturalists who believe a God:
notwithstanding, Catholics, Jews, Heretics, Turks and Naturalists, are
not ALL of ONE RELIGION. Horses and Asses are living Creatures, but not of the
same species with a man. Lutherans and Caluinistes, are not Catholics. The
Pope is no Protestant, the Bishops of our Church are not of your communion, our
Priests are consecrated to say Mass, our People believe as their Pastors: All
abhor your Heresy, and detest your Schism. Your Books are against our
faith: your laws against the exercise of our Religion. You accuse us of
Idolatry, Superstition, Error, Heresy. Name others, name YOUR OWN: and a
CONTINVALL SVCCESSION of them; name not us.

Your Religion in that it is distinct from ours, is made up, partly of new
devised stuff, partly of old rags, left unto you from the torn coats of
Iouinian, Donatus, Aerius, Vide Coll. R. Chalc. c. 23.
Nouatus, and such other, found in old nastie monuments. If upon her now, for
pity, you will pull the Waldesian habitte, spoken of in the former chapter,
the beggars coat I mean, represe^ting, with party colored patches, the
pieces of her co^stitution; and lace it with the rags you find in Illyricus,
it will be very trim. But, how soever you may find some rags in
Antiquity; it is still evident, that after a busy search, made by all your
deuines, into libraries and records; you are not able to prudence a continual
succession of that kind of men whereof you are, or of that whereof VValdo was,
from waldo vpwardes to the Apostles. I do not say a Catholic or universal
succession of them, but a succession only, though never so small, you have not
in every age, a Nation, nor one Diocese, which were very little, nor so much
(such is your beggarie) as one man. Much more impossible is it for you to
produce a succession Catholic or universal in that sort, that in every age
and every year since the Apostles, it has been common to many Nations: which
is the condition of the true Church of God.

9. You answer again and learnedlie as you think, that in Fundamental
points, the Romans were Protestant, and therefore are well alleged, Are the
negative propositions, in the Bible, Gods words, and de fide? or w^ll you have
them all blotted out.
to satisfy the demand: though they were otherwise in not-Fundamentall. Or as
others cut out the distinction, in Affirmatiues they were yours, in Negatiues
they were not. Which distinction is laid in the way to catch woodcockes, but
hinders not the course of our argument. For the Roman Catholic, holding
those points which he does, is noe Protestant, nor of the religion current now
a days among you: And the Protestant is no Roman Catholic, his Religion is
not that, which is current in Italy, in Spain, and other places united to the Sea of Rome: wherefore in assigning, Roman Catholics you do not assign a
Protestant succession, whereas the thing demanded is a Protestant succession,
If I had been to dispute with the Waldensis in Bohemia, I would have exacted
the like proof for the Religion current among them.
that is (as I have told you many times) a company of men of the religion
current now in England whereof some have succeeded others and this must have been
ever since the Apostles days if the succession be continual since that time.
We do not Demand of you whether we have a succession in our Church, that
we demand of you is a succession of your own: of Protestants not of
Papists, of men professing the religion which you do. Show this succession:
produce your evidence to prove that such men have been in all ages, and then
we will examine your fundamentalles, giving you time till then for to think
how many and which they be: for assure your selves the common people do
perceive your insufficiency in answering to the demand, which you cannot fly
without crossing and contradicting your own selves. For, I ask you, is a
Papist a Protestant in religion? you answer, no. I demand again: give me
the Protestant succession, the Church Protestant of former ages? You answer,
the Papists succession, was the Protestant succession and the Papisticall
Church was the Church Protestant. By which answer granting and affirming the
Papisticall succession and Church to be the Protestant succession and Church,
you do grant and affirm a Papist to be a Protestant which before you had
denied and still do. They see also that a Pelagian a Luciferian, an Arian, or
any other heretic may defend himself as you do, for each of them held the
true religion in part, each held some affirmatiues and was negative (as you
speak) in other things: and each pretended that he did not mistake in
fundamentalles.

10. And whereas you say that you err not in fu^dame^talles, I answer first,
that you speak at ra^dome and by conjecture mearlie, for to this day you know
not which all the fundamentalles are: and therefore cannot be certain whether
you believe every one of them, or do not. I answer secondly, that the
point of justification is the ground and the soul of your religion and you
mistake in that, and contradict the scripture directly in it and therefore
err fundamentallie. You teach also that the Catholic Church may err in
matters of divine faith, which is a gross fundamental error. You deny the
real presence and holy sacrifice in the Mass, which is likewise a
fundamental error. And by these and such like you are divided from the
Catholic, and so fundamentallie different and divided. Neither is it any
matter whether these and the like erroures be expressed in propositions
affirmative or negative, an Athyest by reason of one negation is of No Religion.
(as they may be either way) for by negative errors, a man may be an
Heretic, Turk, Jew, or Athiest according to the verities which in his
errors he does contradict. To conclude: it is clear that these are shifts to
delaie time and to deceive fools: for the thing we demand, is a Catalogue of
Protestant men such as in England you are: of men holding those affirmatiues
together with those negatiues which you do hold: of men consenting with you in
your religion and belief entirely, The like argument I would make against the
Waldenses, Hussites, or any other: for a man may believe the Trinity or the
Creed with others and yet differ in Religion as we and you do.
whether the things be called fundamental or be not called so, for we care
not how you call the^: of men which without any trick, distinction, paring
of, or adding to the^, may flatly be said to be of the religion ow curra^t
there in England: of such finally as being looked into thoroughlie and beheld
round about, are absolutely. Protestants or men of your religion. Produce the
Catalogue of these men: let your evidence come to light.

11. Your men in the beginning wanting company, and disliking the religion of
the Waldenses, and Hussittes, would feign have shaked hands with the Grecians,
and made an offer: but they were instantly refused and shaken of,, Censura
Orientalis Ecclesiae.
as the world does well know by their Censure in print every where. You have
told me since, and vnskillfullie, that the Ethiopians are of your religion:
being demanded proof, because it is against histories, and against their
Liturgies which are extant, you are able to bring none; neither can I imagine
to what purpose you should run thither, unless it were to get an out side
which might keep color with the inside of your Church. I remember your
doctrine is, that her soul is ever stained with actual and Original sin,
and that all her actions are fouled in the same puddle, to which doctrine of
your own, I may add by experience that she has a foul mouth; if you will
needs have all this, walk in a black out side too, you may go on with your
conceit, but wrong not other men. The Aethiopians as black as they are, do
loath and abhor the communion of your Church, and are the more unwilling to
hear of it, Luther. Respons. ad Dialog. Syluest. Pri. Calu. in Antidot Conc.
Tri. sess. 6. c. 12.
because she is not ashamed to profess, that she cannot keep the
commandments with all the help she has from God almighty, and
co^sequentlie that she cannot for bear blasphemy, nor error, nor witchcraft,
nor adultery, nor murder, nor robbery; in fine, that she cannot possibly
observe that, Minimum legis mandatu^ onus Aetna grauius. Calu. Ibid.
which equity does require and God command. And for this among other reasons,
not Ethiopians only, but all the rest of the world loathe her, and wish she
were retired again into her hole of inuisibilitie.

12. As touching your manner of answearing, I wish you to consider that you do
not satisfy our demand, nor ever will, by naming such as agree not with us in
some one point or more, White. Illyricus.
unless you prove likewise that they do agree with you, and be of the religion
which in England you profess. For example, if you name a man which denied the
Popes primacie, Ob. The Papists have not a Succession of such as they are.
Answ. l. 2. c. 6. and l. 3. c. 4.
as you do, if this man consent not with you in other things, it is childish
to think you satisfy our demand by naming him: he may be in other points of
the same mind with us, or with Arians, or with Nestoria^s, or with Eutichians,
or Mahometans, or Jews, or Athiestes, and therefore not a Protestant, unless you
admit all kind of men into your communion, and will have the Protestant Church
to be the congregation of them all. And this too, would not serve, for the
thing we demand is a catalogue or succession of me^ whose religion is the
same with yours and current there in England. In like ma^nner if you should
name a man which agreed with you in one half of your positions, and in the
other half dissented, this man were not yours: yea less then half, or a
quatter, or the tenth part, is Enough to divide a man from communion, and from
unity in belief, as you may see in S. Epiphanius, S. Epiph. op. Panar. S.
Aug. de Haeres. tom. 6.
and S. Augustine. That you may the better conceive me, suppose one of your
fellows is become an Arian, I ask you whether he be of your religion, and
whether his religion be current there in England or not: if it be, then
Arianisme is there curra^t though the Roman profession be abhorred; if it be
not? the^ a few, yea one point is enough to divide you in religion from that
man, and him from you. Now those men which you bring, were each of them
contrary in many points, as Waldo, Berengarius, Wickleffe: and therefore
divided, and distinct in religion from you. Neither will your distinction of
points fundamental, and not fundame^tall, help you here, both because those
men did differ in your fundamental and most essential point of Protestancie,
that is, in the matter of Justification: as also because errors in other
points besides those which you call fundamental, are sufficient to make
distinction in religion. which is evident and by your selves cannot be denied,
for you say that Papists hold all fu^dame^talls, and yet their religion is
not yours. But of this I have spoked already, and need not repeat it. I
only add now, that a man by your principles may deny every verse which is
in the Bible, and obstinately too, excepting that only which is expressed in
the three Creedes, and Baptism, and the Supper: and yet be of the same Church;
and communion with your self. And what think you of your fellow that says
further that Arian Churches are also to be accounted the Churches of God,
because they hold the foundation of the Gospel. If this hold, Morton. of the
Kingd. of Isr. and the Church. p. 94.
what makes an heretic? what communion do you refuse? what Church among
Christians can be false, If all the Bible but twelve propositions, or there
aboutes, if the Incarnation, if the Trinity, if the Christians God may be
denied, and the deniers be accounted the Church of God? It restes that you say
now that the Turks are also of the same Church and religion with your selves.

13. A like observation to the former I would have you to reflect on, when our
me^ demand, White.
what Church we went out of and what precedent Church did oppose it self to
our religion, and contradict it. We do not ask whether any man ever did
oppose any part of our belief, we know there were such, there were some which
did oppose the deity of our Savior, some the Deity of the holy Ghost, some
the real Presence, some Images, etc. this we know: but the demand requires
proof of a Protestant Church (or any other, if you be weary of defe^ding your
own) which being before ours, did examine, judge, and condemn our religion.
If your men will give satisfaction to the question, they must answer this:
they must assign a visible Church always extant, which did still condemn
our religion, whenever we appeared; and being one in it self, was still
against us at all times when we were.

Your last answer is that the Church of God was all infected with erroures for
many hundred years, which errors were such notwithstanding (say you) as
destroyed not her essence. white.
And this conceit you declare in the example of a leprouse man. For your
Church I admit easily that it is infected with errors: The Church of God is
not, as you shall hear in the third book, where that matter shall be
examined: in the mean time I repeat the former argument and put it thus.
Either all Christians before Luther did err in Matters of religion, some
only, or none at all? If none at all did err, Then why would you mend that
which by your confession was not before amiss? why trouble you the world to
bring in a new religion, without which you confess it was well before? If
all of them did err in matters of religion, then your religion did not come
down to you from the Apostles by a succession continual, as you pretend: your
faith and religion was not always in the world: the Gospel was not sincearlie
and incorruplie professed at all times: I add further, if al did err, then
you have undertaken a task impossible in your own judgment, in offering to
maintain a perpetual existence or being of your religion, and you quarrel
with all that went before. And where then was the all teaching spiritte? did he
mistake the true doctrine or did Christ break his word? If some only did
err and not all, give us a Catalogue of some of the^ who did not err: let us
hear their names, the place of their aboade, the profession they were of, the
time they lived in: produce a Catalogue, a Continual Catalogue of such me^ as
agreed in doctrine with you, such as held the religion now current in England:
who were they? whence were they? where were they? hold up your head man! open
your eyes, and look the question in the face.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. That no satisfaction is given to the demand by recourse
unto Antiquity.
15. HAd your religion been such, that you could have given account and
evidence of her continual existence in the world, there would yet remain a
greater task behind, which were to prove the general communion it had with
Nations, and that it was and is Catholic in that respect: that it did, and
does consent, with Antiquity: with the Apostles doctrine: and with the
Scripture for this must be proved, and exactly too before we receive it, See
the Protest. Apol. and the Prud. Balance.
and leave that which has, been generally professed in England well near a
thousand years together, and was all that space the known religion of the
Christian world. The true religion is such as I have said, and therefore if you
will have us pray with you, first show that your Church is thus ample, thus
Catholic, thus grounded, and ours not: for until you prove this, which will
never be, you may not hope that we will come out of our Church into yours. To
proceed therefore. I demand evidence that your religion, that I say which in
England is now curra^t, has, been generally in the communion of the Christian
world, and I demand such evidence as may command a wise man to believe it.
Your answer to this in effect is, that in the first six hundred years it was
so, though you will not be tied to give account of it afterward. By which
evasion I do gather, that you apprehend the former argument as a ghost
haunting and affrighting you seeing that for fear of meeting it again, you
have stepped over a thousand years together to take sanctuary among the
Fathers in their Church. I was about to say you were ill advised to adventure
yourselfe thither, where Iouinia^s, Nouatia^s, Donatistes, and other your
progenitors were condemned and accursed, but considering your case better I see
that fear would not let you advise at all, but cast you, no matter whether, so
it were far enough out of my way.

16. Now therefore I follow thither, but first observe how you dare not avouch,
and in effect do deny, that the religion you maintain was openly professed,
received publicly, for nine hundred years before Luther: which is but could
encouragement for men to come to, or to stay with you: who pretending to give
account of a continual succession and ever visible Catholic Church, do come
so short of the thing expected that you can show none in all the world for
nine hundred years together and this, which you have said, being wrested out
of you upon the rack, (and much against your will, because infinitely
prejudicial to your cause) I take for an effect of the former argument, which
you have not ben able to answer yet, nor ever will be. The like issue it has
often had before, for your writers and best learned men, having the space of a
hundred years together been urged and importuned with this question, have
laboriouslie searched all records, turned over and over all authors, examined
all writings, with that industry, men are to suppose, which a cause required
wheruppon eternity does depend, and yet, after infinite inquisition, cannot
find such a Church in former time as yours is: and hereupon have confessed
that the Christian world was of our Religion before Luther, not of yours:
imagining hereby, a general Apostasy from the faith to have ouerrunne the
whole world. Call. praef. Instit.
Hence Calvin in his Institutions says, that in the ages past there was no
face of a true Church: and that the true Religion was drowned and overthrown
for many ages. Whittaker says no religion but the papisticall had place in the
Church: Whittak. cont. Dur. p. 274.
and, we know says he as plainly that the Church has perisshed as thou
know a man to be dead. The Popes tyranny says Luther has extinguisshed the
faith many ages. Luth. Capt Babil. c. de Bapt. Perk. Expos. Creed p. 400. Simon
Voyon Ep ad lect. Hutter de sacrif. mis. p. 377.
Before the days of Luther says Perkins, for the space of many hundred years
an universal Apostasy ouerspred the world. When Boniface was installed, says
an other, the whole world was overwhelmed in the dregs of Antichristian
filthiness, with superstitions and traditions of the Pope. another, I grant
willingly that the papist Idolatry has invaded all most all the world,
especially these last thousand years. another, Hospin. Hist Sacram l. 2. p.
157.
in the time of Gregory the great all kind of superstition and Idolatry has
as a sea ouerflowed all the Christian world, no man resisting. Another the
Papisticall and Antichristian Reign began about the year 316. after Christ,
reigning universally, and without any debateable co^tradiction 1260. years,
Napp. on the Revel. p. 68.
the Pope and his clergy during all that time possessing the outward visible
Church of the Christians. another. For certain, through the work of
Antichrist the external Church, Seb. Franc. Ep de abrog. stat Eccl.
together with the faith and sacraments vanished a way presently after the
Apostles departure: and for these 1400. years the Church has been no where
external and visible. another, the true Church decayed immediately after there
Apostles time. Fulk answer to Counterf Cath. p. 35.
I have a horror to recite, what the bouldnes of your men does avouch further
towching the Christian Church in common; and her Apostasy from the faith,
contrary to the sense of all Antiquity, and to the judgment of the Christian
world, yea contrary to the promises of Jesus Christ, and to the covenant of
almighty God, as hereafter I will show. Mean while compare these textes
unto your doctrine of the Church: In the later days shall be prepared the
mountain, Isay 2.
the house of our lord in the top of mountains, and it shall be raised above
the little hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. Thou shall not be called
any more forsaken, and thy land shall not be any more called desolate, Id. c.
62.
but thou shall be called my will in her, and thy land inhabited, because our
lord has taken complacence in thee, and thy land shall be inhabited. Id. c. 59.
My spirit that is in thee and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed, says our lord, from hence forth and for ever.

17. The Church in the Scripture is so ample that All nations flow unto it: so
established and so dear unto Christ that she is no more forsaken, but her la^d
ever inhabited: so mind full of God, that she has his words ever in her mouth:
and by this, she is ever existent, ever visible. That Church or whore which you
hunte after, perished long ago, for many ages she was not seen, her faith
was extinguished, her religion drowned, she was no where visible, she had no
face, she vanished presently, immediately after the Apostles days. Our
Religion in the mean time has been universal many hundred years, it has
over flowed the Christian world none resisting, and reigned universally
without any debateable contradiction these thousand two hundred sixty years.
And thus much of them both you confess.

18. I come now to speak of the religion of the Church primitive, or first six
hundred years as you measure it, and object that you do not, nor ever will be
able to convince by clear and sufficient evidence, that the Christian Church
in those times was of the religion current now in England: and therefore you do
not convince our understandings, that we should leave that religion which a
thousand years together was current here in England, being then also by your
own confession the religion of the Christian world, and communicate with your
congregation. And, to show you here how hard a task you have in hand (being
to give euidenee of the consent of those times with you in religion) I will put
three considerations in your way, which declare the difficulty, and indeed,
the impossibility of the task. The first shall be the judgment of those who
lived since that time, and before us: the second, the testimonies of the
Fathers the^ selves who lived in that primitive age: the third, the confession
of your own prime deuines; and these I will run over as briefly as I can.

19 First therefore our Religion (or Papistrie, as you call it) had possession
of the Christian You confess the same as we have seen above nu. 16.
as all histories do prove cleerlie: and these Christians all, on their
Salvation have deposed that theirs was the very same religion with that which
was common in the first six hundred years and received from the Apostles and
from Christ himself. Among them were great Scholars, grave Prelates and
holy me^ in great abundance, and greater means to know which was the
religion of their forefathers then are now: wherefore the question being of fact
only, it is not possible to resolve it better now, then those could resolve
it then. The question, I say, is now and then was, of fact: as, whether the
known Church of God spread over the world in the sixth age for example, did
frequent mass, adore the blessed Sacrament, confess their sins to Priests,
fast lent, pray to Saints, and the like: what we know of these things, we
have by the relation or writings of others which were before us: for we cannot
see so far immediately with our own eyes, nor immediately hear them speaking
in that age which is past many hundred years ago. Those before us did learn
of others that were elder: the fourteenth age learned of the thirteenth: the
thirtee^th of the twelfth: the eight of the seventh: the seventh was immediate
unto the sixth, and therefore had best means to resolve this point, because
these me^ had their Being, Instruction, Baptism, Sacraments, Orders, Records,
the Bible, and all others things, from them we speak of, that is from the sixth
age: and being close to them of that age, So compare the 6. age to the 5. the
5. to the 4. etc.
and in part also living with them, could see, hear, observe, remember, and
tell what they did. Since therefore all these did believe, and profess, and
teach unto their successors, and to their dearest frinds and children, and
generally unto the world, that theirs was the religion of their forefathers,
it is too late for you now to endeavor to prove the contrary: for you have
no kind of history, no monument, no relation, no fathers writing, no scrowle,
no observation, in fine noe evidence touching the foresaid age, but from them.

To this I add, that it is impossible for the whole Church in any age to err;
which is so clear that to man leaves any way to himself to be assured in any
point of faith from Antiquity, or from the scripture, or from the spirit, who
denies it. It is therefore impossible that for nine hundred years together it
should be mystaken in this great affair of the religion of the whole World
before them. And, if the Spirit forsook it for so long a time together,
notwithstanding Gods promise, you labor in vain to make men believe that he
is at length returned in your time, or another promise more faithfully
establisshed now. Better were it for you to believe, with us, that almighty
God has not violated his covenant, whereof I spoke before, my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth and out of the mouth
of thy seed, Isay 59.21.
and out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, from this present and forever.
And that his eternal ordinance stands in force, whereof S. Paul speaks
saying, that God gave Pastors and Doctors to the consummation of the saints,
Ephesians. 4. v. 11.12.
unto the work of the ministry, to the edifieing of the body of Christ:
until we meet all into the unity of faith.

21. The second means or demonstration Thesaurus Catholicus Iod. Cocc.
among the rest you may look upon Coccius and Gualterius, who have expressed
our consent with the primitive Church so fully, and brought such evident and
so resolute decrees of ancient Fathers, against your errors, Tabula
Chronographica stat. Eccl. Cath. ^a^ Gualt.
that you have dispaired long ago of ever winning the cause by this kind of
trial. The authorities which they allege are almost infinite: Coccius has
filled with them two great Tomes, and my intention is not to make a book of
this matter, but a piece of a Chapter only: Briefly therefore for example I
will give a^ insta^ce in two or three such as do come first into my mind. You
deny the primacie of the Roman See, the belief of unwritten Doctrine or
Tradition, the real presence, tra^substantiatio^ or co^uersio^ of the
substance of bread into the flesh of Christ, oblatio^ or unbloody Sacrifice in
the Church prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints, Crossing, etc. In the
Fathers we read thus. S. Aug. Ep. 162. Iren. l. 3. aduers. Haer. c. 3.
The principality of the Apostolical chair has ever flourished in the Roman
Church. It is necessary that every Church, that is, all faithful round
about resort unto the Roman Church because of her more powerful
Principality: in which Church the Tradition which is from the Apostles is
always kept by the faithful which are round about. Leo Sem 3. de assu^p. sua
ad po^tif.
Only Peeter is chosen out of all the world who is put both over the vocation
of all Nations and over all the Apostles, and over all the Fathers of the
Church: that allthough there be many Priests and many Pastors among the people
of God, yet Peeter properly rule or govern them All, whom Christ principally
does also govern. TRADITION. S. Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. hom. 4.
It is manifest that the Apostles delivered not all things by their Epistles,
but many things without writing, and both the one and the other deserve the
same belief, and therefore let us esteem the traditions of the Church to be
worthy of faith and credit. S. Epiphan Haeres. 61.
We must use Traditions: for the Scripture contains not all things: and
therefore the Apostles delivered certain things by writing, certain by
Tradition. REALLE PRESENCE.

S. Cyrill. Hierosol. Catech. mist. 4. (...).

TRANSVBSTANTIATION. Sermon. de coena Domini apud Cypr. S. Greg. Nyss. orat.
Catech. c. 37.

(...).


With all assurance let us receive the body and blood of Christ; for in the
form of bread the body is given to thee, and in the form of wine the blood
etc. knowing and believing most assuredly, that, that which appears bread
is Not Bread though it seem so to the taste, but it is the body of Christ,
and that which appears wine is Not wine, as the taste does judge it to be, but
the Blood of Christ. The bread which our lord gave unto his disciples, being
changed not in Shape, but in Nature, by the omnipotency of the Word is made
flesh. Christ thorough the dispensation of his grace enters by his flesh into
all the faithful, and mingleth himself with their bodies which have their
substance from bread and wine, to the end that man being united unto that
which is immortal may attain to be made partaker of incorruption and these
things he bestows transelementing the Nature of the things that are seen
into it. SACRIFICE. S. Cyrill. Alexand. in declar. anathem. 11. Conc. Ephesians.
Iren. l. 4. c. 32.
We celebrate in the Church the holy quickening and Unbloody Sacrifice,
believing not that, that which is showed, is the body of some common man like
us, and his blood, but we receive it rather as the life giving words own
flesh and blood; for common flesh cannot give life. Christ took bread, and
gave thanks saying this is my body: and the chalice likewise etc he confessed
to be his blood, and taught the new Oblation of the new testament, which the
Church receiving from the Apostles does offer to God in All the world. In the
books of the Machabees we read that Sacrifice was offered for the dead,
PRAYER FOR THE DEAD. S. Aug. l. de cura pro mort. c. 1.
but were it no where read in old Scripture, the Authority of the whole
Church which in this custom is well known, is not small, where in the prayers
of the Priest which are powered out to our lord God at his Alter, the
commendation also of the dead has a place. WORSHIP OF SAINTS. Justin.
Mart. Apol. 2. ad Ant.
We do worship and adore God the father and his Son, who came and taught us
these things: and the company of his followers and the like good Angels, and
the propheticke Spirit: and we do worship them both by word and deeds and in
truth: and we teach or deliver this abundantly to all those which will
learn, according as we have been taught and instructed. PRAYER TO SAINTS S.
Ambros. l. de Viduis
The Angels are to be beseeched, which are given to us for our guard: martyrs
are to be beseeched whose patronage we seem to challenge by the pledge of
their bodies. They can ask for our sins who with their blood have washed
away their own if they had any. They are Gods martyrs, our presidents,
beholders of our lives and actions: let us not be ashamed to make them
intercessors of our infirmity. CROSSING. S. Aug. tract. 118 in Joan.
What is that sign of Christ which all know but the Cross of Christ, which
sign unless it be applied either to the foreheads of the faithful, or to the
water whereby they are regenerated, or to the oil wherewith they are
confirmed, or to the Sacrifice wherewith they are nourisshed, nothing of this is
well done.

This will serve my turn, and now I argue thus: If our doctrine be found in
the writings of Antiquity and there approved, it is impossible for any man to
make it evident that Antiquity is against us, and for you: but our doctrine is
there found and approved as the authors before named declare abundantly,
therefore etc. And in Confirmation hereof I take only that which they allege
out of those writings which are by your selves acknowledged for ancient and
current, because I need not here dispute of the authority of such as your men
and some of ours do except against. Of this sense of Antiquity I have here
also given you a taste, whereby a judgment not distempered will perceive
immediately that you cannot make it evident that they were on your side. And
in naming them for your predecessors you give no satisfaction to the demand
which inquires for undeniable and clear evidence of a succession of such men
as in Religion you are, The third book shall teach you whose interpretation
must be stood to.
or of Protestants. I know that you do offer to delude all the places which
we bring: but men of judgment may see by your answeares that you dare not
stand to the proper sense of the Fathers words: an experience whereof they may
see presently, if they will but object unto you these few places here cited,
and observe what poor answeares you make, and how far they are from the
plain and Gra^maticall sense of the words or sentences. Now further if your
own me^ would open their mouths and confess plainly, what they believe in
their consciences touching the doctrine of Antiquity, your assertion or
challenge would evidently yet appear more unreasonable and void of title,
much less would it deserve to be supposed for certain on your side that in
those days all were yours. We will demand of two or three of the^ if you
please, and the rather because their confession shall make room for the next
argument and bring it in.

23. Speak Fulck and begin. I confess that Ambrose, Full. reio. to Brist. p.
36. Kem. exam Con. Trid. par. 3. p. 200.
Hierome, Augustine, held invocation of Saints. Kemnitius. Most of the
Fathers, as Nazianzen, Nyssen, Basil, Theodoret, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine,
did not dispute but avouch the souls of martyrs and Saints to hear the
petitions of those who prayed unto the^: they went often to the monuments of
martyrs, and inuocated Martyrs by name. Whit. Def. p. 473.
whitgift. All the Bishops and learned writers of the Greek Church, and
Latins also for the most part, were spotted with doctrines of freewill,
merits, invocation of Saints etc. Call. Inst. l. 3. c. 5.. 10.
Calvin. It was a custom a thousand and three hundred years ago to pray for
the dead: veteres omnes. c. 4.. 38.
but all of that time I confess were carried away into error. Those things
which occur here and there about satisfaction in the writings of those of
old times move me little. I see indeed some of them, I will speak plainly,
almost all whose books are extant have either slipped in this point, or spoken
to rigourouslie, and to harshlie. Whitt. Co^t. 2. q. 5. c. 7.
Whittaker we confess that some Papisticall errors are ancient, and are
held and defended by the Fathers; this we do freely and openly profess. It
is true which Calvin, Ibid.
and the Centurists have written, that the Ancient Church did err in many
things, as touching Limbus, freewill, merit of works etc. Ex Patrum erroribus
vester ille Pontificiae Religionis cento consutus est. id. l. 6. con. Dur. s.
7. Mart. de Vot. col. 1559. Dud. ap. Bez. ep. 1.

Collat. R. Chal. l. 2. c. 22.


The Popish Religion is patched out of the Fathers errors. Peeter Martyr. As
long as we stand to the Counsels and Fathers, we shall remain always in
the same errors. Duditius. If that be the truth which the Fathers have
professed with mutual consent, it is altogether on the Papists side. Stay:
here is enough for my purpose: if any man will have more, let him go to the
Conference of my L. of Chalcedon and read it there.

24. Before I make my argument I will note here an effect of this guilty
conscience of Protestancie, which effect is to decline the way of trial by the
Fathers, to labor to persuade me^ their judgment is vnsecure, Jew. Ap. part.
4. p. 117.
and in fine to contemn them. Hence Jewel in his Apology has said, that the
way of finding the truth by God speaking in the Church and Counsels, is very
uncertain, dangerous, and and in a manner frantic. Rainold in his conference
would have you believe that if the Fathers not only one, or two, but All,
Rainold Conf. c. ^. diu. 1.
held a point now questioned, and not held it only, but wrote it, nor only
wrote it, but also taught it, not darkly but plainly, not seldom but
commonly, not for a short season but co^tinuallie This consent of theirs if
any such be found, were vnsecure. Thus bouldly he prepares himself to
encounter the^ all, this reckoning he makes of their Antiquity, their
Sa^ctitie, their Spirit, their consent. But will you see how Luther in his
Cupps tramples on them. Lut. Coll. me^sal. c. de Pat Eccl.
In the writings of Hierome there is not a word of true faith and sound
Religion, Of Chrysostom I make no account, Basil is of no worth, he is wholly
a Monk I way him not of a hair, Patrum authoritas susque de que facie^da est.
de ser. arbit. c. 2. fol. 433.
Cyprian is a weak Divine etc. And in general, The authority of the Fathers
is not to be cared for. Let us now to the last argument which I make thus.

25. If the Fathers of the first six hundred years have delivered our
doctrine, and contradicted the real Presence, Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of
the Mass, Invocation of Saints, Prot. Ap. tract. 1. Sec. 3.
prayer for the dead, Saint Peeters Primacie, Confession, Satisfaction,
Absolution from sins by the Priest, Merit, Justification by good works,
Images, Vows, Relics, Ceremonies, unwritten Traditions etc. Therefore you
have not yet made it clear that the ancient Church did believe as you do and
was of the Religion now current among you. Do not ru^ne away cowardly from this
argument and busy your self here in expou^ding or obiecti^g Fathers as your
appealants impertine^tly have done: for this is but to dance on a round as
Mr. Brerely in his aduertisments told Morton. But, consider attentively what
is here, objected, and answer it directly thorough out point by point. The
thing urged is the confession of your own Deuines.

What do you say to this Confession; I do not ask in this place how you do
Gloss the Fathers, or what is your opinion: No. But I demand what you say to
the Confession of your fellows, and how you do answer the argument here
drawn from the said Confession. I saw Morto^s Book once, and when I looked
next into the Prot. Apol. I found Mr. Brereleys discourse to be so full, and so
far to ouerreach Morto^s answer, that it was argument, and reply both in one,
and still will be.


So that indeed you are so far from having the better in that part of the
question which your answer does suppose, that your side is infinitely
prejudiced, and impossible that you should ever come to equal terms, much
more impossible is it that you should ever in the consistory of Reason and
Equity gain the cause. Why then do you persuade us to follow you before you
make it clear or credible to learned men that you go right? that you go the
same way which the primitive Church did go? their Posterity which did
immediately follow them, tell us that they went our way, not yours: the same all
Christian Churches ever since for nine hundred years do witness: the same your
own doctors do confess: and why then must not we follow? there is no right
way but one, no faith true but one, no Catholic Church but one. And, now I
resume the reason often urged heretofore, which the further it goes, the more
strength it gettes, and thus I argue. That Religion which never had the
communion of the Christian world, is not Catholic or universal: but the
Religion now current in England never had the communion of the Christian world,
for since Luther it was never the Religion of the Christian world nor in the
time of the primitive Church, nor in the later nine hundred years: therefore it
is not Catholic.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. That no satisfaction is given by pretense of Scripture.
26. THe last shift whereunto in fine you betake your self, is to leave
Antiquity, and to be tried by the word or Scripture only And here too, you
are so nice, that you will admit a part only of Scripture, and scarce know
what your own selves. But of this hereafter. Here I reply that we have
Scripture too, and that you cannot bring sufficient evidence that the
Scripture is against us, and with you. For trial of this I am contented
according to your desire to abstract from all other means what soever: from
the testimonies of learned Fathers, from the definitions of general Counsels,
from consent of Nations, and other arguments of that kind, and to see whether,
the Scripture alone will approve or condemn our Religion. And because in
deducing a consequence out of obscure premises a man's wit may be deceived I will
abstract from this also, that is from drawing consequences out of Scripture,
looking only to that which is, and necessarily must be true, and which is
formallie avouched or denied in Gods word: and I argue thus. The Scripture does
no where formallie deny any point of our faith, nor formallie affirm any
point which our Church does deny, therefore the Scripture does not formallie
condemn us. I say formallie, for your consequences are not Scripture, and
therefore I abstract as I said, from them as impertinent to the terms and
state of this Question wherein now we are.

27. To this argument you and your fellows make answer by allegation of
Scripture against us, The chiefest I will briefly run over here; the rest
shall be answered in other places as it comes. We honor Images, Ex. 20.4.
Honoraria adoratione, non vera latria. Conc. genesis Nic. 2. act. 7. in de^i. and
in ep. ad Impp.
and this you say is opposite to that of Exodus thou shall not make to thy
self any graven thing nor the likeness etc. Our doctrine is that Images are
indeed to be honored, yet not with the sovereign honor due to God, but with
another inferior This is declared by the Church in the second Nicene Council.
Now to the place of Scripture, I answer that it makes not against us:
because, respective or relative honor given to pictures in regard of the
reference they have, (...)
to the Samplers is not there spoken of: (...), non adorabis ea, neque latria
coals ea.
but sovereign honor only: and this we do not give to pictures. The truth
of this answer is clear by the circumstances of the text wherein almighty
God reserues his Soueraignetie and the honor due to God, unto him self, as
being the only God, and none God but he. To help out your argument here, you
add a word of your own to the text, and read, thou shall make to thee no
graven image, whereas the Hebrew word (...) does not signify an image, but
sculptile, a graven thing. You might as well have said sculpere were latin for
to paint. The Greek text has (...), The 70. Interpreters.
whence the Latin word Idolu^, in English an Idol: and the litterall sense is,
thou shall not make to thy self an idol, that is, a feined God, nor adore him.
Now Catholics neither make to them selves, nor adore Idols, nor yield
Sovereign honor or acknowledgment of Deity to any but to God, wherefore this
place is not against us. And if you will needs have the Scripture to contradict
us in this point, since contradiction must be affirmatio^ and negation of the
same, and since the words worship and honor have diverse senses (for men do
worship also others that are not Gods, and do honor their prince, their
Parents etc) let us hear out of the Scripture the opposite of that which we
say: ours is this, it is lawful to honor Images with a relative honor which
is not the sovereign honor due to God, but an other infinitely less: the
contradictory whereunto is this, it is not lawful to give such an honor unto
Images. Show this proposition in the Scripture, and you condemn us, otherwise
it is impertine^t; and because I know it is not there at all, I go to the
next, wherein you labor to knock our Church on the head by proouing the Pope
to be Antichrist.

28. The text cited is this. 2. These. 2^ v. 3.4.
Unless there come a revolt first, and the man of sin, the son of
perdition be revealed, which is an adversary, and is exalted above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, so that he sits in the temple of God,
VVitc^
sewing him him self as if he were God. This text should not have been urged
together with the former, if you had looked to gain any thing with it: for by
the former you would have proved that the Pope made himself (and taught the
Church to be) inferior to many Gods: And Antichrist as you find here, will
pretend to be above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: how then can
you imagine the Pope to be Antichrist? again, the Pope does worship and pray
to Saints, and Angels, he does acknowledge himself to be minister and
servant to Jesus Christ, he does acknowledge the blessed Trinity to have made
and to conserve him, and to be infinitely greater then he, the Pope, is, in
power and Majesty, and this he does teach unto the Church, Dan. 7. and 11.
whereas Antichrist will extol himself above all that is worshipped, and will
speak great things against the God of Gods, and will labor to be greater in
the estimation of men then all that is called God, and thus to sit in Gods
Temple. Moreover S. Peeter did sit as Vicar and Pastor in the Church, Matthew.
16.18. Io. 21.18.
he being by our Savior created the foundation and the Pastor of it, and his
residence was in Rome also, yet none has been hitherto so impudent as to say
that he was Antichrist: and he were sensles that would avouch it, since
Antichrist is not a minister of Christ and his servant, but an adversary, who
does magnify himself above him and above all that is adored. Wherefore it is
a sensles thing to say that the successors of S. Peeter are Antichrist for that
reason, that is, because they sit as Pastors in the Church, and reside in Rome.
And thus much for the matter of this instance. As for the form of it, you must
observe better that the text of Scripture does not affirm that which we
deny, or deny that which we affirm. We say the Pope is the Pastor of the
Church and Vicare of Christ, and that he is not Antichrist. The Scripture, does
not say, the Pope is not Pastor of the Church, that he is not the Vicar of
Christ, that he is Antichrist. And therefore our Church hitherto is not
formallie contradicted by the Scripture.

29. 1. Cor. 10 16. (...) That which is in the Chalice is it which did issue
out of the side. etc. Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
Thirdly to contradict the Church which does believe the holy Eucharist to be
the body and blood of Christ, and not bakers bread, and bare wine; though it
be in the outward forms of them You bring the place of S. Paul, The chalice
of benediction which we do bless is it not the communication of the blood of
Christ: and the bread which we break is it not the participation of the body,
of our lord? I answer that our doctrine is not here denied but affirmed; for
the Apostle teaches here (importing withal by his manner of speech, the
doctrine to be so well, and so commonly known, that none can deny it, he
teaches I say) that the bread and the cup are the communication of the body
and blood of our lord. The reason whereof is clear, because in those forms
are exhibited reallie the body and the blood of Christ. Whereas in your sense
there were no real receiving, giving or participating, of the body and blood
of Christ, but of bakers bread and mere wine. And therefore to the Apostle,
the Corinthians (if they had been of your Religion) might have answered, no:
it is not any communication, participation, or communion of blood and flesh,
but of natural meat and drink. If you stick at the word bread, you are
dull, for the words annexed to it do interpret fully what bread it is; and
before, you have the word applied, and the sense of it inculcated, in the Sixth
of S. John, where our Savior says, the bread which I will give is my flesh;
Io. 6. v. 51.32.58.48.
my father gives you true bread from heaven, I am the bread of life etc. where
I think you are not so se^sles as to take the word bread for that which
bakers make. More over this flesh or body of Jesus Christ, is in the form of
bread in the Church, as it was also in his own hand when he gave it unto his
disciples, and therefore after the phrase of Scripture it is called bread;
Mar. 16. Act. 1.
as Angels appearing in men's likeness are there called me^.

30. Fourthlie, whereas we say that it is not necessary the public service
be said in the vulgar tongue You oppose those words of S. Paul. If I pray in a
tongue (to wit, 1. Cor. 14. v. 14.
which I understand not) my Spirit prays, but my mind is without fruit
Answ. The meaning is, that I have not in that case the benefit of profiting my
soul or mind with contemplation of the thing: yet never the less my Spirit
is elevated, and ascends unto God, which is the substance and essence of
prayer, and this is nothing against us. You urge again, if thou bless in
Spirit, how shall he say amen which does supply the place of the vulgar, v. 16.
since he knows not what thou say: Answ. The meaning is, if thou speak
some praise of God, the hearers not knowing whether it be good or bad, he that
supplies the place of the vulgar cannot say amen to it. Neither is this against
us, for our common prayers or liturgies are both known and approved by the
Church to whom this approbation does belong, and this all do know: and
therefore the clarke or he that supplieth the place of vulgar may boudly s^^
Amen. Moreover the Apostle does not censure as ill that blessing in Spirit,
which you do urge, but says expressly that he does give thanks well which
does so. v. 17.
If you say the contrary, the^ you co^tradict the scripture, not we.

De imputa iustitia nihil noru^t Waldensis Luth. col^oq. c. de Suermeris.
Coce. l. 8. ^. 4.
31. The fifth place is to show by Scripture that iustifyi^g faith is that
special faith whereby you believe that your sins are all forgiven, and you
just by an extrinsecall imputation of the justice inherent in Jesus Christ.
This which is the ground and soul of your Religion we deny. Your proof is.
Abraham believed God and it was imputed unto him to justice. Romans 4.3. v. 16.
And, therefore of faith, that according to grace the promise may be firm.
Answ. This is nothing against us, nor for you: for the question is of the
Object of this faith, whether it were the remission of sins to him that
believed they were remitted, as you interpret it, From the 16. v. to the end.
or something else. Read further and you shall find in the same Chapter that
the Object or thing he believed was that God would make him the father of many
Nations; and that notwithstanding his own age and the sterilitie of his wife,
God was able to perform this promise. Of your Object there is not one word:
neither is it to be found any where in all the Bible. The Object of Justifying
faith, if you believe Scripture is the Incarnation, the Passion, Resurrection,
and other revealed Mysteries. Who is he that ouercometh the world? he that
believes that Jesus Christ is the son of God. ^. Io. 5. v. 5. Romans 10.9.
If thou confess with thy mouth our lord Jesus, and in thy heart believe that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Without faith it is
impossible to please God; for, Heb. 11.6.
he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and is a rewarder to them
that seek him. This is the Object of justifying faith: and the second part,
you do not believe, because it implies a merit in the believer.

32. The sixth place is about communion of lay people in both kinds. You, would
have it a divine precept for the lay people: I admit a divine precept for the
Priests who do consecrate: and deny that there is any such whereby the lay
people are commanded to receive the Sacrament in both kinds. Your place is,
Drink ye all of this. Mat. 26.27
But this place does not import a precept or command for the lay people to
receive the blood: for the speech is not directed to the lay people, but to the
Apostles: And the word all, is referd to them, and was verified by them. This
is manifest by the words of the Gospel. He gave to his Disciples, and said,
take and eat: ibid. v. 26.27.28.
this is my body, And taking the chalice he gave thanks and gave to them (the
same disciples) saying, drink ye all of this, for this is my blood etc. And
S. Mark relating it says, and taking the chalice, giving thanks, he gave to
them, and they all drank of it. If all drank of it, the^ by all, the Apostles
are meant only, for all men were not there: neither have all Christians drunk
of it. In this therefore you have produced no divine precept for all men in
their own persons to receive the blood.

33. The seaue^th place is to prove the Scripture to be judge of
Controversies, and sufficient of it self without help of Tradition. We hold
the necessity of Tradition too. ^. Tim. 3.16.
The place is: All scripture inspired of God is profitable to teach, to argue,
to correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of God may be perfect,
instructed to every good work. Answ. This is not against us, we grant tath
it is profitable: We deny that it is, all sufficient. These two, you must
distinguish; the first is here affirmed, the second is not. There must be
means to know which is Scripture, which Book, which Chapter, which verse:
and to know the sense of it: And herein we must be directed by the Spirit of
the Church. We must take the Scripture from her hands, and the meaning of it
from her mouth. Hark what the same Apostle says in an other place. 2 Thessalonians.
2.15.
Hold the Traditions you have learned, whether it be by word or by our Epistle.
(...).
But of this you shall hear more here after. It is sufficient here that no
place of Scripture does contradict the doctrine of the Church; and your labor
to prove it, is all vain, for that Spirit which directed the writers of Gods
word, does also direct the Church to the sense of it, and therefore it is
impossible for any man to find Opposition betwixt the Church, and Gods word.

34. Stay now! let us look on the contradictions all together in could blood
before we go. The first, God forbids to give sovereign honor to any but to
him self, Papists say: an inferior and relative honor may be given to the
pictures of Christ and his Saints. The second. Antichrist is opposite unto and
extolled above all that is called God, and sits in the Temple of God showing
himself as if he were God. Papists. The Pope is Christ's Vicar here upon earth
and Pastor of his Churth. The third. The Eucharisticall bread is the
participation of the body of our lord. Papists: it is not the participation of
bakers bread, but of the true body of Christ in form of bread. The fourth.
If I pray in a tongue, my Spirit prays but my mind is without fruit.
Papists. It is not necessary that Priests say Mass in the vulgar tongue. The
fifth. Abraham believed God that he should be Father of many Nations and it was
imputed to him to justice. Papists. Justifying faith is not that whereby N. N.
believes his sins are forgiven him. The sixth. The Apostles were commanded all
to drink the cup. Papists: The lay people are not commanded to drink the
cup. The seventh. All Scripcure is profitable to teach etc that the man of
God may be perfect, instructed to every good work. Papists: Traditions are to
be received, the Scripture is not by itself all sufficient. This is the
substance of that which has been here discussed. Good logicians be modest, or
go peripatize with your Aristotle some where else. I sit, and you stand in the
same school, are contradictories according to the rule by which our nimble
Masons do build their new Church: but, A man is justified by works and not by
faith only: A man is not justified by works, but by faith only: are not
contradictorie, though you mean works done by grace and in grace: a little
new mortar may dawbe them both together: for if ye mark, the one of them is
true in the judgment of S. James the Apostle* and the other is true in the
iugdment of Mr. John Calvin, and so they are not secundum idem.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Other places of Scripture are answered.
35. BEing past the monstrouse Argument which thought to affright me which the
multitude of his heads, I was going on to cite Scripture against you, but an
other Chimaera meets me in the Way. John White in his preface to the way had
made his brag that Protestants have Scripture in manifest places, free from
all ambiguitie on their side. And being to make this good in his Defense, I
Whites Defense ^ 8. n. 4.
has picked out such places, as he thought of most advantage and most clear.
Part of them are the same with some of those I have already spoken of in the
former Chapter. The rest I will run over briefly: bear with me if I be
longer in this point then you desire.

The first. An Angel would not be adoared by S. John but refused it, saying,
see thou do not, Apoc. 1^.10. 22 v. 9^
I a^ thy fellow servant, adore God. The Apostle again another time fell
down to adore the Angel, and it was again answered as before. Answ. It is
clear by this text, that the Angel refused to be adored by S. John, and this
we believe: But it is not said here, that it is ill to adore an Angel, yea in
the judgment of S. John, it was convenient, and being told of it he still
believed it to be convenient, for he did offer, notwithstanding the first
refusal, to do it the second time. The place therefore is against you.
Neither is there any difficulty in the matter: for S. John might well offer
it, and the Angel, considering how dear the Apostle was to the Son of God,
and lord of Angels, and how great his Apostolical dignity was, might well
refuse it. So v. Bid, S. Anselme and others upon this place. Luke 17.10.


36. The second. When you have done all things that are commanded you, say we
are unprofitable servants, we have done that which we ought to do. This is
brought to exclude all merit from our actions done by and in grace. But it
comes to short: first, because here is speech only of things commanded: Matthew.
19.21. ^. Cor. 7. v. v. 25.38.40
now there are other actions not commanded: and by those at least we may
merit, notwithstanding this sentence. Secondly God by creation is Lord of all
his creatures, and men thereby are naturally bound to serve him. 2. Pet. ^^
John 1.12.
By grace men are made partakers of the divine nature, and are sons of God,
and he their Father: Wherefore if as servants they could not merit (as by
nature indeed they cannot) as children they might. Servants are unprofitable,
if their masters profit come not from their service: howsoever they may be
peradventure good husbands for the^ selves.
And this place has nothing to the contrary. Thirdly our labor is
unprofitable to God our lord and Master, for he is never the better for that
we do, being infinitely happy in him self: but it may be profitable to our
selves: and this is not here denied.

37. The 3. Blessed are the dead which die in our lord, from hence forth now
says the Spirit, that they rest from their labors, for their works follow
them. This place is brought against Purgatory, or pains after this life,
Apoc. 14.13.
suffered by such as depart in the grace of God. But it is so far from being
clear to this purpose, S. Aug. l. 20 Ciuit. c. 9.
that it rather helps our cause. Some with S. Augustine understand the place
of Martyrs; and Martyrs instantly go to heaven, wherefore in that way there
is no difficulty, S. Ansel. upon this place.
in the words. Others with S. Anselme interpret from hence, that is from the
Resurrection or general Judgment: and they are grounded in the discourse of
the Chapter, This way has no difficulty neither, for all immediately after
that time are in bliss. S. Th. Aq. in 4. d. 21. q. 1. a. 1. q. 1. ad 1.
S. Thomas does distinguish working in way of merit, from suffering in way of
purgation: and graunts that such as are dead in our lord are in security of
their salvation, and therefore happy: and do rest from the labor of merit,
that labor is past: they did many good works in their life time, and those
follow them, they need no more. Ob. Phil. 3. 12. Aus. ibi. v. 15.
But some of them need purging: and therefore they may suffer and be punished.
The soul departing out of this world, and going to the Tribunal of Gods
justice is attended by her works, and according to them receaues her sentence.
We must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the proper things of the body, ^. Cor. 5.10 (...) 1. Cor. 3 v.
13.14.15. The form of the last judgment you have Mat 20. v. 31.32. etc.
consider the respect it has there to Works. Lut. 22.25
according as he has done either good or evil. The work of every one shall
be manifest: for the day of our lord will declare, because it shall be revealed
in Fire and the work of every one what kind it is the Fire shall try. If any
ma^s work abide which he built there upon, on the foundation Christ, he shall
receive (...) Reward. If any man's work burn, he shall suffer Detriment: but
himself shall be saved: yet so as by fire.

38. The fourth The kings of the gentiles over rule them, but you not so. cited
against our doctrine of the Primacie: I Answ. First: the Primacie was not then
instituted, Io. 21.18.
but afterward, and therefore if our Savior had said that none was first at
that time, it were not against us. Secondly if you press the words they will
make for us and against you: they will prove one greater then the rest, v 26.
(...);
he that is the greater among you, let him become as the younger; and he that is
leader, as the waiter. Which precept does suppose a greater, and a leader among
them. Thirdly the sense you make would take Bisshops also from the Church,
for of them the Scripture says likewise that they must not over rule the
Clergy, 1. Pet. 5.3. (...), Act. 20.28.
and the word in Greek is the same with that whereby S. Matthew. does express
the ruling which you do urge, and yet you know that the holy Ghost has placed
Bishops to rule the Church. Fourthlie our Savior does not say that among the
Apostles none shall be Superior, but he says only that it must not be so
among them in matter of government and subjection, as it is among the heathen
Princes: and this we grant. Those Princes ordinarily, domineere imperiously,
and regard not so much the good of their subjects, as their own private ends.
This does not consist with Christian discipline, and is here forbidden. Lastly
the Greek text of S. Matthew does take away all appearance of doubt in this
point: Mat. 20.25.26.
the words are (...). The Princes of the Gentiles domineere over them and
ouerrule them: and they that are the greater, exercise power against the^: It
shall not be so among you. You know the power of (...) which is here twice
used: turn your lexicon and read there (...) Dominium exerceo aduersus, (...)
dominantur aduersus eos, do bear rule against them. put then all together, and
you will be ashamed of your own argument.

39. The fifth; 1. Tim. 3.2^
brought for marriage of Priests It behooves a Bishop to be the husband of one
wife. Answ. Is the meaning think you, a Bishop of necessity must have a
wife: or; he that has, or has had, more then one, is not fit to be made
Bishop. If you will have the first to be the sense, you are contrary not
only to the practice of our Church, and of the Apostles, but also to your
own fellows, and are a Religion by your self. If you think the second be
the sense, it makes nothing against us: S. Ierom. Chrysostom. Oecumen. Theoph.
we make none Bisshops that are bigami, that have had more wives then one:
such me^ are not fit for so sacred an office. There is indeed a controversy
betwixt us and you, Vide Cocc. t. 2. l. 8. art. 6. 7.
Whether it be lawful for a Priest or Bishop to take a wife. You affirm, we
deny it. And the Apostle does not contradict us; he does not say it is lawful
for a Bishop to take a wife, which was to be shown in Scripture.

1. Tim. 4.3.
40. The sixth. Some in the last times shall come commanding or persuading to
abstain from meats which God created to receive with thanks giving. Answ.
There were men to come that would forbid to eat meats, esteeming them
unclean, Epiphan. haeres. 66. Aug. haeres, 46.
and created or made by an ill cause: such were the Manichees, who did hold
there were two prime causes, one good, the other bad: both eternal, both Gods.
And flesh they said the bad God created. Aug. l. 30. con. Faust. c. 5. and 6.
The Apostle speaks of these men as S. Augustine and others well observe, and
it is manifest by the reason in the text whereby the Apostle does impugn the
foresaid men; for says he every creature of God is good. v. 4.
Which proposition is evident in it self, and opposite directly to the ground
of the foresaid Heretics. But this does nothing concern us who do abstain
some times by the example of our Savior, and by the command of our Mother the
Church, Vide Coc^ tom. 2. lib. 3. a. 8. 9. 10.
not for that reason of the Manichees, but for other good ends.

41. The seventh* Romans 1^.^.
let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but
from God. Answ. we teach the same as you see by all our commentaries upon
this place. But what your Master Calvin thinks of the business, the world
knows. I refer you to the Preface of the Protestants Apology, to
Monarchomachia, etc.

42. Apoc. 17.18.
There is an other out of the Apocalypse to prove the Pope Antichrist. The
words are, the woman which thou saw is the great city, which has king
done over the kings of the earth. Answ. The mystery here spoken of is so
profound and dark that you can find no bottom to build upon; But to endeavor
upon those Hills whereon the woman sittes (be they mystical, v. 9.
all one with the Heads and Kings, or material) to raise a Fort to batter the Sea of Saint Peeter erected and established by Jesus Christ, is Antichristian.
The City some interpret mystically thinking it to be the confused multitude
of the Wicked, which is the City of the Devil, opposed to the City of God
or Society of the Good: Others think it to be Rome as it was in S. John's time
when the Emperors there abiding did persecute the Church of Christ: and as it
will be about the end of the world. Be it this, or that, or some other: nothing
is here avouched against us. It is not here said that the Pope is that Woman,
or, that he is the Beast on which the Woman sat, or, that he is one of the
Heads of the Beast, or, that he is Antichrist. No one of all these is here
affirmed: why then do you allege it: what is this to the argument wherein I
said, the Scripture does no where formallie contradict us? or how does it
justify your brag that you have Scripture in manifest places free from all
ambiguitie on your side.

43. And thus far, concerning the texts alleged by John White, which he
affirmed to be manifestly and without ambiguitie for the Protestants: where as
not any one, does in terms contradict that which our Church does teach, which
was the thing he made his reader to expect. But you will bid a man ask the
Spirit for the sense of these places: And to meet with you at this turning too,
so will I. You will direct him to the Spirit in your self, in John white. I
will direct him to the Spirit in the Church. My direction and resolution is
well grounded, as I will declare here after: Yours is not. And if by this little
which has been said here in this Chapter a man would make a guess at your
Spirit, he should quickly find his nature. First he contradicts the Spirit of
the Fathers who held Purgatory, merit. etc. Seco^dlie he co^tradicts the Spirit
of the Catholic Church which he does oppose in these things. Thirdly he
contradicts the Spirit of S. John the Apostle and imputes unto him a deliberate
act of superstitious Idolatry (so you call adoring a^gells) together with
gross stupiditie, that being told once, and that by an Angel too, he would
not forbear, but do it again. But of this, I shall speak again in an other
place* that which for the present I conclude here is, that the Scripture does
not condemn us in plain words. You have done all you can to show it, and
cannot yet find one place for this purpose. You see also by the way what I
think, of your consequences; though that was not my scope in this discourse as
I declared in the beginning of the former Chapter.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. That is impossible for Protestants to win the cause by
Scripture.
44. Heretics all generally affect obscurity; they draw their opponent as
much as ever they can into the dark, that he may not see there what they do,
or their confusion be concealed from the people, and so their credit saved. I
expected clear places, I looked for a co^bate in the light, you should have
shown in plain words in the Scripture, there is no Purgatory: Christ is not
in the Sacrament reallie: Priests and Bishops may take wives: to worship
Angels is Idolatry. These and the rest of your propositions you should have
shown there, if you would have wo^ne that way, and have done that which you
pretended. But you have not done it, you have cited some places which have it
not in the words, and in regard they are obscure to you or to the ignorant, you
suspect or guess, and pretend the sense which you would have may lie secret in
the words, though you cannot show it there, and we know it is not there at
all. We have light enough to see that the Scripture in those places does not
as much as obscurely speak against us; we have prayer and industry, we have
the Fathers help, we have innumerable eyes regardi^g the doctrine of the
Church and the Scripture, and co^paring them together. In a word the assisting
Spirit with all his guif^s is in our Church.

45. Now to show further how impossible a task it is for you to declare and
make it evident out of Scripture that yours is the true Religion and ours not,
I will turn the argument which I did use in the beginning of the former Chapter
into an other form and make it thus. If the scripture does formallie avouch
our doctrine and deny yours, Infallibility of the Church in delivering
Scripture and Gods word generally, Traditions, real Presence, Oblatio^ of
Christ's body and blood in the forms of bread and wine for the remission of
Sins, which is the unbloody Sacrifice, The Primacie of S, Peeter, and his
Pastoral office, Absolution from sins by Priests, Indulgences, Justice
before God, and intrinsecall in me^, or inherent, Justification by works, and
Reward of them, keeping the Commandments, Freewill in works of grace, Vows
and works of Counsel not of command, Single life, prayer for the dead,
Intercession of Saints and Angels, and finally Worship of some things
inanimate or sensles in regard of the reference they have to things truly
capable of honor more then civil. In these general heads the rest are
included, and these you name always, and stand most upon them. I am now by
my promise, to bring their grounds out of Sripture, wherein I will be as
brief as I can, and will begin with the nearest which is the last, and so
backwards till I meet the first again. Before I begine the task two things
are to be noted: The first is, that I am not in this Chapter to contend about
the sense and meaning, if you pretend it is not that which the words offer
immediately: but that my task is done if I bring places of scripture which
affirm formally (if the words be taken in their proper sense) that which we
do. A further Judgment or determination of the meaning and sense of the words
I bring, is to be taken from the testimony of the Spirit: The Spirit (I say)
is to be judge of the sense and meaning: not the spirit of externes, or in
them: but the spirit in Gods Church. And this Judgment is evidently on our side
as I will prove in the third book. Here I am not to meddle with it: but only
to find our doctrine in the same or equivalent words, and to put it here
down. This you must bear in mind likewise for the argument which in the
third Chapter I made out of the Fathers. It suffised there against you to cite
our doctrine out of their mouths. Of their meaning, the Spirit must be Judge.
And, not the Spirit in externes: but the Spirit in the Church. The second is,
that, since to descend unto particulars and to inquire each ones opinion in
matter of Religion among Protestants is endless, and of infinite regard, 3. Book
4* chapter
because every man holds what he lists, and does assume to himself the
judgment of controversy in Religion: I mean here to name only your two
Masters, the late Eua^gelists, and reformers forsooth, of the Church, Luther
and Calvin; and to cite them in this business, including you as far as you
consent with them: for I intend in this Chapter to extend my former scope a
little, and to show more generally the opposition of Protesta^tes to the
Scripture. Of Protestants, (for I speak now of the whole body such as it is)
some be Lutherans, some be Caluinists: in some things the Lutherans oppose the
Scripture more then Caluinists: in other things the Caluinists more then the
Lutherans: in other both are opposite unto Gods word. When you are on that side
which does consent with us, the^ my discourse does not proceed against you:
yet then also, my argument holds, in as much as it is confessedly true that in
those points the Scripture is not against us. If (I say) at any time you
dissent from your masters whom I will name, and admit that they and their
Spirit of interpretation are contrary to the Scripture, you may interpret
your self not to be included amongst them I speak unto: But my argument will
run on against you for all the rest of the points wherein you consent and
agree with them, which are almost all, in substance, howsoever there may be
some little Difference about the manner. If the Scripture affirm any thing
absolutely, (...), and you grant it only (...), or, with a limitation, I go
on in such cases against you as opposite unto the Scripture. So in the points
of single life, keeping the commandments, free will as you expound your
selves, tradition, divine assistance and some other. Likewise if you admit the
words but understand them improperly, as in the matter of the real presence,
priesthood, absolution: for in such cases your consent is but verbal, and
under the words you conceal a different sense, whereby the common The state of
the Question that it may not be vnderstoo^ WE often ofsett purpose ouercloude
with darkness: things which are manifest we impudently deny: things false
without shame we avouch: things plainly impious We propose as first
principles of faith: things orthodoxall we condemn of Heresy: Scriptures at
our pleasure we detort to our dreams: We boast of Fathers. When We will
follow nothing less then their doctrine etc. The Confes^ion of Zanchiu^ a
great Protestant concerning the proceeding^ of Protestant writers, Doctors and
pillars of that Church. Ep. 10 (...) Sturm. fine l. 7. and 8. Miscell.
people are deceived. Of the Fathers authorities I mean the same. If you
admit our doctrine plainly, subscribe; and along to the next; if you do not,
then attend to the plain sense of the Scripture which I produce. Vide Co^ lat.
doctr^ Cath. and Protest. (...) express^^ Scripture ver^^s. (...)
The obscu^^st of those things which I am to propose is invocation of Saints:
yet you dare not abide ^he trial of that point by confessed testimonies of
Antiquity.

46. Touching the honor given to some things in animate for the Sa^ctitie
which they have, as relics, Cross, pictures, etc. you remember that it is
relative proportionate unto the Sanctity, not absolute as I told you before.
This kind of honor done to such things, You do wholly condemn. Debitu^^
honorem and vener^^tionem etc. Con^ Trid. se^^ 25. in greek (...). which word
yo^ have inte^preted b^ the ^. Ni^ Co^^. in e^ a^ ^^pp.
Calu. l. 1. Instit. c. 11. and 4. c. 9. We do give it. To contradict your
general denial, one example ou^ of the Scriptere will serve, because it is
the same reason in the rest. You esteem the dead body of a Saint, more then
common earth* if therefore I show you that honor is in Scripture commanded to
be given to the very ground in regard of relative sanctity, you will admit that
in this point it makes for us against you. In the third of Exodus our lord
seeing that Moses went forward to see, he called him out of the bush, Exodus 3.
v. 4^5. Honor to the ground.
and said approach not hither: loose thy shoes from thy feet: for, the place
whereon thou stand is holy ground. Here is command and example of honor
done to the ground, in regard of relative sanctity, which it had. And if the
ground might have a kind of honor, why not the dust and bones of Martyrs? why
not the Cross whereon Christ suffered? why not the place where he stood? why
not his picture wherein he is represented? when Iosue was in the field of the
city of Ierico, he lifted up his eyes, Ios. 5. v. 13.14.15.16.
and saw a man standing against him, holding a drawn sword, and he went unto
him and said art thou ours or our adversaries? who answered, No. But I am a
prince of the host of our lord, and now I come. Iosue, fell flat on the
ground, and adoring he said, what speaks my lord to his servant? loose, We
have need of a Mediator to Christ our Mediator. S. Bern. sermon. sig. magn.
says he, thy shoe from thy feet, for the place wherein thou do stand is
holy. And Iosue did as it was commanded him.

47. Next concerning Saints and Angels: Though we do not acknowledge them
our Principal Mediators (for the chief Mediator is Jesus Christ, appar. vide
Cyrill. l. 12. Thesaur. c. 10.
God and man) Yet we believe that their subordinate mediation to speak with S.
Bernard, and Intercession, and prayers in particular for us, relying on the
merits of our Savior, are profitable to us, agreeable to their happy estate
and presidencie, and conformable to the Scripture. You say No. Calu. 1. instit.
c. 14. and 3. c. 20. Christus solus populi vota ad Deum defert. ibid.. 20. The
Scripture. The Angel of our lord said, Zach. 1.12. See also. Dan. 10.
Intercession.
O lord of hoasts how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
cities of Judah, with which thou have been angry. And in the Revelation of S.
John. The four and twenty Seniours or Elders fell before the lamb, Apoc. 5.
v. 8
having every one harpes and golden vialles full of odours which are the
prayers of saints. This place does prove subordinate Intercession not to be
injurious to the mediation of Jesus Christ, but to be included in the order
which he has serte. Apoc. 4. v. 2.
Consider further the circumstances of the vision to find out what persons
these Elders were. Behold, quoth S. John, there was a throne set in heaven, v.
4.
and upon the the throne one sitting etc. And round about the throne 24
thrones: and upon the thrones 24 Elders sitting, clothed about in white
garments, and on their heads crowns of gold. If now you will have me to
believe that these Elders, clothed in white, an attire of Apoc. 3.^ 4.
saints, and crowned after the 2. Ti. 4.8
victory as it seems, with golden Apoc. 14. v. 14.
crowns, and sitting being now at Ibid. v. 13.
rest, upon thrones round about the throne of Christ in heaven, are not
saints there reigning with Christ (...) He that shall overcome and keep my
works unto the end, I will give him power (...) over Nations (so your selves
turn it) And he shall rule them with a rod of iron. Apoc. 2. v. ^6. see Matt.
25. v. 21. and 23. (...) I will make ruler over many things.
over the earth; or, if we must believe that the Saints whose prayers they
present, be not holy men on earth: you must bring not a guess but a
theological demo^stration for it. I was here to bring the letter, and I stick
to it, and cannot be removed unless you show clear Scripture (for Tradition you
look not after) against the sense I take it in, and that it be so judged, not
by you (for I esteem not your judgment) but by the Catholic Church, which is
impossible as you know by that which she believes in this point. Observe this
for the next, Angels offer prayers. Apoc. 8. v. 9. (...),
and others after, that I need not repeat it. Another Angel came and stood
before the alter, having a golden censa^, and there were given to him many
incenses, that he should give of the prayers of all saints upon the alter of
gold which is before the throne of God. And the smoke of the incenses of the
prayers of the saints ascended from the hand of the Angel before God. Thus
for Angels and Saints offering the prayers of the Church unto God. and in
this is included essentiallie, that they do take them after their intellectual
manner, that is, understand them. Heerevppon the Church does call upon them;
and so did the Ancient Fathers, whose Testimony and Spirit might have suffised
for our example. We believe also that it is good to pray for the Dead. You
say no. Calu. 3. Inst. c. 5. The Scripture. It is a holy and behouefull
cogitation to pray for the dead, 2. Mac. 12.46. Prayer for the dead, S. Aug.
l. 8. de ciuit. c. 36.
that they may be released from their sins. I said the scripture because, to
use here S. Augustines words not my own, Tbe books of the Machabees not the
Jews but the Church esteems Canonical. And what Spirit is to judge which is
scripture which not, you shall have examined hereafter at large.

48. Concerning the distinction of works, into some that are commanded, others
that are not; which distinction you reject. We believe that there are some
works not commanded, yet proposed by way of Counsel, for attaining of greater
perfection. You say no, Matthew 9. v. 21. Evangelical
Luth. de Vot. monast. Calvin. 4. Inst. ca. 13. The scripture If thou will he
perfect go sell the tbings which thou have, and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me. Counsels. 1. Cor. 7. v.
25. Ibid. v. 40. (...),
And the Apostle. Concerning virgins, I have not a commandment from our lord,
but counsel I give. And again, She, the unmarried, shall be more blessed, if
she remain so according to my Counsel. We believe that single life
consecrated unto God, is better then wedlock. You say No. Luth. Sermon. de Matr.
Calvin. in 1. Cor. 7. The scripture He which joins his virgin in matrimony
does well and he which joins her not does better. 1. Cor. 7. v. 38.
We believe that Religious profession under vow is according to the word of
God. Single life, Isay 19.21. Vows.
You say No. Luth de Vot. Monast. Calu. 4. Inst. c. 13. The scripture. They
shall vow vows to our lord, and shall pay them. And we believe they are in
conscience bound to pay their vows. You say no. Luth. Call. cit. The scripture
Vow ye and render to our lord God. Psalm. 75.12.
Let me note here by the way that you discover your Church not be Gods, since
it contemnes these things which God foretold would be in his, and approoues as
good; and if the thing were to be tried by the Spirit in any man, any man of
judgment would rather acknowledge the Spirit of S. Bennet and S. Francis, which
God by miracles (recorded by saints also) has witnessed to be from him, then
your spirit understanding this scripture oppositelie to their spirit.

49. As for the commandments. We believe that he which will attain to
everlasting life, must keep them. Mat. 19.17 Psalm 14.2. Commaundeme^ts kept.
You say no. Luth. in 3. Gal. Calu. in 5. Act. The scripture. If thou will
enter into life keep the commandments. lord who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy holy hill? he that walks without Spot,
and works justice. You say they are intolerable. Lut. de Libert. Christ.
Calu. Antidot. Conc. Trid. sess. 6. c. 12. we say, no. The scripture. His
commandments are not heavy. we believe that they may be, and have been
observed. 1. Io. 5.3.
You say No. Luth. in 4. Gal. calu. in 3. Romans The scriptute. Zachary and
Elizabeth were both just before God, Luke 16. (...). Psal^ 18. v. 8.12.
walking in all the commandments and iustifications of our lord without blame.
The law of our lord is immaculate co^uerting souls etc. the judgments of our
lord be true, for thy servant keeps them: in keeping them there is much
Reward. And of King Josias the scripture says that he returned to our Lord in
all his heart, Psalm. 118.55. 4. Kings. 23. v. 5.
and in all his soul, and in all his power according to all the law of Moses.
Thou saw a few names in Sardis which have Not defiled their garments: and
they shall walk with me in whites for they are worthy. Apoc. 3.4.
I must add one more for your comfort who brag that you know God better,
and are more familiarlie admitted to his secret counsels, and dearer to the
spirit then other men: 1. Io. 2 v. 3.4 etc.
In this we know that we have known him if we observe his commandments He
that says he knows him, Protestants liers. the Apostles kept it. Io. 17.6.
and keeps not his commandments is a lier and the truth is not in him: but
he that keeps his word, in him in Very Deed the charity of God is
perfited. in this we know that we be in him.

50, We believe that there is justice inhere^t in men, Dan. 6.22. Justice
inhere^r 1. Io. 3.7. (...)
which is such in the sight and judgment of God. You say No. Luth. in 3. Gal.
calu^ in 8. Romans Daniel in the scripture. Before him, God, justice has been
found in me. He that does justice, is just, even as he, christ, is just.
Moreover you cannot deny that the Apostles and many other have had charity or
love, Romans 13 10
and love is vital and inherent and is the fulness of the law (...). Ibid. v.
9. Romans 5.5,
and He that loves his neighbor has Fulfilled the law. The Charity of God
is powered forth in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us. We
believe that a man which has charity may by Gods grace avoid sin: You say
No; Lut. in 2. Gal. calu. de Lib. ar. l. 1. all his actions you say are sins.
The scripture. 1. Io 3.9. Sin. eschued 1. Io. 5.18. ^ habit. (...)
Every one that is borne of God commits not sin, because his seed abides
in him. and again, every one which is borne of God sins not: but the
generation of God preserves him and the wicked one touches him not.

51. Liberty or power to make choice of good to Salvation by the assistance of
Gods grace, and to eschew that which is bad: Also, to make choice of the
better in good things occurring, we acknowledge, You deny. Lut. art. 36. Call.
Co^f. f^d. p. 108. 2. Inst. c. 3. Deuteronomy. 30. v. 15.19. Liberty
The scripture. I have set before thee this day, life and good, and
contrariwise death and evil, that thou may love our lord thy God and walk
in his ways, and keep his co^ma^dements etc. I have proposed unto you life
and death, blessing and cursing: Choose therefore life, that both thou may
live and thy seed. 1. Cor. 7.^7
And the Apostle, He that has determined in his heart being settled, not having
Necessity, but having Power of his own Will, and has judged this in his heart
to keep his virgin, does well. Therefore he that joins his virgin in
Matrimony does well, and he that joins her not does better. Let me add one
more out of Genesis, Genesis 4 7. Vide S. Aug. l. 15. de ciuit. c* 7. Ps. 118. v.
112. S. Ierom. ^. 8. Sept. ibid. 1. Cor. 9.2^
The lust thereof shall be under thee and thou shall have Dominion over it. we
believe that good works may be done in conte^plation of a reward, or crown:
You say No. Luth. in Fest. OO. SS. Calu. in Antid. sess. 6. c. 16. David. I
have inclined my heart to do thy iustifications forever, for Reward. and the The
Apostle. Every one that strives for maistrie refraineth himself from all
things* and they certes that they may receive a corruptible crown: but we an
incorruptible. we believe that me^ have reward for their works given them by
Gods justice: You say No. Luth in 2. Gal. Calvin in 4. Romans Matt. 16.27. Reward
and Merit, Apoc. 22.12.
The Scripture. The son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with
his Angels, and then will he Render to every one according to his works.
Behold I come quickly and my Reward is with me, to Render to every man
according to his works. Thou saw a few names in Sardis, which have not
defiled their garmente, and they shall walk with me in whites, Apoc. 3.4.
because they are Worthy (...) because they merit and deserve it. 2. Tim. 4.8
And the Apostle. There is laid us for me a Crown of Justice, which our lord
will Render to me in that day a just Judge; and not only to me but to them
also that love his coming. We believe that a man may increase in Justice,
according to that in the Revelation he that is just let him be justified yet
and let the holy be sanctified yet, Apoc. 22.11.
And we believe that men are not justified by faith only, Ia, 2.24. works
justify.
but also by works done by the Assistance and help of Gods grace. You say, By
faith only. Luth. in 2. Gal. Call. in Antid. sess. 6. c. 9. The Scripture. A man
is justified by works and not by faith only.

52. We believe that upon S. Peeter, by grace made a Rock, the Church was
built: You say no. Luth. in 16. Matthew. Calvin. ibid. The Scripture: Mat. 16.18
Primacie.
Thou art Peeter, a rock, and upon this rock will I build my Church: In the
Syriacke in which language our Savior spoke the thing is yet cleerer, for in
both places for that we read Peeter, and Rock, is the same word Cephas,
thus: thou art Cephas, and upon this Cephas will I build my Church. Moreover
the circumstances of the text, and the connection of the speech do convince
that the Church was built on Peeter; and the Fathers, impartial Judges, so
understood it: witness your own men (for here I am not to allege Antiquity)
D^naeus: Dan. Con^ 3.16.277, pessime Zanc. de Eccles. c. 9. c. 8. col. 94*
The Fathers interpreted naughtilie those words of Christ, Matthew. 16. Thou art
Peeter etc. of the person of Peeter: Zanchius another great Protestant, The
Fathers exposition, upon this Rock that is, upon Peeter, is not admitted,
and Luther the great Apostle of Protestancie: Here all, Lut. in 2. Pet. c. 5.
fol* 490.
either Fathers or Doctors as many as hitherto have interpreted Scriptures have
stambled, as when, that of Matthew. 16. Thou art Peeter etc. They interpret of
the Pope. We believe that one of the Apostles peculiarly was made Pastor of
the Church. You say, No. Luth. in Assert. art. 25. Calu. 4. Inst. c. 6. The
Scripture Peeter feed My Sheep. Io. 21.18*
We believe that the Apostles, and their Successors had power to forgive and
to retain sins: You say, No. Calu. 3. Inst. c. 3. and 4. c. 19. Luther here
so ouerlasheth o^the affirmative side that in his book de Clauibus he
avouches the keys to apertaine to all Christians equally every way. Omnibus
modis Luthers Ghostly Father*
And in another place (de abrog. mi. pr.) he houldes that if the Devil should
absolve, it were valid. Dum vitant stulti vitia etc. In the scripture power to
forgive sins (I do not say to declare them forgiven, or hidden and not
imputed as you mince it, but to forgive and detain Sins) is given to Men
only, and to some, Io 20. v. 22 Absolution.
not to all. The scripture. Whose sins you shall forgive they are forgiven
them, and whose you shall retain they are retained. We believe that power was
given to S. Peeter and to the Church to release men by way of indulgence, from
temporal punishment remaining due for sin: You say No. Luth. Cap. Babil.
Calvin. l. vnic. Inst. cap. 9. The scripture. Whatsoever thou Peeter shall
bind on earth shall be bound also in the heavens: Matt 16 19 Indulgences.
and Whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, it shall be loosed also in the
heavens.

53. In the matter of the Eucharist, the Protestant school is divided about
the real Presence, and you follow Calvin: So do Jewel, Perkins, Rainolds,
Wittaker, Bilso^, White, etc. And howsoever some of your fellows in words
admit a real Presence, being forced there unto by the arguments of our men,
yet they also when they are looked into, are essentially Caluinists in this
point, believing no more that Christ is in the signs, or in the forms of
bread and wine, then a man's lands are in the Chest where his writings be, or
in his fathers will and testament whereby they were made his, which is VVhites
example. We believe that in the Eucharist, under the accidents of bread and
wine there is the body and blood of Jesus Christ; You say No. So John Caluins
school. Our savior in the scripture. This is my body; Mat 26. v. 27.28.
Real Presence.
This is my blood. We believe that the bread which our Savior gave, was in
substance flesh, the very same with that which was given on the cross, for
the redemption of the world: You say No: it was not in substance flesh but
plain bread. Calu. school. Our Savior in the scripture. Io. 6 51. (...) etc
Luke 22.19*
The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world. This is my body which is given, for you. We believe that the
drink in the Cup, in form of wine, was shed for us, and therefore was in
substance blood, and not wine: You say No, it was mere wine. Calu. School.
The Scriprure. Luke 22.20. Io. 6.55.
This is the chalice the new Testament in my blood (...) which Chalice is
shed for you, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. We
believe that the Church is to eat the flesh of our Savior; and to drink his
blood. You say No. Calu. school The Scripture. Unless you eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood you shall not have life in you. We
believe that the Christian church does Sacrifice and offer unto God publicly
an Oblation every where. You say No, There is is no Sacrificing or offering of
any public Oblatio^ since Christ offered himself at Jerusalem on the cross.
Luth. de for. Mis. pro Eccl. wit. Calu. 4. Inst. c. 18. The Scripture From the
rising of the Son even to the going down, Malae 111 Oblatio^
great is my name among the Gentiles and in ^uery place there is sacrificing
and there is offered to my name a Clean Oblation, because my name is great
among the Gentiles says the lord of hosts. Is is pretty to see how you offer
to interpret this place of your works, as if they were the clean Oblation
here spoken of and opposed to the public visible Sacrifices of the Jews, when
as notwithstanding you teach and maintain that all your works are foul and
impure; Luth. de bo^ oper. fol. 581. Gal. l. 1 de lib. arb. p. 141.
All your justice or righteousness as the cloth of a me^strued woman; all your
fairest and best actions mortal sins. These, forsooth, are that which God
himself esteems a clean Oblation. These are the rare Sacrifice which could
not be found among the Jews. Further, we believe that our Savior being a
Priest according to the Order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 109.4 Heb. 5.6.
did offer his body and blood after an unbloody manner before his passion,
for his Church, and for the remission of Sins: And that he did ordain it
should be continued and frequented in the Church, which is to offer and
institute a Propitiatory Sacrifice. You say No. Luth. de Capt. Bab. Call. 4.
Inst. c. 18. and 1. Cor. 9. The Scripture This is my body which is given for
you. (...) which is broken for you. Do This. Luke 22.19 1. Cor. 11.24. Mat.
26.28 Luke 22.20. Propitiatory Sacrifice.
This is my blood of the new Testament (...) which is shed for many unto
remission of Sins. (...), which translated word by word is, This the chalice,
the new Testament in my blood, which chalice is shed for you. In which
sentence the word signifying effusion, (...), does not accord with the word
(...) which signifies blood, but with the word (...), (...). Mat. 26.28 Mar.
14.24. Luke 22 20. and of the Body, (...) Luke 22.19 (...) 1. Cor. 11 24.
which signifies the Chalice, as every Syntaxian knows; whereby the sense is,
This the Chalice which chalice is shed for you. And since you cannot exclude
the time present because the word (...) imports it, and all the Greek texts of
the Evangelists agree in it, it is clear that then, before the passion, at the
last supper, the chalice was shed for the Church, and for remission of Sins,
by Jesus Christ a Priest according to the Order of Melchisedech; And this we
call an vnblody and propitiatory Sacrifice. We believe; that under Jesus
Christ our high Priest there are Priests in the new Testament* You say No.
Luth. Abrog. Mis. pri. Calu. 4. Inst. c. 18. Isay 66. v. 19.20.21. Priests
Episcopi and Presbyteri proprie iam in Ecclesia vocantur Sacerdotes 8 Aug. li.
20 de Ciu. c. 10.
The Scripture* I will send of them that shall be saved to the Gentiles into
the sea, into Afric and Lydia: into Italy and Greece; to the Islands far of
etc. And I will take of them to be Priests and Levites says our lord. we
believe the Apostles, and their successors were by Christ's institution, for a
perpetual memory and representation of his death and passion, to do that
which our Savior did at his last Supper, that is (as I have declared by the
Gospel) to offer unbloody Sacrifice. You say No. Luth. Calu. cit. The
Scripture. Luke 22.19.
Do this for a commemoration of me. we believe that there is also in the
Christian Church, an Alter: these three things Sacrifice, Priest, and Alter
having a reference of coexistence. You say No. Luth. for. Mis. Eccl. Wit. Calu.
4. inst. cit. and 1. Cor. 9: The Scripture. In that day there shall be an
Alter of our Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt. Isay 19.19 Altars. Heb.
13, 10
And the Apostle. We have an Alter whereof they have not power to eat who
serve the tabernacle.

54. We believe that Traditions are to be observed, whether received from the
Apostles in writing, or else by word of mouth: You say No. Luth. Post. in fest.
sancti Steph. Calu. 4. inst. c. 8. and. Antid. sess. 4 Kemn. ibid. The
Scripture Hold the traditions which you have learned, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. (...),
Traditions.
whether it be by word, or by our Epistle. We believe that Gods word shall by
divine Assistance be continually delivered by word of Mouth, and openly be
still professed. You acknowledge no infallible delivery of true doctrine by
word of Mouth. Luth. Calu. cit, and Beza not. Eccl. whitt. cont. 2. q. 4. c. 3.
and q. 5. c. 17. The Scripture* Isay 59.2^.
My words that I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy Mouth, and
out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed
says our lord from this present and for ever. The same place your brother
Puritan, does also contradict, in denying a perpetual visible Church. We
believe that the Church is assisted by the holy Ghost to all truth. You say No
And so do all Heretics. Our Savior in the Scripture. Io. 14.16. and 16. v. 13
I will give you another Paraclete that he may abide with you for ever, the
Spirit of Truth; he shall teach you all truth;

55. Thus I am come in fine, to the first again which does confirm all the
rest, Remember what I said in the beginning of this Chapter.
in so much that what I have here showed, in the last place out of Scripture,
does prove, that the Church doctrine delivered by word of Mouth is all true,
whether it be written down in the Bible, or be not: for these places of
Tradition by word; the word of God ever in the mouth of the Church, and the
Spirit suggesting, and teaching all truth, are not limited in the Scripture to
writing, as in the text, you see. And therefore, now I repeat my argument made
in the beginning of this Chapter. If the Scripture does formallie avouch our
doctrine, and deny yours in the maine points wherein we differ, it is
evidently impossible for you or any man breathing to make it evident by the
Scripture that the Apostles and primitive Church were of your religion, not of
^urs, or, that yours is true, ours false.

56. Now since your doctrine is thus contrary to Gods word, and consequently,
your spirit being rubde upon this tuchstone being found to be counterfeit, it
were not amiss to look about from whence you had your doctrine, and whence
your Spirit came. Which thing I could find out without much ado, and would
set down here, but that I have allreadie been to long. I will therefore only
\ show you the way to find it, and so conclude. Look out the place where
Gods commandments are never kept but esteemed impossible: where all actions
are sins: and sins never remitted or wiped clean away: where there is no
Indulgence or remission of any pain due to sin, no works of supererogatio^
acknowledged, no state of perfection, no Merit of works, no Liberty to do
well, no prayer for the dead, no Communion with saints in heaven, nor,
prayers made unto them, where Priestlie function is abhorred, holy Sacrifice
blasphemed: and the very Images of Christ and his Saints loathed and detested.
Where there is no Justice inherent, no constant rectitude or infallibility of
judgment, no continual Visibilitie of sacred Profession, no Unity in Religion:
but a confused admittance of all that are against the Catholic: of
Wicklefists and Hussites, Luther does confess it in his Book de missa pri.
tom. 7. fol. 228. VVittemb a. 1558. See Luthers life by Mr Brereley c^ 1.^ 2.
and Arians and Athiests and all people that will obstinatly refuse confession
of their Sins, works of piety, and the common Creed, and make themselves,
their own wits the Judge of all, look out this place and the rest you will
find there. I have heard, and read, and do believe, that the spirit which
instructed Luther your Master, came from thence.

The Conclusion.
THe protestants are not able to give satisfaction in the Question of the
Church; whereby, as also by their Opposition to the Scripture and Antiquity,
it is manifest that theirs is not the true Religion, which or where else soever
the true Religion be.



THE SECOND BOOK. WHEREIN IS DECLARED which is the true Church.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Showing by authority of holy scripture that the true
Christian Church is Catholic for time and place.
1. SINCE your Church cannot be proved to be Catholic or universal in
regard of a general communion which the world and perpetual visibilitie, you
pretend there is no necessity of any such latitude of place or time: and would
persuade us that it is Catholic for doctrine, because it holds the three
Creeds, with Baptism and the Supper: and is not tied to one time or Nation,
but such as may be in any: which you call negative universality for time and
place, and for doctrine positive. Thou seem to speak acutelie (said S.
Augustine to Vincentius a man of the Rogation Heresy, and your Master in the
way of defending your Religion as it seems) when thou do interpret the
name Catholic, S. Aug. ep. 48,
by the observation of all divine Precepts and all Sacraments, and not of the
communion of the whole world etc. but indeed the thing which thou do
endeavor to persuade us is that only Rogatians have remained who are rightly
to be called Catholics by the observation of all the divine laws and all
Sacraments, and that you only are the men in whom the son of man may find
faith when he comes. Pardon us: we believe it not. And afterward in the same
Epistle, you are with us in baptism, in the Creed, in the rest of our lords
Sacraments: In the spirit of Unity, and in the band of peace, and finally in
the Catholic church you are not with us. As that Rogatian, so you in your
interpretation would seem acute, but unto such only as neither know
Scripture, nor the state of the Question. It is true that the doctrine of the
true Church is perfect, and the Object of her faith entire in it self: but in
your books and belief it is mangled and divided so, that part only is there
allowed, as hereafter shall appear. The Question is not here about that, but
about the Church: that is, about a certain congregation of men, and about the
Universality of such a Congregation, not negative, as you would have it, but
positive, of time and place. And because you admit not a positive
universality, that is, a being of the Church in all Nations, and in all times,
I will demonstrate unto you by Scripture the Universality of the true Church
which soever it be, whether the Roman or any other: of which further point I
will not dispute in this Chapter. And allthough the scripture be full of
testimonies for this universality, I will allege a few only, and those in
order out of Moses, the Psalms, Prophets and Gospel; which being well looked
into, will suffice.

2. But first lest you rhinke you are to open your eyes to look on a Church,
and it invisible, by reason that in the Creed we believe the Church, you must
consider that the eye of faith, and the corporal eye may both find their
objects in one and the same thing. We read the Scripture and believe the
sense: The Apostles saw our Savior, and believed he was the Son of God: The
faithful assembled when the holy Ghost came amongst them, were visible, and
yet they where the Church. First therefore in a word I will declare that the
Church of God, which soever be, is visible: secondly I will show you the
greatness of it, which is the thing I principally do intend in this Chapter:
thirdly the durance or perpetuity, that you may frame in your understanding
the true conceit of the Church of God.

3. And first touching the visibilitie, or to speak yet more generally
touching the sensible perceptibility of the thing we speak of, it is clear
that, that which makes a continual noise, Visibilitie.
and is always speaking, and in all men's eyes, and cannot be hid, is a thing
sensible unto men that have eyes and ears; and if this thing be in all Nations
and at all times, it is sensible to all the world; Now this is the condition of
the Church of God, Psalm. 18. v. 6. Isa. 52. v. 10
which soever it be, which I prove thus by Scripture He has put his
tabernacle in the Sun says David, and Isaie, Our lord has prepared his
holy arm in the eyes of all the Gentiles, and all the ends of the earth
shall see the salvation of our God. They of the west shall fear the name of
our Lord, and they of the rising of the sun his glory, when he shall come as
a violent stream, 59. v. 19.20 21.
which the spirit of our Lord drives, and there shall come the Redeemer to
Sion and to them that return from iniquity in Jacob says our Lord. This is
my covenant with them says our Lord. My spirit that is in thee, and my words
that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the
mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth, of the seed of thy seed says our
Lord, 62. v. 6. Mat. 5. v. 15 See S. Aug. enar. in ps. 47.
from this present and for ever Upon thy walls Jerusalem I have appointed
watchmen: All the day and all the night for ever they shall not hold their
peace. You are the light of the world: a city cannot be hid. situated on a
montaine.

4. I omit the allegation of more authorities, because hereafter I shall
speak more of this matter, and these few declare, and prove manifestly the
truth of that which I said. I go therefore on to the chief point intended in
this Chapter which is to show Gods eternal and inviolable ordinance about the
Churches universality; Universality. Gal. 3.
And to begin with Moses; we have in him the promise of an ample Posterity
to old Abraham, Father of Believers made by God himself, and expounded by S.
Paul of the Church of Christ, Genesis 22. v. 17.
I will bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven,
and as the sand that is in the sea shore: thy seed shall possess the gates of
their enemies, and in thy seed shall be blessed all the Nations of the earth.
This did God then confirm with an oath: and proceeding in the promise, 28. v.
14.
confirmed it again to Jacob afterward: thy seed shall he as the dust of the
earth, thou shall be dilated to the west and to the east, and to the north, and
to the south, and in thee, and in thy seed, all the tribes of the earth shall
be blessed. Next in the psalms we hear God the Father saying unto his son
our Savior, Psalm. 2. v. 8
ask of me and I will give the Gentiles for thine inheritance, and thy
possession the ends of the earth: and the Prophet adds in an other psalm, all
the ends of the earth shall remember and be converted unto our Lord, 21. v.
28.29
and all the families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight All Nations
whatsoever thou have made shall come and shall adore before thee o lord. 65. v.
6.


5. Among the Prophets, Isaie. In the latter days the mountain of the house
of our lord shall be prepared in the top of mountains, and shall be raised
above the little hills, Isa. 2 v. 2.3
and all Nations shall flow unto it: and many people shall go and shall say,
come and let us go up to the mount of our lord, and to the house of the God of
Jacob: and he will teach us his ways, and we shall walk in his paths. And
again: upon thee o Jerusalem shall our lord arise, and his glory shall
beseene upon thee: and the Gentiles shall walk in thy light and kings in the
brightness of the rising: 60. v. 2.3.4 5.
lift up thine eyes round about and behold, all these are gathered together:
they are come unto thee: thy sons shall come from a far, and thy daughters
shall arise from thy side: then shall thou see and shall abound, and thy heart
shall wonder and be enlarged when the multitude of the sea shall be converted
unto thee, the strengh of Gentiles shall come to thee. After him Daniel: I
beheld in the vision of the night, and lo with the clouds of heaven there came
in as it were the son of man, Dan. 7. v. 13.14.
and he came even to the ancient of days and in his sight they offered him;
and he gave him power, and honor and kingdom: and all people, tribes, and
tongues shall serve him, his power is an eternal power that shall not be taken
away, and his kingdeme shall not be corrupted. The like is in the rest: I add
only Malachie which is the last, and nearest to our Saviors time: from the
rising of the sun even to the going down, Mal. 1. v. 11
great is my name among the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrificing,
and there is offered unto my name a clean Oblation, because my name is great
among the Gentiles, says the lord of hosts.

6. As the old Testament, so the new does establish the foresaid universality
of the Church, and our Savior does give commission unto his disciples, and to
their Successors to raise such a one. All power, says he, is given me in
heaven and in earth going therefore teach ye all Nations, Mat. 28. v. 19.20.
baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the son and of the holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you:
and behold I am with you all days even to the consummation of the world. Going
into the world preach the Gospel to all creatures. And in another, Mar. 16. v.
15.
he declares the issue of the foresaid prophetical speeches, against such as
would have imagined they were co^ditionall speeches only. These are the words
which I spoke to you, Luke 24. v. 44.45.46
when I was yet with you, that all things must needs be fullfilled which are
written in the law of Moses; and the prophets, and the psalms of me: then he
opened their understanding that they might understand the scriptures; and he
said unto them, that so it is written, and so it behooved Christ to suffer, and
to rise again the third day from the dead: and penance to be preached in his
name, and remission of sins to all Nations beginning at Jerusalem. I need not
add any more: for by this, is abundantly shown that the Christian Church
was by the intention of God the Father, and of his son Jesus Christ, to be in
the communion of all Nations, and Catholic in this positive sense: and that
all this infalliblie was to be, and would be fullfilled. And thus much noe
Jew, nor Christian* turn about which way he will can deny.

7^ Now further, least one should foolishlie conceive that in the primitive
time it had gotten to this amplitude fully, and then decayed, I proceed and
show that the same Church is universal for time likewise; and indeed, this
tergiuersation might be refuted by experience, because the world knows that
many Nations came into the Church since that time (which is S. Augustines
argument against the Donatists, who thought by that means to deceive the
Catholics, and delude their arguments of universality) but here I will
prove it by Scripture: And first I might urge to this purpose the testimonies
allreadie cited, both because the extent of the Church unto all Nations does
consequently reach unto all times: Perpetuity.
all Nations and people being not at one time converted, and Christian; as
also, because some do express a perpetuity; but the Scripture being full, I
will add more. God the Father in the Psalms, speaking of his son, amongst
other things, says. Psalm. 88. v. 28.29.37* 38,
I will put him as the first begotten high above the kings of the earth, and I
will keep my mercy unto him forever, and my testament faithful unto him: I
will put his seed for ever and ever, and his throne as the days of heaven
etc. His seed shall continue for ever, and his throne as the sun in my
sight, and as the moon perfect forever. Isa. 62. v. 3* 4.
And of the Church, thou shall be a crown of glory in the hand of our Lord,
and a diadem of a kingdom in the hand of thy God: thou shall be no more
called Forsaken, and thy land shall be no more called Desolate: but thou shall
be called my will in her: and thy land inhabited, because it has well pleased
our Lord in thee: and thy land shall be inhabited. I will make a league of
peace to them, an everlasting covenant shall be to them: Ezech. 37. v. 26.27.28.
and I will form them, and will give my sanctification in the midst of them
forever; and my tabernacle shall be in them, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people; and the Gentiles shall know that I am the Lord the
Sanctifier of Israel, when my sanctification shall be in the midst of them
for ever. The God of heaven will raise up a kingdom; Dan. 2. v. 44.
that shall not be dissipated for ever, and this kingdom shall not be
delivered to an other people: and it shall break in pieces and shall consume
all those kingdoms, and it self shall stand for ever. To which the new
Testament does consent. Luke 1. v. 33 Mat. 16. v. 19.
he, Christ, shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
there shall be noe end. Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it. 28. v. 20.
I am with you all days even to the consummation of the world. Ioh. 14. v. 15
I will ask my father and he will give you another paraclete, that he may
abide, S. Aug. de unit. Eccl. c. 13. Mat. 13. v. 30.
with you forever etc. The like is in many other places, amongst which S.
Augustine does urge that of S. Matthew, let both grow till harvest; because
our Savior does expound himself by the field to have understood the world,
by the good seed* the children of that kingdom, v. 37. etc.
by the cockle the children of the wicked one, by the harvest the end of the
world, so that both are to grow until then. Lastly, that I leave not the
Apostle of the Gentiles out in this business, He (Christ) gave some Apostles,
Ephesians. 4. v* 11.12.
and some Prophets and other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors, and
Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, unto the work of the ministry,
unto the edifying of the body of Christ: until we meet all in the Unity of
faith and knowledge of the son of God.

8. This congregation, Unity. Io. 10.16,
or Church notwithstanding the foresaid greatness ad extension is but one,
being one fold, and one body, under one Pastor and one head Jesus Christ:
Ephesians. 4* v. 16.
of whom (says the Apostle) the whole body compact and knit together by all
iuncture of subministration, according to the operation into the measure of
every member, makes the increase of the body unto the edifying of it self
in Charity. By which words we are taught likewise that this body is
heterogeneall, that is, See more of this in the 3. Book. 6 c*
consisting of diverse kinds of parts, as man's body is, whereunto this
mystical body is compared: having in it, eyes, mouth, feet, and the like in
proportion: 1. Cor. 12*
which may be understood more fully out of the Epistle of the same Apostle to
the Corinthians.

9. And thus far I have proceeded in the Scripture: showing you there the
Church of God, built on a rock, against which the gates of hell cannot
prevail, a perpetual kingdom if you believe God, that shall not be
dissipated, corrupted, delivered to another people: that shall stand for ever,
shall have no end, a people that shall be no more forsaken, no more desolate.
They shall have the Spirit with them, abiding with them, not departing from
them, and Jesus Christ with them all days to the consummation of the world,
and the Sanctification of God in the midst of them for ever. Into their
communion shall come the streingth of Nations, the multitude of the sea, all
kings, and people, and tongues: all the families of the Gentiles, all Nations
what soever. They shall be dilated to the East, West, North, and South: and
shall be multiplied as the dust of the earth, as the sand of the Sea, as the
stars in heaven. They shall be as the sun in the sight of God, and as the
days of heaven. They shall have pastors and Doctors to the worlds end: the
word of God shall never out of their mouths, and thy shall not hold their
peace day nor night for ever.

10. Compare this now to your Church, to your company: which we have searched
and hunted after in the former book, but could not get tidings of, in all the
world before Luther. I, in the mean time will on further to look out this
Church of God. But first I would have you to note, that as in the natural
body there are many superfluous material parts of flesh, fat, and some
other eauen in the hands, ears, and eyes (as you see in men that are gross)
which parts though they be coherent now, are not resumed all in the
resurrection, because they would exte^d and increase the body unto more then
the just bigness of the man, and beyond the original proportion of the soul:
So in this mystical body of Jesus Christ, are many parts, which will not rise
with it unto glory: and therefore are multiplied above the number which is
written in the book of life: yet being called (as many are called, few
chosen) for a time they do believe; but they fall again before they die.
Another thing you may note if you please: that as the natural body receiving
the soul when the principal parts are prepared, does grow and flourish, and
afterward loses again the exterior beauty in old age: So the Church
received the Spirit when, by the instruction of the son of God, the chief
parts (the Apostles) were prepared, and then did extend it self in bigness, and
flourished, but in her old age, in the days of Antichrist she will loose her
exterior beauty and majesty, and be greeuouslie afflicted, and persecuted
for a The Church in the time of her extreme persecution will be visible, for
persecution it self is an evident argument of visibility, as in England you
see: At the same time she will be also Catholic and spread over the earth as
S. John tells in the twentieth Chapter of his revelation, where of the
persecutors he says, they ascended upon the breadth of the earth, and
compassed the camp of the saints, and the beloved city. Upon which words
clear enough in themselves. S. Augustine in his books De cluitate Dei writes
thus. They are not said to come into one place as though the camp of the
Saints, or the beloved City should be in some one place, since this indeed
is nothing but the Church of Christ spread over the whole world: And therefore
wheresoever this Church shall be then (which shall be in all Nations, for so
much is insinuated by the latitude of the earth) there shall be Gods beloved
City, there shall she be beseiged by all her enemies, for they also shall be
in all Nations with her. So he li. 20. c. 11.

Moreover that extreme persecution of Antichrist shall be very short, as
enduring some three years and a half, which the Scripture also has
declared. He, Antichrist, shall think that he can change times and laws, and
they shall be delivered into his hands eue^ to a time, times and half a time.
Dan 7.25. Power was given to it, the Beast, to work two and forty months.
Ap. 13.5. They shall tread under foot the holy City two and forty months.
Ap. 11.2. From the time when the Continual Sacrifice shall be taken away, and
the abomination shall be set up 1290. Days* Dan. 12.11. See also Ap. 12. v.
6. and 14.


time as S. John does foretell. But now to find this Church.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. The Catholic Church assigned.
11. Having seen the picture of the Catholic Church as in Scripture it has
been drawn by God himself; it is not hard for him that will cast an eye upon
the world and compare this picture with the communities he finds there, to
discover among all Churches and congregations which is the Catholic, or to
learn it if he will but ask the question of any man. For all, S. Aug. de vera
relig. c 7.
and even Heretics and Schismatiques as S. Augustine long ago did observe,
when they talk not with those of their own sect; but with others, do, whether
they will or no, call no other Catholic but the Catholic: because they
cannot otherwise be understood unless they design her by that name, which the
whole world calls her by. Men generally being demanded which are Catholics
point at us: and being asked which Church is the Catholic, do direct unto
that which is in communion with the Roman See. This was known to be the
Catholic Church in the time of S. Paul: this was acknowledged to be the
Catholic Church in the time of S. Augugustine, and S. Gregory, and ever
since, and is now. Ask all Christians such only excepted as your selves
condemn for heretics, and they will tell you so. Ask Jews and Pagans and
they will tell you this is the Church of Jesus Christ: ask your fellows
White, Cowell, and such others, and they will send you to this.

12. If a man should have come to Luther when he did look round about for
company, and found none of his opinion, and should have said unto him, Sir
Luther, in the Bible there is an ample description of a perperuall Catholic
Church, I pray you which is it, that I may be Christian in communion of that
Church; Your Doctor for his heart could have directed to no other, then to that
Congregation which then was in communion with the Bishop of Rome. For to you,
he could not have directed him, because, poor men, you were not in the world
as yet, with your Religion, nor ever deserved the name of Catholic, as in the
former book to your confusion has been seen. To have said that he; a sole
man, was the Catholic Church, which the Scripture speaks of, had been to
multiply himself over the world into many Nations, and into millions of men
at once. To the Jews or Pagans he could with no face have sent him, and had he
done so, they would have given him the lie. It rests therefore that Luther, and
so Calvin, so Jewel, must have directed him to us, and have told him, the
Catholic Church is that, which has and still had communion with the Roman
See.

13. I know some of your fellows would send a man to the Grecians, and some
further to the Aethiopians: but these are not Protestants, as the Grecians
declare them selves, and by the Aethiopians doctrine he may see, that is not
blind. Neither has the Grecian belief in those things wherein they differ
from the Church of Rome, ever been in the general communion of the Christian
world, and therefore Grecisme is not, nor ever was Catholic: and the same it
is of Aethiopians, and all others. Another shift you have, and this is to say
the Catholic Church is invisible, among the Romans, the Grecians,
Aethiopians, Germans, and others, but lies hid. This would trouble the man
surely, for how should he be instructed by her, and embrace her communion unless
he could find her? and how should he find her, if she did not appear but were
invisible? moreover he would say, that the Church which the Scripture has
described is there also declared to be perpetually visible, with gates ever
open, the Pastors always exercising their holy function, and Gods word in
their mouth ever: for this Church he does inquire, show him this Church and he
will trouble you no longer, for the rest he shall have there. A third shift is
to send him to the primitive Church, and to tell him that indeed, then was
this communion with all Nations, this ample Church which the Scripture does
commend, was then, but since it decayed; and now you are building it again.
This journey were to long for him; he is not able to read books, otherwise
he would not trouble you, nor your Congregation at all, for he should easily
find the thing himself: wherefore that he may be directed by the judgment of
other men better seen in that business, he desires to know, which and where is
the present Catholic Church, and by that Church he will be directed about
former times; he desires therefore D. Luther to tell him where the Catholic
Church is now, for such a perpetual one the Bible speaks of. This question
must be answered; the man that does ask it may be any that is in England, for
example, and it might have been answered in Lurhers time who was your Master,
for which reason I tie the question to that time for the more perspicuitie, and
leave the man with you to answer for your Master.

14. Your fellows finding here no way to fly the question do confess, that
the known Church of the world in Luthers time, that which had communion with
the Pope, was the Catholic Church, and labor to find her in error and
Apostasy. So White, Field and other of your companions, so Luther, so Calvin.
Of errors I will speak hereafter, I look now for the Church only, because
this is to be found first before we dispute of further matters. And thus I
urge. That Church which all the world does say is the catholic church, we
likewise We profess the Church of Rome it self in all ages to have been the
visib^e Church of God So white. Defense, c. 41. in the name of his fellows.
we most firmly believe, all the Churches in the World wherein our Fathers
lived and died, to have been the true Churches of God, in which undoubtedly
salvation was to be found Field. Church l. 3. c 8 and c. 47. We never doubted
but that the Churches wherein those holy men (S. Bernard, S. Dominick. etc.)
did live and die were the true Churches of God, and held the saving profession
of heavenly truth. See him also in the sixth Chap. of the same Book. We
confess that all Christian good is in the Papacy, and that from thence it
came down to us. Luth. Epist. cont. Anabapt. and ibid. I say further that in
the Papacy is the true Christianity, yea the true kernel of Christianity.
and upon the 28. of Genes. We Confess the Church to be among the Papists,
for they have Baptism, Absolution, the text of the Gospel: and there are many
godly among them. We deny not that the Churches remain under the Popes
tyraenny, but they are such as with sacrilegious impiety he has profaned.
etc. Calvin. 4. Inst. c. 3. and upon 2 Thessall. 2. he confesses the Church
communicating with the Pope, to be Temple and Sanctuary of God.
says is Rome, and, that London, which the world says is London: But the
whole world says that the company of Christians in communion with the Sea of
Rome is the catholic church, for so your fellows, so your Masters, so we,
so Jews, so Pagans: and no other can be found: wherefore since Gods word and
promise of a perpetual and universal Church must needs be true, we must
believe that it is this.

15. Moreover the Religion which you call Papistrie, is now spread over the face
of the earth, in almost all Nations, and was confessedly the general Religion
of the christian world before Luther, for many hundred I answer as before,
that Grecisme was never generally the faith of Christendom, nor any other
faith whatsoever, but that only which we profess: not the Grecian I say, not
the Ethiopian, not the Armenian, not the Berengarian, the Waldesian, the
Lutheran, the Caluinian, none at all: and herein the Histories of all
Countries, and the memories of all Nations bear me witness. Secondly, you say
that Mahomet has seduced a great part of the world, and so restrained the
latitude which we pretend. Whereunto I answer, first, notwithstanding
Mahomete and his company, that the communion of the christian world has been
with us, and with no other, which is all I desire. I answer secondly, that our
community has gained more in the mean time, then ever the Paga^ took away,
by an infinite increase both in this old, and also in the new world. Witness
all those Nations in Europe which have been converted since that Impostor
came, besides the daily and admirable increase in India, Iaponia, Brasile,
China, and other places. You answer thirdly, that all thos^ worlds of people
have been in error. But this is impertinent, for here I look only for the
church, that we may find it, and when we have found it, we will inquire then
whether it has erred or no. And that this is the Catholic Church is evident
because no other is, or has been in the general communion of Nations, but
only this: nor ever any for the latitude of communion equal to it.

16. I go now futther, and prescribe against you for our church and Religion
thus. That Quod vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, nec Concilijs institutum sed semper
retentum est non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. S.
Aug. l 4. de Bapt. c. 24.
and looking upwards toward the Apostles time, no other origin of it can be
found, is verily to be believed to be such: But such is the faith of this
co^munitie, for it has been the general belief of the Christian World, as I
have showed: and, that no other origin of it can be found, I prove clearly
because, whenever you or any other begin later, we show easily that it was
before. And this because you persist without ground in your fond persuasion,
any indifferent man who does understand Latin may do thus. In any maine
controversy of faith which you question, and accuse this great company (I now
speak of) of innovation, do you name the time when their doctrine first began,
and let him who would see the trial take Gualterius, Coccius, or some other of
our Authors, who write of that matter, and he shall find another in the
primitive Church, who did teach it before the time or party you assigned:
whereby it will be evident unto him, that you were deceived about the beginning
of it. And if he follow the direction of the book, he shall find the same in
the Fathers. I said, in any maine controversy of faith, and not, in any thing
whatsoever, because the Church has power to make laws, and prescribe
ceremonies, and therefore may introduce or alter such things according as the
circumstances in her judgment require. For this reason I speak of points of
faith, or such things whose institution we hold to be Divine. For example, the
substance of Baptism is of divine institution, but Ceremonies have been
added: and the substance of the Mass is by divine institution, but prayers and
Ceremonies have been and may yet be added by the Church.

17. If you be discontented with this manner of proceeding, from which without
a prejudice you cannot disclaim at all, I urge an other, and take learned men
to scanne the business. In the seventh age when the Christian word was
Papisticall and of our Religion as you confess, the Scholars and wisest men
had the Fathers writings, and the Memories of the sixth age, which you must
needs grant, because the precedent age did leave them to their posterity,
the Fathers to their Children, the Masters to their Scholars: Now those of the
seventh age, as I have noted more fully in the former book, Bishops,
Pastors, learned me^, and generally all the Church of that time, having these
pregnant and infallible means of informatio^ by writings, and otherwise, did
judge and believe, and therevppon did engage their part in heaven and eternal
estate, that they received their faith and Religion from the former age being
the sixth: Wherefore since a world of men in matter of Fact, as whether their
Fathers went to Mass, prayed to Saints etc. could not be deceived, the thing
being subject to the eye, and there being infinite eyes observing religiously
what was done, it follows cleerlie, since the world generally did then
believe this to be the Religion professed by their Fathers, that so it was.

18. My fourth argument shall be this. Papistrie, as you term it, was the
general Religion of the Christian world in the time of Boniface the third, as
you may see in the Ecclesirsticall histories of that time, whereby appears,
that all generally did go to Mass, pray to Saints confess their sins etc.
and your men also withal the world, and this Religion did remain in the
communion of Nations till the time of S. Leo and S. Gregory the Great, as you
may observe in their books, wherein their communion with the Christian world
is manifest: so compare the sixth age, to the fifth: the fifth age, to the fourth
etc. as I before did the 7. to the 6.
Now Saint Gregory died in the year six hundred and four, and Bonifacius the
third, who in the time of S. Gregory had been employed at Constantinople, came
to be Pope, and died also within the space of three years after; in which
space the Religion of the Christian world was not generally changed, as we see
manifestly by all histories of that time, therefore the Religion which was
universally in the world in Bonifacius his time was the same religion with that
which was universally in the world in time of S. Gregorye which Religion you
confess to be the right. Moreover, that in the foresaid space of three years
it was not changed, besides the Testimony which is taken out of the histories
of that time, where no mention is made of such a change, by friend or foe, but
all things current as before in matters of faith I confirm first, by the
practice of Saint Augustine and his company, who being sent by Pope Gregory,
brought Papistrie from him into England; as is largly observed in the
Protestants Apology, and by your learned men there confessed. Prot. Apol tr.
1. Sect. ^
I prove it secondly, by the writings of such as lived in the sixth Age,
wherein are expressly contained all points of Papistrie: which you may find in
Coccius and Gualterius, if you take the pains, and I will put down if it be
required. Thirdly, it is not only incredible to any man of judgment, but also
manifestly impossible by reason of the divine ordinance and promise of Jesus
Christ that all Christian people, in the space of three years, without meeting
in common Council, without resistance of any zealous men, without force of
arms or other constraint, should generally change the religion of the whole
world, and conspire all generally (for you cannot produce any one man who stood
for your Religion in that time, which you would have us believe was the
Religion of the first six hundred years, there is not in histories mention of
any one Protestant man then resisting, therefore I say again, it is impossible
that they should conspire all) all kingdoms, all states, all Provinces, all
Nations, all universities, all Bishops, and generally all men living, learned
and unlearned, good and bad, Pastors and people, against the Evidence of the
former Religion, against the Religion of the Christian world, (which you
foolishly suppose to have been the Protestant, howsoever) against the Religion
of the world before them, maintained to that time by Fathers Writings and
Authority, by the force and power of clear Succession in the Chaires of
Christ's Apostles, by the word of God interpreted by the Spirit in known
Saints, by consent of Nations, and generally of the Christian world, and
finally by the seal of infinite miracles recorded every where, and fresh in
memory; which Religion they had seen exercised in all the Christian world with
their own eyes, and had practiced their own selves. Yet this you make a
company of silly people to believe, on your word, Isa. 59.21. Io 14.16.
Ephesians. 4.14*
against a world of eye witnesses, against all the men of that age, yea against
Gods covenant with his Church, and against the express promise of Jesus Christ.

THIRD CHAPTER. Further confirmation that the Company of Christians in
communion with the Bishop of Rome is the Church.
19. THe former Argument, because I know you will strive what you can to cauil
at it, I will second with another taken out of the confession of your Deuines:
and, though I loathe to rehearce their foul speeches, and errors against the
Church and her doctrine, yet some of the^ here I will set in your way, desiring
the Catholic reader to turn his eye aside a while till they be past. I will
begin before Luther when our Church generally was acknowledged for true by the
Christian world and her doctrine believed: and will go upward to see, Whether
the Confession of your men for the general acknowledgment of our Church and
doctrine by the Christian world will reach to S. Gregory's time or no: From
thence, to proceed afterward to the Apostles with the universality of the
same Church and doctrine will be easy. First therefore, by your learned men it
is confessed that Papistrie (to use was the general Religion of the Christian
world before Luther came. In so much that Tota Occidentalis Ecclesia defendit
quicquid impietatu^ detestamur Calvin. Resp. ad Versip. p. 354.
Calvin affirms all the Western Churches to have defended it, and
Discessionem a toto mundo facere coacti sumus. Id. Ep. 141.
that his separation was from all the world. white, Defense c. 37. p. 136. The
Papacy, or articles wherein we refuse the Church of Rome, are a leprosy etc.
White says it was a leprosy breeding in the Church so universally that there
was no visible company of people appearing in the world free from it. Benedict.
Morgestein tract. de Eccl. p. 145, and he says there further, that it is
ridiculous to think that in the time before Luther any had the purity of
doctrine, and that Luther should receive it from them.
Morgestern. The whole Christian world knows that before Luther all Churches
were over whelmed with more then Cymerian darkness. Bancroft. Censure, c. 4.
Ba^croft. The Priests and all the people too, were drowned in the filth of
Popery, from top to toe. Jewel sermon. on the 11. c. Luke
Jewel. The whole world, people, Priests and Princes, were over whelmed with
ignorance: All Schools, Priests, Bishops, and Princes of the world were by
oath obliged to the Pope. Daniel Camierus ep. 49.
Camierus. Error possessed, not one little part or other, but Apostasy auerted
the whole Body from Christ. Brocard in c. 2. Apoc. fol. 41. cognitio Christi
defuit in omnibus and singulis suis membris. Whit. Cont. 4. q 5. c. 3. p. 684.
Brocard. When the preaching of the Gospel and the first assault made upon
the Papacy was approved in Luther, the knowledge of Christ was wanting in all
and every one of his members. i Whittaker. In times past no Religion but the
Papisticall had place in the Churches. And. Id. Cont. 2. q. 3. p. 467. per
omnes visibiles Ecclesias grassata est.
That Antichristian plague has gone thorough all parts of the world and all
visible Churches. Thus in general. To run thorough the particulars were
infinite They say, Luther, sermon. de simulacr. fol 277. Altero abusu (imaginum)
totus orbis oppletus est.
The whole world was filled with the abuse of images. That Calu* 2. Instit. c*
2.. 4. Ad vulgus etiam ipsum omnes hoc principio imbuti sunt, praeditum esse
hominem libero arbitrio.
All to the very common people were imbued with this principle that man has
free will. that Confess. Aug. c. 20. Fateri omnes necesse est de fidei iustitia
fuisse altissimum silentiu^. Magburg. praefat. Cenur. 13. extincta est doctrina
de fide tantum sine operibus. Calu. Resp. ad Sadolet. p. 125. Dogma istud (de
iustificatione per solam fidem) quod in religione summum erat, dicimus fuisse a
vobis ex hominum memoria deletum.
the principal point of Religion, justification by faith only, was blotted out
of memory, that Bucerus li d^ concord. p. 660. Hic error (de reali praesentia
loquitur) apud totius orbis Christianos inualuit.
the error so they speak, of the real presence, prevailed among all the
Christians of the world, that Gualt. in praefat. Com. in ep. ad Rom
All the world erred, in that article of the real presence. that Calu. 4.
Instit. c. 18.. 18. Missae abominatio in calice aureo propinata, omnes Reges
terrae and populos a summo vsque ad nouissimum sic inebriauit, vt proram and
puppim suae salutis in hac vna statuerint
the Mass made drunk all the kings and people of the earth from the first to
the last. that Luth. Captiuit. Babil. fol. 68.
scarce any thing was more believed then that the Mass was a Sacrifice. that
Calu. Respons. ad Sadolet. p. 130
all endeavored to merit, to satisfy etc. And to sum all up in a word, they
confess our Religion to have prevailed over their supposed Church and Religion
so far Luth. Capt. Babil. fol. 77. Id. in Psalm grad. fol. 568 and in 2. Gal.
fol. 306.
that the Protestant faith was abolished and extinguished. That Magburg
praefat. Centur. 5. w Calu. 4. Instit. c. 2.. 2. Sub Papismo doctrina citra
quam Christianismus non constat, tota sepul^a and explosa.
under the Papacy there was an extreme abolishing of the true Protestant
Religion and the divine word. that under the Papacy the DOCTRINE without which
Protestant Christianity does not subsist, was ALL rejected and buried. This
was the state of our Church before Luther; and not for a small time, but for
nine hundred year, yeauen from the time of Boniface and Gregory the Great:
All the known Churches in the world; all that time frequenting and believing
Mass, confessing to Priests, praying to Saints and for the dead, believing
justification by works do^ne in grace, and the merit of the^, satisfaction,
traditions, religious vows etc. and the communion of the Pope was with the
Christian world generally all that time. This you might know particularly from
time to time out of Ecclesiastical Histories if you would read the^, but of
histories I am not to speak now, let us go on with the confession of your men
for the general acknowledgment of our Religion and the general poverty or not
existencie of your supposed Church. Speak Perkins. During the space of nine
hundred years the Popish heresy has spread it self over the whole earth.
Bale. From Phocas (who lived a. 602.) till the renewing of the Gospel, the
doctrine of Christ was for that space among Idiotes, and in lurking holes.
and, after Gregory, the purity of Protestant doctrine perisshed, Powell.
Confid. Pap. reas. p. 105.
Powell. I grant that from the year of Christ 605. the professant company of
Popery has been very visible and conspicuous. Fulke Ans. Count^ Cath. p 36.
Fulke. The Religion of the Papists came in, and prevailed in the year of our
lord 607. and so universally that, the revelation of Antichrist with the
Churches flight into the wilderness was a. 607. Hutter de sacrif. Missat. p 377.
Libenter concedo Idolomaniam pontificiam, cuius verum est Sacrificium
Missaticum; torum pene terrarum orbem inuasisse, praesertim superiore proximo
millena^io.
Hutter. I grant willingly that the Papist Idolatry has invaded all most all
the world, especially these last thousand years. Simon Voyon Catal. Doct. in
ep. to the reader.
Simon Voyon, when Boniface was stalled in the Papal throne the whole world
was over whelmed in the dregs of Antichristian filthiness, with superstitions
and Traditions of the Pope: Then was that universal Apostasy from the faith
foretold by Paul. Bibliander orat ad Princip. Germ. c. 72. apud Caluinoturc.
l. 1. c. 4. A morte Gregorij magni ponimus esse per se notum, clarissimum, and
extta omnem dubitationem quod Papa Romanus sit Antichristus qui suis
abominationibus, blasphe^iis and Idololatriis omnes regesterrae and populos a
summo vsque ad nouissimum sic inebriauit vt brutis ipsis essent stupidiores
Bibliander. It is of it self known, most clear, and out of all question,
that from the death of Gregory the great the Pope of Rome is Antichrist, who
with his abominations, blasphemies, and idolatries, so made drunk all kings
and people from the highest to the lowest, that they were more stupid then very
beasts. Hospinian. Hist. Sacram. l. 2 p. 157. Gregorij magni aetate omne
superstitionis and idololatriae genus etc.
Hospinian. In the age of Gregory the great, all kind of superstition and
Idolatry has as a Sea ouerflowed almost all the Christian world, not only
none resisting but rather all helping and adding thereunto what force they
could. Thus I have, by Protestants assigned to me, the space wherein Papistrie
has been general, and the supposed Protestancie suppressed; I mean from Luther
upwards to Boniface, and to the death of Gregory the great.

20. Now that the Religion, general in the world then, was the same with that
which was general in the world in the time of Gregory the great, who died
but three yearet before Boniface, is manifest by the testimony of a world of
eye witnesses, that is, by the testimony of all kingdoms, Nations, Scholars,
Pastors, People, by the testimony I say of all Christian Churches, which being
in the time of Boniface and of our Religion as you heard your Deuines confess,
had most of them seen the exercise of the Religion in all the world in S.
Gregory's time, and could not be deceived in the fact, subject to the eye,
every where; as, going to Mass, praying to Perkins expos. Creed. page 266.
Bale Centur. 1.74. Id. p. 65.
saints, confession to Priests, adoration of the Blessed sacrament etc. They
had also all means that me^ could have to be informed certainly of the
Religion of the world in S. Gregory's time, Books, Records, Relations; eyes to
see the practice immediately, ears to hear what they said, Instruction,
Baptism, Bible, Orders, all, they had from them immediately; and the matter
touched the^ all, and each in particular more then lands, life, or whatsoever
else can be dear to man. I might confirm this further out of Gods assistance
to the Church, out of which it comes ineuitablie that neither the former
Religion could abruptly stop as you imagine, and the faith fail, the Church
fall on the sudden, the Church I say diffused thorough the world; nor all
known Christian Churches in succeeding time, or the whole Christian world
generally err in a matter of the greatest moment, in the discerning the true
Religion, and the true Church of former times. Leaving you therefore to deal
with babes, whom you may peradventure make believe, on your bare word, without
evidence, against histories, against the promise of almighty God, and against
the testimony of all the Church of that time, that (whilst all were a sleep it
seems by your dream) the Religion of the world was generally changed in
Boniface his time after the death of Gregory: I take upon the testimony of a
world of people, upon the Testimony of all Nations then Christian, that it was
not, but, that the Religion then current, was the Religion current in the time
of Gregory the great.

22. Now that S. Gregory had communion with all the world every one knows by
his Epistiles to the Bisshops of Corinth, Siracusa, Extant inter Op. D* Greg.
Constantinople, Alexandria, Carthage, Numidia, Jerusalem, Arabia, Antioche,
Arles, Vienna, etc. You grant also that he did communicate with the former
ages, and was of the same Religion with them, which is also clear by the
consent and judgment of the Christian world in his time who believed that he
and they were of the same Religion with the Church of the precedent age, and
had best means to know it. The same Church and Religion in the time of Leo the
great, was also universal, and this likewise out of his writings may be
proved, The universality I say, of Leo his communion, is known clearly by
his Epistles to the Bisshops of Italy, Ie op. v. Ie*
France, Thessalonica, Vienna, Sicilie, Campania, Tuscia, Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, Jerusalem etc. in a word, it is included, and to the world made
known, by the Council of Chalcedon. If you will ascend hiegher with this
universality, go up to Syluesters time, and his communion with all the
Christian world you have in the first Nicene Council: and Further I think you
will not press me, though I could further name S. Paul, witnessing of the
Roman faith that it was renowned in the whole world.

22. Having been long in the former argument (and the longer because I would
see whether you could make the like in all respects for the universality of
your Church and doctrine the Church Protestant was hidden from the time of
Constantine, to wit, 1260. years; that, then the supposed Protestancie went
into the desert, Bright. in cap. 11. and ^2. Apoc. Id. p. 577. Broc on Revel.
fol. 110 12^. Nap. Revel p. 68. See also p. 191.
and that ever since Antichrist (so he calls the Pope) has reigned. Brocard
says also, the church, supposed Protestant, was trodden down and oppressed by
the Papacy even from Syluesters time to those times viz. 1260. years. and
Napper says. Between the year of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian and
Papisticall reign began, reigning universally and without any debateable
co^tradiction 1260 years, the Pope and his clergy possessing the outward
visible Church of Christians all that time. And for the supposed Protestant
Church and doctrine he says, Gods true Church, most certainly abode so long
latent. Ours therefore by the confession of these Protestants was universal
long before the time of Gregory the great. I know that you object, the
Primacie to have been confirmed to Bonifacius by Phocas. But this will not
hinder my argument, for it is one thing to declare and second, an other thing
to institute: the institution of the Primacie you have in the Gospel, Man
(...) 18. Io. 21.18. S. Hierom. ep. ad Dam Theod. ep. ad Renat. Presb. Sand.
Visib. Mon. l. 7. Touching the existe^cie of our Religion in the time of
Constantine, See more in the Protestant Apol. tract. 2 c. ^. Sect. 3.
the acknowledgment you have in Antiquity, as I will declare hereafter; and
the exercise before the time of Boniface, is well known. On this Rock will I
build my Church, said our Savior; who commended his flock peculiarly to S.
Peeter. I quoth S. Ierom to Damasus then Pope, Following none foremost but
Christ, do communicate with thy Holiness, that is, with the chair of Peeter,
Upon that Rock I know the Church was built. And Theodoret a Grecian speaking
of that See: That holy Seat has the government of all the Churches in the
world. You heard before what S. Leo said of it and you know how he did
exercise this power. Only because your fellows are wo^t to object a speech of
S. Cregorie, not content to take the interpretation of it from his own mouth,
I put you hear in mind that he did exercise this power over all the Christian
Churches in his time: and this you have noted by D. Sanders in his Monarchy,
Sand. Visib Mon. l. 7.
and not answered yet. He shows there I say, out of S. Gregory's own writings
how he did exercise the foresaid power over the Bishops and Churches of
Italy, Sicilie, Corsica Sardinia, Afric, Spain, Ireland, England, France,
Dalmatia, Greece, Corcyra: and that the Patriarcks have confessed Subjection to
the Church of Rome. Lastly we have the confession of your men here cited in
this an gument for the general obedience to the Pope ever since Constantine,
which is sufficient for this purpose, howsoever the Grecians might some times
bear themselves in some occasions; of which I am to speak in an other place.

23. A seventh Arg. It is manifest by the scriptures above cited, that the
Catholic Church is perpetual, and cannot fail; and that has been
petpetuall, but this which I speak of: Therefore this individual Church is
the Catholic Church. To See the truth of that I have assumed, let us look
upon the rest. The Pagans come not in question because their Church is not
Christian; nor the Jews for the same reason, though they far exceed you in
this point of perpetuity: The Grecians, they were in our communion the first
thousand years, and since have been, neither was Grecisme believed allwaies or
ever the faith of Nations: and communion with you they have refused. Your
Church and Religion has not been perpetual, as in the former book we have
seen to your grief, Another that can callenge, there is not, not the
Ethiopian, nor the Maronite, nor any whatsoever. The Roman has ever been,
and, her communion ever been universal; therefore this great and ample
Society is the true Church of God.

24. An eigth Argum. That is the Catholic Church whereu^to come all Nations,
and out of which all Heretics do go: But into the communion of that company
which I have out of it all Heretics have gone. Therefore this is, and has
ever been the Catholic Church. The proposition is clear by the promises
related in the begini^g, that all Nations should be converted to the Church and
her gates be ever open day and night to receive them: c. 1. Is. 60. S. Aug. de
Sym. 6. l. 1. c. 5.
and as for Heretics it is well known that they are boughs lopped of the
great vine; and that that heresy is a corruption of the true faith. The
assumption you have at large in Ecclesiastical Histories, and you deny not,
but in the Primitive time this company was the Church, Baronius Spondan.
auctar. Iarricius Magdeburg. Osiander. Pappu^. See Prot. Apol. tr. 2. c. 1. s.
4.
that Nations from Infidelity were converted to it, and that Heretics all
went out of the same company. Since unto the same have been converted the
Germans, Vandalls, Polonians, Danes, Hungarians, Noruegians, Brasilians,
Indians, and diverse others: and to your company or religion, immediately from
infidelity no Nation at all. Out of the same great company have gone all
Heretics since that time, and among them those who in part were your
predecessors, Iconoclastes, Berengarians, Waldenses, Albigenses, Lollardes,
Hussites.

25. Bear with me if I repeat the same again And the same congregation 300.
years after was still the Catholic Church, and had the communion of the
Christian world, as you know by the General Council of Nice; Into it, came
Schythia^s, Iberians, Armenians, Hunnes, and others. Out went the Marcionites,
Nouatians, Manichees, Arianes. Betwixt the fourth and fifth age was the Counsel
of Calcedo^; and in that time likewise the foresaid communion was the Church
Catholic, and their communion was with the christian world, as by that
council of calcedon, and the Epistles of Leo the great, who was President of
it, all men know. Into this communion came Scotts, French, and other Nations.
Out went Pelagians, and Nestorians, after whose communion in the Aethiopians
you seem to thirst. In the next ages followi^g which were the sixth and
seaue^th, were the General assemblies at Co^sta^tinople, One, in the time of
Vigilius being the fifte General Council. The other in the time of Agatho;
which you have in the To^es of Councelles, with most ample subscriptio^ of the
Bishops which were in the^: and by these General councelles (which did also
receive the former) it is evident that in those times also the company of
Christians in communion with the Sea of Rome, was the Catholic Church, and
that the communion of those Popes and those Cou^celles was with the world of
Christians. Into it came the Pictes, Goths, Barbarians, and our Country. Out
were cast the Tritheites, Monothelites, and other such excrementes. After those
Councelles Followed others; One at Nice, in the time of Adrian the first,
Another at Constantinople Adrian the second being then Bishop of Rome. By which
Councelles it is clear that the communion of the Roman See, was then also
general, and this company the Church of God. They did also receive the former
Councelles, and noe communion was General in Christendom, or continued by
Universal Succession, but only this. Into this company came the Frisians,
Hassites, Russians. Out went Maronites, and your dear freindes the
Iconoclastes, with diverse others. You see how this communion, continues ever
Catholic, and, that the Roman See is found ever in the Church, and the
Church in communion with the Sea of Rome. To follow the stream further it is
needless, because you confess, that long before this, the communion of the
Christian world was with the Pope of Rome, and that Nations were converted
thereunto. He that will, may reflect on the general Assemblies held at Rome,
at Lions, at Florence: As Also, upon the flowing of Nations unto this Ocean in
this and former ages, together with the discarding of the Waldenses,
Albigenses, and other Heretics, and he will see it to be most true that in noe
age any communion has been acknowledged Catholic but only this which we
speak of, and that the Sea of The first Nicene Council an. 325. Fathers 318.
Against Arius. Communicated with Syluester Bishop of Rome Cedrenus, Photius,
Socrates, Eusebius, Baronius. First Constantinopolitan Council an. 381.
Fathers 150. Against Macedonius. Communicate. With Damasus B. Rome. Vide ep.
Conc. ad Damas. Theodoret. and Socrat. Phot. Baron. Ephesine Council an. 431.
Fathers 200. Against Nestorius. Communicate. With Celestine B. Rome. Epist.
Council. ad Celest. and ep. ad Imperat. Marcellin. Liberat. Theophan. Balsam.
Niceph. Baron. The Council of Chalcedon. an. 451. Fathers 600. Against
Eutiches, Communicate. with Leo B. Rome. Vide acta Conc. and Leon ep. 50. Baron.
Second Constantinop. Council an 553 Fathers 165. Against Anthim. and Theodor.
Communicate. With Vigilius B. Rome. Zonaras, Eutichius Ep. ad Vigilium. Greg.
magn. Niceph. Baron. Third Constant. Council an. 289. Fathers 680. Against
Monothelites. Communicate. with Agatho B. Rome. Vide acta Conc. Zonar. Theoph.
Cedren. Baron. Second Nicene Council an. 787. Fathers 350. Against
imagebreakers. Communicate. with. Adrian B. Rome. Vide act. Conc. Cedren. Zonar.
Baron. Fourth Constantinop. Council an. 869. Fathers 101. Genebr. 300. Against
Photius. Communicate. With Adrian 2. B. Rome. Vide act^ Conc. Anastas. Niceph.
Platin. Baron.
Rome was ever in the General communion of the Catholic Church. Your
obstinacy and opposition has been occasion that I have considered more
particularly of this matter, and considering it. I take much content to see
the old Prophecies of the Greatness and Perpetuity of the Christian Church,
fulfilled before mine eyes in the Church wherein I am.

26. The tenth argument. Were all Papists silent in the matter of the Church,
the thing one true Church, many false and heretical. And all those Heretical
are against the Catholic Church, as errors are all against the Truth. Now, by
Ecclesiastical Record it is clear that all confessed Heresies from the first
to the last, have opposed themselves severally The first Lateran Council an.
1122. Fathers 300. For instauration of Discipline etc. Communicate. with
Calixtus 2. B. Rome. Sugerius Abb. Platina, Onuphrius, Baronius. Second Lateran
Council an. 1139. Fathers 1000. For the Right of the Clergy. Communicate. with
Innocent. 2. B. Rome. Oth^ Frising. Sigon. Platin. Onuph. Baron. Third Lateran
Council ann. 1179. Fathers 300. For Reformation. VValdens. condemn.
Communicated With Alexander 3. B. Rome. Guelielm. Tyrius. Plat. Onuph. Baron.
Fourth Lateran Council an. 1215. Fathers 1285. Holy War. Transubstantiation
defined. Reformation of the Clergy. Albigenses condemned. It Communicated with
Innocentius 3. B. Rome. Vide acta Conc. Palmer. Onuph. Plat. Genebr. Spondan in
Auctar. ad Baron. The Council of Lions an, 1274. Fathers 1000. Against the
errors of the Greeks. Communicate. With Gregory 10. B. Rome. Guiliel. de
Nangis, Gregoras, Matthew. Palm. Plat. Onuph. Spond. The Council of Vienna an.
1311. Fathers 300. Against several Heresies. Communic. With Clemens 5. B.
Rome. Platina. Palm. Onuph. Spondan. The Council of Florence an. 1439. Fathers
141. The Reunion of the Greek and Latin Churches. Armen. Ind. Co^munic. With
Eugenius 4. B. Rome. Palmer. Chalcond. Volateran. Plat. Spond. The Council of
Trent. Communicate. With Pius 4.
to the company, with which the Bishop of Rome did communicate in the time
wherein those Heresies were; and this company likewise has opposed it self
to them all; neither did they ever oppose them selves all to any other company
whatsoever. This company therefore which I speak of and no other is, and ever
has been, the true Church.

27. The 11. Argument. That company which has ever borne and maintained the
general providence of common Church-affaires, First the General communion of
the Church in the time wherein each was held. Secondly the communion of the Sea of Rome with each of these Councelles, and consequently with all those
parts, from whence the Bisshops came. Thirdly the communion of each of these
Councelles with the former Councelles and precedent ages. Fourthlie which is
the thing I have spoken of in this argument, this Churches diligence in
conseruing Church Discipline, and condemning erroures.

28. Hark how the canones roar (if your nicer ears will bear the word) in
Bithynia, in Thrace, in Ionia, in Italy, in France, every where. Against
Arius and his faction at Nice, against Macedonians and Monothelites at
Constantinople, against Nestorians at Ephesus, against Eutichians at Chalcedon,
against Waldenses, Albigenses at Rome, against the Begardes at Vie^na, against
modern Greeks at Lions, and Florence, and against Luthera^s, Caluinistes, and
all Protestants at Trent: In Defense, Of the Sacraments, Of the Primacie, Of
the real Presence, Of the Incarnation, Of the Deity of the holy Ghost, Of the
consubstantialitie of the Son of God; and other points of the Catholic
faith and Church. Again, Sabellius from men of this communion receaues his
doom in Alexandria, Paulus Samosetanus in Antioch, Pelagius in Carthage,
Berengarius in Vercells, Gilbertus Porretanus in Rhemes, Nouatus and Donatus in
Rome. Finally all Heresies that have been hitherto, have had their sentence of
condemnation from men of this communion and company, from this Church of ours.
This Church and no other has maintained the faith hitherto at all times on all
occasions. This has maintained the word of God, and kept it to this day, and
you know not which it is but by this. This Chutch and no other has maintained
the Fathers doctrine and the authority of general Counsels hitherto. This
Church has triumphed over all confessed heresies: she has already suppressed
more then two hundred: and has bruised the heads also of those which last
peeped out of Hell to hiss against the Truth.

29, By the foresaid way of Oecumenicall Councelles is demonstrated evidently
the Universality of the Roman Church, and the Catholic communion which in
all times it has had: because the Roman See or Bishop, as I have showed
has communicated with all those Councelles; and the communion of each of those
Councelles was universal in the time wherein it was held, by reason of the
Nations and kingdoms, from whence those Bishops came, which is set down at
large in Baronius. And by this we see cleerlie the great amplitude of Go^^
Church, whereof the Prophettes did speak whom in the beginning of this book I
have cited. Neither is there any other Christian communion that can equal it
all this time, or is any way answearable to the description there put down.
I would go Further yet and put your eye to it, as it has been in each time,
but it is not necessary to take the pains, a general view was all I did
inte^d, and this I have exhibited, The Catholic Church is seen and known by
her Universality in Times and Nations, this Universality is seen in the
General communion of Christian Churches, this general communion is seen in
General Councelles and these Councelles you may look on when you will.
Hereafter I will examine whether this individual Church whereof I have spoken,
has divine assistance, and how far, but here I abstract from that question:
and if you grant this to be the Catholic Church, as of necessity you must,
I have all I intend in this book. And for this purpose only, have brought
these few motives, omitting infinite others, which every where you may find.

30. For that which I have alleged out of Counsels, I need say no more; it
is their communion only which here I urge, and the Tomes of Counsels I
suppose you have in your library; Of the truth of their doctrine I will speak
afterward. If you will go Further yet, and see all the Bysshopricks of the
Church, Notitia Episcopat. Aub. Miraei
either in elder times or now, take Miraeus and read them there; and mark
also in him those which are erected since the discovery of the new world. If
you will See, the particular demo^stratio^ of each poi^t of our faith, out of
Antiquity, and co^sequentlie the consent of the world in our Religion and
cause, from the Apostles time to this day, look in Coccius who has taken the
pains to declare it in two large Tomes, and there are undoubted Authors of
every age, though here and there may be some also which are not undoubted
works, which the learned, ad such as do write controversy are to discern; it
being sufficient for his purpose to have digested in that sort what he had
read. Collat. doctr. Cath ac Prot. cu^ expr. script verb.
If you will See the consent of our Church and her doctrine to Gods word, and
your opposition to it, read the conference of my Lo. of Chalcedon. If you
desire to know the signs, and marks of the true Church, and in which and how
in particular they are verified, read Bosius, you have it there. And finally,
if your desire be to see the Acts and Monuments of our Church in particular
from year to year, you have them in Baronius, who has made in this kind an
ocular demonstration of it, and thereby of our Church. In the former Book you
had other proofs of our Church and in the next you shall have more, for the
points which I handle in these three Books are connected and united so, that
one maintains the other. And you will find the Books, so to conspire against
you that when you think you have answered any one of them, the other two will
oppose them selves to your answer, and save me in the judgment of an
intelligent reader the labor of writing any more. When you are about your
answer, if you will needs be answearing, and are thinking with your self
how I may oppose it out of the grounds laid down in these three Books, you
will guess whether I have spoken within my compass, and if you spend your
judgment more suddenly, your conscience I believe will then retract it.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. The Jews rejected.
29. I Care not if I leave you now consideri^g what I said in the last chapter,
whilst I look Further into more remote times on the begininges of our Church.
Dispute I need not because neither the times present nor the persons into
whose hands this will come do require it, and the cause does contain such an
argument of truth that simply to relate ours is to refute others; and a
relation serves my turn for the co^nection of my discourse. In all Nations and
at all yeauen the most obscure times it has been a general notion, a faith
transcendent, a common and most constant Principle that there is a Deity: so
fathers taught their children, so Philosophers did prove in schools, so the
worlds variety, and order, and beauty, and majesty did proclaim abroad. No
man so simple but knows he has a cause: and (each being of the same nature)
all the species, all mankind has a cause. Each subordinate cause has a
cause; and the collection of subordinate and depending causes does argue the
existencie of a higher power supereminent unto the collection, on which power
they all depend: which efficient being none of the dependant causes, is wholly
without a cause, and therefore has of it self an infinite necessity in Being
and in all that appertaynes thereunto. Moreover, because infinite in existencie
and Being, all wisdom, all power, all perfection is in it: and this
immateriall, intellectual, immovable, omnipotent, all-commaundinge Creator
we call God: who, as he does vnspeakeablie exceed all, so is he in like
manner incomprehensible of all, and lives eternally in the height and fullnes
of bliss, comprehending and enjoying his own substance, which is the root
and fountain of existencie, the original and universal verity infinite
ways infinite, and a most pure and holy Goodness unbounded every way.

30. Here the Atheist, a man that intricates himself in Circles and infinities
to deny that which he cannot avoid, God, will interrupt my discourse and
except, that all subordinate efficie^t causes depend not upon any determinate
thing, because they may either ru^ne the round, or ascend ever without an
end. This fellow looks in time to begette his father and exchang relatio^s
with him: and to be Ada^s great grandfather infinite times and as many times
more Adams son. But his ignorance is very childish. Each man has a cause as
I said, and therefore the whole nature or species has a cause; for, if any had
not, he wear not of the same species or nature with the rest, he wear not a
pure man. The whole collection or multitude therefore of men, the very nature
and the species does depend on some cause efficie^t: which likewise depends
on an other, or is independent and immovable: if independent and immovable,
it has Being by it self preciselie, without any cause, condition, or
contingencie what soever, and therefore has a pure, unlimited, and so an
infinite necessity in Being, and this is God. If the cause of mankind has a
cause, and that an other, still the collection of depending causes (whether
finite, as it is indeed, or infinite as one might dream) does depend, and
essentially too, this being an attribute common to them all, therefore upon a
cause; for it is childish to say that an effect is dependent and not upon a
cause, or to make a circle in causes subordinate: there is therefore a cause
which is none of the dependent causes, and upon this the collection of
dependant causes does depend, and this (bear with me for repeating often the
same words) because it is none of the dependant causes is absolutely
independent, and God. Brass, you know, does not bring it self to the form of
Mercury or Caesar; nor does matter bring it self to the form of a lion, tree,
or man: and generally, no potentiality can put it self in act, but has it by
the efficient: if therefore nothing had a pure, infinite, eternal, necessity
of Being, but that every thing were potentiall to this act, nothing could
bring it self into Being, and so nothing could be at all. Whereas
notwithstanding, you are, other things are, and therefore the contradictorie
must be granted, that is, some thing has a pure necessity in Being which
gives Being to the rest, and this is God.

31, Now though there wear in all Nations as I said, this principle and ground
of Religion that there is a Deity, year in the determination of this general
ground in obscure times there were many errors among men: as man is apt to
conceive every thing limited (his own nature being so) and limitation gives
way to variety: Whereas indeed that thing which is remote from potentialitie
is immateriall, pure, infinite, and but one. Some, admitting a deity or one
thing best amongst all, and erroneouselie subsuming that the Sun was the best
thing, concluded in their error, the Sun was God. Others, the Moon, Stars,
Men, and such like. Among the Gentiles there were diverse great scholars; who
with the power of stronger wits burstings thorough those clouds of ignorance
found out that he was one, immutable, eternal; as Aristotle, Plato,
Trismegistus: but he by special favor singularly revealed himself unto the
Nation of the Jews, and there was peculiarly served and adored.

32. These Jews had among them many Prophets which foretold certainly future
and contingent things as the event after did did manifest. Among their
Prophecies the cheifest were of a Messiah that should come a Savior and a
Master to instruct and redeem man, who had lost Original integrity, and
missed of the way to the end whereunto he was ordained. That a Messiah is
promised in the foresaid Prophecies it is clear, Isay. 7.14.
and the Jews grant it. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son and
his name sball be called Emmanuel, God with us: says Isaie one of those
Prophets, and then speaking of things future as if they were present, to
signify thereby the certainety of the event. A little Child, Id. c. 9. v. 6*
says he, is borne to us, and a son is given to us: and principality is
made upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Marvelous, Counselor,
God, Strong, Father of the world to come, or eternity, Prince of peace. I cite
no more of this, because the Jews as I said before, admit willingly that
there is in Scripture manifest promise of a Messiah, and I deal in this
discourse with them only. But they deny that he is yet come and still expect
him. Against them we have manifest places of old Scripture whereby it is
evident that he is already come, there being now among the Jews no Scepter,
nor Prophet; and Daniels weeks being run out more then fifteen hundred years
ago. Genesis 49.10* Lawgiver.
The Prophecy; The Scepter shall not be taken away from Judas, and a Duke out
of his thigh, till he come that is to be sent, and the same shall be the
expectation of the Gentiles. This text with the circumstances ensuing in the
verses following agree not to any but to the Messiah, as he will find that
will run thorough each part attentively, and the time therein appointed for
the coming of this Messiah, is expired 1600. years ago: for all this time,
there has been among the Jews no King, Duke, Lawgiver, Prophet: neither of
the of the tribe of Judah, nor of any other.

33. A second Prophecy for the time is in Daniel. Seventy weeks are abridged
upon thy people, Dan. 9. v. 24.2; 26 27.
and upon thy holy city, that preuarication may be consummate, and sin
take and end, and iniquity be abolished; and everlasting justice be brought,
and vision be accomplished, and prophecy: and the holy one of holies be
anointed. Know therefore, and mark, from the going forth of the word, that
Jerusalem be built again, unto Christ the Prince, there shall be seven weeks,
and sixty two weeks, and the street shall be built again, and the walls in
straitnes of the times. And after sixty two weeks Christ shall be slain: and
it shall not be his people, that shall deny him. And the city, and the
Sanctuary shall the people dissipate with the prince to come: and the end
thereof waste, and after the end of the battle the appointed desolation. And he
will confirm the covenant to many one week: and in the half of the week
shall the host of the sacrifice fail: and there shall be in the temple the
abomination of desolation: and even to the consummation, and to the end shall
the desolation endure. These words likewise agree to none but the Messiah as
you will find if you consider the beginning well. The weeks here mentioned are
7. and 62. and 1. in all 70. In scripture we find weeks of days, Leuit.
23.15. ib. 25.8.
and weeks of years. And taking these for weeks of years which are the
longest weeks that are found in Scripture, they make 490. years: v. 25.
which time (being reconed from the going forth of the word that Jerusalem
should be built again after the Babilonians had overthrown it, of which
building of the city the Angel here speaks, 2. Esdr. 4. etc. 6.
and was performed and suddenly in the time of Artarxerxes Lo^gimanus sixth
Emperor of the Persians) is expired sixteen hundred years ago; wherefore it
follows ineuitablie against the Jews that the Messiah is already come.
Again, v. 26. and 27.
the desolatio^ there spoken of, has been also these 1600 years wellnighe* for
both city and Temple some 40. years afters our Saviors Passion were utterly
overthrown: and since the Jews have been scattered ore the World without
Temple, Josephus de bello Iudaico li. 7.
Sacrifice, Priest There is no way to escape this argument: because the city
to be built when this was revealed, is so long ago ouerturned, the dissipation
is seen unto the world, every where: and the weeks are expired manifestly
1500. years ago howsoever the beginning be taken for the reco^ning of them. To
say that he speaks of weeks of ages, were without example in the Scripture,
and indeed ridiculous: for they make 49000. years, and till then the Jews
were to expect their Messiah. If weeks of Jubilees, they take up half the
time, that is 24500. years, whereas the Temple is already burnt, and the
city quite ouerturned more then 1500. years ago. Olympiads, the Scripture
never compts; Josephus de Bell. Iud. l. 9. c. 10.
neither would the time agree with the cities overthrow in any sort but
reaches more then a thousand years be yo^d it. In fine, these are silly
shifts without ground and may by the Prophecy be controwled easily. To look
into the thing further, and consider exactly what year these weeks began,
what year precisely they ended; Also, why the whole su^me was divided into
three parts, is not necessary: though there be in the text a light to find it
out. It is sufficient and evident, that the time is past more then 1500. years
ago.

Agge. 2. v. 8 9.
34. A third Prophecy Thus says the Lord of hosts: as yet there is one little
while, and I will move the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry
land, And I will move all Nations. And the desired of all Nations shall come:
and I will fill this house (the second Temple then standing) with glory says
the Lord of hosts. Great shall be the glory of this last house, more then of
the first. That temple which was to be so honored in the coming of the
Messiah, the hope of the Gentiles, and was indeed more glorious in regard of
his presence, then the former built by Solomon* is now rased to the ground more
then 1500. years ago: wherefore this Prophecy is fullfilled long since.

35. The Jews object against us, that the Messiah is to come in glory and
Majesty Jesus came in humility and poverty, and therefore they will not
believe he is indeed the Messiah. In this discourse these Jews err against
the Scripture which they admit: and their error is in this, that they
distinguish not two commings or aduents; one to redeem, the other to judge the
world: one, in humility, the other in Majesty: one past, the other future in
the end of the world: And here, because the Jews deny the former coming of
the Messiah, that is in humility to suffer for the redemption of mankind, I
will recite it out of the Prophets, where it is so manifestly foretold that it
cannot be denied or eluded. Rejoice greatly o daughter of Sion, Zach. 9. v. 9
behold thy king will come to thee, the just and Savior, himself poor, etc.
His look among men shall be inglorious, and his form among the sons of men.
Isa. 52.14
He shall not cry nor accept person, neither shall his voice be heard abroad,
Isa. 42. v. 2 3.4.
the bruised reed he shall not not break: and smoking flax he shall not
quench: he shall bring forth judgment in truth: he shall not be sad, nor
turbule^t till he set judgment in the earth: and the ISLANDS shall expect his
law. There is no beauty in him, nor comeliness: and we have seen him and
there was no sigthlines, and we were desirous of him. Despised and most abject
of men, A MAN OF SORROVVES, AND KNOVVING INFIRMITY: and his look as it were
hid and despised, whereupon neither have we esteemed him: he surely has
borne our infirmities, and our sorrows he has carried: and we have thought
him as it wear a leper, and stricken of God and humbled. But he was WOVNDED FOR
OUR INIQVITIES, he was broken for our sins: (...). etc.
the discipline of our peace upon him, and with the wail of his stripe were
healed. All we have strayed as sheep, every one has declined into his own
way: and our lord has put upon him THE INIQVITIE OF ALL US. He was offered
because himself would, and opened not his mouth: as a sheep to slaughter shall
he be led, and as a lamb before his shearer he shall be dumb, and shall not
open his mouth. Therefore will I distribute unto him very many, and he shall
divide the spoils of the strong, for that he has delivered his soul unto
DEATH, and was reputed with the wicked: and he has borne the sin of many,
and has prayed for the transgressors. Before you heard out of an other
Prophet. After sixty two weeks CHRIST shall be SLAIN: Dan* 9.26.
and it shall be noe more his people that shall deny him. Zach. 12.10.
I will power out upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of prayers: and they shall look upon ME
who^ they have PIERCED. They have dug my hands, and my feet: Psalm. 21. v.
18.
upon my vesture they have cast lotte. All this, and more, the Prophets do
relate of the Humility and Passion of the Messiah, expreslie against the
Jews, who are scandalized in that which was manifestly there declared long
before.

36. They object secondly, that they are to be saved when the Messiah comes.
Judah, is interpreted the confession of God. See Galat. l. 5. c 11. domus Judah
Congregatio confitentium Deum.
Indeed the Church of the Messiah, the Congregation of those that
perseuerantly adhere to him: is to be saved. And when all Nations have entered,
the remnant of the Jews will acknowledge our Savior too: which will be before
his second coming. But at his first coming it is clear by the Scripture
that the Jews would reject him and put him to death, and that the Gentiles
would receive him, as they have done and do, and will do till all Nations
have entered into his Church. So that the Jews obstinacy, though it be
gross, is not strange to us, for we are assured of it by the Scripture; and
of their desolation, together with the cause of all. I will set this down
briefly too, First their fact, puttinge the Messiah to death. Secondly their
desolatio^ there upon. Thirdly God turning his favor to the Gentiles.
Fourthly, the Jews acknowledgment of our Savior or conversion in the end. The
fact. Dan. 9.26.
After sixty two weeks Zach. 12.10.
etc. I will power upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace etc.
and they (the inhabitants of Jerusalem) shall look upon me (the author of
grace, and God of Israel) whom they have pierced. The desolation follows in
the words of Daniel: and is also in Osee. Dan. 9.27. Ose. 3 4.
Many days shall the children of Israel sit without King, and without
Prince, and without God Casting the^ of and turned to the Gentiles. I have no
will in you (Jews) says the lord of hosts, Malach. 1. v. 10.11.
and gifts (or oblation) I will not receive from your hand, for from the
rising of the su^ne eue^ to the going down, great The Jews acknowledgment in
fine. Ose. 3 5.
The children of Israel shall return (says Osee immediately after the words
above cited of their Desolation) and goodness in the last days. And Isay. In
that day the residue of the house of Israel, and they that shall escape of the
house of Jacob shall not add to lean upon him that strikes them: Isa. 10.
v. 20.21.22.
but they shall lean upon our Lord the holy one of Israel in truth: the
remnant shall be converted, the remnant I say of Jacob, to the strong God. For
if thy people, o Israel, shall be as the sand of the sea, the remnant there of
shall be converted. Consummation abridged shall make justice over flow: Our
blessed Savior foretold us of it too, whose speech the Jews have seen
verified already in part, and therefore they might believe him in the rest.
Luke 21. v. 20.24.
When you shall see Jerusalem compassed about with an army, then know that
the desolation thereof is at hand etc. There shall be great affliction upon
the land, and wrath on this people. And they shall fall by the edge of the
sword: and shall be led into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trode^ of the
Gentiles, till the times of Nations be fullfilled.

37. In findinge out the Person of the Messiah there is no difficulty, for he
was to come with miracles and by his works to declare himself. He that will
take directions out of old Scripture for to find him must attend unto the
circumstances there determined, as when, from what place, in what manner, he was
to come. And he may find him thus without more ado. Look out, one, borne at
Bethlem, before Jerusalem was overthrown, whose carriage was humble, Mich. 5.6.
Dan. 9. v. 26.27. Zach 9. v. 9. and 12. v. 10. Isa. 49.6.
and actions wonderful, who was refused by the Jews, and put to death, and
has been acknowledged, followed, and adored by the Gentiles ever since, and
this is he. And in him to whom these few circumstances do agree, are verified
all the Prophecies and all other circumstances foretold, as you will find if
you run them over. Moreover, that all the circumstances here named agree
pu^ctuallie to Jesus the son of Mary, every Jew, every Gentile knows.
Neither is it possible now to make them agree to any other, since God cannot
deceive, nor time run back, nor that be undone which is already done.

38. The later Jews except also against the Deity of the Messiah; beleeuinge
that he was to be pure man. We believe that in God there are three Persons, in
propriety all distinct: in substance and nature, one: And, that the second of
these divine Persons, the Son and Word coeternall with the Father, did for
redemption of mankind assume and unite unto himself the form of man, or
humane nature. So that, the same Person having two natures, is reallie God by
reason of his divine nature, the God of hosts, the God of Israel, the only
God; and, By reason of his humane nature he is reallie also man. In Jesus
therefore, the Messiah, Coll. 2.9. Phill. 2.6.7.
our Savior, does dwell the fullnes of the God head corporally. And he, when
he was in the form of God, thought it no robbery himself to be equal to
God, but he exinanited himself, taking the form of a servant, made into the
similitude of men, Heb. 1. v. 3.4.
and in shape found as man. Who being the brightness of the glory (of the
eternal Father) and (...), the figure of his substance, and carryinge all
things by the word of his power, making purgation of sins, sittteth on the
right hand of the Majesty in high places: being made so much better the
Angels, as he has inherited an more excellent name above them. Coll. 1. v.
16.17.
In whom were created all things in heaven and in earth, visible and invisible,
whether Thrones, or Dominations, or Principalities, or Potestates: all by him
and in him were created, and he is before all, and all consist in him. Thus far
the Apostle; now hear a piece of S. John's deuinitie: Io. 1. v. 1, 2.3.
In the begininge was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the
Word: This was in the beginning with God: All things were made by him, and
without him was made nothing. 1 Io. 5. v. 7
There be three which give testimony in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three be one. This great mystery, we are taught in the
school of Jesus Christ. And though it be very high, as concerning the
subsistence of the Deity in it self, yet is it easily defended against all
the adversaries of our faith: No Jew, Pagan, or other that does refuse our
Creed, being able to prove that he who has made other things fruitful, Isa.
66. v. 9.
has not a supereminent fecu^ditie in himself: or that God, being
intellectual, does not produce a Word infinite as his intellection, and equal
to himself and consubstantiall. Or, that these two divine Persons, Father and
Son, by their comprehensiue mutual love do not produce a third Person,
immanent also and infinite as the love, and therefore in substance all one with
the Father and the Son, though distinct in propriety as proceeding from them
both.

39. But we are here briefly out of the Prophets whom the Jews receive to
declare the divinity of the Messiah. And, this we can easily, for though the
old Scripture has not all mysteries so cleerlie, God reserving unto himself
the revelation of some till he came in Person, yet there is enough for our
purpose. I will here only repeat a part of that I find. The places are so
forcible that they cannot be avoided, and therefore the Jews have e^deuoured
to corrupt the text, but too late, for the cause was won on our side long
before, and the ancient Rabbines are for us. Ps. 2. v. 6.7
I (says the Messiah) am appointed King over Sion etc. and the lord said to
me (King of Sio^) Thou art my Son, I this day (of eternity) have begotten
thee. And David. The lord said to my his Word, Paraphr. Chald. the Messiah
Antiq. Heb. Ps. 109. v. 1.7. v. 3. Psalm. 44. and cited also by to this purpose
by the Apostle Hebr. 1
lord sit on my right hand, (an honor importing equality) with thee the
beginning in the day of thy strength, in the brightness of holy things from the
womb before the day star I begat thee. And, Thy throne o God for ever and
ever: a rod of equity the rod of thy kingdom: thou have loved justice and
hated iniquity, therefore thee, God, thy God has anointed with oil of
exultation above thy fellows. In Isaie. Isa. 45. v. 14.15.
Thus says our Lord, the labor of Egypt and the merchandise of Aethiopia and
of Sabaim the high men, shall pass to thee and shall be thine, they shall
walk after thee, (the Messiah) they shall go bound with manicles: and they
shall ADORE THEE and shall beseech thee. ONLY in THEE (he speaks still to the
Messiah) is God, and there is NO GOD beside thee. Verily thou art God hidden,
in the form of man, the God of Israel, a Savior. God here auouches that
another disti^ct personally from himself is God, the only God, God hidden:
which speech is verified in the Messiah; and cannot possibly be verified of
any pure man. Go further and you shall find in Jeremy the great name
tetragrammaton, that incommunicable name of God given, and by God, to the
Messiah. Behold the days shall come says our Lord, Ierem. 33. v. 14.15.16
and I will raise up the good word that I have spoken to the house of Israel,
and to the house of Judah etc. I will make the SPRING OF JUSTICE to bud forth
unto David: the same is also in the 25. c. v 5.6.
and HE shall do judgment and justice in the earth. In THOSE DAYS shall Judah
be saved and Jerusalem shall dwell confidently, and this is the name they shall
call HIM, By Rab. Aaron and Rab. Jacob
(...) THE LORD our just one. Note here by the way, that the poi^ts in Hebrew
were invented more the^ four hundred years after Christ, Elias Leuita Iudaeus
Praefat. 3. ante Massoreth Hammassoreth. Genebr. Chr. ad an. 76. Zach. 2. v. 8
9.
and therefore in reading you may take them of again; for in the poi^ting many
texts are corrupted. In an other of the Prophets. Thus says THE LORD OF HOSTS,
after glory he sent ME to the Nations that have spoiled you, for he that shall
touch you, touches the apple of mine eye because lo I lift up my hand upon
them, and they shall be a pray to those that served them. Mark diligently in
the beginning who speaks, saying that he is sent, and you will find him to be
the Lord of hosts; HE is sent: and is sent by the Lord of hosts also: one
divine Person sending the other. The same Person, the Lord of Hosts does
continue still his speech, and says, and you shall know that the Lord of
hosts SENT ME. Praise and rejoice o daughter of Sion, because lo I COME, and
will dwell in the midst of thee, v. 9.10.11
SAYS OUR LORD. And many Nations shall be joined to our Lord in that day, and
they shall be my people, and I WILL DWELL in the midst of thee: and thou
shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent ME to thee* The same God of
Israel, in an other Chapter affirms himself to be pierced by the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, as indeed he was in his passion. The words I put down before,
Zac. 12.10 To give the spirit of Grace is an act proper to God.
and they are these, I will power out upon the house of David and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and prayer, (the God of Israel
speaks) and they shall look upon ME, The God of Israel, WHOM they HAVE
PIERCED. It is clear then, that the God of Israel has flesh and blood by
Incarnation, how else could he be pierced? Before he foretold his coming in
flesh and blood. Isa. 7.14.
A virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and his name shall be called
Emmanu-el, God with us. c. 35. v. 5.
And in an other place, God himself WILL COME, and will same you: then, shall
the eyes of the blind be opened and the ears of the deaf etc. Again the God
of Israel, in an other place, I my self THAT SPOKE, Isa. 52.6.
lo I AM PRESENT. All which do manifest the ttuth of that which we read in
Baruch. This is our God, and there shall none other be esteemed against him.
Baruch. 3 v. 36.37.38
He found out all the way of discipline and deleuered it to Jacob his servant
and to Israel his beloved. After these things he was seen UPON THE EARTH, and
was conversant with men.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Of the Introduction of Christianity into the world.
40. IN the beginning of the former Chapter I proposed unto my self a brief
discourse of the introductio^ of Christianity into the world, and the
propagatio^ of the Church in the times primitive, but Atheists and Jews did
interrupt me so, that all the Chapter was spent with them. Having there shaken
them of, I will now resume the subject, and will, as then I said, relate not
dispute. He that has raised this great building whereof I have spoken in this
Book, the Church I mean diffused in all Nations, is Jesus, borne at Bethlem,
Son of Marie. This all do know and confess, Pagans, Jews, Atheists. And
this great work well considered does argue in him more then was ever in any
other upon earth: no one, of what quality so ever, no Scholar, No Monarch,
none that ever lived, has ever done the like: to unite, I say, so maay
Nations, for so long a time, in so obscure a Creed, by such means, as he has
done. These things we see are done, they are undeniable; let us look on the
beginning to see how: and if we keep a settled eye on our Master and his
proceedings we shall discover that he was indeed the God of nature conuersing
here visiblie amongst men.

41. His doctrine was of Sanctity, of Salvation: of the power, and the
knowledge, and providence, and sovereign will of God. Of the last end and
chief Object of man's Being, Of the perfection of the next life in immortality
and the dispositions thereunto: Of the horror and effects of sin; and of the
goodness of all virtue whereof he did exhibit himself a divine form and
example to the world by practicing them all in the heroicke and most perfect
manner. Reflect upon his carriage in his passion, the bitterest in all respects
that ever man suffered, and you will find his behavior in each particular to
be divine. In his rule there is no virtue wanting, so perfectly did he
comprehend what moral Philosophers could never attain unto; and beyond all
these he teaches Faith relying on the prime Verity, Hope reposed in Gods
infinite Mercy, and Charity loving the divine Goodness for it self. Whatsoever
in speculation men knew concerning God the highest Object, he delivered it more
cleerelie all, discovering further his providence, mercy, and justice about
man; and which is furthest out of our sight, the Sacred Mystery of the
Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, subsisting in one infinite
Nature and community of bliss. Moreover he did look into men's thoughts and
discover what he pleased, Matt. 9. and 26.1.
in the presence and to the confusion of those who sought occasion to traduce
him: Luke 18 19.21. Matthew. 10.100.12.
and certainly foretold things to come to himself, to his adversaries, to his
disciples, to Jerusalem, to the Gentiles, to the Church.

42. His miracles were many, done in the sight of his enemies, done often with
a word. He cured the sick, gave sight unto the blind and life to those were
dead. Matt. 9. Luk 7.
And was so powerful herein that he gave his disciples power to do the same,
and so far that their tutch, their word, their clothes yea and shadow there
followed miraculous effects. Act. 5.
Neither was his life only but this death likewise full of miracle, in so much
that nature her self was troubled with the horror of that day where in he, on
who^ she depended, died. The earth trembled, the rocks burst in sunder, the
veil of the Temple splitte, graves did surre^der their dead, Matt. 27. Luke
23.
the Sun was ecclipsed strangely, and a general darkness ouerspred the whole
earth. Being put to death in the sight of a world of people and his body
buried, he rises (such was his divine power) from death, having thereby paid
the ransom for mankind, Mat. 27. Luke 24. 1. Cor. 15.
and is the third day again alive, and appears, and conuerses, and gives
instruction, power, and commission to his disciples, and lastly in their sight
does ascend. Being ascended, he sends the holy Ghost in visible manner unto
them all assembled, whereby they receive an inward testimony of the truth he
had taught: Act. 1. and 2.
and are so confirmed and encouraged by the power of this Spirit, that they
begin confidently, notwithstanding the Jews threats and opposition, to
diuulge his doctrine.

43. And behold; Peeter, Supremu^ and antiquissimu^ Theologorum stigium. S.
Dionys. diu. nom. c 3.
of an ignorant fisherman, is now become the Prince and Head of deuines: and
maintains, with the victory, by the known success of many ages,
universally now manifest, the cause of Jesus Christ, against all the world. He
is also so good an Orator, and on the sudden, that with his first speech,
and this made without study, Act. 2.
the winnes, in the sight of his Adversaries, three thousand to the faith. For
the better diuulging of the Gospel in all Nations, these Fishermen have also
bestowed on them by their Master the guifte of tongues, and instantly, the
doctrine of Jesus Christ is uttered in all languages: the Parthians, and
Medians, and Elamites, and those which inhabit Mesopotomia, Judea and
Capadocia, Pontus and Asia, Act. 2.
Phrygia and Pamphilia, Egypt and the parts of Lybia that is about Cyrene, and
strangers of Rome, Jews also and Proselytes, and Cretensians and Arabians:
all, with admiration and amazement hear their own languages from the mouths
of unlettered Galileans. O heavenly Master! o powerful and divine spirit! o
wondrous School! o happy Scholars! The holy Ghost, says a great Saint,
fills a boy given to the harp and makes him a Psalmist: ^. Gregor. sup. Ezech.
he filles an abstinent child and makes him the Judge of Elders: he filles a
neatheard and makes him a Prophet: he filles a fisherman and makes him Prince
of Apostles: he filles a persecutor and makes him Doctor of the Gentiles: he
filles a publican and makes him an Evangelist. Add here, that he filles a
company of unlearned men and makes them linguists, Deuines, Preachers, and
Apostles.

44. The Disciples, thus miraculously furnished with knowledge and tongues to
the amazement and confusion of all opponents, did according to their Masters
commission resolutely set on their great task, which was to carry the good
tidings of the Worlds Redemption by Jesus the Son of God, to all Nations: and
dispersing themselves into diverse parts, did preach every where, Mar. 19.
our Lord cooperating and confirming their doctrine with signs and woonders.
And now, the World began to turn; from Vice to Virtue, from Superstition to
Religion, from Idolatry to God again.

45. The Enemy of virtue and of all good proceeding, (who affecting divine
honor fell from heaven, and continuing his desire thought to compass it here
on earth) perceauing of the motion now begun, and seeing his ministers
contemned, his Idols overthrown, unclean Spirits commanded out of men, and a
general reformation in the way; began to storm, and raised a most bitter
persecution against the Church: wherein by his instigation, Jews, Gentiles,
and Heretics, with wit, power, and malice, were to oppose her; and the
world made a Theater of the combat.

46. The particulars are to long for this place, and therefore I remit you to
Baronius to read there what the Christians did suffer in the times of Nero,
Domitia^, Traian, Marcus Aurelius and Sueuerus, commanders of the Roman World:
when confessing the faith of Jesus Christ in all places, on all occasions,
before all kind of people, their number did increase daily in the face of
torment; and the sword of Persecution prevailed nothing but to lay open their
constancy to the world. Provinces, Islands, Castles, Fortresses, Tents, Camps,
Tertull. Apol. ad Gent. c. 37
Courts, Palaces, Senates, Market places, all were full: and the Kingdom of
Christ discovering it self further the^ the Roman Empire, was outstreched into
all corners, believed in all places, reverenced of all Nations, every where
reigning, adored every where. After the forenamed, followed other most bitter
persecutions by Decius, Dioclesian, Maximinian; Wherein the Priests were
tormented, the Churches pulled down, the Books burnt; and the fury was such,
being with extreme violence borne into all provinces, Cities, Towns, in the
Roman world, that it threatened an universal extirpation yeauen to the last
Christian man, and yet could not the number of believers be diminished. We
read of seue^teene thousand martyred in one month and that in Egypt, a part
of Afric, there were 144000. put to death, and 700000. banished from the same
place in Diocletia^s time. Read Eusebius. Baron. Spondan.
by which if we guess at the multitude which did suffer in all the time of
the ten persecutions in all the world, the number will appear infinite, and
our faith be confirmed with a world of blood. So earnestly did the Devil by
these tyrannical cruel means oppose the Church: which notwithstanding, when
all was done, was greater then before, Constant.
in so much that Christianity got the Empire, and then securely spread it self,
and Rome, as Leo the great truly said, S. Leo sermon. 1. de Not. Apost.
being made the Sea of Peeter, came to rule more universally by divine
Religion, then by te^porall Soueraignetie; for though enlarged by many
victories, she had extended the right of her Empire by sea and land, yet that
which the toil of War subdued, was less the^ that which Christian peace did
bring under.

46. Out of this admirable plantation of Christianity, and so powerful a
proposition and persuasion of the truth unto the World that it was esteemed
above all things else dearest otherwise to men, the Fathers make excellent
discourses to show the divine power of our Savior Jesus Christ, the author of
this work. One out of S. Chrysostom I will put down, who says thus. No man
will deny that Christ has founded all the Churches in the world, and hence
we demonstrate his power, S. Chrysostom. Quod Christus sit Deus to. 5.
and show him to be God. For it is not in the power of a mere man to lay
hands on the whole world by sea and land in so short a time, and to set at
liberty mankind prevented which such absurd behavior, and entangled in so
great euiles: and not Romans only, but Persians also, and all kind of
Barbarians. Moreover that he did this, using no weapons making no expenses,
raising no armies, fighting no battails: but by eleven at first of no
reputation, base, rude, unlearned, poor, naked men, he has persuaded so many
tribes of men, and not the present only, but those also which are to come.
what? that he has overthrown country laws, abolished inueterate customs,
pulled up plants so long rooted, and for them planted other of his own he has
withdrawn us from those things wheru^to we were inclined, and induced us unto
those which are hard and troublesome. And whilst he was doing these things,
his, were molested by all, and him self did suffer a most ignominious kind of
death, the cross. No man will deny that he was crucified, and by the Jews:
that he suffered infinite things from them, that daily the Gospel does
increase, and flourish, not here only but even among the Persians too, eauen
whilst by them it is opposed. For there are many swarms of Martyrs from
thence, and those who were there more savage then woolues, having heard the
Gospel are become milder then sheep, and discourse now of immortality, and
of the resurrection, and of inexplicable good things. Neither have these noble
enterprises been in cities only, but they have gone into villages, and
Cuntreies, and Ila^ds, ports and bays. And not private men and princes only,
but kings them selves which wear the crowns, do with a notable and great
faith submit them selves to him that was crucified. Neither did these things
unwittingly come to pass, but were foretold long before: and least there
should be any suspicion at all in this, we have the books from the Jews
which nailed him to the Cross. Certainly these things, undeniable, and
subject to men's eyes, prove a Deity in the worker: and the correspondence to
the predictio^s erecte our minds to the acknowledgment of a providence that
preconceaued and ordained the work long before.

47. It is stra^g to see the vanity of some, who make trial to break
thorough this discourse as being industrious to find a way to escape: but they
are penned in on every side and cannot get away. Some times they think of
attributi^g the whole business to the Devil: but presently their thought is
checked when they consider from what and whereu^to this Motion is. He that
knows what is meant by the world Devil, does conceive a spirit bent to evil
and opposite unto good. In motu; terminus quo; terminus ad quem, mobile and
eff^ciens.
Now this Motion (to judge of the whole by that part which is evident) is a
Reformation and an amendment of the world, for it is a withdrawing of it from
vices which are manifestly against reason, and a drawing of it unto virtues
manifestly consonant unto reason. The Christian Rule discouers to us more
clearly whatsoever nature knows either in good or ill, proposing the good to
be followed, the bad to be eschued. It is further evident that this is against
the inclination of the Devil; wherefore it is likewise evident that this Motion
is not from him. Our Rule discouers the Devil also and does inuit all to
detest him, whereas he has an infinite ambition of honor, whereby it is
likewise evident that it is not from him. Next they care not if they attribute
it to an Intelligence and good Spirit, seducing us: Where again they find them
selves deceived when they consider that such a Spirit being good does not lie
or deceive (as they imagine this has done) for if he lie or deceive it is
thereby manifest he is not good. If he be good, a man were out of danger that
were directed by him, by an Angel, a good Angel, telling truth. Thirdly they
would attribute it to the Stars: and straight are confounded when they
consider that the consent is intellectual, of worlds, in an obscure Creed,
not demonstrable by all the power nature has. For example; that in the Deity
are three Persons consubstantiall; this principle of our Religion is not
impressed into man's understanding by the Stars: Neither can the Stars make it
evident with all their light. They have not yet made evident what kind of
things themselves are, what their Orbs, what their influence, what their
matter, form, their subsistence, macula solares. Martis reuolutio.
whether they be corruptible or incorruptible; whether the Planets be fixed in
orbs, or moved in a liquid substance. Of the truth, of these things, none ever
have been so assured from the Stars, that they would die for it: for the
truth of our Creed many men of great learning have given their lives. Neither
can the stars raise a man that is dead, those who planted our Religion have
done it: and have done it with a word, whereas if a man expected such a thing
from the Stars, It contains 49000. of our years
he must stay till the great year be past, for the same disposition of the
heaven, and the^ will be as weere it as he is now. Variasse debuerat error
Ecclesiarum. caeterum quod apud multos vnum in venitur non est erratu^ sed
traditum. Tertull. praeser. c. 28.
Fourthly they would give the work away to chance: But see their error, when
they consider how long before it was foretold and how often. Again chance is
some times one, sometimes other; this is constantly the same in a world of men.
Fifthly they question the miracles we speak of. But in vain, for they were
done in public in the sight of many of all sorts: and being diuulged at
that time by the Evangelists, the time, place, and other circumstances put
down; and examined by severe adversaries, both Jews and Gentiles, not any one
of them could ever be disprooued. So that he who will now question them has
against him the endeavors of the learned Jews and Gentiles them living, who
doing all they could, were not able to discredit any of them, as appears
still by their Books, and also by the issue and event. He has also against
him all the Christians of those times, the rather to be credited because an
infinite company of them, together with the Apostles, gave their lives for the
doctrine confirmed unto them by these means. The Gospells as I said, where
diuulged, and therein were put down the miracles done publicly, the time,
place, and other circumstances were there assigned. On the one side the Jews,
studied in the Scripture, and Gentiles learned in Philosophy, did labor to
suppress Christianity and to disprove and discredit these miracles by which
it was confirmed and proved to be divine. On the other side were the
Christians, persecuted and molested for this doctrine, and to be deprived of
their goods, honors, liberty, country and lives. Both sides did examine
earnestly the truth of things: the one because they would suppress the
Religion, beginning to spread it self: the other because it did concern their
lives, and further their eternal estate. The memory of things was fresh, and
both sides were present unto the time and place. A more eager inquisitio^, a
greater cause there was never any. You know the issue. The poor fisher-me^
did prevail. There were innumerable, and among them as wise men, as great
Scholars, as the world had ever any, gave their lives in testimony of the
truth. Our adversaries were confounded. Miracles still increased. The world
became Christian, and still continues so. He that notwithstanding all this
will not believe those things were done, and that indeed they were miracles,
is constrained to see a miracle, strange without example, before his own eyes.
He sees that now the world believes the obscure Christian Creed, persuaded
thereunto by a few, poor, contemned, and unlettered fishermen: Read S. Aug.
de ciuit. l. 22. c. 5*
this miracle effected by fishermen they must see whith their eyes, and
therefore unless they will deny that which with their own eyes they see, they
must grant that those poor men, could and have done a miracle.

48. If at the time when the Apostles did receive their commission to teach the
world, a man should have demanded whether those fishermen were ever like to
bring to pass this great work which we see with our eyes now, that is,
whether they were like to make the World Christian, it would have been thought
incredible, impossible: Considering the hardness and obscurity of the Doctrine
they were to preach: the Learning of the Philosophers with whom they, not
brought up in Schools, were to encounter: the diversity of judgment in the
world in things far more intelligible, no Master having ever been able to
win so many followers in things more clear: considering also the sundry
conditions, laws, customs, forms of government in the World, which before was
never brought under ONE COMMON RVLE or law by any man: and especially if the
violent Oppositions of Princes, Emperors, and the World in common had been
foreseen. Since therefore this great work, incredible and impossible in man's
judgment, is effected as we see, and by those simple men, by the Disciples of
Jesus: it is evident that a supernatural and divine power did work by them.
You know that Plato, one of the Wits of the World, was long about a Common
wealth, and could never make it any where but in his mind. Philosophy has
been laboring many thousand years, to unite all understandings in the
grounds of Nature, clear in the^ selves, and within the compass of man's wit
but with all her Schools, she cannot effect her purpose: the longer she
teaches, the more men disagree. The Arabian Impostor, to win the people,
laid open a wide path toward a sensual Paradise, tempering his Religion to
the popular taste; and lest any thing should hinder his diffusio^, got the
Turkish sword, to make his way: No marvel then, if there be many in that
sink, either willingly descending to the sense, or tumbled down by force.
The Fisher-me^, having never heard Philosophy speak out of her pulpit, were to
make the Schools believe a dark obscure Creed; being unarmed, they were to
meet the Sword. They had no sooner begun their task, but men's hands were
full of books against their doctrine; and the world in horror, affrighted
with the torments provided for their Scholars. Yet, unlearned and unarmed as
they were; notwithstanding the violent oppositions of sensuality, Power, and
Hell it self, they have brought their Creed and discipline (Posterity being
astonished at the event) into Nations, into Courts, into the whole World: and
so powerfully, that it has be^ universally diffused these sixteen hundred
years. And hereby have raised a Church unto their Master Jesus Christ,
greater the^ all the Societies, all States, all Kingdoms, all Monarchies that
ever were before.

49. I have now done what I intented in this place, only because the thing I
speak of is a Church, let me a little look upon it in that form. The house
of God, you know, is founded in faith, raised by hope, covered with charity.
Faith is the foundation, the walls Hope, and Charity is the roof. In faith,
the Apostles were eminent, as being Masters of Christianity, and are therefore
Mountains, whereon the rest of the Church does stand, according to the
Prophetie, Isa. 2.
In the later days the Mountain, the house of our Lord shall be prepared in
the top of mountains. They were eminent in sa^ctitie likewise, whereuppo^
another Prophetie, Psalm. 86.
The foundations thereof in the holy Mountains. And, what the Apostles
taught, the Prophets, as being elevated above others with whom they lived, to
see things far of, did foretell, and after their manner, also teach: so as
they come in, within the compass of the Foundation too, wherefore the Apostle
in his Epistle to the Ephesia^s, You, says he, are citizens of the Saints,
Ephesians. 2.
and the domesticalles of God, built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the highest corner stone, in whom the
building framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in our Lord: in whom you
are also built together into an habitatio^ of God in the holy Ghost. These
Apostles and Prophets, do rely upon Jesus Christ, a MOVNTAINE, in regard of
his knowledge, Power and Sanctity; wherein, as man, he does excel men and
Angels all together, and, as God, he is infinite in each of them. On him being
the prime Verity, and the increated Word of God the Father, profound in all
kind of perfection, immovable, and eternal, the Catholic Church does
stand. On him, the Apostles; on the Apostles, Christian men are built, as
living stones, held together by Communion, and raised up by strong Hope,
toward heaven, to the very sight of God. Be ye, quoth S. Peeter,
superedified, as it were living stones, spiritual houses. In the golden roof,
1. Pet 2.
millions of Saints do shine, and give light to the edificatio^ of others.
The Pillars, are the Pastors, who strongly support the Building, and are
wo^derfullie disposed in Order Hierarchicall, according to the form of that
which is in the Angelical Church in heaven. In these Pillars, all the Virtues
are, alive. The Door of this Temple, known generally by the name of Baptism,
is open to all parts of the world, and infinite do enter, washed clean as they
come in. So the Prophet. In that day shall be a Fountain, lying open to the
house of David, Zach. 13.
unto the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for the ablution of the Sinner. This water
takes away the spots of sin out of the soul, so that it comes in to the
Church, purer then the Sun: and there finds the bread of life, bread of
Angels, the medicine of immortality, the fountain of all good, and
consummation of Sacraments, the holy Eucharist, to feed upon. Every where,
there are Altars, whereupon is Sacrificed vnbloodilie the Lamb of God that
takes away the sin of the world, according as JESUS our high Priest, Priest
for ever, according to the Order of Melchisedech, did institute and ordain. In
the way to these Altars, are Tribunalls, wherein those do sit who can open
Heaven to the Penitent, where the Priest does forgive trespasses committed
against God: Heaven approving the Sentence of a man. I will give to thee
Peeter, Matt. 16. and 18.
the keys of the kingdom of heaven; Whatsoever you shall loose in earth,
shall be loosed also in heaven* whose sins you shall forgive, they are
forgiven them, Joan. 20.
and whose you shall retain, they are retained. Here are the Doctors,
Evangelists, Prophets, and Pastors, of whom we read in S. Paul. Here are
Isaies Kings and Queens, Abraham's Stars, the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and
Gods Elect. All Tribes, and People, and tongues, all Nations, all the ends of
the Earth, do come hither and adore in this Mount of our Lord, in this House
of God. Here the Holy Ghost still abides, illuminating, directing,
Sanctifying: and before him a hundred thousand hearts burn ever in the flames
of divine love. Here some are weeping for their sins, others meditating on
the Passion, others teaching and instructing the people, others defining in
general Council, others converting Nations, others adoring the souueraigne
will of God, others suffering for his sake. In the Quire, innumerable tongues
are employed day and night, in the praise of their Creator and Redeemer: And
round about are Watchmen, that never hold their peace. Lift up thine eyes, o
JERUSALEM, round about, and see, all these are gathered together, they are come
unto thee. Thy somes are come from a far, and thy daugthers are risen from
thy side. See and abound, let thy heart marvel and be dilated, for the
multitude of the Sea is converted, and the streingth of Gentiles comes unto
thee. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and stretch out the skins of thy
Tabernacles, spare not, make long thy cords, and fasten thy nails. behold,
thou do penetrate to the right hand, and to the left; thou art dilated to
the East, and to the West, and to the North, and to the South. The Gentiles do
walk by thy light, and Kings in the brightness of thy rising. Kings are thy
nourcing Fathers, and Queens thy Nources. The children of them that humbled
thee come crouching now and adore the stepps of thy feet. Thy God has
established thee his throne as the days of heaven, and has made thee the
pride of worlds a joy unto generation and generation; thou art a crown of
glory in the hand of our Lord, and the Diadem of a kingdom in the hand of
thy God.

50. This Church, the SPOWSE of Jesus Christ, holding in her hand the BOOK OF
GOD, does contemplate and behold therein as in a glass, her OWN SELF: she
beholds there her own greatness, her own proportion, her own face* And (such
is the rare purity and perfection of this glass) she beholds there also her
doctrine, her inward composition, her life and soul. The proposition of the
Object is supernaturallie made unto her in most clear and evident
circumstances: And by the infallible operation of the All-teaching Spirit she
is directed in her act. By these two powerful certain means, she is so
consta^tly settled in her faith, that if the world shrink under feet, she will
not leave the truth. Repeat now the first Chapter, and read there in
PROPHECY that which worlds of people since have beheld with their EYES, and
still do: read I say, and consider it diligently, to the end you may see how
one is verified in the other; that Prophecy in this Church, and this Church in
that Prophecy: And hereby you will understand at leingth by gods grace, both
that Prophecy and this Church to be from one, and the same cause and prime
author, whose providence and power are so universally eminent that none can
frustrate his design, or hinder an event which he foretold: and therefore both
divine, and both from God.

51. From this Church and from no other I take my direction for eternity. My
own wit might run amiss; I might mistake in the estimation of the Spirit
in me, if I went alone: And I were mistaken manifestly if I followed any that
swarued from the Spirit of this community. And an other community like this,
the world never saw. The consent of so many worlds of people in an obscure
Creed* is an evident argument of a supernatural cause uniting their
understandings, It was over the world before Constantine: and yet all Princes
were against it*
in this consent; and consequently of a divine Spirit moving them. For, all
these Nations were never (much less all this time of sixteen hundred years)
actualy subject to any one Prince or State: and the light of nature does unite
many in one principle or Conclusion, but by way of evidence which is not here
in our Creed. Further, we know that Scholars never yet agreed so generally
in things subject unto the natural power of their understanding: neither can
any man alive find out or assign and defend against a Scholar, any natural
cause of this unity in belief. The infinite miracles illustrious and
undeniable in this Church are an evident argument that the Author of nature is
in it, changing the common course of things, to the astonishment of the world,
thereby to draw the eyes of all upon this Company, where they may see, and
learn the service of their Creator. The uniformity of this Company of
Gentiles to the description made before in Prophecy, and the Reprobation of
the Jewish Nation, left now without Temple, without Sacrifice, without Prophet,
without miracle, without any argument of Gods presence, and true service among
them, are an evident argument that this Company and the Messiah Church
described in the Scripture, are all one. Wherefore worthily did our
predecessors and we do worthily rest in the communion of this company. And
since mortal man with his industry ca^ go no higher nor better resolve
himself in divine and heavenly ^^^ires, being here arrived, he meets with
Gods providence to conduct him to security,

Is a man moved to believe by example and consent? here are worlds in our
communion, and this so ample as the like is no were to be found. Is he moved
with Miracles? here are infinite. The blind see, the lame walk, the dead
arise: and of this we have as great evidence as man can desire. Is he moved
with the common and uniform resolution of the learned? here are general
Decrees made in Counsels Oecumenicall by the wisest of all the world: the
prime Scholars and grauest men coming together from all places, to discuss
and to determine. Is he moved with Antiquity? the Reverence of elder times is
all with us: here are Gregory's, and Chrysosto^s, and Augustines, and Basils,
and Ephrems, and Cyrills, and Cyprians, and Iustines, and others innumerable.
Is he moved by Gods word? it is flatly and vnansweareably on our side.
Atheists, children can answer, they err so grossly against the light of
nature. The Jews are forced to see with their own eyes the Prophecies of the
Messiah and his Kingdom, fullfilled in Jesus Christ and his Church. And this
Church to be the Catholic, yeauen that which is now, and has been ever in the
Communion of the Roman See, is so clear, that denying of it all Histories, all
Books, all Monuments, all Memory must be denied: and nothing be confessed for
true which ever yet has been on earth. Denying of it you may also deny that
there was ever Jewish Nation, or Roman Emperor, or Heathen Idol: you may as
well deny that Rome, Constantinople, London, are or ever were.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. What meant by a Catholic.
52. BEfore I go on to your Objections, because the place is very fit, and
the thing necessary to be observed, and borne in mind, I will tell you what I
mean by a Catholic, which question is here answered, without difficulty.
You have seen the Catholic Church, that is the congregation of Christians in
communion at all times with the Sea of Rome, by a Catholic man, I mean one
who believes the Creed of this Church, one of this comunion: and every one
which did heretofore embrace this communion was a Catholic, so long as he did
embrace it, and died a Catholic if he died in it. In the communion with this
Church, is included a Union with it: which union is founded in a conformity,
or uniformity of faith and judgment in divine matters. And this was in all
those who did resolve their belief into the proposition or judgment of this
Church. For, he who submittes his judgment wholly to the Church, and believes
as she tells him ready to believe more, if she declare her self more fully,
and to condemn all doctrine which she co^demnes, is undivided from the Church
in judgment, and therefore uniform.

53. Hence it comes also that not only those who lived at one time, were of
our communion, but such also as lived in diverse ages: because the following age
did receive the doctrine, and general decrees of the precede^t, believing all
which was then by the Church believed, and condemning such opinions as they
condemned. By this means we do also communicate with them all as perfectly
in the disposition of our soul, and redines of our understanding, as if we
had lived with them. Hence it is, that we admit all the Councelles that were
generally received by the Church in their time; and are sufficiently moved
thereunto by the judgment of the Church, which then received them. For, we
resolve our judgment into the judgment of the Church, and that is our rule
under God, who is the prime rule, and highest Object of our faith.

You will be ready to make an other use of some part of this discourse, but
you cannot* for you make your own choice of that which you believe, and do
not submit your judgment to the judgment of Gods Church. We acknowledge
divine assistance in Church-proposition as I have said before, and this does
every Catholic: which is the reason why we are all of one religion, though
we live at several times. Out of this comes the Catholic Union, or unity
which is most ample, reaching into all Nations, and through all times: which
kind of unity depending on the Churches mouth as on a subordinate cause and
rule, but principally on the all-teaching Spiritte directing to revealed
ve^ities as on an infinite and immovable principle, (as hereafter I will show)
is peculiar to the Church of God. Ask any man of our religion, on whose
judgment he relies in matters of faith, and he will answer that he relies on
the judgment of the Church; and if you ask further, on whom the whole Church
of this age has dependence for exterior proposition of matters of faith, I
answer that this whole age resolves it self into the precedent age, and that
into the precedent, and so vpwardes to the first, which age did resolve it
self into the Apostle proposition, and they resolved their faith into the
proposition of our Savior, who came into the world to this purpose, and he
Cour, Savior) being the natural son of God, did cleerlie behold all truth
with an infinite understanding. And there stays the resolution, having made a
full compass, and returned thither where this verity first was. For, all
truth is first in the divine understanding, and thence revealed many ways, as
it has pleased that original goodness, the eternal Father: as by prophettes
in old time; and after by his Son Jesus Christ; who did instruct his Church,
and bequeathed an everlasting assistance, to bear in mind, and to deliver
truly this lesson to future ages. Hence it came, that this instruction or
word, which he put into her mouth, has not yet got out of it, nor will to
the worlds end.

54, I had made a full point, and was going on to the next Chapter; but I
remembered with whom I am now again dealing, and that I am to repeat the same
things over more then once, having for the same reason also contented my self
with very few things among infinite which might be said for our cause. My
chief intention therefore in this second book was, only to declare which
company of people in all the world, is the Church Catholic, or the Church
answearing to Gods eternal decree declared by the Prophets. And I have proved
it to be that company which is and has been ever in the communion of the Sea
of Rome. This company of Believers is the Church described in Gods word, and
no other company distinct from this whatsoever it be is the Church there
described. In the proof of this I have taken such grounds as are undeniable;
as, the known communion of Nations, the like being no where found; the
Testimony of worlds of people; the Confession of the most learned Adversaries
that we have, or ever had since Luther came; The Evidence of general
Councelles, and the known Opposition of all confessed Heretics in all times
to this Church, and to no other. These grounds or arguments I take so far
only as they are manifestly undeniable, and no further: and to prove that
which your own fellows and your Masters do yield unto, and though most
unwillingly, have confessed in their books. That is, I take them to declare
that the Church in communion with the Sea of Rome is and has been ever the
Church described by the Prophets, and that no other answearable to that
description is any where else to be found. When you answer this Book, I will
have no other thing answered in this place but this. Keep the question all a
part and distinct, that such as read our papers may know when one matter is
ended or agreed upon; and do not thrust other things in here. If you grant
it, Say so. If you do not, speak directly to this point, in this place, and
of no other. I will not hear of erring, or not erring in fundamentalls or not
fundamentalls. I have nothing to do with that, It shall have a place a part: I
look only which is the Church answearing to the description, whether it be
subject to error in any thing, or be not, whether it does err actuallie, or
ever has actuallie been in error. I meddle not here with that. The thing
described in Prophecy, the substance of the thing, the Church I look for, and
have found her by her proportion, by her face: it is not yours, it is ours.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. Wherein answer is given to some exceptions made against
the Universality of the Church.
THe Arguments which you and your abotters make against the foresaid
universality of the Church, S. Aug. de Unit. Eccl. c. 12.
are answered easily. And whereas, first as Donatists heretofore did also,
you plead for your poverty and paucitie of adherentes, that there are few
chozen, and the world full of fools: I confess there are to many fools
indeed, and have been ever, if you consider the whole collection of all kind
of Heretics, together with Paganes, and Atheistes: the number whereof being
infinite, the world may be said to be full. But what is this to the purpose,
since the Catholic Church notwithstanding spreds it self into all Nations,
and makes some of every nation (and those very many also) wise, many being
called by the Pastors, by the Apostles, by God to Christianity from all
nations, among which many though they receive the word, and for a time do
well, do flinch in time of temptation, and fall of before the end, and so they
be fools too, and with the foolish virgins be shut out of heaven. But yet
notwithstanding all this, there are in the Catholic Church some wise of all
nations, tongues, and people, more then can be numbered, which infalliblie will
gain the crown of glory.

56. An other exception you make against our Church because it does not
communicate with all Christians, as with your congregation for example.
Whereunto I answer that to the Churches universality, communion with
Heretics, and Schismatiques is not necessary, but communion with, or in all
Nations, and this communion the Roman Church with the rest adherent has. With
Heretics we will not communicate, and do herein follow the instruction of
our Savior, and Saint Paul. And accordi^glie the Church in former times
would not communicate with Arians, Eunomians, Nestorians: or with Armenians,
Grecia^s, Aethiopia^s, or others at such time as they were in error. Neither
was this communion necessary to the universality of the Church, as I said
before, because it is not necessary that it communicate with all persons in
the world, but with all Nations. Nor it is necessary that the Churches
communion, be at once in all nations, and so continue: but that in the compass
of her time it be in all. And thus is our Religion Catholic which has been
in all Nations one time, or other, that hitherto have been Christian, which can
be truly said of noe other: and by her great power of converting Nations is
going on to possess the rest of the Nations that are on earth.

56. Thirdly you except against the generality of some Councelles, wheru^to
the Greek Church then divided, would not come. But this is noe hindrance to
the cause; for to the generality of a Council, noe more can be required
possibly for persons, them the presence and consent of the Bysshopes in
communion with the Catholic Church, since Catholic Pastors, not heretics,
are to be heard, followed, and obaied in matters of faith and religion. These
do succeed in the promise made to the Apostles, and their successors to the
worlds end, and in them is the whole teaching authority of the Church-present
unto the time wherein they are, whether they be more or not so many as were some
age before. In particular to that of the Grecians I answer that their consent
was not necessary to the generality of the Cou^celles held in the time they
lived in Schism and Heresy, and therefore without them the Council was
Oecumenicall: for that Council is Oecumenicall which does include the
authority of the present Catholic Church. It is not requisite that all
Bisshops which ever were, should be raised again to life to sit in Council,
nor that such as in after ages are to come, should be borne before their time,
to make a Council general: neither is it necessary to call in Heretics of
all sorts. It is sufficient to call the Bysshopes of the Catholic communion
then living, when the Council is to be held.

The Grecians in the time of their Schism, were not of your religion, as you
have heard from their own mouths, when you offered union: and in your own
judgment they held heresy, as that is of the procession of the holy Ghost
from the Father only. They returned also to the communion of the Catholic
Church, as you may see in the Council of Lions, and Florence, where East and
west agreed in doctrine against your heresy: and before their Schism they had
been in the communion of the Church a thousand years well near. Of Indians and
Armenians you know by this what I will say, and it is not necessary to run
over the same again.

57. A fourth exception is, that all nations be not at one time in the Church
because some are Paga^, some Heretic. And hence would you make a man have a
scruple in reciting that part of his Creed wherein he does profess to believe
the Catholic Church then existent when he says his Creed. Notwithstanding
this objection, the Creed was said in the Apostles time, by such as were in
their visible communion, and must, and will be said as long as the world
endures: and he that says it, if he believes Gods word and promise, may
securely and must believe that still there is a Catholic Church, which Church
has communion with all Nations: though this communion in all the latitude be
not existent at that time, but some was before, some is to follow after: as the
Church it self taken wholly, is not existent all at one time, but
successively to the worlds end, it being the collectio^ of all Catholics
which ever were, are, and will be.

Orbis miratus est se fact^ esse Arianum Dial. con. Lucif.
58. A fifth is made out of an exaggeration of Saint Ieromes. To the ground and
occasion of the speech, which was the act of the Bishops in the Council I
might answer as S. Au. does to the like ob. made out of some words of S.
Hilarious: Quis nescit ilio tempore obscuris verbis multos parui sensus fuisse
delusos, vt putarent hoc credi ab Arianis, quod etiam ipsi credebant: alios
autem timore cessisse and simulate consensisse. Aug. Ep. 48. See Baronius as
the year 359. about the Council of Ariminium which approved the Nicene faith
and condemned Vrsatius, Valens etc. Afterward happened that which S. Ierom
speaks of, when the Council was neither f^, nor approved, and all Catholics
in the world admit that such a Council might (...).
of Ariminium (never approved by the Sea Apostolic, nor ever acknowledged for
lawful by the Church, and by your selves also rejected) I answer that there
was noe cause of fear that the Church should by that act be all deceived and
err in faith; for the Church has always the assistance of the holy Ghost,
to preserve her from error in faith, by covenant of God the Father, and
promise of God the son, as in the next book you shall hear at large.
Neither wanted there at any time learned men who knew that a Council wanting
the consent of the Sea Apostolic was not Ecumenical properly, nor an
infallible rule of faith.

58. If you plead against the visibilitie of our Church with this objection; it
is weak, for the Arians ever found oppone^ts and those visible, such as at
last won the field. If you plead with it against the universality of the
Church it is also weak: and impertinent. it is impertinent as it comes from
you, because those Arians were not Protestants, and therefore their number
makes nothing for the universality of your cause. And it is also weak;
because their communion was never with all Nations, nor did ever equal the
universality of the Church. Which is evident, because the Catholic communion
was elder by three hunderd years and was in that time spread over all
Christendom, and has continued after Arianisme is gone these many hundred
years in the communion of the Christian world; and more Nations have been
since converted to it, and are daily, and so will be till she has been in the
communion of them all. If therefore you will measure both, take each communion
in her greatest latitude of time and place or Nations; and you will presently
see Arianisme to be too narrow and too short: as not having possessed so many
Nations, nor dured so long a time. Much less will you find, that, beginning
the same time, it ran side by side in an equal or a fuller stream through
all ages to this day and were so to continue: if you intended this I should
suspect your brain.

59. Touching the comparison of it to that part of the Church at least which
was at that time; you think it so filled all places of the Christian world
that Catholics had noe room. This error is of ignorance, you may amend it
if you inquire of some who did live then. If I should bring many testimonies,
you would say I were tedious in matter of history, and therefore will content
my self, and you also if you be reasonable, with one from many Authors. S.
Athanasius a man beyond exception, together with diverse Bysshopes of Egypt,
Thebais and Libia, wrote to Iouia^ the Emperor, of the Nicene faith thus: Know
certainly, ap. Theodoret. l. 4. c. 3.
most holy Emperor that this same faith has been published from all memory
of ages: this the holy fathers assembled at Nice have confirmed, to this have
assented all Churches every where, as of Spain, of Britanie, of France, of
all Italy, of Dalmatia, of Mysia, of Macedonia, and all Greece, and all the
Churches of Afric, Sardinia, Cyprus, Creete, Pa^philia, Lycia, Isauria, and
the Churches of Egypt, Lybia, Pontus, Cappadocia, and the Churches of the
bordering countries, and finally the Churches of the east some few excepted
which do favor the Arian sect; for we do certainly know the sentence of
them all, and have received letters from them, and do know certainly most
holy Emperor, that although a few do contradict this faith, the whole world
cannot suffer prejudice thereby.

60. Sixthly you oppose unto us want of unity. I answer that all Catholics
do submit their understandings to the iugment of the Church and to the
general decrees of their Pastores, and masters, ready to believe whatsoever
they generally in Counsels do define, and to reject whatsoever they
condemn; and by these means are united perfectly unto those Councelles, and
to the whole Church in faith and judgment about religion: each man in the
Church having his understanding undivided in belief from the Church, and so
being one with it: Unity consisting in Indiuision as you have learned of the
philosopher long ago. Our Councelles likewise are one in doctrine, as the
parts of Scriptures are (though they be not Scripture, but declarations of
Gods word) that is they are undivided: there being amongst the^ all noe
opposition or dissent in decrees and definitio^s, and the later receiving what
has been formerlie defined, whereof hereafter I will discourse a part, because
as Julian, Porphyrie and others thought they saw co^tradictions in the
Scripture, so you have imagined the like of Cou^celles, though nothing so many,
nor haueing that show, as those had which by the foresaid infidelles were
objected; and if you know not so much, you are not of that reading your frindes
have taken you to be. To your argument I say therefore that this company has
unity in belief: noe man at all in the company being divided from the rest
in belief, howsoever about things vndefinied and undetermined by the Church
in their time there might be diversity of opinions and may be now in the like,
as he knows that has been a week in the Schools of deuinitie. The same
company has originallie likewise unity in religion, and faith, each
understanding in the whole mystical body, being submitted to the same judge
of controversies, that is to Gods Spiritte in the Church Catholic; and
acknowledging this one Spiritte and this one Church, and this one Spiritte in
this one Church judging, defininge, determining, ruling all. Which common
union and consent in one, makes their communion, so general, so firm, and so
conspicuous as you are feign to see with your eyes against your will.

61. A seventh argument is made against succession, and it is objected that we
have noe succession of Catholics, or of such as we are. I answer, that the
Catholic religion and Church is that whose communion is with all Nations, as
you have heard: and a Catholic is a man who does resolve his faith into this
Church, and into the Spiritte which does assist and teach it; such were all who
did receive the General Councelles before spoken of, and the doctrine of the
Church present to the times wherein they lived, which were infinite, and such
will be to the worlds end. If you will have some assigned more particularly
that you may dispute against them, I name whole assemblies of pastors in
General Council. I name the General Counsels mentioned heretofore. In them
was our Succession, and the Catholic Church in them was conspicuous, and
worlds of people did communicate with them. This is a succession because they
were not all at one time; and a Catholic succession, because the communion of
Nations was with them: and with their faith and their Decrees.

61. Other objections you have against the truth of the doctrine which this
Church does maintain: But the chiefest of them are already answered in
another place: And hereafter I will prove at large that the Catholic Church
only has the assistance of the all teaching Spiritte, and therefore cannot be
condemned of error by any means extant in the world whatsoever: noe judgment
being of greater or of equal authority with hers, by reason of the Spiritte
which does teach her all truth.

The second Conclusion.
The Christians in Communion with Vrbanus VIII, are the Church of God.

THE THIRD BOOK. OF DIVINE ASSISTANCE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Proouing divine Assistance in the Catholic Church.
1. HAVING declared sufficiently which is the Church, it follows next that
we speak of the divine assistance in believing and teaching; which assistance
the son of God has promised unto it. Catholics as I have said before, do
resolve their judgment into, the judgment of the Church, and the judgment of
the Church does rely upon the assistance of the holy Ghost, by whose
providence it is preserved from erring in the p^oposition of divine faith. This
assistance in Church-proposition we believe, and that you must also grant, and
believe it, I am now to prove. You will not deny that men are to be
instructed truly, in faith an divine matters, for how shall they live as
Christians ought, unless they believe rightly, and how shall they believe
rightly, if they be not well taught and instructed? how shall they invoke
(says the Apostle) in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14.
and how shall they believe in who^ they have not heard, or how shall they
hear without a preacher? it cannot be. For no man of himself is able to find
out, or to discover the mysteries of our faith; the Trinity; the Incarnation
of the Son of God; the Scriptures, and their meaning. It is therefore
necessary that men be instructed in matters of faith.

2. And since instruction is necessary (as we also by experience know) this
instruction must be looked for in some School and from some masters or
instructors. The question therefore comes presently about this teaching
School, which and where it is, that a man there may be instructed. To this
question the answer is easy: first it is not the company of Athiests or
Pagans, for their doctrine and instruction is not holy and divine. Secondly
it is not the company of Jews, for their doctrine is not Christian. Thirdly
it is not the company of confessed Heretics; therefore it is the Church, for
the Church is the School of Jesus Christ: and which this is, I have declared
in the former book. This supposed I reason thus for divine assistance.

3. It belongs to the providence of almighty God to assist that School in
which by his will and ordinance the whole world is to be instructed in divine
matters and Religion: Therefore it belongs to Gods providence to believe and to
teach. The first of these acts is in the understanding, and interior: the
second is public or exterior, and in the mouth. The Spirit does assist the
Church both ways, that is to believe, and to teach: but the argument does
proceed here of assistance to the later, to teach: because faith according to
S. Paul does suppose instruction or teaching: and every one should have faith,
for without faith it is impossible to please God, and he that believes not
shall be condemned. Hebr. 11. Mar. 16.
Moreover you know that for resolution in divine matters, it is necessary
that a man know where to seek instruction, whom he may securely follow, in
whose judgment he may rest, in whom and where the Spirit of God does speak.
This is the thing we look for, and this thing is in noe other company but
the School of Jesus Christ the Church.

4. It may be you will say that a man desirous of instruction should come to
you. But this will not satisfy, for what should a man have done before Luther,
when Protestants were not, nor your Religion thought upon as I have seen
allreadie in the first book. He might have gone over all the world to look
for your Church and lost his labor. But deal plainly with us and declare
your mind, is there any congregation in the world whose instruction one may
securely fellow, or no? if there be not, what course should unlearned men
take to learn the truth? shall they believe without preachers? If there be
which is it, and whence has it that it may be followed? of it self? or from
the Spirit? you can answer nothing, but the Spirit: and this Spirit, not in
Athiests, nor in Jews, nor in confessed Heretics, but in the Church. And
thus much for those who seek instruction.

5. I prove secondly this assistance by the necessity of a Judge to
determine controversies or that part of it which is to teach. The judge of
controversies therefore is the Church. Whence it follows that the holy Spirit
does assist her in this act of determining controversies in matter of faith,
directing her understanding to conceive the meaning of Gods word, and
preserving her from error in the proposition of it. This discourse you cannot
deny with any show of probability, for there is no means to make an end of
controversies among men, if the judgment of the Church be neglected, or be not
certain and infallible: if the Spirit of truth be not in the Church it is in
none at all; if it does not teach the Church, it does teach none; if it does
not direct the Church to understand Gods word, it directs none; if it does
not assist the Church when she for the general good of the Christian world
does determine a controversy of faith, it does assist none at all: for all the
promise made by our Savior Jesus Christ of assistance, is made unto the
Church, and the only means which men have under heaven to be informed of the
truth is by recourse unto it, unto the Church, and to the Spiritte in her.

6. I will descend unto particulars, and make it more manifest. A man believing
or knowing that there is a God, would gladly hear what he has imparted to
men of the truth, and therefore inquires for Gods word, he would esteem
himself happy if he could be certainly directed to it, and not cozened with
other things in steed of it, with forged Gospells and Epistles: To this man the
Church does give satisfaction by reaching him the Bible and assuring him that
she knows it to be Gods word, by the assistance and testimony of the divine
Spiritte, which protectes her from error in belief: and this promise she had
from Jesus Christ, who by miracles, by prophecies, and other sufficient means
proved himself to be the Son of God. You on the otherside, who deny this
certainty and assistance, can give him no satisfaction in the world. Next
opening this book he finds it hard, as containing many obscure passages about
the Trinity, the Incarnation, the death of Christ, his resurrection, the
sacrament of his body and blood etc. to this the Church answears him
directly, and tells him the sense of God, assuring him as before, that she by
the assistance of the divine Spiritte left unto her does know is to be so. You
leave him without satisfaction, to the dishonor of Jesus Christ whose wisdom
you call in question withal, whilst you deny, that he provided means for men
to be informed of his doctrine, and of the way to serve God.

7. You are more sensible, peradventure in examples nearer home (though these
which I have put co^cearne every man very neerelie) I therefore put you in
particular in the business, and on the other side put my self. The question
betwixt you and me is, whether the visible Church be judge of controversies and
infallible, or be not* what means to end it? your wit? why rather then mine?
or why either, since the matter is divine? The Spiritte? why in you rather then
in me? especially since I am in the communion of the Church and you not, as I
have allreadie proved: or rather why the Spiritte in either rather then the
Spiritte in the Church? I am a part, that is the whole. I am to learn and by
Gods grace have the Spirit to be taught and directed, in the Church are my
Pastors and I must hear them by the command of my Savior, why then shall I
not believe, that when the voice of them all is one, it is the voice of my
Savior Jesus Christ. Other things also you question, as whether it be in the
heart only to believe, or in the mouth also to teach and to profess? whether
the promise be executed invisibly only and in the heart of the predestinate,
and no where else, or visiblie also by public proposition and profession of
the truth. These and infinite other controversies we have with you, and with
your fellows now adays, and what means are there to find the truth? if you
say your wit, or the Spiritte, I reply as before, and am certain that in
fine no thing can be brought but the Spiritte, nor this pretended howsoever,
but existent by Gods promise in the Church. Seeing the controversies in our
time are grown in number so many, and in nature so intricate, that few have
time and leisure, fewer strength of understanding to examine the^, what
remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, but
diligently to search out which amongst all the Societies of men in the world is
that blessed company of holy ones, that househould of faith, that spouse of
Christ and Church of the living God, which is the pillar and ground of truth:
that so they may embrace her communion, follow her directions, and rest in her
judgment. Thus Field in his Epist. to the Byssh. of Cant. before his Church.
But if you keep your eye long upon this man, you shall see him dance the
round too with his fellows.


8. Thirdly this assistance does efficaciously follow out of Gods eternal
ordinance and decree about the Church, which ordinance and decree he has
revealed in holy writ. All powerful and wise persons intending ^. Book. 1.
Chapt.
and since the means to do this is infallible proposition of the truth, it
follows that he has ordained infallible proposition there of; which
proposition being not by externes, but by the Church, it remains that the
Church-propositio^ is infallible. Your a^sweare is that the proposition made to
the elect is infallible, but not the proposition made to the rest. I reply
that the proposition which I speak of, that is the exterior proposition is
one and the same in it self and made to all: but the elect make good use of
it, others do not. To put this in example for understanding of it* you know
that our Savior did preach openly, and his doctrine was instruction for the
elect and was infallible, but reprobates did hear it also. Good and bad heard
the Apostles preach, and their doctrine was the same; all men cast their eyes
on the Scripture, and the decrees of General Counsels are proposed unto all.
These all are means ordained by almighty God for the instruction of his
elect, and therefore by his perpetual watch are kept infallible, though
reprobates hear and see the same, but make not of them such use as they ought.

9. But to speak of the elect particularly, since you desire it, I demand of
you whether God does provide exterior proposition of divine faith and pure and
solid truth for them, or no? if you grant he does I have that which I intend,
for noe man is so mad as to think he does imploie infideles and not his Church
in this business, and if he does employ the Church in it, he keeps her from
erring in the proposition; that so the true doctrine may be conuaied into the
hearts of his elect; if you deny that he does provide and dispose things so
that the true doctrine be exteriorlie proposed unto his elect, how then do
they believe? you must study hard to resolve the question, Romans 10.14.
for the Apostle thought it could not be. And why do you trouble your selves to
preach and write books? perhaps you have some other end. but why did
almighty God se^d prophettes into the world, and afterward his own son?
why did our Savior send Apostles to teach Nations, if this were not
necessary for the instruction of Gods elect? why did God ordain pastors and
teachers and promise that his words should never out of their mouths? Ephesians.
4. Isay. 59.
why were the Gospells and the Epistles written, and the assistance of the
holy Ghost why was it promised unto the Apostles and their successors? why all
this, if exterior proposition be not necessary for Gods people? and why rather
does not every man bid adue to pastors, Apostles, Bible, and all exterior
means, and expect to be illuminated and instructed inwardly and privately
about heaven and divine things? Thus every man might be master in religion,
judge in controversies, and a Church unto himself.

10. I will not repeat what you say about the rule of scripture for that I
have said allreadie, and has been objected unto you often, is more then all your
fellows could ever answer yet, as that without the judgment of Gods Spiritte
in the Church men cannot be certain which is Gods word, and what is the sense:
and therefore you must yield at last that the Church is assisted in proposing
divine things by the Spiritte of Almighty God.

11. c. 1.
A fourth argument I make out of the promises of perpetuity made unto the
Church, and related in the former book. Heresy knowledge may be parted. But
omitting this, I reply that your affirmation is against the authority of
holy Scripture. Ierem. 31.33.
This shall be the covenant which I will make with the house of Israel says
our Lord (speaking of the Catholic Church) I will give my law in their
bowels, and in their heart I will write it, Ezech. 37.26.
and I will be their God and they shall be my people. I will give my
sanctification in the midst of them for ever: and my tabernacle shall be in
them etc. I will despouse thee to me for ever: and I will despouse thee to me
in justice and judgment, Osee 2.19.20.
and in mercy and commiserations: and I will despowse thee to me in faith, and
thou shall know that I am the lord. By this you have that the Catholic Church
can never be separated from the love of Christ, howsoever some particular
members of it may, as some parts of a man's body many be without sense, though
the whole can never be without it. And hence I confirm further the
infallibility before mentioned, for holiness does include freedom from error
and constancy in the faith: but the Church of God is holy allwaies as here
you have heard, and in the Creed you profess to believe it; therefore it is
always free from error.

12. The fifth way to prove the said assistance is the continual presence of
our Savior, and thus the discourse is made. If the Apostles and their
successors have the assistance of our Matthew. 28 18.19.20.
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth, going therefore teach ye all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the father and of the son, and of the
holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you, and behold I am with you all days even to the consummation of the world.
You know that a coexistence of two things to the end of the world, includes the
existence of each of them all that time. I was not with you all the year,
because I came away before it was half done. Since therefore the Apostles had
not existence here on earth all the days till the worlds e^d, which is not yet
come though they be dead and gone many hundred years ago, it follows that
our Savior speaks also in them to their successors, and consequently to the
Church in all ages whilst the world does endure. And by this means I have what
I desire in this place that I need look no further, first the assistance in
these words I am with you, before which our blessed Savior not ignorant of the
difficulty which you would make in this matter put an ecce, behold I am with
you. I have secondly the parties whom he does assist, to wit the Apostles,
which were the Church and in them their successors whilst the world endures
that is the Church in all ages, in these words, I am with you all the days
even to the consummation of the world. I have thirdly the object of the
assistance, that is, to what kind of acts, and how far it does extend, teach
all nations baptizing the^ etc. teaching the^ to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you. Fourthlie I have here continual assistance to visible
acts, for such are preaching and baptizing, and these are visible to all
nations since all nations are to hear these things, and to be baptized; and
since all nations do not hear and receive baptism at one time as we see by
experience, but some one time, some another, since also the assistance to
these acts is perpetual, and therefore the acts themselves perpetually found
in the world, it is manifest even by this promise without going further that
there is in the world a perpetual visible Church. Fiftlie that our Savior ca^
thus assist howsoever he does bring it about, I have in these words al power
is given to me in heaven and in earth. So that if we believe Jesus Christ, no
further doubt can be made of this assistance.

13. Out of the former comes another which is grounded in the obligation
Christians have to hear their pastors, and to believe their doctrine, and it
shall be the sixth which I will make thus. If all the people in the world be
Going into the world preach the Gospel to all creatures, Mar. 16. v. 15.16.
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved: but he that believes not
shall be condemned. Out of this argument follows yet further, that the Church
cannot err in any thing of faith, whether it be fundamental, or not
fundamental, incurable, or curable, great or little: for the people are to
believe that which the Church does teach, and thus God does warrant in the
place here alleged, and therefore it appertains unto his providence to assist
and protect the Church so, that it never teach error in steed of Gods word.

14. The seventh argument I make out of the judgment of all Christians before
Luther touching the foresaid obligation to believe the Church, and the divine
spirit in it. And here I except only such as your self shall confess to
have been Heretics, and proceed thus. General Counsels did always saved,
it remains undeniable that they did believe the Church.

15. And here because you some times when you have drunk to much of the cup
of self love, do think that you entertain the holy Ghost better then any of
our religion have done, especially since you last were in heaven, and read
your name there in the book of life, I oppose spiritte unto spiritte, I oppose
unto you the known Saints of our Religion both late and ancient, and object
unto you the Spiritte which was in them. You have there Saint Thomas of Aquine,
Saint Bonauenture, Saint Francis, Saint Dominicke, Saint Charles Boromeus,
Saint Xauerius, and others whose sanctity God by miraculous works and signs
has diuulged. Among the ancient you have the holy fathers and Martyrs; it
were long to repeat their names here, You have the martyrologe of Baronius,
there are thousands of them, and the places where they lived; consult his notes
thereunto, if you doubt of any. And now I argue thus. All true Christians in
all ages even from the Apostles time did ever rest in the judgment of the
Church as infallible: beleeui^g what was in the Church before them universally
believed, and condemning for Heretics all those which before were
universally condemned for such. And this common principle descended through
all ages so, that whatsoever was universally taught by the pastors as matter
of faith, was received universally by the people, and was approved by the
general judgment of the Church of God and of her spiritte. This I would have
you to consider well; and mark again that the communion of Gods elect was in
this multitude: which is further manifest, first because this only is the
true Church of God, and they were all of the true Church; Secondly by those
infinite miracles, whereby God has as it were with a seal confirmed their
course of life and blessed end; and thirdly because the communion of all holy
fathers whose sanctity you acknowledge, and of infinite Martyrs put to death
for profession of Christianity has been openly with and in this Church.

16. I prove the same assistance eightlie by the testimony of Saint Paul,
Apostle and Master of the Gentiles. a rule you know must places, as all know
by the controversies now adays. We look therefore for a living rule or judge
and certain proponent of Gods word and meaning. Such a rule the Apostle
directs us unto: a^ exterior, visible, perpetual rule to be followed by
Christian people* and this if it be proposed by God to be followed, is
infallible by his protection and assistance; will you hear the Apostles words.
He, Christ, gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists,
and other some pastors, Ephesians. 4.11 12.13.14.
and Doctors to the consummation of the Saints, to the worck of ministry
unto the edifying of the body of Christ: until we meet all into the unity
of faith and knowledge of the Son of God into a perfect man into the measure
of the age of the fullnes of Christ: that now we be not children wavering and
carried about with every wind of doctrine in the wickedness of men to the
circumuention of error. Mark in this chapter of S. Paul how many things are
defined against you and your fellows. First the perpetuity of the Church, in
that he says God gave some pastors and Doctors until we all meet in the
unity of faith. Secondly the perpetual visibilitie of it, in that these
pastors are building all the time, and that they are Apostles, Pastors,
Doctors, whose office is visible and does manifest their persons to the flock:
thirdly the infallibility of the Church is explicated by the end of the
foresaid perpetual ministry which is that we be not wavering. Among those
the Apostle speaks of you I hope include the predestinate, who therefore you
see depend, upon exterior, certain, common, and in a word Catholic
proposition of the faith, a little before you have the unity of this body, and
of the Spiritte of it, and after follows the variety of functions in this one
visible body of Jesus Christ, including the elect as I have noted before. The
words are. Doing the truth in Charity let us in all things grow in him which
is the head Christ, (...). 15.16.
of whom the whole body being compact and knit together by all iuncture of
subministration according to the operation in the measure of every member
makes the increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in Charity.
Reflect or all this, and tell me whether in this Body be Gods elect or no?
whether it be visible or invisible? whether it be many bodies or one body, and
whether this body be the true Church of Christ whereof he is the head.

17. But now let us to our argument again. Saint Paul teaches in this
Chapter that God has provided continual visible means to keep men from
error; therefore these means are by his providence kept free from error. You
would feign answer that to the e^d the Church-propositio^ do settle
Christians in faith and infalliblie guide them, it need not be kept infallible
and free from error. But how then, am I infalliblie right (as Christians do
believe they are) if the rule which I do follow be not so? if I be allwaies
as that, and that be some times wrong, how am I ever right? suppose that do
err; and that I follow it (as Christians here by Saint Paul are warranted to
foilowe the Church) do not I run into the same error? if you insist in this
error, carpentars and masons will hiss at your doctrine.

18. This is yet further confirmed because as S. Paul here makes the Church to
be the rule to direct our faith, so does our Savior himself in the Gospel
warrant men to believe as the Church teaches, saying to his Apostle and to
their Successors the Pastors of the Church, he that hears you hears me, and
he that despises you dispiseth me: and again; Luk 10.^ Matthew. 1^ 17.
if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the heathen and the
publican. How could this be true if a man might contemn all the Church as you
do, and if all the Church might err? if to hear the Church be to hear
Christ, sure Christ speaks when the Church does, the words be his words in
her mouth: and if they be his words, they are not lies, they be true.

19. Touching the place of Saint Paul, bid your brother puritan observe here
with you, that (as you have now learned if you be not incapable of learning)
the Church whereof Saint Paul speaks, is visible, and that assistance in
teaching is given according to the divinity of Saint Paul to the visible
Church of God. And the contrary is a mere shift and contrary to Scripture,
to experience, and to the necessity of Gods people. They have not each one
immediate revelations, but are instructed by visible men: such our Savior did
send to teach Nations, and such will be to the worlds end to this purpose as
the Apostle has here told us. Such are those, whom the Holy Ghost endowes
with his guiftes, to the edifying of the Saints, or holy ones, of which
guiftes the Apostle speaks in an other place. Romans 12. v. ^ 5.6.7.8.
As in one body we have many members, but all the members have not one
action: so we being many are one body in Christ, and each one another
members. And having guiftes according to the grace that is given us different,
either prophecy according to the rule of faith, or ministry in ministering,
or he that teaches in doctrine, he that exhorts in exhorting etc. Here is
the Spiritte of God in a visible body, a body I say manifestly visible, in
manifold operations and functions here described; In this body, this visible
body the Spiritte is, and in the same are Gods elect, it being the mystical
body of Jesus Christ, and this mystical body being one, ^. 5*
as you have read in the Apostles words. The like discourse he has in his
Epistle to the Cori^thia^s, where the unity of this body (wheri^ S. Paul
also and the rest of the Apostles were) and the visibilitie of the same one
body containing in it the predestinate (unless you will exclude Saint Paul and
the Apostles from the number of them) are commended. there are divisions of
graces, but one Spiritte: 1. Corinthians. 12. v. 4.5.6 c and.
And there are divisions of ministrations, but one lord: And there are
divisions of operations, but one God which works all in all. And the
manifestation of the Spiritte is given unto every one to profit. To one certes
by the Spiritte is given the word of wisdom: and to another the word of
knowledge according to the same Spiritte: to another the working of miracles;
to another prophecy: to another discerning of Spiritts: to another kinds of
tongues: to another interpretation of languages. And all these things works
one and the same Spiritte dividing to every one according as he will. (this is
the body which has the Spiritte, and these are the functions, v. 12.13.14
and these are visible to them which have eyes) for as the body is one, and
has many members, and all the members of the body whereas they be many yet are
one body, so also Christ. For in one Spiritte were we all baptized into one,
whether Jews or Gentiles, (...) v. 20.
or bondmen or free, and in one Spiritte we were all made to drink. for the
body also is not one member, but many etc. now there are many members indeed
but one Body. Thus far Saint Paul, wherein he has confuted the Puritans
error of two Churches, and accuratelie declared the visibilitie of Gods
Church, and assistance of Gods Spirit. And I would have you mark particularly
how S. Paul, and consequently the rest of the predestinate are baptized into
the same one visible Body, and are parts of it, which the Greek text does
yet express more distinctlie.

20. A ninth way the divine assistance is proved out of the Epistles of the
same great divine and Apostle unto Timothy, and thus you may conceive it. The
Church or congregation ^. Tim. 3. v. 14.15.
The assumption I find in Saint Paul. These things I write unto thee,
Timothy, hoping that I shall come to thee quickly. But if I tarry long, that
thou may know how thou ought to converse in the house of God, which is
the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth.

21. You try many ways to answer this argument, but none will serve, the
first is, that the Church cannot err in teaching as long as it follows the
word of God, and teaches according to it. This is a piece of deep divinity.
Ca^ an heretic, ca^ a Turk. ca^ an Athiest, ca^ a devil err as long as he
follows the word of God, and teaches according to it? are these pillars of
truth? The second is that those words are meant of the Church of Ephesus. take
your spectacles and read again. The Church of the living God, what Church is
that, but the Catholic, wherein Timothy, and all good Christians are? This
Church is the ground of truth. The third is, that it is meant of the invisible
Church. This is likewise against the text, for the Apostle in all that Chapter
does discourse of conversation of Christian people very visible, and tells
Timothy, that the things which he says there are directions for him to know
how he is to carry himself in the Church of God. read the text for it is
clear.

22. The last argument I make out of the Ioh. 14. v. 15.16. 16. Chapter v 13
I will ask my father and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may
abide with you forever, the Spiritte of truth he shall teach you all truth.
Here the spiritte is promised to the Church forever to assist her to all truth;
what could be said plainer? The like God before promised unto the Church and
called it his covenant, Isa. 59.21.
to wit, that the words which he put into her mouth should never out of it.
And herevppon the Apostles believed that they had divine assistance: and
affirmed their act and decree, Acts 15.28
to be the act and decree of the holy Ghost, as you read in the Acts of the
Apostles. Stay here and consider well what you will do in this case; if you
deny the assistance you deny the word of God: if you grant it the cause is
ours.

23. That you may seem to answer you will say ever something, and the more
intricate it be the better it serves your turn. Forsooth you grant Assistance
of the Spirit least you be seen directly to contradict Scripture; but you
deny that the Church has it. The Church you say may mistake the sense of
Scripture and was mistaken many hundred years together, but the spirit directs
you to to it; your Apostle Luther and you have hit it now at last. Silly men,
what are you? what ground have you for divine assistance? by what letters
Patents from Gods private Counsel can you make this good? Our Savior Jesus
Christ has promised the assistance of the Spiritte unto the Church, and this
promise is recorded in the Scripture: This holds not (you say) he has
bethought himself better and recalled it, and made a later and an irreuocable
firm promise unto you. If you be not impostors, let us see it: if you show it
not, as you cannot, for God is God and it not changed, you know what men are
to think in such a case.

24. But why would you rob the Church of God of her legacy? she does inherit
lawfully this assistance, it was bequeathed her by Jesus Christ; she has
undeniable writings to show for it: she has had possession of it long ago.
Sixteen hundred years she has enjoyed it. It is to late for you now to
commence your suit. Go first, and prove that you are the Catholic Church;
that the communion of Nations, and of the ancient Fathers; and of the Martyrs;
and Saints of God, have been with you. Produce your Succession of Pastors
continued ever from S. Peter, bring to light your General Counsels, which
yet never saw the light, name the Nations you have converted unto the faith:
let us hear of your miracles, let us see how the old Prophecies all do
meet, and are verified in your Church? When these things are done; and so well
done, that the world sees cleerlie your Church and not ours to be the
Catholic Church, then begin your suit, and not now, for your beggarie, and
want of title, and imposture is yet believed, or rather seen and felt of all
the Christian world.

25. If we consider only those who^ your selves do confess to have been
Heretics heretofore; you must confess likewise that they were not Heirs
unto the promises Jesus Christ made unto his Church among which promises one
was of perpetual assistance. For this promise or legacy was made and
bequeathed by our Savior unto his Church: and confessed Heretics were not
the Church and flock of Christ. It rests therefore that you grant that Church
to inherit this legacy, which is the true Church and not confessedly
heretical and false, whether this Church be yours, or ours. This is evident.
Now further it is evident by the former books that the true Church, is not
yours, but ours; therefore the divine assistance is in ours, not in yours And
this I would have you to mark diligently, turn down the l^^f^.
to the end I need repeat it no more That is; whenever the question is
about the Spiritte, look that you do not challenge it until you have proved
that yours is the Church; for there is in holy Scripture no promise made of
the Spiritte, but unto the Church. And the like I do say to your fellows,
either a part or all together, either modern, or more ancient; if they will
have me believe that they have the Spiritte of Jesus Christ, let them prove
that they are the Church. Neither do I care whether the controversy they
pretend to determine by the spiritte be fundamental or not fundamental, for I
harken to no spiritte but to that in the Church, therefore I say again if they
will have me believe them, let them prove that they are the Church, and bring
such evidence as I have demanded heretofore; which will never be as long as
the Scriptures and Histories are extant.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Wherein the last of the precedent arguments is unfolded
more at large.
26. IT greeues you much that in the former Chapter I say the divine
assistance was bequeathed unto the Church, and much you frette against me for
it, but cannot mend your self. For that which I said is there proved many
ways. It is a tedious thing to preach to those who shut their ears when the
word of God is delivered, who have eyes but will not see. I must speak louder
yet, and repeat the same over again and again, that this sacred and
transcendent truth of divine assistance may by the operation of Gods grace
enter into your soul which error possessing has made deaf and dull to Gods
word. To run over all again would take more time then I can spare, I will
therefore inculcate the last argument only, wherein are three texts of
Scripture for assistance, combined and connected all in one; which I will here
propose, distinctlie. In the first the divine assistance is promised by God the
father, and I will produce the covenant: In the second our Savior Jesus Christ
does bequeath it unto the Church, and I will bring the words of his will
registered by an Apostle. In the third the confessed Church of Christ does
acknowledge the receipt of this assistance which is to be for ever hers. To
begin with the first, I argue thus.

27. If the words of God (which no doubt are the sacred truth, for God speaks
no lies) be allwaies in the mouths of the Pastors of Gods Church by virtue of
Gods promise and providence, this Church has in this, divine Assistance: But
the words of God are always in the mouths of the pastors of Gods Church by
virtue of Gods providence and promise, therefore the Church has in this, divine
Assistance. The proposition is clear and includes proof sufficient within it
self, because if Gods covenant and providence effect this thing we speak of,
God effects it, and is the cause of it. The Assumptio^, the prophet Esaias, one
of Gods Secretaries, a man beyond all exception, declares in these words, Isa.
59.21.
My spiritte that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed etc. says our
Lord from this present and for ever. Thus he. And the title of it is, This is
my covenant with them, He does not say, my precept.
the Church of the Redeemer, says our Lord.

28. The first answer is that the place concerns not the Church of Christ,
but only the Prophets of the Jewish Church. But this is against the text it
self, which does speak very manifestly of the Church of the Messiah, as you
may see by the words that immediately go before. They of the West shall fear
the name of our Lord, v. 19.20.
and they of the Rising of the Sun his glory, when he shall come as a
violent stream which the Spirit of our Lord drives, and the Redeemer shall
come to Sion and to them that return from iniquity in Jacob says our Lord.
As if he had said; when the Messiah come into the world, a Redeemer to Sion,
and to those that return from iniquity an Israel (for when all Nations have
entered into the Church, the Jews will acknowledge our Savior too, as I have
declared in the former book, Romans 11.^
and the Apostle does also confirm out of this place) both East and west, that
is, the world, will believe: And this is my covenant with them, the Believers,
the Church, My Spirit that is thee, and my words etc. The text above cited is
by S. Jerome translated out of the Hebrew, which in his time had noe points,
into latin thus, Time bunt qui ab occidente nomen Domini, and qui ab Ortu
solis gloriam eius, quum venerit quasi fluuius violentus quem Spiritus Domini
cogit, and VENERIT Sion Redemptor, and eis qui redeunt ab iniquitate in Jacob,
dicit Dominus. Hoc foedus meum cum eis, dicit Dominus, Spiritus meus qui est in
te, and verba mea quae posui in ore tuo non recedent de ore etc.

29. The second answer is, that the promise is conditional, and the sense
this, that God will keep the true doctrine of Salvation in their mouths if
they follow the Scripture, and forsake not the truth in their hearts. This
answer does change the sense of almighty God, for it adds the condition
of following the Scripture, whereas the promise and covenant of almighty God
is absolute and without condition as were the rest of the promises of sending a
Messiah, and calling the Gentiles, and the promise our Savior made of sending
the holy Ghost after his ascension. It takes also the true sense away, for
the covenant is of effecting the Churches perseverance, in teaching and
professing the sacred truth, and adhering to his word, and this you take away.
And the rest which you leave is not the sense of God, nor of the words as they
are in the bible, nor any privilege at all but a thing which to Athiests and
devils you do grant, for you confess they do teach true as long as they
teach the word of God.

30. I demand of you here whether you think in your conscience that God can
continue the visible profession of the faith or no? You cannot deny that he
can do it if he will, for his wisdom and power are infinite, and nothing can
be but so as he pleases to effect or to permit, and if you deny this, you
deny that which in your Creed you do profess. Now granting that he can do
it, why do not you believe that he will and does, seeing that he has obliged
himself thereunto by promise and covenant, as the Scripture does testify. It
is a very hard case when a man dares not stand to the plain words of
Scripture, and to their immediate sense which they do offer, especially a
sense which is honorable to God, and beneficial to the Church: but will add
conditions of his own, as if God could make no covenant, unless he were his
lawier to give him counsel. But omitting your tricks as foolish, and
ungrounded, and contrary to Gods honor, and veracitie, and wisdom, I will
put you in mind of one thing which our Savior said touching the prophecies
of himself, and his mystical body the Church. Luke 24. v 44.45.46.47.
All things (says he) must needs be fulfilled which are written in the law of
Moses and the prophets and psalms of me. The^ he opened their understanding
that they might understand the Scriptures, and he said to them. That so it is
written, and so it behooved Christ to suffer and to rise again from the dead
the third day and penance to be preached and remission of sins unto all
nations beginning from Jerusalem. Hear you have heard this preaching of the
Gospel to all Nations particularly by Christ inserted among those things,
which he said must needs be fulfilled, (...).
And the covenant which I have cited is in the prophet, and touches this
preaching particularly, why do you then oppose your self to Jesus Christ,
and say it need not be fulfilled, it must not needs be?

31. The third answer is that God according to the covenant does keep the
true doctrine, and saving faith in the hearts of the predestinate, though they
do not always profess it. This will not serve your turn; we speak of
profession, of preaching the word of God: of professing the true faith; this
God has promised to continue, and this makes men seen and heard of others,
this makes a noise in the world that all Nations may hear, and come unto the
Church, where continually one generation follows an other with the Gospel,
the doctrine of Jesus Christ, the words of God in their mouth. Isay. 59.21.
Hark Puritan the Scripture thunders, this in my covenant with them says our
Lord; my Spiritte that is in thee, and my WORDS that I have put in thy MOUTH
shall not depart out of thy MOUTH, and out of the MOUTH of thy seed, and out
of the MOUTH of the seed, of thy seed, says our Lord, from this present and
FOREVER. Reflect upon these words. This is my covenant: with them, the
Christian Church; says our Lord; My Spiritte which is in thee, in thy heart,
and my words; he says not this or that poi^t, but generally my words, which
I, God, have put into thy mouth, shall not out; whence? of thy mouth nor out of
the mouth of thy seed etc. till when? For ever. I was about to make an end
here of this part, but I cannot for bear adding one sentence more out of the
same prophet in an other Chapter next but one, where he declares the perpetual
visibilitie of the Church by reason of the continual noise which her Pastors
make, and shows in part the use of the foresaid assistance. Upon thie walls
Jerusalem I have appointed watchmen, Isay 62.6.
all the day and all the night forever they shall not hold their peace. It is
not said they shall not hold their peace if they do not sleep, according to
your drowsy gloss: or if they will not speak the word of God; but
absolutely it is said, they shall not hold their peace. And thus much of the
first.

John 14. v. 16.17.
32. The second place does contain our Saviors will, as I said: the words are
these. I will ask the Father and he will give you another Paraclete that he
may abide with you for ever the Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, neither knows him, but you know him because he
shall abide with you, and shall be in you. v. 26.
The Paraclete the holy Ghost whom the father will send in my name, he shall
teach you all things, and suggest unto you all things, whatsoever I shall say
unto you. ^6. chap. v. 12.13.
Yet many things I have to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now: but
when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he shall teach you all truth. For he
shall not speak of himself, (...)
but what things soever he shall hear he shall speak. In these words observe
with me seaue^ things, the first is who se^deth, Jesus Christ the son of God:
secondly, whom he sends, another comforter the holy Ghost the Spiritte of
truth: thirdly, to whom he sends this comforter and Spirit: to the Church he
was to leave behind him here one earth, consisting of Apostles, and Pastors,
persons visible by their function and office. Fourthlie, how this Spirit is to
be with them, to abide in this Church, and to remanie with it. Fiftlie, to what
end all this; to teach them the truth. Sixtlie, Some pro: are so Wise as to
exclude teaching, and say the spirit was left only to comfort not to teach.
what truth and how much; whatsoever I shall say to you, what things soever he
shall hear, All truth. Seauenthlie, for how long, For ever. All this is in the
text; and therefore our position is most true that the Church has divine
assistance in the proposition of the faith.

33 I must tell you moreover, first that God with a few words can signify
many things, his comprehension being infinite and he knowing all the
significations and uses of all words. And next, that I take these words of
Jesus Christ in the whole fullnes of their sense and meaning, though some
Interpreters have contented themselves to put a part of it only down, having
not then occasion as we have now to searth further. In the Church are people
and Pastors, the Spiritte assists all, some to teach and to govern, others to
obaie and to be directed. Some are predestinate, and with these the spiritte
continues to perseverance, some are not but for a time believe, and this by the
assistance of the spiritte And some of them are teachers also and governors,
and in this kind do participate also the assistance of Gods Spirit, who
disposes all as he pleases, dividing his gifts and graces among men, to his
glory and the good of the predestinate. In fine all those whose names are
written in the book of life persevere finally. So that the Spirit leads them
further to the state of glory, and there shows them all truth in it self,
abiding so with them for all eternity.

34. But now let us hear what you say to this place. First you say it is
promised to the Apostles, in their own persons only. This is false, first
because it is promised to remain with them for ever, whereas the Apostles in
their own persons were not to live ever here: and perpetual coexistence of
two extremes includes a perpetual existe^ce of each of them as I noted before
upon the like occasion; it is to them therefore and to their successors after
them without ending at any time and so forever. Secondly by the end of the
grant the same is evident: for the Church now a days stands in need of this
Assistance as well as it did then and in some respects more; because it is
greater: and the like it is of other ages, and will be still to the worlds end:
since therefore the providence of our Savior for the establishment of his
Church and salvation of his elect is perfect, the grant holds according to the
letter, and is so to be understood as the word stands, forever.

35. Next you say the sense is, the Spiritte teaches the Church all the truth
that is taught her. If I should tell you that my master in England did teach me
all languages, and confess afterward they were but two that he taught me, you
would think sure that I did lie, for two be not all. Yet would you have the
Scripture to speak in this manner. But I answer that the words of Scripture
are plain, he shall teach all whatsoever I shall say to you: whatsoever he
shall hear: all truth. chapter 14. v. 26 Chapter 16. v. 13
And I think if I should give you all my books, you would not be contented if
my executors should give you the tenth part, with this interpretation of the
will, I give you all, that is, all which are given you: and then define what
that is, among themselves, as you do in the matter of fundamental points; but
of this hereafter.

36. The third way of eluding the place is to say that in heaven the Spirit
teaches all truth but not here. That in heaven he teaches all I know well;
but you err against the scripture in denying that he teaches all truth here.
Read the text and you shall see that our Savior sends the Spirit unto the
militant Church from which he meant to withdraw his visible presence: to the
Apostles left in the world: and to their Successors, to comfort them in his
absence; to reduce unto their mind what he had said, and to assist and teach
them all truth. The Spiritte of truth (says excellently S. Cyrill) will lead
unto all truth, Cyrill. Alex. li. 10. in Joan. cap. 41.
for he knows exactlie the truth whose spirit he is, and has revealed it
unto us, not in part only, but entirely, for though in this life we know in
part only as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 13.
not an imperfect but the entire truth has shined unto us in this little
knowledge. The Objects of the Churches faith, as the Trinity, the Incarnation
etc. may be known either obscurely by faith: or clearly by vision. The former
of these is an imperfect knowledge of them; the latter is perfect (As he that
believes all the Conclusions in Euclide, for the Authority of Scholars who
generally agree in them knows them imperfectly: but he that can demonstrate
them knows them perfectly) To both the foresaid knowledges the holy Ghost does
lead the Church; to the former here on earth; to the later in heaven. Of the
one S. Cyrill here does speak; of the other S. August. tract. 96. in Joan. To
help the ruder to the understanding of this difference in the knowledge of the
same things: Suppose a man were borne and bred in a cave under ground, and
there taught that above there be heavens, sun and stars: And afterward
brought out in a clear night to behold the beauty of the firmament with the
heavens immensitie; In the day to see the Sun illustrating all the world with
his light. This later knowledge of these things is clear and perfect if you
compare it with the former which he before, at his being under ground where he
saw no greater light then a poor candle, had of them. So is the Churches
knowledge here. Here below, she is instrusted that in God there are three
persons, the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost, and makes an imperfect
obscure conceit of it: but when she getts up thither she shall behold God
clearly as he is in himself. And so all the rest of the Mysteries which now
she does believe.


37. The fourth way is to say that the place is to be limited to those
truths which are necessary for the common people. But this holds not, for
what shall become of the learned? who shall compound differences in religion?
condemn Heresies: and repair the faults of Schism, which tear the Church in
pieces? if the Spirits assistance does it not. In vain do you limit the words
of God, you are a man, you are not God, you cannot rule him, and pare of what
you please from his promise: his words import all, not only whatsoever; is
necessary for common people, but all whatsoever he has revealed: they are
extended as far as the necessities of the Church do require. Again it is one
thing to determine how far this assistance is affoorded to this, or that
Christian in particular which lives in a Catholic country and in peace,
another thing it is to define how far it is affoorded unto the whole body of
the Church.

38. The last way is to say that this promise was to be performed only in
the invisible Church, by teaching them privately. This is false. For the
Church whereu^to this promise was made, was the visible Church, and God made it
to no other. The Apostles were visible; And how could it be otherwise when
their noise went over all the world? The company of Christians in communion
with them were visible. Their Successors, the Pastors of the Church, were
visible. Their office of preaching, of ministering the Sacraments, and
governing Gods people, did manifest their persons to the flock. The guifte of
tongues, of interpretation, of working miracles and the like, made the men, and
so the Church, visible. The predestinate needed visible instruction, Romans 10.14.
for how should they believe unless they hear (says the Apostle in this case)
and how should they hear without a preacher? and a preacher you know is
visible, you see him, you hear him, you can point at him. Now preachers
deliver not infalliblie such doctrine as the predestinate are to believe,
without assistance, and therefore for the predestinate peoples sake it was all
together necessary to assist the Church in visible acts, in preaching, in
delivering true doctrine, which is to assist the visible Church. In fine the
office of the Apostles and Pastors, whose acts are in teaching and directing
others, and consequently visible acts, could not be rightly performed
without Assistance, which you confess, and our Savior intending the
perfomance of those acts (that so his Church, being called by his word,
delivered with the mouths of me^, might be gathered out of all Nations) did
leave them, that is the Apostles and their Successors to this end, divine
Assistance: and said the Paraclete whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, John 14. v (...) 16 (...) 13.
and suggest unto you all he shall teach you all truth.

39. The third place I am to inculcate for this Assistance contains the
Testimony of the undeniable Christian Church acknowledging the receipt of it.
For, if we produce evidence for the promise, and this by covenant; and for the
actual sending: and finally for the receipt of this Assistance by such as
confessedlie might do it in the name of the whole Church: the cause is won.
To proceed therefore to this part, you will confess that the Apostles were the
true Church: and that, if they received this Assistance, the Church received
it: and, as they understood the promise, and believed it, so we are to
understand and to believe it. Now it is most certain that they received this
Assistance, and did not only believe, that according to the promise of our
Savior, they had it infalliblie when they were to determine matters of
Religion, but they did further declare unto Christians this Assistance, and
direction which they had e^ioyed, and did puhlishe it to be believed by the
Church. For, the decree which after much dispute and inquisition they made in
their general meeting at Jerusalem, they begin thus: It has seemed good to
the holy Ghost and to us. Acts 15. v. ^.
affirming by these words plainly and proposing also to Christians to
believe, their public act and decree to be the act and decree of the holy
Ghost. And if it were his also, then he with them made it, assisting and
directing them in the doing as our Savior had promised he should do. And
herein the Apostles gave example to their Successors to understand our Saviors
promise so, and to believe and do so, as they have understood it, and
believed, and done. The place is clear The thing is undeniable.

40. As these Masters of Christianity had understood, believed, done: assuring
themselves and others of divine assistance in their common definition and
decree by reason of our Saviors promise, without any more ado, he being God,
and therefore meaning as he said, and as good as his promise: so did their
successors understand, believe and do: in regard the promise was made forever.
And therefore they also believed, and assured others of divine assistance in
their common definition and decree, by reason of the same promise. This the
pastors assembled in general Counsels have done ever since, and the Christian
people in communion with these Counsels have believed it. Those Christians
which lived in the first age did believe that the Apostles had by virtue of our
Saviors promise divine assistance to propose and spread the Gospel, and to
teach rightly the word of God, and that they were therefore to be believed in
all which by general consent they did propose; or wherein they did all agree:
so that the Predestinate and all others, might securely believe as they
taught, and go on toward heaven that way, which they pointed out: The Church
in the second age did believe, that the Church in the first age had the
Assistance of the divine spirit by virtue of the promise of Jesus Christ and
therevppon believed also that they might securely believe, what the first age
by general consent had taught. The Church in the third age did believe the
same of the Church in the first and second ages; and thus ever, succeeding
worlds of people did believe of the Church in all ages before their time. Thus
it has been believed. Thus has the possession of the divine legacy (received
at first by undeniable heirs, the Apostles) been kept by the Church these
sixteen hundred years.

46. In this Church have been infinite people, pastors innumerable, great
deuines, grave Fathers, the Reverence of Antiquity, and Flower of learning. In
it have been all the true Martyrs that ever suffered for Jesus Christ, all the
contemplatiues, all the Saints, and predestinate, all the Apostles, all holy
people that have been since the son of God came down into the world to
redeem and instruct man. And the spirit of all these condemns you and your
Spirit, as being opposite to the Spirit of the pastors of Gods Church, to the
Spirit of ancient fathers, to the Spirit of Gods elect, to the Spirit of
Apostles and Evangelists; who believed all, that the Church whereof they were,
had the Assistance of Gods holy Spirit.

42. Will you see your adversaries all at once? men stay not long in this
world, some die, more are borne; so that mankind like a flood runs on and
every one is a part, a drop in this flood; The understanding only can stay
in it self, and make all at once stand before it. Assemble therefore in your
understanding the Catholic Church of all former ages, and look then on the
company, and see them all against your self. Behold a Council, for we have
abstracted these men, the Church I mean from time and place diffusing it; in
which consideration the union of the parts in belief and their communion does
remain: therefore I say again, behold a Counsel Oecumenicall, the most
ample, the most learned, the most reverend that ever was. Wherein are, all the
Bisshops of Asia, Afric, and Europe before Luther, I except only confessed
Heretics; All the ancient Fathers, all the great Deuines; all the Pastors
that have been in the space of fifteen hundred years, confessed Heretics
excepted all the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, all the Saints, and Predestinate:
all the Apostles, all the Evangelists, and people infinite. In the midst of
this great Council is the holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, moving all as he
pleases, and by his operations keeping the truth manifest. And the President
of it is Jesus Christ, the natural Son of God, God and man. All these
condemn your doctrine, your Spirit is against the Spirit of all these, and
therefore by Christian people to be condemned and abhorred.

43. I am no Rhetoritian, I do not amplify; I have proved all that I do
say. And here end this Chapter, wishing you to consider well what I have said
hitherto, for divine assistance. And if you understand it well (as God grant
you may) you will see that it cannot be denied without contempt of all the
Christian world; without contradicting the Spirit of the predestinate; without
opposition to known Saints in the matter of divine religion; without giving
the lie to the Apostles, Evangelists, and prophets; and finally without open
injury to the Father the Son and the holy Ghost, who have each their
peculiar interest in the matter: the Son in entreating: the Father in
sending: and the holy Ghost in coming. Whereby this transcendent Principle of
divine assistance does rely peculiarly upon the whole Trinity, which is the
prime Verity and origin of created understanding.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. That the Argument is not answered by the distinction of
fundamental and not fundamental.
44. THat you may have some thing to say and conceal your vnsufficie^cie from
such as are not Scholars you put in here a distinction of fundamental and not
fundame^tall points, and think to stop our mouths with one piece of the
distinction. Some of your fellows express themselves in other terms, but in
sense you meet. Your answer is that the Church has infallible assistance to
fundamental points, not to others. Concerning the fundamental points you are
not yet agreed, most commonly you think that they are the chief poi^ts in the
three Creeds, And agree all that they are very few. Some will have four,
others six, others eight: suppose with the most that they be twelve. According
to your distinction the Spirit does assist the Church infalliblie to these
points and has done so ever, It remains now that I add a word or two
touching the rest.

45. I am therefore to prove a further assistance of the Spiritte then to six
or twelve points which you call fundamental; and first my Arguments which I
made in the former Chapters are not answered by your distinction, but prove
strongly that Gods assistance is to all; and your answer which makes a wide
exception, whereas the Scripture has none at all, is first without ground in
the Scripture: You should have shown your distinction there if you had
expected belief, for men may not presume to make exceptions at their pleasure
in the general rule of God. Secondly it leaves the world without satisfaction
in the matter of controversies: for you leave noe means at all to make an end
of the For example; to end the controversies betwixt us and you, you leave noe
means at all. Not the assistance of Gods Spiritte, for you say they are in
matters not fundamental; and that our Church in fundamentalls never erred. Nor
the wit of man, for all men if not assisted, may err in divine matters. Nor
the testimony and judgment of Antiquity, for if they were certain of these
matters it was either by their own Wits, and these without Gods assistance
might err: or it was by the assistance of the Spiritte to these points; which
is against the doctrine of your distinction. Nor is there any other, way found
either in the disposition of Gods Providence, (for this is the thing would
overthrow your distinction) or in the wit of man.

46. Thirdly this doctrine of yours is against the perfection of our Saviors
providence; for all powerful and wise persons establishing a perpetual common
wealth, take order for the peace and unity of it, since division is the ruin
of the public weal: And our Savior as you have heard before, has
instituted a spiritual common wealth to last forever, wherefore if he has not
ordained means for the peace and unity of it his providence has been
deficient, and this common wealth of his with infinite divisions arising about
the most obscure rule or law which he has left will be torn into pieces and
so perish, and not be perpetual as he intended it should be. Again, divisions
and Schisms are not only in points, by you esteemed fundame^tall, as
appears cleerelie by your schism, And, Gods rule or written word contains
not only things fundamental in that sense; as you may see in the Scripture
wherein are other points of doctrine and manners all most infinite. And further
yet; there is and has been controversy about the rule it self; as which it is,
how much is Scripture; which book, which chapter, which verse is or is not
holy Scripture; what is the meaning of this or that verse which controversies
must be decided, otherwise there will never be unity and consent about the
divine Word, rule and law. Now these things cannot be determined without
Divine Assistance as I argued before; and, for the Unity in Religion, and the
Communion and Perpetuity, power to determine them is necessary, wherefore,
since our Saviors Providence was not deficient, it follows that there is, and
in the Church, such power and Assistance.

47. Fourthlie if the holy ministry in the Church of God be established as a
rule of men's faith to the end they be not in their faith wavering and borne
about with every wind of new doctrine to the circumuention of error, then is
it by Gods assistance and perpetual watch and direction infallible; but the
sacred ministry of the Church of God is thus established by Jesus Christ,
which I prove by the testimony of S. Paul before alleged: he Christ, Ephesians.
4. v. 11. etc.
gave some Apostles, and other some Pastors, and Doctors, to the consummation
of the Saints, unto the work of the ministry, unto the edifying of the body
of Christ: until we meet all into the unity of faith and knowledge of the
son of God, into the measure of the age of the fullnes of Christ: that now
we be not children wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine in
the wickedness of men in craftines, to the circumuention of error.

47. Fifthly, since you distinguish the doctrine of faith into fundamental and
not fundamental, it follows that the Apostles had put into their mouths for
instruction of Gods people, doctrine also not fundame^tall, John. 15. v. 15.
all things whatsoever I hard of my father I have notified unto you, said our
Savior to the Apostles. Whence I infer also that, that doctrine shall never
out of their mouths or the mouths of their successors while the world
endures: and prove it by Gods covenant of assistance, Isay. 5^.
my spiritte that is in thee and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed says our lord from this present and for ever.
And by the promise of our blessed Savior, Isay. 14. v. 26. (...).
the Paraclete the holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my name he shall
teach you all things, and suggest unto you all things whatsoever I shall say
to you,

49. That you may the better understand this piece of divinity which does often
occur, I will spend a little more time in it to let you know: first that you
and the rest of your fellows in this matter do cross and contradict your
own selves. For touching other points points of religion and gods word,
which you say are not fundamental: Further Confirmation of the former
arguments
either there is certain knowledge to be had of them: or there is not: make
choice of which you please. If you be not certain, you must confess you doubt
of the truth of such points, and of the meaning of Gods word in all places by
us alleged which are not fundamental, and that you confidentlie avouch in
the pulpitte, and maintain against us in the matters of real presence,
justification, merit, works of Supererogation, sacrifice, invocation of
Saints etc. that which you doubt whether it be as you say or not. If you be
certain: either you mean that the Spiritte does assist and assure you in more
then fundamentalles, which indeed is your ordinary pulpite brag where none
dispute with you; and consequently you must grant against your distinction
that the assistance of the Spiritte is extended further then to your pretended
fundamentalles: or you mean that you are not assured by the Spiritte but
only by your wit which wit you oppose to the wit and judgment of all the
Church in divine matters. And if it be thus, you contradict you selves because
at home you say you resolve it not into your own wit but into the Spirit.

50. You answer that by illation you conclude against us; but who knows not
that the difficulty is about the sense of the place from whence you offer to
conclude against us: and that first you must be certain of this sense before
you can extract any thing out of it by good consequence. I demand therefore
whether you be certain of the sense or not? if you be not, you are not
certain of the conclusion which you draw there hence as every logitian can
tell: if you be, then I demand how? since man's wit in divine matters may
mistake, and this you confess: assistance of the Spiritte you have not, or if
you pretend to have it, then confess that in your own judgment it is extended
in Gods promise to more then fundamentalles.

51. Secondly you contradict the whole Church and her spiritte in this foolish
affirmatio^ of the Churches error in points not fu^damentall as you call
them. A second Confirmation.
And this I prove because all Christians that ever were in the communion of the
Church hitherto did submit their judgment to the general judgment of the
Church in the age before them, believing all whatsoever was the^ generally and
without exception believed, whether the point were one of those which you call
fundamental, or were not one of them: in so much that you are not able to name
any one point held generally without exception in any former age to be matter
of faith, though it were not one of your fundamentalles, which point was
rejected by the Church generally in any ensuing age. And, to give all the
scope in this you can desire, take all the time from the coming of the
assisting Spirit, which was the whitsontide next after our Saviors ascension,
to this present year. But be sure you observe diligently what I have said in
this argument; and do not speak of things which are not to this purpose:
either because they were not generally and without exception esteemed matters
of faith by the Church Catholic; or because the contradiction tradition was
not the act of the Church but of some private man, either mistake^ by
ignorance, the Church not approving his assertion: or pertinaciously a uouching
it, ^n Heretic.
and so without, and none of us.

3. Confirmation.
52. The truth of that which I have said is further yet manifest in this, that
all, whosoever were generally condemned for Heretics in any former age by
the Church, were esteemed so by the Church in following times, whether their
Heresies were in matters you call fundamental or not: as he may see who will
run over the Heresies of former times: whence it follows elderlie that the
Church in later times did conform her judgment to the judgment of the church
in former times, and esteem it infalliblie. This is true at all times; from
the Apostles to this day, therefore all the Church of all this time is against
your affirmation: and your affirmation against the Spirit of all this Church,
pastors and people, (...) and learned, ancient and modern.

53. Fourthlie, 4. Confir.
If all Christians be warranted by Jesus Christ the Son of God and true God,
to hea^e the Church and to (...) judgment, then is it impossible that the
general resolution of the Church in matter of faith though not fundamental in
your sense, be false, and co^tradict the eternal truth: because God being
truth and goodness, obliges not men to err, and to contradiction. But all
Christians are so warranted. Luke 10. v. 16.
He which hears you hears me, he which contemns you contemns me. It is
therefore impossible that the general resolution of the Church in matter of
faith, though such as you call not fundamental, be false: therefore it has by
Gods providence the assistance of the Spirit of truth in every such general
resolution.

54. Fiftlie, If the whole Church, the^ all Bisshopes, all Fathers though
consenting all together and teaching uniformly, may have erred in matters of
faith, which are not of your fundamentalles. 5. Confir.
Whence it follows, that whatsoever they have said, or believed, or received
above those few fundame^talles, may be false; and consequently nothing,
nothing at all in matter of faith is certain, but only those few
fundamentalles. Why then may not the rest of deuinitie, yea all the rest of the
scripture be false? and why may not old damned heresies howsoever in the
primitive; time abhorred, be true? If you offer to answer that you ^^owe
certainly those things to be false and the rest of the scripture to be true; I
reply that you do either pretend to know this by the spiritte; and thereby you
admit what before in your distinction you denied: or you pretend to know it
by your wit, and then you entangle your self more in in the briars, for, how
will you make it evident that your wit cannot err in these matters, if all
other wits might have erred?

55. Having lighted here on the consideration of the fond esteem you have of
your own wit above the world, I begin to see that you affect a place far
above the quality of your person, though this disorder in affection be in a
manner secrette from your self. You judge and determine controversies in
matters not fundamental, as you speak: and this men see, and your forwardnes
herein, has enforced me to this answer. Now, you take this office of
determining these controversies from the Church, as we have seen often before,
and if you would acknowledge it to be there I need write no more of this
matter. This throne was high: but you affect a higher yet, which I show: for
either in this matter of determining these controversies, you give place to the
Spirit, as to the judge, or you do not? if you do, the Spirittes holy
assistance is exte^ded further then to your fundamentalles; if you do not, you
sit in the throne and judge, for you determine them against us. Let
Christians tell me now whether you usurp the place or not.

57. Sixtlie your error is fu^dame^tall, 6. Confirm^
therefore the opposite which the Church believe this a fundamental truth. And
consequently in your pr^ciples you must confess that she does not err in it,
for you say she erreth not in fu^dame^talls. That your error is fundame^tall I
prove, because that error is fundamental, which is the ground of infinite
errors; but yours is the ground of infinite errors, because it takes away the
certai^tie from all Gods word, and all deuinitie, those few points only
excepted, which you call fundamental.

58. Moreover to touch your fundamentalles also: 7. Confirm
It takes away all certainty in them; first because you leave noe means to
know which they be: and secondly because you leave noe means to know they be
diuinelie revealed, if it were known which in particular they al were, for the
authority of the Church proposes equally the whole Scripture, and therefore
if it suffices for any chapter or point, it suffices for every chapter and
every point. And the Spiritte of God did equally direct the writer in all:
and it is Gods word all: and therefore, if the Spiritts direction or Gods
authority serve to warrant some, it serves to warrant all: and if it be not
able to warrant all, it is unable to warrant any at all.

59. You think I have done now; but hark further: Your assertion does
scandalize the Christian world, if it may be scandalized; for you take away all
certainty from the word of God, in all points, and parts, but some twelve
propositions which you call fundamental, 8. Confirm
denying that there is at all any means to know certainly that the rest is
Gods word. This I prove, and I take the Gospel of S. John: or, to declare it
more fully, I take all the Bible, and argue thus, Either the Spiritte of God
does assist his Church to know certainly that all in the Bible over and above
your fu^dame^tall points, is the word of God, or it does not? Make your
choice. If it does not, there is no way to know certainly that it is the word
of God; for men of themselves and without Gods assistance, all might err,
especially in obscure matters as those are: and in this especially, which is
to know whether God spoke those words or not. If it does, the field is ours,
for every thing there is not one of the fundamentalles,

60. The same argument may be made of the sense of any place: for, either the
place is fundamental, and such are few by your account: or the place is not
fundamental: and then (excluding the assistance of the Spiritte) you have noe
way to be assured of the sense.

61. Let us o^ to the trial of this argument. Open your Bible, turn to the
first Chapter of Genesis, and read the first verse. In the beginning God
created heaven and earth. Of this verse I demand eight things. First whether
you be certain that it is the word of God, and how? Seco^dlie whether it be a
fundamental place or be not Thirdly how you do know certainly that it is,
or that it is not fundamental. Fourthlie whether there be means to know
certainly the sense if need require. Fiftlie what are the means which may
assure men of the sense. Sixtlie whether there be any means to know
certainly whether in these words be more literal se^ses the^ one. Seuenthlie
whether the assistance of the Spiritte be or be not necessary to the certain
knowledge or assurance of these things. Eightlie whether this assistance be
promised to the Church or to others out of it, as to Heretics and pagans.
These eight things I demand about that verse, and when you have answered
them, I go to the second verse, and demand all the same. And the^ I go to
the third, and demand all the same. And when this Chapter is done, I go to
the next, and so on forwards thorough the Bible, verse after verse, till I come
to the last verse in the Apocalypse or Revelation.

62. You will peradventure marvel that I do include that book too because
it is full of obscure mysteries; notwithstanding I will alonge thorough that
also, with all these demands: for there are means to know that it is the
word of God; and the Assistance of the spirit is sufficient to open the sense
of each verse, when the circumstances do require it, and you dispute against
us out of it, and allege under the title of manifest Scripture free from all
ambiguitie, the deepest mysteries that are there. Moreover the Prophecies there
contained will be manifest in the end, as the prophecies in the old Testament
of the Messiah and his Church are now open to the world. The spiritte also
does open to learned men many things in the scripture which are hidden from the
vulgar, and are not yet by general decree defined, because the common exige^ce
of the Church requires not the open and public notice of the^: yet these
might be defined if need were, as many things by occasion of your heresies
infesting and endangering Gods people, have been of late.

63. You will also wonder that I speak of many senses: but I have reason to
say as I do, because Gods word is full of sense as before I said, and some
time so many se^ses do occur in the same speech, that it is not easy to
determine which God intends, or whether he does inte^d more the^ one. And
that I go not further to fetch examples, the words now cited are very hard. In
the beginning God created heaven and earth. what is this beginning? what kind of
making does he speak of? what does he mean by heaven and earth? In the
beginning God created heaven and earth. It is not easy to find the sense of
these words, as you will conceive if you attend and ponder each. the beginning,
What is it? is it the beginning of time which he means? or the beginning of the
works of God before he made time? or is this beginning Gods eternal word? or
what other thing is signified by these


64. Saint Augustine a great Scholar, and a man of the Church primitive, and
one of Gods elect, did search with great diligence, and earnest prayer in his
old age for the sense of this place, as you may read in the twelfth book of
his Confessions, where having acknowledged the scripture^ ^o be so profound,
that it is horror to look into the^, he brings many senses of these words,
and after a long discussion, Aug. l. 12. Confess. c. 31.
and serious Weighing of the difficulty concludes thus. when one says the
prophet understood that which I do: and another that which I. I think I
speak more religiously, why not both if both be true, and if any body sees
in these words some third thing or fourth, or some other at all whatsoever, why
may not he be believed to have seen all those things, by whom one God has
tempered holy writ to many men's judgments, which were to see diverse things.
then he adds something in commendation of that full kind of style, and in fine
resolves. In any wise when he wrote these words, he understood and thought
whatsoever truth we could find, and whatsoever we could not or cannot yet,
but may be found in them. Mark this deuinitie well, and remember whose it is.

65. I forbear to speak of the Assistance given to the prophets and
Evangelists, and Apostles in all they did write, and publish as Gods word:
which does afford me an other argument, as hard for you to answer as the
former. I will not here discover the gap you lay open to infinite Heresies,
about admitting, about understanding the word of God. I loathe to let the world
see how scandalous your doctrine i^ ^^w you oppose Christianity under the
color of reformation, and do what you can to shake the fou^datio^ of the
faith, that others may stagger in all, as you peradventure do: and so the
devil get the day. But all your endeavors, poor men, come to short, you shoot
your arrows against heaven which they hurt not, but wou^d your selves in the
return. The Church of God is built on a rock, and a few words defend it
(such is the power of the words of Jesus Christ) against all that Heretics,
and Pagans, and Persecutors, and impostors, and devils, Matt. 16.18.
can attempt. Thou art Peeter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. These words have defended it
these sixteen hundred years against all adversaries whatsoever, and we were
fools if now we should be afraid. We are safe; we are secure. The son of
God is our foundation, the holy Ghost is our direction, and our Lord round
about us for ever. I conclude: and because you seem to take the SCRIPTVRE, the
SPIRIT, JESUS CHRIST, for judges of controversies when you talk at home before
your parish, to stop this brag of yours I here present this controversy of
ours about the assistance, to the SCRIPTVRE, to the divine SPIRIT, to JESUS
CHRIST, in these terms: whether the Spirit be to teach some truths only
which you call fundamental, or others also, which you call not fundamental.
The answer is, ALL. Io. 16.13.
The Spirit of truth shall teach you all truth. These be Gods words. I believe
them: and here I rest.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Showing how Catholics all believe the same, though some
more distinctly then others: and the reason why Heretics agree not.
66. THat I may impart unto you now the manner of discourse which I form unto
my self sometimes in this business, you must understand that the all-teaching
Spirit or Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Unity, and that his Organ is the Church
wherein he remains and teaches as I have declared. This Spiritte by the
foresaid organ, or mouth of the Church delivers the true sense of the
Scripture: and those which believe and submit their vndersta^dig to this
judgment and visible tribunal are all one in faith; every one believing ALL
which the Church thus assisted does hold and believe: and therefore all the
same. If I thought you conceived not my meani^g I would deliver my self
plainer thus: The doctrine of the Catholic Church all together or the
collection of points which it holds, is but one sum of doctrine, or
collection of points. And not only the body of the Church taken in gross,
but every Catholic does believe it all. And therefore take any two
Catholics whom soever, where and whenever they lived, and their belief is
the same to the last point or title: because each believes all that the other
believes as I have said. But the thing which troubles you is your ignorance in
the manner.

67. Know therefore secondly that two ways a man may believe all which the
Church teaches, to be true. One way is by acknowledging each point of her
doctrine in particular, because the Spirit of God in and by her does avouch it:
and this faith is unfolded. An other is, by acknowledging in general and as
it were in gross, all to be true which the Church does teach: not descending
into the particular consideration of each: and this is implicit or infolded
faith; because in it are infolded all the particulars which the Church does
teach.

68. By this distinction of unfolded and infoulded faith you now know my
meaning, and it is this; That the faith of all Catholics both learned and
unlearned, late and au^cie^t, is not equally unfolded; but yet is all one:
because that is infolded in ones faith, which is unfolded with an other. And
thus a man who reads the Scripture and still does increase in divine
knowledge, learning daily more and more, is of the same religion and the same
faith all the while. Thus are the people and their pastors of the same religion
though the pastors know and believe more in particular then the clownes ever
heard of. Thus was S. Augustine, and his mother Monica of one religion, though
she knew not all the deuinitie or poi^ts of faith or Scripture in particular
which he knew. Thus were the Corinthians and S. Paul, thus are we and the old
Fathers: the Fathers and the Apostles, of the same religion: and thus is the
later Church and the primitive united in faith. Because nothing is generally
believed now, which was not then generally believed; though now something be
more unfolded in the general belief of the community (I say nothing of some
eminent men of those times) then was by the multitude believed in particular or
unfolded then: and something might have been then unfolded which is not so
commonly known at this time. And no doubt but the Apostles knew more in
particular then me^ do now.

69. By the same doctrine you may understand how the Catholics in the whole
body from the Apostles to this day, though infinite, have been all of one
religion and the same with us; notwithstanding that each clown knew not all
in particular which the learned did, yea notwithstanding many learned knew not
all in particular. And the reason is because in this principle I believe as the
Church, and follow her judgment in matter of faith, each had ALL, whether he
were learned or unlearned: and every Catholic did this; and he who did it
not, was no Catholic.

70. You think peradventure that no two are exactlie of the same religion,
unless their faith be equally distinct in object, and unfolded equally; which
conceit if it were true, none were of the same religion with the Apostles in
their time, nor with the holy Fathers in theirs, who believed not distinctlie
and in particular, as many points as they did: which is a gross error in
Christianity, and makes as many religions almost as men. Are you in your
parish all of one religion or not? if you are, then by your rule (who cannot
abide implicit faith) each old wife and young girl knows as much in
particular in the Bible and Deuinitie as your self; or if they do not, I
pray you tell me how they be exactlie of the same religion with you? I know
you will run to fundamentalls, but the shift will not serve, because
agreement in fundamentalls in your sense does not suffize to the exact
agreement in religion, for we and you be not of one religion as all the world
knows, and yet you say that we disagree not in fundame^talls; and indeed
there are infinite ways to err against Faith: otherwise he that did
obstinately deny all the Bible, and every verse of it, excepting those
only wherein is one of your fundamentalls (which fundame^talls as you recon
them are very few, and contained in the Creed with baptism and the supper)
he I say who did obstinately this, were no Heretic but a man of your
religion exactlie: howsoever he be detested by the Christian world.

71. Having declared the reason why Catholics are all of one religion, by
reason of their common union in one universal principle containing their
particular consent in the rest as occasion does require; to which general
principle they are all moved by the words and promise of Jesus Christ: it is
not amiss now to look about for the original cause why Heretics are not
all of one religion, since they resolve all, or pretend to resolve their faith
into the Scripture, or the Spirit. I need not go far to find it out; for
it is known by the definition of an Heretic. He is a man who makes his own
election by his private judgment in matter of religion. And thence it is that
having cast of Church authority, and putt his own wit in place to judge,
each takes where and what he likes: and their judgments being diverse they take
diverse things and expound diversely.

74. Neither does the scripture serve the turn in this case; first because
there is disagreement which is Scripture: which cause must, be first determined
by some judge, and this judge to each Heretic is his own wit. Seco^dlie it
is obscure, and therefore there is infinite variety in guessing at the meaning
of it, as we see by the experience of many hundred years, and in this case
likewise each Heretic does adore his own judgment. As for the spirit, that
of God is not among Heretics: but in the Church, as I have proved: since
therefore they are not the Church, and their Spirit opposite, it follows that
it is another, and that erroneous. And by the mulplicitie of judgments and
contradictions among them selves it appears evidently that they are many: and
no marvel, since each crowcheth unto his own; since each has his Maozim
within himself. This therefore is the reason why Arians, Nestorians, Lutherans
etc. though they be all against the Catholic, be not of one religion among
them selves.

73. Neither would the consequence be good if you should argue thus. Luther
receaues the letter of Scripture, and Calvin receaues the letter of Scripture,
therefore Luther and Calvin are of one Religion: it does not hold I say, since
they receive not the same sense, nor are united, in any one common mean to
receive it. And were the argument good it would prove Caluinists and Arians to
be of the same Religion, since each receive the letter.

74. Hence it comes also that all Heretics cannot have one definition, but
that every one is to be defined according to the points he does hold in
particular; because of his difference from others in the sense, though perhaps
he admit the letter with others. And in taking this sense he is not bounded
by any authority common to him and to other Heretics, but only by his own
will and conceit. Since therefore there is difference among Heretics, and
that this difference is not by means of the letter, Reflect well on all this
when you answer the first book.
nor of any common good Spirit (for that would not contradict it self, as
they do each other) this difference cannot be taken but from the sense,
imagination, and will of each party; and therefore each party must be defined
by his own wit, or by all his opinions in matter of faith.

75. And here I answer to your common reply of the Schoolemens disagreement
in Schoole-questio^s; for (notwithstanding the variety of opinions in matters
not defined by the Church before or in their time) all Schoolmen that were
Catholics did agree in faith; and all did believe the same, according as I
have said before of other men. Each of them took the judgment of the Church
for infallible: therein believing all whatsoever she either had or hereafter
would determine. This did every School man; every Catholic Divine, every
Father.

76. This way S. Augustine does excuse S. Cyprian in the matter of
rebaptization, Before the consent of the whole Church, by the decree of a
plenarie or general Council, S. Aug li. 1. de Bapt cont. Don. c. 18.
had determined what was to be embraced of all in that controversy (of
rebaptizing the reconciled) S. Cypria^ with almost fowerscore of his fellow
African Bishops did think that every one who was baptized out of the
Catholic communion ought to be baptized again, when he had reconciled
himself to the Church. As yet there had been no general Counsel assembled in
that behalf but the world was held in by the strength of custom, l. 2 c. 9.
and this custom only was opposed to those which endeavored to bring in
that novelty of rebaptization, because they could not apprehend the truth: yet
afterward whilst among many on both sides it is spoken of and sought, it is
not only found out, but also brought to the authority and strenght of a
general Council, after Cyprians passion indeed, but yet before I was borne.
A precede^t plenarie, may be amended by a subsequent plenarie in matters o^
fact And in faith a general not approved, by a general approved Council.
In the same place by occasion of the Counsels by S. Cyprian and his
predecessors made in Afric, he says that particular Counsels must yield to
general, and that the whole is deservedly preferred before the part, or
particulars. More over in the same book a little before he proves out of S.
Cyprians words that if S. Cyprian had known of such a definition he would have
corrected his opinion, and then shows how much he does rely on it himself,
Neither durst we affirm any such thing if we were not well grounded upon
the most uniform authority of the universal Church, l. 2. c. 4.
unto which undoubtedly S. Cyprian also would have yielded if in his time the
truth of this question had been cleared, and declared, S. Augustines Spirit.
and by a general Counsel establisshed. And of the same again he has an
excellent discourse in the fifth book where among other things, he says that
he pleases not the Saint if he seek to prefer his wit and eloquence, and
store of learning before the holy Council of all Nations, ^ 5. e. 17.
to which doubtless he was present by unity of Spirit. and, if I with the whole
world do judge more truly, ^bid.
I do not prefer my heart before him, neither is he in that he judged
otherwise divided from the whole world, ^bid.
I prefer not my opinion before his, but the judgment of the holy Catholic
Church: ^ Cuius vni^ersitas ip^ non fuit ^d in eius ^niuersita^ perman^t.
all which he was not, but remained in it. This is enough for my purpose, and
in the same principles of S. Augustine you see now that I can answer any
objection that you can bring out of the dissension, of ancient or modern
writers: or rather if you reflect on it well, you will be able to answer it
all your self.

77. This passage has made me call to mind other speeches of the Fathers not
far from this purpose, whereof I think it not amiss to put some down for
your better meditation, if you will be pleased peradventure to think more
seriously on their words then you have done hitherto on mine. The truth of the
scripture is held of us in this matter when we do that which pleases the
whole Church, Aug. l. 1. ^nt. Cres. ^3.
the which the authority of the scriptures does commend, that because the holy
Scriptures cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be deceived with the obscurity
of this question, let him require the judgment of the Church which the holy
scripture without any ambiguitie does demonstrate. Vincent. lirin. con^ Haeres.
c. 2^
It is necessary by reason of the windings of unconstant error, that the line
of prophetical and Apostolical interpretation be directed according to the
rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. And in the Catholic Church
likewise we must have a great care that we hold that which has been
believed every where, ever, and by all: c. 3.
for this is truly and properly Catholic as the power and reason of the
word or name does import, which truly does comprehend all universally. And
this is so done in fine if we follow universality, antiquity, consent:
universality we follow if we confess that one faith to be true, which the
whole Church thorough the world does acknowledge: and Antiquity if we do not
in any sort leave those senses which it is manifest that our Fathers and holy
elders have celebrated and commended: and consent also if we follow the
definitions ad decrees of all or near all the Priests and Masters in
Antiquity.

78. A protestant would think me unreasonable if I should demand and exact all
these conditions in every protestant proposition before I believe it: yet I
will believe none of their doctrine unless it be thus proved, nor all their
Religion unless it be thus proved all, which is as much to say as that by Gods
grace I will never believe it. We have possession; the spirit is in our
Church, and this father was of it, and does acknowledge it of greater
authority, of more infallibility then himself, and his rules were ruled by
it, but I go on. In the Antiquity of the Church two things are constantly
and with great care to be observed, Idem c. 41
to both which all they that will not become Heretics must steed fastlie
adhere. The first is, whatsoever is auncientlie decreed by all the Priests of
the Catholic Church in a general Council; secondly if any new question
does arise concerning which there is no such decree to be found, then must
recourse be made to the judgment of the holy Fathers: I say of those only,
who every one in their own time were found to be approved masters continuing
still in the unity of communion and faith. And whatsoever they are found to
hold with one and the same meaning and consent, that without all scruple and
doubt must be the true and Catholic doctrine of the Church. Whosoever believe
that Christ came in our flesh, and that he arose from death to life in the same
flesh in which he was borne and suffered, S. Aug. de Unit. Eccl. c. 4.
and that he is the son of God, God with God, and one with the Father, and
the one unchangeable word of the Father by which all things are made: but do so
disagree with his body which is the Church, that they hold not communion with
the whole as far as ever it is spread about the world but are found separate
in some part or corner, it is manifest that they are not in the Catholic
Church. Prosp. de promiss. and praedic. Dei par. 4. c. 5.
The Apostles Peeter and Paul, delivering in the city of Rome, to posterity,
the doctrine of our Lord, peaceable and one; have consecrated the Church of the
Gentiles with their blood and memories, according to the passion of our Lord. A
Christian communicating with this general Church, is a Catholic. S. Cypri.
de Unit. Eccl.
He that is separated from it, is an Heretic. There is one head, and one
orige^, and one mother, by the issue of her fecu^ditie copious, by her increase
we are borne, we are nourished with her milk, with her spirit we are
animated. The Spouse of Christ cannot be defiled with adultery: she is pure,
and honest. She knows one house, and with chaste bashfullnes, keeps the
sanctity of one bed. This Church preserves us in God; this aduanceth to the
kingdom, the children she has brought forth. Whosoever, divided from this
Church, cleaves to the adultresse, he is separated from the promises of the
Church. He cannot have God his Father, who has not the Church to his mother.
In the Church, S. Iren. l. 9 adu. Haere^ c. 40.
God has constituted Apostles, Prophets, Doctors; and all the rest of the
operation of the Spirit: of which those are not partakers, who repair not unto
the Church. Where the Church is, THERE IS THE SPIRIT of God: and where the
Spirit of God is, there is the Church, and all grace. Idem l. ^ c. 4^.
We must obey those Priests that are in the Church: those that have
Succession from the Apostles: who tegeather with Episcopal power, have
according to the good pleasure of the Father, received the certain gift of
truth. And, all the rest who depart from the original Succession (wheresoever
they be assembled) to have suspected, either as Heretics, or Schismatiques or
Hypocrites: ^actant. ^. 4. (...) ^nstitut. c. ^lt.
and all these do fall from the truth. It is only the Catholic Church that
has the true worship and service of God. This is the wellspring of truth, the
dwelling place of faith, the temple of God, into which whosoever enters not,
and from which whosoever departs, is without all hope of life, (...). Aug. de
^de ad ^et. c. 39.
and eternal Salvation. Hold for most certain and undoubted that no Heretic
nor Schismatique, though baptized in the name of the father and of the son,
and of the holy Ghost, though he give alms never so largely, yea though he
shed his blood for the name of Christ, can possibly be saved, unless he be
reconciled unto the Catholic Church.

70. I omit many other grave speeches of holy Fathers to this effect of
consenting with the Church in faith, and submitting our judgment thereunto: And
of S. Augustine particularly (whom I do allege more willingly because you
pretend to honor him) as where he says for his part he would not believe the
Gospel, (...). Aug. co^t. Ep. fund. c. ^.
unless the authority of the Church moved him. That he was held in the Church
by the consent of people, ^. c. 4.
and Nations, by an authority begotten with miracles, nourished with hope,
increased by antiquity. And that it is a point of most insolent madness to
dispute whether that be to be observed which is frequented by the whole Church
through the world. Ep. 118. c. ^
Moreover what S. Augustine said of S. Cyprian, he might have said of any other
father: to wit, that he would have yielded to the authority of the Church:
Neither would the Fathers hold communion with any who did oppose themselves to
the definitions of general Counsels, or to the doctrine of the Church, but
held them for Heretics.

81. And thus much for this point: wherein I have not alleged the foresaid
authorities to move you: for I know that in your Vide I. Rain. Concl. 2. fine.
conscience you will not yield to the Fathers, neither a part, nor all together
in General Council: nor stoop to their Spirit: nor believe their Creed. But
I have done it to show you, that I have learned of them the doctrine which I
told you: and that by their example I do submit my understanding to the Church
in all controversies, and securely rest in her judgment, For she with infinite
eyes does always diligently look on Gods word, and with infinite care, and
industry attends unto the truth. Good wits though learned may mistake: each
scholar is not a Saint; the gifts of the Spirit are divided among me^; But
all the treasure of the spirit, all the Saints and Predestinate, the highest
Authority; and all means possible for mortal men to learn the truth, are in
the Church. There the Angels of the Gospel deliver the will of the divine
Majesty, there the Secretaries of heaven do register Gods words, and there
Jesus Christ our Master does teach and bring up his Elect, and prepare them
for his high School of deuinitie, wherein the Cherubins and Seraphins have
their order. From You say that we obtrude unto you doctrine for divine which
is not such; For the nouice in Controversy.
at some parts of the Bible, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory. we deny that
we propose any thing for divine and revealed which is not indeed divine and
revealed This is therefore a Controversy betwixt us. What way is there to know
the truth in this controversy? The Spirit. where? In the Church. Again, you
say we interpret the Scriptures wrong. we deny it. what Judge? The spiritte
of truth. where? In the School of Jesus Christ. Which is this School? The
Church. Which is the Church? That which is in communion with Vrbanus 8.
Reflect well on this discourse, and make the like on all occasions in any
Controversy of faith whatsoever. Is it a controversy you speak of, or is it
agreed on both sides! If a Controversy, and in Religion, the truth may be
known, The question then comes Who it to Judge? And the Answer is, The spirit.
In Whom! in The Church But you will ask, why must we stand to the Judgment of
the Spirit in the Church rather then to the judgment of the Spirit in N. N. as
in John Calvin for example? I answer, because we know by divine Revelation
that he is in the Church ever, teaching all Truth. as I have declared at large;
and I have declared also which is the Church of God. but we have no divine
Revelation that he is in N. N. in John Calvin. Yea we know he is not in him,
because he contradicts the Spirit in the Church.
this Church the Fathers had instruction; to the judgment of this community,
the greatest judgments did ever stoop: Their practice does so demonstrate,
Their books for them confess it still. And this is our practice also, this is
our resolution; we confess it, we profess it. we rest in the judgment of
Gods Spirit in the Catholic Church; and to this Tribunal (be you never so
unwilling) you must also come as I have declared in this book: and here all *
Controversy must be determined. We do not fly the Scripture; we have it:
we have the Reverence of Antiquity on our side: and reason pleads for us: but
here the cause is ended. When you do question the real presence, justification
by woorks, S. Peeters primacie, and allege Scripture; we do likewise allege
Scripture, and so pregnant that you cannot reallie answer; and then alonge
we go to be judged by the divine spirit in the Church, where we are certain
he is, and teaches all truth. When you say, this or that book is not
Scripture: this was, or was not received in the primitive Church; the sense of
the letter is this or that, We examine all, and then appeal to to the Spirit
in the Church where we are sure he is suggesting all whatsoever the Son of
God has revealed, and taught to be received and believed of men. When you
pretend that our doctrine is against reason, against holy Fathers, against
Antiquity, we produce testimonies of ancient Fathers, and reason for our
side, and then submit the cause to the Spirit in the Church, which looking on
all truth, can judge best what is most conformable to reason, to the Fathers,
to all Antiquity. And when you say that the Counsels contradict one another;
that there are contradictions in the Scripture: We are satisfied in these
points also by the Spirit in Church, as being the highest Judge of all
controversies, of infinite understanding, and no less infinite veracitie. So
that all particular Controversies do run into this general Principle to be
resolved: and this Principle we have in plain terms from the mouth of God.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Wherein some exceptions are answered.
82. THe objections which you and your fellows make are partly against the
infallibility of the Catholic Church in it self, and partly against the
infallibility of general Counsels, where Bisshops are assembled out of all
Countries to determine commonly by divine assistance what belongs to faith,
and what is contrary thereunto. Of this second part, it being not the whole
Church formallie in it self (whereof I have entreated hitherto,) but the whole
in representation only, as deuines term it, I will speak a word or two
hereafter, And will answer that here, which you bring against the first,
which is the matter we have in hand. You are to show, not that some
particular man or some part of the Church might fall of, and leave to be part
of the Catholic not-erring Church, for that we see cleerelie in your masters
Luther, Calvin, and others which once were Catholics: and in the Church of
England which was in the communion of the Church for a thousand years
together, and by that communion Catholic, as being then part of Gods Church.
And is now fallen into schism and Heresy: but you must prove that the
Catholic Church may err in faith, or to use your own terms, that all the
Church of God may be in error, affirming and believing contrary to that which
is true in faith.

83. And first I observe that if you did understand your own principles, you
would despair of the success of your own arguments, because by those
principles of yours all that you can say, may justly be contemned. This I
demonstrate: for you will either prove this doctrine of the Churches
infallibility in the sense wherein we defend it, to be an error
fundamental, or to be some other error not fundamental. The first you cannot
pretend without contradicting your self presently, for you say also that
the Church cannot err in fundamentalls, and that ours in fundame^talls does
not err, granting withal when you are well urged, that ours is the Church,
and if you should start back and deny it again you will find it under
double proof in another place. The Second you cannot as much as pretend to
prove and demonstrate in your principles, because according to the^ you can
take no means whereof you are certain: not reason, for all men may err in
obscure matters: nor Fathers, for in your principles all might err: nor place
of Scripture; for you have no means to know certainly that it is the word of
God, the place not being one of your fundamentalles: nor the Spirit, because in
not fundamentalls he assisteth not, as you say and maintain in this question,
or if he does assist in this very matter whether you call it fundamental or
not fundamental, he does assist the Church; for to the Church is the promise
made.

84. Thus you very wisely have over reached your self, and left your self no
means to prove any thing against us, either in this controversy or in any
other, for fundamentallie you confess we have not erred, and in other things
by your own principles you are not certain. Yet to gull the people, you
bring texts not fundamental according to your distinction, and cry out
Scripture Scripture, the Gospel, the word of God. And if you find a place in
S. Augustine which neither your parishioners nor your self do understand, you
challenge us to the Fathers, whereas in your conscience you believe for
certain neither Fathers nor scripture, but only some places which you call
fundamental: neither do you acknowledge any means in the world either from
God or man to be sure of things not fundamental (as you term them) as I have
showed before: and the same these your protestant arguments which follow,
would feign prove.

85. The first argument to this end is made against the Church in the state of
the old law before the coming of the Messiah and therefore is nothing to the
purpose, because we speak of the Christian Church, as it is established by
Jesus Christ and governed by his Spirit, which Church is not limited unto one
Nation only, but over all the world, and therefore Catholic; and of this I
have proved and we do believe that in faith it is infallible. Notwithstanding
to maintain the infallibility of the Jewish Church too before the Messiah
came (which is an other question) I resolve your doubt made against it. You say
the people of Israel did adore the brazen calfe therefore the Church all did
err. You should have proved that all did adore the calfe, that Moses, and
the Levites all did: which you will never prove as long as the Bible is
extant. If you read Exodus in the two and thitieth chapter you shall find
that when Moses had said, if any man be our Lords let him join to me, there
gathered unto him all the Sons of Levy. Exodus 32.26.
And these were no small company as you may gather out of the book of Numbers.
Number. 3. v. 39.
Next you say Elias did complain that he was left alone, This makes a show,
and is repeted over and over in your books and your pulpittes. The truth is
that there were at the same time diverse in Israel where this Prophet was, 3.
Kings. 19. v. 18. Romans 11.4.
which bowed not before Baal, of which number God said to Elias, he would
reserve seven thousand. And at the same time also in the kingdom of Judah
there was public profession of the true religion at Jerusalem. Wherefore you
cannot prove by this place that the Church failed and was not visible on the
earth, if we would grant you (as you have seen we need not) that it was
not visible in the kingdom of Israel at that time. Neither was it necessary
to the visibilitie of it, that it should be still visible in both kingdoms,
one of the^ only does suffice for this purpose, in case all in the other had
forsaken God. Let us now come to the Catholic and Christian Church.

86. In the second argument you tax the Apostles, 1. Rainold^
and first accuse S. Peeter of false doctrine because he was reprehended by S.
Paul. Then further you condemn the Apostles all of error against faith, in
not beleeui^g the resurrection. To that of S. Peeter which old Heretics
objected, it was answered fourteen hundred years ago that it was a fault of
conversation which he was taxed for, not of doctrine. The fault is set down by
S. Paul in these words, Gal. 2.12.
for before certain came from James, he, Peeter, did eat with the Gentiles,
but when they were come he withdrewe and separated himself, fearing them that
were of the circumcision. This carriage of S. Peeter, S. Paul did repre-to
Iudaize his making others by his example hend; and was in this. But here is no
false doctrine maintained and published by him: much less by the Apostles all,
taught and generally by the Church believed; whereof we speak now. In the
conversation of the Popes which you tax by this occasion there may have been
faults also; for they were men; but from them in general Counsels there has
come no false doctrine, nor ever will.

87. The second parr of your objection has no difficulty, because we know
that the Apostles did learn the particulars of faith by degrees as you may
observe easily in the Gospel: and their slownes to believe the point
mentioned, but not any error maintained by them for Christian doctrine, was
reprehended. Neither was the all-teaching Spirit, as yet come; our Savior not
being ascended: who therefore did instruct the^ in the matter his own self.
Now the thing that we defend is, not that the Apostles believed all in
particular from the first time they were called, or that in conversation
nothing ever happened amiss in any one of them, but that after the coming of
the holy Ghost the Catholic Church did never believe or teach error in
matter of faith: which I would have you to read over and over that you mistake
not the matter, but argue to the purpose.

88. A third argument which I thought good to put in this place touches the
resolution of our faith into the Church, which resolution seems not firm
because it is made into authority not divine. To this I answer that the
authority of the Church alone if you consider it apart, not adding thereunto
the authority of the Assisting Spirit, is greater then any other authority in
the world that is distinct from the divine authority. And this by reason of an
infinite multitude of learned and holy men which are in it: of infinite
miracles which do give testimony of a greatness which nature wonders at: of
the strange union of worlds of people in one obscure faith, with a constancy
which neither flattery nor fear can shake, which union does acknowledge no
cause in nature, since nature inclines not so constantly to communion and
uniform judgment in things not found in nature, as God incarnate, the son in
substance and power all one with his Father, and yet distinct in person, and
the like. The authority I say of the Church by reason of these and such other
motives is the greatest of all authorities among men: in so much that no other
is any way equal to it: and therefore none able to draw a wise man from it.

89. Yet this alone is not the thing whereunto we do make the last resolution
of our faith: But we make it into the testimony of almighty God in the
Church: This testimony does originallie move our faith. The sun is always
visible in it self; but cannot be seen of us unless it be in the Orb above
our hemisphere: and when it is risen, the elevation does not principally move
our eye, but the sun in that elevation does move it to see both sun and
heaven, and all other things which the light comes upon. So Gods eternal word
of it self is ever apt to move, and to be seen, though we cannot discover it
with the eye of faith, unless it be exposed or proposed to us in the firmament
of the Church: or some other way equivalent. But if it be so applied our faith
discerns the word and the Church proposing it and all other things that are
revealed. Wherein the Church-proposition does concur instrumentallie, with
subordination to the Word of God: and of them both in several kinds our faith
depends.

90. We resolve therefore into authority truly divine; into the divine
Spirit teaching in the Church. Or, if you will have a longer way, which in
effect is all one, we do resolve into the present Church, assisted with the
Spirit: This present Church does resolve into the Church in the former age,
assisted by the Spirit; that again into a former age, and so to the Apostles:
they resolve into Christ. Where you find the like as before. that is, the
eternal, and increated word, moving by way of humane speech: and the Apostles
faith depending (though diversely) on both at once, that is, on the eternal
word, as on the original motive: and, on the word of his mouth, as on the
Application.

91. If you would have yet another way, take the motives of faith all
together, or the collection of them, as applications, and the prime veriry as
formal object: and you have all that you justly can desire. In the collectio^
of motives I do include the whole Church these sixteen hundred years: and
the Apostles and Jesus Christ, as he appeared and taught: and all the miracles
done in confirmation of the Christian Catholic faith: the conversion of the
world from bad to good, which ca^ be from no bad cause: the prophecies of the
old and new Testament: and whatsoever else learned men use to bring to this
purpose. And taking in this collection all that which is distinct from the
increated authority of almighty God, I call it the condition, circumstance
or application of the formal object: which formal object is the divine
verity revealing. Further I must not go, because the divine verity is
infinite, and therefore able to move any understanding: and the circumstances
are beyond all exception to warrant the prudence of my choice. I have used some
School terms in this answer; but you must pardon me, for it is a School
point, as you know and fit for Scholars only.

92. A fourth exception is, that you seek the will of God more sincerely, and
therefore enjoy the assistance, which we do not because we rely only on
men. This argument is allreadie answered in effect: we depend on men
proposing and as isntrumental, or ministerial causes under Jesus Christ the
great Pastor: And sure the Apostles on whom the primitive Church depended
were men also. But principally we depend on Jesus Christ, and the holy
Ghost assisting in and by the Church. For your sincere seeking of the truth it
is a frivolous pretense, since you do not take the means by God ordained to
find it. Jesus Christ has left it in the Church, and if you would find it,
you should look it there. Your pretense of prayer, and the gift of
interpretation, and conference of places, are tricks only to delude fools;
for all wise me^ know that Christ has bestowed all helps necessary upon the
Church: and that in the Church are the power of interpretation, and sanctity,
and generally all the gifts of the holy Ghost. Wherefore you are first to
prove that you are the Church, before you challenge the Spirit, and his
gifts: till then we number you among those who come in at the window to rob
and steal the souls out of men; and endeavor also as much as lies in you to
rob the Church of God of her endowments.

93. For the sanctity of our Church, wherewith you would equal yours, I
remitte you to Baronius Martyrologe, and desire to see the like catalogue from
your holy number. But who knows not that it is proper to the Catholic
Church to breed Saints, and that thence are those which out of all Nations,
tribes, and tongues, are chosen to reign with Jesus Christ. Yet are not all in
this Church truly Saints: there are degrees of incorpotion and union to the
head and members. Some are united by faith and charity, some by faith and
exterior communion, but want Charity, and they have some kind of motion and
influence from Christ the head: for without him none can believe a right: and
they are part of the great mystical body the Church. Yet they want the
principal union; which union will be perfect and constant in heaven, where the
Church shall see the deity of the son of God; But here, good and bad are
mixed: yet so, that the Church militant shall never be without many good and
holy men, according to the Scripture This is the covenant which I will make
with the house of Israel says our Lord, Ierem. 30. v. 33.
speaking of the Christian Church, I will give my law in their bowels, and in
the heart of them will write it, and will be to them a God, and they shall be my
people. Ezech. 37. v 27.
And in Ezechiel. I will give my sanctification in the midst of them for ever.

94. If you ask me whether the Church may be said to sin, since there be
sinners in the Church. I answer, no. If any sin, it is not by means of the
Church; but contrary to her direction and Spirit. And, if any err, it is not
by her means, but contrary to her Spirit and proposition. So that, neither
the sin, nor the error of particular men can justly be attributed unto the
Church, since they work not in those cases by the common judgment and
direction of the Church, but by their own private apprehensions and affections
contrary to the Churches will and rule. As when one in a well-instituted
commonwealth does secretly steal, and murder; it is his private action: it
is not the action of the common wealth, but flatly against the will and laws
of it. This only I will note in this matter, that every mortal sin does not
destroy all incorporatio^; and therefore a man may be in mortal sin, and yet
in the Church, for he which believes, does participate some kind of life,
though imperfect as I said before. Neither is it necessary that in each part
all vital powers be: for a man's foot does participate life but cannot see,
nor hear, nor imagine as does the head.

95. In the next place insteede of an argument I note your vanity in heaping
things together to win the vulgar. Your silken discourses unless they be
flowred with histories of Popes, Friars and Monks, are not gaudie, and
therefore this embrodery must not be wanting. I will not loose time to rehearse
the particulars, but in general answer thus. First if among twelve Apostles
pict out by our Savior Jesus Christ, one was naught and proved an Apostata, it
can be no marvel if among more then two hundred Popes elected by men, some
few did amiss, Neither can their faults prejudice Papal authority, and the
general doctrine of the Church, or redound unto it, more then did the
Apostasy of Judas prejudice Apostolical power, and christianity, or redound
unto the rest. You should have considered rather, that many Bishops of the
Roman See are known Saints.

96. I answer secondly for Friars, that their rule is good, holy, and
beyond all just exception, and therefore if any not conforming themselves to
this rule, by weakness fail and live amiss, the profession is no more to be
condemned for it, then is Christianity for the wicked conversation of many
that profess it. And the stories of Friars which you have are but few, some
dozen peradventure, were they a thousand the matter were not great, whereas in
all the Catholic world are Friars. And touching Monks it is the same; their
Rule is holy and their conversation such as crowns and scepters have been left
for to learn it; 33. millia^ Abbatiaru^. and 14. millia Prioratuum. Genebr an.
524. Ordinis Praedicatorum feruntur fuisse 4143. coenobia. id an. 1216.
Franciscanorum suo tempore 90. millia fuisse scribit Sabellicus Ennead. dec. 9.
l. 9.
their institution has bred many Saints, and their Order has been so
genenerally spread, that they have had many thousand monasteries at a time.
Among so many to have happened a few disorders is no wonder; but to think that
your stories, put case they were in part true (which is not worth examination)
can prejudice the rule and institution, is very childish.

97. Of Catholics in general I have spoken all ready: they were not all
saints in the Primitive Church, neither be they all saints at this day. Many
are called few chosen: Good and bad are mingled here: The spouse is black and
fair. In the Churches decrees there is no error against faith; no rule
against manners: Her rule is irreprehensible, being the rule of Christianity;
And when any thing is amiss in men's carriage or behavior toward God or man,
she does admonish and punish as occasion requires. Hence have come all those
decrees of reformation made in Counsels general and particular, which you
have seen more then once. In an infinite number to have some disorders is
incident, and we were foretold that scandalls should be. Mat. 18.
But consider further, that this Church has an infinite company of holy men
likewise, and that all which arrive to glory shall have lived in this Church,
Apoc. 7.
and those of all tribes, tongues, and Nations. For this very Church, though
not according to all the material parts, shall triumph, as I have said in an
other place, and in state of triumph, shall be all fair, and all over without
spot: she shall be without actual or original or venial sin, when she
comes with open eyes to look the prime verity in the face, and to embrace the
divine goodness, with all the latitude of her soul.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Of the Protestant multiplication of Churches by visible and
invisible.
68. IN this place before I conclude I have a word more to say about your
distinction of visible and invisible. I thought once to make it a Chapter in
the first book; one of your great leaps when you are pursued ending in it.
From Luthers School you skip into Waldoes, from thence you thrust your selves
on us, from us to the Church primitive and from the primitive Church you get
quite out of the eyes of the whole world, and betake your selves to
Inuisibilitie. In regard I there pursued you, I thought (I say) to speak also
of the distinction there: But the thing will be more easy now because in many
places as occasions were offered I have discoused of the He that desires to see
more of the Visibilitie of the Church, shall find it exactly handled, and the
Protestant euasions all clearly refuted by L. my of Chalc. in his book de
auctorae essentia Protestantica Ecclesia. l. 2. c. 6. and seqq.
Visibilitie of Gods Church. The Church of Gods is one and visible as the
Scripture does witness: Yet you with two words visible and invisible, have made
a distinction to rend it into two, and do maintain stoutly that God has two
Churches, one invisible, consisting of predestinate persons only, The other
visible, which does exteriorlie profess the faith.

99. The whole company of the faith full may be divided into two parts by God
almighty, the one part is predestinate, the other part is the company of
those which are not predestinate. By this, the whole is sufficiently divided,
for every man in the company belongs to one part or member of the division,
and no man belongs to both. For you cannot affirm two contradictories of the
same, as to say, Peeter is predestined, and Peeter is not predestined. This
being so I demand now which of these companies is visible, and which
invisible? And what makes the one to be so rather, then the other? If
predestination make men invisible, why does not reprobation make men
invisible, since reprobation is a secret as hard to know? If profession of the
faith make the reprobate visible, why can not profession make the predestinate
men visible? And if these companies be together mingled, why are they not both
visible, or both invisible? or rather why is not the whole company visible,
by reason of the profession and communion, though Gods disposition toward this
and that man in particular be invisible and secret?

100. We believe that the whole company of Catholics is the Church, as I
have declared larglie heretofore: We believe that the predestinate are in this
company: that they die all of them in the communion of the Church: and that
here they profess their faith. This I will declare briefly, and then I will
be so bold as to demand some questions touching your invisible congregation,
for look on it I may not, because it is not to be seen.

101. First therefore if the thing be well considered it is manifest that the
predestinate do profess their faith, and thereby do manifest themselves to be
the servants of Jesus Christ: and this also our Savior Christ requires of
his servants, Matthew. 10.32.33.
every one that shall confess me before men, I also will confess him before
my father: but he that shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my
father which is in heaven Every one that confesses me before men the son of
man also will confess him before the Angels of God: Luke 12. v. 8.9.
But he that denies me before men shall be denied before the Angels of God.
Hereupon the Martyrs of Jesus Christ which have been at all times, and whereof
all Christian Nations have yielded store; have openly in the face of
persecution made profession of their faith, and thereby they were visible, and
being Martyrs were also members of the predestined Church, they were
predestinate. The predestinate therefore, and the visible professors of the
faith may be in one and the same Church, yea the same man may be predestinate
and also visiblie profess the faith.

102. Secondly it is manifest that the Apostles were visible professors of the
faith, and therefore members of the visible Church of God; and they were also
predestinate and therefore members of the predestinate Church: The same men
therefore may be visible and predestinate. The same Church may be visible and
predestinate: and consequently visibilitie and predestination divide not the
Church into two Churches. As I said of the Apostles and Martyrs, so I say of
the holy Doctors of the Church: they did preach and teach visiblie, they were
known far and near, and were ptedestinate also, whereby it is manifest
that the predestinate did profess their faith the same faith with other
Catholics, with others in their communion, and were visible.

103. Thirdly the Apostolic Church is visible, it includes essentiallie
public persons, As Apostles, and their Successors, Apostolical men for
conversion of Nations; Bisshops; Pastors; Doctors, as you know by Scripture:
Now these public persons are manifestly visible: Pastors, to their flock:
Bisshops, to their Diocese, Apostles and Apostolical men to the Nations they
convert: The Apostolical Chutch therefore is visible. And you know further
that the holy Catholic and Apostolical Church are one and the same, for so
it is in the Creed. I believe one holy Catholic and Apostolical Church:
Symb. Constant.
and this Creed you profess that you believe, and you put it also among the
fundamentalls of your faith. The Catholic therefore and holy Church is visible.

104. Fourthlie, if the Church be the mystical body of Jesus Christ, and this
body one, whereof visible men are members, and Predestinate also members of
the same; then are there not two Churches of Christ, one visible, the other
invisible; Now, it is most certain by the testimony of holy Scripture that
the Church is the mystical body of Christ, and that this mystical body, is
but one, wherein are visible and predestined persons therefore there are not
two Churches of Christ, one visible, the other invisible; two bodies one
visible, the other invisible; but all appertain to one body, and one Church.
I confirm this out of S. Paul who in his Epistle the Ephesians says, that God
the Father has made Christ, the head over all the Church which is his body.
Ephesians. 1. v 22.23. Chapter 4. v. 13.
In this Church the Apostle says, Christ put Apostles, pastors etc. till we
all meet into the unity of faith, which is till the end of the world: Chap.
2.19. Chapter 1. v. 13.
and in the same Church are the citizens of the Saints: the domesticalls of
God, Those which are signed with the holy Ghost of promise which is the pledge
of our inheritance: in fine the predestinate: and S. Paul himself, was in this
Church. This one body therefore had these two attributs to wit, it was
visible, for having in it intrinsecallie and for ever public persons, Pastors,
Doctors, it might thereby be seen and heard: and it had in it the
predestinate, which you call invisible men; whence it follows that visible and
invisible in that sense leave it still as it was, one body.

105. Fiftlie our great Pastors fould is one, not two as your distinction
makes it. He has one fould: and that is visible. For the Church of God is
visible as I have manifestly declared before, and to this fould his
predestinate are all brought, out of what Nation, out of what part of the world
soever. Other sheep I have that are not of this fold (a fould wherein the
Apostles were, John. 10.16.
men visible to the whole world, and wherein their successors are, men also
visible) the^ also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there
shall be made one fould and one Pastor. Here by the testimony of Jesus Christ
the fould, the Church is one: away then with your distinction; believe one, as
we do, which is visible, in which the predestinate people are.

106. And indeed, where should one look for our Saviors Scholars, but in
his School? where should we look for Gods domesticalls, but in his house?
where should we look for his members but in his body? where should we look
for holy people, for predestinate, for Saints but in the Church? And
therefore having demonstrated before which is the Church, this labor might
have been spared. For as I answered of the Spirit; that you should not
challenge him till you had proved that yours was the Church (a task
impossible,) so now I may answer of holy people, of predestinate, of Saints,
that you do not callenge any till you have proved (which you will not do as
long as God is God) that yours is the Church.

107. It is verily a ridiculous thing to see what Churches you frame in your
imagination: One, full of words, ever preaching, all mouth, but without Spirit,
without heart, without soul. The other, full of the Protestant Spirit, but
silent, and ashamed of her own doctrine, in so much that for a thousand years
together she was dombe: a church without a mouth. The mouth and heart you know,
are both parts of one man: the heart is within, and is not seen but by the
mouth; in the mouth it does show it self in what form it pleases to affect:
The Church too has heart and mouth, heart to believe, to love God, and mouth to
praise, inuoake and profess him. These make not two Churches, they are two
parts of one. God has promised these two to one, and the same Church. his
spirit is always in her heart, and his words always in her mouth. I will
ask my Father and he will give you an other Paraclete, Io 14 v. 15 16.17.
that he may abide which you for ever, the Spirit of Truth, whom the world
cannot receive, because it sees him not nor knows him. But you know him,
because he shall abide with you, and shall be in you. Thus our Savior to his
Apostles, public and visible persons, and in them to the visible Church. Isay.
59.21. Romans 10. v. 9.10
My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth etc for ever. If thou confess with thy mouth our
Lord Jesus, and in thy heart believe that God has raised him up from the dead
thou shall be saved, for with the heart we believe unto justice, but with the
mouth confession is made to Salvation. Gods Church therefore has both heart and
mouth, in her heart she has Gods Spirit, in her mouth his word, and these are
not two Churches, but one Church.

108. Neither does predestination make it invisible as childishly you imagine.
The predestination it self indeed is invisible unto us, it is Gods purpose
and decree, and therefore is in God, as man's purposes are in the mind of man:
and those purposes even in men are secret and hidden till the men reveal them:
But the predestined as I said before are as visible as other men. So was S.
Peeter, S. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, the Martyrs of Jesus Christ
were visible, otherwise, how could they have been tortured as they were? The
Doctors were visible, S. Jerome and S. Augustine, were known far and near,
and to come nearer to our time S. Francis, S. Thomas of Aquin, S. Bonauenture,
S. Charles Boromeus, were visible, yet predestinate: whereby it is most evident
that predestination does not make men invisible, they may be public persons,
and known to all the world, and predestinate also; And so may the Church be
both predestinate and visible too. And is so, though every man in the Church be
not predestinate, some are there more then number, as in a man's body there are
some parts superfluous, which will not be resumed in the resurrection as I said
in the former book, and these parts are like the rest, they communicate with
the rest, they believe as the rest, but they do not persevere as the rest. Now
which those are that will persevere finally, which will not, God has reserved
as a secret unto himself. He has not as yet made any secretary coppie out of
the book of life. The sanctity of some in all times he makes known for the
example, and encouragme^t, and confirmation of others, by such signs as he
pleases, such as you read in the lives of Saints, penned by saints also,
by S. Athanasius, S. Jerome, S. Augustine, S. Gregory of Nice, S. Gregory the
great, S. Bid, S. Bernard, S. Bonauenture and others who in their works have
related diverse wonderful things of holy men, and this is a further argument
of their visibilitie: But God (as I said) has not yet permitted the book of
life to be coppied out, and diuulged.

John. 4.23 1. Io. 2.27.
109. You object first, that true worshippers adore in Spirit and truth, and
unction teaches all. This is true. But those worshippers, those a^nointed are
in the Church, they are a part, and the chiefest part of the visible
community, whereof I have spoken in the second book, they are in the visible
fold of Christ. Were the Apostles and the rest of their Religion the true
Church or no? were they, was that Body, that community, visible or invisible?
their sermons were not they heard? were not their writings seen? went not
their sound over all the world? why, then they were visible. As for the vnctio^
it teaches the Catholic Church, it teaches men to give assent to such
things as the Apostles then did, and their Successors now do propose. They may
preach and be heard also, but without unction the people will not believe. 1.
Cor. 3.
Paul planteth and Apollo waters, but God gives the increase. In the same
Catholic Church are those adorers in Spirit, and in the midst of it the
sanctification of God is forever. The Apostles did they adore in Spirit or no?
if they did, why may not a visible Church do so? if they did not, who will
believe that you do?

110. Secondly you object that there are none in the Church but predestinate.
If you speak of the Church triumphant, you say true: if you speak of the
militant Church, it is not so. for all those that for a time adhere unto this
body, and are parts of it, do not finally persevere; some are multiplied
above number, and believe a while, but revolt and fall of before they die. The
Church militant is the company of believers in communion with S. Peeter and
his See. It is the company of Catholics. And Catholics some are in
charity and in the grace of God, and are saved, some die in mortal sin,
some loose their faith at last. 1. Tim 1.
In the primitive Church some made shipwreck of their faith as Hymeneus and
Alexander, says the Apostle. Some do believe for a time said our B. Savior,
Luke 8.1
and in time of temptation do revolt. And the Spirit manifestly says that in
the last times certain shall depart from the faith, attending to the Spiritts
of error. 1. Tim. 4 Matthew. 2 14.
Many are called, but few chosen. There are some with wedding garments and
some without: some wise virgins, some foolish: some corn, some chafe: some
vessels of honor some of dishonor: some good some bad, some predestinate
some reprobate in the Church. The predestinate will persevere, the rest will not.

111. I come now to the second part of this Chapter, wherein I am to loosesome
time in asking a question or two about your dombe-preaching Church, about the
Saints of your election, about those people which were in all times but never
before Luther, and in all Nations before his time, but no wherein the world.
And I demand first whether all the rest were like you or no? if they were, why
then were they invisible? You say you are predestinate, and yet you are visible
(notwithstanding your predestination) and a member of that Church: why then
might not the other men be visible also: every one of the^, and the whole
visible?

112. I demand secondly whether you do know the rest of your Church, the
rest of your predestinate breethren or whether you know none of that Church
but your self only: and whether every one in that Church know himself
only, and no more? If you do not know any of them, what Society ca^ you
have among you? what government? what form of a Church? If you do know any I
desire to hear how? we find not your names in the Scripture, the book of
life is not printed with the Gospel: 2. Tim. 2.19. John. 10.14.
we read there that our Lord knows who be his, that our great Pastor knows
his sheep. That you can do it, that you can number all his sheep, that you
can point them out, we read not. I pray you, how come you to know the
secret? is it by exterior profession? that serves not, they may dissemble and
(which is worse for you) none professed your religion for 900 years together
and therefore by profession you know none in all that time. Neither would an
unfeigned profession have served the turn, for every one that persuades
himself that he believes is not constant in the faith, nor predestinate. What
then be the certain marks whereby you know your invisible brethren, that we
may know them too? or do you not indeed know them? Remember what has been
said in the first book.
if you know them let us hear the marks, the marks of a predestined
Protestant: and bring us one example any time for 900. years before Luther of
such a man; an example out of question, a manifest example. If you do not know
them, you cannot confer with them in your difficulties, you cannot help them
in their necessities, you cannot meet in Council as the Apostles and Pastors
did in the primitive Church; you cannot have the face nor the government of a
Church.

133. I must examine further by your leave. In your Catholic Church of
predestinate, is there order, or confusion? are there Pastors, and Doctors and
Bishops, or no Bishops, no Pastors, no Doctors? is there a Hierarchy, or
not? are the preachers and Superintendents seen and heard? or how are the
things do^ne? The reason of my demand or doubt is, because this Catholic
Church of yours is invisible and therefore it seems that no man can see the
Preacher, otherwise many in the company might see him, if not all, and so he
were visible. He also might see them he preached unto, and so they were
visible too, and consequently the whole company and the whole Church were
visible not invisible.

114. It might seem by your talk that this holy Congregation of yours has
great ears and no eyes: for if they had eyes, they might then see the
Ministers that instruct them, they might see their Superintendents, Or if they
can hear and not see these Ministers, their ears reach a great deal further
then their eyes. But this will not content me neither if yo grant it: for that
which may be heard makes a noise, and by the noise discouers it self, if
therefore your predestined Preachers have made a noise in the world, the
Christians or Papists living with them should have heard it, though they could
not see those invisible men; and this at least would be found on record, as
other wonders are; to wit, That in all Christian countries there was a
Protestant noise, and sermons every where, in every Nation, but no preacher
seen. this would have been found in the Chronicles of all countries; and some
would have been so curiouse as to have noted the points of the Sermons and set
down the doctrine. But it has been so far from this, that for a thousand
years together there was a deep silence in the world, and no Protestant
sermon heard; yea Luther did very earnestly listen after such a sermon, Luth.
de Missa pr^uata ton 7.
but his learned ears could hear none save only from the devil one, and
that indeed he has registered in his writings.

115. Having entered into the consideration of your invisible Church, I will be
bold to look about me. where are your Superintendents? how do they exercise
their office without being seen? Your Ministers of this Church who creates
them and how? is every one a minister, or some sheep and some pastors? how do
you know the pastors from the sheep? the ministers from other men? are all
Apostles? 1. Cor. 12. v. 28.29.
are all prophets? are all Doctors? are all miracles? have all the grace of
cures? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? who do? who do not? how
may one know? how do you know? v. 27.
S. Paul says, some verily God has set in the Church, first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly Doctors, next miracles, then the graces of doing
cures, helps, gouerments, kinds of tongues. Are these things in the invisible
Church? and if they be not there, how is it the Catholic Church? are there
tongues in that deep silence? is there government in that confusion? are there
helps and cures, where no man sees another wants and miseries? miracles and
none wonder? Doctors and no Scholars? Prophets, and Apostles and no preaching
of the word? Where are the pulpits? where are your communion tables? how are
the collectio^s made? do you meet only in the night, or in the day, or not
at all? what calls you together if you meet? a sign? that may be seen. a
sound? that might be heard, and you might be found, which is against the nature
of a Church invisible. Your assemblies for a thousand years together how were
they made, and where? or did none preach all that time? did no Bisshops
govern? did all believe, and so long, and so ordinarily without preachers? how
could that be? how could your people invoke in whom they believed not? how
could they believe whom they heard not? and how could they hear without a
preacher? Answer for your Church, and teach S. Paul something, which he knew
not. If you admit gouerme^t and instruction, and order in that Church, you
grant it to be visible, for these things are visible. If you deny them you
cannot show how those your imagined predecessors had any faith, and were a
Church militant. So that you puzzle your own self in this business, and are
over come without an adversary.

116. I note it therefore for a particular weakness in your brain that
determining to feine a Church of predecessors, you had not so much wit as to
invent a thing which did not infold a contradiction in it self, as this does;
for, being invisible it has no preachers (for preachers are visible things)
now where there are no preachers there is no faith, where there is no faith,
there is no Church, the Church being a Congregation or Society of faithful
people, therefore in making a Church invisible, you make the same thing to be
a Church and no Church. Again, there are no Saints where there is no
sanctity, there is no sanctity, where there is no faith, no faith where there
is no preaching, no preaching where the is no mission, Romans 10.15
no mission where there is no government; no government where there are no
gouerners. And in an invisible company there are no gouerners; therefore from
the first to the last there are in it no Saints. Notwithstanding it has
nothing else you say but Saints. So that it has people in it; it is a
Society of Saints (if we believe you,) and yet has not a Saint in it:
which is another contradiction.

117. Moreover this Church of yours has preached continually Protestantisme
in all Nations: because in all Nations you have had Saints, if your
imagination be admitted: and sanctity is grounded in faith, He that shall be
ashamed of ^^me and of my words, him the son of man shall be ashamed of, When
he shall come ^n his Majesty. Luke 9.^6.
faith gotten by hearing, as I said before: yet all this time she has not
spoken, but was ashamed of her own faith: Now, how these two hang together do
you judge. If you think I do you wrong in accusing your Church of silence,
take in hand again the Argument of the first book; produce evidence of any
one man, yours or ours, frind or foe, Christian, Turk or Athiest that ever
heard a Protestant speak in any place of all the world (a rome wide enough) in
any part of fifteen hundred years before Luther (a time long enough) or ever
since the beginning of the world if you would have a longer space, and though
this will not serve for a Church of all Nations, yet will it show that you
know something more then all your fellows: and that you have profited a little
since you wrotte last. As for the credibilitie of your device; they will
believe yet another Gospel on your bare word, against all the evidence in the
world, that believe this conceit of yours: and every young Logician that has
heard his master talk of Chimeraes, can make as good, and ground them as
solidlie as you do. for every child knows that the Church militant is a
Society of men serving God; which men are not mere Spirits but things
visible, the Society of the^ also is a thing visible* teaching, baptizing,
ruling, converting Nations, confuting Heresies are visible acts, In nullum
nome^ Religionis seu verum seu falsum, coagulari homines possunt, nisi aliquo
signaculorum vel Sacramentorum visibilium consortio collige^tur. S. Aug. li.
19. cont. Faust. c. 11.
and acts of the Church of God. Man owes unto God visible acts of worship
and not invisible only; praise, sacrifice, Sacraments, are visible things: the
word of God is visible, yea God coming to raise this Church did exhibit
himself here visible, God himself was seen with men's eyes, as I told you in
the second book, and if you be a Christian you believe it. The Church which
you speak of, being invisible, can be no Society and therefore no Church. And
as it is no Church but a Chimericall non ens, so the acts of it proportionablie
be negative; it has converted no Nations, it has confuted no Heresies, it
has brought up no Saints. Before Luther it was in no place, it administered no
Sacraments, it made no Sermons. It had no conscience, no mouth, no face.

118. Unworthy therefore is this fiction of yours to be compared to the Church
of God, these imaginary Saints of yours to the Saints of Almighty God: these
dombe preachers to the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and their Successors: this
unsociable society not daring to appear or whisper a fore men for many
hundred years, to that Church which has had always Gods Spirit in her heart,
and Gods word in her mouth: which has converted Nations; condemned Heresies,
assembled Councelles; maintained order; administered Sacraments; and bred
Saints. To the Church described in the Scripture. To the visible, To the
Catholic Church.

119. It may be that your self by this time are weary of your own invention,
to the end therefore I may give you scope to interpret your self better then
you have done hitherto, I will ask a question or two more, and make and end.
Either it is sufficient to salvation, to follow the instruction of the visible
Church or no? if it be not sufficient then God has not provided sufficient
means for instruction, for without a preacher men cannot believe as I have
told you often from S. Paul. If it be sufficient, then leave us to follow this
instruction, to be directed by this Church: we have that we look for. I have
proved heretofore that the Church has Gods words ever in her mouth and that
she delivers true doctrine without error fundamental or other, I demand
now whether the predestinate do believe this doctrine, this religion, thus
perpetually taught, or not? if they do not, they be not of the true Religion,
they be not the sheep of Christ, for his sheep do hear his voice: Io. 10.
they may be your predecessors, they are not ours: they are Saints of your
making, but not Gods elect. If they do, then this visible Church and Gods
predestinate are all of one Religion, one faith, one body mystical: they all
make one Church. Speak plainly man, the Religion which God makes the Church
to profess allwaies, is it true or false? if false, how is it Gods
instruction? You have profited sure exceedingly by your Spirit, if now you
tax God with false doctrine: if it be true, we may follow it, we must
follow it. The predestined people are they of this Religion thus professed,
or are they of an other? if of an other, Gal. 1. ^. Cor. 16.
I have nothing to do with them, anathema, anathema: if they be of this
Religion, all is well.

120. To conclud, that the Church of God is one and visible, and that the
predestinate are in it, has been the sense and faith of all the Catholic
world who have all hoped to be saved in this Church, in the visible Church of
God: it has been the faith of all the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, who acknowledged themselves children of it, and were directed by it: it
has been the faith of the Saints and predestinate themselves, who did here
believe as we do, and God has by miracles, and other ways manifested their
sanctity unto the world. And finally it is the sense of the Spirit of the
Catholic Church which cannot err in such a point, as I have proved larglie,
and you in your grounds should confess, because the thing is fundamental, and
therefore it is a sign of extraordinary stupiditie or malice, or both, to
stagger in it.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. Two other arguments are answered.
121. IF any of your arguments should escape untouched you would brag of
their streingth, and therefore I am glad I have overtaken other two before they
get out of my memory. The first is; Whittak. Rainolds.
That which may happen to any one, may happen to all or to every one; But to
err may happen to any Church (add, for ought you know) for thus it did happen
to the Churches of Thiatira, Corinth, etc. therefore it may happen to every one
or to all, and so all at o^ce may err. Thus you. I have some cause to think
you have a wide mouth, suppose you ca^ thrust a^ egg into it; A clown there
might dispute in your form and mood thus. That which may happen to any one of
the eggs in your parish may happen to all or to every one; but to be thrust
into your mouth at once, may happen to any one of those eggs therefore it may
happen to them all, and then your mouth will be stopped. Now if one mouthfull be
not enough for your dinner, you may fall next to the meat and eat it all
every bit, for that which may happen to any bit may happen to every bit the
clown your Scholar would say; and ofterwards at the same meal you might
drink all the drink, every cupfull, every drop.

122. Suppose all the men in England should cast the dice for a thousand pound,
with these conditions that the first which threw twelve with two dice should
have it, and if none threw twelve the money, should be yours. To see fair
play and to do you all the favor we can; we will suppose the dice to be
just and no trick used at all. The first may throw ames ace: I suppose the
least for your good: but it is five to one he will not. Yet admit he does. It
is five to one the second does not: yet admit his cast be ames ace too: for
what chance might happen to the other might happen to him. Thus I will run on
till I come to twenty, and surely it is much that twenty, one after another
should have the same cast and the dice exactlie just. It is not probable that
it would hold on so to a hundred: yet what might happen to any one, might
happen say you to every one: It is incredible it should go on in the same
chance to a thousand: yet in your logic this guggion must be swallowed after
his fellows. But that it should run thorough them all it is not possible, for
then fortune would be constant and co^tingencie would prove to be a neeessity,
which no man will say, who knows what he says: yet this must down your
throat too, for what may happen to any one may happen to every one, that so
in the end you may get to your self the thousand pound. The like might happen
if all the men that are in the world should cast the dice and should have done
so ever since dice were first invented: because what might happen to any one
might as you say happen to every one. And when each had thrown he might die
before you and co^sequentlie all might do so in your principles so you should
be the only man a live and have all their money too. And thus much to let you
see the weak form of your argument which nothwithsta^di^g is one of the maine
foundatio^s where on your me^ do build their doctrine of the fallibility of
Gods Church.

123. Now to the matter of the argument I answer, that allmighiie God is
infinite, and therefore none can hinder his design or make frustrate his
intention. Wherefore since he has decreed to keep always to the worlds end a
Church on earth infallible in doctrine as I have declared by the testimony of
holy Scripture, his providence will effect it, and make it persevere in what
persons and what places he please. We have no revelation thath the true faith
shall persevere always in France, or in England for example, but in the world
it shall always be, ^. 2. c. 1.
for so much is evident by the Scripture. Neither does it follow: God
permittes some times one man to fall into Apostasy, some times another,
therefore he will at once permit all: he permittes diverse to die before you,
and (for ought you know) he may permit any one man whom soever you can name
or think of, yea any one in all the world: yet hence it is not co^seque^te
that it stands with his general providence to permit every one to die before
you that so you may be last, the only man a live. I answer therefore that As
by virtue of Gods general providence in as much as he is author of nature
there be still in the world men, though some at all times dropp away: so by
virtue of Gods providence as he is author of the supernatural order among men,
there be ever Catholics in the world and so will be still as long as the
world stands, though some men yea some Nations and some particular Churches do
fall of.

124 The next which is also the last I am to speak of here, looks big o^
all and thinks to make an e^d of our cause with one blow. The scope of it is
to prove that all may err, and therefore that we are not to be heard though
never so many Counsels and ancient fathers and worlds of people do stand for
us, and comes on in this manner. The whol^ Church militant consisting of me^
Wh^ are liars, may err alltogethe^ as every part thero^ Fulk ans^ to Count
Cat. p. 89.
All Christians that are or ever were in the world are men, therefore it might
happen that all have erred though they were assembled together never so
orderly, because every man is a lier. If this argument did prove any thing,
it would prove that all Counsels, all Apostles, all Evangelists, all prophets
hither to may (for any thing you know) have been in error: for all these were
men and every man is a lier. This is the up shot of your disputation, this is
the haven you have all this while been sailing unto: this (though first but a
shifte whereunto you were driven by the strength of authority brought against
you) is now your doctrine and a Conclusion in your books. Our answer is
easy that man of himself might err, but by divine assistance, might be so
guided that he erred not: and no man can deny this, unless he deny that God is
omnipotent or omniscious which if he do, the light of nature will condemn
him. Thus general Counsels are assisted, thus were the Evangelists also, and
thus the Prophetts, though nor after the same manner all. And the promise of
the Assistance did more concern the Pastors then the people: Oecumenicall
Counsels, then each Bishop single: the whole college of the Apostles more
then one. Though each Apostle being to teach the whole Church in the nature of
an Apostle had this assistance too: and our Savior praying for the
sanctification of his elected in truth or for their perseverance, included the
means also of this perseuera^ce of his elect in the truth, which is the
perpetuity of his assistance unto those in whom is the teaching authority
respectiuelie to the whole, in which those elected are though to pastors in
particular unknown.

125. But to look now a little upon you who are so resolute in your
ignorance, as to think that all may have mystaken the truth which you have
found: and have been forsaken by the Spiritte who singularly favors you, I
demand of you the Spirittes darling and worlds fresh Oracle, First how one may
know that you are exempted from the world of men which may err altogether?
or what other species or kind you and your wit belong unto, that men should
leave the whole world though consenting, and take your authority against them
all. the same Question would I ask of your fellow Rainolds, and of Whittaker
were they living: but having undertaken their cause, the resolution belongs to
you in their abse^ce. Secondly I desire a sight of your particular letters
patents from Jesus Christ, wherein the teaching Spiritte is thus singularly
bequeathed and addicted unto you, or to either of the forenamed in particular,
or John white if you had rather: together with a clause, that though he break
his promise made unto the Church, and has not (as he said he would) sent the
allteaching Spiritte to the Apostles, to their Successors, or to the Church
Catholic; yet that, that other promise, no where extant for ought we know,
made particularly unto you his dearest, he will not break: and how you are
sure he will stand to this clause. Thirdly I demand why the Catholics of
England be there commanded and urged also to conform their conscience to the
doctrine of your Church, and to rest in her judgment and in the parlamentarie
decrees for points of Religion, though worlds of men as learned every way (I
speak least) as your selves, do and have maintained the contrary to their
dying day, as conformable to the Scripture, to reason and to the practice of
their forefathers time out of mind. I demand (I say) why you proceed with
the^ in this manner, before you give evidence that you are not in error: since
you likewise are me^, and all me^ may err as you tell us. Evidence I say
greater the^ any these have on their side. I demand further of your wisdom,
how you do know and are certain that the Eua^gelists, Apostles, and Prophetts
did write those books, which you take for divine Scripture, and how you do
know your self, and ca^ prove to me there is no error or mistaking in the
matter if all me^ may have erred. And I demand further how you do know that
he which did write the first Gospel (suppose he were S. Matthewe) did not
err, since he was a man, and all men you say may err. I demand Fiftlie how
men shall come to be sure of the sense of a piece of Scripture, and to have the
controversies in religion determined; Must he come to you? why rather then to
the Church which was before you were borne, and had the promise of the
Spiritte. If to the Spiritte? why rather to that in you, them to that in the
Church? If to others? why must we go to old Heretics, to Jews, to Pagans,
to Athiests, rather then to the Church? why should any know better then she?
or abound more with the Spiritte, then she does? I demand next what an
Heretic is and why he which opposes himself in matters of faith to general
Counsels, to the Spiritte of the Catholic Church, and to Gods word proposed
by this Church, and expounded by this Spirit is not one? And Seuenthlie I
demand whether this sin be not against the holy Ghost? and whether he who
dies in it shall be saved, and admitted into the Church triumphant who thus
opposed the militant, and died a vowed enemy to her, and to her doctrine, and
her Spiritte?

126. Awake man for shame awake, and look about; consider what you do: here
is a fair way before you, and you like a bedlome run out of it, over shoes,
over boots, over head and ears: imagining notwithstanding that you walk
above heaven, and that every step is on a star. The Church, the Counsels,
the Fathers, Apostles, Evangelists, all are in error, all under your feet,
whilst your chariot is rowld uniformly above the Sun, and heaven takes new
laws from your almighty wit. I will ascend into heaven, Isay. 14. v. 13.14.
above the stars of God I will exalt my throne, I will sit in the mount of
the Testament, in the sides of the North. I will ascend above the height of the
clouds. I will be like the highest. So he that went before you: if you prick
on apace you will overtake him, for he is yet at his Inn; and there to stay an
eternal night. That past, you may iogge on together. I love your person, I
wish your salvation, but hate your heresy, and make no great account of that
which you most adore, your learni^g. In the School of error be many good
wits. There the Manichees, and Aria^s, and Caluinists have their order, if
there be any order where no man will be second. Aristotle's Logic, and Tullies
Rhetoric, could not make of superstition true Religion. I am not in love with
Hell, though in it be great Scholars. the Foulest there was once the Fairest
among creatures, for endowments or nature and strength of understanding. I
know that such as did applaud his co^ceipt were partners in his fall. I know
too, that all the knowledge of all Pagans, of all Heretics, of all
adversaries put together does not equal the knowledge of the Church. It is the
School of Jesus Christ who taught (a thing worthy of eternal admiration) a
poor fisherman and on the sudden too, to speak all tongues, I speak it to
the confusion of such adversaries of our Savior as glory in their skill in
others language: and do repeat again to the Rhetoricians, he suddenly made
the same man so good an Orator that he converted unto his Masters doctrine in
the face of his adversaries, Act. 2:
three thousand with one Sermon. he so instructed his disciples in deuinitie,
that they convinced Greece, the worlds Academie for wit and learning: persuaded
Rome in the flourishing time of her power though she employed all her force to
frustrate their proceeding: and in fine (to relate many wonders in a word)
converted all the world, to believe a man God, to believe a most obscure and
witt-transcending Creed. In this School we do learn, here we are assured
of the truth. The manifestation of the Spirit is given here. To one the word of
wisdom. 1. Cor. 12. v. 8.9.10.
To another the word of knowledge according to the same Spirit. To another
faith in the same Spirit. To another the grace of doing cures in one Spirit. To
another the working of miracles. To another prophecy. To another discerning of
Spiritts. To another kinds of tongues. To another interpretations of languages.
Can you give these things? can you teach this School in this sort as the
Spirit does? or if you cannot, as without infinite blasphemy you may not
presume you can, why do you endeavor to thrust out the holy Ghost, and intrude
your self into the place? why do you thus oppose the divine ordinance, and
openly wrong the son of God? Auant Heretics, Jude v. 2.
clouds without water, borne about with wind, raging waves of the Sea, foming
out your own confusions, enemies to the Church, to the Scripture and to God,
auant: We need not your instruction, we have better Masters. Without you the
Church was planted, the world converted, the truth maintained; without you the
Schools are full of Scholars, the world of Martyrs, heaven of Saints.
without you the Church has stood, and does stand, and so will do, still.

The third Conclusion.
All Controversies in matters of Religion are to be decided by the Spirit in
the Church.

THE FOVRTH BOOK WHEREIN SOME PARTIticular Controversies are briefly discussed.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the Primacie.
1. YOUR general arguments being dispatched in the former book, I shall find
little danger or difficulty in the encounter of the rest of the disordered
route, and may justly in your own principles contemn them all as I said
before in the like occasion and must repeat it often. For, whence is their
strength? from wit or from authority? If from wit, you must not think
amiss of me, if I prefer the wit and judgment of many worlds of learned
me^, before yours which has declared it self unreasonable hitherto:
especially since all men be liars, to turn the point of your own weapon
upon your self, and you no God nor Angel but a man. If your arguments have
their streingth from authority; either this authority is of men, and this you
have refused as uncertain because all me^ are liars. and you have labored not
only to disgrace the Church of later times, and the Fathers in their age, but
also to take the Apostles triping, and therefore their authority moves not
you. Or this authority is of God in holy Scripture; where he delivers,
according to your distinction, two sorts of points, the one is of fundamental
points, and in these you confess, that the Church neither does nor can err:
and therefore the ensuing controversy is not about them, as for example, the
Incarnation, the passion, and the rest which you call fundamental. The other
sort of points or textes in the Bible are as you call them not-fundamentall;
and these you do not hold for certain; which, howsoever you dissemble the
matter, is clear, for in your principles there are no means from God or man
to know certainly that they are indeed parts of Gods word, or to know which
is their true meaning. Not the wit of man alone, for that may err
especially in such an obscure point, as whether this text, this verse, be Gods
word and not the word of a man: Not the Spirit, for that does assist only to
fundamentalls you say, and these you say are not of them. you must answer this
here, before you go further: and know that of the certainty of consequences
it is the same. Moreover, since divine assistance to the understanding of the
Scripture, depends upon Gods promise; and since this promise is made unto the
Church, to the Apostles and their successors: you are first to prove that you
are the Church, before any man is to believe you have the assistance and
interpret right: for, arguments out of Scripture prove nothing, if they miss
the sense of God, and be grounded in a wrong sense. For these, and the like
reasons I might have forborne to make further answer to your exceptions.
Notwithstanding, to give you content I will descend unto the particular
consideration of the chiefest.

2. First therefore, to make your way into the Church, there to spoil and
altar what you list, you set upon the Pastor. It is defined in the Council
of Florence that the Bishop of Rome is successor to saint Peeter, and that he
has received in him, saint Peeter, from our Savior, power to feed and to
govern the whole Church. This is one of the things which you cannot abide; a
Superior you think is a heavy burden, and therefore you would shake him of.
The Apostles, say you, were according to Cyprian equal in honor and dignity.
Cypr. de unit. Eccl. Ieron adu. Iou. Leo ep. 84.
The strength of the Church was equally established on them all in the opinion
of Hierom, and with Leo, they had a likeness in honor. This is the first onset,
wherein you show neither skill nor judgment. You had but lately discharged
all the Fathers for unable men, and therefore it was an unadvised part in you
now to summo^ them to fight under your colors: for you may justly fear that
in time of trial they will declare themselves to be o^ our side who have ever
reuere^ced and defended the^, and not on yours where they and the Church
authority, and the Spirit of Gods Church, are dis-esteemed and contemned.

3. But I answer, that before S. Peeter was made Pastor, the Apostles were
all equal: after he was made Pastor, they were not equal. S. Peeter was then
chief and Superior. The rest of the Apostles had power given them to preach
the Gospel, to forgive sins, to bind and loose, to do miracles: but only
S. Peeter had the prerogative of Pastor, as the Scripture does evidently
declare. And hereby he was otherwise compared unto the flock then any of the
rest, ^. c. 6. n. 52
with whom he had all the forenamed, but excelled in this, that they being
Legates or Apostles only, in regard of their general jurisdiction; he was
Pastor of the Church. This is the doctrine of those Fathers which you have
cited, as you may see in their books; and to save you the labor of looking
further, I will show it in the very same places you allege. The Church (says
S. Ierom) is founded on Peeter, S. Ieron. adu. Iouin. ^. 1.
though in another place it be done upon them all, and all receive the keys
of heaven, and the strenght of the Church be equally establisshed upon all.
These things were equally done before S. Peeter was made Pastor, they were
all equally made Apostles, and foundations, and had equally the keys: but
afterward, of these Apostles thus equal, one was created Pastor, the rest
remaining as they were; who remained therefore unequal to this one, which was
Peeter, 10. 21.
as you know by the Gospel of S. John. and in regard hereof S. Hierome does
add immediately to the words but now cited, yet (says he) for this, one of
the twelve is chosen, that a HEAD being constituted the occasion of schism
might be taken away. Capite co^stituto.
So now, they are unequal: because one is made head. S. Cyprian does teach
the same in the place you cite, Although (says he) after his resurrection, he
(our Savior) gives equal power; saying, as my father sent me, so do send you,
S. Cyp. de unit. eccl.
take the holy Ghost etc. (where the power of remitting sins is equally
bestowed on all) yet that he might declare unity, he by his authority
disposed the ORIGIN of the same Unity, BEGINNING FROM ONE. Quamuis Apostolis
omnibus etc. tamen vt vnitatem manifestaret, vnam Cathedram constituit, and
vnitatis eiusde^ originem ab vno incipientem sua authoritate disposuit. Hoc
erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and
honoris and potestatis; sed exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur. Primatus Petro
datur, vt vna Christi Ecclesia and Cathedra vna monstretur. S. Cypr. de unit.
Eccl.
Here S. Cyprian does show what course Our blessed Savior took, to keep
manifest, unity in his Church, and among the Apostles themselves. He, our
Savior, disposed, being must wise, an Origin, Root, or cause of Unity, which
Unity he would have in his Church and amongst all the Parts of it. This Orige^
or Root, was not a multitude equally governing the Church, but it was ONE,
that is Peeter, whom our Savior made Pastor, of his Church, and upon who^ he
built it, as S. Cyp. noted a little before and therefore he says he disposed
the Orige^ of this Unity beginning from ONE. So that we have in this very
place, the Primacie of S. Peeter, in that he is the Root and Origin of Unity
in the whole Body, wherein the Apostles were; and also the reason of the
Institution of this Primacie, or Origin in One. In another place he does
specify it more particularly saying that, The Origin of Ecclesiastical Unity
is the CHAIR, that is the Pastoral Authority, Nauigare audent and ad Petri
Cathedra^ atque ecclesiam Principale^ vnde vnitas sacerdotalis exorta est. li.
1. ep. 3. Vna Ecclesia a Christo Domino nostro super petram origin vnitates
and ratione fundata l. 1. ep. 12.
of Peeter. And now I hope you will believe it is his mind, heering it out of
his own mouth. Again he says that the Church is founded on a rock in the
Orige^ of Unity. And that the Church is founded on Peeter. which place S.
Augustine does also allege in his book against the Donatists and in the same
place (which I must note hereby the way) he atributeth expreslie the Primacie
to Peeter. Lastly S. Cyprian says the Sea of Rome is the Mother or Matrice
and Root of the Catholic Church. Now if S. Peeter be the foundation or Rock
of the Catholic Church, and the Origin of Ecclesiastical Unity we may
conclude that he is, as S. Ierom said, the Head.

S. Leo does teach very well, that their election was equal. they had many
things, and among the rest Apostolical dignity equally bestowed on them: but
afterward one was particularly made Pastor of the Church, the Root of
Priestlie Unity, and Superior to the Cyprianus in Ep, ad Quintum ita loquitur,
nam nec Petrus inquit, quem primum Dominus eleget, and super quem a dificauit
Ecclesiam suam, cum secum Paulus disceptaret etc. S. Aug. l 2 con. Donat. c. 1.
Apostolum Petrum, in quo Primatus Apostolorum, tam excellenti gratia
praeeminet, etc. Ibid. Hortatos esse vt Ecclesiae Catholicae Matricem and
Radicem agnoscerent and tenerent. S. Cyp. l. 4. Ep. 8. vide eundem l. 1. ep 3.
and l. 4. ep. 9.
rest; Vni tamen datum est vt caeteris praeemineret. S. Leo. ep. 84. S. Leo
sermon. 3. de Anniuers. Ass die. qui praeponatur.
which done they were not in ALL respects, equal. His words are, Among the
most blessed Apostles in similitude of honor was a certain DISTINCTION OF
POWER, and whereas the Election of all was equal, to one was granted that he
should be EMINENT ABOVE the rest. Again. Out of all the world, says he,
Peeter alone is chosen, who is constituted over the vocation of all Nations,
and over ALL THE APOSTLES, and over all the Fathers of the Church, that, al
though among Gods people there be many Priests and many Pastors, yet Peeter
PROPERLY GOVERN THEM ALL, whom principally Christ does also govern. Ep. 89.
Apostoloru^ summo.
And he says further of the Pastoral office that, Our lord would have the
Sacrament of this function so to appertain to the office of all the Apostles,
that he placed it principally in blessed Peeter the chiefest of all the
Apostles: that from him as from a certain HEAD he might diffuse his guiftes
into the whole Body.

4. You Object that Leo could not prove by Scripture that he said. But I
demand then, why do you allege his authority if you will not stand to it
your self? I demand secondly which of all the Fathers after him did note this
doctrine in him, an erroneous or not current? He was a great Scholar, and a
Saint, and in the communion of all the Christian world in his time. Yet to
give you further content, I will put down the Scripture whereon the doctrine
of S. Leo, S. Hiero^, and the rest, is grounded. There be two chief places,
the first is in the 16. of S. Matthew. And Jesus answearing said, blessed art
thou Simon Bar Iona etc. and I say to thee, thou art Peeter, and UPON THIS
ROCK will I build MY Church. or thus I, say to thee, Simon, thou art Cephas,
and, upon this Cephas, which thou art, I will build, My Church. Here the
demonstratiue, this, does point at the thing whereupon the Church is built,
upon this Cephas will I build my Church. and Simon is this thing, Thou, Simon
art Cephas, and upon this I build. This sense you cannot EXCLVDE without
contradicting the words of Jesus Christ. Now therefore, If you ask the
Scripture, who is Deus vnus est, and Ecclesia vna, and Cathedra vna, super
PETRVM Domini voce fundata. S. Cyprian. ep. 40. PETRVS super QVEM adificata ab
eodem Domino fuerat Ecclesia, vnus pro omnibus loquens etc. Id. Ep. 55. Sicut
ipse lumen Apostolis donanie vt lumen mundi appellarentur, caeteraque ex Domino
sortiti sunt vocabula: ita and SIMONI qui credebat in Petram Christum, Petri
largitus est nomen: and secundum metaphoram petrae, recte dieitur ei, adificabo
Ecclesiam meam super TE. S. Hieron. in cap. 16. Matthew. Ego nullum primum nisi
Christum sequens Beatitudini tuae, id est, CATHEDRAE PETRI, communione
consocior, super ILLAM PETRAM, adificatam Ecclesiam scio. Id. Ep. 57. ad
Damasum. Dominus constituit PETRVM primum pastolorum, PETRAM firmam, super QVAM
Ecclesia adificata est, etc portae inferorum non valebunt aduersus eam: (portae
inferorum sunt Haereses and Haeresiarihae:) iuxta OMNEM enim MODVM in IPSO
firmata est fides. S. Epiphan. in Ancorato. Hic est qui audiuit ab ipso, Pasce
agnos meos: CVI concreditum est ouile Ibid. PETRVS qui paulo ante eum confessus
erat filium Dei, and in illa confessione APPELLATVS ERAT PETRA super QVAM
fabricaretur Ecclesia, paulo post Domino dice^te. etc. S. Aug. Enar. Ps. 69.
Vide eundem li. 2 de Bap. cont. Donat. c. 1. Intuitus eum Jesus dixit, tu es
Simon filius Iona, tu vocaberis Cephas, quod interpretatur Petrus etc. Vocabulo
commode significans, quod IN EO tanquam in Petra, lapideque firmissimo, suam
esse: adificaturus Ecclesiam. S. Cyr. Alex. l. 2. in Io. c. 12. vide l. 12. c.
64. Ego dico tibi, inquit, tu es Petrus, and ego SVPER TE aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam: ego TIBI dabo claues regni calorum. S. Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Matthew. Vnus
de toto mundo eligitur Petrus, qui and vniuersarum Gentium vocationi, and
OMNIBVS APOSTOLIS, cunctisque Ecclesiae Patribus PRAEPONATVR, vt quamuis in
populo Dei multi Sacerdotes sint, multique Pastores, OMNES tamen PROPRIE REGAT
Petrus, quos principaliter regit and Christus. S. Leo sermon 3. de Anniuers.
Assumpt. Tu quoque petra es, quia mea virtute solidaris, vt quae mihi potestate
sint propria, sint tibi mecum participatione communia. Ibid. Cunctis Euangelium
scientibus liquet, quod voce Dominica sancto and omnium APOSTOLORVM Petro
PRINCIPI Apostolo, TOTIVS Ecclesiae cura commissa est. IPSI quippe dicitur,
Pasce oues meas, confirma fratres tuos, tu es Petrus and super hanc petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, tibi dabo claues, etc. S. Gregor, Magn^. 4 Ep. 32.
ad Mauritium August. Cura ei TOTIVS ECCLESIAE, and PRINCIPATVS committitur.
Ibid. Had not these saints as good eyes as Luther?
the thing, in this place, upon which the Church is built, it does answer,
that it is PEETER, here called CEPHAS. Moreover, if you ask the Fathers, S.
Leo, S. Hierom, S. Aug. S. Cyprian, S. Epiphanius, S. Chrysosto^, S. Gregory;
they answer, it is PEETER. If you think I interpret them amiss, See the 1.
Book. c. 6. n. 52. As if you should say this, points at Christ, or any other
thing Without inuoluing Peeter.
ask your Fellows, and they will tell you, the Fathers did think so. And,
the exclusion of this sense, is open violence to the Text; and makes it
vncoherent.

Hence I may deduce two things, here: The first, The Church of Christ was
built upon Peeter: for our Savior was as good as his word, and he said he
would do it. The second: The rest of the Apostles were built upon Peeter:
For, if they were the Church of Jesus Christ, they were built upon him,
because our Saviors Church, which was but one in all, was built on him; Or, if
they were in the Church of Jesus Christ, as parts in the whole, If the Whole
be built upon a foundation, each part in that whole is built thereon.
this Church this whole being built on Peeter, on this rock will I build my
Church, they, being contained therein, that is, being parts of the whole thing
built on Peeter, were also built on Peeter. And so Peeter, was their
Foundation, and their Head, subordinate unto Christ, the chief Head and
maine Foundation of them all. You cannot avoid this discourse; because the
Apostles were not Infidelles or Heretics, and therefore, either they were the
Church, or, they were in the Church.

The second place is that in the Gospel of saint John. Peeter, Feed my
sheep, by which words, saint Peeter peculiarly, is made Pastor of the sheep
of Christ. Vide S. Bern. l. 2. de cons. ad Eug. pap.
Hence I argue thus. The rest of the Apostles were our Saviors sheep,
therefore saint Peeter was their Pastor; for, our Savior made him Pastor of
his sheep. If you say, they were not our Saviors sheep, then they were not
his Disciples; he was not their Pastor; he redeemed them not; for he gave his
life for his sheep. If they were our Saviors sheep, they were also commended
to saint Peeter, 10. 10.
for our Savior made him Pastor of HIS sheep, without excepting any. By this
you may understand a place of S. Augustine objected some times. Si hoc Petro
tantu^ etc. tract. 50. in Ioa^. Cuius Eccesiae Petrus Apostolus propter
Apostolatus sui primatum gerebat figurata generalitate personam Idem Aug. in
Io. tr.


6. Your exception here is that, what was spoken to Peeter, was spoken to all,
and that Peeter did represe^t the Church when he took Authority from Jesus
Christ. Answer. If you mean, it was in proportion, and secondarilie spoken
to all the rest, and not only to the Apostles, but also to all other lawful
Pastors in the world, I grant it: but this will not make the^ all equal. If
you mean that it was equally and immediately said to all your gloss is
false, and contrary to the text. He said to him, Peeter, feed my sheep.
Peeter was nor all the Apostles. As for the representation, I answer that S.
Peeter took the office at the hands of Jesus Christ for himself to use, and
for his successors, and for all the Pastors of the Church, as far at it
should be couenient to make them partakers of this power and solicitude, vlt.
propter primatum quem in discipulis habuit. id. in psalm. 108.
for the common good of the whole Church: and he in this did represent them all
according as I have declared because all his successors, and all inferior
Pastors to the worlds end, could not in their own persons be there to receive
this power: and the Church her self was no otherwise to take the power I
speak of, but by the hands of her Pastor: because the co^munitie of Christians
could not exercise that office of governing or being Pastor, in regard this
community was the flock.

8. By that which I have said here in this Chapter you find excluded your
fellows tale of Phocas first instituting the office of a general Pastor in
the Church. For if the scripture may be believed, Io. 21. cited in Coccius and
Gualterius.
our Savior did institute this office or Authority. And thus much was
acknowledged by the Fathers of the primitive Church, and exercised by the
Popes, Successors to saint Peeter, before Phocas ever appeared in this world.
It is true that Emperors might second what our Savior had ordained before: to
the end, the Imperial decree thus waiting on the divine institution, me^
respecting the temporal power, might stand in fear to transgress, who would
otherwise preuaricate notwithstanding the divine institution so, many forbear
stealing for fear of temporal laws, whom Gods eternal law would not move
to forbear. In this kind Phocas decreed that the Pope should be accounted
head, though the title were due to him by virtue of a higher Institution: and
he styled head of Bishops before this, as you may find in the fourth general
Quibus tu quidem sicut membris caput praeeras etc. Conc. Chalc. ad Leonem.
rogamus, and tuis decretis nostrum honora in iudicium, and sicut nos capiti in
bonis adiecimus consonantiam, sic and summitas tua filijs quod decet adimpleat.
ibid.
Council. Neither does the title of Oecumenicall or Universal Bishop, in the
sense we take it any way derogate unto the rest their titles of Bisshops; as
Philosophers giving the title of universal cause to a cause supereminent as to
the su^ne, or to God. hereby take not away the name of cause from particular in
this lower world, as from horses, fire, men. But yet, if you take universal,
in an other sense, not for that which is eminent over many particulars, but,
for that which so has all within it self, that none answearing to the name is
without it, as Si vnus Patriarcha vniuersalis dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen
caeteris derogatur. S Greg. l. 4. ep. 36. put that of causes, in the same
form. Si vna causa vniuersalis dicitur, causarum nome^ caeteris derogatur.
And, tell me now in what sense the proposition is true? Si vniuersalem me Papam
vestra sanctitas dicit, negat se hoc esse quod me fatetur vniuersum. ^. Greg.
l. 7. ep. 36. indic. 1. ad Eulog. Alex He that in this sense should arrogate
the title of Universal Bishop, were a fore runner of Antichrist.
saint Gregory did understand it, so neither is the Sun an universal cause,
nor the Pope universal Bishop, because there are more causes besides the
sun, and more Bisshops besides the Pope.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. The Pope above other Bishops.
I have done with the comparison of saint Peeter to the rest of the Apostles,
it follows now that I consider what comparison his successor, the Pope, has
unto the Patriarchs and other Bishops. Your labor is to equal others with him
in authority. To this purpose, you first make use of the Grecians proceedings
in the Council of Chalcedon, where the Bishops you say, did equal the
Constantinopolitan See with the Roman. I answer first, that this adequation
pretended, was not in original or prime authority, but in matter of
privilege, as in the words it is expreslie set down, to enjoy equal
privileges etc. aequis senioris regia Roma priuilegiis fr^^^ etc. Conc. Chalc.
ac^^ 16.
Now privilege is a distinct thing from original authority, and accessorie
thereunto. The privileges they did aim at were that the Bishop of
Constantinople should in his proportion have a majesty in Ecclesiastical
affairs above other Sees (Rome excepted) in regard that Constantinople was
then the Imperial seat, as before Rome had been, and therefore that he should
take place of other Patriarckes and be second or next after him of Rome. And
with all, that he should ordain Metropolitans in the Dioceses of Pontus, Asia,
and Thrace. These privileges they did aim at, and hereby would have had a
kind of analogy with the Roman Bishop. this attempt of the Grecians, Leo
then Pope, would by no means approve, and the decree which the Bishops had
conceived he did anulle. We do utterly, says he, make void and by the
authority of the blessed Apostle Peeter, S. Leo. Ep. 55. ad pull. Aug.
do with a general definition wholly disanull the consents or decrees of the
Bishops which were repugnant to the rules of the Canons made at Nice. Hence I
answer secondly, that the decree wanting the consent and approbation of the Sea Apostolic, was not Ecumenical, and therefore were it understood of
original authority (as it is evident it was not) and that the Bishops would
therein, not by proportion only but absolutely have equalled an other Bishop
with the Roman, it would not suffice, because a Council when it is not
Oecumenicall, does not contain the full power of the Church to define or make
decrees, but may mistake and err.

10. Since you cannot speed there, you endeavor by the Nicene Council to
prove the Bishop of Alexandria to be thus equal to the Roman, and that the
Roman Bishop was there limited by the Council as well as others. I have
looked on that canon, but see nothing for your purpose. The Bishop of
Alexandria is not said there to be equal to the Roman Bishop, neither is there
any speech of limiting the Roman to the west, as you pretend. The words are,
Conc. Nicen. can 6.
Let the ancient custom be kept in Egypt, Libia and Pentapolis, that the
Bishop of Alexandria have power over all these, because the Roman Bishop has
such a custom. Here the Popes custom, is a reason why the Bishop of
Alexandria is to have power over Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis; whereby is
insinuated that the Bishop of Alexandria therein depended on the Popes
accustomed manner of gouerme^t: which argues a superiority in the Pope, not an
equality in the other. Your explicatio^s you must prove to be text if you
will have me to believe the^. Mean while, neither in this Council can you
find any thing for your cause, unless we childishlie will take a gloss, for
the text, and give you equal authority with a general Counsel in assertio^s
and decrees. If the Roman Bishop had there been with his own consent, limited
to the west for exercise of Patriarchal authority, I would a^sweare, that he
sustaining diverse offices in one and the same person, might be more limited in
regard of the one then of the other: his Patriarchall power might be contained
with in the west, though his Pastoral Jurisdiction reached over the whole
Church. as man has the power of seeing restrained unto colored Objects, but
his power of understanding reaches further to the whole latitude of being.

11. Failing again this way, you stand still like a stock, and refuse to
acknowledge any successor to saint Peeter in his general care and Pastoral
office, because you cannot see what necessity there is of a Successor. It
seems you are grown dull with disputing, and would hear me rather speak. I
am contented. A Successor in that office, was, and is necessary, first because
the Church at all times needs a general Pastor, and visible Foundation, as
well as it did in the beginning: since therefore the Christian Church is to
endure till the worlds e^d, Visible Pastor such as saint Peeter was
the Pastor and visible Fou^datio^ must likewise endure, to confirm and to
direct it. secondly, Peeter in person, could not feed and rule all the sheep
of Christ, from his time till the words end, our Savior therefore providing
the Church of a Pastor that might feed and rule the^, did in the person of S.
Peeter understand his Successors, in that office, that so the sheep might
always have a Pastor to rule and feed them. Otherwise the greatest part of
the flock, that is all after S, Peeters days, till the worlds end should have
no general Pastor here on earth though they wanted him no less, yea more then
did the Christians in saint Peeters time. Thirdly the best form of government
is Monarchical, something tempered with Aristocracie, and the more Nations are
added to the Church the more need of a Monarch. One, is undivided in himself,
his judgment and his principles are the same, but a multitude is divided; and
the greater the multitude, the more variety of judgment the greater the
variety of inclinatio^s, dispositio^s, affections, and judgment is the more
need there is of a cause of Unity to keep them in One, which would never be
if every man freely might chose his way, and be a rule unto himself. We see
this in Heretics, who having no visible cause of union in matter of faith,
do run sundry ways, Arius one, Nestorius another, and so to the very last.
Philosophers, old and modern have gonne several ways, and filld the
Schools with questions; which will never be decided, their judgments being
directed by no One. Several Nations have diverse laws according to the
different opinions of their Rulers and Lawe-makers, the like would be in
England, if each Shire were independent of another, and of a Monarch or common
couerner. In religion also each Minister would have his way. Now the Church
was to have it it all Nations, and in them is infinite variety of judgment,
10. 10. id. c. 21.
wherefore our Savior to contain them all in one, did ordain a Monarch,
there shall be made one Fould and one Pastor. Peeter feed my sheep. Act. 20.
And tempering this Monarchy with Aristocracie, he put Bishops also to
rule the Church. Fourthlie, it was necessary that in the Church there should
be one to attend generally to the whole; to call general Counsels; to be
President there, to contain the multitude of Bishops in Unity; and to have a
care principally of the Churches general affairs, which care our Savior
gave to saint Peeter as an Ordinary Office, in that he made him Pastor of his
Fold, the Christian Church: and if it were necessary then in the Apostles
days, much more it is now. Fifthly, Pastors are to continue in the Church till
the end of the world by the doctrine of S. Paul; therefore the chief Pastor is
likewise to continue, which could not be in one person, therefore in diverse. If
you say that our Savior himself is chief Pastor, Ephesians. 4.
I reply that among visible Pastors one is chief, though subordinate unto
Christ, and he is to remain as well as the rest of the clergy: and his
existence is necessary for the Government of the Church. Our Savior does
continually teach and baptize, but by others, and so does he co^taine the
Church in Unity and govern by subordinate means ordained and instituted for
this purpose, as God lights the world with the Su^ne though if he had so
pleased he could have done it otherwise.

12. What you pretend about Election of a Successor, is not hard, the Church
designs the Person, and then he receaues power from our Savior in virtue of
the first institution: as man disposes matter in the generation of a man, and
nature presents it so prepared unto the Creator, who by virtue of the first
institution of mankind inspires a soul which the generant could not make. It
is true that the Churches action is hindered sometimes by Schism or other
means, as man's generation is likewise hindered otherwhile, but such hindrances
are in time removed, and the Successor designed. Neither is the Succession
interrupted properly in this time, because this Election is a continuation of
it. So that, all you have said about the time of Schism might have been
spared, because then the Church was busy in determining a successor, though
she were hindered sometimes more, sometimes less, according to the difficulties
which did occur.

13. To conclude your opposition in this matter, you take upon you not to
know, who does succeed saint Peeter. But if you had looked about, you could
not have doubted. First, because noe Bishop in the Church ever yet was esteemed,
or did pretend to be above the Roman Bishop: since therefore S. Peeter was
put in charge of the flock of Christ and made Pastor of the Church, and
since this office of general Pastor does remain, it follows that the Bishop
of Rome is and still was he, because he is and ever was confessedlie the first
Bishop in the Church. Secondly, the Pope of Rome by your confession, has
exercised the Office of General Pastor of the Church these thousand years,
and by the Cou^cells the same is clear, neither was there any other all this
time who did exercise or take on him that Office: not the Bishop of Antioch,
nor of Constantinople, for these Bisshops, and the most ancient Counsels, as
the Nicene, Constantinopolitan and others did acknowledge Rome before those
Sees. Neither was the Sea without a Successor all this time, as I have showed
before, because the Pastor and Foundation, is necessary to the Flock and
Building, therefore the Roman was and is he.

14. Thirdly, the fathers of the au^cie^t Church, as S. Augustine, saint
Ierom, saint Cyprian, saint Ireneus and others affirm cleerelie, that the
Roman Bishop is saint Peeters Successor. S. Hieron. ad Damas. S. Aug. ep.
162. S Cypr. ep. 55. Optatus cont. Donat. l. 2. S. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Tenet ista
sancta sede gubernacula regendarum cunct orbis, Ecclesiarum. Theod. ep ad Ren
p^ To. S. Leo ep 84.
Saint Ierom calls that See S. Peeters Chair, adding that the Church is
built on that rock. saint Augustine putts a Catalogue of the Bisshops there,
first Peeter, then Linus etc. and says that the Principallitie of the
Apostolical Chair has ever flourished in the Church of Rome. saint Cyprian
calls it also saint Peeters Chair and the principal Church, whence
Priestlie unity has come. The like has Optatus. saint Ireneus does add
that for the more powerful principality of that church, it is necessary that
all Churches have recourse unto it. That holy seat, says Theodorette, holds
the stern of governing the Churches of all the world. saint Leo knew this in
practice, but hear his words. It is by great order provided, that all should
not claim all things to themselves, but in every Province should be some who
should have the prime sentence among the brethren, and again others placed
in greater Cities, should undergo greater care, by whom the care of the
Universal Church should come to the one seat of saint Peeter. Fourthlie,
this is the judgment of the Church, acknowledging in the Roman Bishop
authority and power to call, to moderate, and to approve general Counsels
and it is declared* in the great Lateran Council, that the Roman Church, has
by Gods disposition the principality of ordinary power over all the Churches.
Conc. Lat. sub Innoc. 3. c. 5.
And finally both East and West have defined it in the Council of Florence,
Co^c. Flor. defin.
We define say the Fathers there, that the holy Apostolic See, and Bishop
of Rome has the Primacie over the whole world, and that the Roman Bishop is
the Successor of Blessed Peeter Prince of the Apostles, and the true Vicar of
Christ, and head of the whole Church, and Father and master of all Christians,
and that unto him in S. Peeter is given by our Lord Jesus Christ full power to
feed, rule and govern the universal Church. The same both Armenian,
Aethiopia^, Vide Cocc ^. 1. l. 7. art. 4. 5. 6. 7 8.
Russite and Assiria^ Christians have acknowledged. So that, for this Primacie
of the Sea Apostolic, we have the Fathers Testimony, Theological
Arguments, Definitions of General Counsels, and the Testimony of the Spirit
in them, the worlds consent, and Gods word.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. The Bishop of Rome President in General Counsels.
15. YOur next pretense is that the Pope has no title to be President in
general Counsels, or to call or approve them, though he has practiced these
things now of late. Before I answer to this argument, to show more cleerelie
wherein the force of it does lie, you are with me to observe two things, the
first is that there are two kinds of calling a Council, One is Eclesiasticall
in way and form of ordination, the other is Temporal in way of execution. The
Question is of the former, which is pri^cipall, and we are in it to see
whether any man in the world has such authority to call a Council so as the
Bishops are in regard of that calling bound to come. The second observation is,
that one may have the place of President in his own name, or in the name and
place of another, to whom principally it belongs: and this Presidencie may
be either to some temporal end, as to keep exterior order and peace in the
Congregation, or to a spiritual end, which is to judge and define matters of
belief, and to establish Church discipline by decree. The question is of this
second kind of Presidencie not of the first, And, who is principal in this
kind as having power to do it either by himself or by his deputy:
whereunto, notwithstanding your objection, I answer that it is the Pope, to
whom belongs properly to call, moderate, and approve General Counsels,
because he is above another Bishops, and Successor to saint Peeter in the
government of the whole Church. Being above other Bishops, and their Pastor, he
has power to call, and to command them to meet in Council, when the
General Church-affaires do require it; which no Bishop or Patriarch besides
can do, none of them all being Superior to all the rest. Neither ca^ the
Emperor or any other secular Prince do it: not principally, because he is
not Governor of the Church, or Church business; nor subordinatelie if by some
principal cause he chance to moved thereunto; because his power is not
extended to the latitude of the Church, or over all Nations and all Bisshops
whatsoever, nor ever was. So that his command, unto such men as were out of
his Dominions, were of no power to bring them together, more then the command
of the king of Spain, or of the Spanish Bisshops, would serve in France. When
the Bisshops are assembled, the Pope still remains as he was before, their
Pastor, and their Foundation, and there-their director, their moderator, and
President. And this the General Council of Chalcedon did acknowledge in the
Person of Leo, whom they styled their Father and their Head, and themselves
his Sons and his Members.

10. The Catholic Church also did ever acknowledge in the Pope this right of
Presidencie, which I prove by all the General Counsels that ever yet have
been. For the later held in the West you freely grant it, and if you did not,
the proof were easy from Trent, Lions, Florence, and Rome it self. Of the
former held in Greece I prove the same: Quibus tuquidem SICVT MEMBRIS CAPVT
praeras in his qui tuum tenebant ordinem beneuolentiam praeferens. Imperatores
vero AD ORNANDVM decentissime praesidebant. Council Chalced. Relat. ad Leonem
Papam. Insuper and contra ipsum, cui VINEAE custodia a Saluatore commissa est,
extendit Dioscorus insaniam, id est, contra tuam quoque Apostolicam
Sanctitatem. Ibid. Confidentes quia lucente apud vos Apostolico radio, and
vsque ad Constantinopolitanorum Ecclesia^ consuete guberuand, illum spargentes,
hunc sapius expanditis co quod absque inuidia consueueritis vestrorum bonorum
participatione ditare domesticos. Ibid Rogamus igitur and tuis DECRETIS nostrum
honora iudicium, and sicut nos CAPITI in bonis ad^ecimus consonantiam, sic and
Summitas tua FIL^IS, quod decet, adimpleat. Ibidem.
because Donatus, Stephanus, and Marinus were Presidents in the Subscrip.
eight Council as Legates of Adria^ the second. Two Peeters one an Archdeacon,
the other an Abbot were Presidents in the Subscrip
seventh, in the name of Adrian the first. Two Priests, Peeter and George
together with John a Deacon were Presidents in the Act. Conc. and Zonar. vit.
Co^nsta^t.
Sixth for Agatho. Eutichius in the name of Vigilius was President in the Zonar.
in vita Iustiniani, Vide Ep Eutichij ad Vigil Petimus praesidente nobis vestra
ocatitudine etc. fi. collat. 1
fifth. Paschasius and Iulianus in the Conc. Chalc. in Relat. ad Leonem.
Fourth for Leo great. Cyrillus for Celestine in the Conc. Ephesians. Relat. ad
Imp. Marcellin. in Chron. Libertat. in Breuiar. c. 5. Niceph. l. 14. c. 34
third. The Bishops who were at the Ep. ad Damasum ap. Theodoret. l. 5. c. 9.
second Council call Damasus their Head: a^dit became Oecumenicall in regard
is was by the Pope approved: who before had called a general Council, but the
Bishops could not all meet at Rome as he had appointed by reason of the Arian
Heresy. And therefore the Eastern Bisshops met in one place under
Nectarius, the western in an other under Damasus, who afterward did approve
the Decrees of both parties, and so came the council to be one, and
Oecumenicall. In the Subscrip See Card. Peron. Replique l. ^. c. 35. and se qq.
first Hosius, Vitus, ad Vincentius were Presidents in place of Syluester* And
by this induction it is clear that in the Catholic Church the Popes right of
Presidencie, was not only acknowledged but practiced ever. Neither can you
allege good Authority, or any one approved Author, who says that ever yet,
any Priest, Bishop or Patriarch was President in any General Council in his
own name and not in the Popes: which you should do, and prove also that the
Church approved it as lawful, before you deprive the Pope of possession which
he has had many hundred years by your confession, and ever, as I have
proved: and by Christ's Institution too, who made him in S. Peeter the
Foundation and Pastor of the Church.

17. As for the Emperors, Conc. Chalc. in Relat. ad Leon.
I answer out of the Council of Chalcedon, that they were equiuocallie
Presidents, not for Judgment and Definition, but for peace and Ornament. And so
much Constantine the great whom you prefer before those, unto whom he gave
place, will confess for himself and his Successors. God, says he to the
Nicene Fathers, has made you Priests, Ap. Ruffin l 1. c. 2.
and given you power to judge of us, you may not be judged by men, wherefore
look for Gods judgment only amongst your selves; and let your dissentions
whateuer they be, be reserved to Gods examine. You are given us as Gods, and it
is not convenient that man, judge Gods, but he alone of whom it is written, God
stood in the midst of Gods, and in the midst God does judge. For
Approbation of General Counsels my answer and proof is the same. First,
the Roman Bisshoppe because Successor to saint Peeter, is the Foundation and
Pastor of the Church, and Cou^cells: for him did our Savior pray that his
faith should not fail: he was charged to confirm his Brethren, and this will
be necessary till the worlds end. General Counsels have ever desired his
Approbation, his definition and sentence in the midst of the Bisshops, or
presented in his name to them, or theirs by him approved, not else, has been
constantly stood unto by the Catholic Church at all times. and no Decrees
ever admitted which he rejected and refused to confirm. Which Universal
Judgment, and General consent of the World, together with the authority of
the Scripture, make his title so clear that you shall never be able to
dispossess the present Pope of this honor, or to win future times to your
opinion.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Of the Counsels of Nice and Constance.
12. BEfore I leave this matter of the Pope and Counsels I must answer two
other objections that you make. in the one you oppose the council of
Franckford to the second of Nice; in the other the Laterane counsel to that of
Constance, hereby to prove that the Church does contradict her self and err.
Touching the former two, you pretend that the Council of Franckford has
condemned the Nicene. Your Proof is taken out of the a Caroline Books. The
reason pretended is because the Nicene decred such honor to the pictures of
Saints as is due to God. Of these Books (...) what Be^^lar. does write, l. ^
de Imag. ^ 14. and 15
I answer First, that in the Council of Franckford there is no such thing to
be found. Secondly, your Accusation is false, for the honor due to God is not
given to pictures in the Nicene Council, but another inferior: wherefore if
at Fra^ckford divine honor had been denied to pictures, yet the Counsels would
agree. Thirdly, your proof or witness discredits his own story and over
throws himself; for he tells us that the Council condemned at Franckford was
held at Constantinople in Bithynia. If at Constantinople, how then in Bithynia?
Constantinople is in Thrace, Nice indeed is in Bithynia. See the ground quakes
under the feet of your argument. Fourthlie, those Caroline books out of which
you make this argument say that the Council condemned at Franckford was held
without the Popes Authority; See Baron. an. 794.
In that of Nice the Popes Legates subscribed to every Act. Allata est in
medium quaestio de noua Graecorum Synodo quam de adorandis imaginibus
Constantinopoli fecerunt, in qua scriptum habebatur vt qui imaginibus Sanctorum
ita vt deificae Trinitati seruitium aut adorationem non impenderent, anathema
iudicarentur. Qui supra sanctissimi Patres nostri omnimodis orationem and
seruitutem eis impendere renuentes contempserunt atque consentie^tes
condemnarunt. Liber Carolin in Praefat.
Definimuscum omni diligentia venerandas and sanctas Imagines dedicandus and in
Templis sanctis Dei collocandus, habendasqua. Quo scilicet per hanc Imaginum
pictarum inspectionem, omnes qui contemplantur ad prototyporum memariam and
recordasionem and desiderium veniant, illisque salutationem and HONORARIAM
ADORATIONEM exhibeant, NON secundum fidem nostram, VERAM LATRIAM qua solum
diuinae naturae competit Definitio Conc. Nic. 2. act. 7. Legatur Epistola
Concelij ad Impp. in fine eiusdem actionis. To this Decree the Church in the
Council of Trent refers it self. Sess. 25. and says only we are to give
Images DEBITVM honerem and venerationem; leaving the further specification of
this honor to be learned out of the Nicene Decree, further: A thing may be
adored per se, and per accidens; and by this I leave you to understand the
Schoolmen: for I speak here only of the doctrine of the CHVRCH. Poets and
Rhetoricians have their figures.
Must a General and approved Council be condemned with such beggarlie
vn-cohere^t proo^e as this? Magdeb. cent. 8. c. 9. col. 636. Quare contra
Adriani Pontificis and Legatorum eius sententiam decernunt, etc.
The Church has ever since the Apostles days, and then too, believed that
such a Council cannot err, and therefore you must produce better evidence,
better the^ that which planted Christianity if you will make her in her old
age change he Creed.

19. But suppose the Franckfort Council had condemned all kind of honor done
to Images, which thing you do further pretend but cannot prove, This were
nothing against the infallibility of Oecumenicall Counsels and Decrees, For,
that Decree of those Bishops assembled there out of the Western parts had
wanted the consent of other Churches in communion with the Sea of Rome It had
wanted also the consent of the Sea Apostolic without which no decree is or
was ever by the Church esteemed Oecumenicall. Adrian the^ Pope refuted the
Canoline Books, and maintained honoring of Images as appears clearly by his
Book to the Emperor, ye^ extant in the Tome^ of Counsels.


20. The Second Objection in this kind is, that two Oecumenicall decrees one
made in the a Laterane Council, the other b at Constance are opposite in the
matter of the Popes authority: one will have the Council under the Pope; the
other over: whence you infer that the Church does co^tradict her self in
believing both. Stay Sir, not so fast the Church has not both parts of any
oppositio^ in her Creed. but let us consider the streingth of your argument.
If you should avouch that you saw two lions fighting, it is not sufficient to
the verity of your relation, that the things which you saw did fight, or that
they were Lions, for, if one were a Lion the other a Bear, or if both were
Lions but did agree and not fight, your relation would be laughed at. To make
good your argument, you must prove here two things; one is that these are
decrees and each Oecmenicall: the other, that one of them in sense is
contradictorie to the other. Then further, if you will accuse the Church, you
must prove that she believes them both, in those contradictorie senses. Your
labor would not be unprofitable, if you N^c illud nos moue^^ debet quod
sanctio etc. eum etia^ solu^ Romanu^ Pontificem pro tempore existentem tanqua^
authoritate supre omnia Co^cilia habente^, conciliorum ind^cendorum
transferendoru^ ac dissoluendoru^ plenu^ ius and potestate^ habere, nedu^ ex
sacrae Scripturae testimoniis, dictis Sa^ctorum Patrum, ac aliorum Romanorum
Pontificum etiam Praedecessorum nostrorum, sacrorumque canonum decretis, sed
propria etiam eorundem Conciliorum confessione manifest constet: quorum aliqua
refer platuit etc. Conc. Lateran. sub Leone 10. sess. 11
Ispa Synodus in S. S. Congregata legitime, generale Concilium faciens,
Ecclesiam Catholicam militantem repraesentans, potestatem a Christo immediate
habet tui quilibet cuiuscunque status vel dignitatis etiamsi Papalis existat,
obedire tenetur in his quae pertinent ad fidem and extirpationem dicti
Schismatis, and reformationem generalem Ecclesiae Dei in capite and in membris*
Conc. Constant. sess. 4.
could efficaciouslie prove and make it evident, that one of them is such a
definition as you speak of: and that, which soever it be, we all will
admit, and thank you too. But I must advise you of the difficulties you are
to find herein, being such, as greater Scholars then I take you for, have not
been able to overcome.

21. First therefore, you are to make it evident that in the Lateran Council
the Superiority of the Pope is formallie defined, and that the words wherein it
is attributed unto him or acknowledged as belonging unto him, have the nature
of a decree, for a Council defines not every thing, which it says.
Secondly, you are to make it evident, reflect in whose time and where it was,
how things stood in France etc
that the Council was Oecumenicall, and that it was open and free to all
Bishops in the communion of the Church. Thirdly, you must make it evident that
the decree of Co^stance, is not limited in circumstances; and that it does not
speak only of such a Pope, as were doubtful; or in case of Heresy, or
Schism, but absolutely of any whatsoever. Fourthlie you must also make it
evident that the decree was Oecumenicall, or the General Decree of the Church,
and not of one Obedience only; other two not consenting. These are some of
the many, and obscure difficulties, which hitherto learned men have not been
able to see thorough: and therefore the truth in this Controversy lies hidden
so as neither part is cleerelie known for a^ Oecumenicall decree or
definition: though you rashly and most ignorantly have affirmed it of them
both. Which you did to make show of good form in your argument, every one
knowing that a contradiction betwixt Oecumenicall decrees, does suppose that
both parts contradicting are Oecumenicall.

22. Another part of your argument is that ita is Contradiction: and this part
must be proved also, and made evident before your argument recover strength.
But it is so far out your power, that (suppose all the rest were dissembled)
you could never be able to make it good: that is, to prove and demonstrate
that one is opposite or contradictorie to the other; and therefore you do most
vndiscreetelie reject the Authority of General Counsels, reverenced ever by
the Church, and directed by Gods Spiritte, out of fear or apprehension of a
contradiction, which in the Laterane and that of Constance you think you see.
The Scholar who reiects Aristotle, or Justinian, or the Bible for every
seeming contradiction, will never be good Philosopher, nor good Lawier, nor
good Divine.

23. It is manifest by the acts of the of the Council of Constance that the
decree whereon you insist was at first not made by the whole Church; because,
of three Obediences which then were, One only, that is, John's Obedience or
party made it: the other Two not being united unto them. So that if you take
it as proceeding from those only who first made it, it was not Oecumenicall.
The other Obediences of Gregory and Bennet united them selves afterward: One
in the 14. Session, Act. Conc.
the other in the 22. and the Church thus united, a Pope was chosen: so that
the Council now, that is, after the Union of all Obediences, and Election of
the Pope, was Oecumenicall; and therefore what was now decreed anew, or approved
though pe^ned before, was thereby made Oecumenicall. If therefore you can make
it evident that the Council and Pope at this time did approve the decree
before made, I will admit that it is Oecumenicall, and believe it. Neither is
there any reason I do so before this appears, because decrees take their
force from the approbation of those which have authority, and not always
from the writer or conceauer. In Parliament, a constitution may be conceived in
the lower house, and agreed o^ there; yet has it not the true nature of a law
till it pass the upper house, and also be confirmed by the King. So likewise
this constitution conceived and agreed on first by John's Obedience or
adherents, has not the nature and force of an Oecumenicall decree, till it
pass the General Council wherein the whole Church is united, and also be
confirmed by the Pope.

23. That we may see further the weakness of your argument, since you cannot
make it evident that the Canon made at Constance in the fourth Session, was
thus generally received and approved by the Council when all Obediences were
united; and there ratified by the Pope: Let us freely and out of courtesy
suppose it had been so, and that the Pope were bound to obey the decrees of
such a Council, in the things which the canon speaks of, and further that in
power it were Superior unto the Pope: all this would consist with the words of
the other Council, and both might be true. These two propositions. A Council
perfectly Oecumenicall and by the power of the Sea Apostolic approved, I
do not atte^d what the Council was when the Canon was conceived but what it
was when we suppose that the Canon was confirmed.
and thereby representing the Church perfectly, and simpliciter, as
Philosophers speak, is above the Pope. A Council vnperfectlie Oecumenicall as
not being approved by the Pope, nor including his power, and consequently not
representing the Church perfectly, is not above the Pope. These two
propositions (I say) are not contradictorie nor Opposite, and therefore if they
were defined, we would believe them both.

24. If you should ask in that case, in whom, or in what formallie that power
greater the^ the Popes, were; It would be answered, that it were not
preciselie in the Pope, nor preciselie in the rest, but in the whole,
consisting of them all: as the soul is not preciselie in the head, nor
preciselie in the rest of the body, but in the whole and complete body,
consisting of head, shoulders, arms, heart, and other parts in regard
whereof, as when the body is taken a sunder and divided the head from the
shoulders, the soul is in neither of the parts: even so it would be said in
that case, that if you consider the Pope, and the rest of the Council a part,
this power were in neither; because it is the act, the form, and the virtue of
the whole, or of the Totalitie, to speak as the Philosophers do. It would be
further answered that such a full Council had immediately the assistance of
the All-teaching Spiritte, and power to bind and loose, and the like by virtue
of our Saviors promise: yet so, that the Pope alone had power too over each in
the Church, he being in S. Peeter made Pastor of them all. In regard of which
Institution of our Savior all Catholics agree in this, that the Pope is
superior to every Bisshoppe in the Church.

25. Having compared the Pope, being a part of a full and perfect Oecumenicall
Counsel, to the whole body or Counsel, wherein he was included as a part in
the whole, as the head in a perfect and entire body, it remains now that we
divide this Council or perfect Body again into two parts, by taking the
head from the rest, and compare these parts together. In this division these
parts are but two, one is the Pope, the other are the rest of the Council,
which is imperfect, and therefore a part being without the Pope, as a man's
body without a head is but an imperfect body, and indeed but a part. Of the
counsel in this sense, the Lateran speaks as the words themselves do convince
evidently and it is among all men out of question. So that if it were an
Oecumenicall decree, the clear sense would be that the Pope were above such a
Council; and this we would believe. Neither were there any contradiction at
all in this, to say that one part is in power above the other: and that the
whole is in power above either part. Read over your Logic rules, examine
well the nature of a contradiction, mark the terms, and you will see that it
is true which I do say: (...) you (...) with any ^^^^^culties out of Afric,
it will be easy for you to drown the^ here.
And therefore I conclude the solution of this argument here; having declared
the two propositions which you apprehend as opposite decrees, and incite
eagerly one against the other thereby to extenuate the authority of General
Counsels, to be so far from the rigor of contradiction that if they were
both Decrees and both Oecumenicall, of their own accord they would come
together and shake hands.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Of the Scripture.
26. FRom Constance you come to Trent, and accuse the Council held there, of
two things touching the Scripture, the one is addition to the Canon; the other,
the authorization of the vulgar Latin. Before I answer I must put you in mind
That as you accuse us for believing some books in your judgment not
Canonical, to be the word of God, so do others which are in a manner your
Masters in Religion, and had the first fruits of the protestant Spiritte
accuse you for adding to Gods word the Epistle of S. James, the Revelation of
S. John, and other parts: whereunto you can give no reasonable satisfaction,
unless you acknowledge an error in reprehending us, Negat ^^^ Luth. in praef.
ad ep Iac. and in 1. Pec. 1. Illi^. praef. in Iac. Kem. Exa. sess. 4 Magd. c.
l. 2. c. 4.
and subscribe to that which we know to be the truth. For, I demand how you
prove against Luther, Kemnitius, the Centurists and other Lutherans, that the
Epistle under the name of S. James, is the word of God. If you say that you
know it by testimony of Antiquity, they will answer that no such thing was
then generally believed, Eusebius l ^. Hist c. 25 ^ Hiero. de ^e Viris il^st.
in Ia^obe.
and will call to witness Eusebius, S. Hierom and other ancient writers. To
answer that you know it by the style and phrase of speech, gives them no
satisfaction at all, For they so disesteeme it in this respect peculiarly that
in regard of the style and matter they profess themselves moved to believe the
contrary, and to put it out of the number of Canonical books. If you answer
that by the help of the Spiritte you discern it, you move them not, for they
claim as great an interest, as full a participation of the Spirit as your
selves, and therefore you move not the^ to believe as you do. But suppose if
you will that all Antiquity stood on your side, what could this prevail to
move a Lutheran to believe the matter or to confirm your disciples who stagger
at your want of proof? what could this avail I say, seeing that it is agreed
amongst you that the Church, that all the Fathers, that all men since the
Apostles might have aggreed in an error.

27. According to the grounds of our Religion every Catholic can answer
easily that whatsoever by the Church of God is received for divine Scripture
is infalliblie such, because the Church is directed by Gods All-seeing Spirit
which can discern it well. And suppose the Catholic were unlearned and that
all of you together both Luthera^s and Caluinists should pretend that in the
Books there wanted the Spirit of truth, and seek to maintain this with a
show of oppositio^, either within it self, or to some other part of
Scripture, or to reason, which thing you do many times pretend, as Julian and
Porphyrie and others have done before; he would answer you all without
difficulty by recourse to the divine Assistance in the Church, which he takes
for a principle of Christian Religion, believed heretofore by the whole
Christian world, and warranted by God himself in clear terms: and would say
that the knowledge of the Church thus assisted is more certain then the
contrary pretense of any adverse part whatsoever, and she more able to epsy
contradiction, error or opposition, the^ any other is, in regard of the holy
Spirit, who directs her, and with an infinite understanding looks earnestly
upon All. In virtue of which assistance she has maintained scripture against
Heathens, and Apostataes, and misbeleeuing Jews, and Heretics hitherto, and
still does and will do. Further more, a Catholic does not think it
necessary that the book which he believes to be Scripture, has been ever
universally by the Church esteemed so, He knows it is sufficient if the
Catholic Church has at any time believed it: For, one of the Principles of
our Religion is that the Catholic Church cannot err at all in matter of
faith, it cannot err in any age, in any time. And this principle has ever
been believed by Catholics. Moreover, that which at any time she believes,
has be^ infolded in her faith at other times, and so virtuallie believed ever
and by all.

29. Now to your opposition. Whereas you say that of late only some Books
have been taken into the canon. I answer first that such Books as your
selves do receive for canonical, were not all at once universally received
in the Church but were acknowledged by degrees. S. Hieron. de viris illustribus
in Paulo, Iacobo, Petro and Ioa^ne. and in Ep. ad Dardan itemque in Prolog.
So much you know by those I have allreadie named, and S. Hierom can tell you
more. Yet are these also by your own confession the word of God, and were
such in themselves before it was generally known unto the world. As our
Savior was the natural Son of God and his increated Word, before the world
did know or believe him so to be. The reason is, because man's knowledge is
later then the verity; and the more obscure the thing is the longer he is
ordinarily before he can find it out. Secondly it is not so late as you
think since these Books were in the Church esteemed. Cit. Bellarm. de Verbo
Dei l. 1. Vide Baron an. 415 August. Ep 235. and de doct. Chr. l. 2. c. 8.
Innocent. Ep. 3. ad Exuper. c. 7. and Can. Sa^cta Rom d. 15. Ierem. 36.
canonical and divine though not so generally, as I noted before: for you
find them cited for such in the Fathers writings very often, and in the
council of carthage held in the time of Boniface twelve hundred years ago,
you have a Catalogue of them all, the very same which you find now delivered
by the counsel of Trent, saving only that Baruch (which the ancient Fathers
did acknowledge also for divine) is after the manner of those times comprised
with Jeremy, whose Secretary you know he was. I add thirdly that whereas S.
Augustine who subscribed to the foresaid council, does prescribe a rule for
young Deuines to find which Scripture is of greatest authority, bidding them
prefer that which all Churches do receive before that which is received
only by some Churches, or some part, we now, seeing the foresaid canon
received at length by the whole Church of God, and this declared in a General
Council, must and do, yeauen by S. Augustines rule receive it all as the word
of God, and consequently of one and the same Authority all, there being no
surer ground of man's faith in such a case then is the Spirit of God in the
Church. The like I answer them also who run to the Jews canon: for the
Spirit of the christian Church is no less able to discern a verity then they
were, and therefore if the christian Church at any time declare a Book to be
divine though the Jews knew it not, we believe it, and must, For the holy
Ghost cannot err. The Jews knew not all that God has taught his Church.

30. The second exception is unreasonable if you consider well what is done,
and the reason of it. All Scholars as you know do noe not addict their
studies to the tongues: the Hebrewe is so obscure, that few do attain unto
any reasonable knowledge of it, and none at all in these later times
especially, to the comprehension of the tongue, but by help of Dictionaries
compiled by such as come short of the thing it self, Of the (...).
or of modern Jews not equal to the learned of the time wherein the Books
were first written, do endeavor what they can. This, experience has taught us,
Elias (...) in Hab^^^ Vide Genebrard in Psalm. 104. Serrar. Prol. Bibl. c. 19.
q. 6. Aliquoties dixi plurima vocabula esse, quorum significatio ipsis etiam
Hebraeis ignota est. Luth. in Genesis c. 34
it is evident also in the continuation and transfusion of all languages to
posterity; and Rabbines themselves do confess it. In regard therefore that
Scholars commonly understand not Hebrewe, it has ever been thought
convenient the Scripture should be translated into such a language, as
generally they do know, which is Latin. In the primitive Church this was
practiced and among you it is allowed also, in so much that your predecessors
Luther, Calvin, Beza, Iunius, and others have made every one his own
translation to bind his fellows there unto as the best, and you have not yet
done translating, and changing your translations: whereas none of you can
deny, and all wise men do see, that if one translation could be generally
aggreed upon it were best. Now further, because elder times as being nearer to
the writers, had better helps and purer coppies, it is better in the judgment
of all me^, the translation be old and made in those times, rather then now in
this scarcity of coppies, this obscurity of the language, this want of the
means which then were. Co^c. Trid Sess. 4.
This considered the Catholic Church has decreed in the Council of Trent
that among Latin translations the old and common, by the long use of many
ages approved in the Church stand authentic and be taken for It is not any
where declared by the Church that in the Clementine Edition the Vulgar Latin
Translation is fully restored to the Primitive Integrity in all parts and
words. Our belief does follow the declaration of the Church: What she
defines we receive. THOSE who were used in the restitution of the Translation
say thus. Accipa Christiano lector CLEMENTE summo Pontifico ANNVENTE, veterem
ac vulgatam Sacra Scripturae editionem quanta fieri potuit diligentia
castigatam, quam quidem sicut omnibus numeris absolutam pro humana
imbecillitate affirmare deffieile est, ita caeteris omnibus quae ad hanc vsque
diem prodierunt emendatiorem purioremque esse minime dubitandum. Praefat. ad
lect. Some of Sixtus Bibles might be surreptitiously scattered and James might
get a coppie: but they were never openly sold in Catholic Countries. And the
Church never believed the Correction to be so accurate that it could not be
amended. Decree of a General Council for the fullnes of either correction (I
speak of them as of two in that sense as James does) you know there is none.
A Bull takes not force from the Printer nor from the Secretary; and James
cannot prove that Sixtus his Bull was ever authenticallie published. By the
records no such thing appears. The Church knows not of it. If it had been, it
were not hard to accord all. Remember what has been said in the former Chapter
touching pretended opposition in Decrees; and what I have ^eere cited out of
the Preface to the Bible.
such. I told you before, wise men would have but One, and this one to have
been made long ago when it might better be performed, and to be looked on by
diverse able to judge of the goodness, and better able and more impartial then
our selves. Whence it follows that the wisest, had not the decree at all been
made, would yet have chosen this, it being the Old and common translation. For,
it was made in the time of the Primitive Church, reuiewed in those days by S.
Hierome, compared since by learned men in all ages to such originalls as in
each age they could find, and used by the Church for many hundred years.

30. The Fountains we reverence too, and more fully then you do, admitting
and believing whatsoever can be manifestly proved to belong justly
thereunto, to the very last word and letter. And it is ignorance in you to say
that in the Council of Trent they be rejected. The decree speaks of Latin
editions only, ex omnibus latinis editionibus quae circumferuntur etc. and
makes choice of one by general use long before approved. True it is that the
purity of the fountain it self in some places is called in question, Calu.
in in zach. 11. and inst. l. 1. c 13.
and Calvin your Master does imagine that it runs not allwaies cleerlie, as
you may see in his Institutions. Luth. Enar in Esa. c 9.
Luther cries out on the Jews for crucifying the text; and what difficulty
the Rabbines themselves have, appears clearly by their great Massoreth. We
have more help then you all to know the truth in this question too. we
admit the doctrine of Tradition; so must the Jews, so must you: otherwise
you know not which is text. We have also the assistance of the holy Spirit
in the Church to declare the verity and power of originalls where the general
necessity of the Church does require it. and there is no Catholic in the
world which is not ready to believe their purity and integrity so far as
there is sufficient warrant for it.

31. But how came these corruptions into the Bible? this question you should
have putt unto your Masters. for my part I think the resolution of it nothing
at all necessary for our purpose. Writers might easily mistake, especially
considering the little difference of many Hebrewe Characters and the nicenes of
the points: and suppose the points be taken of, there will be found some fault
in the letters. I know the Jews are men, and therefore if Gods assistance be
not in the business their labor in counting letters gives me no security,
for how shall I know that their coppies were exact, that the letters be duly
ordered etc. which is requisite, because the disposition and combination of the
same letters may be diverse, not only in one period which may serve to change
the sense, but in the same very word: and of the integrity in this kind
which is necessary to the knowledge of the sense, as also of the exact
integrity of the Coppies which they numbered you can give no general warrant.
Again, besides the difficulty or impossibility of this you will be sore
troubled, yea it is impossible for you proceeding in your Protestant
Principles, to give satisfaction yeauen to your own fellows in any part of
Scripture whatsoever, because you maintain that all men notwithstanding the
promise which God has made unto the Church, may have erred, and consequently
S. Ierom, and S. Augustine and others being men, may likewise have done so in
determining or judging which Scripture or writing is divine, especially since
each part, each verse is not a fundame^tall, as you speak. I am not troubled
at all in the business but let the learned scanne the difficulties, and sift
things out, remaining ever ready to believe what the Church has, or hereafter
shall resolve touching the purity, the interpretation and sense of the whole,
or any part, place, or word of the text: you and your Protestant Congregation
with your distinction of fundamental and not fundamental, have no means to
determine the integrity of the Scripture, touching books, parts, verses,
words, interpretation, as in an other place I have declared more at large.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Of the real Presence.
33. When we dispute, you grant the Real Presence, not able otherwise to
make answer to Scripture and Antiquity; but when you dispute, you declare
manifestly that you believe it not. You will not believe you say, that the body
of a man can be under the form or shape of bread, that the same thing can be
in heaven and on the alter too. If you believe not this, how do you believe the
Real Presence? how do you believe the words of Jesus Christ, saying of the
Sacrament in his hand, this is my body, and of the Chalice, Mat. 26. v. 27.28.
this is my blood? if that thing were his body, the^ was his body in the shape
of bread and at once in diverse places. If you say that thing was not his body,
you contradict him: you do not reallie believe the presence to the signs. I
do not say, to your imagination, but, to the signs; this reallie you believe
not.

34. As for your oppositions, they are sent back with this answer, that
nature indeed cannot effect those things, they are out of the sphere of her
actiuitie, but the power of God is infinite, and the things in them selves
include no contradiction: wherefore God can effect them. And being grounded in
his word, we believe them without more ado. Man is not able with his wit to
discover all the ways of God, or to comprehend the whole object of his power.
Our knowledge we gather from those few things we see, or perceive by some
exterior sense, and the perfection of almighty God is infinitely above all
this. He knows more then we do, and being truth by nature, cannot lie,
wherefore if he tell us any thing though we understand it not, we must
believe it. Faith is an argument of things not appearing. Heb. 11.
that in the Deity be three persons, each distinct reallie from the other two
yet all reallie the same God, is a great mystery, it is obscure, our
understanding cannot reach it, but faith giving creditte unto God who says it
is so, does believe it. that our Savior is the second person in this holy
Trinity co^substa^tiall to God the Father, is a Mystery which nature wonders
at, yet faith believes this too, because God who cannot deceive or be deceived
does avouch it. We trust his knowledge, and take his word. Nature is Gods
work, she has not the perfection of her maker; and therefore must not compare
and equal her self with him in understanding, or cast an imputation of Error
on all that is not within the circuit of her acquaintaince. God knows more
then she does, and therefore she may learn. Scholars that are ingenuouse
believe their Masters and so come to knowledge, whereas those who believe
nothing are ever rude and unlearned A Scholar hears his Master say the Su^ne
is bigger then the Earth, and believing falls to learn the demonstration: The
clown takes measure of the object with his eyes, Stellat primae magnitudinis
ce^ties septuagies maiores terra asseru^t Astronomi.
and esteeming it no bigger then the Cheese he cut yesterdaie when he came
from plough, will not believe the philosophers, nor the Mathematicians, nor all
the books in the world before his own eyes; not he, no that he won not. We
are in the School of Religion: our Professors and Instructors are the Pastors
under our great Master Jesus Christ, who clearly does see the truth of all he
does avouch. You rudely take measure of things as in your silly imagination
they appear, making sensible things there, or the short knowledge you have of
them, the rule and compass of all Being: so denying in effect that God is able
to do any thing further then you can direct him. as if in your head were as
much Art as God has, and your knowledge the full compass and direction of
Gods omnipotence.

35. But what is the thing you stumble at? Substance of it self is not
determined to place, it has this determination by accidents? by Quantity,
Localitie, Vbication. If God bestow on it supernaturallie two Sacramental
Vbications at once, it is at once in two places Sacramentallie; if a thousand,
it is in a thousand places. Sacrame^tall Existencie, whatsoever it be called,
as Vbicatio^, Presence, or by what other name you will, is an Accident, and
this Accident is the formal reason or cause of being present under the
dimensio^s in the room of Bread. It is supernatural to the body, and God
has power to produce many of these at once.

36. You reply that the very same thing cannot without contradiction be at
once present in many dimensions without being divided. This is false, the thing
may have indiuiduation or unity in it self, and by it self, and yet be in
many dimensio^s too. The soul of man is one and indivisible, and yet in the
dimensions of all the members of the body. That which is in the head is in the
feet, not a piece, for the soul has no pieces, it is indivisible, but it is
all in each part. God is here and in heaven too, and, yet not divided though
betwixt this place and heaven there be many other things.

37. Again you reply that the same body cannot be at once in many mouths.
But, why not, if it be at once in many dimensions? The foul, an indivisible
thing, is naturally at once in many members, it is at once in the head,
hands, feet, fingers, and toes, and in each member all. and this without any
contradictio^ or division; why the^ may not God whose power is infinite
supernaturallie put one and the same Body at once in many mouths? It is no
contradiction, He may do it. Measure not his power by your wit. The thing
may be above your conceit, no marvel, it is supernatural. The existence of
the soul in many members all, is natural, Tell me first how this is done? It
is in the head and in the feet, yet has no distance in it self. It is in
many fingers, yet one. It is in every part of an extended body, and yet not
extended* it is in the heart, and in the sides, in the tongue, and in the mouth
that is round about it, it is in the head, that does compass the brain and
it is within the brain all, unless in your brain peradventure it be not. Shall
I now argue out of this that it is within and without, and round about it
self? if I meant to trouble an unlearned reader, and turn his brain as you
do, I would. When you have made him understand these things touching the
natural existence of his soul, he will be able to answer all that you can
say touching the supernatural existence of the body of Jesus Christ in many
mouths; and if he does not yet understand that, being natural, no marvel if
he does not understand this Mystery, it being supernatural.

38. The other piece of your difficulty is, that a body is naturally
extended, and a ma^s body fills a great place, therefore it cannot be within
that little room. I answer, that substance of it self fills no place, but by
an Accident called Situall extension or Localitie, as, by it self it is not
visible, but by a^ Accide^t, Color. These Accide^ts are distinct from the
Substance: they are not Substance. If God take away the Color, or will not let
it move the eye, the substance is not seen: if God take away the Localitie,
it filles no place; He is the Creator and may do as he list. The Body of our
Savior in the Sacrament has not situall extension or Localitie, it succeeds
into the room of bread. Before, bread was under those dimensio^s which you
see, and the body succeeds to bread, wherefore the body is now under the same.
It is true that the nature of a body requires extensio^, but God is Author of
nature, and needs nor pay but when he please* his Dominion is absolute. Humane
nature has a proper subsistence due unto it, yet in Christ it has none but
divine.

39. To your question how this is done, I answer that other Infidels had the
like difficulty in other matters, as how he who filles heaven and earth should
be in a Mothers arms, a little child Almighty God. Do you understand how this
does come to pass? how is the indivisible Substance of God in each part of the
world all? S Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Heb Hom. 2. S Cyrill. Alexand. l. 4. in Joan. c.
13. Read here an ^xcellen discourse ^o this ^urpose.
I said God is every where says a learned Father) but I do not understand it:
I say that he is without beginning, but do not understand it: I say that he
has begott a Son etc. You should attend to the counsel of S. Cyrill, in
such high things never to question how, when God works leave the way and the
knowledge of his work unto himself. As the heavens are exalted above the the
earth, so are my ways exalted above your ways, Isa. 55.
and my cogitations above your cogitations, says almighty God. This how, is
the Jews question in this matter, as the Father before named does well observe.
Our Savior had said that the bread which he would give was his flesh, 10. 6.
and that he who did eat it should live for ever. Whereupon the Jews moved
this question, how can this man give us his flesh to eat? If they had believed
he was God, they might then have known that he was able to turn bread into
his flesh and so give it in the form of bread to be eaten, but they did not
believe him to be God, and therefore moved the question how. Which question I
leave a while in your mouth, and betake my self to the text, where I find
that he gave his body and blood to the disciples: and thus I argue.

39. If Jesus Christ, true God, and therefore almighty, did affirm in
express terms that the Eucharist which he gave his Disciples was his body
and blood, we are to believe it was so, since God is Truth, and Truth cannot
lie: but Jesus Christ whom you confess and I have declared to be true God, l.
2. c. 4^
and almighty, did affirm in express terms that the Eucharist which he
gave his disciples was his body and blood, therefore we are to believe it.
The Proposition you will not question, for you profess you are a Christian, l.
2.
and if you were none there is enough said in another place, to make you grant
it. The Assu^ption is clear in the Gospel. THIS IS MIE BODY, Mat. 26.
THIS IS MIE BLOOD. And further yet, that men should not mistake our Saviors
meaning, he, our Savior did add such attributes to this Body and Blood, as
cannot agree to Bread and Wine, Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. or, is delivered.
This is my Body which is given for you, this is my body which shall be
delivered for you. Was bread given for us? were we redeemed with bread? was
bread crucified for the redemption of the world? Mat. 26.
This is my blood of the new Testament, which shall be shed for many unto
remission of sins. Was wine the blood of the new Testament? was wine shed for
remission of Sins? No, it was the true blood of Jesus Christ. Luc. 22.
This is the Chalice the new Testament in my blood, which Chalice shall be shed
for you. or, is shed.
The Chalice, that is the thing in the Chalice is shed for us. Is this thing
wine, or blood? If wine, then you are redeemed with wine, wine was in the side
of Jesus Christ. If the thing in the Chalice were blood, then blood, true
blood, the blood wherewith we were redeemed was there in the Chalice, 10. 6.
and the Disciples drank it. In an other place he said also, the bread which
I will give is my flesh, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you, my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
1. Cor. 10.
abides in me and I in him. And the Apostle. The Chalice of benediction which
we do bless is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? and the bread
we (...) do sacrifice vnbloodilie as in the next. chapter v. 24. (...) And your
Calvin does acknowledge this sense, frangi says he upon that place
Interpreter immolari. 1. Cor. 11.
break is it not the participation of the body of our Lord? whosoever shall
eat this bread or drink the Chalice of our Lord unworthily he shall be
guilty of the body, and of the blood of our Lord. He that eats and drinks
unworthily eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body
of our Lord. And you too, discern it not, you esteem it bakers bread. You do
not believe that it is the body of our Lord. You do not believe that it is
heavenly bread. That it is the flesh of Christ. that the Chalice is the
communication of blood that the blood of Christ is drink and his body meat.
that Christ is is in him that has eaten this bread. This you believe not, but
are content with common bread and wine. Common wine with you is the Testament
of Jesus Christ, it issued out of his side, you were redeemed with it, and
bakers bread was crucified for your sins.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. The Fathers understood the Real Presence as we do.
40. FOr the Real Presence out of Antiquity are cited Justinius the Martyr,
Ireneus, Tertullia^, Hilarious, both the Cyrills, Ambrose, Epiphanius,
Hesichius, Optatus, Augustine, Ierom, Leo, Gregory and others by Zanchez,
Coccius, Garetius and Gualterius. Your answer is that all are to be understood
of a figurative, and not a real Presence. You think the Body and Blood are
in heaven only and no nearer: but wine and bread you say are equiuocallie
called the blood and Body though they be indeed nothing else but signs. This
device does not satisfy. For the Fathers have directly expressed all the
conditions of a real Presence to the very last; and will not be contented
with your figure. This I delare.

41. First because in conceauing the Institution of a sign, there is no
difficulty, it was easy to say, and for men to understand that bread was a
sign or figure of the body, if our Savior had meant only this, but the
Fathers apprehende in the Eucharist a great and incomprehensible Mystery. I
will cite one or two least you deny it, and will observe the same manner of
proceeding to the end of this Chapter. S. Chrysostom speaks thus. Good Lord
what a wonderful miracle is this? S. Chrysostom. d^ Sacerd. l 3.
how great is Gods love toward mankind? Behold he who sits above with his
Father, in one and the same moment of time is touched by the hands of us all,
and he gives himself to such as are desirous to receive and embrace him. Ide^
Hom. 60. ad Pop. Antioch.
Think with thy self what honor is done unto thee, and what a table thou art
made partaker of. We are united unto, and are fed with that very thing at
which the Angels when they behold it do tremble, neither dare they boldly
gaze upon it by reason of the bright shining splendor which issues from it.
Ide^. hom. 14. in pri. Cor. Ibid. vocat cali^ em benedictionis salicem formi
dolosum and horroris plenum S. Ephr. l. de not. Dominime scrut. c. 5. Ibidem.
In saying the Eucharist I open all the treasure of Gods blessing. S. Ephrem.
Why do thou search things that are unsearchable? If thou diue curiously into
these matters thou shall not be called faithful but curious. Be thou faithful
and innocent, receive the unspotted body of this Lord with an entire faith,
being assured that thou eatest the lamb himself entire. The Mysteries of
Christ are immortal fire: search them not rashly, least in their search thou
be burned. This truly which the only begotten son Christ our Savior has
done for us, surpasses all admiration, all thought, and all speech: for he
has given us fire and Spirit to be eaten and dru^ke, that is, his body and his
Blood. Hence I argue thus. If the Fathers did apprehend in the Eucharist a
great and unsearchable mystery, they apprehended more then bread and wine
with a relation unto the body and blood, this being an easy thing and not
incomprehensible; but the Fathers did apprehend in the Eucharist a great and
unsearchable Mystery, as you have heard; therefore more then bread and wine
with a relation to the body and blood of Christ.

42. Secondly. The Fathers say that bread and wine are changed into the body
and blood of Christ. You strive indeed to put the^ of with an accidental
change in office and use: as a counter when it stands for a crown, has a
moral change by reason of this deputation, though the substance be still the
same it was: so here you admit a change in accidental reference, for of no
sign it is made a sign, it has a new reference, yet the nature you say is
the still the same; to wit, bread and wine. But this will not serve, For the
Fathers say they are changed in nature and esteem it a work of Gods
omnipotence; comparing it also with other physical changes, as of Moses
rod into a Serpent, ^. Ambros. de mist. ^ nit. c. 9.
water into wine etc. How many examples do we use to prove that the thing, is
a not that which nature made, but that which the blessing has consecrated, and
that the power of consecration is greater then the power of nature, for by
consecration the very b nature it self is changed. Thou have learned
therefore that of bread is c made the body of Christ, Id. l. 4. de sacr. c. 4.
and that wine and water is putt into the chalice, but by the consecration of
the heavenly word it is made blood. He, our Savior, changed once water into
wine, S. Cyrill. Hier. Catech. Mist. 3. Id. Catech. 1.
and is he not worthy to be believed of us that he has d changed wine into
blood? The bread and wine of the Eucharist before the sacred invocation of the
adored Trinity were simple bread and wine: but the invocation being once done,
the bread indeed is e made the flesh of Christ, and the wine his blood. The
bread which our Lord gave unto his disciples, Auth sermon de coena. ap. Cypr.
being changed not in shape, but f nature, by the omnipotence of the word is
made flesh. I do righlie and with good reason believe that the bread being
sanctified by Gods word, S. Greg. Nisse^. orat. Cathec. c. 37.
is g changed into the body of God the word. Christ thorough the dispensation
of his grace enters by his flesh into all the faithful, and mingleth
himself with their bodies which have their substance from bread and wine, to
the end that man being united to that which is immortal may attain to be made
partaker of incorruption, Ibib.
and these things he bestows h transelementing by the virtue of his blessing
the nature of the things that are seen, into it. God, S. Cyril. Alex Ep. ad
Calos.
co^descending to our infirmities does flow into the things offered on the
Altar the power of life converting them into the Verity of his own flesh,
that the body of life as it were a certain quickening seed might be found in
us. ^. Gaudent in Exodus tr. ^.
The Lord and Creator of Nature that of earth made bread, again because he
can do it, and has promised to do it, k makes of bread his own body, and
he that of water made wine, now of wine has made his blood. Now Sir,
Conversion, change of Nature it self, transelementation of bread and wine
into flesh and blood, do put flesh and blood reallie and substantiallie in the
remaining signs or exterior forms of bread and wine.

43. As that which we believe in this matter may be and is explicated in
several propositions, and by the Fathers too, so your Opinion may be unfolded
into diverse propositions by way of explication. I will briefly put them down,
and leave your conscience to judge both of my explication and of their accord
with the Fathers, to whom the letters shall direct you in order as I have put
them down. And first your opinion, if it be stripped naked, is, that the
Eucharist is nothing else reallie but plain bread and wine. For, relations
founded in exterior deputation only, are not real, and the substance of our
Saviors body you say is not at o^ce in many places reallie. This supposed;
your Opinion is that a the thing on the Altar is in Substance the same it was.
The Protestant Opinion of the Eucharist, by the^ hidden under figurative
speeches, there by to coze^ the vulgar Epist. Cyrill. ad Calos extat grace in
Bibliotheca Imperat.
that it is b not reallie changed by consecration, that the body of Christ is
c not made of blead, nor his blood of wine. that wine it not d changed into
blood, that it is reallie e the same it was before Invocation. that it is not
changed f in nature, not changed g into the body. that nothing is here h
transelemented into the body and blood of Christ. nothing i converted into the
verity of his flesh. that our Savior makes not of bread his body, and of
wine his blood. I refer the comparison and judgment to your self, or to any
other man, learned or unlearned; and go on.

44. Thirdly out of that which is allreadie said, I may conclude with ease
that the Fathers thought the substance of bread and wine remained not in the
Eucharist. For that which is changed, converted, transelemented, into an other
thing, is no more existent in it self: and you have heard them say that the
nature of bread and wine is changed, converted, transelemented, into the body
and blood of Christ: whence it follows that it is not existent in it self.
But you shall hear them further affirm that in the forms or accide^ts of
bread and wine there is not bread and wine, S. Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
but flesh and blood It is not common bread but Eucharist consisting of two
things, the earthly, the species, and the heavenly, the Body. Let us give
credit to God every where, let us not oppose against him, though what he says
does seem to our sense and to our thinking to be absurd: let his saying master
our sense and our reason. S. Chrysostom. hom. 83 in Matthew.
Let us do this in all things and especially in the Mysteries, not regarding
alone the things which lie before us: but holding fast his words for by his
words we cannot be cozened, our sense 1 may easily be deceived his words
cannot be untrue, our sense is often times beguiled. Seeing therefore that our
Lord has said, This is my Body, let no staggering or doubt lay hold on us,
but let us believe it, and see it with the eyes of our understanding: for
nothing that is sensible is given unto us here by Christ, (...).
but, in sensible things indeed, yet All that he gives, is 2 insensible. It is
3 not that which nature made, but that which the blessing has consecrated. S.
Ambr. de Mist. in c. 9.
by the blessing even nature it self is changed. Conceive it not as bare
bread and bare wine, for it is the holy body and blood of Christ, for though
sense does suggest this (that it is bread and wine) unto thee, yet let faith
confirm thee, S. Cyrill. Hier. Catech. c. 4.
that thou judge 4 not according to the taste, but rather take it as of faith
most certain without doubting the least degree that the body and blood is
given thee. And a little before, With assurance let us receive the body and
blood of Christ, for in the 5 form of bread the body is given to thee, and
in the form of wine the blood etc. Ibid.
Knowing and believing most assuredly that, that which appears bread is 6
not bread though it seem so to the taste, but it is the body of Christ; and
that which appears wine, it not wine as the taste does judge it to be,
Theophil. in c 26. Mat.
but the blood of Christ. Bread is transelemented by an ineffable operation
although to us it seem bread, because we are weak and have a horror to
eat raw flesh, especially the flesh of man: for this reason bread
appears: but in essence and 7 substance it is not bread. S. Ansel. in c. 11.
pri. Cor.
To the 8 exterior senses it seems to be bread, but know by the sense of
your understanding that it is my body, not another but the same in substance
which shall be delivered to death for your redemption.

45. The Protestant Opinion. our 1 sense cannot err. The substance given us is
2 sensible bread, it is 3 that which nature made. Of the substance contained
under those accidents judge 4 according to the taste. The Protestant explication
of this point.
a man's body is not in the 5 form of bread. it is bread and wine, 6 the
sense is to be believed. in essence and 7 substance it is bread. it is not
that body which was delivered, but that 8 which it seems to the exterior
sense, that is plain bread. Compare this to the Fathers words, and judge of
the difference in this point.

46. Fourthlie, out of the former places of the Fathers it is Further clear
that they believed the body of Christ in the Eucharist to be the same body
which is in heaven, and the same blood which issued out of his side to be in
the Chalice. I will add a place or two more of this. S. Aug. l. 12. co^t.
Faust. c. 10.
The blood of Christ has a loud voice on earth when all Nations having
received it do answer Amen. This is the shrill voice of blood, which the blood
it self does make out of the a mouths of the faithful redeemed with the same
blood. V. Beda in c. 10 pri. Cor. ex S. Aug. Sermon ad Neoph.
In the bread you shall receive that very b thing which did hang upon the
Cross, and in the Cup you shall receive that which was powered out of the
side of Christ. Our Lord does patiently sustain Judas a devil, S. Aug. ep.
162.
a thief, his betrayer: he permits him to receive among the innocent
disciples that which the faithful do know c the price of our Redemption. S.
Chrysostom. hom 24 pr. Cor. Ibid.
That which is in the Chalice is that which did d issue from our Savior his
side. This body the Sages did reverence in the cribbe: thou see it not in
the cribbe but e on the Altar. This mystery makes the earth to be a heaven
unto thee: Ibid.
Open heaven gates and look in, or rather open the gates of the heaven of
heavens, and then thou will see that which is said to be true. For look what
is there most preciouse, I will show it unto thee f here on earth. For even
as in royal palaces the walls and the gilded roofes are not esteemed the
most magnificent thing of all, but the royal Person seated in his princely
throne: so is the kings body in heaven. Now this may thou see here on
earth. For here I show thee not Angels nor Archangells nor heavens, nor the
heaven of heavens, but I show unto thee him who is the very Lord of all those
things. Thou perceauest now in what manner thou do behold here on earth that
thing which is most precious, and most honorable of all other, and how thou
do not see it only but also do touch it, and that thou do not touch
it only but also do eat it, and eating of it returnest to thy house. S.
Chrysostom. de sacerd. l. 6.
At the time of the Sacrifice the Angels stand about the Priest, and the whole
company of the celestial powers do make a noise, and the place round about
the g Alter is full of Angelical quires in honor of him who h is there
sacrificed. which thing those will believe easily who do consider the great
Sacrifice which is then done.

47. The Protestant opinion. Blood is not in the a mouths of the faithful.
that b thing is not in the form of bread. Judas did not c receive the body
but only a piece of bread. That in the Chalice was never d in our Saviors
side. The body which the Sages worshipped is not o^ the e Altar. The body of
Christ is not f here on earth, nor in the dimensions we do see, touch, and
receive. Christ is not g Sacrificed on the Altar by the Priest. The humanity
of Christ is not on the h Altar. Compare it.

48. Fifthly, it being the same body which is in heaven, Christ I say being in
the Eucharist, and the Fathers professing this: it follows that he is there
also, in the Eucharist, to be adored, and this the Fathers also did
acknowledge. you remember what I repeated even now out of S. Chrysostom: take
more out of others. S. Gregory says of his sister Gorgonia. S Greg. Naz.
orat. 11.
She prostrateth her self with faith before the Altar, and with a great cry
calls on him who is 1 worshippeed on it, the said Altar. You must observe
here that S. Gregory does not only declare the action of his Sister, but
also the Custom of the primitive Church, in these words who is worshipped on
it, and then you will see that Christians in those days did worship our
Savior on the Altar. S. Augustine. S. Aug in ^sal. 98.
Our Savior took flesh of the virgin Marie, and because he walked here in
that flesh, and has given us that flesh to be eaten to Salvation, and no man
eats that flesh unless he first adore 2 it: behold we have found our in what
manner such a foote-stoole of our Lords feet (his flesh) may be adored, and
how that we do not sin by adoring it, Id. Ep. 120. c. 27.
but we sin by not adoring it. The rich come indeed to the table, they eat
and adore, but are not filled, Saint Ambrose. By the foot stool understand
the earth, S. Ambr. l. 3. de sp. s. c. 12
by the earth the flesh of Christ, which yeauen at this day we 3 adore in the
mysteries, and which the Apostles did adore in our Lord Jesus Christ.
Theodoret. Theodor. Dial 2.
The mystical signs are understood to be that they are made, by consecration,
vzt the body and blood of Christ: and they are believed and 4 adored as being
that they are believed to be. O most divine, S. Dionys. Eccl. Hierarch. c. 3.
De lib is it. autho vide Baron. a. 109. Mart. Delr. Vindic. Areopagit. Gualt.
Chron. c. 28 secu. 1. ver. 1
and holy Sacrifice open those mystical and signifying veiles wherewith thou
art covered: show thy self clearly unto us, and 5 replenish our spiritual
eyes with thy singular and reueiled brightness.

49. The Protestant Opinion 1 No body is worshipped on the Alter the flesh of
Christ in the 2 Sacrament is not to be adored. It is not to be adored in the 3
Mysteries. the Sacrament is 4 not adored. there is no body in the Eucharist,
or under those signs that can hear or 5 is to be prayed unto. Compare.

50. Sixtlie the Fathers say the Body of Jesus Christ is here immolated after
a^ unbloody manner, that this unbloody Sacrifice offered by the Christians is
in substance the body of Christ, that it is the host which was offered o^ the
Cross, and the price of our redemption: which things agree no more to bakers
bread then adoration and the rest whereof I have spoken before, but only to
the true body of Jesus Christ. S. Ignat. Ep ad Smyr. ap. Theod. dial. 3. S.
Chrysostom. or 17. in Ep. Hebr.
They, the Simonians and Saturnians, old Heretics, admit not Eucharists a and
Oblations, because they do not confess the Eucharist to be the flesh of our
Savior which suffered for our sins. We do still offer the same, not another
now, but ever the same, and for this reason the Sacrifice is one, as being
offered in b many places it is one body not many bodies, Ibid.
so also the sacrifice is one. It is our high Priest who has offered the
host which does cleanse us, and we also now do offerre the same which was
then offerred, ^d. hom. 51. ^ Mat. and ^o. ad pop ^ntioch. Cyr. A^^. declar.
^nat. 11.
which cannot be consumed. Let us hear and tremble, he, Christ, has put
himself c immolated before us. we celebrate in the Church the holy,
quickening and d unbloody Sacrifice, believing not that, that which is showed
is the body of some common man like us and his blood, but we receive it
rather as the life giving Words own flesh and blood. ^onc. Nic ^ct Vatic. ^p.
de di^na men's. ^c testim. ^oscunt ^colamp ^uin. ^quin. ^blit. ^e Bell. l ^e Sa.
^. c. 10.
In the divine table let us not abase our thoughts to consider the bread and
cup which is set there upon, but rather erecting our mind and fixing it on
high let us by faith understand that there is present upon that holy e table
the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, who is offered in
Sacrifice by the Priest without slaughtering. and we verily receiving his
body and blood let us believe that these things are the pledges of our
Salvation and resurrection. This host does singularly preserve the soul from
eternal damnation. which host does repair unto us by mystery that death of
the only begotten, S. Greg. l. 4 Dial. c. 58. Pro nobis ITERVM in hoc mysterio
sacra Oblationis immolatur.
who rising from the dead now dies not: yet living in himself immortallie
and incorruptiblie he is again Sacrificed for us in this mystery of the holy
Oblation. Hither appertains that which S. Augustine writes of his mother a
good Christian woman of the Religion then common, that departing out of this
world she desired memory to be made of her at the Altar, S. Aug. 9. Confess. ^^
13.
from g whence she knew the holy Sacrifice to be dispensed wherewith the
indictment against us was blotted out. Then he commendes her soul to the
prayers of such as read his Book. Observe what and where this thing was. it
was the victime or Sacrifice wherewith the ransom was paid for our sins;
this is not bread I trow, and this was on the Altar and therehence dispensed as
you heard from S. Augustines mouth. And there adored in the mysteries as you
heard before. Optat. l. 6.
Whereupon we find the Altar also called the seat of the body and blood of
our Lord. Hither also does appertain that which we find in Antiquity about
offering sacrifice for the dead, which you may read ar your leisure in
others, for I have been already to long in this.

51. The Protestant opinion* no Eucharisticall a Oblation is to be admitted, it
is not the flesh of Christ that suffered for us. The sacrifice of the body of
Christ is not offered in b many places. Christ is noe more c immolated* there
is no unbloody d Sacrifice which is the flesh of Christ* the lamb of God is
not on the e Altar, he is not offered in sacrifice by the Priest* the Son of
God is not f again sacrificed for us* the sacrifice is not g dispensed from
the Alter. Compare.

52. Seauenthly, the Fathers did believe that the body of our Savior was
present to our bodies and mouths when we receive the Eucharist, which is
another evident argument that they thought it substa^tiallie present here on
earth where our bodies are; for a thing which is in heaven only cannot be so
present. We deny not that we are Spirituallie joined unto Christ by true
faith and sincere Charity: S. Cyr. Alex l. 10. in Io. c. 13.
but that we have 1 no conjunction with him at all according to the flesh,
that verily we deny: and affirm it to be contrary to the divine
Scriptures. and, because you are ready to run to the Incarnation, it
follows a little after. Does he, Nestorius, think perchance that we know
not the force of the mystical benedictio^, co^secratio^, which being done in
us does it not make Jesus Christ to dwell in us 2 corporally also with the
communication of the flesh of Christ? which thing he does prove there by
Scripture; and after declare with an example. S. Aug. l 2. cont. Adu. Leg. c. 9.
We receive with faithful heart and 3 mouth, the Mediator of God and man, man
Christ Jesus, giving us his body to be eaten and his blood to be drunk,
though it seem more horrible to eat ma^s flesh then to kill, and to drink
man's blood then to shed it. S. Leo. sermon. 7. de Ieiun. men's. 7.
You ought so to communicate of the holy table that you doubt nothing at all
of the truth of the body and blood of Christ, for that is received with 4 the
mouth which by faith is believed. S. Greg. Dial. l. 4. c. 58. S. Greg. Nyss.
orat. Catec. c 37.
His blood is powered into the mouths of the faithful. Our Savior by his
flesh enters into all the faithful, and mingleth himself with their 5
bodies, to the end that man being united to that which is immortal, may
attain to be made partaker of Incorruption. We are made (...) hearers of
Christ when we have received his body and blood into 6 our members. S. Cyr.
Hi. Catec. 4.
So the Fathers, understanding the body of Christ indeed to be in those
dimensions, and so to be in our body reallie when the Sacrament is in it, and
to be received with our mouths. Whereas you denying that he can be reallie
here and in heaven too, must gape as wide as heaven if you will receive the
signs and the body too with your mouth, for the signs are here, and the
body and blood according to you are only there in that one place.

53. The Protestant Opinion. The flesh of Christ is 1 not near unto our flesh.
Christ is not 2 in us corporally. Christ is not received with the 3 mouth,
that which is believed is never 4 in the mouth, never nearer then heaven is to
the earth. the blood of Christ is no where but in heaven* it is in no bodies
mouth at any time. the flesh of Christ is not near our 5 bodies. it is as
far of as heaven is from earth. the body of Christ is never 6 in us. Compare.

54. That which troubles you, did not move the Fathers to discredit the word
of God as you do. His omnipotency was in the beginning of their Creed as it is
in ours. Hear what they say of your doubts. The first. S. Cyr. Hi. Catec. 4
S. Chrysostom. ho. ^3. Mat.
Sense tells us it is bread. S. Cyrill. though it seem bread it is not
bread. S. Chrysostom. let our Saviors words master our sense and reason. His
words cannot be untrue, our sense is many times deceived. The second. It is not
possible for one to have his own body in his own hands. S. Augustine. In
what manner this may be understood of David (or another pure man) we cannot
find, S. Aug. in in Psalm. 33. conc. 1.
but we find it fulfilled in Christ, for Christ was carried in his own hands,
when commending his own very body, he said this is my body, for then he
carried and held that body in his own hands. If you did believe it were
reallie in the Sacrament as the Fathers did, you would never stick at this nor
at any other thing, for all are grounded in the Sacramental being. The third.
Christ could not eat himself, the Sacrament he might and did eat. S. Ierom.
He, S. Hieron. Ep. ad Hedib. q. 2.
Christ, was the Banquetter and the Feast, the eater and the thing eaten. We
drink his blood, etc. The fourth Christ is ascended, S. Chrysostom. hom. 2. ad
Pop. Ant.
therefore his flesh is not here. S. Chrysostom. Christ, both left us his flesh
and ascended having it. The fifth, the body should by this time be all
consumed, for many thousands have received it. S. Grerie. S. Greg. Nyss. orat.
Cat. c. 37.
We must enquire how it can possibile come to pass that the one only body
of Christ which is allwaies thorough out the world imparted to so many
thousands of the faithful may be wholly in every one in particular, and
also, remain whole and entire in it self. His answer. These things he,
Christ, bestows by transelementing thorough the virtue of benedictio^ the
nature of those things which appear of bread and wine into it, his body. The
sixth. A man's body cannot be in that form. S. Epiphanius. When he Christ, had
given thanks he said this is my body, and blood, S Epipha^ in Ancora.
and yet we see that it is not of equal bigness nor yet like: for it has no
similitude with the image of that flesh which he took upon him, nor with the
Divinity it self, which cannot be seen, nor with the lineaments and shape of
members. For this is of a round figure, and according to the power insensible,
yet he vouchsafed by his grace to say this is my body? and blood: neither may
any man refuse to give credit to his words, The real Presence a fundame^tall
point.
For he that believes it not to be true, falls altogether from grace and
salvation.

55. Being here come to the end of this Chapter, I wish you now to consider how
impossible a thing it is for you to make it evident that Antiquity was with
you, against us, and to make such as have wit and learning to believe it.
That which we believe, we find in the Fathers, and the judgment belonges not
to you or me but to the Church, which if the cause were obscure, by the divine
Assistance promised and present to her could determine it; but this cause is
clear, the Fathers have given as fair evidence as we could wish: We cannot
yet express our meaning better then they have done. It is not common bread,
it is not bread, it is not that which nature made, The Fathers.
bread is made the body of Christ, that in the Sacrament is flesh, it is the
flesh of Christ, made of bread: the nature is changed, nature it self is
changed, it is changed by Gods omnipotency, it is transelemented. The senses
may be deceived, believe the^ not, believe the words of Christ. It is not
bread though the taste esteem it so, it is changed not in shape but in nature:
it is the flesh which suffered for us, that which did hang upon the cross,
the price of our redemption. It is the Lord of Angels, he is here on earth,
and thou receauest him. He is sacrificed on the Altar: the Son of God is
again sacrificed for us: the La^be that takes away the sins of the world,
is offered in sacrifice by Priests, without slaughtering. We offer an unbloody
sacrifice in the Church, it is offered every where, it is the same which Christ
offered. The victime is dispensed from the Altar, we do eat the lamb
entire, Christ he is the feast, the Angels tremble when they behold that
wherewith we are fed. Christ, is worshipped on the Altar, we adore the flesh
of Christ in the mysteries, the mystical signs are adored, as being that they
are believed to be. That in the Chalice is not wine, it is blood, it is that
which did issue out of the side of our Savior. We drink blood, we drink
blood with our mouths, it is powered into our mouths, that which faith
believes the same we receive with our mouth. we receive the body and blood
of Jesus Christ with our mouth into our bodies, into our members. So the
Fathers. Our B. Savior. This is my body, this is my blood. I conclude with S.
Hilarie. S. Hilar. l. 2 de Trinit.
There is no place left of doubting of the truth of the flesh and blood for now
both by our Saviors profession, and our belief, it is truly flesh and
truly blood. And these being received and drunk do bring to pass that we
be in Christ, and CHRIST IN US.

THE EIGTH CHAPTER. Of Transubstantiation.
56. IN the Council of Trent is defined the conversion of bread and wine into
the body and blood of Christ, which conversion is there and in the Lateran
Council termed by a proper name transubstantiation. To these Counsels and to
the Ancient Fathers above cited, you oppose a few obscure sentences, One out
of an Epistle of one John of Constantinople, falsely attributed to S.
Chrysostom. Another out of one Gelasius, whom to make your argument seem the
stronger you style Pope, but falsely as Baronius and others have demonstrated
against your Calvin. The third out of Theodoret a known Adversary of your
cause.

Ep. ad Caes. Mon.
57. The first. Chrysostom says the nature of the bread remains. Answer. It
is false, saint Chrysostom says expreslie it is changed, as you shall hear
anon. The Epistle which you cite is a refutation of Eutichianisme, which
began many years after S. Chrysostom was dead, Chrysostomus videtur
tra^substantiationo^ confirmare, nam ita scrible, mo^ vidos pane^ number vinu^:
number sicut reliqui tibi in secessum vadunt: absit, nec sic cogites nam sicut
cera etc. Magdeb cent. 5. c. 4. col. 517.
the Author of it is also against you, for he says in the same place that
there are not in the Sacrament of the Eucharist two bodies but one, and that
one the body of the son of God. This man you see was not yours in this
point; his doctrine take it all, is not curra^t among you; for if there be in
the Eucharist only One body, and this One, the body of the son of God,
then bread in substance is not there, because the body of Christ, and
natural bread be not one and the same body. by the nature he means the
propriety or natural quality of the bread, which is also called the
nature, and this does remain.

58. The second. Gelasius says, De Duab. naturis.
the substance or nature of bread does not leave to be. Answer. The meaning
of this man is, that it is not annihilated, but the substance is turned into
another thing: and so, as it remains not in it self (for it is turned) but in
the propriety or proper accidents, taste, color etc. All this the same Author
teaches in the very same place in these words, they (the substance of bread
and wine) do pass into a Divine substance the holy Ghost effecting it; yet
remaining in the propriety of their nature. wherefore this man whosoever he
be, is noe Protestant in this, for he that holds the substance of bread and
wine to be converted by the power of God, into a Divine substance the body and
blood of Christ, is no mere Figurist nor of your School: but this Author did
old it, as you find in his own words, therefore he was not a Protestant as
you are.

Theodor. Dial. 1. (...), manent enim in prioris substantiae and figura and
forma. or, manent enim in riri esentia etc. Idem Dial 2 Idem
transsubstantiationem videtur ^apere quod Theodoretusscribit sicut ergo Symbola
etc post innocationem
59. The third. Theodoret says our Savior delivering the Sacrament called his
body bread, and that which is in the Cup he called his blood: he changed
the names, and gave his body the name which belonged to the sign, and to the
sign the name which belonged to his body. Answer. Read further and you
meet the solution of your difficulty. The reason of the change of names was
because he would have such as partake the divine sacraments not to heed the
nature of those things which are seen (the signs) but for the change of names
to believe also the change that is made hy grace. You reply out of another
place, the mystical signs after consecration depart not from their nature,
but abide still in their former substance and figure and form and may be seen
and touched as before. Answer. It is true that the signs are not changed; for
those are Accidents, those remain: but the substance whithin the signs or
Accidents is changed. The things are changed by reason of that which is
interior and within, they are not changed by reason of that which is exterior
and without exposed to the sense. mutantur and alia fiu^. etc. Magd. cent. 5.
co. 517. Ibidem. (...)
And Theodoret proceeding says, they are understood to be that they are made,
(that is, the body and blood of Christ) and are believed and adored as being
the things they are believed to be. No man believes that bread is flesh. No
man does believe these propositions to be true, bread is a ma^s body, bread
is flesh; flesh is bread. No man adoreth bread. Now the Mysteries, Theodoret
says, are adored as being indeed the things which they are believed to be. he
does not say, they are believed only to be, but they also are that which
they are believed to be: and so are, that they may be and are adored. So then
Theodoret is no Figurist nor Protestant in this point.

60. The fourth Argument is taken out of Scripture. Our Savior took bread
therefore he gave bread. Answer. Matt. 26.
It does not follow. because after he took it he changed it by consecration
into his body, and then it was not bread but flesh in the shape and form of
bread. it was heavenly bread, the bread of life, after consecration: but
after co^secratio^ it was not bakers bread. that he gave, was the same with
that he took, in outward shape: but the interior substance was not the same.

61. I have turned the rest of your forces against your felfe; I will now turn
this also, and make my first argument for the change of bread into the body
and wine into blood, (which change or conversion we call transubstantiation)
out of this place of Scripture, thus. Before consecration the thing in the
dimensions and shape of bread was bread, after consecration the thing in
those dimensions was the body of Christ: This is my body. therefore it was
changed. Matt. 26. Hoc quidem sape diximus, quod nunc quoque repeta^ retineri
reipsa no^ posse (...) in his Christi verbis, hoc est corpus meum, quin
transsubstantiatio Papistica statuatur. Beza de caena. cont. westphal. vol. 1
tr. 6. Gene. 1582.
The same argument I make of the cup; for, if blood has succeeded unto wine,
there is a change made, but after consecration blood has succeeded unto wine,
for it is blood after consecration, This is my blood; and before it was not
blood but wine.

62. A second argument I make out of the judgment of the Fathers and the Church
Primitive. If the Fathers did believe that before consecration the things
proposed were bread and wine, and that after consecration there was not common
bread and wine, but the body and blood of Christ, then did those Fathers
believe an inward substantial change in those forms; for this comes not to
pass without a change, as he who believes the drink in the cup to be water
when it is brought to the table, and afterward to be wine and nor water, does
acknowledge a change; for were there no mutation it would be still as it was at
first, water and not wine. But the Fathers did believe that those things before
consecration were bread and wine, as you also do confess, and that after
consecration there was not bread and wine in those forms, but the body and
blood of Christ, as I have declared in the former Chapter; therefore thy
believed an inward change.

63. Thirdly the Fathers in express terms do teach this change or conversion
which we speak. of I have cited them before. S. Amb. d^ Mist. init c. 9.
Ibid. Id. l. 4. de Sacr. c. 4.
S. Ambrose. It is not that which nature made, but that which the blessing has
consecrated. The power of consecration is greater then the power of nature, for
by consecration the very nature it self is changed. This bread is bread
before the Sacramental words, but when consecration comes, of bread it is
made the flesh of Christ. S. Chrysostom. S. Chrysostom. hom. de Euch. in Encoen.
As wax joined with fire is likened unto it so as nothing of the substance of
it remains, nothing abounds, so here conceive the mysteries to be consumed
with the substance of the body of Christ. The things set before us are not the
works of humane power: we hold but the place of Ministers, Idem hom 83 in Mat
it he Christ. who does sanctify and change these things. S. Cyrill of
Jerusalem. S. Cyr. Hier. Catech. 1.
The bread and wine of the Eucharist before the sacred invocation of the
adored Trinity were simple bread and wine, but the invocation being once
done the bread indeade is made the body of Christ, and the wine his blood.
Id. Catech 3.
He, Christ, once changed water into wine, and is he not worthy to be believed
of us that he has changed wine into blood? that which appears bread is not
bread but the body of Christ. Id. Cat. 4. S. Gauden. in Ex. tr. 2
Saint Gaudentius Bishop of Brixia. The Lord and Creator of Natures that of
earth made bread, again (because he can do it and has promised to do it)
of bread makes his own body: and he that of water made wine, now of wine
has made his blood. S. Cyr. Alex. Ep. ad Calosyr.
S. Cyrill of Alexandria. That we should not feel horror to see flesh and
blood on the sacred Altars, God condescending to our frailty does flow into
the things offered the power of life: converting them into the verity of his
own flesh, to the end the body of life be found as a certain quickening seed
in us. S. Greg. Nyss. orat. Catec. c. 37
S. Gregory Nissen. I do rightly and with good reason believe that bread
being sanctified by Gods word, is changed into the body of God the word. The
same Father says that our Savior did transelement the nature of bread into
his body, Ibid.
and of wine into his blood. I have cited more to this purpose in the former
Chapter. This does abundantly prove Antiquity to have believed the change of
bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, which change in regard it
is of one whole Substance into another Substance under the same Accidents,
under which first the one is and then the other; we call Transubstantiation.
These witnesses whose testimony I have here produced were eminent men in the
Church, they were known Saints in the communion of the Christian world, and
by them we know the mind of the rest in their communion.

64. Fourthlie we have this change declared by the Church in general
Counsels, in the great Laterane Council in the time of Innocentius the
third. Conc. Lat. c. 3. Con. Flor. in Decreto Eug. quod decretum factu^ esse in
publica Synodali sessione patet ex fine. confer cum fine Concilij, dum hac
gerebantur etc. Conc. Trid sess. 13. ean. 2.
Again in the Counsel of Florence, and last of all at Trent. If you should
here object that such a conversion were not possible, I would send you back
again to S. Gregory, to learn of him the possibility. Nature can turn
bread into flesh, wine into blood, why then cannot God? It is easier to make
flesh of some thing then of nothing. God made the world of nothing. It is
easier to change then to create. Our Savior turned water into wine, Aaron his
rod was turned into a serpent, and the same power could turn the serpent
again into a rod. Gods power is infinite, and therefore finds no difficulty.
he ca^ turn wine into blood, Vt sint qua erant and in aliud commutencuae. S.
Amb. 4. Sac c. 4.
and blood agai^e if he list into wine, or into any other substance. The
object of his power is all that includes not contradiction in it self, and
these things we speak of, include none.

THE NINETH CHAPTER. The sacrifice of the Mass.
65. THe change of bread into flesh and wine into blood being once admitted,
there is no difficulty in admitting unbloody sacrifice, because, to induce by
consecration the body of a victime into the form or shape of bread and the
blood of the same victime into the shape or species of wine in acknowledgment
of Gods soueraignetie and dominion of life and death, is to Sacrifice this
victime or host vnbloodilie. And in the Mass this is do^ne: for by
consecration the body of Jesus Christ, the la^be of God that takes away the
sin of the world is induced into the form or species of bread, ^0. 1.
and his blood into the species of wine, the substance of bread being turned
into the body, and the substance of wine into blood, and this in attestation
and acknowledgment of the soueraignetie of almighty God, and of our
dependence on him for being, life and all things else that we have, natural or
supernatural. And this by the ordination and institution of God also, ^. 1. c.
vlt.
as I declared in the first book Wherefore this Lamb of God is unbloody
Sacrificed in the Masle.

66. This sacrifice is a representation of that bloody Sacrifice of the
Cross, Christi benedictione, panis fit corpus eius non significatiue tantu^,
sed etia^ substantive neque enim ab hoc Sacramento figuram omnino excludimus
neque eam solam admittimus. Veritas est quia Christi corpus est, figura est
quia immolatur quod incorruptibile habetur. S. Ansel. l. de di. offic.
and yet includes the same victime too. It is a figure if you will, of that
bloody Sacrifice, and yet reallie has in it the same flesh and blood that was
there. It is a figure and represents, by reason of the exterior form: the
substance covered with this form: is the same. The second person, the son of
God is said by S. Paul to be the brightness of his Fathers glory and figure of
his substance and yet his substance or essence is the very same which the
Father has, they being but one God, and therefore having but one Deity,
though they be personally distinct.

67. Your argument against the Sacrifice of the Mass, is out of S. Paul
affirming, all with one oblation to be consu^mate, and that Christ was offered
once. Answer. That is true which S. Paul does say: but you must not exclude
that which the Scripture delivers also in other places. I told you in the
first book that in the Christian Church a clean oblation was to be offered to
God in all places, That text, cannot be understood of your works, they are
vnpure, ugly; nor of the Sacrifice of the Cross, that was not offered in all
places but in one only. It is also clear as there I noted, that our Savior
did offerre at his last supper an unbloody propitiatory Sacrifice, and
commanded the Church to frequent it. Wherefore of necessity you must admit the
distinction of bloody and unbloody Sacrifice, the one, offered on the Cross
at Jerusalem, only once for the redemption of mankind* the other, offered
first before the passion at the last supper: and since frequented in all.
Nations, for the application of the bloody Sacrifice of the Cross S. Paul
does speak of the bloody Sacrifice: Heb. 7. v. 23.27.9.25.26.10. v. 10.
and this you shall find, not only by the general scope of that Epistle, but
also by the circumstances of every text which you or your fellows allege
against us out of it. the bloody Sacrifice was offered only o^ce, the
unbloody is repeated often. The one did consummate all by way of Redemption. The
other was instituted for Application.

68. Next you say, a living thing if it be Sacrificed must be killed, for so
victimes were sacrificed heretofore. Answer. If the living thing be
sacrificed in the form and species of a living thing, you say well; such
things were killed. If it be not sacrificed in the form of a living thing, but
in the form of another thing that does not live, as in the form of bread and
wine, the^ killing is not necessary; Consecration inducing the body under one
form: and the blood under another, is sufficient. This change is sufficient,
both for the substance of a Sacrifice, and for the representation of the
bloody death of Christ.

69. The victime being thus immolated, it is then eaten by the Priest and by
the communicantes, that very flesh which did hang upon the Cross, the same
now the Church does eat. It does eat this victime immolated after this
unbloody manner by the Priest on the Altar, as I could you but now, and before
you heard the same from Antiquity. they eat the lamb of God with their
mouths, Ep. ad Hedib. Origin. in d. loca Eua^g. hom. 5
they receive him entire, each receaues him all. Jesus Christ is the feast as
S. Ierom says our Lord and Master comes into our bodies, there more freely to
communicate himself unto our sowles. We do nor receive bread from a man's
hand, but rather fire from a Seraphim as Saint John Chrysostom does speak
sometime. We do receive under those veiles of bread the natural son of
God to whom all hearts are open, before whom the powers of heaven do tremble,
and with who^ the Father and the holy Ghost are ever inseperablie, as
subsisting in one and the same Deity.

70. Of comunion in both kinds I have spoken before. In each kind is the body
and the blood, though diversely. Concomitancie.
The question is whether there be a divine precept for the laity to receive in
both kinds. The Church knows of none. l. 1. c. 4.
Your argument I have answered. If you dispute any more do not mistake the
state of the question. It is not of the custom of the Primitive Church, nor of
an Ecclesiastical precept only; nor how the Priest must communicate when he
does say Mass. No, these are other questions which you find also disputed
and declared in our deuines: but the question is whether there be a divine
precept obliging the laity to receive in both kinds. The Church has resolved
that there is none.

71. Touching the effect of the Sacrament, you are to regard that you do not
confound it with the substance or essence. Spiritual conjunction and union is
an effect of it. The Sacrament is before this union. Christ is there, on the
Altar, and in the Priests hands as you have heard from Antiquity, and this
before it Quoad vsum Eucharistiae, recte and sapienter Patres nostri tres
rations hoc sanctum sacramentum accipiendi distinxerunt. quosdam enim
docuerunt SACRAMENTALITER duntaxat id sumere, vt peccatores: alios tantum
SPIRITVALITER, illos nimirum qui voto propositum illum caelestem panem edentes,
fide viua quae per dilectionem operatur fructum eius and vtilitatem sentiunt:
tertios porro SACRAMENTALITER simul and SPIRITVALITER. Conc. Trid. sess. 13
cap. 8. If you understand this, as it is easy, you will understand many
passages of the Fathers which do concern the communion. Dupliciter caro
Christi and sanguis intelligitur, vel SPIRITVALIS ILLA atque diuina de qua ipse
dixi caro mea vere est cibus, eadem substantia co^parata ad diuersos modos
existendi.
and sanguis meus vere est potus: Vel caro and sanguis qua CRVCIFIXA est, qai
militis effusus est lancea. Iuxta hanc diuisionem, and in Sanctis eius
diuersitas sanguinis and carnis accipitur, vt ALIA sit caro quae visura est
salutare Dei, alia caro and sanguis quae regnum Dei NON qu^ant possidere. S.
Hieron. Comment. in cap. 1. ad Ephesians. Learn this all well, and when you read
S. Augustine it will do you good. Flesh and blood cannot possess the kingdom
of God. 1. Cor. 15. v. 50. you would think this to be against the Article of
the Resurrection. read the whole Chapter, and mark the Apostles distinction
of a body into a natural body and a spiritual body. and this spiritual
body, in substance is the same body which here nature framed, consisting of
flesh and blood, and this you believe the Resurrection. See Card. Peron his
Treatise of the Eucharist, Paris 1622.
comes to the communicants mouth. Yea some times he is received unworthily as
you may read in S. Paul: 1. Cor. 11.
but those receauers have not the spiritual effect and conjunction. they
receive the body into their bodies: they receive not grace into their sowles
from this body; because they receive it unworthily, and not as the body of
Christ (a thing most holy by reason of the vnio^ to the divine person) ought
to be received.

72. As for signs, some do signify things present; some things absent. The
Eucharist is a Sacrament and therefore a sign. it is a sign of grace, and a
sign of the body of Christ present. So the form does signify, This is my
body, and so the species under these words. do signify to good Christians,
to all those that believe Jesus Christ. S. Aug. enarrat. ps. 3. and cont.
Adimant. c. 12.
This mystery is also a representation of the bloody passion as I said
before, it is a figure of that sacrifice, yet a Sacrifice too. The word of God
is the figure of the Fathers substance, and yet he is a divine person too. The
same thing may have diverse attributes, one not excluding another. the Eucharist
is a sign, a representation, an oblation, a Sacrifice, and in it are reallie
the body and blood of Christ, yea Christ himself is there. All these do
consist, one does not exclude the other.

73. Lastly to conclude this matter, I wish you to reflect, that opposing the
Mass, as you do, you oppose all the Christian world that was before Luther.
This I will declare briefly. In Antioche. Alexandria. Jerusalem. Aethiopia
Chaldaea. East India.
First, it is manifest that all known Christian Churches in the age before
Luther did frequent the Mass. In all Europe, in all parts of Asia, and Afric
where any Christians were. The Christians in the parts lately discovered,
all were found to frequent the Mass; Also the Nestorians, and Eutichians in
Egypt: the Russians, Muscouites, and Grecians, all frequent the Mass. Which
is an evident argument they had it by tradition from the Apostles, Both those
who knew nothing of the Bishop of Rome: and those who knew him but obaied him
not all agreed in the substance of the Mass or unbloody Sacrifice.
who taught the world. for such uniformity and consent of so many Nations, so
dispersed (and some to the rest wholly unknown) in so dark a Mystery as this
is, could not be from any natural cause. Seco^dlie, all these Churches that
is, all the known Churches in the world, did believe they were thus to do by
the institution of Jesus Christ, and the Tradition of the Apostles. And among
these the true Church was one, because that is ever visible by her profession
as I have proved. Whence it follows that the frequenting of Mass is
approved by the Spirit of the true Church, S. Aug. l. 4. de bapt. c. 6
and consequently it cannot be an ertour. Thirdly, that custom which men
even then looking upwards did not see instituted by those which were later then
the Apostles, is well believed to have been delivered, by the Apostles, says
S. Augustine. But all these Churches, Infinite eyes looking upwards could not
see the Institution of unbloody Sacrifice or Mass, later then the Apostles,
which is manifest, because they all received it as divine and Apostolical
Therefore by S. Augustines rule it is well believed so to be.

74. For the later ages you easily admit they went to Mass, and that they
believed an Unbloody Sacrifice; for the Primitive Church you are yet some what
doubtful it seems what to do. Missa abominatio in calice aureo propin^^a
omnes reges terra and populos a su^mo vsque ad nouissimum sic inebriauit, vt
proram and puppim sua salutis in hac vna voragine statuerint Call. 4. Inst. c.
18.
Let me help you forward to resolve upon the truth. That unbloody Sacrifice
in the forms of bread and wine, (which we call the Mass) was frequented by
the Primitive Church I prove, first by the consent of all Christian Churches
ever since, and by their liturgies which (as all these Churches do testify)
were delivered them from the Church Primitive: Among these, have been infinite
wise men, and great Scholars as in another place I did argue. They had better
means to know the practice of the Primitive Church then we have, being nearer
and some of them immediate. The matter, as frequentation of the Mass, and
their exterior profession of their faith touching these things was subject to
the sense. And among these was the catholic Church the spouse of Jesus Christ
having the Assistance of the holy Ghost to discern the true worship of
almighty God. The testimony of all these, is sufficient to make us believe
that the Primitive Church went to Mass, or no testimony of men is sufficient
in any cause.

75. I go nearer. In the beginning of the seventh age lived Isidorus, S. Isid.
l. 1. Offic. c. 15. plura c. 18.
Bisshoppe of Civil and a Saint, and he says the order of Mass or prayers,
whereby SacrificeS offered unto God are consecrated, was first instituted by S.
Peeter, the celebration whereof (says he) THE WHOLE WORLD does perform after
one and the same manner. All this world sure had means to know what their
Fathers in the age before had done, better then we: they had their books,
they had conuersed with many of the^. let us ascend. In the sixth Age, we
have the Testimony of several Council. Agath. cap 470 Geru^ den. cap. 1
Aurelian. ^ 28. Turonens. 2 cap 3. and 4. Consta^tin act. 1. citat. Ga^ret. Co.
Gualt. S. Greg. Magn. 4. Dial. c. 58 and Hom. 37. in Eua^ S. Aug. l. 1^ de
Ciuit. c 22.
Counsels celebrated in many Nations, wherein there is such express mention
of the Mass, as no tergiuersation can suffice. But omitting that, as also the
testimony of Remigius, Cassiodorus, Fulgentius, and others of that time, I
content my self with the place before cited, out of S. Gregory because he was
in communion with all the world. Christ, living himself immortallie is AGAIN
SACRIFICED FOR US, in this Mystery of the holy oblation. In the beginning of
the sift age lived S. Augustine. when Melchisedech did bless Abraham, there
first appeared the Sacrifice which is offered now to God by Christians in ALL
THE WORLD. we do not erect Altars wherein to sacrifice to Martyrs, Idem l. 22
c. 10.
but we do offer sacrifice to their God and ours. The Sacrifice it self is
the body of Christ. And to the Jews. Open your eyes at leingth, Ibid.
and see from the east to the west, not in one place as it was appointed you,
but in EVERY PLACE offered the Sacrifice of the Christians, Idem orat cont.
Iud. c 9.10.6. vide eundem de Ciuit. l. 17. c. 17. and l. 18. c. 35. S. Ierom.
adu. Vigilant. c. 3. vide S. Amb. ad Ps. 38.
not to what God soever, but to the God of Israel who foretold it. In the
fourth age lived S. Jerome. Ill therefore does the Bishop of Rome, who over
the venerable bones (base dust according to thee Vigilantius) of dead men,
Peeter and Paul, does offer Sacrifice: and thinks their tombs to be Altars;
and this, the Bisshops, not of one town only, but of ALL THE WORLD do, who
contemning Vigilantius, enter into the Churches of the dead. And Eusebius
Bishop of Caesarea; speaking of those words of the Psalmist, thou have
prepared a table in my sight etc. He does says he, Eusebius. Caesar. Demonstr.
Euang. l. 1. c. 10.
in this openly signify the mystical unction and horrour-bringing Sacrifices
of the table of Christ, wherein operating, we are taught to offer UNBLOODY
and reasonable, and sweet VICTIMES in our whole life to the most high God by
his most eminent Priest of all. And a little after upon a place of Esaie, they
shall drink wine etc. Ibid.
He does prophecy to the Gentiles, says he, the joy of wine, signifying
therein, somewhat obscurelie, the mystery of the new Testament, BY CHRIST
instituted, Idem orat. de L^^d. Constant
which at this day verily IS OPENLY celebrated in ALL NATIONS. The same man
in his Oration in the commendation of Constantine, tells of Churches, Altars,
Vide Cyp. l. 2. Ep. 3.
and sacrifices, in the whole world. In the beginning of the third age Saint
Cyprian did live, who says, S. Cypr. lib 1. ep. 9.
all that are honored with divine Priesthood, and placed in Clericall
ministry ought not to serve but the Altar, and Sacrifices, and to follow
their prayers and devotions. Our Lord and God Jesus Christ is himself the most
high Priest of God the Father, Idem lib. ^ ep. 3.
and he first of all has offered SACRIFICE to God the Father, and has
commanded THE SAME to be done, for a commemoration of him. Tertullian,
Tertall. l. ad Scapul. c. 2. S. Iren. l. 4. adu. Haere. c. 32.
we do offer Sacrifice, for the saftie of the Emperor to our God and his. In
the second age lived Ireneus and Justinius both Saints, the one says He,
Christ, took that bread which is of the creature and gave thanks saying,
this is my body: and likewise he confessed the Chalice which is of the
creature which is according unto us to be his blood: and taught the new
oblation of the new testament, which the Church RECEAVING FROM THE APOSTLES
does offer to god in ALL THE WORLD. S. Justin. Dial. cum Tryphone
The other, Even then he, Malichias, foretold of our Sacrifices of Gentiles,
which are offered IN EVERY PLACE, that is, of the bread of the Eucharist, and
the cup likewise of the Eucharist etc. Ibid.
God preventing does wittnes all those to be grateful unto him who offer
thorough his name the sacrifices which Jesus Christ delivered to be done, that
is in the Eucharist of bread and the Chalice, which are done by Christians IN
EVERY PLACE.

76. And here I name again the Liturgies of the Churches of Rome, of
Alexandria, of Jerusalem, and of Aethiopia; wherein is evident acknowledgme^t
of this Unbloody Sacrifice in form of bread and wine whereof I speak: in so
much that all these Liturgies, and generally the Liturgies of all known
Christian Churches that ever yet were of any note in the world, consent and
agree herein. If you deny these were ancient, I bring against you all these
Churches, who profess and believe to have received them from hand to hand even
from the Apostles. Thus other books have been delivered unto us from
Antiquity. And this Tradition must have equal force in the delivering of
these books. I add further that all Churches cannot err in tradition of
Books, otherwise you could neither be certain of any work of any Father as
of S. Augustine, S. Ierom etc. nor of any part of the Bible, since therefore
all known Churches agree in the receipt of the Liturgy from the Apostles, you
must believe it; or else with the same pretense you may refuse the Bible too.

77. Next I name the Apostles who taught a propitiatory Unbloody Sacrifice in
form of bread and wine: and did also say Mass. Our B. Savior also at his
last supper did offer this die Sacrifice, (...). Sacrificantibus autem illis
domino Act. 13. v. 2. vert Eras. remember what I cited but now out of S.
Ireneus. The Liturgies of S. Peeter. S. James S. Matthew, and Saint Mark are
yet extant.
as I have declared by the Gospel in the first book; and the thing is so
clear, that you cannot avoid it if you take the words of Scripture in their
proper sense, as the Church has ever done. So well is the Mass grounded for
which we suffer now. In the Mass you are to distinguish the substance of the
sacrifice; oblation, consecration and the consumption of the sacred host, or
eating of the victime in this unbloody form by the Priest: from the Epistle,
Gospel, prayers, ceremonies etc. the first was ever since, and every where
the same: the second, not. names of Saints, prayers, ceremonies, might be and
yet may be changed by the Church.

78. To all this I add further, the testimony of the holy Ghost, the Spirit
of Truth and Interpreter of Gods word: for, that sense wherein the Catholic
Church spread over the world, does and ever did from the beginning universally
consent, is the sense of the Spiritte of the Catholic Church and of the holy
Ghost himself. And in this sense of unbloody exterior Sacrifice in form of
bread and wine the catholic church diffused thorough the whole world does
and ever did universally consent, as I have sufficiently declared.

76. Lastly taking the Christian Church thus believing and practizing, and
comparing it to the Prophecies, I confound the Jews too and make an in
euitable demo^stration that the Catholic Church in communion of all Nations,
thus offering a clean Oblation to God EVERY WHERE, is the true Church of God:
and shake those people of with that of Malachie. My will is not in you says
the Lord of hosts, and guifte I will not receive at your hand: Mal. 1. v. 10 11.
for, from the rising of the Sun even to the going down my name is great
among the GENTILES, and IN EVERY PLACE there is Sacrificing, and there is
offered to my name a CLEAN OBLATION because my name is great AMONG THE
GENTILES, says the Lord of Hosts.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. Tradition.
80. BEing not able with your silly Arguments to drive us from the Mass, you
grow desperate, and run foolishlie into the mouth of a Canon. It was
declared at Nice, and since again at Trent, Conc. Nicen 2. act. 7. Conc. Tr.
sess. 4.
that Tradition is to be admitted. without it, you can know nothing in divine
matters; because it must reach you the Scriptures, wherein you pretend to
ground your self. Yet, because it does withal offer more then you are willing
to receive, you speak against it. I have spoken of it sufficiently in the
first and third books, but since you repeat your argument I will resume also
part of my discourse.

8s. The doctrine of Tradition is grounded in the Scripture. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 15.
Hold and observe the Traditions which you have learned, either by word of
mouth or by our letter. here are distinguished as you see plainly, two ways
of delivering the sacred truth and instruction, one is by writing, the other by
word of mouth, and it is to be kept and observed (if the Apostle may be judge
in the matter) whether it be delivered the one way or the other. The same in
another place also he does teach writing unto Timothy thus, 2 Timothy 2. v 2.
The things which thou have heard of me by many witnesses commend unto
faithful men which shall be fit to teach others also. This is the care the
Apostle did take that what he had said might be conuaied unto Posterity from
hand to hand, commend unto them says he which shall be fit (he does not say
to write but) to teach these things which thou have heard of me, he does not
say which thou have read, but heard, and that openly by many witnesses:
this doctrine taught by word of mouth, is to be conserved by teaching others.
and this is the sacred depositum, where of he had spoken in the former chapter,
referring the good keeping thereof to the assistance of the holy Ghost, 2. Tim.
1. v 14.
keep the good depositum by the holy Ghost which dwells in us. Which is
conformable to our Saviors promise in S. John, He (the holy Ghost) shall
teach you all things and suggest unto you all things whatsoever I shall say
unto you. He says not, whatsoever shall be written; but whatsoever I shall
say. and God the Father in his promise to the Church, Isa. 59. v. 21
My words that I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth etc.
which words are more general, then if he had said thus: the Scripture shall
never be out of thy eyes, or thou shall be ever reading that which I will cause
to be written: or it shall never out of the book whereinsoeuer I shall write
it. he says not so, but, my words shall not out of thy mouth, and out of the
mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, from hence
forth for ever. a clear testimony of the perpetuity of sacred doctrine ever
delivered by word of mouth, which is the thing we call Tradition.

82. Heerevppon Saint Ireneus a man near unto the Apostles time, ^ Iren. l.
3. ^du. Haeres. ^. 2.3.4.
and well seen in their doctrine, does say that the Tradition in the Church
received from the Apostles has been kept by the Succession of Bisshops, that
the Apostles laid up in the Church as in a rich depositorie all truth: and that
therefore for resolution of controversies recourse is to be made unto the most
ancient Churches. So likewise Tertullian, one also of those who were near
unto the Apostles time, does tell us that in disputation with Heretics we
are not to appeal unto the Scripture, Tertull. Praesc. c. 19.
because Heretics will interpret as they list, but that we must inquire
where the faith, where the Church is, from whom, by whom, when, and to whom,
the discipline has been delivered whereby Christians are made: for where it
shall appeal that the truth of discipline and Christian faith is, there will
be the truth of the Scriptures, and of Expositions, and of all Christian
Traditions. we must use Tradition, S. Epiphan Haeres 61. Vide eundem in
haeresi 55. and 69.
says S. Epiphanius, because all things cannot be had out of divine scripture:
wherefore the holy Apostles have delivered some things by scriptures, and some
things by Tradition. Many things, says Saint Augustine, are not found in the
writings of the Apostles, nor in the constitutions of later Counsels, which
notwithstanding are believed to have been delivered and commended by them (the
Apostles) because by the universal Church they are observed. S. August. l. 2.
Bapt c. Donat. c. 7.
The doctrines which are observed and taught in the Church we have partly by
the written word, and partly we have had them brought unto us by Apostolical
tradition, S. Basil. l. de sp. s. c. 27. Ib. c. 29. S. Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. ^.
says S. Basil, and in another place I esteem it Apostolical to persevere in
unwritten traditions. It is manifest says S. John Chrysostom, that the
Apostles delivered not all by letters but many things without writing, and
these, the unwritten, are as worthy to be believed as those other delivered by
writing. Wherefore we think the Churches tradition worthy of belief: it is
a tradition, Vincent. Lirin. c. 1. and 2.
look no more. To conclude, Vincentius Lirinensis in his book of the Profane
Novelty of Heresies, does tell that he learned of wise and holy men this way
to persevere in the true faith, to fence it as he says with the authority of
the divine law and with the tradition of the Catholic Church. And obiecting
presently to him self, as if Ecclesiastical authority were not necessary
because of the sufficiency of the Scriptures he answeares, that it is
necessary because, all men understand not the Scripture the same way because
of the depth of it, which he declares largely in old Heretics, and the same
we see in the modern by experience, and then concludes, that it is therefore
very necessary in regard of so many windings of error, to direct the line of
prophetical and Apostolical interpretation according to the rule of the
ecclesiastical and Catholic sense.

83. This is here sufficient for Traditions divine and Apostolical, which the
Spiritte of the Church (being to lead unto all truth) does distinguish from
such as are false, and superstitious, and does easily defend against all you
can say. The Scripture has not one word against them, as any man will easily
see who does but mark what he does read, and will not take speaking for
writing, which the most ignorant with attention can distinguish in them selves,
being able to do the one and not the other. And the Fathers are clear as you
have seen, requiring ever tradition (as indeed it is required) for the
Scripture and for the sense: though the written word be perfect, within its
own bounds. You also though you loath it never so much, must needs admit of
it for the Scripture, for the number of Canonical books, for the pars of
them, for the sense, and for other things: you being not able any other way in
the world to answer any man who would deny them, or to persuade him to
believe that you have the word of God, or any part of it. Moreover this
doctrine is by general consent of the Church defined in the Counsels of Nice
and Trent, and has been the means whereby the Catholic Church has
conserved until now the word of God, and therefore the contrary open Heresy,
being opposite unto Gods express words which I have put down in the beginning
of this chapter, and to the belief of the old Fathers, of general Counsels,
and of the Church.

84 The text, all scripture is profitable etc. is answered in the first book.
c. 4.
It is profitable, true, but it is not all sufficient. It is sufficient too in
one kind; for the written word; but nor in all kinds, not all-sufficient.
Tradition and divine Assistance, are necessary too, each in their kind does
concur. Tradition is more general then writing; it delivers the scripture
and the sense of it, and can teach also without writing, and did before the
Scripture was extant. This Tradition relieth upon the divine Assistance,
whereof I have discoursed largely the third book, and need not repeat it
here. Particular causes in this lower world are sufficient in their kind, a
horse to generate a horse, a man to generate a man, but the effect is not
produced without the concurrence of higher causes. The Sun and a man says
the Philosopher produce a man. The inferior and superior causes are
sufficient in their kinds, and yet unless the prime and most universal cause
does concur nothing is produced. You are to prove that the Scriture is
sufficient in all kinds if you will exclude tradition. To all your peaching,
your mouth is profitable, and sufficient too in that kind, you need not two
mouths; but wthout a tongue you cannot do it. Mouth and tongue are
profitable, and sufficient in their kinds, but you cannot do it without
brains, brains and wit are profitable and sufficient in their kinds but all
will not serve without learning. So that you see the argument is not good; it
is profitable and to all, therefore all-sufficient.

85. And thus I am come at last to the end of this part also, having answered
the chiefest things which you oppose in the decrees of the Church, and showed
how the Church representative is unjustly accused of error. The Decrees of
general Counsels were believed before Calvin had any School, and will be
when he has never a Scholar. In them is the highest TEACHING AVTHORITIE in
the world, and therefore the Scholars of Jesus Christ must believe what they
define. The sheep are not to choose their pasture: old wives and plowmen are
not to decide Controversies in Religion: they are not to asce^d the Chair and
expound Scripture to the world. No, the Pastors must do this; Mat. 28. Act.
20.10.21. Ephesians. 4.
The Apostles and their successors were sent to teach. God put Bisshops to rule
the Church; he charged Peeter to feed his flock. The pastors are to teach.
The sheep to learn.

86. In general Counsels the Pastors are are assembled, their Authority is
united there, to move the Whole, to teach the Church. The Church is to follow
their common direction, and therefore it belonges to Gods providence to assist
them defining; And the whole Church universally does believe that such
Counsels are assisted, and cannot err; learned, unlearned, people, and
Pastors, all believe it; and all the Church as I showed you before cannot err.
The Apostles did believe it also, and so understood the promise of Jesus
Christ, Act. 15. Io. 16.
when he said that the holy Ghost should teach them all truth. God rules and
moves the lower world by the higher. The heavens virtue does begette and
conserve things here on earth. To the heavens for the regularitie of their
Motion he has addicted an Intelligence. Our Savior has so disposed his
Church, that the Laity are moved and governed in matters of Religion by the
Clergy. Romans 20. Romans 10.
The Pastors begette and conserve in the people faith by preaching the the word
of God. And to the Pastors for the Regularitie of their Motion he has left an
Assisting Spirit, Io. 16.
the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth. The Christian truth is to be learned in
the School of Jesus Christ: this School is the the Catholic Church: The
highest CHAIER in it, is a Perfect Oecumenicall COUNCIL. No man has, or can
with any appearance pretend, (as will appear in the examination) a fuller
participation of the TEACHING POWER, then such a Council.

87. To make an end therefore, consider well what I do say. That definition,
which the Catholic Church universally, Of Church proposition there is more
in the third book, where I have also told you how the divine authority, and
the Church authority do move both in several kinds, to the same act.
does take for a suffic^e^^ direction of her faith by way of Proposition, IS
FREE from error. Otherwise the Catholic Church universally might err,
which is impossible, as I have declared in the third book. Now, the Catholic
Church universally, does take the definition of the Council which SHE
ESTEEMS Oecumenicall, to be a sufficient direction of her faith by way of
Proposition, as I have declared there also. And hence it comes that the
definition of a Council ESTEEMED by the Catholic Church, Oecumenicall, is
free from error. Will you have another way without recourse to such a
Council? Take this. What the Bisshops diffused (those I mean who are in the
Catholic communion) do uniformly teach, is true. If you should oppose, that
they are many, and that you cannot know the doctrine of them all being
diffused: I would answer, that by their communion with the Sea Apostolic
their doctrine is known sufficiently for this purpose, and their communion is
very manifest unto all. Where you must note that it is the exterior profession
which I atte^d unto, Proposition
this is easily known, and this, as far as it is uniform in ALL Bishops in
the Catholic communion (be they many or few, so they be all) is WARRANTED by
the Holy Ghost: and by this exterior proposition or common doctrine,
(whatsoever else any of them think secretly in their minds) I am to be
directed. Ephesians. 4. Mat. 28.10.16.
He, Christ, gave Pastors, that we be not wavering. Teach all Nations, and
behold, I am with you. The spirit of truth, shall teach you all truth.

If you dispute again, meddle not with points, not yet agreed upon among us.
Talk not of things controuerted in our Schools at this day. The proposition
which you oppose, if you will oppose me, must be a Catholic proposition
agreed on generally by the Church. Other things I can dispute in our own
Schools, and with such as know them better then you do.


