THE MOTHERS BLESSING. OR The godly counsel of a Gentlewoman not long since
deceased, left behind her for her CHILDREN:

Containing many good exhortations, and godly admonitions, profitable for all
Parents to leave as a Legacy to their Children, but especially for those, who
by reason of their young years stand most in need of Instruction.

By Mris. DOROTHY LEIGH.

PROVERB. 1.8. My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not
the law of thy mother. Printed at London for John Budge, and are to be sold at
the great Southdore of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1616.

TO THE HIGH and excellent Princess, the Lady ELIZABETH her Grace, daughter to
the high and mighty King of great Britain, and Wife to the illustrious
Prince, the Count Palatine of the Rhine: D. L. Wishes all grace and
prosperity here, and glory in the world to come.
MOst worthy and renowned Princess,
I being troubled and wearied with fear, lest my children should not find the
right way to heaven, thought with my self that I could do no less for them,
then every man will do for his friend, which was, to write them the right
way, that I had truly observed out of the written word of GOD, lest for want
of warning they might fall where I stumbled, and then I should think my self
in the fault, who knew there were such downe-falls in the world, that they
could hardly climb the hill to heaven without help, and yet had not told them
thereof. Wherefore I writ them the right and ready way to Heaven well waranted
by the scriptures of the old and new Testament, which is the true word of God,
and told them how many false paths they should find, how they should find
them, and what care they should have to shun them: if they took a false way,
what a trouble they should have in turning again, what danger if they went on:
and of many doubts which the world would make without a cause, and how silent
it would be in danger. Thus when I had written unto them of these things, I
was at much peace, quiet and contentment.

But as no contentment in the world continues long, so suddenly there arose a
new care in my mind, how this scroule should be kept for my children: for
they were too young to receive it, my self too old to keep it, men too wise
to direct it to, the world too wicked to endure it. Then in great grief I
looked up to heaven, from whence I knew comes al comfort, and looking up, I
saw a most Angelical throne of Princely Peers and peerless Princes prepared
for heaven, and yet by the appointment of God were here to comfort us on the
earth: then I perceived that this Throne was the joy of England: then I
considered that the highest blud had the lowest mind: then I saw humility
looking downe-ward, while the sweet slips of her virtue grew upward: then, even
then, Princely Lady, I beheld your mild and courteous countenance, which
showed, your heart was bent to do good to all: wherefore without fear, and
with much faith, I adventured to make your Grace the protectresse of this my
Book, knowing that if you would but suffer your name to be seen in it,
Wisdom would allow it, and all the wicked wind in the world could not blow
it away. The Lord multiply his graces more and more on you, and vouchsafe unto
you a numerous posterity, in whom your Grace may receive much joy and comfort,
and GODS Church, and true Religion continual defense and propagation.

Your Graces, in all humble and obseruant duty. D. L.

TO MY Beloved sons, GEORGE, JOHN, and WILLIAM LEIGH, all things pertaining
to life and godliness.
MY Children,
God having taken your Father out of this vale of tears, to his everlasting
mercy in CHRIST, my self not only knowing what a care he had in his life
time, that you should be brought up godlily, but also at his death being
charged in his will by the love and duty which I bare him, to see you well
instructed and brought up in knowledge, I could not choose but seek (according
as I was by duty bound) to fulfill his will in all things, desiring no greater
comfort in the World, then to see you grow in godliness, that so you might
meet your Father in heaven, where I am sure he is, my self being a witness
of his Faith in Christ. And seeing my self going out of the world, and you but
coming in, I know not how to perform this duty so well, as to leave you these
few lines, which will show you as well the great desire your Father had both of
your spiritual and temporal good, as the care I had to fulfill his will in
this, knowing it was the last duty I should perform unto him. But when I had
written these things unto you, and had (as I thought) something fulfilled your
Fathers request, yet I could not see to what purpose it should tend, unless it
were sent abroad to you: for should it be left with the eldest, it is likely
the youngest should have but little part in it. Wherefore setting aside all
fear, I have adventured to show my imperfections to the view of the World, not
regarding what censure shall for this be laid upon me, so that herein I may
show my self a loving Mother, and a dutiful Wife: and thus I leave you to the
protection of him that made you, And rest till death,

Your fearful, faithful, and careful Mother, D. L.

Counsel to my Children.
MY Sons, the readers of this book,
I do you not entreat
To bear with each misplaced word,
for why, my paine's as great
To write this little book to you
(the world may think indeed)
As it will be at any time
for you the same to read.
But this I much and often desire,
that you would do for me,
To gather honey of each flower,
as does the labourous Be.
She looks not who did place the Plant,
nor how the flower did grow,
Whether so stately up aloft,
or near the ground below.
But where she finds it, there she works,
and gets the wholesome food,
And bears it home, and lays it up,
to do her Country good,
And for to serve her self at need
when winter does begin:
When storm and tempest is without,
then she does find within.
A sweet and pleasant wholesome food,
a house to keep her warm,
A place where softly she may rest,
and be kept from all harm.
Except the Be that idle is,
and seeks too soon for rest,
Before she filled has her house,
whereby her state is blessed.
And then as she did rest too soon,
too soon she sorrow knows:
When storms and tempests are without,
then she her self beshrowes.
She looks out and sees death,
ready her to devour:
Then does she wish that she had got
more of the wholesome flower.
For why, within, her store is spent,
before the winter's past.
And she by no means can endure
the stormy winters blast.
She looks out, and sees death,
and finds no less within,
Then too too late for to repent,
you see she does begin.
Therefore see you noridle be,
this I would have you know,
Be sure still that the ground be good,
whereout the Plant does grow:
Then gather well and lose no time,
take heed now you do see,
Lest you be unprovided found,
as was the idle Be.
D. L.
THE MOTHERS Blessing.
CHAP. I. The occasion of writing this Book, was the consideration of the care
of Parents for their Children.
MY Children, when I did truly weigh, rightly consider, and perfectly see the
great care, labor, travail, and continual study, which Parents take to
enrich their children, some wearing their bodies with labor, some breaking
their sleeps with care, some sparing from their own bellies, and many
hazarding their souls, some by bribery, some by simony, others by perjury,
and a multitude by usury, some stealing on the Sea, others begging by Land
portions from every poor man, not caring if the whole Commonwealth be
impouerished, so their children be enriched: for themselves they can be
content with meat, drink, and cloth, so that their children by their means
may be made rich, always abusing this portion of Scripture: He that
provides not for his own family, is worse then an Infidel: 1.Tim. 5.8.
ever seeking for the temporal things of this world, and forgetting those
things which be eternal: when I considered these things, I say, I thought
good (being not desirous to enrich you with transitory goods) to exhort and
desire you to follow the counsel of Christ: Mat.6. 33.
First seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then all these
things shall be administered unto you.

CHAP. 2. The first cause of writing, is a Motherly affection.
But lest you should marvel; my children, why I do not, according to the
usual custom of women, exhort you by word and admonitions, rather then by
writing, a thing so unusual among us, and especially in such a time, when
there be so many godly books in the world, that they mould in some men's
studies, while their Masters are mard, because they will not meditate upon
them; as many men's garments motheate in their chests, while their Christian
brethren quake with cold in the street for want of covering; know therefore,
that it was the motherly affection that I bare unto you all, which made me now
(as it often has done heretofore) forget my self in regard of you: neither
care I what you or any shall think of me, if among many words I may write but
one sentence, which may make you labor for the spiritual food of the soul,
which must be gathered every day out of the word, as the children of Israel
gathered Manna in the wilderness. By the which you may see it is a labor: but
what labor? a pleasant labor, a profitable labor: a labor without the which
the soul cannot live. For as the children of Israel must needs starve, except
they gathered every day in the wilderness and fed of it, so must your souls,
except you gather the spiritual Manna out of the word every day, and feed of it
continually: for as they by this Manua comforted their hearts, strengthened
their bodies, and preserved their lives; so by this heavenly Word of God, you
shall comfort your souls, make them strong in Faith, and grow in true
godliness, and finally preserve them with great joy, to everlasting life,
through Faith in Christ; whereas if you desire any food for your souls, that
is not in the written Word of God, your souls die with it even in your hearts
and mouths; even as they, that desired other food, Number. 11.3
dyed with it in their mouths, were it never so dainty: so shall you, and
there is no recovery for you.

CHAP. 3. The best labor is for the food of the Soul.
OH my Children, is not this a comfortable labor? Our Savior Christ says,
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to
everlasting life: Ioh. 6.27.
and yet I see and fear, you shall see how many there be that cross Christ
in these words: nay rather, cross themselves: for, contrary to our blessed
Saviors counsel, they labor for the meats that perishes, and in the mean
time they lose the food of everlasting life. This (my beloved sons and dear
children) this is the cause that makes me so much to fear you, and those who
hereafter shall come of you, because I see so many that regard not the words of
our Savior Christ, who came from the high Throne of God, and preached to us,
and prayed for us, Gal. 4.4.
and took our flesh upon him, and kept it without sin, refusing no company,
healing every sickness and disease, Math. 4.23.
fed the hungry, gave pardon to every sinner that would but ask it, dyed for
us, Romans 4.25.
endured the pains of hell for us, yea, more then this, even in our own flesh
he overcame sin, death, and hell, yea, and more then that also, he carried
our flesh into Heaven in the sight of many, and there keeps it, and is become
a Mediator for us in it; he joined himself to us in our flesh, as it is
written, He took our flesh upon him: Heb. 2.14.
he taught us to join our flesh unto him by faith, that Where he is, there
we might be with him also: Ioh. 17.24.
and if we will not follow him, that has done all this for us, and much more
then I can write or declare, how unthankful shall we show our selves?

My dear Children, have I not cause to fear? the holy Ghost says by the
Prophet, Can a Mother forget the child of her womb? Es. 49. 15.
As if he should say, Is it possible, that she, which has carried her child
within her, so near her heart, and brought it forth into this world with so
much bitter pain, so many groans and cries, can forget it? nay rather, will
she not labor now till Christ be formed in it? will she not bless it every
time it suckes on her breasts, when she feels the blood come from her heart
to nourish it? Will she not instruct it in the youth, and admonish it in the
age, and pray for it continually? Will she not be afraid, that the child which
she endured such pain for, should endure endless pain in hell? Could Saint
Paul say unto the Galathians, that were but strangers to him concerning the
flesh, only he had spent some time amongst them to bring them to the profession
of the truth, from which he feared they would fall: and could he, I say,
write unto them, My little children, of whom I do travail again in birth,
until Christ be formed in you? Gal. 4. 19.
And can any man blame a mother (who indeed brought forth her child with much
pain) though she labor again till Christ be formed in them? Romans 9. 3.
Could S. Paul wish himself separated from God for his brethrens sake and will
not a mother venture to offend the world for her childrens sake? Therefore let
no man blame a mother, though she something exceed in writing to her children,
since every man knows, that the love of a mother to her children, is hardly
contained within the bounds of reason. Neither must you, my sons, when you
come to be of judgment, blame me for writing to you, since Nature tells me,
that I cannot long be here to speak unto you, and this my mind will continue
long after me in writing; and yet not my mind, but I seek to put you in mind
of the words of our Savior Christ, which says, Labor not for the meat that
perishes, etc. Ioh. 6. 27
where you see, that the food of the soul is to be gotten by labor. Why
stand you here (says Christ?) Mat. 20. 6.
here is not time to be idle: they that will rest with Christ in heaven, must
labor to follow him here on earth. Blessed are the dead, which dye in the
Lord: for they rest from their labor. Reu. 14. 13
Thus you see, if you will go to the place, which Christ has bought for you,
you must labor to follow Christ: he labored to get it for you, or else all
your labor would have been as nothing; and now you must labor to lay hold on
him, or else all your labor will be worth nothing. Many there be that labor
the clean contrary way; for they leave Christ, and take hold of traditions:
and a number loyter, and by that means never get hold on Christ. And this is
the cause why I write unto you, that you might never fly from him with the one,
nor yet loyter with the other, but that you might learn to follow him, and to
take hold of him in the written Word of God, where you shall find him (as
Christ himself witnesses) and no where else. Ioh. 5. 35
Search the Scriptures, says he, for they testify of me. Labor therefore,
that you may come unto Christ.

CHAP. 4. The second cause is, to stir them up to write.
THe second cause, my sons, why I write unto you (for you may think that had
I had but one cause, I would not have changed the usual order of women, is
needful to be known, and may do much good. For where I saw the great mercy
of God toward you, in making you men, and placing you amongst the wife, where
you may learn the true written Word of God, which is the pathway to all
happiness, and which will bring you to the chief City, new Jerusalem, and
the seven liberal sciences, whereby you shall have at least a superficial
sight in all things: I thought it fit to give you good example, and by writing
to entreat you, that when it shall please God to give both virtue and grace
with your learning, he having made you men, that you may write and speak the
Word of God without offending any, that then you would remember to write a
book unto your children, of the right and true way to happiness, which may
remain with them and theirs for ever.

CHAP. 5. The third cause is to move women to be careful of their children.
THe third is, to encourage women (who, I fear, will blush at my boldness)
not to be ashamed to show their infirmities, but to give men the first and
chief place: yet let us labor to come in the second; and because we must
needs confess, that sin entered by us into our posterity, let us show how
careful we are to seek to Christ to cast it out of us, and our posterity, and
how fearful we are that our sin should sink any of them to the lowest part
of the earth; wherefore let us call upon them to follow Christ, who will carry
them to the height of heaven.

CHAP. 6. The fourth cause is, to arm them against poverty.
THe fourth cause is, to desire you, that you will never fear poverty, but
always know, it is the state of the children of GOD to be poor in the world.
Christ says, Ye shall have the poor with you always. Ioh. 12.8.
It may be he has appointed you or yours to be of this poor number: do not
strive against Christ. It is as hard (says he) for a rich man to enter into
heaven, as for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle. Math. 19. 24.
Saint James says, Woe be to you that are rich. Iam. 5.1.
S. Paul says, The desire of money is the root of all evil. 1. Tim. 6. 10.
Which if it be true, as it is not to be doubted of, and you fear poverty,
then does it necessarily follow, that you will desire the root of all evil,
which is money, and so become good for nothing. The fear of poverty makes men
run into a thousand sins, which nothing else could draw them to: for many
fearing the cold storms of poverty, which never last long, run on to the hot
fire of hell, which never has an end. This matter requires many words, for it
is hard to persuade the nature of man from the fear of poverty: wherefore I
will speak more of that afterward: only I now say, Fear not to be poor
with Lazariu, but fear a thousand times to be rich with Dives.

CHAP. 7. The fifth cause is, not to fear death.
THe fifth cause is, to desire you never to fear death; for the fear of death
has made many to deny the known truth, and so have brought a heavy judgment
of God upon themselves. A great reason, why you should not fear death is,
because you can by no means shun it: you must needs endure it, and therefore
it is meet that you should be always prepared for it, and never fear it. He
that will save his life, Math. 16. 26.
says Christ, shall lose it, and he that will lose his life for my sake and
the Gospels, shall find it. Do not fear the pains of death, in what shape
soever he come: for perhaps thou shall have more pains upon thy bed, and be
worse provided to bear them, by reason of some grievous sickness, then thou
art like to feel, when God shall call thee forth to witness his truth. The
only way not to fear death, is always to be provided to dye. And that thou
may always be provided to dye, thou must be continually strengthening thy
faith with the promises of the Gospel; Ioh. 11.25. 26.
as, He that lives, and believes, shall not dye: and though he were dead,
yet shall he live. Psalm. 1. 2.
Meditate in the laws of the Lord day and night (as the Psalmist says) and
then thou shall be fit to bring forth fruit in due season: then thou shall be
fit to serve God, thy King and country, both in thy life and in thy death, and
always shall show thy self a good member of JESUS Christ, a faithful subject
to thy Prince, and always fit to govern in the Christian commonwealth: and
then thou may faithfully and truly say: Whether I live or dye, I am the
Lords. Romans 14.8.
But without continual meditation of the Word this cannot be done. And this
was one of the chief causes why I writ unto you, to tell you that you must
meditate in the Word of God; for many read it, and are never the better, for
want of meditation. If ye hear the Word, and read it, without meditating
thereon, it does the soul no more good then meat and drink does the body,
being seen and felt, and never fed upon: for as the body will dye although in
see meat: even so will the soul, for all the hearing and reading of the word,
if that ye do not meditate upon it, and gather faith, and strengthen it, and
get hold of Christ; which if ye do, Christ will bring you to the kingdom of
his Father; to which you can come by no means but by faith in him.

CHAP. 8. The sixth cause is, to persuade them to teach their children.
THe sixth reason is, to entreat and desire you, and in some sort to command
you, that all your children, be they Males or Females, may in their youth
learn to read the Bible in their own mother tongue; for I know, it is a great
help to true godliness. And let none of you plead poverty against this; for I
know, that if you be neither covetous, prodigal, nor idle, either of which
sins will let no virtue grow where they come, that you need not fail in this:
but if you will follow the commandment of the Lord, and labor six days,
and keep the seventh holy to the Lord, and love him with all your heart,
soul, and strength, you will not only be willing, but also able to see them
all brought up to read the Bible. Solomon that was wise by the Spirit of God,
said: Eccl. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. And ye are also commanded, to
write it upon the walls of your houses, and to teach it your childern. Deuteronomy.
11. 19.20.
I know (says God) that Abraham will teach his children, Genesis 18.19.
and his childrens children to walk in thy commandments. Also I further
desire you, because I wish all well, and would be glad you should do as much
good as could be in the wilderness of this world, that if any shall at any time
desire you to be a Witness to the baptizing of their child, that then you
shall desire the person so desiring, to give you his faithful word, that the
child shall be taught to read, so soon as it can conveniently learn, and
that it shall so continue till it can read the Bible. If this will not be
granted, you shall refuse to answer for the child; otherwise do not refuse to
be a witness to any; for it is a good Christian duty. Moreover, forget not,
whether you answer for the child or no, to pray, that the child baptized, may
receive the holy Ghost, with all other children of the faithful, especially
when you are where a child is baptized; for it is your duty to pray for the
increase of the Church of God. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem (says the
Psalmist) let them prosper that love thee. Psalm. 122.6.


CHAP. 9 The seventh cause is, that they should give their children good names.
THE seventh cause is, to entreat you, that though I do not live to be a
witness to the baptizing of any of your children, yet you would give me leave
to give names to them all. For though I do not think any holiness to be in
the name, but know that God has his in every place, and of every name; yet I
see in the Bible, it was observed by GOD himself, to give choice names to his
children, which had some good signification. I think it good therefore, to
name your children after the names of the Saints of God, which may be a means
to put them in mind of some virtues which those Saints used; especially, when
they shall read of them in the Bible: and seeing many are desirous to name both
their own children and others after their own names, this will be a means to
increase the names of the Saints in the Church, and so none shall have occasion
to mislike his name, since he bears the name of such a Saint, as has left a
witness to the world, that he lived and dyed in the true faith of JESUS
Christ. The names I have chosen you, are these; Philip, Elizabeth, James, Anna,
John and Susanna. The virtues of them that bore those names, and the causes why
I chose them, I let pass, and only mean to write of the last name The story
of Susanna, though it be not canonical, nor to be equalled to those books that
are, yet it may be true, and of good use, as many other histories written by
men are.
Susan, famoused through the world for chastity; a virtue which always has
been, and is of great account, not only amongst the Christians and people of
God, but even among the Heathen and Infidels: insomuch that some of them have
written, that a woman that is truly chaste, is a great partaker of all other
virtues; and contrariwise, that the woman that is not truly chaste, has no
virtue in her. The which saying may well be warranted by the Scripture; for who
so is truly chaste, is free from idleness and from all vain delights, full of
humility, and all good Christian virtues: who so is chaste, is not given to
pride in apparel, nor any vanity, but is always either reading, meditating,
or practicing some good thing which she has learned in the Scripture. But she
which is unchaste, is given to be idle; or if she do any thing, it is for a
vain glory, and for the praise of men, more then for any humble, loving and
obedient heart, that she bears unto God and his Word: who said, Six days
thou shall labor; Exodus 20. 9.
and so left no time for idleness, pride, or vanity; for in none of these is
there any holiness. The unchaste woman is proud, and always decking her self
with vanity, and delights to hear the vain words of men, in which there is
not only vanity, but also so much wickedness, that the vain words of men, and
women's vainenesse in hearing them, has brought many women to much sorrow and
vexation; as woeful experience has, and will make many of them confess. But
some will say, Had they only lent an ear to their words they had done well
enough. To answer which, I would have every one know, that one sin begets
another. The vain words of the man, and the idle cares of the woman, beget
unchaste thoughts oftentimes in the one, which may bring forth much wickedness
in them both.

Gen.3. 12.
Man said once, The woman which thou gave me, beguiled me, and I did eat.
But we women may now say, that men lie in wait every where to deceive us, as
the Elders did to deceive Susanna. Wherefore let us be, as she was, chaest,
watchful, and wary, keeping company with maids. Once Judas betrayed his
Master with a kiss, and repented it: but now men like Judas, betray their
Mistresses with a kiss and, repent it not: but laugh and rejoice, that they
have brought sin and shame to her that trusted them. The only way to avoid al
which, is to be chaste with Susanna, and being women, to embrace that virtue,
which being placed in a woman, is most commendable.

An unchaste woman destroys both the body and the soul of him, she seems
most to love, and it is almost impossible to set down the mischiefs, which
have come through unchaste women. Solomon says, that her steps lead to hell.
Prou. 2.18
Wherefore bring up your daughters, as Susanna's Parents brought up her: teach
them the law of the Lord continually, and always persuade them to embrace
this virtue of chastity.

It may be, that some of you will marvel, since I set down names for the
imitation of their virtues, that bore them; why I placed not Mary in the first
place, a woman virtuous above all other women. My reason was this, because I
presumed, that there was no woman so senseless, as not to look what a
blessing God has sent to us women through that gracious Virgin, by whom it
pleased GOD to take away the shame, which EVE our Grandmother had brought us
to: For before, men might say, The woman beguiled me, and I did eat the
poisoned fruit of disobedience, and I dye. But now man may say, if he say
truly, The woman brought me a Savior, and I feed of him by faith and live.
Here is this great and woeful shame taken from women by God, working in a
woman: man can claim no part in it: the shame is taken from us, and from our
posterity for ever: The seed of the woman has taken down the Serpents head;
Genesis 3.15.
and now whosoever can take hold of the seed of the woman by faith, shall
surely live for ever. And therefore all generations shall say, that she was
blessed, who brought us a Savior, the fruit of obedience, that whosoever
feeds of, shall live forever: and except they feed of the seed of the woman,
they have no life. Will not therefore all women seek out this great grace of
God, Ioh. 6. 53
that by Mary has taken away the shame, which before was due unto us ever
since the fall of man?

Mary was filled with the Holy Ghost, and with all goodness, and yet is called
the blessed Virgin: as if our God should (as he does indeed) in brief
comprehend all other virtues under this one virtue of chastity: wherefore I
desire, that all women, what name so ever they bear, woule learn of this
blessed Virgin to be chaste: for though she were more replenished with grace
then any other, and more freely beloved of the Lord, yet the greatest title
that she had, was, that she was a blessed and pure Virgin; which is a great
cause to move all women, whether they be maids or wives (both which estates
she honored) to live chastely, to whom for this cause God has given a cold
and temperate disposition, and bound them with these words; Thy desire shall be
subject to thy husband. Genesis 3.6.
As if God in mercy to women should say; You of your selves shall have no
desires, only they shall be subject to your husbands: which has been verified in
Heathen women, so as it is almost incredible to be believed: for many of them
before they would be defiled, have been careless of their lives, and so have
endured all those torments, that men would devise to inflict upon them, rather
then they would lose the name of a modest maid, or a chaste Matrone. Yea, and
so far they have been from consenting to any immodestie, that if at any time
they have been ravished, they have either made away themselves, or at least
have separated themselves from company, not thinking themselves worthy of any
society, after they have once bin deflowred, though against their wills.
Wherefore the woman that is infected with the sin of uncleanness, is worse then
a beast, because it desires but for nature, and she, to satisfy her corrupt
lusts.

Some of the Fathers have written, that it is not enough for a woman to be
chaste, but even so to behave her self, that no man may think or deem her to
be unchaste. We read, that in the Primitive Church, when there were wars
between the Christians and the Pagans, if at any time the Pagans had gotten
the victory, that then they would seek to deflowre the Virgins: to the which
sin before the Christians would yield, they would continually lay violent
hands upon themselves; in so much that the Doctors of the Church were
oftentimes constrained to make diverse Sermons and Orations to them, to
dissuade them from that cruelty, which they inflicted upon themselves, rather
then they would suffer themselves to be deflowred: such a disgrace did they
think it, to have but one spot of uncleanness, and yet none of these were so
holy as this Mary, this pure and undefiled Virgin.

Some godly and reverend men of the Church have gathered this, that there were
five women of great virtue in the time of the Law, the first letters of whose
names do make her whole name to show, that she had all their virtues wholly
combined in her, as namely; Michal, Abigail, Rachel, Judith, and Anna,


1. Sam. 19. 12.
She was as faithful to her husband, as Michal, who saved her husband David
from the fury of Saul, although he were her father and her King, not
preferring her own life before the safety of her husband. 1. Sam. 25. 3.
She was as wise as Abigail, who is highly commended for her wisdom: amiable
in the sight of her husband, as Rachel: Gen.29.17
stout and magnanimous in the time of trouble, as Judith: patient and zealous
in prayer, 1. Sam. 1. 10.11.
as Anna. Seeing then, that by this one name, so many virtues are called to
remembrance, I think it meet, that good names be given to all women, that
they might call to mind the virtues of those women whose names they bear: but
especially above all other moral Virtues, let women be persuaded by this
discourse, to embrace chastity, without which we are mere beasts, and no women.

CHAP. 10. Reasons of giving good names to Children.
IF ye shall think me too teadious about the naming your children, I tell you,
that I have some reason for it; and the first is this, to make them read in
the Bible Secondly, because many have made a God of the virgin Marie, the
Scripture warranting no such thing, and have prayed to her, (though there they
shall find that she was a woman, yea, and a comfort to all women, for she has
taken away the reproach, which of right belonged unto us, and by the seed of the
woman we are al saved) it was therefore fit I should speak largely of that
name. Thirdly, seeing many have the second Commandments; I thought it better
to have you remember them, by bearing their names, and by reading what they
taught us in the Scripture, and how they led their lives, then by looking upon
a painted piece of Paper, or a carved stone. And this by the way may be
marvelled at, that they which love to worship Images, never love to name their
Children after the names of the Saints; for if they had so done, by this time
we should have had no other names but Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Timothy, and
such as followed Christ faithfully. Then Moses and his mildness would be
more talked of: Samuel and his obedience would be more sought after: Abraham
and his faithfulness, would be more followed. Moses? Is this an Elias, and
have such qualities as these?

CHAP. 11. Children to be taught betimes, and brought up gently.
I Am further also to entreat you, that all your Children may be taught to
read, beginning at four years old or before, and let them learn till ten,
in which time they are not able to do any good in the Commonwealth, but to
learn how to serve God, their King and Country by reading. And I desire,
entreat, and earnestly beseech you, and every one of you, that you will have
your Children brought up with much gentleness and patience. What disposition
so ever they be of, gentleness will soonest bring them to virtue; for frowardnes
and curstness does harden the heart of a child, and makes him weary of
virtue. Among the froward thou shall learn frowardness: let them therefore be
gently used, and always kept from idleness, and bring them up in the Schools
of learning, if you be able, and they fit for it. If they will not be
Scholars, yet I hope they will be able by Gods grace to read the Bible, the
law of God, and to be brought to some good vocation or calling of life.
Solomon says, Pro.22.6.
Teach a child in his youth the trade of his life, and he will not forget it,
nor depart from it when he is old.

CHAP. 12. Choice of Wives.
NOw for your wives the Lord direct you; for I cannot tell you, what is best to
be done. Our Lord says; First seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all things else shall be ministered unto you. First, you
must seek a godly wife, that she may be a help to you in godliness: for God
said, It is not good for man to be alone, let him have a helper meet for him;
Gen.2.18.
and she cannot be meet for him, except she be truly godly; for God counts
that the man is alone still, if his wife be not godly. If I should write unto
you how many the Scripture makes mention of, that have been drawn to sin,
because they married ungodly wives, it would be tedious for you to read.

Gen.6.2.3
The world was drowned, because men married ungodly wives. 1. King. 11.4.
Solomon, who was not only the wisest man that ever was, but was also mightily
endued with the Spirit of God, by marrying idolatrous women, fell for the time
to idolatry. Never think to stand, where Solomon fell. I pray God that
neither you, nor any of yours may at any time marry with any of those, which
hold such superstitions, as they did, or as some do now; as namely, to pray to
Saints, to pray in Latin, to pray to go to purgatory, etc. Let no riches or
money bring your posterity to this kind of tradition. The beloved Apostle of
Christ says: 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world: for he knew well
that a little that a man loves not, would suffice him: a little with a godly
woman is better then great riches with the wicked. Rebecca says, I shall be
weary of my life, if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth; as if she
should say, If my Son marry an ungodly wife, then all my comfort of him and
his is gone, and it will be a continual grief to me, to see him in league
and friendship amongst the wicked. If such a shame and sin comes upon my Son,
as can by no means be helped, nor I by no means comforted, what avails me
then to live?

2.Cor.6. 14.
Be not unequally yoked (says the holy Ghost.) It is indeed very unequal,
for the godly and ungodly to be united together, that their hearts must be
both as one, which can never be joined in the fear of God and faith of
Christ. Love not the ungodly: marry with none, except you love her, and be not
changeable in your love; let nothing, after you have made your choice, remove
your love from her; for it is an ungodly and very foolish thing of a man to
mislike his own choice, especially since God has given a man much choice
among the godly; and it was a great cause that moved God to command his to
Marry with the godly, that there might be a continual agreement between them.

CHAP. 13. It is great folly for a man to mislike his own choice.
Me thinks I never saw a man show a more senseles simplicity, then in
misliking his own choice, when God has given a man almost a world of women
to choose him a wife in. If a man has not wit enough to choose him one,
whom he can love to the end, yet me thinks he should have discretion to
cover his own folly; but if he want discretion, me thinks he should have
policy, which never fails a man to dissemble his own simplicity in this
case. If he want wit, discretion and policy, he is unfit to marry any woman.
Do not a woman that wrong, as to take her from her friends that love her, and
after a while to begin to hate her. If she have no friends, yet thou know
not, but that she may have a husband, that may love her. If thou can not
love her to the end, leave her to him that can. Me thinks, my son could not
offend me in any thing, if he served God, except he chose a wife that he could
not love to the end: I need not say, if he served God; for if he served God,
he would obey God, and then he would choose a godly wife, and live lovingly and
godlily with her, and not do as some man, who takes a woman to make her a
companion and fellow, and after he has her, he makes her a servant and
drudge. If she be thy wife, she is always too good to be thy servant, and
worthy to be thy fellow. If thou will have a good wife, thou must go before
her in all goodness, and show her a pattern of all good virtues by thy godly
and discreet life: and especially in patience, according to the counsel of
the holy Ghost: 1. Pet. 3.7.
Bear with the woman, as with the weaker vessel. Here God shows that it is
her imperfection that honors thee, and that it is thy perfection that makes
thee to bear with her; follow the counsel of God therefore, and bear with
her. God willed a man to leave Father and Mother for his wife. Gen.2.24.
This shows what can excellent love God did appoint to be between man and
wife. In truth I cannot by any means set down the excellency of that love: but
this I assure you, that if you get wives that be godly and you love them, you
shall not need to forsake me; whereas if you have vviues that you love not, I
am sure I will forsake you. Do not your selves that wrong, as to marry a woman
that you cannot love: show not so much childishness in your sex, as to say,
you loved her once, and now your mind is changed: if thou can not love her
for the goodness that is in her, yet let the grace that is in thy self move
thee to do it; and so I leave thee to the Lord, whom I pray to guide both thee
and her with his grace, and grount that you may choose godlily, and live
happily, and dye comfortably, through faith in JESUS Christ.

CHAP. 14. How to deal with servants.
YEt one thing I am to desire you to do at my request, and for my sake: and
though it be some trouble to you to perform it, yet I assure my self you
will do it. If God shall at any time give you or any of you a servant or
servants, you shall ask them, if they can read. If they cannot, you shall at
my request teach them, or cause them to be taught, till they can read the
ten Commandments of almighty God: And then you shall persuade them to
practice by themselves, and to spend al their idle time in reading, that so
they may come the better to know the will of God written in his Word. Remember,
your servants are Gods servants as well as yours: if they be not, say as David
said: Psa.101.7.
There shall not an ungodly person dwell in my house, he that loves or makes
lies, shall depart out of my sight.

It is not for you, by any means, to keep any ungodly, profane, or wicked
person in your house; for they bring a curse upon the place wherein they are,
and not a blessing, neither will they be taught any goodness: but you must
keep those that be tractable and willing to serve God, that he may bless
you and your household. For, God does not delight in that Master, that will
suffer his servant to blaspheme his name, or to mis-spend his Sabbaoths: for
God commanded the master, Ex.20.10.
that he should see his servants to keep holy the Sabbath day; and if he
keep that day holy, he will learn to spend all the other days in the week
well, in following the duties of his calling. I pray you keep the servants of
God, and then remember they are your brethren: use them well, and be as ready
to do them good, as to have their service. Be not chiding for every trifle;
for that will hinder good living, and nothing enrich you. Be careful that they
be godly; 1.Tim.4.8 1.Tim.6. 6.7.8.
for Godliness has the promise of this present life and of the life to come:
godliness is great riches, if a man be contented with that he has: for we
brought nothing with us into this world, neither shall we carry any thing out
of the world, if we have food and raiment, let us therewith be contented.

CHAP. 15. Patience is necessary for Governors of families.
Live godlily and patiently in your house: if you cannot be patient, never
think to live godlily; for if Satan see you of a froward mind, he will soon
find matter enough to set you on work. Pray faithfully with your servants
twice a day, and live so godlily, that you may be an example to them to follow
you. Pray often privately, faithfully, and zealously unto GOD, in the name of
Christ, so as may be well warranted by his Word; for that is a true mark of
the child of God. Matt.22.14.
Many hear the Word, as our Savior witnesses, but few follow it. Many pray
openly as the Pharisees did, Mat.6.16.
to be seen of men; but Christ says, they have their reward. This was not
because Christ misliked public prayer, but because he saw their hearts, and
so knew that they prayed more to be seen of men, then for any true faith they
had in him. Christ says, Mat.18.20.
When two or three be gathered together in my name, I will be with them. And
this merciful promise is enough to make any man pray: for though he do it
very weakly and coldly; yet he shows his humility and obedience to God; and
confesses his own weakness, and calls to God for his assistance and grace
to serve him. One is also helped by the prayer of another; and the weaker is
made partaker of the prayers of the stronger; for Christ taught us to pray one
for another, Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses. When Christ says, If two or three be gathered
together in my name, I will be with them; he does not say, With some of them,
but I will be with them, that is, with all of them that are joined together in
my name. Though some be weaker, and some be stronger, yet they all show their
obedient hearts, and God will accept them in Christ. And this is a great means
to stir up their hearts to prayer; for it is the hardest thing that is, for any
man to perform rightly, truly, and faithfully.

CHAP. 16. Means to further private prayer.
NOw all things are to be used, that are means to stir us up to private
prayer, and all things are to be shunned, that hinder us from it. Those things
that may further us to it, are hearing the Word, reading it, praying publicly,
and being in company with others when they pray; for all these help to increase
and strengthen faith, and without faith it is impossible to pray aright, either
publicly or privately, or to take hold of the promises of God in Christ,
believing that our prayers shall be accepted and granted, so far forth as shall
be to Gods glory and our good: and the true servant of God will never desire
more, then he knows by faith in Christ (which he has learned by the
promises of the Gospel) that he shall have.

CHAP. 17. Lets.
THere be many things that will hinder both man and woman from this duty.
The devil will do what he can to hinder us: the world is our hindrance
continually: and a man's own friends are oftentimes hindrances too: yea, a man's
own nature will never be willing to talk with God; for by nature we run
away from him with Adam, and rather hide our selves with figge-leaues, and
excuses, then come to God and fall down before him on our faces, confess our
sins, acknowledge our unworthiness, crave pardon for Christ's sake of God,
for all of our transgressions. Yet Adam had more cause to run away, then we
have, and we have more cause a great deal to come to God, then he had; for
he knew not then that God would call him back again, and give him his pardon
in Christ, who should tread down the head of the Serpent, which beguiled him:
but we know that GOD has called Adam and all his posterity, and given them
pardon in Christ, if they will come and ask it in faith and repentance. He
therefore that does not often and privately fall down and humble himself
before God, and confess his own sins, craving pardon in Christ, and by
faith applying the promises of God to himself, has great cause to fear, that
his heart is not true and right before God. And therefore if thou can not pray
privately, or feel thy self cold in prayer, for to help thy self, thus
thou shall do.

CHAP. 17. Helps against the former lets.
EVery morning, so soon as thou can, profit or pleasure (for these are the
devils baytes) or before thou feedest thy body (for the body is a great deal
more subject to the Spirit, when it is not pampered nor fed at it own will)
then I say, go into some private place, and fall down on thy face, as the
Publican did, and see thy self a far off, and say, Luke. 18. 13.
God be merciful to me a sinner. O Lord, I acknowledge that I cannot pray:
pardon me, dear Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, and quicken me with thy holy
Spirit; give me faith to call upon thee; and I beseech thee graciously to
remember thy promise, which says, Mat.11.28
Come unto me, all ye that labor, and be heavy laden, and I will ease you. Oh
Lord, I am laden with my sins, and against all reason they keep me from
seeking pardon for them, and grace to shun them. Good Father, for Christ's
sake, remove my sins far from me, and give me faith in thy Son, which may
assure me, that thou do accept of me, as of thy servant in him. And though
I be most unworthy in my self, yet by thy promises in Christ, which shall
never fail, I pray thee accept me.

Furthermore, for the better stirring thee up to pray, Matthew, or some other,
wherein thou may hear the promises of GOD in Christ, to strengthen thy

CHAP. 18. To pray often.
Never make account of thy self as a dilligent servant of God, if thou do
not twice a day (at the least) come privately to God and acknowledge thy
infimities, and confess that thou can not pray, and desire GOD to give thee
grace to do it faithfully. When thou feel a motion to pray, do not
ouer-slip it for any cause in the world; for thou know not what graces or
blessings GOD means to bestow upon thee at that time; for it is the Spirit of
God calling thee; and therefore find no delays, but go; for the nature of
man, of it self will never be stirred to private prayer: But howsoever thou
do, be thou Master, or be thou servant, be thou at home, abroad, or in
what condition or place soever thou be, do not sleep at night, till thou
have humbled thy self before God on thy knees in prayer; for night is a time
when the world leaves a man (as it were) for a while, and when the world leaves
him, the devil has not so much power over him; for the world is a great
Instrument for the devil to work by. Therefore when the world is asleep (as
it were) the devils power is weakened, and then be sure thou prayest to God to
deliver thee from the devil, and from the world. The world is like Pharaoh,
which by no means would suffer the children of Israel to go to serve the
Lord; so does the world, if it know that thou go to serve God, it will bring
thee back again, if it be possible: and therefore it is best to pray
privately, though thou do it but weakly; for within a while this weak prayer
will stre^gthen greatly thy faith. Pray when the world is asleep, for as soon
as it is awake, it will cry and call on thee (as Pharaoh did on the Israelites)
to attend it: it will bring thee more work still, as he did to them. And as
that Tyrant told the Israelites, that they should go and serve their God; but
when the time came, he would not let them, but still found imploime^t for them;
even so will the world do by any that will believe it; it will promise, At
such a time thou shall go serve God; and, When such a thing is done, thou
shall go pray; but when the time comes, it will find more work for him
still, and will not let him go. Pharaoh is the very figure of the devil, and
the devil calls himself the god of this world. And if the devil has to do
with this world, as no doubt but he has, then it is certain, that the world
will never give us leave to serve God. Our own nature is as the nature of the
Israelites; for they had rather have tarried with Pharaoh, who was the very
image of the devil, Number.11.5
and have been his slaves still, then to have gone through the red sea, and the
wilderness, to the promised land of Canaan, which was the figure of heaven: and
even so had we rather be slaves and drudges to the world, which will take all
from us, and cast us to the Devil (as Pharaoh would have done by the children
of Israel) then we will leave the world and all his baits, and go to our God
every day, and humble our selves at his foot, and confess our selves to be
weak in faith, and acknowledge our frailty, and call earnestly for the help
of God to overcome the world for us, and to strengthen us by his power against
the devil, the world, and our own frailty, and wicked fleshly lusts; and yet,
except we do call continually to God for his grace and help, we can no more
overcome these, then the children of Israel could overcome Pharaoh, or go
through the red sea without drowning: for it was God that overcame Pharaoh for
them, and also all their enemies, and delivered them out of the red sea: and so
it must be God that must overcome the Devil and all thy enemies in the world,
and deliver thee, that thou sink not in the sea of thy own sins.

CHAP. 20. Not to neglect private Prayer.
WHerefore I desire you, and every one of yours to the worlds end, that
whatsoever service of God you omit, you do not neglect private prayer; for
many may hear the Word of God, as Adam did, and disobey it presently after:
and some hear the Word of of God, as Adam did after his fall, and had rather
be further off as he had then. But private prayer is, to offer thy self and
thy service to God, confessing thy own imperfections, and to call to God for
his assistance. Now when a sinner by himself calls his own ways to
remembrance, and confesses his particular sins, then he sees what sin his
own nature is most subject unto, and prays earnestly against that sin,
wherewith he is most infected, and confesses his own weakness, and wondreth
at himself that he is not able to overcome that one sin, as well as some
other sins of as great force. The reason is this, the nature of man is wholly
corrupted with sin, and is good for nothing; as the earth is fit to bring forth
nothing but weeds, except it be dug and dressed, and continually labored
and weeded: yet one weed or other will grow in some part of the earth by
nature, which will not grow in another part, though it besowne there; but some
other weed will grow there, that is as ill, and one weed ouergrowing the
ground, is able to make it unprofitable for any thing: so one sin will rule
where another will not, and that one ouerrunning thee, is able to make thee an
unprofitable member of the Church: therefore thou must labor by private prayer
to overcome it.

CHAP. 21. Men become worse for want of using good means.
Moreover, as a garden, if it be twenty years kept with digging, watering,
and weeding, and then be let but two years alone, it will become
unprofitable, savage, and of no respect; even so, if thou do in thy youth, or
many years use private prayer, and hearing of the Word preached, and public
prayer and fasting, and all good means to keep thy earthly body in subjection;
yet if thou becommest negligent and careless but a while, it will soon become
savage and wild, and consequently an unprofitable member of Christ his Church,
or rather manifest thy self to be no member, as the earth will be no garden;
and therefore you must have a continual care of your selves. It is not for a
small matter that you must have this care, but for a great and a most glorious
kingdom, which lasts for ever, where thou shall enjoy the sweet and loving
presence of almighty God, and be a a member of Jesus Christ in the Kingdom
of heaven for ever, world without end. Then neither Satan, nor the world, nor
thy own flesh shall be able one minute to trouble thee, if through faith in
Christ, by continual prayer, thou once gettest thither. Neither is it to
shun a little danger, that you must be thus watchful and wary of your
selves, as was drowning in the red sea, which was a figure of hell: but it is
to avoid burning in hells torments for ever and ever, and being joined to the
devil and all his wicked spirits for ever, there to be tormented, and never
have rest. And this will be more then a thousand millions of pains, to those
that shall enter into these torments, to think that God has offered so
merciful a means, as to send his own Son to endure those pains for them,
that they might never have felt them, and sent them his Word, and willed them
to follow that; and that should teach them to follow Christ, and Christ should
bring them to heaven: and if that the devil, the world and the flesh, did lay
blocks in their ways more then they could remove, that then they should call
upon him, and he should help them over, and make the way in time more plain
and easy for them; and yet they would not take a little pains here, to keep
them from endless pains of helfire. Oh, how will they be tormented, when
they know that there never will be an end of their perpetual misery? What
would they not give? (nay, they have nothing to give; for the world has
deceived them, and has taken all things from them) but what pains would they
not take to follow our Savior now, if they might? pains? nay they would think
it a great pleasure, and wonder greatly at themselves, that they ever could
think it pains; when indeed it is the most pleasant, and most comfortable,
the most profitable, and most delightful, yea, and the most contenting thing
in the world.

CHAP. 22. To lay hold on Christ, is the best thing in the world.
IT is the most pleasing thing, because it brings so sweet contentment to the
soul, mind, and conscience of man, that nothing can offend it. It is the most
comfortable thing, in regard it so comfort and strengthens the heart, that
nothing can grieve it. It is most profitable, for it gets an everlasting
kingdom to those that use it. It is most delightful, for it brings joy to
the whole man. It is most contenting, for no cross in the world can discontent
it; when as the world on the contrary side are never content, never quiet,
never feel joy in their hearts. Though they laugh, Es. 48.22.
their hearts are not quiet; for there is no peace to the ungodly. And this is
the cause that they seek so much for pastime, and sit up in the night swilling
and drinking, until they feel sleep call them to bed, and then they lie
down like brute beasts, never regarding the mispending of their time, nor
calling for grace to spend the rest of their days better. And yet for all
this, in the dark they often feel discontent in their minds, because they
do follow the devil that wicked serpent, which will torment them, and he
begins to torment here, and yet they will serve him. On the contrary, those
that serve God, and follow Christ, and every night reconcile themselves unto
him, and confess their own weakness, and pray Christ their Savior to defend
them that night and evermore, they feel much comfort in their hearts; for
Christ begins the comfort here. I laid me down in peace and rose again
(says David) and the Lord sustained me. Psa. 3. 5.
So they which serve God, and follow Christ, are in peace; for the Lord
sustaineth them.

CHAP. 23. What need there is to speak much of Christ.
IT may be you marvel my Sons, why I write so much of Christ. Marvel not
why I write, for I wonder, that every one which has heard of him, does not
write what Christ has done for us. For was it not a great wonder, that the
only begotten Son of God should come down from heaven, and take our flesh
upon him, and keep it without sin, and suffer himself to be buffetted, and
also to have his face spit in, and to be most spitefully crowned with a crown
of thorns? And being with out sin, he bare all our sins upon him, and
having never offended God, he bare all the wrath of God, and endured the
pains of hell for us, which was due unto us for our sins, and he has
overcome sin, death and hell for us; and ascended into heaven to prepare us a
place there; and yet he left us not thus, but he left his Will and Testament,
to direct us the right way how to come unto him; and yet he did more for us
then this; for he taught us in his Word, how we should know when we were out
of the way, and how we should return into the right way again. And yet he did
more for us then this, he promised that he would be with us unto the worlds
end, Mat. 28.26.
and whenever we wanted his help, do but call upon him, and he would help
us. And yet he did more for us, he sent preachers to call upon us, and put us
in remembrance of these benefits, and to direct us the right way to heaven to
himself. And what promises he has made to us to intise and draw us to come
unto him, and what threatenings and warnings he has given us to shun hell, it
is impossible for me and all the Writers in the world to write. Saint John
says, John 21. 25.
If all things which Christ did were written, the world would not contain the
Books. But I am sure if all the Writers in the world, had written what Christ
has done for us, they could not sufficiently declare it. If all the sea were
ink, and all the iron in the world were pens, and all the creatures writers,
they could never declare the great benefits, the great blessings, and the great
mercies given unto us in Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior. What is man without
Christ, more then a firebrand of hell? and what an excellent creature a man is
in Christ, can hardly be expressed; and yet there are many that are angry,
because there are so many books. Reading good books works a man's heart to
godliness; for even as the fire warmeth the wax and makes it fit to receive a
good fashion; even so good books, written of the mercies of God in Christ, are
the way to Christ, and teach us how to shun the way that leads from Christ. But
because I would have you writers of the mercies of God in Christ, I will tell
you what good writing of books does. It makes the the way to Christ easy to
those that desire to go in it. And I will tell you who are they that are angry
with writing of books: they are such as are ignorant, and the more ignorant
they are the more angry: they are those that love the world so well, that they
cannot find leisure to read books. Saint John says, Love not the world nor
the things that are in the world: for the love of the world is an enmity to
God. And here you see that they are enemies to God; for they love not to have
him so much written of. And they that love not many books, love not many
Sermons, neither do they care so much to know what Christ has done for them,
and how they should follow Christ: they are stalled with it: they love the
earth, they can talk of it year after year, and they are never weary. In
truth, it would weary a heavenly minded Christian, to hear an earthly-minded
man how continually he will talk of the earth and earthly things; the very
time that he is in the Church, he can hardly hold his peace from talking of
some earthly thing or other, and the whole Sabbath which God sanctified, and
rested himself, and in mercy to him commanded him to rest, that will never
rest from these earthly and transitory things, for heavenly rest he never
respects. Truly I think he means to make himself sure of hell
hereafter: for Christ says, He that loves the world, is an enemy to GOD,
And he that is an enemy to God, can never come to be an inheritour of the
kingdom of heaven, except he return, and reconcile himself to God through
Christ: and he cannot be thus reconciled, except he leave his earthly
affections and attend upon Christ: for God loves none but those, whom he sees
waiting and attending upon his Son; and then the Almighty God accepts him
as his son, and bids him call him Father, and whatsoever he needs, he is
ready to furnish and relieve him withal: but if he be obstinate, and will not
attend upon Christ, but attends his own business and worldly affairs, GOD
never respects him, how many friends soever he has in the world, nor how
mighty soever they are, and then are his riches and his friends nothing worth,
neither can they do him the least good as can be thought of. Now he that
loves not writing of books, nor hearing of Sermons, he has little leisure,
and less desire to pray this I assure you is true, and his own conscience
will tell him so much, let him examine it when he will; for Sermons, and
reading good books, are the only means to bring a man to prayer, and prayer is
the only means to help us to the mercies of God in Christ; for if we hear
Sermons, and do not pray earnestly to GOD, for Jesus Christ's sake, to send the
holy Ghost to inlighten our understanding, and to sanctify our hearts, and
follow that which we hear, we are never the better; for many hear and
understand not, and many understand and follow it not: but there is none that
prays faithfully to understand, and for grace to follow it, that obtains
not, if he continue in true prayer. The holy Ghost says, 1. These. 5. 17.18.
Pray always, and in all things be thankful, and the promise is made, Ask
and ye shall have: Mat. 7.7.
that is, whatsoever you go about, pray to God to bless it, and thank God in
prosperity and adversity, or howsoever it pleases God to deal with you; for
it comes by his providence, and therefore be thankful to God, what cross
soever it pleases him to lay upon thee. Do not as they which rage and swear
at the loss of a few earthly things; but thank God again and again, that it
is no worse. If it be but for the loss of some earthly thing, it cannot be
ill for the child of God; for Job never honored God so much, nor did so much
good in the Church of God, while he was rich, as when he was poor; for when
he was rich, the devil himself told God, that Job served him not for
nothing. Job. 1.9.
As if he should say, Thou have given him many blessings, if he should not be
thankful, it were a marvel.

CHAP. 24. The unthankfulness of rich men, a great sin.
OH, this will be a witness against many rich men, which receive many great
blessings, and yet they be unthankful: for the devil thought, that he which
received gifts and blessings, could not choose but be thankful: and yet when
Job was rich, he never did God so much honor nor service in his Church, as
when his goods were gone: for before, he was a rich man, and lived well, and
gave something to the poor: what should he have done with his goods else? and so
did many more besides him. But when all his goods were taken away, he did not
as worldly men do, he did not say, I am bewitched; or, it is the negligence of
my servants; but he said, Job 1.9.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, and as it pleases the Lord, so it
comes to pass; blessed be the name of the Lord, And thus he became
thankful for his losses. This is a thing that every one cannot do: and he
was so patient and thankful, what crosses soever it pleased God to lay upon
him, that he glorified God in his obedience, and showed that he loved God, and
that his love was not set on this worldly wealth. So he might have God without
the world, he cared not, he was none of those that must needs have God and
the world together, or else they will none; but he was one that left an
example to the whole Church of God to be thankful and patient.

CHAP. 25. How to read with profit.
I Pray read the story of Job, and not only read, but gather some fruit out
of it, and ever when you begin to read any part of the scripture, lift up your
hearts, souls and minds unto God, and pray privately or publicly; but of
private prayer never fail, and desire God for Christ's sake to inlighten your
understandings, to sanctify your hearts, and to make them fit to receive the
good seed of his word, and to give you grace to bring forth fruit to Gods
glory: for Christ says, Ioh.15.8.
In this is my father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit, and be made
my Disciples. And again he says, Mat.5.16
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven: Here you may see you must glorify
God, and you must leave an example to the Church, that you serve and love God:
this did Job, and I pray God, for Christ's sake that you may do the like; and
that you may do it, you must pray to God continually, yea and in private for
his grace and assistance.

CHAP. 26. The pre-eminence of private prayer.
THis is the most excellent virtue and happiness, that belongs to private
prayer, no man by any means can deprive a man of it. Some have had their
Bibles taken away, that they could not read: Preachers have been banished,
that could not hear: they have been separated from company, that they could
not have public prayer, yet private prayer went with them: thereby they talked
with God, and made all their miseries known unto him, and craved his
assistance in all their troubles. And this is the greatest comfort that all
good Christians have, that no man can bar them from private conference with
God. Then take heed you do not bar your selves from it, since none else can
do it, and you know not what need you shall have of it, nor what accident may
happen to you in your lives, nor what need you shall have of it in the hour of
death. Therefore if you would always have it, you must always use it, and
then you shall see what profit will come by it, and then you will be humbly,
faithfully, and familiarly acquainted with God.

CHAP. 27. The benefit of acquaintance with God.
OH heavenly and happy acquaintance! for the longer thou use it, the stronger
will be thy faith, the humbler thy heart, the earnester thy zeal, and the
holier thy life; and this makes God accept you in Christ, and then thou art he
that Christ speaks unto; when he says, Ioh.16.23
Ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you. Thy faith will be the
stronger, because thou shall see, that God hears thy prayers, and grants
thy request. The more humble will thy heart be, because thou see thine own
misery and corruption, and that all grace and goodness comes to thee from God:
and this will make thee more earnest and zealous in prayer; and thy earnest and
faithful prayer will move God, according to his promise, to give thee grace
and faith; for the Apostles prayed and said, Luk.6.25.
Lord increase our faith. And this grace and faith will work in thee holiness
of life, and then shall thou be able to fulfill Christ's saying, Mat.5.16.
Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

CHAP. 28. How long we have need of private prayer.
NOw that you and every one of you shall have need of private prayer, from
the very beginning of your life, to the very last hour of your days, my own
experience teaches me: and the word of God a true witness, affirms that we
are wholly corrupted by the fall of Adam with sin, and therefore continually
we ought to suspect our selves, and to call upon God without ceasing, for his
help, grace, and assistance in all our actions: for we know that our own
flesh is our own enemy, and that it is made of the earth, and is so heavy
and earthly-minded, that it can never seek for heavenly things, without the
especial grace of God; and the devil has made an entrance into this earthly
body, by reason that our own parents Adam and Eve, did take of the fruit of
disobedience at his hands, and did eat at his appointment: so that now he
claims such an interest in us, that none but Christ can keep him out: and
therefore we have no way, but to call continually on the name of God in Christ,
to assist us with his gracious spirit, which will keep away the devil,
overcome the world, and conquer our own flesh for us.

CHAP. 29. Who pray privately.
THis is certain, that there are none godly, but those that pray privately and
truly to God according to his word; and there is no ungodly person, no
swearer, no prophaner of the sabbath, no drunkard, no adulterer, no covetous
person, no profane person, nor none that is of a false religion, not warranted
by the word of God, that does pray privately, truly, and faithfully. By these
considerations you shall find out the true marks of the children of God; for
the wicked can hear the word, read, come into public assemblies of prayer:
the hypocrite will talk of faith, as if he had come presently from heaven; but
to go into a private place, and lay open his heart before God, confess his
own imperfections, and pray that he may not be an hypocrite, he is far
enough from it. The swearer, the adulterer, the covetous, the idolater, nor no
unclean person dare come to God in the name of Christ except they leave their
wicked ways; and without they bring Christ with them they cannot come to God;
and Christ delights not to go with those that are continually breakers of
his fathers commandments: for Christ himself tells them, Math. 5.19
that he that keeps the commandments, and teaches men so to do, he shall
be great in the kingdom of heaven: and to him that orders his conversation
aright, will I show the salvation of God, Psa. 50.23
says God by the Psalmist. Moreover Christ says, Mat. 16 24
He that will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. As if he should say, I am gone to heaven, and if you mean to
follow me thither, you must forsake your selves. I know this will be a cross
unto you, but you must take it up and follow me, or else you may not come there.

CHAP. 30. The way to rule our corruptions.
Again, when the children of God, who would feign be with their father, see
that they cannot rule their own flesh, then with humble hearts they go to
God, and cry and call to him for help, that he would help to bridle their
unruly affections, even but for that day, and at night, they will wait upon
his majesty a gain; and thus they will never leave him, till they feel the
spirit of God working in their hearts; and that will stir them to continual
prayer. But the wicked want faith to go in the name of Christ, and this is the
cause, there are so many wicked prayers in the world; for they that make them,
have no faith in Christ: and without him, they have no promise to be heard; and
therefore wanting faith to come to Christ, they go to the Saints to pray for
them; and yet the Saints did never promise them so to do, neither do they
know whether the Saints hear them or no. Again, some pray in latin, when
they do not vnderderstand what they say, nor what they pray for; but the holy
Ghost says, Pray with the spirit, and pray with the understanding also. 1 Cor.
1.4.15.
Why say they, God knows our hearts; we pray with the heart. God knows indeed
that their hearts are vain and foolish, because they do not pray with
understanding, and therefore they have no promise to be heard, and yet they
will have a pair of beads, and tell how many prayers they say, though they
cannot tell what they say. I dare undertake, a parret might pray as well they
do, if it could speak all the words. They pray while they live, that they may
go to purgatory; and when they die, they give much goods to others, to pray
that they may come out of purgatory again: these are most vain prayers never
warranted by the word of God. They pray also to our Lady to help them, much
as the Israelites prayed to the Queen of heaven: and as the Israelites prayers
were accepted, so are theirs. But I pray God, for Christ's sake, that you, nor
none of yours may make such prayers. And I pray God to bless his whole Church,
that their prayers may be right and faithful, for prayer is the key which
opens unto virtue. Oh Lord, let not our prayers be turned into sin; for
then the gates of thy mercy shall be shut against us. Wherefore we humbly
beseech thee, give us the spirit of truth, that we may pray rightly, which if
we do, we must needs search the scriptures and see there how Christ teaches
his Disciples to pray. When ye pray, pray on this manner. Our Father which art
in heaven, etc. Mat. 6.9
And whatsoever prayer is not on this manner is wicked and ungodly. And yet
here you see, there is neither praying to Saints nor Angels, neither praying
for the dead, nor to the dead: and therefore all such prayers are wicked, and
are the overthrow of those that use them. But Christ says, Mat. 6.6.7.
When thou prayest enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray unto thy father in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, will
reward thee openly: use no vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they
think to be heard for their much babbling, but whatsoever ye ask the father
in my name, that will he give you. Ioh. 16.23
Ask and you shall have, seek, and you shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. Mat. 7.7.
If your children ask you bread, will ye give them a stone, or if they ask
you fish, will you give them a serpent? Mat. 7.9. 10.11.
If ye which are evil, can give your children good gifts, how much more shall
your heavenly father give the holy Ghost unto them that ask it? And this was a
great mercy in Christ, not only to bid us pray, but also to promise, that
whatsoever we ask the Father in his name, we should have it, and he
appealeth to our consciences, how we would deal with our children, if they
ask us any thing, and gives us warning we should use no vain babbling, and
tells us we should ask in one word the holy Ghost, without the which we
are miserable wretches: which if we have, we enjoy all happiness and peace; for
he must be our Comforter and bring us unto Christ, and he will bring us unto
his Father. Christ also wills us to ask the Spirit of truth, John 16.13.
because he will inlighten us, and show us the way of all happiness: and
because our faith should be strengthened to ask the holy Ghost, he also
promised us to send him, to teach us all things, and bring all things to our
remembrance, without which we are like a house which is built fair on the
outside: John 15.26.
but there are no windows to show any light at all into it, and then the house
is good for nothing, because there remains nothing but darkness in it: even so
dark is to earth of Adam, which we are made of, that though we seem never so
fair on the outside, yet if we have not the holy Ghost within us, we can
never see to find the way to Christ: and then it is impossible to come unto
the Father; and so consequently we must needs perish; for Christ says, Mat.
11.27
No man comes to the Father, but by me. And here you see, that those that
put their trust in Saints to pray for them, have no promise to be heard, and it
shows that they are not enlightened by the holy Ghost, to see the way to
Christ, and they themselves will confess, thet they dare not go to Christ:
which shows that they have no faith to believe his promises, nor will to obey
his Word. For Christ says, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are lade^ and I will ease you. Here you
see, that he leaves out none, but cal's all sinners unto him, and promises
that he will ease them. I humbly beseech God to give you and every of you, to
the worlds end, grace to pray to God for the holy Ghost. And I pray you, let me
request you to pray to God continually, to inlighten you with the holy Spirit,
that the holy Ghost may bring you to Christ, so Christ to bring you to his
Father; and then shall you reign with them for ever and ever, world without
end. Which God grant for Christ's sake, our only Mediator and advocate.

CHAP. 31. The benefit of the holy Ghost.
SEeing some pray not at all, and others pray falsely, do ye often and
earnestly pray for the holy Ghost; for I will tell you what he will do, he
will inlighten you, and unite you to Christ, and give you grace to rule over
all your affections, and make you able to be masters of your selves: where on
the contrary side, they which have not the holy Ghost written within them,
are mastered and ruled by their own filthy affections, and so become servants
to them; but if ye have the holy Spirit, ye shall be able to say to your
selves, as the master says to his servants, Thou shall do this, and, Thou
shall do that: Thou shall not swear, nor blaspheme thy God; Thou shall not
drink and swill like a beast, neither shall thou come in company among such,
etc. Reason thus, I will overcome thee by Gods grace, thou earthen potsheard,
which broughtest me nothing, and would thou now confound all these excellent
graces, which it has pleased the almighty God to bestow upon me in Christ?
no, by the grace of God, I will rule over thee, or else I will pine thee. I may
say with Saint Paul, 2.CO. 12.7
These are the messengers of Satan to buffet me, I will pay to my God to
assist me, 2.CO. 12.9.
and his grace is sufficient for me. I know thy nature, thou art like an
unruly colt, that if he be pampered, fed, and well kept, he will throw his
master under his feet, and cares not what become of him, so he may be rid of
him, and then he runs whither he list himself, although he fare much
worse then he did before: even so is it with those that become subject to their
affections, they are as hard to be overcome, as a wild colt, which many times
is like to be, and sometimes is, the utter destruction of his master: therefore
your resolution must be, to deal with your stubborn and rebellious
affections, as you will deal with a pampered wild colt, and say unto them, By
Gods grace, I will not be ouermastered by you, I scorn to serve so beggarly
and so base a slave as thou art, I will bridle thee, and thy headstrong, stout,
proud, scornful, and disobedient, intemperate, unholy, high-minded, froward,
covetous, and idle disposition; for there is no goodness in you by nature, but
by Gods grace I will temper you, I will make you humble, patient, chaste, quiet,
and diligently to fall to some labor, you shall never be idle, for that will
bring you to naught. And this must be the victory betwixt your selves and your
affections, and then the holy Ghost will teach you to master your selves, and
not suffer you to be subject to every filthy motion of the flesh. Further, he
will teach thee all things, and bring all things to thy remembrance; as, John
14. 26.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Iam. 4.6.
He that commits adultery, 1. Cor. 6. 18. 19.
sins against his own body, and makes the Temple of God, 2. These. 3. 10
the temple of an harlot. He that will not work, Ephesians. 6.16.
let him not eat. He will give thee faith to quench all the fiery darts of the
devil. Therefore pray for the holy Ghost in all temptatious, he will be with
thee in them, and strengthen thee to overcome them, he will be with thee in
the hour of death, when all thy friends, thy pleasures, and profits will
forsake thee, and then he will bring thee to Christ; and therefore pray for
him, and acknowledge his great mercy in Christ, who has taught thee thus to
pray, and whatsoever thou neglectest, neglect not private prayer, and howsoever
thou do, seek for continual knowledge, that your prayers may be according
to the Word of God; for if they be not such, then are they turned into sin,
and then thou have nothing to relieve, comfort, or reconcile thy self to God
again: for as concerning all the sins, that a man has fallen into, through
the frailty of nature, he has been reconciled to God by faithful prayer;
but if your prayers be not at all, or not as they ought to be, then all your
help is in vain.

CHAP. 32. God accepts weak Prayers.
IT is a very weak Prayer that God will not accept, if it be rightly made. I
speak thus much, because I would not have you discouraged, and think you had
as good not pray at al, as pray weakly for the almighty God accepts your
obedience and well meaning, that you will prepare your selves to pray as well as
you can. But if thou see thy self neglect private prayer, be sure that satan
has something to work against thee; and by this you may understand, that there
are none that ever did or shall perish, but it was, because either they did not
pray at all, or else because they did not pray as God has warranted them in
his word. Me thinks if I were a man and a preacher of Gods word, as (I hope)
some of you shall be, and I pray God for Christ's sake, you may, I surely
persuade my self, that through Gods grace I should bring many to pray rightly,
which now pray unadvisedly or not at all. But those that have gotten a custom
to pray after the invention of men, and contrary to the word of God, as to pray
to Saints, to pray to Angels, to pray to our lady, to pray in a tongue they
understand not, to pray to the dead, to pray for the dead, to pray to go to
purgatory; these, I say, you may pray for, that they may not use such prayers
any longer, but to persuade them, is almost as vain as their prayers. Yet once
again I say unto you, Pray: for you have no promise except you Pray. Mat.7.7.
Ask, and you shall have (says Christ) he does not say, you shall have,
whether you ask or no: but he says, Ask, and you shall have. Was not this a
great mercy of our Savior Jesus Christ to proffer us, if we would but ask, we
should have. Surely, I think he were a very unworthy person, that would
think much to ask a thing, for which he might be the better forever. If a
master should say to his servant, when such a lease comes out, ask me for it,
and I will let thee have a very good peniworth in it: because thou have spent
thy time in my service and in attending upon me, therefore I would have you get
something to live upon hereafter to defend the world withal, that thou may
not beg when thou art old: and this were a very reasonable thing. Now the
Master being a worthy man, and fully resolved to do his servant good, when the
time comes, he considers with himself, at how easy rate he may set the rent
of his farm for him to live upon, and yet give some attendance upon him still.
The time being come, he expects when he should ask; but if the servant
thinks much to ask, it is ten to one but his Masters mind will be clean
altered, although he were never so fully bent to deal liberally with him, and
says to himself, If it be not worth the asking, it shall be worth the
keeping; or, If it be not worth the asking, it is not worth thanks: and very
likely he will think worse of his servant, then ever he did before, because
he would not ask it, and think he is grown proud, and scorned his gentle
offer. Now if the Master will not give his servant the thing so promised,
because he will not ask him, although indeed he ought in conscience to give
him something; for God faith, Let not thy servant go away a poor man; how
do thou think thou shall receive the thing which our Savior has promised,
upon the same condition that thou should ask, when thou have deserved
nothing at his hands, but he of his own free mercy has bought thee, and paid a
dear price for thee, and thou have done nothing for him, but forthy
beggerlinesse he bids thee ask and thou shall have? What can thou look
to obtain, when our Savior Christ has precisely told thee, thou must ask,
and yet thou refusest to do it? Enter into thy chamber, Mat.6.6
says he, and shut thy door. Although every place will serve, yet it
pleases Christ to name thy chamber, because he would have a man without
accumberances. Every man finds one place, or other to lodge in; let them then
find the same place, or some place else to pray privately in. Shut the door
(says Christ) as if he should say, shut thy self from the world, and shut the
world from thee; it may be thou have some thing to say to me, that thou
would not have the world to hear. Oh the mercy, the wonderful mercy of
Christ of man how he became man for man. And he knew the nature of man, that
he would be loath that every one should know the corruption which was in
him, and therefore said, come to me alone, and shut the door, no body shall
know, what is betwixt thee and me. I know thy sins already, but I would know
whether thou know them or no; for many a man sins and knows it not,
because he knows not my word: but if thou know them, confess them to me
and I will give thee pardon for them: and if thou will leave them, and can
ask help of me, I will give thee grace to overcome the^; for I have overcome
them all for thee, even in thine own flesh, and thou through mine help shall
do a greater work; for thou being a sinner, shall overcome in thy self, which
is a greater work then for me, whicham God, and without sin to overcome sin:
and yet not you, but I your Savior, who dwell in all those, that lay hold of
me by true faith, for without me ye can do nothing; and therefore come to me,
follow my counsel, come secretly, let no body know of it for hindering you, or
for fear vain glory should follow you, no man shall need to know of it, for
I will reward yon openly. Oh the wonderful mercies of Christ to man, never able
to be set out! he knew that man would be desirous to have it known that he
served such a worthy master as none could serve a better, that every one should
say he served Christ, he served the son of God, who will bring him to
preferme^t. Every one desires to have it known, that he serves a noble
master, and therefore he will wear his cognizance upon his sleeue; that it may
be known what an excellent man he serves; for it is a great credit to serve a
worthy master, and a man shall be very well accounted of for his sake: but
he that serves a wicked and ungodly man, shall never be so well thought of,
because his master is wicked, and he is oftentimes ashamed of his masters
doings so that he will never be a credit unto him; and therefore never serve a
wicked man, although he be never so rich; for the desire of man is to serve a
master of credit, and that Christ knew: he knew also that man was loath to have
his sins openly known; and therefore out of his great mercy and wonderful
wisdom, he appointed man to confess his sins privately, without which there
can be no good prayer. Therewards of Christ's service are heavenly.
He told man, that he should not need to make show of it unto the world; for
he would reward him openly, and make it known, that he served a good master
indeed; for he would give him such graces and blessings, as all that knew
him, should perceive that he had them neither of the world, the flesh, nor the
devil, nor of his own nature: but it should appear, they were only the
gifts of the almighty God. He did not promise earth and earthly things, you
may see; for every venomous earthworm, is full of these: the usurer that is as
far from heaven: as it is to hell, where if he take not heed, in time he
may find his part, he (I say) may brag of his gold: the extortioner, whom
God hates, may brag of his silver: the covetous person, whom God abhors,
he may brag what a deal of earth and earthly dirt he has purchased, as
the Prophet says, Hab.2.6.
they load themselves with clay: he does not say, God gives it them; but they
load themselves. Among these foolish and abominable people, whom the scripture
speaks so much against, as against no man more, nor so much, I think,
strumpets and whores, who for covetousness sake sell their souls and bodies,
and make themselves such filthy vessels in this earth, that it is most
loathsome to think of, may brag as well of their jewels and costly apparel
that the world bestows upon them, as any other of these covetous wretches,
whom God abhors, and gives warning that no man shall speak well of them,
for the holy Ghost says, Speak not good of the covetous whom God abhors.
And that thou may know it is no worldly trash that God bestows on thee:
know, that the devil calls himself the prince of this world: and so one
would think he were; for these outward things are most commonly bestowed upon
the wicked; but that which God will bestow on thee, is a treasure which the
wicked ones have not, nor are never like to enjoy, except they leave their
wicked ways, and go privately to the Lord Jesus Christ, and lay open their
miserable estate to him, and crave his pardon and grace to live a new life, and
then he will give thee the greatest treasure that man can imagine, even a most
heavenly treasure: he will give thee faith, which will bring thee to the
everlasting kingdom of heaven: he will give thee patience, to bear all the
crosses and troubles in the world: he will give thee humility, which will
fill thee full of grace, and make thee in favor with God and man: he will give
thee his grace so plenteously, that thou will speak always the truth, and
keep thy promises, though it be never so much to thy hinderance in the sight
of the world. Nay, in the sight of the world it must needs be a praise to thee,
for the world sees that every earth-worm can break their promise or turn it
so, that it is worse then a promise breaking for it shows that they are full
of hyprocrisie, dissemblers, and would serve the world, and would not have the
Devil know it: but the devil will not be so deceived, he makes account the
world is his, and he hampereth all those that love it, in chains, and he
will have the world know it, that it may be a witness on his side at the day
of Judgment. Nay, The danger of breaking promise.
his own conscience will be a witness against him at the day of judgment,
that breaks his word, even at that dreadful day, when the trash, for which
he so lightly regarded his promise, shall be consumed with fire and
brimstone, then will he wonder, he could think it would be so long before
that day would come, and now seeing it is come, he fully persuades himself,
that his pain will never have an end. If thou think, that breakers of their
word have a room in heaven, read the fifteenth Psalm. But what should I
speak of a room in heaven, when indeed they ought to have no room amongst
civil men on the earth: nay, nor yet among the heathen? for it has been
accounted so great a shame for a man to break his promise, that he would
rather die, then it should be said that he were one of those. But pray thou
privately and faithfully, and God will not only give thee power to keep thy
promise with men; but thou shall also have grace to keep thy word and promise
thou have made to Almighty God, to forsake the devil, the world, and thine
own filthy affections: Which will show openly that thou art the servant of
God, and that God has bestowed his manifold graces and blessings upon thee,
Matthew. 16. 17.
as Christ said unto Peter, Flesh and blood has not taught thee these things,
but my Father which is in heaven. So every one that beholds thee, will know,
that neither the devil, the world, nor thine own flesh has bestowed these
gifts on thee, but the Father which is in heaven. Blessed be the name of Christ
for his bountiful goodness bestowed upon mankind; he did not only bid men
pray, and promised they should be heard, but also told them to whom to pray;
and because men durst not go to God alone, he bad them go in his name, and
promised that he would be there with them, and he would be a Mediator, which
none else could do, and he would make peace between God and them, and
therefore any might boldly come to him; he teaches them where to ask:
privately: and what to ask: the Holy Ghost, without the which, wear
fire-bands of hell: but if we have him, we are Saints in heaven, even joined to
Christ and as his members; and yet he fearing all this would not serve, it was
his greatest mercy to show us more concerning two men, which were praying, and
made us acquainted how they prayed, Luk.18.10
and how they sped. Christ says, There was Pharisie and a Publicane went into
the Temple to pray. The Pharisie was one that thought himself a just man, and
despised others. The Publican accounted himself a sinner openly known. The
Pharisie stood up and prayed, and said, I thank thee, oh Father, I am not as
other men are, nor like this Publican: I fast twice in a week: and give tithe
of all that I have. Now you may see who they be, that say I fast, or we fast:
as if they should say, I fear it shall never be known that it is I, or we
that fast and pray, and pay tithe of all that we have, and that we deal justly
and keep the commandments. But the Publican stood a far off, and durst not
look up to heaven, but smote on his breast, and said, Lord, be merciful to me
a sinner. Here you see we must humble our selves, and confess our sins;
for Christ says, He went away justified rather then the other: for he that
humbles himself shall be exalted; and he that exalts himself, shall be
brought low. Also he wills always to pray, and not to wax faint, saying:
There was a certain Judge in a city, Luk.18.2.
which neither feared God, nor reverenced man, and there was a widow in the
city, which said, Do me justice against mine adversary; but he would not for
a time; yet afterward he said, Although I fear not God, nor reverence man,
yet will I do her justice, lest at the last she chance to weary me, And the
Lord said, Hear what the unrighteous Judge says, and shall not God avenge the
cause of his Elect, which cry and call day and night upon him? And therefore
pray continually. And do not think (my sons) that I have spoken too much of
prayer; for as I said before, without it we have no promise to obtain any
favor of God, nor yet to be kept from any evil by God, and therefore do it.
You must needs also be thankful to God for his mercies in Christ, and most
humbly thank Christ, who has thus mercifully taught you to pray, and give God
thanks who has brought you into the world in such a time, when as you may be
taught to pray according to his word; and I beseech him, that you may pray
according to his counsel.

CHAP. 33. No certain rule for private prayer.
NOw I would have you know, that private prayer is for every man's private use;
and therefore there is no certain rule, neither can words be set down what ye
should say: for though we be all sinners, yet some are more troubled with one
sin, some with another, and some are troubled because they cannot be
troubled so much with their sins as they desire, which sort Christ calls
unto him, saying, Matthew. 11. 28.
Come unto me, all ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you. But
although all sins dwell in us, and we are subject to them (wherefore Christ
says, Matthew.26. 41.
Ye had need watch and pray) Yet there is in every one of us, some one sin,
that will draw to a head, and bear some rule in us, and will not be subject
nor subdued to the Spirit, as the child of God would have it: but then he
goes to Christ, and craves his assistance, and yet sometime the sin will
overcome him, and then he goes and confesses his sin again, and craves
pardon, confessing withal his own weakness, that he should be overcome of
so vile and base an affection. And thus every one ought to seek by prayer to
God, to get victory of that sin, which otherwise would overcome, and destroy
him body and soul for ever and ever.

CHAP. 34. Diverse men troubled with diverse sins.
SOme are troubled most with envy, some with pride, some with anger, some with
covetousness, and some with sloth, etc. All these with a company that attend
on them, set upon every man, but one must be captain; then overcome the
captain, and all the army will be discomfited. In wars, if the Captain
prevail, the soldiers will ruinate the City: even so it is with sin, if
the chief sin gets the victory, it will let in a great number of enemies
that will never leave, until they have utterly ruinated and brought to
confusion the whole body and soul of a man; and therefore every one ought to
pray to God, for help and assistance against his greatest temptation; for if
we overcome that, the rest will fly, as S. James says, Resist the devil,
Iam.4.7.
and he will fly from thee. And this will be a great comfort to any man, when
he sees his enemy cannot triumph over him: then the devil shall have no
cause to laugh in his face, nor the world to left behind his back, neither
can his own affections brave nor vpbraid him: but he shall have a greater
comfort then this; for by obtaining this victory, he shall be sure to be
servant and soldier to the most worthy Captain that ever was. Yet he must
acknowledge that he got the victory by the help of his Captain; and so long
as he is a soldier under him, he shall always have the victory: for the
devil himself is afraid of this Captain, the world will fly at his
presence, and thine own affections will fall down before thee, if he come.

CHAP. 35. Be not hurt by a little temptation.
THere is another thing, which I must admonish you of, that ye be not overcome
of a little temptation; for that is the basest thing in the world: even as if a
great Captain should be overcome of a mean soldier, that had neither might
nor policy, which must needs return with shame to the Captain. But it is
much more shame for a Christian, that has vowed to forsake the devil, the
world, and his own affections, to be overcome by the weakest of them all.
There be many that think, if the devil overcome them not in a great sin, all
is well, though that indeed he set them on work continually on trifles, and by
this means keep men in some device or other. He cares not what they do, so
they serve not God, and so he may blindfold them that they cannot see their
own sins. And thus they are in a very dangerous and evil case, and know not
what they do; yet they shadow their folly, that the world may not perceive it.
and then they think it is well enough. Thus the devil leads them quietly to
hell, and they never know whither they are going, till they come there; even as
a wind carries a ship, and they that are in it, know not where they shall be
set on shore For the devil is a cunning fowler, he will never lay a great
bait, where he knows, a little one will serve the turn, and he is so full
of policy, that he sees a great bait would make the party afraid to come
near it: but thus does the devil, first he gives a little bait, and says
to him whom he means to catch, I warrant thee, thou may take this, go
near it, taste of it, it will not hurt thee, many swallow a greater bait then
this, and thou see no hurt come of it: as he said to Eve, It is but an
apple, it may do thee much good, to bring thee to knowledge, and make thee
like a God. And therefore now we see, we had need set a special watch over
our selves, that we may spy the devil, when he goes about thus to entrap us
in his engines, with his alluring baits, and return his baits again, and when
he offers us any of them, may say: I defy thee, Satan, and by Gods grace
have knowledge that thou art a wicked serpent, and did deceive our first
Parents with an apple. I will not play with thy baits, be they never so
sweet, pleasant, or beautiful. I know thy subtlety, and I know that I serve
a Captain, Christ, that thou art afraid of, and he will bring us to a happier
Paradise, then thou did put us out of, and he will make me like a God, and
renew the image that thou did decay in us. Thou did scoff at me, and
said, I should have knowledge, when thou would have utterly overthrown
me; yet I have this knowledge (I thank the almighty God for it) that now I
can see thy policy, and how thou came to our Parents, when they were alone;
thou thoughtest they could not stand by themselves: but thou shall never find
me alone; I know I cannot stand by my self, and therefore I draw near unto
my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and I will attend upon him, and will
not leave his Commandment undone, for all thy baits and allureme^ts thou
can show me in the world, where thou call thy self Prince, but thou
gettest it by wicked policy, and thou rulest it by a wicked tyranny, destroying
the good, and maintaining the wicked, and bestowest thy trash on them not for
any love thou bear to them, but to make them thy wicked instruments, that
thou may do the more hurt by them And as soon as they have served thy
turn a while, thou will bring them to shame in this world, and everlasting
destruction in hell fire. And therefore now I would have thee know, that I have
knowledge, and perceive that all these usurping tyrants have learned all their
mischievous policies of thee, using all means they can possibly, to destroy
the good, and with their paltrie trash, which they call their wealth, they
win the wicked to their wills; and when they have their purpose a while, they
will pick some quarrel against them, although they have no reason for it, and
although they follow their wicked wills never so much, yet in the end they will
overcome them. And so, Satan, do thou deal with all that serve thee; and
therefore thou art an usurping tyrant: for the earth is my Lords, who has made
it, and all that is therein; and that which belongs unto thee, is nothing but
that trash, that he cares not for: it is like tares, and the worser sort of
grain, more fit to feed swine, then for the children of so mighty a King as
my Lord is, who has such treasure for those that belong unto him, as thou
shall never come near. Yet this is thy despite and envy, because thou can
get none of it thy self, thou would have me have none of it neither. But
thou shall not deceive me with these earth then baits, which one day my
almighty God shall set on fire about their ears that love them so well, when
themselves shall be suddenly strangled with the smoke thereof: and it makes me
marvel, how thou should deceive so many as thou do with them; for once my
gracious Lord drowned them and all that loved them, and many times he sinketh
very much trash in the sea, that Pirates might see they shall sink one day, and
all those that sell their souls for such trash, except they turn speedily
unto my Lord and and Savior Iefus Christ, who is a Savior and will save all
sinners that turn unto him. But thou art a destroyer, and wilt destroy all
those that follow thee: thou know my Lord burnt Sodom and Gomorrha, with
other Cities, which were full of the glistering dross, to show that he cared
no more for it, then Kings do for counters: for if he had respected it, he
would never have burnt it, and consumed it with fire: Yet thou, Satan, do
deceive worldly wisemen, giving them dross for gold, which is no better then
copper counters, and in the mean time thou make the^ deceive themselves of an
everlasting treasure. Earthly treasure may be compared to glass, which is so
brittle a metal, it can never continue long; for as it might be, now a man
has it to do him good, and in the turning of a hand it is broken and worth
nothing even so it is with the trash and pelf of this world, and the life of
man which is but a breath, and what can be of less power then a breath. The
Scripture says, Iam. 4.14.
it is like a vapor, which appears suddenly, and is as suddenly gone again;
Christ says, Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy soul from thee,
Lu. 12.20
and whose things shall these be that thou have gathered together? If our
Savior Christ calls him a fool, that cares for earthly things, I know he
is a fool, and therefore thou shall not make me so simple, but thou shall make
me wise; for I will ever be watchful, and wary in all my ways, continually
attending upon the Son of God, Christ Jesus, my Lord and Savior, that thou
may not find me alone. I will also keep company with the godly, by which
means the way of my Savior will be made more easy for me; for when many
godly men are together, they encourage one another to that which is good.

CHAP. 36. Idleness and covetousness to be avoided.
Now though every sin be a great hinderance to prayer, yet idleness and
covetousness are two of the greatest; and therefore we ought most earnestly
to pray against these sins, and to take heed of such sports and recreations,
which have no warrant in the Word of God for many are so carried away with
idleness and pastimes, that they can find no time to pray; and therefore we
had need to be very circumspect, and watchful over our selves, lest we be
snared with this part of the devils policy: for if a man take not heed, Satan
will fill his heart so full of these vain and idle pastimes, that he shall
never have any regard of preparing himself to pray. GOD says, Six days thou
shall labor, and do all that thou have to do; Exo. 20.9
and therefore be sure there is no time appointed in these six days to follow
your idle pleasures and sports; and the seventh day, we must keep holy. The
holy Ghost says, What soever is not of faith is sin; To. 14.23
and thou can do nothing of faith, except thou have good warrant for it in
the Word of God: Ephe. 516
and the Word of God says, Redeem the time, for the days are evil. And thou
can not redeem the time with vain recreations. I speak not to bar any from
lawful recreation, but to warn you to take heed that for a little foolish and
idle pleasure, which presently comes to an end, you lose not a glorious
kingdom which endures for ever. And this Kingdom can never be gotten without
private, true and faithful prayer; for although Christ has already obtained
it for us, yet we have no promise of it, except we lay hold on him by faith,
which faith we can never have, except we pray for the holy Ghost to
enlighten us, and teach us to lay hold on Christ. You must continually call
for mercy and grace; mercy for thy sin, and grace to serve God. And this I
am well assured of, that hearing of the Word preached, is the very means that
God has appointed for obtaining of faith, and by no means may we neglect
that, except you will contemn the counsel of the Holy Ghost, which I pray God
for Christ's sake you may never do. The holy Ghost tells you, 1. Cor. 3. 6.
that Paul planteth, and Apollo wateneth, but God gives the increase. So you
must always have your prayers ascending to the Almighty God to desire him to
send the showers of his grace into your hearts, that the seed of his Word may
grow, and bring forth fruit to everlasting life.

CHAP. 37. A dangerous let of prayer.
I Will let you understand in my judgment, what is one of the greatest
hindrances unto prayer that can be, but it is so close and subtle an enemy
unto mankind, that I can by no means discover it so well as I would; for it is
to cunning, and so forcible an allurance of the Devil, that it draws many
more from true and faithful prayer, then any net that ever he laid: but I
cannot well tell, which way to describe it unto you. I cannot say, that it is
altogether covetousness: for as David says, If it had been an open enemy,
Psalm. 56. 12.
that had done me this dishonor, I could have borne it; So I may say, If it
were an open sin, which would deprive you of this benefit of prayer,
peradventure I should find some way to disgrace it unto you; but it is a thing
that carries some color of goodness, even amongst them that think
themselves good, and yet indeed it is stark naught, and deceives a
multitude, and it frequenteth every place, city and town, and among all sorts
of people, husbandmen, tradesmen, and all kinds of arts and professions in
the world: so that I cannot, as I would, tell you which way to shun it: I would
to God it were not amongst Preachers. Now as well as I can I will explain it
unto you: it is an overmuch care of those things which a man may lawfully use.
For man being earth, those earthly things bear much sway in his mind, and
especially because they carry the name of lawful: and so they make a man
forget the Law of God, and neglect the duty of Prayer; the which two things
being ouerslipped, he loses the promise of the gospel, which is an
everlasting kiugdome. And that it is thus, I will make it more plain unto you,
because I hope God will give you grace to shun it, which I desire you may for
Christ's sake. Man being earth, and Satan being the Prince of this earth, he
labors to set men's earthen minds altogether on this earthen world, which he
may easily do: for man being earth by nature, and naturally inclined to love
earthly things, he is the more easily drawn unto this eathlie affection. It
is even as if a man should run down a steep hill, he can more easily run
down, then go up softly: even so man can easier run after these earthly
things, then stay himself in a mean. He has nothing to help his earthly
nature, but grace; which he must needs pray for, or else he can never have it;
yet does he follow the things of the earth so much, that he has no leisure
to pray for it. In the night, when he should meditate on the Law of God by the
appointment of the H. Ghost, he is thinking of some earthly thing or other,
either of this bargain, or that purchase, or such like; when oftentimes he
might be much more happy to be without it. And me thinks, he that can
think of heaven and have it, is well enough: but these kind of people would
have heaven and earth too. It is said, Matthew. 19. 24.
It is as hard a matter for a rich man to be saved, as for a Camel to creep
through the eye of a needle. And this is the cause of it, his head is so busied
about earthly things that be lawful, that he forgets to meditate of the Law
of God in the night. And in the morning when he should pray, before he can
settle himself to it, his earthly business is so much, and requires so great
haste, that then he cannot stay to pray; but if he do, they are such prayers
as some offer to their Saints: they speak of God, but their hearts are on the
world: some are troubled with their merchandise, some with buying and selling,
some coveting to grow rich, some casting to maintain their families, but their
riches are so unlawfully used, and so hard a matter it is for them to use them
lawfully, that it cannot by any means be expressed. But the most merciful and
mighty God has taught man what to do in such a case, which is to meditate in
his laws day and night, and then he shall bring forth his fruit in due season,
and shall know when to serve God, and when to deal in the world. Take heed
therefore: you see what danger you are in, whilst you are here on earth; for
this is a dangerous disease, and many die of it; and therefore cleave to the
mercies of God in Jesus Christ, which has given you such warning of this
desperate disease, saying, Ioh. 6.27.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the food of ever lasting life.
Thus you see, what Christ says, he biddes you not labor for earthly things,
he tells you, they perish; he bids you labor for the food of the soul, which
shall never have end. The holy Ghost says, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
Bodily labor profits little; but godliness is profitable to all things,
which has the promise of the life present, and of that which is to come. Here
you see godliness has the promise of the life present, and therefore I
marvel men should refuse to be godly: it has the promise of the life present,
and of the life to come; whereas worldliness has not so much promise, as of
the life present. Godliness is great gain. 1. Tim. 6.6
Would you have gain? then embrace godliness; so shall you have your desire:
for that purchases a Kingdom, and it is profitable for all things. Mat. 6.33
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all things else shall be ministered unto
you. Here Christ promises, that if you will serve God, all worldy things
shall be given you. Christ says, Mat 6.34.
Care not for tomorrow; let to morrow care for it self, the day has enough
with his own grief. Here you see, Christ would not have you care so much for
these earthly things, as you do. Psalm. 37.5.
Cast all your care upon God; for he cares for you. Here you see, that God
discharges you of all your earthly cares, and tells you, that he takes
care for you, as if he should say, Your care can do you no good, and therefore
take none: serve me, and I will take care for you; as if a father should say
to his son, Go to the school of learning, study to serve God, your King and
Country, and I will provide you all things necessary, and you shall want
nothing. Labor for learning, or else you can never get it; that is a thing,
which I cannot buy for you; you must get it by your own industry and diligent
study, if you will have it: but when you have it, it is more worth then all I
can leave you besides. It will be a wise master to teach you, a diligent
servant to attend you, a discreet Counselor to admonish you, a witness of
the well spending of your time, a faithful friend, and of great account, able
to credit thee even with Princes: and these things cannot by any means be
gotten without thine own diligent study. Even so our loving father in Christ
tells us by the mouth of his Son our Savior, that we should not care for these
earthly things, for they shall be given unto us: but we must care for the
Kingdom of heaven; for that cannot be gotten without care and laboring for;
and this is a thing worth our labor, this is a kingdom, and lasts for ever;
it will bring comfort to your hearts, even in this life, and bring you in
favor with God and all good men, and everlasting happiness without woe, want,
or end. Furthermore I will tell you, what cause you have to take care for this
kingdom: if you lose it, you fall into a pit of everlasting destruction, where
you shall be tormented with fire and brimstone for ever and ever, where no man
shall ever come out again; for there is no redemption: and therefore by all
means possible I advise you to take heed. Christ endured the pains of hell
for you, because he pitied you, and knew you were not able to overcome them.
Therefore you may believe me, if you could bear all the pains of hell one
hour, and then could be delivered, you would never come there again for all
the world, nay you would never love the world, nor any thing that is in it,
because they are nothing but baits to draw men to destruction. But if the
Devil get you once there, you can never come back again, and Christ will
never fetch you from him; for the Devil and he are enemies, and he is able to
live without any of his servants: for those that will serve him, shall have an
everlasting Kingdom, and live in joy and happiness: and those that will serve
the devil, he will torment them in fire and brimstone for ever. Now if Satan
can get any to serve him, he is worthy to have them; for Christ will none of
them: and therefore I tell them now, if they come once in hell with the devil,
they shall never come in heaven with Christ; for he is just, and will not
meddle with the servants of another. But if any see his filthy and base
ways, and consider the miserable and wretched estate it will bring him unto,
and then turn to me (says Christ) and defy the Devil and all his works,
and serve me, I will save him; for I am a Savior, and that is my name, and my
glory: for there is no Savior but my self, I came into the world to save
sinners, but not such sinners as will serve the Devil; for though there be
none in the world but sinners, yet those that love me, and keep my
commandments, them will I save; but them that serve the Devil, I will destroy
and torment them. Although all are sinners, yet those sinners that pluck up
their sins, as a Gardener pulls up his weeds, and cast them behind them,
and follow me; although they be weak, and fear that they cannot overtake me,
yet I will put forth my hand, and take hold of them, they shall not need to
fear. Matthew. 12. 20.
The bruised reed will I not break, and smoking flax will I not quench: I
came to bind up the brokenhearted, to preach liberty to the captives, etc to
comfort them that mourn: let all that labor and are heavy laden, come to me
and I will ease them; but those that follow their sins, and are merry and
joyful, and carry them lightly, and never feel any weight in them, they
never call for help to bear them, they carry them well enough, they dance
after the Devils pipe, they follow the devil more swiftly, then my servants
follow me: for they follow nature, and the Devil helps them forward, and
the world is a friend to them both, and they like laden asses follow the Devil
with his treasure, and make him their Lord and Master; and yet some of them
will not stick to say, they hope, I will save them, though I have often told
them, I will save none by my servants, and I will not meddle with them; for if
they will serve me, they must clean forsake mine enemy the devil: for he is
an enemy to me and all mine, and does all the despite against us, that he
can; and I will not save him that will serve mine enemy, and therefore let them
never presume upon my mercy: for I have told them, that the hope of the ungodly
shall perish. He that is an ungodly person, a swearer, a drunkard, a prophaner
of the Sabbath, false in religion, careless in life, and yet hopes to be
saved by me, his hope is in vain, and grounded upon no foundation; for I never
made promise to save any such: and therefore they have no reason to say, they
hope I will save them, except they speedily return from the devil, and his
ways, and follow me and my ways; for I have plainly told them, Mat. 16.24
He that will be my Disciple, must for sake himself, take up his cross and
follow me, and assuredly I will save him. Now tell me, how would a man like
one that should serve his utter enemy, and do what his enemy could devise to
hurt and grieve him, and then when he had done all the hurt, that he could
against him, when he could do no more then he would come to him, and think to
have a great blessing and a great benefit of him? he should surely be
deceived. Then with what face can a sinner go to Christ to save him when he
dies, who would never serve Christ while he lived? Though God had commanded
him to cast all his care upon him, for he would care for him, yet he has
spent almost all his time in serving the world, the flesh, and the devil.

Chap. 38. Reasons of casting our care upon God.
I Will tell you great reason, none upon the world; for God is our Father, our
Maker, and governor, and our feeder: Christ is our Savior. Now the father and
governor knows, what is fit for the child, better then the child; for the
child would surfeit, if he might have his own will; therefore let him be
content with that which his governor will give him. Another the hook; some
he covers with gold, some with silver, some with earth, some with clay, some
with honor, some with beauty, some with one thing, and some with another. He
will not lay all his baits alike; for he is cunninger then a fisher: he
knows a little bait, will serve for a little fish, and a great bait for a
great fish; for a great bait will not serve to catch a little fish, nor a
little bait will not serve to catch a great fish. And besides this, he must
have the alteration of baits, as the cunning fisher well knows; but with
these baits he must have a sharp hook to take them, and a long line to draw
them to himself. So soon as he sees they have swallowed the sweet bait, he
lets them play a while with it, but before it belong, he draws them out of
the sweet stream, the water of life, and throws them into a pan of
boiling liquor: and as sometime the fisher is feign to entangle the fishes
with his nets, and so take them: even so Satan finds the humor of every
man, and then he searches in the world to find a bait fit for him, and having
found the bait he presently poysoneth it: then he puts in a hook and a line,
to draw him from the pure sweet stream, the water of Life, the Word of God:
and then he lets them play a while with the poisoned baits of the world,
and so draws them to him, and throws them into a furnace of boiling
brimstone, whose boiling shall never end. Now there is none that can keep us
from the baits of the devil, but only God our Faher, our governor, our
Savior, our sanctifier; and had we not need then cast all our care upon God,
since we are in so great a danger, and none can keep us from the devil but
he? We cannot keep our selves from the baits of the devil, no more then
children can guide themselves in all their vvayes, to feed, learn, govern,
and clothe themselves, without the help of their father and governor. Shall
the children depend only upon their father and governor, and shall not we
depend only upon our God, that is our Maker, our Father, and our governor? and
who, when we fell from him, and followed the counsel of the devil, sent his
only Son to die for us, and to endure the pains of hell for us? the holy
Ghost says, To. 8.32.
If he has given his son for us, will he not with him give us all things
also? And yet shall we not dare to depend upon him? Is he not able to dry up
the waters of the red Sea, that thou might go on foot dry-shodde through?
Cannot he rain thee Manna, that thou needst not starve? Cannot our God give
thee water out of the rock? He gives thee water out of the rock Christ
every day: Oh that thou would receive it! But I know what thou would
have: thou would have Quails to fulfill thy lusts: Iam. 1.15.
for lust when it conceiueth, brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished, brings forth death. Then may thou cry, Oh wretched man that I am,
To. 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, it is he that must deliver me from this body of death. And
yet thou will not follow him, nor depend upon him. Another reason why thou
should follow Christ and depend upon him, is, because if the devil find
thee at any time alone, thou can not escape his hands: and therefore my
greatest desire is, that I might persuade you to cast all your care upon God,
and none upon the world: nay, I pray God, that Christ may prevail with you,
for your vocation six days, and keep the seventh holy to the Lord, and in
all your labor use no kind of deceit, nor desire to be rich. Do you labor
in your vocation, and be sure you pray morning and evening, and at noone, and
at all times and hear and read the Word of God, and meditate on that day and
night, and follow Christ and take hold on him by faith; let that be all your
care, and for your bodily goods take no care. If you dare not trust God with
your bodies, who feeds them as you see every day, how dare you trust him with
your souls, which you cannot well discern by reason of your earthly nature?
You have a promise for your bodies, if you will serve God and keep his
Commandments; and yet many dare not trust him, they would serve him with all
their hearts, if they durst trust his Word. If they should loose their mortal
bodies, it were but a small matter, for they must have an end. And for your
souls you have but his Word and promise, upon condition that you follow
Christ, and take hold of him by faith: now if you neglect the condition, the
promise is void: and yet you say, you durst trust God with your souls, when
you never go about to keep his Commandments: you never follow Christ, nor
take hold of him by faith, nor have you any experience by your bodies, for you
never durst trust Christ. David says, 1.Sam.17 34. 35.
I have killed a Lion and a Bear, and therefore I dare venture on this
uncircumcised Philistine. If he had suffered the Lion and the Bear to have
overcome him, he had never overcome the Giant, and then had he never bin made
the Kings son. So if thou will overcome that great Goliath, thou must first
kill the Lion and the Bear: thou must first ouercom the temptations of the
world, if thou meanest to overcome the devil, and so be made the Kings son
of heaven.

CHAP. 39. Against immoderate care.
Our Savior says, Care not for to morrow, let tomorrow care for it self; the
day has enough with his own grief. Here you see, that our Savior pitties
you, that you will take such care, and wills you that you should not take
care for the next morrow, because you do not know, whether you shall live till
then or no; for Christ sainh, Lu. 12.20.
Thou fool, this night will they take away thy soul from thee. As if Christ
should say, I thou dyest with taking care for this world, thou losest the
kingdom of heaven, and thou shall lie burning in hell fire. Then do thou not
show thy self a fool, to take so much care for this world, since thou know
that hell fire is before thee, and thy goods are behind thee, and thou know
not who shall enjoy them? Psalm. 39.6.
If thou think thy children shall, thou know not whether they shall live
or no, or spend and waste them wickedly, as thou perhaps have gotten them, or
whether they shall be other ways deprived of them or no. A thousand ways may
separate thy sons and their goods asunder: thou know not but that the
world may end: thou know not what shall become of thy goods, or whether any
body shall enjoy them or not: and to say the truth, some of you make sure work
that none shall enjoy them; for whosoever gets the^, were better be without
them, if they be not gotten in the fear of GOD, and then they cannot be
enjoyed in the faith of Christ; for it is unlawful to have stolen goods in thy
house, and thy goods may bring a punishment upon thy children, and therefore
thou art a fool, to take any care at all for or about these things, and thou
art a fool because thou do care, yea and spend all thy care about these
things. Thou know, if thou do not spend thy tune in the fear of God
which is but the beginning of wisdom, Prou. 1.7.
and in the faith of Christ, which is the end and finishing of wisdom; thou
thy self, thy body, and thy soul shall lie burning in hell fire for ever and
ever, and there is no means for thee to be delivered. Thou may turn thee
and tumble thee in the fire of hell, and can never get out, and wonder at thy
self, that thou were such a fool to take care for those things which thou
should never know what became of them, and take little or no care for thy
self, when thou knew, thou should come to this miserable and wretched
end, that should never end. Here in the world none dare call a rich-man
fool: but Christ says, he is a fool that sets his heart on these worldly
things. But if by taking care for worldly things, he miss heaven, and fall
into hell; he will call himself a thousand millions of fools, that omitting
better things, he would take care for this world, which is worth nothing: nay,
it is worse then nothing; for his own conscience will tell him, if he had had
nothing, he should have cared for nothing, and so he might have served GOD
and gone to heaven: and having something, his care was so much to compass
more, that indeed he had gotten nothing but everlasting torment. And now he
knows not what to do: sometimes he thinks, I would I might creep through
ten thousand hells, and be ten thousand millions of years in crawling
through them, to go to Christ, and then get faith, and take hold on Christ: for
he knows now, that none can come to God, but by faith in his son, for the
which he would now take all the pains that could ever be devised, to obtain
that faith in the end, and yet he thought, whilst he was in this world, that
one Sermon in a month would have served him to have gotten that faith; but he
sees he would not believe the word of God, for Gods own word willed him, that
he should not labor for the meat that perishes, Matthew. 6. 28. 29.
but for the food of everlasting life; And least he should doubt of these
things which God says, Christ says, Consider the Lillies of the field, they
labor not, neither spinne they: I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory
was not clothed like one of these. If God so cloth the grass, which is here
to day, and to morrow is cast into the furnace, will he not do much more for
you, Oh ye of little faith? Here Christ tells them that will not believe his
promise, and follow his counsel, they are of little faith. And the holy Ghost
tells us that faith comes by hearing of the word preached: To. 10.17
and, Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God: and there were never any saved
but by faith, nor there were never any damned, but for want of faith. For the
holy Ghost says, He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that
he is a rewarder of them thot seek him. He did not believe that God would
provide for him in this world, and save him in the next, because he wanted
faith. And he wanted faith, because his delight was not as Mary's was, to leave
his worldly affairs, and to hear the Word preached. He could not pray, that
he might profit by the Word preached, because he had no knowledge by the
word to see his wants. He had no knowledge, because he did not continually
hear and read the word, which would have taught him to have known God and
himself. If he prayed sometime without knowledge and faith, his prayers were
vain and frivolous. And thus he sees, it was his own negligence that brought
him to hell, because he would not labor for the meat that perishes not, and
now he is so vexed at himself because he did not follow the counsel of our
blessed Savior Christ, that took such pains for him, and gave him so many
warnings, and told him how he should find it, if he would follow his
counsel, that he would now, if it were possible, be revenged on himself, as
Judas, Mat. 27.5.
when he had done that which Christ had warned him of, and saw that now it
could not be undone, he laid violent hands on himself to be revenged upon
himself. But when they see they cannot be revenged on themselves, nor no way
can mitigate their torment, then they are ten thousand times more tormented
with torments, which cannot be expressed; then they will defy Satan, and
cry out against the world they loved so well, and say, Satan laid all his
baits by the things which are in the world, yea many baits he laid, and
took many even with things that were lawful to be used in the world, by the
appointment of God, as you shall see. Meat is ordained of God for the
nourishment of man; and yet how many does Satan take with the sin of
gluttony; and therefore take heed that thou eatest temperatelie. Meat is
ordained for the belly, and the belly for meat, but God will destroy both them
and it. 1 Cor. 6. 13.
Drink is very lawful; yet how many does Satan take with the sin of
drunkenness? and therefore Christ says, Take heed, lest at any time your
hearts be overcome with drunkenness and surfeiting, and cares of this world.
Luke 21.34
Mark this counsel of Christ, Lest at any time. As if he should say, be
continually careful, lest thou art overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and cares of this world; for thou may surfeit and be drunken with any thing
thou take care for in this world. And therefore Christ says, Mat 6.31. 32.
Take no care and do not say; What shall we eat; and what shall we drink?
and wherewith shall we be clothed? for after these things seek the Gentiles.
And your heavenly father knows, you have need of these things. But first
seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall
be ministered unto you. Oh the mercy of God, which would tell you, that your
heavenly Father knew, that you had need of these things, and he would give
you that he knew sufficient? Seek ye the Kingdom of heaven, and these things
shall be ministered unto you. Seek ye the heavenly treasure, and a little of
this earthly trash will serve the turn. And if you knew all, and how Satan
has poisoned most of it, you would be afraid to take any of it. But if you
take nothing but at my hands (says Chirst) Satan's poison shall never hurt
you: but if you begin to be your own caruers, Satan will so sauce it with
sweet poison, that he will deceive the wisest worldling in the world. And
therefore see you take nothing but at the hands of the Lord; for Satan has
spread his net, as the spider does her web. Now the spider lies close hidden
in a dark hole, until the silly fly be entangled, and then he comes and
takes her as his own: and even so Satan lies close, until he see you
entangled within the things of this world, and then he claims the world, and
you and all, for his own.

CHAP. 40. The poison of outward things.
SEe how Satan has poisoned all things in this world, as apparel with pride,
honor with haughtiness, beauty with vanity, recreations with swearing, riches
with covetousness: a thing clean against reason: for the natural man would
think, that he which is rich, need not be covetous; and yet it is commonly
seen, the more rich, the more covetous. Yea, and even our virtues, how does
Satan seek to poison them? as for liberality, how does he seek to poison it
with prodigality, and honest labor with carfulness? And therefore S. John
says, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world: for the love
of the world is enmity to God. 1 Ioh. 2. 15.
Then some worldly man will say, What? shall we do nothing? Yes: but see how
soon the Devil will lay a snare to entangle the withal, that thou may be
idle; the very bait with the which he catches all: for many desire goods,
that they may be idle, and the Devil has most leisure to talk with a man,
when he is idle; and idleness brings a man to many vain recreations, and
so to much eating and drinking, and to many wicked sins. The holy Ghost
says, Matthew. 12. 36.
that we shall give account for every idle word that we speak: and therefore
thou may not be idle by any means. Thou must labor six days, for GOD
has commanded thee so to do; and thou must do it, not for any care thou
have of the world, but because GOD commanded thee: and thou must show thy self
obedient to him, and all thy care in thy labor must be how to please him, and
leave the success of thy labor to him, and thou must be careful in thy
labor, that thou take no care for thine own profit, nor thine own
pleasure, but how to please God, and then let it please thee: but be sure it
please not thee and offend God. And thus thou must labor six days; and
follow the commandment of God, and his example, after whose image thou were
made, and whom thou art to imitate: he labored and made in six days these
things for thee, labor thou to obey him: he labored and looked over his
work, and saw it was good. So thou must labor, and look over thy work, and
see that it be good before God. Though there are many imperfections in thee,
yet because thou art reconciled to GOD in Christ, and now show thy humble
obedience to his commandment, that thou will neither be idle, nor yet labor
for thine own profit nor pleasure, nor do thy own ways, but see that thou
do those things that he has appointed thee, taking hold of Christ by faith;
he accepts them for good through Christ, who has fulfilled all for thee:
for obedience is better then sacrifice. 1. Sam. 15. 22.
Then also thou must rest the seventh day, for so for thy ensample he rested,
and commanded thee to rest that day, and to keep it holy to the Lord. Now he
commands thee to leave all earthly business, and attend upon him and hear
what further instructions he has for thee, how to strengthen thy faith, how
to take hold on CHRIST, and how to come to his kingdom. Now thy care must be,
how to learn at his mouth to keep his commandments. Now he will show thee
the figure of that everlasting rest, which he will bring thee to through
Christ. Now if thou be not very ready and diligent to attend upon him the
seventh day, thou show, that all thy labor on the six days was for thine
own pleasure or profit, more then for thy obedience toward the Lord thy God:
for if thou would have obeyed him in thy labor in the six days, thou
would have obeyed him in thy rest the seventh day also. This shall be a
witness to thine own conscience, least that thou be deceived, as many be, who
think that they labor all the week to please God, when indeed they labor
to please themselves, because that commandment pleases their humor better,
then to keep holy the Sabbath: and they will be willing to take one hour
from the Lord in the morning, and another in the afternoon, or two it may be,
which shows that their minds and affections are more on the world, then on
the true service and obedience they owe to God.

CHAP. 41. Prodigality set out.
SOme think, that the prodigal man takes too little care for the world: but I
say, he is a wicked man, and takes too much care for the world, and too little
care to please GOD. He is an idle man, and will not labor 6. days. He is a
disobedient man, and will not keep holy the seventh day. He is a wast full man,
he will spend wastfully for the vainglory of the world, which somesay they
care not for, he leaves those things which God has given him and his family
without care. Yea, he is a covetous man, for he will borrow of others, and
spend it wastfully, and never pay it again. He breaks the commandment,
which says, Owe nothing to any man, but this, To. 13.8
that you love one another, for the holy Ghost says, The ungodly borrows,
and paieth not again, Psa. 37.21
but the merciful man is liberal and lends. Some will say, they would pay
if they had it: but indeed they will not have it, because they will not obey
God, and live as he has appointed them. They are proud, and will spend so far
beyond their calling, that they have nothing to lend to the poor children of
God, because they spend either upon the wicked, or in excess when there is no
need, or upon those that have as little, or less need then themselves. Such
a person is worse then an Infidel, 1. Ti. 5.8.
because be provides not for his own household. God does not say, Because he
takes not care for his own household; for all his care should be to please
God: but he cares not to please God, neither does he obey God, to labor 6.
days, and to see his household labor; for whilst he is idle, or using some
vain pastime out of his calling, his children and servants dissobey GOD, and
mispend their time, and weaken his estate, and all through his own
carelessness to please God. He shows himself no good Christian: for a good
Christian life is a careful life, not careful of the world, but careful
least the world should hinder him any way from serving of God, either in being
too negligent in his calling, and so provide not for his household, and become
worse then an Infidel; or lest he should be covetous, and become the man whom
God abhors. And yet there be some so ignorant, that they will say, The
prodigal man bears a noble mind, But he bears a wicked mind, and they know
not what a noble mind is, that say so. Our Peers and Princes are called Noble
men, because they bear noble minds, that is, they are virtuous and temperate,
and discreet, governing the Commonwealth according to their calling, regarding
the virtuous, and keeping under the vicious, holding in the prodigal, who
would run away with a whole kingdom, if they might have it: nay, no kingdom is
able to satisfy prodigal persons; for their disobedient humor will never be
satisfied, because they do not labor to keep the commandment of God. Some
are more infected with this sin, then others, but all that are not infected with
prodigality, have a disobedient humor, they are indiscreet because they
cannot spend when they should, and spare with discretion when the time is. They
are unthankful because they do not heartily thank God for his blessings, but
wish they were more. Neither will they be thankful to the King, nor a worthy
noble Prince or Peer; for if they spend a little prodigally in their service,
they will think they are indebted to the^, though all of it were by the Prince
liberally bestowed on them: but indeed such are not to be about Princes or
Peers, no more then the covetous. Some wise and learned men have disputed,
whether the covetous or the prodigal be the worst member in the Commonwealth;
but I pray God you nor yours be none of both: but here what the holy Ghost
says, The covetous is the man whom God abhors: The prodigal is worse then
an infidel. And thus I leave them, and pray to God for Christ's sake, they and
we may leave both those and al other sins, and take hold of Christ by faith,
and live through him with God for ever and ever.

CHAP. 42. Difference between an act and habit of sinning.
NOw you must know this, that the dear children of God, for want of
discretion, do sometime an act, which may be called covetous and yet not upon a
covetous, humor; and an act, that may be called prodigal, and yet not upon a
prodigal humor, but for want of discretion at that time: for there is none so
discreet at all times, that is not somewhat infected with either of these sins;
for we are infected with all sins; and therefore God, in great mercy to man,
made the Sabbath, or Lords day, so that if a man did in six days ouerslip
himself, as indeed we all do, and did not reconcile himself to God every
night, as we ought to do; yet on the Sabbath day, the Lord calls him to him,
and shows him his faults, and wishes him to be reconciled unto him through
Christ, and breaths into his face the breath of life again, and renueth in
him the image of God again, that was decayed by his sin, and so he goes home a
renewed man. And therefore I say, and say truly, that all the writers in the
world cannot express, what hurt that man, woman or child does himself, that
does not attend on the Lord on the Sabbath day, neither can any man or woman
do their servants more hurt, the^ to keep them from the Lords house that day.
The Lord has charged thee, that thou (if thou have any under thee) shall see
the^ come, and come thy self, as thou will answer it: for the Lord himself
is now there prepared to teach thee and thine; and therefore go to him, and go
prepared, Iam 4.8.
cleanse thy heart of all earthly things, and know that he is there to see
thine heart, and all thine affection and behauior. Some will say, I would go to
the Church, but there will be little: but I say unto thee, I fear that thou will not learn that little. If God, for thy disobedience, will speak but a
little to thee that day, yet thou have a great deal to say to him; confess
thy sins, show thine obedience, be an example to them, which would stay from
the presence of God, pray for his grace upon thee and them, and the whole
Church, and appeal to the promise of God; Mat. 18.20
When two or three be gathered together in his name, he will be with them: pray
that GOD may send his word plentifully for Christ's sake, although our sins
deserve to have it taken away altother; seek to do some good to the poor,
although there be but a poor company of you gathered together. Move the people
to provide themselves a Preacher, tell them of their wants, speak to the
Magistrates, mourn to see the Alehouses full, and the Church of God empty.

CHAP. 43. The service of the Sabbath ought to be be public.
SOme will go to the Church of God in the forenoone, and in the afternoon
they will serve God at home, but thou can not do God so great service at
home: serve him six days at home, and the seventh go to the Church of the
Lord, if God be truly worshipped there, as I pray God he ever may be in our
Churches to the worlds end; and I pray God you may be true worshippers of God.
And always in the Church of God, both forenoone and afternoon, let there be
one the more for thee. But of this I warn you, for the love I bear to your
souls and bodies; if you cannot get the people to provide a Preacher, which may
dispe^ce the Word truly and sincerely, remove you, where you may have and hear
the Word so preached; for where the Word of the Lord is not truly preached, the
people perish for want of knowledge. Prou. 29. 18.
But if you can get a Preacher where you dwell, and do good both to your self
and others, I think it better so; for the harvest is great, but the laborers
are few; Matthew. 9. 37. 38.
therefore pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his
harvest: for the true laborers indeed are not few, but very few: for as the
holy Ghost says, Phil. 2.21.
All seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's. All is taken here,
as it is in many other places, for the most part; for the most seek their own:
nay, it would seem well, if some would be contented with their own; but they
seek more then their own: if they examine themselves well, they shall find it
so; whereas the true Preachers of Gods word will be contented with less then
their own; so they may win souls unto Christ they care not. They count all the
world dung, as indeed it is, so they may be Christ's, and draw many to him. I
hope in God, that through his grace some of you will be preachers. I pray God,
for Christ's sake, to enlighten you with his Spirit, and give you grace, that
you may betruly godly, and very zealous for the glory of God, laboring by all
means possible to increase the glorious kingdom of Christ. And of this be
sure, if you will lose nothing of your own, you will never win many to
Christ: and mark how the holy Ghost says, They seek their own. He does not
say, They seek more then their own: but, They seek their own. As if he
should say, as indeed he means; They busy themselves about seeking their
own, but in the mean time they neglect the great work and the great
business that I have set the^ about, to gather together the souls that Jesus
Christ the Son of God shed his heart blood for; and contrary to all reason,
they look for their wages, before they have done their work. S. Paul which was
called to be a Preacher of the Word of God, says, Woe be to me, if I preach
not the Gospel. 1. Cor. 9. 16.
But he does not say, Woe be to me, if I seek not goods. He says,
Necessity is laid upon me to preach the Gospel. But he does not say,
Necessity is laid upon me to get goods. Yet some of them will say, they must
not lose their goods and right: rather they must go to law for them: but
contrary to the Law of God, they neglect their duty in his Church, they do not
study how to divide the word of God aright, and to give to every one that
which is fit for him. What does the holy Ghost call negligent Preachers, but
dumb dogs that will not bark? Esaias 56. 10. 11.
The dog will bark and give warning to the whole household within, if any
danger be near: but those that should deliver my message unto the people, they
busy themselves about their own affairs, they slumber and delight in
sleeping: they will not call out to the people, and give them warning of the
danger that is near them. I pray tell me, or let any man tell me if he be a
good servant, which will go about his own business, and neglect his masters or
no? no man will account of such a servant, but will cast him off for naught:
even so God will cast them off for naught, that seek their own, and neglect
the diligent seeking of that which is Jesus Christ's.

CHAP. 44. The honorable calling of Ministers stained by worldlines.
I Must needs say, I have bin very desirous, and have of ten begged of, GOD,
that some of you might be Preachers, yea and all of you and yours, if it might
please his divine Majesty to bestow such graces upon you, as were meet for so
high a calling. But God knows, I never desired it, because you should get any
thing in the world, but because you should get servants to God, and souls to
Christ, and because you might be so enlightened with the Word through the holy
Ghost working within you, that you might make no account of the world, as
indeed it is nothing, nay, it is worse then nothing; for nothing does no hurt,
and the world does much hurt. I pray not for the world, says Christ, but for
those thou have given me out of the world: Ioh. 17.9.
those, that though their bodies be in the world, yet their hearts, their minds
and their affections are as high as heanen. Col. 3.1.
If you be risen with Christ seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God: set not your affections on things which are
on the earth, but on things which are in heaven. I pray GOD for Christ his
sake, you may be of those, which Christ prayed for, those which have their
minds and hearts busied about heavenly things, and never taking care for the
things of the world. Woe is me, which fear, lest any of you or yours should
love this world: but if it please God that any of you hereafter should be a
Preacher, and love the world, I cannot express the grief it would be to me,
even so long as I were in the world. If any of you should ask me, if it were
not as evil in another man, as in a Preacher? I answer, no; for it is a very
dangerous and indeed a damnable estate to love the world. I know what I say; I
do not say, to be covetous, or desire to be rich, whereby one is moved to use
unlawful means to get goods: but I say, to love lawful goods which God has
given thee, and to neglect the service of God about them, if it be but in
thinking of them, and to be at any time more loath to lose thy lawful goods,
then to go to law to the hurt of thy brother whom Christ died for, it is a
wicked sin in any man. To set a rent or price of any of thy lawful goods or
lands, more then thou in such a case would be willing to give, it is a
wicked sin. To let or sell any thing to any man, The danger of dealing with
wicked men.
for sinister respects, that thou do not think to be the true and faithful
servant of God, if thou may let it well to those that are, is a sin. But to
let a Farm to any that thou do not think to be the true servant of God,
but because he is richer, or is better able to pay thee, or will give thee more
for it, is a great sin: For the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein,
and he has set thee as a steward over some part of it, and thou art by his
appointment to let it to his children and servants that love him; and because
many things have many prices, he bids thee deal in all his business, as thou
would be dealt withal in such a case. He biddes thee deal liberally with
thy brother, Job 31.29
that his soul may bless thee: yet thou will neglect thy brother, who^ thou
see careful to serve God in Christ, and let it to one that has little or no
Religion in him, because thou see that he can deal more warily in the
world, or more wisely, as the world calls it, though indeed it be more wickedly
before God: yet because thou see he is more able to pay thee thy rent, thou will let it to him, who is indeed Gods enemy, and for who^ God never made it:
for God made these things for his children and servants, and he does neither
love God as his Father, nor obey him as a servant: neither will be more become
obedient to God, and serviceable to his Church, if thou let him a good
peniworth; whereas if he thrive not of it, he will rail on thee, and on thy
religion, which is indeed against God; for he knows not, that it is God that
gives power to get goods, and that it is God again, that keeps men short:
although sometimes with his mouth he speaks it, yet the true knowledge of it
dwells not in his heart; and if he grow rich upon it, he will not be liberal to
the poor children of God, considering their wants as if they were his own:
for he has no natural affection toward them, because they are not his
brethren. Lo, here thou see what to do with thine own, or, as somesay, Gods
and thine own; or, as the truth is Gods, and not thine own; and therefore thou
may offend God in it: for thou art but a tenant at the will of the Lord, and
art to depart at an instant; yet thou have a great title under God for thy time
and thy title is good, and lawfully thou may enjoy them, yet the love that
thou bear unto them is utterly unlawful; for it is the love that thou
bear to these worldly goods, that makes thee to let them to such a tenant,
as will neither serve God, nor do good to the poor servants of God. The man to
whom thou let it, may be a civil honest man in the world: for among the
heathen, yea, among the Jews that would kill Christ again, if they had him, and
hate the children of God; there are such as in the world will deal ciuilly, and
pay at their day, perhaps, better then some Christian. But if thou be the
true child of God, thou must have a discerning eye of faith, which every one
has not, and know the child of God from a civil man: neither may thou
judge the other for all that, but pray for him, and hope that though he be not
the true servant of God now, yet in good time, by Gods grace he may be. Thou
may not impart the benefits of God, as near as thou can, but to those
who^ thou know to be the lords true servants, and thou must do it for the
love thou bear to God. Why should thou not love Gods children much more
then any goods thou have? There is great reason to do it, able to persuade any
man, if his heart be not of stone. For GOD made us most excellent creatures,
according to his own image. Satan came by stelth and subtlety, and through
envy stole away that excellent image from us, and made us most ougly persons,
deformed devils, so that we were ashamed of our selves, ran away and hid our
selves, and we were good for nothing, but evil for all things, fit for nothing
but firebrands of hell, into the which we were ready every hour to fall, and
God had said, that if we suffered the devil to deceive us, hell should be our
portion, the devil stood gaping to receive us: were thou not in a miserable
case then? I tell thee, we were all in this miserable case. And I tell thee
true, I am sorry at the heart, when I see any that does not consider the case
wherein he was, and I am afraid, lest any of you should forget the state
wherein ye were, and so become unthankful, and fall into it again. Oh, the
danger is great! But tell me, would thou not love him, that would come and
make thee like a God again, and wash away al thy filthy poison, and deliver
thee from the slavery of the devil, and from the fire of hell, and set thee in
Paradise again, yea in such a Paradise as the devil can never have power to
deceive thee? and for thy better assurance bids thee hold thee by him, and thou
shall never need to fear? If thou should not love him and al his, thou were
greatly to blame. But I know now in thy distress thou do not make so much
question, whether thou should love him or no; for thou think it
impossible but that thou should love him and all his, and do whatsoever he
would bid thee. If thou were once in Gods favor again, thou would not
disobey him for all the devils and worlds that ever were. But on the misery!
here is the thing: how is it possible that thou should be helped? God is
thine enemy, the devil is thine enemy, the world can do thee no good, nor
make thee clean: for all the blood within thy veins is corrupted, thy heart
blood is become most filthy poison, and thou art become most ugly deformed like
the devil, and thou art a shame to thy self, although no body see thee but thy
self, and hell fire is so big, that all the water in the world cannot quench
it. Thus beginning to despair, thy torments begin to increase, when thou
could see no way to escape it: but oh the love of God, the wonderful love of
God toward thee never to be expressed, not for any goodness that is in thee;
for behold here what a filthy creature thou art; but for the everlasting
goodness, that was in himself, his great mercy and wonderful wisdom he found
a way, even for his own sake; or else man and his posterity had been burning
in hell fire for ever and ever. How did he find a way? he sent his only Son to
wash this filthy creature man, his only Son, I say, the Son of God. And how did
he wash him? No water would make him clean: he washed him with his own
blood, and he sweat water and blood with washing of him, yea, he shed his heart
blood, and gave it man to drink, Mat. 26.27.
that it might enter into his heart, and so run through all his veins, and so
cleanse him indeed. Genesis 6.12.
Man's flesh was corrupted. The Son of God brake his body, and gave them his
flesh to eat, Mat. 26.26
that it might renew their flesh, and that their leprosy might be healed: and
the Son of God did this indeed; he brake his body, and gave it us to feed on;
he shed his blood, and gave it us to drink, or else we could never have bin
cleansed. But woe is me, God would not accept him, he said that man for his
disobedience to him, and obeying the devil, must go to hell and burn there.
Oh the mercies of the Son of God, how is it possible they should be shadowed
out! for no body can express the depth of it, Ephesians. 3.18. 19.
that he would endure the pains of hell for us: he being man, Gal. 3.13.
endured them; and being God, overcame them: he stopped the mouth of the
devil, shut the gates of hell, took man by the hand, he having washed him and
endured the pains of hell for him: John 14.7
he takes him by the hand I say, and leads him to his father, John 8.36
he accepts him in Christ. Oh the mercies of God in Christ, that are never
able to be set out by man! Eccl. 7.29
Man through his fall wrought his utter ruin alone by himself; Christ the Son of
God, has wrought his recovery alone by himself, without the help of any,
John 3.16
and set man in a far better estate, then he was before; for now he has given
him the hand of faith to hold on him, Ioh. 11.25
that he may never fall: before, man was alone, but now he is joined fast unto
Christ by faith. Mar. 16.16
Now what has man to do, To follow Christ, and take hold of him by faith. Not
that man deserves heaven by following Christ, no nor by his faith; but he
takes hold of him, which has deserved heaven for him, and brings him
thither, and sets him in a glorious place by God his Father, and God
accepts him in Christ, and takes him at his hands. No man comes to the
Father, Mat. 11.27
but by me (says Christ.) Now ought not thou in conscience to love, obey,
and follow his counsel, that has done all this for thee? and to love his
children and servants, better then the children and servants of thy utter enemy
the devil? who was not only enemy to thee, then when he first corrupted thee
and thy seed, but he is utter enemy to thee still, and not only an utter enemy
to thee, but also to christ thy Savior, and will by all means hinder him, and
impouerish his kingdom, and if he can possible he will bring thee from Christ
to hell again? And will thou enrich his kingdom for a little goods (which Christ
never bid thee get) who is an utter enemy to thy Savior, and seeks by all
means to impouerish his kingdom, to speak against his Word, to scoff at
them that follow him, yea, often stops their mouths that would gladly
speak on Christ's side, saying, If thou art altogether on Christ's side thou art
not Caesar's friend, Ioh. 19 12
and wilt not enrich his kingdom? Thou know when thou inrichest Satan's
kingdom, thou weaknest the kingdom of Christ, in that thou weaknest thy
faith; for thou can not in faith part with any of thy goods, to one who^ thou
do not think the servant of God in Christ; To. 14.23.
and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. And I prove this unto thee thus. When
thou losest the favor of God, and becommest a bond slave of the devil, thou
losest all the blessings, which God in mercy has made for thee, and bestowed
on thee. But they did not then fall to the devil, but did fall to the Lord,
whose they were; for they were not thine before, but the Lords, and therefore
thou could not lose them, nor forfet them to the devil: yet thou have lost
the^ from thy self, and they fell to the Lord, who lent thee them so long as
thou did serve him: but the Devil finding thee possessed of them, claims
them now, not that he has any right to them, but like an usurping Tyrant, and
it it was thy fault in yielding thy oobedience to him, which makes him to
claim thee as his bond-slaue, and all thy goods to be at his commandment; but
thou had nothing to lose but thy self, and that thou losest, but Christ
redeemed thee. Take heed therefore, for as an usurping Tyrant, who having
gotten once possession of a kingdom, will ever after lay claim to it, and will
use all the means he can to get it again; and the first possession is not only
a great light to make him get it the easier, but also it makes him if he get
it again, to keep it more strongly, and fortify it with a mighty power, and
keep watch and ward in it, that he will never lose it again: So will the
Devil, and therefore take heed thou deal not with any of the servants of the
devil, nor by no means enrich his kingdom. If a noble and worthy-minded man,
who has great possessions, pass by some puddle, where he should see a harlot
casting away her own son, if he should inquire for the father, and find that
contrary to nature, he were run away from his own child, leaving it to utter
ruin and destruction; if this noble-minded Gentleman should take up the
child, and cause it to be washed, clothed and fed, and cause it to be
instructed, and taught those things which it were fit it should learn, and
when he came to be a man, he should say, I found thee thus and thus, and
seeing no body had care of thee, I took thee up, and ever since maintained thee
is good estate; and now I would have thee acquainted with my affairs and
business; for I mean to trust thee with those things that I have: for so it is,
my King calls for me, and the affairs of my Country require that I should
neglect mine own business and attend upon them; wherefore I leave my Lands,
Lordships and Tenements with you in trust, till I come again: let the^ to my
friends, and let the^ such pennyworths, that they may well live upon them: let
your own friends some part of them; deal so in it, as at my coming home I
may find you faithful. Now if this servant should neglect his charge, neglect
his own friends and his masters, and go for a little more rent, which his
master cared not a whit for, and let his lands and tenements to his utter
enemies, who growing rich with the Lands and goods of this noble Lord, would
be ready to bid him battle at his return home, and to strike at him with
his own sword; judge you, would not this Lord think, he had dealt very evil
with him? nay, would not every honest man that should but hear of it, think
and say that he had dealt most vildly with so good a Lord and Master, and that
he were never meet to come in the company of an honest man again? Thus has
Christ dealt with us; When our wicked father and ungodly mother, Adam and Eve,
cast us into the puddle of sin, and ran away, and left us there, where we
should never have been able to have gotten out, Jesus Christ, the only Son of
the high and mighty God, our merciful Lord and Savior, came by, and washed
us, and brought us up at his own cost and charges, and we have nothing but from
him; he taught us himself in all good doctrine; and being gone to overcome the
enemy of his King and Country, he has left his goods with thee, bids thee to
deal well with his servants, and let them good penny-worths, and deal not
with his enemies, neither make any marriage with the^: 2. Cor. 6.14.
yet thou for a little money wilt buy and sell, marry and give in marriage with
them, yea and think, because thou find the^ more rich in the world, they
are better for thee to deal withal; and yet they are the utter enemies of thy
Lord, and will be ready at his coming to bid him battle, and strike at him
with his own sword.

CHAP. 45. The right use of goods.
Here thou see, what cause thou have to love Christ and his servants, and
how thou ought not to love thine own; but to use it, as the Lord has
appointed thee, whose indeed it is. If thou dealest not with thy Lords goods
and lands, as he has appointed thee, art thou not in a great fault? Surely
thou have nothing to say for thy self, save to appeal to his mercy, confess
thy sins, and amend thy life. But if a Preacher, who^ God has enlightened to
see, what he was out of Christ, and what he is in Christ, and has willed him
to tell the people from his mouth, how he and they should now behave themselves
inwardly in their hearts, Tit. 2.1.
and outwardly in their goods and substance; if he, I say, Mat. 5.14.
Whom God has set upon a hill to give light to many; if he I say; whom God
has given much unto, Luke 12.48
and of whom much shall be re-required; if he, I say, whom the sun of
understanding should arise upon; nay, if he, I say, in whose heart the glorious
Son of God should shine, will darken his glory with the thick clouds, or
rather thick clods of this earthen world, his sin is great: but what did I
say, darken their light? nay, they darken the light of the Gospel, that all
should see to go by: nay, they darken the glorious light of the Son of God,
and eclipse his glory: whereas they should draw many unto Christ by their
liberality and true preaching, 1. Tim. 4. 16.
they drive many from Christ by love of their own (as they say) and by their
idleness and negligence in preaching (as I say) and I say, this love of their
own, as they call it, is a thousand times worse in them, and does a multitude
more of hurt, then in other ordinary men, who love the world as well as they;
but there are not so many that look on them, and God has not set them for a
light, as he has done the Preachers. And the reason why the Preachers are
many times ouercom, is this, because the enemy does bend all his forces
against them, not unlike the enemy to the Israelites, who said, Fight neither
against more nor less, but against the King of Israel. 1. King. 22 31.
So does our enemy the Devil, he fights neither against more nor less, but
against the Captains of the Church, namely the Preachers; for he knows, that
if they be once overcome, then the whole army will soon be confounded and
brought to naught. Be you all vpholders of them, which by no means can be
done but by prayer; for as our preachers should pray for all, so all should send
up their prayers to Almighty God, in the name of his Son, to send his holy
Spirit into the hearts of the Preachers, to sanctify them throughout, that
they maybe holy in body and mind, following the example of our Savior Christ,
who said to Peter his Apostle, whom he had appointed to be chief Preacher to
the Church of the Jews, Luke 22.31.
Peter, Peter, Satan has sought to winnow thee like wheat, but I have prayed
that thy faith fail not. Again S. Paul appointed by the Son of God to be
chief Preacher to the Church of the Gentiles, witnesses of himself, saying,
The messenger of Satan was sent to buffet me, but I besought the Lord Jesus,
that he might depart from me. 2. Cor. 12. 7.8.
Now in these two great combats made betvveen the devil and the dear
children of God, ye see, that prayer is the vveapon whereby the Tempter is
overcome. Wherefore I earnestly entreat you, let your prayers alvvaies be sent
up to God, through Christ, for the Preachers, and all such as are in high
places, that so they continuing firm and steadfast, your faith may by the^ be
more confirmed. And the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost be with you all from this time, even to the worlds end. Amen.

FINIS.

