VERTVE TRIVMPHANT, OR A LIVELY DESCRIPTION OF THE FOUR VERTVES CARDINAL:
Dedicated to the Kings Majesty.

Prima canenda venit matter prudentia rerum:
Ordine tunc sequitur men's moderata suo:
Post animus magnus: postremo munera dico
Iustitiae, per quam nectitur orbis amor.
AT LONDON, Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood, for Matthew Lownes. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, JAMES, King of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
THe deepe-grounded root (most dread Sovereign) of my duteous love to your
famous and memorable Sister my gracious Queen and Mistress, being newly
watered with the drops of your Princely favor, spreads it self into many
branches of much loialtie, and full desire to bring forth the fruit of my most
humble zeal and faithful service to your Majesty. And albeit my best
labors, being brought into a choice and Princely taste, can neither desire nor
deserve greater grace than to be held as perfunctorie and triuiall: yet
vouchsafe (most mighty King) to give so favorable a passage in your gracious
consideration, that were the stock answerable to the bud of my devoted mind,
or the fruit agreeable to my faith and loialtie; it should at least have
carried the relish in your judicial allowance, of good fruit. Kirnels being
set at first, in time bear fruit; but being vngraft, never come to perfection:
So, may it please your Highness, from this tender plant of mine, there can
appear nothing worthy either keeping or gathering; but being grasted in the
least favor of your Majesty's protection, it may hereafter bring forth matter
of more approbation, content and consequence. I must confess, that this so
worthy a subject might have been written with greater maturitie and
deliberation; but the gold of my invention has proved too base, therein to
set the rare-orientall pearls of these royal virtues: only my much
respective duty has thus dared to vent her greatness, which though it make
no large current from the first head; yet is it as pure and vndistained, as
where it flows most. The God of Heaven indue your Highness with all Princely
blessings, and daily more and more propagate and spread abroad the glorious
luster of your Majesty: to the which, as England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, so likewise the whole world may have regard unto, as their true mark
and perfect Cynosure; since the universal school of the world is, the Person,
the House and Court of a virtuous Prince.

Your Majesty's humbly devoted servant, of the honorable band of Pensioners,
William Leighton.

VERTVE TRIVMphant to the Kings Majesty.
1
NOw that Hyperion with his cheerful beams, Prooemium.

Has cleared the troubled sky of cloudie state;
Since little springs do run to largest streams,
And mutual faith determins fear of hate;
Oh happy land who such a King do gain,
By whom are dried the tears of sorrows rain.
2
Our earth esteemed half dead through Winters spite,
Groans underneath the burden of her spring:
The fields with natures Tapistrie are dight,
For joy whereof the winged consort sing.
Each vegetable Plant late nipt with frost,
Vows treble hope for all the fruit we lost.
3
Our memorable Phoenix now takes rest, Mors Reginae Elizabethae.

Her ashes does a mighty Monarch raise,
Whom best men love and God himself has blessed,
For all our good, and his eternal praise.
Chosen by him on highest throne to sit,
For Wisdom, Temperance, Justice, Power and Wit.
4
Our cleerest skies with dark clouds ouer-cast,
In splendent brightness show their wonted hue;
Our doubts of death are turned to life at last,
All wounds are cured, and we revived anew.
Twixt present hope, joy past, and former fear,
We scarce know what we are, or late we were.
5
Elizaes loss made wet the driest eyes,
And spread sad sorrow through our state and land:
But present bliss shone from the glorious skies,
For mighty Jove stretched forth his holy hand.
In one sad morn by death our hearts were slain,
Which at midmorow were revived again.
6
As Pharoes heart most deeply Exodus 7. v. 14.
hardened was,
And would not let Gods chosen people go,
Nor suffer them from yoking bondage pass,
But sought their lives and hopes to overthrow:
Through raging Sea without thought of despair, Exodus 14. v. 21. and 22.

God made their passage easy, dry and fair.
7
Yet he with might and maine did still pursue
Our Gods elected Nation to confound,
Till in that Sea himself he overthrew,
And all his host were in an instant drou'nd. Exodus 14. v. 28.

The like, God works to those whose hate would bring
Death to his elect, or his anointed King.
8
Our state that lived so many months and years,
Odd weeks and days, with fearful thoughts of death,
See how Gods power and mightiness appears,
To give us life that gron'd and gaspt for breath!
And does defend our country, state and land
(As those he loves) from A seditione and gladio vindice ac dissipante.
cruel Pharoes hand!
9
Yet some may seek by envy and debate
To sow sedition in our fields of peace,
But they shall reap the sheaues of Pharoes hate
That sunk in Seas, when they sought to increase.
God grant all those that grudge our Regal power,
The Sea may drown, or earth may quick deuower.
10
Our ships of care on dangerous Seas were tossed,
Our hopes of life the waves of death sanke down,
Like Jonas in the fishes belly lost, Ionae 1. v. 17. matt. 12. v. 40.

Till God gave grace, where first he began to frown:
Now do our storm-beat-ships their full sails spread,
And we like Jonas live; ere-while thought dead.
11
As Sidrach, Misach, Dan. 3. v. 27.
and Abednego
Did safely walk amids the burning heat,
And in the flames alive themselves did show,
That force of fire could not them ill entreat:
So we beset about with flames of fire,
God quenched the rage, and sent our hearts desire.
12
What people lived more fit for mourning cheer?
What country left in greater grief and scorn?
Our fall looked for by Neighbors far and near,
Drowned in despair we held our selves forlorn.
Yet see the work of Mighty Jove his hand,
That sent such comfort to a woeful land!
13
Our Kingdom cast in dreadful desolation,
Our minds seduc'st with spite and proud sedition,
Our factions fraught with secret expedition
To take our lives, and work us all perdition.
How great a debt owe we to him above,
That sends a King to work united love?
14
Pardon (dread Lord) these harsh and ruder times
Unfitting objects for a Princes eyes:
The thunder-scorning bird of Jove sometimes,
Makes a low pitch to earth from lofty skies.
Enough is me, if but your Highness daine
The smallest approbation of my pain.
15
To Majesty alone belongs my Theme,
The sure foundation of a Royal state,
Breaking the boistrous surge of fortunes stream,
Held up by Providence the Curb of fate.
In this, as in a Crystal thou shall see,
What best befitteth Rule and Emperie.
16
Virtue that labors like heavens golden eye,
To light the world with her admired rays,
Comes to salute your sacred Majesty, Sapient. 8. 4. moral virtues the
subject of this book.

Tendering her offspring to your happy days:
First Prudence, next to her comes Temperance;
Then Fortitude, whom Justice does advance.
17
Sage Prudence busied in foresight of things, De 4. virtutibus ingenere vsque
ad paragr. 63.

And moderate Temperance with her golden squire,
True manly Fortitude (the heart of Kings)
Ioin'd with impartial Justice, all desire,
For their more safety and securer rest,
A sacred mansion in your Princely breast.
18
Now Virtue looks more debonaire and sweet,
And darts strange flames Plato in Phaedro.
of love in every place,
It Is so; Cic. 1. offic. c. 5.
when she and Princely greatness meet,
Accept the good that Virtue gives your Grace.
A double ease then shall your Highness find,
Making these Virtues Squires of your mind.
19
What comfort comes by such a gracious King,
In whom the four rare moral virtues reign!
A Prince that wants of these in anything,
Can not serve God, nor subjects well maintain.
All which great gifts his Princely mind must bear,
That will Th'emperiall Crown of honor wear.
20
These four, Currus quatuor virtutum.
a Chariot of four wheels have framed,
Which whosoever mounts shall great and mighty be;
And for this merit shall as much be feigned,
As if the Conqueror of the world were he.
Few Kings this goodly Chariot have driven;
For unto few these Cardinals are given.
21
Which virtues are fast knit and ioin'd together, Virtutes connexae. Arist. 6.
Aethic. cap. 17. and. 18.

Yet proper and distinct in quality,
Like Rivers flowing in a stormy weather
Out of the fountain of pure honesty. August. 7.

Thus all are one, Trinit. c. 3.
and one esteemed all:
Who wants one, Cic. 1. offic. cap 6.
possesses none at all.
22
There is one only wise and Sovereign king, 1. Tim. 6. v. 15.

Who sits on his high and holy throne,
And by his word created every thing, Genes. 1. Joan. 1. v. 3.

From whom true Iaco. 1. v. 5.
wisdom does proceed alone,
Which teaches us his holy word to know,
And in abundance does his mercy show.
23
These Moral virtues, Quadrupliciter Cardinales a cardine, vel stabilitate
dictae. lsidorus.
Cardinal are named,
A cardine, as ancient writers say;
Which is a hindge, on which the door is framed,
By which it shuts, and opens every way.
All Monarchs, kingdoms, commonwealths and Kings,
Guided by these, possess mostblessed things.
24
By these, they are made open unto God,
And to all goodness in their land and state;
Preserved from Satan and his wicked rod,
And from those vices which these virtues hate.
Who rules by these, shall have eternal bliss,
And reign with God where virtues glory is.
25
Further, they call them Card'nall, as I guess,
By reason of their firm stabilitie;
Both in themselves and persons they possess,
Where they inhere with perfect constancy.
When doors are moved the hindges fixed remain,
And yet not changed return the same again.
26
The third cause is, for that our conversation
And course of life supported ought to be, Causa in nobi^ ad cardinem disposita.

By these four virtues without alteration,
As doors borne up on hindges which we see:
Though to and fro the door do daily pass;
Yet borne on hindges, is the same it was.
27
Fourth reason, why we do them Card'nall prove,
Is praeminence and power above the rest;
The Cardin's are the chiefest parts above,
Of Heaven, of Earth and Sea which God has blessed:
Alluding unto man composed by nature
Of elements, Homo qualrata figura.
or else no perfect creature.
28
These virtues do exceed all others far,
By them are noble acts and deeds begun:
The least of them shines bright as any star,
And all in one as glorious as the Sun.
The soul who strives the greatest works to effect,
By these four virtues does herself direct.
29
The fifth cause, Haec quinta causa est superaddita defectui tertiae.
is their principality,
For unto them all virtues are inclin'de;
They lead the motions, power and quality
Of heart, of soul, of body and of mind:
They teach, they rule, they govern and they guide
The mind and soul that is to wisdom tide.
30
Prudence the act of Reason still does sway, Officia quatuor virtutum.

Which virtues is from vices to discern,

To take or leave it teaches us to learn.
It makes us see, and know the good from ill,
And having choice to take the better still.
31

Of the concupiscible faculty: Cic. 1. rhetoric. August. lib. 83. quaest. q.
31.

Which is, things good and pleasing to elect,
To comfort man, and with Gods word agree.
It does dispose all actions which delight
Man's humane good, and highest God of might.
32
Fortitude rules the actions, will and power
Irascible, Macrob.
in hearts and minds of all
That manage valourous actions at each stower, Cic. 1. Rheto. and lib. 1.
offic. Aug. lib. 83. quaest. q. 31.

And to endure what perils can befall:
Rather than faint in any fearful guise,
They show themselves both valiant, stout and wise.
33
These Fine and obiecto distinguuntur.
former virtues do themselves dispose,
With several actions in their proper places;
But Justice does direct and lead all those
To all good works indu'de with heavenly graces,
And by her understanding power control
The outward acts, August. lib. 2. de Genesi contra Manich^os. cap. 10.
and inward thoughts of soul.
34
In number four these choicest virtues are,
Which learned men in books define to be
A Corpus Morale.
body knit with substance firm and rare,
Sound without change, from all corruption free.
Yet have they objects in a different kind,
To every wicked thought and work inclined.
35
Against Prudence warreth senseless Ignorance; Four objects contrary to four
virtues.

Infirmity with Fortitude does fight:
Unbridled Lust defieth Temperance:
And hateful wrong against Justice bends his might.
Thus every virtue finds a vicious foe,
The one does good, the other does not so.
36
The Church, Been disponitur Ecclesia per has virtutes.
which is of Christ the Spouse and mate,
By these four virtues is adorned and wrought,
As of four precious stones of highest rate;
Not to be matched, if all the world were sought:
Which do protect and keep on every side,
Gods Word and Truth so often purified.
37
Prudence before, The properties of Prudence, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude.



does teach her to foresee
All future mischiefs like to come at last:
Justice behind, will always witness be
To every thing before is gone and past.
For what is to come, the first does her defend:
For matters done, the latter help does send.
38
But Temperance the right hand does attend,
Lest it be puffed up with prosperity;
And Fortitude the left hand does defend,
For fear it fall into adversity.
These former virtues do the Church uphold,
In Gods true fear, that cannot be controlde.
39
Next, wise men do these Cardinals compare
To the four Rivers pure of Paradise, Four virtues compared to four Rivers
of Paradise, in the first comparison.

Which water that fair garden Eden rare,
The place of all delights and high devise.
For as they moisten earth in every place,
So those bedew the soul of man with grace.
40
By these, men cool the heat of carnal lust,
And wicked passions which oppress the mind:
By these, our hearts are moved to do what is just,
From ill to good they make us still inclined:
By these, the Lord his blessings still imparts
Unto the sons of men, to glad their hearts.
41
They are compared to those fair colors pure,
In whose clear hue those Curtains were discerned,
Of Moses Tabernacle built most sure,
From whom are all good acts and precepts learned;
Which severally the virtues do define,
And show Christ's Church on high to be divine.
42
The first, the Iacinth is, of heavenly hue;
Whose rareness does to Prudence appertain; Four virtues compared to four
colors in the second comparison.

Whereby we imitate our Savior true,
And with his Angels hope in bliss to reign.
This color does so bright in glory shine,
That mortal hearts by faith see things divine.
43
The second, pure white Sanctorum iustificationes intellige. Apoc. 19. v. 8.
silk does signify,
And unto Temperance of right belongs:
It does the soul both cleanse and purify,
Divinely freeing it from offering wrongs:
To work, to speak, to think, the heart it moves
To all those things the highest God approues.
44

Which does on noble Fortitude attend, Purpura. i. verbum Dei. Apoc. 19. v. 13

To venture life and blood at every blow,
The spotless truth of Jesus to defend.
No dangerous adventure, labor, toil,
In Gods just cause can make her once recoile.
45

Resembling justice in her scarlet tires; Imperatores, Reges, Pontifices
Coceineis vestibus iudicant.

To censure humane causes as their head,
Whose burning zeal Christ's glory still desires.
And as this color lasts without stain,
So shall the conscience clear from touch remain.
46
These virtues natures lively we may prove
In spices four from whence that unction wrought, Exodus 30. v. 23. etc.

T'anoint the place, Four virtues compared to four spices. Comparat. 3.
and Priests of highest Jove,
And vessels all, that to Gods house were brought.
Which stately Throne perfumed with heavenly sweet
Affoords these virtues place, as room most meet.
47

With actions governed in our time of youth;
This does the wicked thoughts of men surprise,
From judgments rash, to see and know the truth;
And makes us in our courses often incline
From damned plots, to muse on things divine.
48
The second, is the sweetest Cynamon,
Whose color is for darkish brown allowed;
This being pounded, sends forth anon
A pleasing breath, that mounteth like a cloud:
Which does present to us Per humilitatem, omnem iustitiam intelligimus. Matthew.
3. v. 15. eten^m humilitas quod suum est Deo vere attribuit.
Humility,
As well the book of books can verify.
49
From whence all prayers do ascend and rise
Of faithful people, like the morning dew,
As incense sweet, Apoc. 8. v. 4.
whose smoke does cleanse the skies,
Which in the evening like a mist does show.
As this spice, broke, does make sweet smell each where,
So humble prayers pierce our Saviors ear.
50
What spice so sweet, as when this same is bruised?
What sacrifice so pleasing in Gods sight,
As prayers which in broken heart are used,
Which Vid. Seraphim.
flame and burn, and shine like glittring light,
Which mildly draw the Majesty divine,
With humble humane creatures to combine? Pro. 8. v. 31.

51
To whom shall I send down my holy Spirit,
But unto those that are of contrite heart? Isai. 66. v. 2.

Who shall my holy land of bliss inherit,
But those from whom true meekness does not part?
Whose hearts do quake and tremble at my word,
Which wounds the^ more than men or mortal sword.
52
Peraldus. Tomo 1. cap. 2. tract. 1. de virt. Cardi.
waters grows,
Resembling Prudence; and does comfort take,
From purest streams where perfect doctrine flows:
And of small Springs a River great do make.
From will to wit our senses it increases,
And by experience perfect wisdom teaches.
53
Calamus contusus re^ert ecclesiam, passa, floret: oppressa, crescit:
contempta, proficit: laesa, vincit. etc. Hilarious lib. 7. de Trinit.
a fragrant Plant
That bears the branches of true Fortitude,
Which in extremes no patience does want.
This drives away contagious sent and rude.
The more these spices we do beat and bruise,
The sweeter smell and savor still ensues.
54
Join unto these a godly fear and Love,
And all the heavenly works of Charity, Conjunction of four in one.

Which with the grace proceeding from above
Does make this ointment smell in purity.
For, Eccles. 7. v. 3.
better is a good and honest name,
Than any wealth or precious ointments fame. Prou. 22. v. 1.

55
Fourthly, Four virtues are compared to 4 wheels in the fourth comparison.
these virtues are esteemed fit
To the four wheels of that same fiery coach,
Wherein Elias and Gods servants sit,
Being lifted up the heavens to approach.
Which fiery Chariot to us knowledge gives
Of their true zeal that in our Savior lives. 4. Reg 2. v. 11.

56
Fifthly, Four virtues compared to four living creatures in the fifth
comparison.
the number of these virtues can
Be well alluded to four living creatures,
The Aegle, Calfe, a Lion, and a Man;
Which do describe their perfect several natures.
These four do sundry kinds decide, De his quatuor Apoc. 4.

How these rare virtues do themselves divide.
57
The first does us a perfect figure give
Of Prudence in her secret property: Aegle. 1.

To watch, observe and note the age we live,
And with quick sight all diffrent things to see. Visus aquilinus* acutissimus.

Whose provident praescience does prevent
All future acts might come to ill event. Plin. de aquila, and Barthol. Arist.
etc.

58
The second shows true Temperance to appear, Calfe. ^.

Which makes us give our bodies unto God,
With true oblation to our Savior dear,
As sacrifice, not fearing scourge of rod:
But still to hazard living, life and all
For Gods true cause, what ever should befall.
59
The third of these does Fortitude contain, Lion. 3.

Which is the Lion, of all beasts the king:
As he above them all does rule and reign,
So this rare virtue rules above each thing.
As the one no man, Prou. 30. v. 30.
nor creature can dismay,
So the other will from all the rest bear sway.
60
Man being the fourth, Man. 4.
does Justice comprehend,
Which is the band of true society.
This does all right, Pro. 13. v. 6.
and causes just defend
In faith, in truth and lawful equity:
And does prefer with care the poor man's right,
Before rewards, or greater men of might.
61
Lastly to note, the number still persists
Of these chief virtues whereof we entreat,
How God appointed four Evangelists
As blessed Gospels to confirm their seat.
Which shows that those who teach the truth indeed,
In these four seu'rall virtues should exceed.
62
What ever honest is, Oic. 1. offic. c. 6.
does come from them:
For they of honesty the fountains been;
And from grave Reason draw their sacred stem,
All unto virtue bowing as their Queen.
These thus discoursed of in general, Thus far in general.

I haste to show their powers several. De Prudentia in particulari, quae est
prior naturaliter vt regula dirigens; caeterae prae^edunt in esse perfecto,
quatenus diriguntur.

63
From Wisdom daughter of immortal love,
And sacred Science of Diuiner things,
Belonging to the Deity above,
The birth of well advised Prudence springs.
This the first fountain is, that purely runs
From Reasons head whereas true virtue wonnes. Fons primus.

64
No mortal man can perfect good attain,
That wants this virtue in her heavenly kind:
Nor can his life from actions vile refrain,
Nor yet control the wicked thoughts of mind.
Of Prudence therefore this is understood:
Men wanting her, are not accounted good.
65
She is the nurse of true and holy fear, Pro. 2. v. 4. 5.

Both to love God, and to obey our King:
She is the Ancient, does the colors bear
Into those fields, where fairest blessings spring.
She makes us know our selves, and fear the Lord;
To love the king, and in one faith accord.
66
A prudent King, Rex prudens, prudentia and sensu regit Israel. 1. Paral. 22.
a firm assurance is
Unto his people over whom he reigns,
Vpholds the right, and mends the faults amiss,
He roots out vice, and virtue still maintains.
Clap hands for joy, Vid. Pro. 29. v. 14.
when such a King we crown,
That raises good, and pulles the wicked down.
67
This virtue sprung from wisdom most divine,
With knowledge got, and by Gods goodness had,
Does rule men's actions and their hearts incline,
For to discern and choose the good from bad.
Whose office does consist by skill to choose,
What virtue bids, and all the rest refuse.
68
She is a beam proceeds from that true sun,
Which gives not only understanding light;
But kindles our affection still to shun
What should offend the God of power and might.
She is the quick, the clear and purest light,
Which does direct all other virtues right.
69
As sight amongst our numbered senses five, Arist. de sensu and sensato.

Accounted is as fairest and most clear:
So other virtues must their light derive,
And brightest splendour from her glorious Sphere.
By her direction all good works are wrought,
And men's minds clothed with mild and constant thought.
70
This virtue does contain three other parts; Prudentiae tres partessen
potentiae.

As Understanding, Memory, Foresight,
Esteemed Eyes by learned men of Arts,
Which makes her judge and censure times aright. Cic. 1. offic. Gabriel. 3.
sent. did. 33. q. vnica conclus. 2.

Time present, first: and past, the second shows:
The last of these, does future times disclose.
71
Nor may we here exclude the Canonists,
Nor Schoolmen, Vid. Scholast. lib. 3. sent.
which avouch five needful parts,
Which in this Princely virtues power consists,
Lively described in the liberal Arts. Arist. 6. Ethic. and in Politic.

These do attend, observe and keep their place,
For humane good and heavenly works of grace.
72
The first of them they term Didacticall,
Which teaches us our selves to know and guide.
The second they hold Oeconomicall,
To rule ones house, De his 5. vide Angelum de Clauasio in sua Summa. verbo,
Prudentia.
and maintenance provide.
By this, our selves, our house and people learn,
Twixt good and evil rightly to discern.
73
The third is taken for a warlike Spirit,
By which an Armie's marshaled, ruled and led;
To yield reward to valiant men of merit,
To cure the hurt, and care to bury dead.
Which gives each one his office and his place,
Pleasing the best, and giving none disgrace.
74
The fourth is deemed for Politic estate,
Which, Haec pars dicitur Legis positiua, qua ciuitas vel Regnum administratur.
Architecton, men of wisdom name;
Ordaining laws the truth for to debate,
As right falls out to censure of the same.
Establish such Decrees as may us lead,
To know the path of perfect good to tread.
75
The last is pure and simple Policy;
By which the subjects do their fortunes shroud
Under the King in their extremity,
As skies ou'rcast within a mighty cloud.
Which Prince for peace, sets down, and keeps good laws:
And with just care does hear the poor man's cause.
76
Prudence does manage, Prudentia, principatum in dirigendo caeteras virtutes,
obtinet.
exercise and try
The secret acts and functions of the rest,
Respecting parts of true Philosophy,
Wherewith so many virtues are possessed.
Aethicke and Oeconomicke those they call,
And Politic they term the last of all.
77

Ab etimologia.
families does rightly guide;

And mighty kingdoms where good laws abide.
So that our selves, our houshold-state and lands
What best becomes, are brought to understand.
78
This virtue is threefold in secret skill: Joan de Combis. lib. 5. cap. 34.

Whereof the first is taken from the heart,

And notes all what is past on every part. Triplex prudentia.

It does provide for future times event, Deuteronomy. 23. v. 29.

That, Had I wist, provoke not to repent.
79

Which does consist in mod'rature of speech; Pro. 10. v. 31. 32.

This is the badge of wisdom pure indeed,
As proof and eke experience do teach.
For fools that hold from prattle and vain talk,
Shall in account of perfect wise men walk.
80
The third is of the work and true effect,
Which in this place as proper does consist;
To show good actions, and the bad reject;
And from the works of faith not to desist:
But meat such measure unto all we should,
As every one to give to us we would.
81
Well may we further note, Adhuc Prudentia triplex? mundana, diuina and humana.
and so observe
The worlds Prudence; and next thereto humane;
The third divine, which does the soul preserve:
All called alike, but not in work the same.
Yet two do seem from virtue to proceed
In outward show; but not in work or deed.
82
The first is busied daily to procure
All temp'rall things, which most men's humor feed;
The second never cease to allure
Carnal desires, which souls confusion breed:
The third with zeal endeavors Christ to please,
And craves his help, Gods anger to appease.
83
Against this virtue there are opposite
Four vices covered underneath a veil: Quatuor vitia Prudentiae opposita.

Resembling in some sort true signs of merit;
But not abiding touch, their purpose fail.
Yet do they strive, and work, and labor still,
With goodly show to work the course of ill.
84
Prudentia carnis we do name;
Astutia the second, we may call;
Dolus, a branch is of the same;
Fraus, the last, though not the least of all.
Which ever in their actions do agree,
With virtues cloak to work all villainy.
85
Yet find they in themselves a different course,
(Though in vile plots and purposes, one head.)
For Craft we may of these account the worst,
Which first, the path to wickedness, does tread.
These with their subtle, false and sly deceits,
In show like honest, lay soule-trapping baits.
86
Next, Dole and Fraud do cunningly defend,
And still excuse the damned works of evil:
But Dolus to deceit is surest friend,
And couching close does seek the soul to spill.
Yet Fraud most properly does rest in facts,
Not in the words of such deceitful acts.
87
This virtue did with orient brightness shine
In Solomon, Examples.
that matchless king of praise,
Who left with fame his Proverbs most divine,
To be true Prudence guide for us always.
Whose holy wisdom all the world bereft, 3* Reg. 3. v. 12.

That since his death the like was never left.
88
Who did true wisdom in his censure show
Betwixt two women striving for a child: 1. Reg. 3.

An inward prudence wrought the truth to know,
That the true mother should not be beguilde.
In offering them the infant to divide,
He both the truth of love and nature tri'de.
89
The lawful mother did lament and cry,
She would not any such division make,
But rather seemed her right clean to deny,
And bid the mother false the whole to take.
By which the King in wisdom understood
The mother right, whose love preserved the blood.
90
I rightly may of Jesus Sirach speak,
And famous Esdras, Extant libri in ret^ri testamento.
who did both design
Such prudent rules they never meant to break,
But all men's faults by virtue to refine;
And by their light, and holy works, to move
Men's mortal hearts to honor God above.
91
By Prudence, Vid. Herodot. lib. 8. and 9. and Plutarc. in vita Alexand.
Alexander did obtain
Two battles of Darius, Persians King:
Which time twelve hundred thousand men were slain,
And fifteen Nations did to bondage bring.
Five thousand Towns and Cities he that day, Milites in vno praelio 1000000.

By wisdom, power, and rule did ouersway.
92
Did not this virtue Julius Caesar show, Plutarc. in Pompeio.

In reconciling Senators of Rome,
By whom he learned the perfect way to know
For Consulship, to have the peoples dome?
Then Prudence joined with bounty, worth and wit,
Brought him in Rome an Emperor great to sit.
93
The worthy fame of Solons prudence springs
With branches great of endless memory; Plutarc. in Solone.

Which the Athenian iarres to concord brings,
And all to live in love and unity.
This he obtained in taking part with none,
Yet made them choose him Ruler all alone.
94
Lycurgus worthy maker of sharp laws, Plutarc. in Liturgo.

Who did reform the Lacedemons state;
Five hundred years of peace he was the cause,
And settled loue'mongst those that swelled with hate.
So that they lived in government and peace,
Until his laws and ordinance did cease.
95
Well may we note, Plutarc. in Phocione.
how Phocion spoke his mind
Against the Athenians enterprise in war,
And since they took his counsel to unkind,
He spoke aloud that men might hear him far:
You force me do the things I ought not think,
Nay yet from speech, nor counsel for to shrink.
96
Demosthenes, a woman poor preserved;
Who had engaged herself upon receipt
To them of whom from faith the one was sweru'd,
And got the money from her by deceit.
Her cause by prudence he did well defend,
And for the payment made her foes attend.
97
Here strike we sail, Cor Principis domicilium virtutis.
and now the anchor cast
Of our bifronted Prudence in the bay
Of sacred royalty, there remaining fast,
Till her fair sister Temperance bring we may.
O that she find such quiet harbor there,
As may the date of datelesse time outweare.
98
This Cardinal does wicked ways subdue, De Temperantia in particulari.

Chacing bad motions which misleade the mind;
Preserving man in mean and measure true,
Gods laws to keep which are to us assign'de.
And to contend by all the means we can,
To beat down sin; and raise the inward man.
99
This Temperance is described three parts to have: Tres parts Temperantia.

First, Continence does rightly challenge one.
The second office, Clemency does crave.
And Modesty, the third does hold alone.
Each one of these sits in his proper place, August. lib. 83.

To build Gods house; quaest. q. 31.
and Satan's to deface.
100
The first, August. lib. de continentia. cap. 13.
the mind and appetite does lead
With inclination to good works of light.
The other, Probatur exemplo mulierum Syrarum. August. lib. 2. cap. 20. de
adulterinis coniugijs.
carnal motions down does tread,
And all external evils pardon quite.
The third, distinctly measured with suspense,
Does judge the cause and manner of offense.
101
From Continence two other branches spring:

And those corrupt desires of every thing,
That should procure our everlasting pain.
The other works to bridle that desire
Sapient. 8.

102
By Continence the appetite is taught, Continentia Demonium superatur.

And governed by the square of grave advise,
Virtue to love, and vices set at naught,
And for the best all courses to devise.
Whereby is proved, that vile intents contained,
Are changed to good; and wicked acts refrained
103
Clemency is a Temperance of the mind,
When just Revenge may take his time and power; Esther 13. v. 2.

Or Lenity in noble hearts most kind,
Which might afflict inferiors every hour,
And to impose upon them punishment
For all offenses done with ill intent.
104
Though this for all men be expedient, Misericordia and veritas custodiunt
Regem, and roboratur clementia thronus eius. Pro. 20. v. 28.

Yet unto Princes chiefly it belongs;
Whose care to punish faults convenient,
Gives us example to desist from wrongs.
Which is confirmed and proved in each respect,
When God made Moses Judge of his elect.
105
Who was the Number. 12. v. 3
meek'st and temperat'st Prince alive,
That lived obedient in Gods fear and love,
And would no man of his due right deprive,
Nor once his foot from that was truth remove.
Then England Joy: God has a Moses sent
His right to keep, and all our harms prevent.
106
Well may we note in Israel many Kings,
That were most gentle in their toilsome reign,
Which did in mercy censure doubtful things, 3. Reg. 20. v. 31

And with attention hear the poor complain:
And having heard the truth on both parts tri'de,
In temperate judgment did the cause decide.
107
I would in no wise wrong my Regal power, Esther 13. v. 2.

Nor once abuse the greatness of my place;
But rule my subjects every day and hour,
With pity, mercy, lenity and grace:
This Esther writes renowned Queen of fame,
That following Princes might observe the same.
108
Behold, Matthew. 21. v. 5.
the King does come unto the mild,
And with the gentle makes his abode;
But from th'obdurate he will be exilde,
And shun the path where wicked people trod.
From Clemency this knowledge still does spring,
To know a Tyrant from a gracious King.
109
A shamefast wise regard is Modesty, Modestiae descriptio.

Of honest things inhabiting the mind;
And the reward has of authority, Pro. 22. v. 4.

The which does pure and stable actions bind:
And teaches us in compass how to live,
Of precepts, such as Temperance does give.
110
This shows man himself how to behave, Seneca. lib. de 4. virtutibus.

In laughter, words, and gesture decently;
In ord'ring well those parts which God us gave,
In comely habits of Civility. 1. Tim. 2. v. 5.

All these Sobriety does still observe,
And never from true modest actions swerue.
101
Temperance does guide the seasons of the year, The properties of Temperance.

And their conjunctions firm and mutual makes,
Of elements whose temperate times appear;


And perfect ornament to deck the same.
102
It is the groundwork of man's happy life,
And preservation of his inward soul;
It is the curb and bridle of all strife,
Drawing the raines which choler do control.
It does contain the inward thoughts of mind,
By which all actions moderate passage find.
103
From Prudence rightfully she draws her line, Species diuersae ab alijs
deriuari possunt per modum dirigentis* Sic Bonauent. lib. 2. and 3. sentent.

Withouten which we cannot Temperance gain;
Nor any can to Fortitude incline,
Unless the moderate virtue he attain.
For courage will be rash and heady still,
And wanting Temperance, follows rages will.
114
This virtue knit and joined with all the rest,
Does work perfection in their true effects: Gabriel. lib. 3. sent. did. 36.
q. vnica.

Without the which, no virtue is possessed
With that true good that Wisdom most respects. Oecham. lib. 3. sent. q. 11.
iuxta finem.

In Noble minds where temperate motions fail,
Presumptuous thoughts do evermore prevail.
115
The ornament that best beseemes all Kings,
Inuesture is with robes of Temperance; Quatuor virtutes ornamenta Regum.

That makes their fame so high to fly with wings,
And to the heavens their Scepters does inhance.
In right and truth a King we may him call, Ab etimologia.

That his desires and pleasures masters all.
116
This virtue is the light that banisheth

A double virtuous quality she has,
For she preseru's us both within and out.
With private, public, and humane respect,
She frees the soul, which vice did so infect.
117

Over the passions of Concupiscence:
She keeps the motions of the mind in season;
And to the soul is still a sure defense.
Nothing so rare on earth can be espi'de,
As she, which both the soul and mind does guide.
118

As firm and fast as surest driven nail: A definition.

It roots out lust, and does bad facts control;
And makes perfections in our minds prevail.
That man who entertaines not such a guest,
True reason wants; and lives like a beast.
119

The helm and shield against luxuriousness;
It is the eye by which our works are viewed,
And draw'n and kept to lore of happiness.
It good preseru's; the obstinate denies;
And hates the souls disordred enemies.
120
Rare Scipio the noble African, Plutarch.

King Cyrus stout, and Alexander great,
Wasting the world with fire and sword outran,
Yet conquered were by Continence entreat.
Proved by the beauty of Darius dames, Plutarc. in Alexandro.

When they subdued the heat of wicked flames.
121
Architas was with this rare gift indu'd,
Isaeus, Vid. Plutarc. in vit. Pompei.
Pompey, and Plutar. in Pho^ione and Demetrio.
Zenocrates,
Antigonus and Gracchus all eschu'd,
Such youthly motions might their fancies please.
And when such sparks their hearts do set on fire,
Their Temperance rules the heat of lusts desire.
122
We read of Charles that Emperor of great fame,
Lysimmachus, In vi^^ eorum.
Fabritius, and the rest,
Rodulphus, Cato, Socrates by name,
All which this virtue pure and rare possessed.
By her they did their course of life direct,
And strongest passions of the mind reject.
123
Since golden mean does temperance out measure,
Happy the man that can the same attain;
Neither to melt in th'hot desire of pleasure;
Nor fry in heart-breake, grief, and hardest pain.
The greatest enemy that she does find,
Is stubburne perturbation of the mind.
124
Now seat thee Temperance by thy sisters side;
Humbly deuoluing all thy virtuous power,
To him that in his chaste thoughts does provide, Anima Principis, Temperantiae
seeds.

His Princely mind to be your trusty tower.
Stout Fortitude is my next moral theme,
The fountain third of reasons sacred stream.
125
This Fortitude is the earnest appetite, Fortitudinis descriptio.

And strong desire of great and mighty things,
That in contempt of actions base will fight, Deuteronomy. 20.

And servile causes to subjection brings, Eleazar.

With constant suffering in an honest cause, 2. Match. 6. v. 19. 20. etc.

And humble labor to defend good laws.
126
It is the strength and valor of the mind, Dan. 3.

Against the tedious troubles of our age, Martyrs.

Which does with settled resolution bind, Matthew. 19. v. 28. 29.

Our lives and lands for Gods truth to engage;
And to defend with courage bold and stout,
Christ's chosen Church the universe throughout.
127
Twelve helps to this rare virtue do belong. Duodecim brachia fortitudinis.

The first, is Counsel of the grave and wise;

The Priest stands in the vantguard to advise, Pro. 2. v. 10. 11

And with loud voice the people does exhort, Deuteronomy. 20. v. 2. 3

They should not faint to lose the town or fort.
128
And bids them hearken when he calls and cries,
To fight the battle with undaunted hearts,
And march on stoutly against their enemies,
Not fearing death, nor his relentlesse darts.
This shows, that courage which does counsel lack,
Runs on at first, but in the end turns back.
129
Let us observe that wise and holy King, David, Reges Judah and Israel.

That armed his soldiers not with spear and shield,
Exhorting them courageous hearts to bring,
With policy and strength, to win the field.
Which does most plain and perfectly declare,
Warr's little worth, where grave advise is rare.
130
The fame which the old Heroes did atchieue
By their brave deaths; and did the same commend
To datelesse memory and time to live, 2. Match. vlt.

Was fortitude and courage without end:
As Eleazars death has left behind, 2. Match. 6. v. 18. 24.

A worthy project for each Noble mind.
131
Another help is daily exercise,
Whereby the body's kept in perfect use, Hoc d^lectantur Scithae, Turci,
Arabes, etc.

Without the which it hourly droups and dies,
And made a subject to most vile abuse.
Which shows that use and exercise does make
The party apt and prompt all good to take.
132
Hard sinews and strong arms the rusticks have, Bernard. ad fratres de monte
Dei.

Which exercise and daily use has wrought
Whose perfect actions daily custom gave,
And earnest labor readiness has taught.
Use therefore exercise which gives strength,
And brings effect to all our works at length.
133

And conquer all the world with victory. 1. Joan. 5. v 4.

Faith is to Fortitude a Captain true, Hebrae. 11. v. 32. 33. etc.

Fit for to march in deeds of dignity.
She is the hope of things not had in sight, Hebrae. 11. v. 1.

The joy whereof does give the heart delight.
134

To Fortitude in matters of import, Timor filialis.

Of every sin it does abate the sting, Prou. 1. v. 7.

And to clean hands this virtue does exhort. Psalm. 111. v. 10.

The fear of God the true beginning is
Of perfect wisdom and eternal bliss. Non seruilis; quia non habet
charitatem. 1. Joan. 4. v. 18.

135

In perfect silence, Isa. 30. v. 15.
to this virtue pure:
And so enabled, Phil. 4. v. 13.
mighty things it gains,
In him that does sweet comfort still assure. Sap. 3. v. 4.

So Secrecy and Hope true solace bring
To Fortitudes attempt in every thing.
136
The seventh, pure and perfect Charity,
By which, we may two ways observe and take:
First, Matthew. 25. v. 35. etc.
how we should in need relieved be,
And of our neighbors help good use to make.
Which does instruct us in our deeds, Iaco. 2. v. 15.
to do
To others, Luc. 6. v. 31.
as we would be done unto.
137
A brother, which his brother does uphold,
Is like a goodly city of great strength: Prou. 18. v. 19.

If one do fall, the other waxes bold
Him to support, and raise again at length.
What with Gods blessed Word does more agree, Psalm. 133.

Than brethrens love, Eccles. 25. v. 1.
and neighbors charity?
138
The second is, adhaering to the truth, Psalm. 73. v. 28. and Psalm. 119. v. 31.

To which, whose minds and hearts do ever cleave,
Shall still control foolish ways of youth,
And not let worldly vanities deceive. Qui veritati inhaeret, vanitati nullo
modo succumbit. Gregor in Moral.

For those that are to constant truth inclin'de,
Will not admit vain thoughts to vex the mind.
139
The eighth, is Wisdom, which we may esteem
A fitting help and comfort in this place: Pro. 24. v. 5.

A wise man, Valde fortitude destituitur nisi per consilium fulciatur. Gregor.
in Moral.
stout and valiant we should deem:
A strong man learned, gives his learning grace.
Thus Valor should to Wisdom still be tied,
And learned men with strength be beautified.
140

The steps and paths of true prosperity, Gregor. in Moral.

And does sinister accidents subdue. Nulla aduersitas deijcit, quem prosperitas
nulla corrumpit.

For being down cast in adversity,
No loss of goods can change or grieve that mind,
Whom all the gifts of Fortune can not blind.
141
He that does live and naught desires at all, 1. Tim. 6. v. 7. 8

Of wealth or riches in his course of life; Job. 1. v. 21.

Needs not to fear the force of Fortunes fall, Prou. 27. 26.

Nor to molest his mind with care and strife. Matthew. 6. v. 25.

Sweet is the time, Ecclesiastis. 5. v. 17. 18. etc.
the years and days well spent,
Where, that one has, does give the heart content.
142

Of these our bodies in corrupt estate, 1. Cor. 9. v. 27.

Which makes us from our fleshly foes decline, 2. Cor. 12. 7. and v. 8. 9.

T'imbrace good things, which we by nature hate.
And being conquered, works in us more strength
For to attain true virtues goal at length.
143

Unto the poor and them which stand in need; Psalm. 41. v. 1. and 112. 4. 9.

To clothe the naked, Eccles. 11. 1.
and to ease the grief
Of those for whom our Savior Christ did bleed. Dan. 4. v. 24.

Which Alms with honor shall obtain the field, Tob. 4. 7. cap. 12. v. 9. etc.

And rule the mighty Monarchs, Matthew 25. 35.
spear and shield.
144
The last, is prayer of most great avail,
With Fortitude conioyn'd, does high ascend. Iaco. 5. v. 15. and 17.

When Moses did by prayers God assail, Exodus 17.

To Israel the conquest he did lend.
Which shows, that prayer with true virtue knit,
Does pierce the very Throne where God does sit.
145
This virtue does four other parts dispose: Quatuor parts fortitudinis.

Magnificence the first, I take to be;
The next, sure Trust, which nothing will disclose;
The third, is Patience in extremity;
The fourth, Perseu'rance in one purpose still,
And not to rest until she work her will.
146
It has besides, Effectus fortitudinis. 6.
a number of effects:
The first, triumphs over all her foes;
The second, keeps to each her true respects;
The third, enricheth with the ware it shows.
For valiant hand does gather wealth and store; Pro. 10. 4.

And still increases riches more and more.
147
The fourth, it does expugne the highest seat,
And heavens kingdom, Fortitudo fidei.
wherein God does reign;
With violence it suffers to entreat
That glorious state where holy Saints remain. Hebrae. 11.

The fifth adornes the body and the mind
With comely robes, which Fortitude does find.
148

And armed with care in all extreme designs;
With strong defense all danger to endure,
At no dysast'rous chance it once repines.
Security it breeds to all good hap,
And nothing doubts malignant thundering clap.
149
True Fortitude five offices does hold: Fortitudinis officia 5. in quibus
consistit.

The first attempteth matters of great doubt,

Still to effect the work she goes about.
Do manfully with comfort and good cheer;
Daunt not your hearts with any kind of fear.
150

And from the love of earthly joys to run:
The truth whereof by Moses plain was seen,
Deny'ng to be Kings Pharos daughters son. Hebr. 11. v. 24.


With love; Cantic. 8. v. 6.
as strong as death in alterations.
151
Iaco. 4. v 7. 1. Pet. 5. v. 8. and 9.
filthy Temptor to withstand,
And foul suggesting which the mind offends.
2. Tim. 2. v. 5
None shall be crowned, or hold that blessed land,
But he that curbeth sin, and life amends;
Appeasing so the wrath of God, he gives
The world adue: Surmounting Satan; lives.
152
Man's life is like a warfare on the earth,
Whose time is spent with troubles, Job 7. 1.
toil and cares,
Subject to all temptations from his birth,
In woe he lives, and dies at unawares.
The surest sign true fortitude to show,
Is in this life, all vice to overthrow.
153
The Romans Monarch Julius Caesar great, Vid. Caesaris Commentar. and Plutarc.
in Iul. Caesar.

Being sickly, tender, subject to much grief,
Did still the weakness of his state entreat,
With warlike labor for his healths relief.
He made a medicine of his daily toil,
And exercise to be his sickness foil.
154
Of Marcus Sergius we may likewise note,
Whose right hand from his body was bereft:
Yet by continual use and practice got
Such perfect skill ih the other hand was left,
As he did call four seu'rall men in sight,
And overcame them one by one in fight.
155
Fabius Cunctator comes to my mind, Plut.

Whose moderate courage mixed with valor still,
Did show himself of true and noble kind,
When Hanniball his soldiers all did kill:
He rusheth forth and pulls from him his crown,
Wounded to death, there dies with great renown.
156
Pompey the great and mighty Prince of power
Prepar'de to sea, Plutar. in Pompei^.
his ships hoist under sail,
There rose a stormy tempest and a shower,
That all his mariners began to quail.
He puts to sea, spreds sail, and speech does give:
It Is good I go; not fit I stay to live.
157
Agys the Lacedemons worthy king, Vid. virtutem bellicam. Agis in Plutarch. in
vit. Agis and Cleomenis.

Resolved to fight, though often his counsel told,
His enemies, then ten for one would bring;
Which made his warlike sp'rite to speak more bold:
It needs must be, whose power commands many,
Should not be feared with multitude of any.
158
We may not slip with silence in this place
Themistocles, Plutar. in Themistocle.
in whom true worth appeared,
Whom Xerxes mighty fleet could not disgrace,
Nor whole twelve hundredth ships once make affeard.
Three hundredth sail he brought with skill to fight,
Which in that conflict put the twelve to flight.
159
Damyndas answered, being often told
The danger great the Graecians should endure,
Unless they did with Phillip concord hold
Who had prepared an army strong and sure: Plutarc. in Paulo AEmilio

What evil can he cause us for to take,
That no account of death it self do'th make?
160
Dercyllides from Sparta being sent
To Pyrrhus stout, De fortitudins Pyrris. vid. Plutarch. in Pyrro.
his meaning forth to sound,
Wherefore he marched, and what was his intent,
To bring his men on borders of their ground?
If thou be God, our faults deserve no care:
If thou be man, thou art but as we are.
161
Thundering, Plato.
says Plato, terrifi'th a child;
And threatenings are but scar-babes unto fools,
It daunteth none but those are base and vilde,
And never learned in this rare virtues schools.
They fear not death, where fortitude is found;
Nor care to rot above, or in the ground.
162
A man of wisdom once demanded was,
Why he for shame such actions would commit
That should his death procure, or bring to pass,
Or end his days at seasons so unfit?
He answered: Good men put in life no trust,
But in those things, were honest good and just.
163
True proof by Marcus Crassus we may find; Plutar. he Crasso.

Who showed his valor in his later age;
And lost his dearest son to grieve his mind,
And all his men in fury, fight and rage:
Yet showed himself more valiant then before,
And never seemed his losses to deplore.
164
Let us observe stout Machabaeus fame, De diuiso exercitu 40000. and 7000.
equitum sub Ptolom. Nicanore and Gorgia. vid. 1. match. 3. and 4.

When forty thousand men appeared in sight,
And being aduis'de not to abide the same
But fly away, and not endure the fight:
1. Machab. 3. v. 59.
He thus resolved much better was to die
Then lose his name, and from his foes to fly.
165
But stay my Muse: And now brave fortitude,
Which art the part of honesty that reares
The mind to heaven: and solely do include
The soul and spirit, daunting abject fears:
Make haste, and to thy reu'rend sisters hie,
Borne on the wings of sacred Poesy.
166
Justice gives right to whom it appertains: De Iustitia in particulari.

First unto God; next unto every man:
It is a habit in the mind remains,
Which does with care the course of profit scan:
Preserving and maintaining common good,
Which makes true Justice to be understood.
167
It gives to every one his proper place
And dignity, Proprietas Iustitie.
with honor, worth and praise:
It yields desert his true and perfect grace,
And censures judgment to the right always:
It is the virtue that does comfort bring
To all true subjects from a godly king.
168
Six things to upright Justice do pertain: Sex pertin^nt ad Iustitiam.

The first, Religion, which Gods word has taught.
The second place does Piety obtain; 1. Religi^.

By which true works of Charity are wrought. 2. Pie^as.

The third is Grace or favor, 3. Gratia.
which proceeds
From God above, whose sp'rite works holy deeds.
169
The fourth, Revenge of things which are unjust
And contrary to Gods most holy will; 4. Vindicta mali.

Not in the strength of man or horse to trust,
But in his word, Judith. 9. v. 16.
whose truth continues still,
Which shall not change, but rest the same it was,
Though all the world, the earth and heavens pass.
170
The fifth does hold a Reverend respect
And due regard of those that best deserve. 5. Reuerentia.

The last does well the works of truth effect, 6. Veritas.

And from good laws and praeceps never swerve.
But still maintain what euer's good and just,
And not to vain deceitful toies to trust.
171
Religion is the worship pure of God, Religionis definitio.

Observing of his just and holy laws,
To visit those that suffer scourge of rod, Jacob. 1. v. 27.

And to relieve when want does offer cause.
It keeps our minds unstained and vndefilde
From all infection of the world so vilde.
172
But piety is a bountiful regard, Pietus quid.

Whose care respects as well the bond of blood
As duties or priorities reward,
Or great obedience to the mean and good.
In all degrees it makes an equal show,
To yield true measure to the high and low.
173
Favor or grace a virtue we may call, Gratiae descriptio.

Wherein the true and perfect friendship shines,
With memory of subjects duties all,
Whose bounds and limits grace to us defines.
It does contain will to remunerate
The gifts and qualities of each estate.
174
Revenge of things unjust a virtue is, Vindicta mali describitur.

That does subdue oppression, force, and wrong;
All obscure acts which lead men far amiss,
She does repel; be never they so strong.
It does defend the pure and innocent;
And chastise those that in transgression went.
175
Much holiness dread reverence behights, Reuerentia describitur.

For just observance of the merit due
To those, on whom all perfect honor lights,
Whose worth makes their deseruings good and true.
It gives renown and honor in her kind, Praemium virtutis, honos.

To men of note, and of a Noble mind.
176
Truth is a practicke habit, Veritas quid.
as I ween,
Or verity, which does the mind possess,
Inspired into the soul of man, not seen,
By God himself, whose sp'rit brings happiness.
This makes difference twixt the good and evil,
To choose her self, and hate her foe the devil.
177
Justice is termed the simple poor man's treasure, Seeds Iustitiae conscientia
pura.

Locked in the chest of soul and conscience:
It yields to them the truth of great men's measure,
And keeps it swept from eating-moths offense.
All precious stones whose virtues breed no doubt,
It does reserve, and cast all other out.
178
He is not just, Vigor and synceritas Iustitiae.
that dreadeth death or pain,
Or fears exile, or stings of poverty:
No conscience clear, whose eyes do look for gain,
Or heart prefers the foes to equity.
No man for good or honest we regard,
Whose mind does measure justice with reward.
179
Justice has wrought to us most happy things:
Justice by right has taught our land to know
A royal, H. 7. and Iacobus primus, Reges.
lawful, true descent of Kings,
Whose veins the blood of Henry seventh show.
It brought him in; he will not shut her out:
Let none for Justice therefore fear or doubt.
180
This Princely branch from that pure root now springs
Of Brute that mighty monarch of great fame; Brutus.

Whose buddes the fruit of perfect Justice brings,
And to his people ancient Britans name:
Which he adorns with unity and peace,
Throughout the world for ever to increase.
181
We see the buds of that same stately tree,
Whose blossoms yield our hearts and eyes delight:
We reap the fruit of Justice equally
As moats still subject to the Sun of light.
Justice divine, chief virtue of renown,
Commands with love our sacred King to crown.
182
Prudence with Justice did conjunction make,
Uniting so four kingdoms into one:
Heavens in the change did all our troubles slake
In giving power and right to Ieames alone.
He is the first that over all did reign,
Or could with love and peace the crown obtain.
183
He with his Justice does all strife debate,
And makes us love one only God and king:
He ioineth love twixt those that iarr'd with hate,
And does our hearts to true religion bring.
He makes us live in peace and unity
With kingdoms great, and have our traffic free.
184
Blessed be his name, that made us Justice know,
By such a Prince, whose heart intends no wrong.
Blessed be his power that such a tree did show
From that true stock of Brutus, graft so long.
Blessed be heaven, a Princely Britain reigns,
And that so goodly plants of Brute remains.
185
Justice brings peace and concord to our land;
And breeds not wars by offering others wrong: Pace and concordia
stabiliuntur Regna, and sanguini Christiano optime consulitur.

It knits men fast like faggots in a band,
In faith and love, that to one state belong.
Religion, love, and unity increase
Under the King whose heart desires peace.
186
Justice extreme is never to be used
With cruelty, Summum iu^ est summa iniuria.
or rigorous intent:
It may with ouer-wresting be abused,
And turn to wrong the good which vertuement.
The sum of Justice which is in rigor seen,
To injury is changed and alt'red cleene.
187
True Justice, riches never can infect,
Nor gain of kingdoms cut off course of right: Probatio Iustitiae.

No private whisper shall the cause detect,
Till both be heard; and truth be brought to light.
Where Justice flies with flattering wings to the ear,
The King^s abused, and subjects buy it dear.
188
Most pitiful that land and people's left, Regnum sive iustitia est
latrocinium.

Where perfect justice is not understood:
They are of all true happiness bereft,
And sure to sink, Insignia iniustitiae.
let cause be never so good:
But still to labor, strive, consume and spend
All that they have, yet never make an end.
189
What greater plague or viler punishment, Reprehensio malorum siqui sint, non
taxatio bonorum, quorum synceritatem nouimus

Than live in hope of right from day to day?
What greater torment to a state is sent,
Than Judges to sell Justice with delay?
Who rule the cause with coin unto their will,
And keep true Justice from the judgment still.
190
They that abuse this image pure of God, Impiorum fraus and finis.

And sell the truth for pictures of a King,
Are made the means to use the devils rod,
And all good causes to confusion bring:
They never care how matters come about,
So that the purse the gold be pouring out.
191
Paulus the Pythagorian does direct, Omnes virtutes in vna Iustitia
comprehensae. Vid. Plutarc. in Agesilao.

How all men should this gift divine embrace:
As nurse and mother truly to effect
The works of all the rest with heavenly grace,
Gods providence to Justice is appli'de,
Which does the world both govern, rule and guide.
192
In Towns and Cities it is rightly thought
The perfect path to equity and peace.
In private homes twixt man and wife is wrought,
True unity and concord to increase.
It makes men serve their masters with regard,
And masters kind good servants to reward.
193
It is commanded by Gods holy spirit, Deuteronomy. 1. v. 16.

All Magistrates should Justice daily use; Joan. 7. v. 24.

And that their hearts should judgment pure inherit, Iere. 21. v. 12. and 22.
v. 3.

And not Gods holy laws for to abuse.
For whosoever does infringe and break the same,
Can not avoid the curse of endless shame.
194
It does to Justice duly appertain,
To entertain the pure and innocent, Prou. 13. v. 6.

Them to protect till they be free again,
So sent away full safe to their content.
Judgment resists bold deeds of wickedness,
And does with punishment all faults redress.
195
By Solon this was truly taught, Plutarc. in Solone.
as mean
For great preseruance of all common good;
In which consist two things, whereby are seen
The works of right, and Justice understood:
First, Leges Solonis.
to regard the good with true respect;
Then, punishment for wicked men effect.
196
The Egyptians makers of the ancient laws, Menethon. Diodor. Siculus.

Were very careful duly to observe
With diligence and justice every cause,
And from their settled precepts never swerue.
The Greeks and Romans were in zeal precise,
To yield true justice to their enemies.
197
The old Egyptians ever used to paint
Their Judges pictures wanting both their hands;
Their President draw'n blindfolde they appoint, Pausanias.

To teach them how true Justice habits stands:
No bribes must there respect of persons make,
Nor favor judge; or any thing so take.
198
Cleon the Lacedaemon, bent to deal
In public actions and most great affairs,
To all his friends together does reveal,
That for their love or friendship he naught cares;
Because affection caused men to decline,
And step aside from judgment most divine.
199
To Justice Aristides showed his love, Plutarc. in Aristide.

Who had his foe of heinous crimes accused,
Which did the Judge with great impression move
Him to condemn, his answer quite refused:
He kneeled down, and craved to be prepared,
That they the truth of both might have declared.
200
We may just Iunius Brutus call to mind, Titus Liuius.

Whom Titus and Tyberius judged to die
His sons whom he so false to Rome did find,
Who sought Tarquinius race to amplify:
A rare example and of great effect,
How justice should with favor none respect.
201
Phocion refused to help his son in law, Plutar. in Phocione.

Chariles sitting in his judgment place;
When he in fraud his money taken saw,
He said: Alliance gave bad cause no grace;
He was alli'de to him in things were just,
But not in faults for favor once to trust.
202
Great Alexander, more his fame does rear,
When as he sat to judge in justice place,
And that th'accuser spoke, Plutar. in Alexand.
he stopped one ear,
To keep him pure and upright in the case:
So that he would not right preiudicate,
But with sincerity the truth debate.
203
Augustus knew Aspren as was accused,
A friend of his, where he in judgment sat;
And fearing how the matter might be used, Pulchrum exemplum Iustitiae.

To judge aright, and free himself from hate:
He sits in place, heard censure of his friend,
And never spoke till justice made an end.
204
Agesilaus fame deserved praise: Reiecit Regis Persa^^m literas, ne iustitiam
violaret. vid. Plutar. in Agesila^.

Although he were assured to his friend,
Whose gentle nature would employ always
In their behalf to work a happy end;
Yet did his promise to his friend refuse
In matter where he might not justice use.
205
Philip the Macedonian mighty king
That had a poor old woman's suit denied,
(His leisure served him not for any thing:)
[Then be no longer king] aloud she cried: Libera vox foeminae.

Who did with meekness lend to her his grace,
And chose the title of a meaner place.
206
It further wrought impression and desire, The heart and conscience of Philip
pierced with a woman's word.

And touched his heart to do things just and true;
That he unto his palace did retire,
To hear the plaints of all that came to sue.
Where he remained all causes set aside,
Both to do right, and see men satisfied.
207
Another time, being ouer-mou'd to sleep,
Not hearing well Machetas just defense,
Condemned him; and gave him days to keep,
For sums of money without all suspense:
He craved new hearing when the king did wake,
Which being obtained, did upright censure make.
208
Traianus rightly writers do commend, Regale exemplum.

Who bent to war, did from his horse alight,
The poor complaint only for to attend
By woman brought, beseeching him for right:
Which did so much this mighty Emperor grace,
That he was held most just in every place.
209
Nothing more proper to a Prince belongs, Homo iustus vera Dei imago.

That is of mild, and good, and gentle nature;
Then exercise of justice without wrongs,
In equal right to every living creature,
Preferring none but such as walk upright,
Resembling God, resplendent in his light.
210
Justice it is that through Gods holy grace
Erecteth Monarchies and kingdoms great, Aproprietate.

To shine and flourish in their proper place,
And to make truth and equity their seat.
What was of Lacedaemons glory cause,
But setting down and keeping of good laws?
211
God is the author that does justice move,
Which he does use and ever exercise
Amongst us all, as tokens of his love,
Till it us bring to period of the wise.
Such as are decked with justice high renown,
Are fit to wear the high Imperial crown.
212
Justice divine kings ought not for to leave,
Nor they whoeuer will it on them take,
Which may the state and subjects much deceive,
And millions of poor people beggars make.
Justice should not as merchandise be sold:
Therefore most fit the king himself it hold.
213
The speech of famous Alexander was,
And after him of Lodwicke wise and grave:
By way of prophecy should come to pass
When money made great offices her slave,
Where men ingrosse great offices in sale
And after sell them dearly by retale.
214
They that make sale of office or estates,
Do likewise sell the secret'st thing of price, Salerata sanguinis effusio.

The which is justice that all bribing hates;
And would subdue true godliness with vice.
They sell the laws, and take the subjects blood,
That draw reward unto their private good.
215
I touch not good men which do office hold,
But those this lucrous Hydra do embrace,
Which would have justice with their bribes controld,
And damned vice to sit in virtues place.
Those of good zeal, are touched with just desire:
Those that are ill, extortion sets on fire.
216
Aurelian was of most respective fear
How he did place men in their Judgment seat, The pattern of Justice.

Unless desert and virtue did appear
That they all truth with Justice would entreat:
He never preferred one to the Senate place,
Except the whole consent gave praise and grace.
217
Now compast is the circle of my Theme, Conclusio.

Ariuing at the long desired point.
Asttaea with her sword and fixed beam
Firmly unites virtues dissundered joint:
By whom (O King) thy greatness bounded stands
With wide seas limits and the spacious lands.
218
Virtues first resience in Assiria was: Virtus, id est, vigor militaris and
monarchicus.

From thence she took her flight to Persia:
This left she straight to Macedon did pass:
Then never wearied in her toil some way,
She came to dwell at Rome, old ages pride;
And planted peace through all the world so wide.
219
But since the Roman Empire came to waine, Rom^ Bizantij. sub Carolo Magno,
and cius ^^^nis quinto, in Saxonia and Bohemia.

For her abode finding no constant place,
In thee she setleth great Augustus reign,
Confirming it to thy successful race.
Virtue triumphant now we may her call,
Seated by heaven in so high a stall.
220
Thus has my lowly and submissiue Muse,
With her dim Ospray eyes dared to behold
The Sun of Majesty; Oh then what excuse,
For a design so venturous and much bold?
This is my hope: where virtue rules the mind,
Attempts of duty gracious pardon find.
221
As from the highest region of the air
No storms do come, Arist. in Meteoris.
but all is calm and still:
So from a Princes countenance debonaire
No gust of hardest censure issue will,
To doom the wracked of turmoiled bark,
That in her sailing made a King her mark.

