THE Christians Watch: OR, An Heavenly Instruction to all Christians, to expect
with patience the happy day of their change by death or doom.

Preached at Prestbury Church in Cheshire, at the Funerals of the right
worshipful Thomas Leigh of Adlington Esquire, the 16. of February Anno 1601.

By William Leigh Bacheler of Diuinitye, and Pastor of Standish in the County
of Lancaster.

Math: 24. verse, 42. Watch, for you know not what hour your Master will
come. LONDON

Printed for E. White dwelling near the little north door of S. Paul's Church,
at the Sign of the Gunne. 1605.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. Vrian Leigh Knight, grace and peace be
multiplied with increase of all heavenly comforts here, and happiness in the
world to come.
IT is with me (Right Worshipful* Sr.) in this my labor, as it was with
Phineas wife, at the birth of 1. Sam, 4* 21. etc.
her Ichabod, who when they said to comfort her, thou have borne a Son, she
answered not, nor regarded it, in respect she thought so small a gain could
never redeem so great a loss. This poor Posthumus borne at your Fathers
funerals, I have ever since regarded the less, for that my loss was in it
life, nor should it ever have seen more light, had not your place ouer-awed
me, and much instance drawn it on, urging it often as a pledge of my love
toward him that gone is, and a Christian kindenes to those that remain. In
lieu of both, I could not but bring it forth, and lay it in the lap of your
favorable protection, yet accounting it my hard hap, I should with the poor
Gadaren Mark, 5, 2, 3. 4, 5.
thus still haunt the graves of the dead, and wound my self with the stones of
their Sepulchers. Eccles, 7, 4
How be it, if it be better to go into the house of mourning, then of mirth,
and that who sow in tears shall reap in joy, I will Psa, 126. 5
repose my self in this, (that since I could discern what it was to loose a
friend) I have had my part of such doleful Music, and therefore may expect a
joyful croppe of that sowing. But to leave the dead and to come to the living,
your zeal to God, (good Sir) with the love of his truth, in the Religion of
his Son Christ, for which neither your arm has been weary to fight
abroad, nor your tongue to plead at home, over and besides your vndelayed
provision of a skillful Bezaleel, to build up your own house and neighbors
Exodus 31. 2
souls about you: As these may be much to your comfort, so are they greatly to
my joy: for that in sort, I may say with the Apostle, in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you. These 1. Co, 4, 1
blessed buds of religion appearing in Oxford, when first I knew you, and had
the care of their groth committed unto me, from your careful Father that gone
is, now spreading as Ceders in the ready and ripe practice of piety and
Godliness, do make me not only thankful to God therefore, but right joyful
I may undergo any duty to answer your love, or further your faith: and
therefore have made bold (since so you will have it) to put into your Religious
heart and bosom, this Christian Watch. The watch is Iobes, only the winding
up is mine, as God has directed the finger, so it goes: and (as I trust)
truly, to all such of Gods Saints as expect with patience the blessed day of
their change by death or doom: And if I have failed in the compass of any
wheel, as it may be I have, for what am I but dust and ashes, to Ge, 18, 2
Gal, 6, ^
plead with my God? ye which are spiritual reform it, and restore me with
the Spirit of meekenes, considering your selves, least ye also be tempted. And
the Lord of his mercy, multiply his blessings more and more upon you, keep
you ever under his holy and helping hand of providence and protection, with my
very good Lady your Vine, and all your O live branches. From Standish the 1.
of January. 1602.

Your Worships in all kindenes to command. W. Leigh.

The Christians Watch. OR, An heavenly Instruction to all Christians:
Job. 14. 14. If a man die, shall he live again? then all the days of mine
appointed time will I watch, until my changing shall come.
We are here assembled this day (as I trust in the fear of GOD and love of
our CHRIST) not to pray for the dead, or sorrow eue^ as 1. Th. 4. 13
other that have no hope, being taught by the Spirit, that who dye Revel. 14.
13.
in the Lord, rest from their labors and are fully blessed: But we are
assembled rather to gain by ye severity of death, that which for the most
part, we loose in the security of our life, viz: A true touch and feeling of
our own frailtye, taken from the dailye doomes of this declining world, whose
flower (as you here see) is fading, and beauty but a blossom.

For surely it is true in the steddie bole of all the world, which is here
fallen out in a tender branch: There is an appointed time Eccles. 3. 1
for all things under the Sun: a time to plant, and a time to pluck up: a
time to build, and a time to pull down: a time to gather, and a time to
scatter: a time to rent and a time to sow: a time to speak, and a time to
keep silence: a time to laugh, and a time to weep: a time to live, and a time
to dye: yea to dye, there is no remedy: Uni Deo nunquam senectus atra, nec
mors imminet: Sophocles.
sed alia miscet domitor aetas omnia. Only God, neither old age nor black
death can overtake, but for all other things, devouring time, has and will
turn them topsie turuye.

In regard whereof, holy and pacient Job after much debate and many pleadings
with the sins of his soul and sorrows of his heart, does at last (as you may
here see) demurre upon the plea with death and doom, thereby bringing unto
him self (in solace of his soul) a state of inheritance indefeazible, with a
Crown of glory that withers not.

And this is done by a thrreefolde necessity laid upon all flesh: 1. The first
of dying, and that is but once: 2. The second of living again, and that is for
ever: 3. The third and last of watchfulnes, and that is but for a time, even
till the day of our changing shall come.

The necessitye of our dying is the door of life, the necessitye of our living
again, is the doom of death: the necessitye of our watchfulnes is the
Calender of our days, to wit, how we have lived, how we do live, and how we
purpose to live until our changing shall come.

Or thus: that of death, we deem it the day of miserye: That of life again,
we hold it the day of glory: That of watchfulnes, we reckon it for the day of
grace: And so, as one flood puts on an other, these three hale and help us on
to happy dwelling, whereof if you loose a link, you break the Chain and
silken third should wind you out of the laberinth of this world, to the port
and paradise of your God. For no blessed life without a blessed death, and no
blessed death without a blessed life: and then are we blessed in both, when we
stand upon our guard and are found watchful.

1. Now for the first I say with the Psalmist, The cry of death. Ps. 89. 48.
Genesis 2. 17. Heb. 9. 27 Dan. 6. 8.
What man lives and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the
hand of the grave? no, no, the decree of death is an imperial law, acted in
paradise upon Gods fairest Creature, where sin no sooner seizd but death
entered, and has ever since (like the laws of the Medes and Persians) been
irreuocable.

And though happily from the first death there lie an appeal to a better life,
in the prerogative Court and high consistory of our Christ, dead for our
sins, but risen again for our justification: yet is there no repeal of that
first law, by any latter act, I say, no parliment to disanull the doom of
death: No place privileged, no person exempt, no time to interrupt the decree
thereof, but like an omnipotent Queen and regent of all the world, where sin
has kissed, she ever kills.

There is no safety any where. If Angels in heaven sin, down they must: If
Adam in Paradise transgress, out he must: If Judas fail at the side of
Christ, away he must: where is a practice of sinning, there is ever a
necessity of dying, without either privilege of place, person, or presence:
for through envy of the Devil came death into Wisd. 2. 24
this world, and they that hold on his part shall prove it.

I say then and dare avouch, that the matter The reward of sin is death.
of our sinning, is the cause of our dying, and that needs must, needs shall.
Must thou needs sin? then surely shall thou die: sin and death are
hereditarie, they dwell in one house, and like Hipocrates twins, they laugh
together, they weep together, they live together, they die together. And so
shall till time be no more, for no Reu. 10. 6*
time of sinning, no time of dying, In the interim, our Fathers have eaten a
sower grape and the Childrens teeth are set on edge, the Ceders are fallen, how
can the shrubbe stand? the Patriarchs before the Flood, the Patriarchs since
the Flood, the holy Priests and honorable Kings of Judah and Israel, have all
sinned and are all dead. And why should we live?

Jeremiah cried, and so may I: O earth, Chapter 22. 29
earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord: young earth, old earth, middle
earth, fair earth, strong earth, rich earth, hear the cry, your moulde is
earth, your flesh is sinful, and your condition is mortal. Ye Kings of the
earth, ye are but kingly earth, sin is your shame, and death is your due:
you honorable me^, you are but honorable earth: you Gentlemen, you are but
gentle earth, you learned men, you are but learned earth, you mean men, you
are but mean earth: I say of you all, sin is your shame, and death, is your
doom, and when the grave has it due, then tread out the ground, and give me
the difference who is Princely, who is honorable, who is poor, base, and
beggarly? It may be your Tombs, Hearses and Sepulchers, do set out your
state, and shine to your praise, but under and within what is your rottennes
better then others, what is your dignity above the meanest?

This Augustine saw with his Mother Sermo. 48. ad ^ratres. in Eremo.
Monicha standing by Caesar's* Tomb at Rome, when upon the view he said, I
beheld the Corpse of Caesar as he lay in his Sepulcher there, and lo they were
blackish and fallen to rottennes: I looked upon his belly burst, and swarms of
worms issued out: In the hollowes of his head, where once stood his crystal
eyes, two hungry Toades were feeding: The locks of his head were fallen, his
teeth appeared, but his lips were wasted and ye gristle of his nose being
consumed, the very ground thereof was discovered. This when I saw, I said,
dear Mother, where is now the beauty of Caesar? where is the world of his
wealth? where be the troops of his Nobles, Knights and Barons? where are the
armies of his fighting men? Where is the provision of all his delights? his
hunting dogs, his coursing Steeds, his chaunting Birds, his guilt Palace, his
Iuorie bed, his Princely Throne, his royal Wardrobe? where, where, are his
goulden Locks, and his fair feature? long it is not, O Caesar since all men
dred thee, all Princes feared thee, all Cities did honor thee, yea and all
the world did thee homage. Ubi nu^c quaeso sunthaec omnia? quo abijt tua
magnificentia? Where I pray thee now are all these honors, and whither is thy
puissance gone?

To which my dear Mother answered with all pietye and reverence, O my son,
all things failed him when life left him. And now his possession is here in a
Tomb of three Cubits long with corruption and rottennes in the kingdom of
darkness.

Such (my deer brethere^) and no better is the condition of all flesh: The
meanest and the mightiest (as you see) are al of one molde there is no
difference in the grave: and as of men, so may I say of Cities, Kingdoms and
Monarchies of this world: They had their pride, and they have their period:
for go ye (as says the Prophet) to Calneh and Amos. 6. 2
see: and from thence go you to Hamath the great: then go down to Gath of
the Philistims: look upon Ioppa, behold Tarsus, wonder at Niniuie the pride of
Assure, gaze upon Babylon the beautye of all the Isai. 13. 19
Chaldees honor: and as you pass by, cast your eye upon the ruins of
Jerusalem that virgin daughter Syon: and when you have Iam. 2. 13
viewed them al, tell those renowned places of the world, tell them, that even
they are mortal: that sin has sacked them, and therefore they are fallen
likewise, in their decayed places: yea and withal say, that the very best
things of this world, so desired of all, are but vain and vile: for what is
your gold and silver, other then (as one terms it) terrae immundicia? the
slime and filth of the earth? what are your rich Furs of Sables, Budge or
Ermins, but the skins of savage beasts? what is your soft velvet, silk and
satin, but the excrements of vile worms? what is your sweet musk and Ciuet,
but the ordure of vermin? what are your perpetuityes of fair houses, Castles
and Honors (called after your names) Psalm. 49. 1^
but Nimrods Statues, and monuments of former and future confusions? Of all
which when ye have most, then have ye least, and never so freed, as when you
are loosed from them, and can say with a perfect heart (as did the Apostle) I
counted all things but Phil. 3. 8.
loss, and did judge them to be doung, that I might win Christ.

But leave we a little these dead carkases of elder times, with the cause of
their ruins, which was their sin: and come we nearer home, even to that
which we feel in our bones, and find in our flesh as harbengers of deaths
approach, and deeper printes of our mortalitye.

You that are of years old and feeble, The Her^enger of death.
look upon your colors from top to toe, and tell without flattery, what it is
you bear with the burden of your sins, but the blase of your death? The
keepers of the house Eccles. 12. ^, 3. etc.
(which are the hands) they tremble: The strong men (which are the legs)
they bow themselves: The grynders (which are the teeth) they cease, because
they are but few: and they that look out by the windows (which are the eyes)
they wax dim and dark: The doors (which are the lips and mouth) they are
shut with the base sound of the grinders: The Almond Tree (which is your head)
it is white as a blossom: The Daughters of singing (which are your ears) they
are abased, deaf, and dull: what should I say more? sleep is gone from you; you
rise with the Cock; case you have none, for the Grashoper is a burden; you
fear the high thing; you dare not climb; ye dread the fair way, ye dare not
go in it for fear ye fall. Thus man goes to the house of his age; and once
decayed, never repaired till the time of our changing shall come.

O remember therefore thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil
days come not, nor the years approache wherein thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them: And let an experienced Prince, so persuade thee from this
Iuorye throane, yea and more to, That without the Sovereign good, all is but
vanity and vexation of the Spirit.

But happily here our youth may crow, Old men must die and young men may die.
Isaiah. 40^ 6, 7. 8.
and say: their day shall ever dawne, but I say nay, for even your flesh is but
grass, and the grace thereof, is but as the flower of grass, yea oftentimes,
for that your sins are the more, your danger is the greater (I say) take heed,
your blade being green, it is sooner blasted: your vessel being new, it is
sooner tainted: and your plant being tender, it is sooner supplanted, by the
violence of sin which is the fire, and fuel of death. Seneca says well:
Iuuenes mortem habent atergo, et senes ante oculos. Young men have death at
their backs, and old men before their face, like Isreal's host, who had the
red Sea before, and Pharoes Army behind, Exodus 14.
both inevitable gulffes and ready to devour.

And so for conclusion of the point, be thou well assuredly, that thouseest
without and feel within, both young men may die, and old men must die: And
never deem it a new thing, that is so ancient, or think it strange, that is
so continual: nor call it an evil (properly thine) which is so common with all
the world. The first age had it, it may plead antiquity: the second age The
plea of death.
felt it, it may plead co^tinua^ce: and this last age has it, it may plead a
property in all flesh, till sin and time shall be no more.

The use in respect of the doctrine is this, that though we find in our
bones, and feel in our flesh, a necessity of dying, yet we forget our selves,
we forget our sins, yea ye molde and matter whereof we are made, and un til it
come (as now) the opening of graves, the imbalming of bodies, the wearing of
blackes, and the loss of dearest friends, there is no passion of our
immortallitie, there is no impression of our eternity. That this is true, (for
my own part,) I need no better proof the^ mine own heart to bear me witness,
and for you also it is expedient to judge, whether the opening of this earth,
the jmbalming of that body, the wearing of these blacks, with the sommoning of
these solemn funeralles, by the Herolds call, in a sad winterly season, and
toward a joyful spring, be not a resemblance of our pere^ptorie day before
the Lord, when every one 2. co. 5. ^^
shall and must render an account of that he has done in this life, be it
good or evil, whereof if you have feeling, and look for such 2. Pe. 3. 14*
things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spott and
blameles Phil. 2. 15. ^^
in the midst of a naughty and crooked generation, and suppose that the long
suffering of the Lord is salvation, who would have no man lost, but all to come
to repentance.

^ Now for the second part, (I mean of living again, when we are dead,) it
is evident by the text, that as there is a necessity of dying once, so is
there a necessity of living ever, and that we may term an expectant estate
and indefeazible both to the elect of GOD, and the reprobate from GOD, for both
shall rise again. The just to the resurection of salvation, to the John. 5. 2^
29
which GOD bring us: and the wicked to the resurrection of condemnation, from
which the Lord deliver us. Marvel not at this (says CHRIST) For the hour^
shall come, in the wc all that are in the graves shall hear his voice: upon
which Sommons, heaven, earth, and hell shall be assembled the graves being
pregnant shall bring forth their dead: the Sea being called upon, Re. 20, 13.
etc.
shall pick vpit dead: Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes shall yield the dead they
have devoured: yea and in spite of all tirannie, the blessed Martyr shall say,
it skils not much where I rot, for then shall I rise: nay I say more, The
shrill sound of that trumpet shall empty heaven, and shake hell: all shall
come forth and appear before the tribunal seat of God: all his saints out
of heaven, all the damned out of hell, all their dead bodies out of the earth:
out they must, attend they must, appear they must, receive they must,
according to that they have done in this life be it good or evil, not an Angel
spared, not a Devil respited, not a Saint or sinner rescued, but all must be
summoned to give their attendance and to make their appearance.

Good Lord, what a fearful day will it then be? and what an exceeding glory
of our Christ will then appear, who shall empty all upon his sommons, and
fill all upon his sentence: empty heaven, empty earth, empty hell: fill
heaven, fill earth, fill hell: heaven with his majesty, Angels and Saints
attending: earth with his presence, his fairest creatures abiding: Hell with
his judgments, the devil and damned ever dreeing the doom of death, and deep
despair. There shall be a new heaven and a 2. Pe. 3. 13 Isa. 30. 33.
new earth wherein dwells righteousness: but an old devil, and an old hell,
wherein abides horror. Topheth is prepared of old etc

I say then (and not I but the Spirit of God for me, speaking out of this text
and truth) That it is Epicurisme, Atheism, and the greatest Apostacy from
faith that may be, to say, Let us eat and drink, tomorrowe Isa. 22. 13 Old
Atheism.
we shall die, and so an end: or to say with the wicked miscreants wisd. 2. 2.
We are borne at al adventures, and we shall be heareafter as though we had
never been: our breath in our Nostrils is but a smoke, and being extinguished,
the body is turned into ashes, and the Spirit vanishes as the soft air: come
therefore, let us jnioy the pleasures that are present, and let us chearefullie
use the creatures as in youth: Let us fill our selves with costly wine and
ointments, and let not the flower of youth pass by us: Let us crown our
selves with rose buds before they be withered, let al be partakers of our
wantonness: let us leave some token of our pleasure in every green field: and
as for rigor, rage, and tyranny, what is that to us when we are dead? come let us
oppress the poor that is righteous, let us not spare the widow, nor
reverence the white hairs of the aged, but say they have lived too long, let
our strength be a law, and let the thing that is feeble be reproved as
unprofitable.

Thus did the Atheist speak in the days of old, out of the error of their
souls, thus did they practice from a graceles resolution: the Lord deliver the
land from such a burden, his church from such pelf, and our Prince from such a
people, to whom I may say (if any there be that so remain yet unreformed
after so acceptable a time, and free offer of all grace and Godliness) I may
say without repentance, they are a damned crew and deprived of glory, who for
that they will not find out the Lord in his mercies whilst they live, shall be
sure to be found out in judgment, by him, when they are dead: for if a man die
he shall live again.

O it shall not be then with the beastly Epicure New Atheism.
whose belly is his God, eat, drink, dye, and so an end: it shall not be
with the wastfull wanton whose lust is his GOD, spend, sue, pursue, speed, die
and so an end: it shall not be with the greedy cormorant, whose gold is his
God, grieve, grate, grind the poor, oppress the needy, then die and so an
end: it shall not be with the distemperate Spirits of bloody Tyrants, whose
revenge is their God, loath, kill, stabbe, murder the Godly, massaker the
Saints, then die and so an end: it shall not be with the idle minion, whose
pride is her God, prick, pin, paint, frisle the hair, then die and so an
end it: it shall not be with the desperate ruffian whose villainy is his God,
swear, forswear, tear the heavens, and tire the earth with bloody oaths
and blasphemies, then die, and so an end: it shall not be with the gross
Idolater, whose image is his God, bow, bend cross, creep to the creatures
then die and so an end: finally it shall not be with the disloyal subject whose
treasons is his God, plot, complot, practice, at home and abroad, on this side
the seas and on that side, the subversion of a blessed state, and the deposing
of a most gracious Prince, as they did by their own confession. The best
natured and most heavenly qualified Queen, that ever lived D. Parie
in England, it shall not be, Grieve her, curse her, depose her, and deprive
her of life, crown and dignity, the^ die and so an end: for the^ is but the
beginning of sorrows, and after Heb. 9. 27
death comes judgment, when to hide thy self with these sins, it will be
impossible, and to appear it will be intolerable: Lu. 16. 22
Lazarus to Heaven, Dives to Hell, both shall rise again, the one to death
everliving, the other to a life never dying: for the Godly shall have boldenes
in that day, but the wicked shall cry unto the mountains; 1 Ioh. 4. 17 ^^^.
23. 30
fall upon us, fall upon us.

And so to leave the wicked in their sins, and with their brand, and to close
with your religious hearts, seeing you look for better things, be dilligent
that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameles ^ Th. 5. 23
at the coming of our Lord Jesus christ to judgment: and be well assured, ye
that are the elect of God, and christ his peculiar, yt though the wicked shall
rise to their confusion, yet shall ye live again, as in soul, so in body, to
your unspeakable joy and consolation.

Which heavenly Doctrine likewise of your living again to beat out, has
been the proper workeof all the Godly from time to time, in their succeeding
ages, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles yea and Christ himself, as the fountain
whose streams if I should follow to the full, it would be tedious for you to
pass over, and impossible for me to keep the current.

Only Paul's plea for life again, shall The plea of life.
stand as a ground for all the rest, whose several reasons to prove the
resurrection, laid down to the Church of Corinth, I refer you unto, resting
upon the first, as a butteris or binding stone for all the rest, which is
this: Christ is risen again, the first 1. Cor. 15.
fruits of them that sleep, whereupon I infer, if he be first, we must
second him: if he be gone before, we must follow after: if he be risen, we may
not rest: for where the head is, of congruence must all the members follow.

And now that Christ is risen again from that christ is risen
the dead, it is apparent by these several proofs. First it is promised in
Paradise, so to be when God said to Satan, he shall Genesis 3. 15.
break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel, bruise he may by death, but
break he may not. Thine it is o Christ to break satan, sin and death, not
in the heel, but in the head, never to rise up in judgment against us. 2
Secondly his resurection from the dead, was prophesied in Judah, by old Jacob.
Genesis 49. 9. by a Lion couchant under a painful passion, yet passant too, by a
glorious resurection: so said Jacob, as a Lions whelpe shall thou come up from
the spoil, my Son Judah (meaning in a mystery from the spoil of Hell,
sin, and death, to the glory of Heaven, life and immortality) our english
Judah has this honor in her arms and we owe her homage, our heavenly Judah
has this honor in his person and we owe him adoration: al ye faithful of
Judah take this honor to your souls, and bless your christ in the scutchin
of your hearts, carrye him, o carry him forth in your Christian march,
against all incounters: and say, terror hic est hominum, quique hunc gerit est
Agamemnon, which I may english thus.

This Lion here of Judah tribe a terror is, to men and Diuils desperate debarred
of blis:
Who bears him as his Crest, more puisant he then Grecian guide, with all his
chivalry.
3 Thirdly, his resurection was figured by Sampson Judge. 16, who at midnight
rose and Judge. 16. 3
conveyed away the gates of Azzah and bare them up to Hebron. The gates of
Azzah are the bands of death, which our true Sampson did break in the night,
and silence of his resurrection, and in despite of death, bore up his blessed
body to Heaven, where now it abides a pledge of our inheritance. Have I not
power to lay down my life, and Ioh. 10. 17 18
have I not power to take it up again?

4. Lastly it was signified in the heave offering, shaken up, shakend vne, and
Exo. 29. 24
shaken up again: so was our Christ in body, the substance of this shadow,
tossed to and fro in the hazard of this world, up to the cross down to the
grave, and yet up again to glory.

What should I say more? see the vaulte Mar. 16. 6. 7.
where they laid him, (says the Angel) all hollow and empty: there is the
grave, where be the Corpse? there is the Shrine, whereis the Saint? Indeed he
is risen, he is not here: go to Galilie there shall ye see him, (as he has
said) why seek ye the living among Luk, 24, 5 10, 20* 17
the dead? Quem mortuum queris, viuentem tangere non mereris: Marie thou
deseruest not to feel him alive, whom still thou seek thus dead: nor was
this Sermon preached by the Angel to her alone, but was afterward mightily
confirmed by many several apparitions of our Savior Christ, ere he left this
world: yt if in the mouth of two or three witnesses every truth should be
established, this so acceptable a Doctrine of Christ his resurection from the
dead, might want no testimonye: either of these women, of Cephas, 1, Cor, 15.
4, etc.
of the twelve, or of more then five hundredth Brethren at once, whose witness
is true, our conscience bearing us witness thereto in the holy Ghost.

And thus (my dear brethren) being fully assured of the Lords resurrection,
we That we shall rise. 2. co, 4, 14
are well secured of our own, knowing (as the Apostle says) that he which
has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and set us with
the Saints in everlasting tabernacles, whereof yet lest any the weakest reedin
this assembly might fail in judgment, and so saint in hope, I have thought
good, without strain of Scripture, to secure your religious hearts of your
own resurrection, by these few grounds of Faith following.

First for that it is in the will of the Father John, 6, 3^ 40*
so to have it: as also a work of the Son so to effect it, for this (says
Christ) is the will of him that sent me, that every man which sees the Son
and believes in him should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at
the last day: will the Father have it, who shall resist his will? will the Son
work it, who can resist his power? and if in any work, Rom, 1. 4.
assuredly most of all in this has the Lord declared himself mightily to be
the Son of God, touching the Spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from
the dead: his and ours. I say, his and ours: because he that sanctifies, and
they that are sanctified are Heb. 2, 1. ^
both one.

2. A second ground of our resurrection to Heb, 6, 1^
build upon, is the Lords oathe, that by two immutable things, wherein it is
impossible that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, he that has
former he said it is his will, he has likewise said it is his work, and the
Lord his Say, might be our assurance: yet God, willing more abou^dantly to show
unto the heirs of promise the stablenes of his counsel, has bound himself
by an oathe; of old thus: as I live, I will Ez, 33, 11,
not the death of sinner, etc. Of new thus: verily, verily, I say unto you, the
hour shall Ioh, 5, 25,
come, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear it shall live, where God having no greater to swear by, swore
by himself as he is life, and by his Christ as he is truth: wheruppon
Tertullian infers this blessing, O nos felices quorum causa deus iurauerit: sed
o nos infelices, si ne iuranti Deo credimus. O happy we for whose good, God
himself has sworn: But o we most unhappy if upon his oathe we do not
believe him. Tollit diuinitatem, qui tollit veritatem, we grieve the deity,
if we check the verity.

3. A third assurance, is the instrument we hold by, even our letters pattents
from the King of heaven: I mean the old ^estament from Horeb sealed with the
blood of Goats, and the new testament from Syon sealed with the blood of
christ, both vnsealing the door of the Sepulcher, that as 2. ^, 13 2^
upon the touch of Elisha his bones, the dead body of the Moabit did rise, and
at Christ his dolorous cry, Lazarus came John, 11. 43, 44
forth: so both might be pregnant types, and truths of our resurection to
come, and the books mentioning the same, still remain as instruments of our
hold authentical and good, to convey unto us an assurance of our immortality:
in which Saint Augustine is bold to say, Euangelium legimus instrumentum
nostrum: We have read the Gospel which is our evidence we hold by, wherein I
dare say, there is nothing more current from leaf to line, then the doctrine
of death's delivery.

4. A forth ground of our future resurrection, is taken from sufficient
testee, and clowd of witnesses compassing us round on every side, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, though in diverse ages of the world, yet all making good
this one truth from one God, and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which they
spoke: Enoch (as Jude says) the seventh from Adam Iud. 14,
prophesied of it. And Job said, I shall see Job, 19. 26 27
God in my flesh, I my self, mine eyes, and no other for me, Isaiah said, the
dead men shall live, even with my body shall they rise: Isa, 26, 19
awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Ezekiell said, O Son of man
prophecy over these dead bones, and say, here ye the word of the Lord, (...).
^7. 4
when I have opened your graves, o my people, and brought you up, out of your
Sepulchers, and shall put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live: then shall ye
know that I am the Lord. Daniel said, many of them that Dan, 12. 2
sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake* some to everlasting life, some
to shame and perpetual contempt. The distressed Martyr said, when upon
demand he yielded his tongue and hands into the power o^ the tormenter: These
have I had from the 2, Macc. 7, 11*
heaven, but now for the law of God I despise them, and trust that I shall
receive the from him again.

What should I say more, the new Testament is rather in the practice, then
proof of this Doctrine: and Paul is peremptory 1, Cor* 15, 42,
that it is sown in corruption, but rises in i^ corruption: sown in
dishonor, but rises again in glory: sown in weakness, rises again in
power: sown a natural body, rises again a spiritual body: for there is a
natural body, and that shall fall, but there is a spiritual body, and that
shall rise, and all is but one in the substance of being: the difference is of
well being, as now being made more honorable upon the fall by Christ, who
shall change our vile bodies, Phil. 3, 21
that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself.

Yea and to make it a palpable and feeling Doctrine, as to the heart, so to the
hand of each Christian: all the Apostles in one John, and one John for all the
Apostles, brings in the verdict thus: That which we 1, Ioh, 1. 1
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
these hands of ours have handled, declare we unto you. Hands have handled,
what means that? Woe is me to tell: doubtful Thomas demur'd upon the
Doctrine, till John, 20 24, etc.
his itching fingers had fetched it out of the prints of the nails, and his
sinful hand out of his sore side: How be it upon the touch Not sore but open
his heart resolved into sighs, and his eyes into tears, when he said with
an holy resolution: my GOD, my Lord: my God, I am thy creature, my Lord, I am
thy redeemed: I find thee risen* and I feel I shall be raised: Thy wounds are
deep enough to plead thy death, and sufficient wide to purchase life for me,
and all the world.

For conclusion of all, let Christ his witness be instar omnium and stand for
all; who to take away the doubt, forbids the wonder of our new repair, saying,
marvel John. 5. 28 29
not at this, for the hour shall come, in the which all that are in graves
shall hear his voice and come forth.

5. Fifthly we are well assured* that we shall rise again, by double pledge or
hostage: 1. First of the souls of the Saints* Reu. 6, 9, 10. 11.
now lodgers in Heaven under the Altar, killed for the word of GOD, and
testymonye which they maintained, whose loud cry is after a deliverance of
their own bodies, and of us their long detayned brethren, to whom silence
was enjoined for a while, that they should rest until their fellowe-seruants
and brethren. that should be killed (even as they were) were fulfilled. 2.
Secondly of their bodies, lodged in their graves, there to remain as lodgers
for us, likewise until the time that all things be restored, God Heb. 11, 40.
providing this good for us that they without us should not be made perfect.

6, A sixth assurance is the pawn of the Spirit of God within us: for, as the
Apostle To. 8. 11
says, if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by
his spirit that dwells in you. And now my brethren how this spirit has
entered and wimbled into your souls to make passage for this Doctrine, I know
not, read the caracters of your own hearts, you are spiritual: I feel no
spirit but mine own, yet I hope well, that the cheareful spirit of God moves
within you, and lifts up your sad and pe^siue spirits this day, from the dead
grave to the blessed hope of immortality.

7. Seauenthly we are secured per Arram: when the earnest is given it strikes
the bargain, and part of the debt is paid: so was it when upon the
resurectio^ of Christ, the graves Math. 27* 52. 53.
yielded part of their dead as an earnest of the general resurrection, and
full payment to come, then contracted betwixt Christ and the grave, binding
both alike: the grave to deliver the rest of her dead, and Christ to receive
all to life, and immortality.

8. The eight and last, yet not the least Anchor of our sure hope and hold, is
our possession of heaven already taken, whither our head is gone before, and
there sits in potioribus Ioh. 14. 3. To. 8. 34 Hebr. 9. 24
Dei at the right hand of the Father in the best place of heaven, that the head
and the members might be together: So then (I say) in the Man Christ we make
our claim: in the Man Christ has every one flesh, blood, bone and portion: I
believe I shall live where my flesh lives, I hope I shall reign where my head
reigns, and I know assuredly that I shall be glorified where my portion is
exalted.

These grounds of faith (my brethren) are so many nails of the sanctuary, to
fasten us in hope to the hold where Christ our redeemer is: they are so many
Chrysolits, Saphiers, and Emeralds, to support the wall of the holy City,
where we shall dwell, and so many Pearls they are, to garnish Re. 21* 21
the gates of the holy Temple, for the Saints entrance: where the light of the
Lamb is, the people which are saved shall walk in the light of it, and as
John says, the glory and honor of the Gentiles (whereof you are) shall be
brought into it. Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him: or the
Son of man that thou should thus visit him in mercy, and provide for him
in glory.

And yet my beloved, I know not how, but notwithstanding all these proofs,
and this my text, yet has not the tempter ceased from the beginning of the
world unto this day, either like a roaring Lion, feircely to assault, or like a
Serpent by deceit craftily to impugn the same, yea it is a woe Ephesians. 2, 2, 3
and a wonder to see how mightily the Devil has prevailed in the Children of
disobedience, to work their just condemnation through mis-beleefe, even in
this point of the resurrection, and of our living again: whereof I have
thought good to give you a taste of their different errors, the rather to
season you in the known truth.

The Saduc^s say there is no resurection at all, erring (as Christ told them)
in that A dangerous sect of whom we read: few ^r none to have been called,
ma, 22. 23 29 2. Tim. 2. 17. 1^.
they knew not the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Hymeneus and Philetus say
y^ resurectio^ is past already: the Heluetian Heretics say, It is daily in
there generation: The Archa^tici* that the soul lives, but not the body. The
Hirarchits, that the flesh lives again, but not this flesh. The Maniches,
that we shall be turned into an other substance, but into what, they know not.
The Marcionits say, we shall be turned into the nature of Angels: and the
Ualentinian Heretics into the nature of Devils: the Appelleits think the
flesh shall simbolize into the Spirit, and that the spirit shall vanish into the
sostayre: the Chiliaste we are called the Millenarie Heretics, do dream of
a civil government for a thousand years here on earth, wherein they think
the Godly shall live with Christ in all delights and delicacie, and then go to
heaven in the eight thousand year of the world.

But all these different errors and Heresies are mightily confounded by the
alone spirit of God, in these words of my text: If a man die he shall live
again* as and if the truth should say, that grave that shuts shall open
again, that body which falls shall rise again, that man which dies shall
live again, not in part, but in whole, not another from that it was, but the
very same that now it is: These my feet shall tread in his Courts: these my
hands shall be lift up to his praise: these mine eyes shall behold his glory:
these mine ears shall be filled with that heavenly melodye: yea and this my
spirit shall rejoice in God my maker, my savior, my redeemer, my glorifier: I
say this my body and this my soul once feuered on earth, with a woeful
farewell, shall meet again in heaven, never to part* but follow the Lamb
Re. 14. 4.
whither ever he goes.

And thus having cleared in some measure the necessity of our living again,
with an assured hope to all Gods Children of a joy full resurrection to come, it
remains we press the Doctrine; yet further to your comfort, and tell you how
we shall be changed, and when.

For the first, rise we shall with these very Job, 19.
bodies, of flesh, skin, blood and bone* nor shall the least joint sinew or
Artery be lost, but found and fashioned to the rest of the members, to give
the body all feature, grace and beauty. There shall be no transubstantiacion
from one substance into another, but an alteration of quality tending to
further perfection: and therefore we say with one who said well, Gloria non
tollit sed perficit naturam: our glory shall not destroy our nature, but
perfect it.

And for distinction of ages, there shall be How we shall be changed Isaiah*
65. 20.
no more there, (as says the Prophet) a Child of years, nor an old man that
has not filled his days, that is in this wonderful work of restoration,
there shall be no weakness of youth, not infirmities of No distinction of ages
in heaven, no maime, no imperfection.
age, but all shall be fresh and flourishing: for as when GOD first created
man and woman, he made them not either* Infants, old, crooked, or deformed,
but strong, ripe and beautiful: so in the resurrection (which is called a new
creation:) It is not like, but shall be conformable to the first: if not much
more excellent: nor do I doubt, but as the Apostle says, we shall all meet
together unto a perfect Man* and unto the Ephe. 4. 13
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ, so fully blessed with days, glory
and immortality.

This so wonderful change, and excellent state, is shadowed out unto us by
Christ his transfiguration upon the holy mount, when the fashion of his
countenance was Math. 17. 1, 2, etc.
changed, and his garments white and glistred, splendour infacie, splendour in
vestimentis, sic gloria in capite, gloria in membris: brightness in the face of
Christ, with brightness in his garments, is nothing else but glory in the head,
and glory in the members.

This saw the disciple whom the Lord loved, when with a feeling soul and
spirit, 1, Ioh. 3* 2.
he said, dearly belooued: now are we the Sons of God, but it is not yet
made manifest what we shall be, for we know that when he shall be made
manifest (meaning Christ*) we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he
is: like him, see him, and see him as he is: o excellent state of
immortallitie, and sovereign dignity of Gods elect! to be like him is much,
to see him is more, but to see him as he is, most of all.

Paul saw the like when he longed after Phil, 3. 20. 21
a deliverance, and said, we look for the Savior even the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself: whereupon I may infer to your further joy, and
greater wonder, thus: That we shall be changed, is much, that our vile bodies
shall be changed, is more, but that our vile body upon the change shall be
fashioned like unto the glorious body of Jesus CHRIST, is most of all: Many
fashions there are in this world, and all wear out of fashion. There Is but
one suite for the Saints of GOD, and for that it is cut after the best Pattern
viz. after CHRIST'S, it never wears or waxes old, but is always fair,
fresh and glorious: had we been apparelled like Aaron in his holye^obes, or
like Solomon in his Royal array, had we put on the brightness of Angels
upon our change, we might have thought our selves sufficientlye graced, but*
as and if all that were not sufficient: The Lord has changed our vile body*
that it might be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

And this will he do when our case is most desperate, even find us out when
When ou4 need is greatest Christ is nearest and his mercies are preuentions.
Lu. 10. 34
we are lost, and take us up when we are furthest fallen from him, when our
wounds are deepest, then rediest to power in oil and to bind them up, when
no eye pityeth us, I say when by black death we shall be made vile, base and
despicable: Then will he fashion us like unto himself: and (as the Psalmist
says) make us glorious by Psa. 1 49. 4
deliverance.

For it is an excellency in our Christ, and a mercy infallible, found true in
the practice of his pyetye, even then to show mercy when we are moss
miserable: then to feel him nearest, when we deem him furthest gone: his
graces to abound when our sins do superabound: I say, his mercies are
preuentions ever meeting with our miseries, and then when we are most woeful
and wanting.

When the Scepter was gone from Judah, then Shiloh came: when the diseased Genesis
49. 1^ Mar. 5. 26. John. 5. 5*
woman had spent all without remedy, then came CHRIST and cured without cost:
when the poor Paralyticke had lain eight and thirtye years, by the Poole of
Bethesda, and none would help to put him in, Then Jesus said, rise, take up
thy bed and walk: when the Disciples said Math. 14, 15, etc.
unkindly, send the people away: nay says Christ give ye them to eat. What
should I say more? The Lord raised Lazarus, when John. 11
he stunke in the grave: and whilst Martha moved, and Mary mourned, he grieved
in heart, and was troubled in Spirit, put to his hand, took him out, delivered
him, and said now loose him and let him go.

So will he do in the day of our redemption, when our sins shall be full,
and misery Ioh. 1. 16.
most abound: then mercy shall be more full, and grace superabound: and as
at his first coming of his abundance, we al receive grace, for grace (a
chereful refreshing to our sinful souls) so at his coming again we yt dwell
in the dust, shall awake and sing at the shoute and shower of his glory, as
also of the abundance of his glory, receive glory for glory.

Thy dew o Lord is as the dew of herbs* ^^^^^ 26, 19
for even as herbs dead in winter, flourish again by the rain in the Spring
time: so shall they that live in the dust, arise up to joy, when they feel the
dew of Gods grace as the honey drops that water the earth.

And then shall we say with a Godly ^uation: 1, Cor, 15* 54.
now death is swallowed up in victory: for our dry bones are moistened, our
forlorn hope is recovered, we were clean cut off, but now are we grown
again, our bed is precious, and our withered branch is glorious: the Lord has
opened our graves, we are come out of the Sepulchers, and he has brought us
into the land Psa, ^7, 13
of the living, where we shall see no sin, nor feel corruption any more.

Hasten thy judgments o Lord, bow the heavens and come down: discharge the
graves of their dead, the world of it doom, our souls from sin, and our
bodies from corruption: o hasten the day of our delivery, that we may see in
glory what we feel in grace, even the beholding Psalm. 17* 15
of thy face in righteousness, that when we shall awake from death, we may be
satisfied with thy likeness, and filled with the fulness of thy joy.

Thus much of the manner of our change The time of our changing.
and living again: Now to the time when: I mean, when these vile bodies shall
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, fined from the grave, redeemed from
the earth, and bought from men, whereof I hold for Reu, 14. 4.
the negative, that there shall be no full change or restauracio^ of any,
until the general resurection of all: and that before the last day and doom
of all the world, there shall be silence in the grave, no ground stirred, no
body raised: and if raised, for a time by divine dispensation, to confirm the
glory of Christ his resurrection, at what time Sheol should be shaken, yet
laid down again, by like ordination to expect a further refreshing from the
Lord, when all things shall be restored.

So as I may safely say, against our adversaries presumption, in check of
their assumption of the body of the blessed virgin, that except the humane
body of her Son Christ, the pawn and pledge of our Inheritance, the^'s not a
glorified body in heaven: it is true, it is true, upon our disclution: the dust
of our bodies resolves into E^, 12, 7.
earth from whence it came, and the spirit returns to God that gave it. And
as the Act. 3 21.
heavens must hold the body of one Christ till he come again: so the graves
shall hold the bodies of al his saints, till al things Gen, 3, 19*
be restored: earth, to erath, ashes to ashes. dust to dust, is for all flesh
until our changing shall come, for thou Lord turnest man Psalm, 90. 3.
to destruction: again thou say, come again ye children of men.

And that this is true, let these Scriptures waig^ with you: Job in the
precedent verses of this my text has it, and you may believe Job, 14. 1^.
him in that as in the rest, man sleeps and rises not, he shall not awake
again, nor be raised from his sleep till the heavens be no more: where I take
his meaning to be generally of all without exception of any other, then as
formerly I have said of Christ his perfect glorification for ever: and some of
his Saints, by dispensation for the time, and again, laid down to sleep til
the heavens be no more, that is, til all things be restored.

Christ himself a witness omni exceptione Ioh, 3, 13.
mayor, has said likewise, that no man has ascended up to heaven, but he that
has descended from heaven, that Son of man which is in heaven: the doctrine
is positive Catholic and absolute without exception of any, and exclusion of
al, speaking by a coinonie for the present: as attributing that to the
divinity which is proper to the humanitye: but expressing, as de futuro for
the time to come, that no man should ascend in his humanity, before the Son
of man who did descend in his divinity to fetch it up.

And heereunto accords Paul when he ^. Cor. 15, 22* 23
says, as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, but
every man in his own order: The first fruits is Christ, afterward they that
are of Christ, at his coming shall rise again: whence I reason thus, in the
first Adam we all fell by sin to die once. In the second Adam we shall all
rise, by his righteousness to live ever, but in sort different: he as the
first fruit, we as an after crop at his coming shall rise again, even at his
coming shall rise again, so says the text, and not before, so say I. The
inferrence is good, else were the order inuerted, whereat principally the
Apostle aymeth, Col. 1. 18.
which is, that Christ might have the prehemine^ce, prime and pride of the
resurrection, if I may so say.

Again it is said by the same Apostle, that 1 Th. 4, 15
at the Lords coming such as remain shall not prevent them that are asleep,
no^ they that are asleep shall prevent them that are alive: but the Lord shall
prevent both and together, all shall be caught up in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air, and so be ever where he is. The division is perfect and good,
for at the coming of Christ to judgment, all bodies shall either sleep in
their graves dead, or be abiding upon the earth alive, and for their passage
into heaven, none shall be before or after other. The time was when that other
John, 20. 4
Disciple did out run Peter to the Sepulcher, and even now we see, one
hastes to put another in the grave: but then when the Trumpet shall blow, and
the dead shall rise: all shall go from their Sepulchers at once up together,
meet together, and so for ever be with the Lord.

Further for better proof of this Doctrine, there is set down by the
Apostolic Author, Heb. 11. 2.
a choice register of Gods Saints, from Abel the just, down to the days of
the Machabees, by the honorable* Patriarchs, worthy Judges, renowned Kings,
inspired Heb. 11, 39, 40,
Prophets, who all through faith obtained good report, but received not the
promise: God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not
be made perfect.

I say, received not the promise at full* as inioying their desired Christ, not
fully come, in the day of grace by his death, to purge their souls from
sin, nor come in the day of glory, by his life, to fine their bodies from
corruption: God providing this good for us, that they without us, neither in
grace or glory, should be fully perfected. How be it I deny not, but their
souls were fully saved, by the virtue of Christ his death and resurrection,
which they foresawe and felt in their hearts, and therefore If in heaven, ergo
neither in the limbee of popish purgatory, or limbus pa trum.
upon their dissolution were taken up in soul into the very heavens, where now
they are, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Mat. 8. 11. But their flesh does rest
in hope, so (as I may say of them, and of all the dead, as Peter did of the
Patriarch David) David is not ascended into heaven: And if Act, 2, 26 34 Psa.
110, 1 Heb. 1, 13. Ec* 10. 12. 13, 1. Ioh, 2, 1 2. Act, 20, 28 1* cor, 15, 27
not David the root, how may Mary the branch, or any other strain of Adam?
nay, nay, the possession is there given by one God, and taken by one Christ in
right of al thus: Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy
foote-stoole, thou alone to plead their cause, thou alone to purchase their
place, thou alone to keep possession til al things be restored, and then make
good thy purpose, with thy promise, I go to prepare a place for you, and if I
Ioh 14. 2, 3,
go, I will come again and receive you unto my self: that where I am, there
may ye be also.

But if all these Scriptures, like nails of Hebr. 12, 22, 23, 24,
the sanctuary, will not fasten thee to this hold: then search the heavens,
for thy better resolution: see into that secret, and who be there? Hebr. 12.
22. etc. Mention is made of Mount Syon, which is the celestial Jerusalem: and
the City of the living God: to which blessed assembly the elect of God are
incited to join themselves as free Denisons, and to be Infranchised. Now who
be there, tell if thou can? let the Spirit speak and all flesh be silent.

There says the text, are the company of innumerable Angels, and the
congregation of the first borne which are written in heaven: There is God the
Judge of all, and the Spirits of just and perfect men: there is Jesus the
meadiator of the new Testament and the blood of sprinckling, that speaks
better things then the blood of Habel.

Whence I infer, (to pass the rest and to come to that which more neerelie
concerns the matter in question,) that there are only the spirits of just
and perfect men but neither body, blood or bone, other then that of Jesus
Christ, the mediator of the new Testament, whose blood speaks better things
then that of Habels: For the blood of Habel cried revenge, but the blood of
Christ even there sprinckling, as it were in He, 12, 24
his Fathers face, cries pardon, pardon.

I might (to confirm this Scripture) cote that of John: and open unto you the
first seal, with the Altar of God, and the souls of Reu. 6, 9, 10, 11.
the saints lying there under: I might tell you of their enjoined silence, to
pray, or plead for any further repair or perfection in body, until the
number of their fellow servants gone before, and of their Brethren to follow
after (dead as they were) were fulfilled: but I leave the Doctrine to your
further search and examination, because the time hastes on: and for the
present only, content my self, and I hope you to, with the assoyling of some
few doubts, which happily might encounter the Docttrine delivered.

First say some, if there be no bodies in Genesis 5* 24 2, Ki, ^, 11 Look the
Geneua note Genesis 5, 24 and P. Martyr of Henocke and Elias.
heaven but that of Christ's, where then are the bodies of Henocke and Elias,
the one taken away before the Flood, and the other after in a fiery Chariot? I
answer with the learned, whose judgments I reverence, as to inquire where
they became is mere curiosity, so to say they be in heaven, is over bold
presumption: and if I should say with David Kimhi, not the meanest interpreter
of the Hebrews: that in the taking up of Elyas, his garments were consumed with
fire, except his Mantell which fell from him, yea and that himself was
extinguished: so as every one of the Elements of his body dissolved and
returned to the Element whereof it was, but that his Spirit passed to heaven,
it were no singular opinion, for of the very same mind, Oecolampadius seems
to be in his exposition upon the last of Malachie.

But for us it is sufficient, that their translation show there is a better
life prepared: and if we make it a Sacrament either of our resurrection from
the dead, or last taking up into heaven, if we make it a testimony of the
immortallitie of souls and bodies, I hold it may well stand with the Analogy
of faith, and be as Tertullia^ says, documents of our perfection to come, for
the rule is good, multa tribuuntur Symbolis quae tantum sunt rerum
significatarum: many things are said of figures which are only true in the
thing they signify. Therefore if any man say, they are taken up and glorified
in body, as in soul: it is only true in that they signify, and not in
Symbol.

Herein if I be deceived* I dare not say with the Prophet: Lord thou have
deceived Mr. Greenam in his trea. of the Resurrect: Page* 4^7 Mr. Willet in his
Retect. Page, 118, In Episti, Heb, 11, 5,
me. Jeremiah 20. yet may I say ye learned of this age, Calvin, Fulke, Grenam,
Bale etc. ye are deceived and err with me.

It suffices us says Calvin, that their taking away (meaning Henocke and
Elias) was a certain extraordinary death, nor may we doubt, but that they put
of corruptible and mortal flesh, that with the ^est of Christ his members,
they might be renewed into a blessed immortality: might be renewed (says
he,) therefore not yet renewed: and with the rest of the members of Christ,
ergo not single by themselves.

The Rhemistes upon the same place, Heb, 11 5
charge us Protestants to be Sectaries, for that we hold this Doctrine,
their words are these: here it appears that Henocke yet lives and is not
dead, against the Caluinistes.

Mr. Fulke answers the charge, and lays In his mar ginall note Heb, 11. 5
down his judgment in these words: It appears not that Henocke yet lives
in body, more then Moses or Elyas, but that he was translated by God, out of
the world, and died not after the common manner of men, with this marginall
note, more fully to express his mind in the point, Enocke not still living.

But as for any passage into heaven, that Enocke or Elias had in body or
local being there, which is the maine point in controversy: he is so far
from that opinion, as in an other place, he is bold to vouch the contrary in
these very words: It is evident In his Annotat. Reu. 11. 3. Against the
Rhemist.
indeed that Elias was taken up alive, but not that he contynueth alive, yea,
because it is said expreslye that he was taken up into heaven, it is certain
that his body was not carried into heaven* for Christ was the first, that in
his whole humanity ascended into heaven: Ergo (say I) with Mr. Fulke whose
learning, judgment and authority I much reverence, and so may the Church of
England, that yet there is no Body in Heaven but that of Jesus christ's: for
he is the beginning, and the first begotten of the dead: (as the Apostle Col.
1. 18.
says) that in all things, he might have the pre-eminence.

Exiled Bale in his image of both Churches, and in his chaste Paraphras upon
the cited place, Revelation 11. infers thus against the Popish school
Doctors, who would have the two witnesses there mentioned to be Enocke and
Elias: unlike it is says he, that God should call witnesses from the dead: And
what Godly wise man can give more to the figure then to the verity, more were
they not privileged from death, then Christ was: though God would not then have
it so to be known, to declare his wonderful work.

Only that which may deceive is the Original word, Lakac, which found in
other places of Scripture else where, does implye rather a taking away by
death, then any translation from death: as in the 4. of Jonah where the prophet
prays yt God would take away his life: and Ezech. 44. 16. where the Lord
says, behold I will take from thee the pleasure of thine eyes, meaning his
wife: the same original in both places is all one with that of Enocke Genesis 5.
And therefore I see not yet why it may not inure to the same sense and
signification, unless we may deem that Jonah prayed for any such translation,
or that Ezechiels wife was so translated indeed, which may not be, for that
the Prophet lived longer after, and Ezechiels wife was found dead at even: and
for the new testament it is familiar with Christ and his Apostles, to call
death a translation or taking away to blessedness, as Luke 9. 51. John. 13. 1.
and 17 1. In all which places the Greek will bear it to be a translation, or
taking away to a better life, yet ever by a true and certain death.

And therefore I answer to that of the Hebrews, where it is said: by faith
Enocke Heb. 11. 5.
was translated, that he should not see death, that though happily his departure
out of this life was extraordinary without passion, sickness, or greenance: yet
was it a dissolution, and such as left a body behind, else why says the
Text, that these, whereof Enocke was one, without us should not be made
perfect: had he been taken up and glorified in body as in soul, he had been
perfect without us: but because the Scripture plainly says, that he without
us should not be perfected, I hold, as yet in body he is no more glorified
then we or the rest of that Calender.

It is recorded by Jude that Michaell th'a arch Angel strove against the
Devil, Jude, 9.
and dispu^ed about the body of Moses: nor do I doubt but the contention was
anenst the funeralles. The Devil would have them solemn, Michael would have
them secret to avoid idolatry, and love of religques: least the succeeding
age might commit the sin in adoring his dead bones, of whom whilst he lived
they had so great a reputation of all pietye and holiness.

So may I say of Henocke and Elias, in Genesis 5. 24. Heb. 11, 5
that, as the text says, they are gone, not seen or found, they are taken rom
burial, and from all usage of this world: least succeeding ages might adore
them dead, whom they so honored alive: for not found, not seen, we say of me^
rather lost on earth then gone to heaven.

Again when Christ was transfigured Luke 9, 31
upon the Mount: it is said that Moses and Elyas talked with him, and told of
his departure which he should accomplish at Jerusalem: and shall we say that
the one was more translated then the other, more perfect or more glorified then
the other, pardon me, if I plead a like perfection in both: If Elias, then
Moses: if not Moses, then not Elias, but it is plain in the Scripture Deuteronomy.
34. 5
that Moses dyed: and so it is of Enocke and Elias in the general, otherwise
how should that sentence of Scripture be veryfied? Hebrews. 9. 27. It is
appointed to men that they shall once dye: if we shall then conclude and say
from the premises: that by divine dispensation and for the time, Moses and
Elyas took up their bodies to associat Christ in the glorification as did the
Saints, who rise with him to accompany him in the resurrection: when having
performed that which they were appointed to do, they were dissolved again, as
before, I hold it may well stand with the Anolagie of faith: for that the
Scripture says concerning Christ. Act. 13. 34. God raised him up from the
dead, no more to return to corruption, as and if others might twice return,
where Christ should but once see the grave.

As for the Fathers doubtful judgment Of Fathers
there anenst, I say: as I have ever said, I reverence their gray hairs, but I
bless eternity: nor dare I subscribe to all the Fathers in the present point,
for that they are variable, nor to any one of them further then he has good
warrantie out of the word, which is ever like it self, and stable in all truth.
The Rhemistes would prove in their annotations upon the 11. of the Apocalips
two special points of Doctrine against us, to make good their Antichriste yet
to come. 1. First that Enocke and Elias yet live, shall preach in the time of
Antichrist, and suffer martyrdom. the^ that they now live in Paradise: and for
denying of these two positions, they say we^ Protestants are too contentious,
and incredulous, the matter being clear (as they aver) in the opinion of all
antiquity: and to that end they press us with the sway o^ the Fathers, both
Greek and Latin: T(...) whose quotations in that place I referr(...) you, as
also to the variable judgment o(...) antiquity there anenst, whence I resolve
and conclude. To say with some of the fathers, concurring with our adversaries,
that Enocke and Elyas be yet in Paradise is idle: to say they shall fight
against Antichrist, in the end of the world, and suffer Martyrdom is more
idle, to say they be yet alive is dangerous, but to say they be dead as all
others Heb. 9, 27
are, is without all danger, and whereupon never grew schism in the Church of
God, never grief to conscience, or check to the Royal dignity of our
Christ, whose sole and sovereign pre-eminence of being in heaven bodily, I
hold, as an excellency in him, and a blessing to us: yet so as to believe or
not to believe, that Enocke and Elyas be there, may be no bar to our
salvation, for that I doubt not but milions of souls shall be saved, who
never heard or sought into that secret.

And now that I have said God will witness with me before whom I stand in
the sight of men and Angels, that I have spoken nothing to the touch or
prejudice of any contrary judgment, or out of the pride or singularity of my
own heart, but in right and prerogative of my Christ, whose peculiar yet I
take it to be alone, to pardone our sins, to plead our cause, and purchase
our place, whither first he is entered in body to make passage for all, and as
the Apostle says: Now to appear Hebr. 9. 24
in the sight of God for us, and so to conclude with Origin, sicut ex mortuis
primogenitus Ex pa^phil.
christus, it a primus carnem euexit in caelum: As Christ is the first borne of
the dead, so he first carried his flesh into heaven.

2. A second doubt encountering this Doctrine, rises from such as make
question what became of the body of Lazarus after it was raised, as also of
Ioh. 11. 44
the bodies of those saints, which at christ his resurection came out of their
graves, went into the holy city and appeared unto Math 27: 52
many?

To which I answer that all was done by miracle, and divine dispensation only
for that time, to confirm and ascertaine unto us the resurection from the
dead, as in the head, so in the members. And well it might stand with faith and
religion both: that as by like dispensation Christ himself Ma. 17, 1. 2
being yet mortal, was transfigured upon the holy Mount, and glorified in
body, and being risen again and gloryfied, 10, 20, 27*
t^oke an impression of his mortality, as the print of the Nails in his
hands, and wound in his side, to confirm the weak faith of Thomas. So I say
by the very like dispensation has he disposed of the bodies of those his
Saints, for that time to confirm Lib: 3: de mi^a scrip. cap. 13. epistola ad
Euodium. 99
the doctrine of the resurection, who having performed that which they were
appointed to do, by the judgment of Augustine and diverse others, settled in
their graves, as they did before: for Christ being raised from the dead, dies
no more, as and if Rom, 6* 9.
the Apostle were resolved, that many raised to life have dyed again, of
which sort I take these to be.

3. The third and last encounter is with our adversaries, who to advance the
body of the blessed virgin up into heaven, have mightily abased the blessed
body of Christ on earth, pulling down the one at their pleasure into the
compass of a cake, 1* Kin: 12 28: 29:
at Dan, and Bethell, setting up the other in conceit above the heaven of
heavens, and to that end have found out in their dea^ne divinity and
assumption of her body into heaven, and withal proclaimed her a feriall for
the same, to be kept on earth, like one of the feasts of Judah, where anenst,
I say, and dare avouch, they have discovered more folly, found out more
fables, v^tered more untruths, and broched more blasphemies against God and
his Christ, then ever they can answer, if the Lord be not merciful upon their
repentance.

Time will not suffer me to stand upon their particular impieties, and for
that I must refer you to the reading of Io. Bromiard in his summa
predicantium and tract de Maria, as also to Nicholas Blony and Clicto^ius their
homilies, written for the Assumption day, to Anselmus and all the rest, who
Iud. 14. 18
have plowed in their postils with that Romish heffer.

I say, read without pride of them or prejudice of us, and I doubt not but when
you have done, you will pray that the Doctrine and day of the assumption may be
cancelled out of the calender and conscience of Clictouius in his first Sermon
de Assump Part: 2:
all good Christians, and the rather for that themselves confess it to be
without the Canon of the word: et quod ex scripturi^ probari non possit
express, which is, that tha^ cannot be proved out of the scriptures expreslie
but from tradition, whence (says he) it has authority.

And for their allegations of August^ and Jerome, who (they say) writ several
treatises of the assumption: the one ad Paulum et Eustochiu^, the other (I
mean Augustine) one book of the same argument: I hold them both adulterate
and neither of their stamp, for that they are unable either to abide the touch
of their style or trial of Gods truth: (I mean his word) and so are they
taken to be in the censure of the best learned and godliest Divines, whereof
Erasmus gave a taste when he said of Augustine his book for a title, Hic
libellus ne pilum quidem habet Augustini. This pamphlet has not so much as an
hair of Augustine: and of Jerome his Sermon he says, that it was not his,
but that one Sophronius a Grecian writ it, which he proves in the censure
thereof very plainly if you please to read him.

Pardon me (my Brethren) if I seem to have stood ouer-long in the misterye
of Christ his sole ascension up in body: veritas me coegit. The truth and
tender of your good has trained me on, which if you sound well unto the
bottom, you shall feel it a perfume unto your souls, more sweet, the^ all the
trees of Ince^se. For (say sinner) what am I? or what is my fathers house Judge.
6, 15
that God should so (exalt me in his Christ as to purchase me a place, to
give me a Kingdom, to plead possession in my flesh and to keep it for me
until the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies and perfect changing
shall come, when Christ Math. 24. 30. 31.
shall(...) end with all his holy Angels, and come in the clouds of heaven,
with power and great glory to call the dead out of their gra^es, and to gather
his elect from the four winds and from the one end of the heavens to the
other: then, then, and not before to solemnize the great day of the assumption
of all flesh, and to crown it with immortality. But good Lord how long! when
shall our changing come? and when shall thy coming be?

How long and when o Lord, thou know. The last day uncertain. Act, 1, 17.
It is not for us to tell the times and seasons which the Father has put in
his own power. In Caution where of I for warn all Christians of two sins
ragious in the world, and seazing upon al flesh. 1. The one is curiosity
concerning the day of doom, when it shall be. 2. The other is security both
of the time and manner of it being: That of curiosity is in the excess, and
it possesses the wit: that of securitye is in the defect, and it possesses
the will* ^he 1. first is of men too ingenious, and they hasten the judgment:
The 2. second is of men too too careless, and they put of the judgment, not
regarding that there is a God and day of revenge, and that wh^le we sin the
score runs on.

Now in respect of both (beloved) I A caution against the curiosity and
security of this age.
charge you this day, that you stand upon your guard and be watchful, so are
not to hy^, least the fire upon the Mount devour you in your curiosity, nor
hoouer too low least the foolishnes of a Golden Ca^fe beguile Haba. 2, ^ Ex.
19, 12 Ex. 32. 1* Curiosity. 1. Th, 5, ^
you in your security, Medi^ tutissimus ibis, the mean is the best.

For the first, Paul writing to the Saints at Thess^lonica, says, Of the times
and seasons, Brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you ^ where see a
sanctified Church discharged of a dangerous sin, they were not curious to
search the Majesty, least they should be confounded of the glory, and for
that he says, ye have no need that I write unto you.

As and if he should say: o ye Thessalonians, ye are not curious of the
times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power, ye stand upon
no destinies, ye gaze upon no stars, ye respect no conjunctions of fiery or
watery Trigon, ye pry into no prophesies of derne deceit, ye read no Books
of Manilius Maternus, Albumaza^ or Halie. but the love of God is your delight
wherein you have learned, D^* 29, 29
that the secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed
belong to us and our Children for ever.

But woe is me to tell (my dear Brethren) this Scripture is cross to all
our courses, and in that great day, I fear will severely judge us, for what
belongs to the Lord and is secret to himself, thereof are we curious: but
what belongs unto us, and to our Children to know and is revealed, thereof
are we careless, being naturally given rather to know that we cannot learn
and so dye in error, then to search what we should learn and so live in truth.

Search the Scriptures, is in the command John. 5, 39
of GOD, and who does obey it? search traditions, is out of the command of God
and men run mad upon them: the day of grace is ours we have it: and oh Lu,
19. 42
that we did know in this our day the things that belong to our peace, but they
are hid from our eyes: yet if there be but a question moved of the day of
doom, of the desolation of the land by foreign power, if of Lam, 4* 20
the death of our dread Sovereign, the breath of our nostrels, and under whose
shadow we are preserved alive among the heathen (none ours to know, but all
in the counsel of God to determine of in mercy, judgment, as it seems best
to himself) or, yet in all these are we to to peremptory: For we set the
Clock, we calculate the years, we determine the day, we busy our selves
with the conjunction of planets, with doubtful Oracles out of the hollow
vauts and predictions of Merlin, Bardie, and many Beldarnmes of this land: we
tell destinies, read riddles, and try our souls in the search of yt we can
never sound: nay and more, we take from God the honor of a free agent, and we
tie him to a necessity fatal, wrought out by the creatures upon the Anuil of
error, to betray the truth, and trappe the innocent, of whom Augustine said
truly: aedificantur Tract. 13. in John,
ad credendafata, vt eorum corda fiant fa^^a: That is, ordained they are to
believe destiny, that their foolish hearts might become beastely.

Of many to repeat a few, and as it were De quibus Schelcon ^mdanus Lib i would
vltimo ad ^ent: Domini.
to give you a taste of former follies, what was it but like bea^^linesse in
the Mathematitia^s of those days, to tell us of a climatterical year, and a
goulden number, which number should shut up the days of the world, the
fiftenth thousand of it age, and was it not sembleable madness in them, by
their round quadrant and quin^untiall forms to determine of the world, and to
deem of doomesday? was it not like folly in Plato sporting himself, in his
Athlantic^ to tell us of another Athens, which should be after nine thousand
years: when this world being worn away, and another should succeed of a
better people, and building? Nor was it other then earthly wisdom, in the
Egiptians (of whom Herodotus speaks) to report that in ten thousand years,
the Sun should shift it place, twice rising where now it falls, and twice
falling, where now it ryseth, concluding there upon of two new worlds in, ten
thousand years: The beastely Epicures were more sottish in their imaginations*
who dreamed off infinite worlds, one still slitting* and another slowing:
doubly damned in their thoughts for that they deemed souls mortal, and
worlds immortal, I say of all these as formerlie I have done with Augustine:
Borne they were to believe destinye, that their foolish hearts might become
beastely.

But leave we these Pagans in their Atheism, and come we nearer Christian
times, for even Christians have been, are, and I fear me, will be over bold
and curious in the search of this secret: for what was it other then
presumption in the christians of Augustines time, mentioned in his eightenth
book, de ciuit, Dei, who said the world should end four hundredth years,
after the Ascension, others five hundredth, others a thousand, But as he says,
omnes elusit ipsa temporis experientia: Experience played upon their follies,
and latter days still mocked their former dotage.

Other Christians with the Rabbis have De quo vi de Galatinum de Arcanis
catholicae veritatis. ^, 4, ca, 20
and do much busy themselves with the prophecy of Elya the Thesbit, whereof
they write in their book Abadasser, Duo millia inane, Duo millia Lex, Duo
millia Christus etc. That is, two thousand years nature, two thousand years
the Law, two thousand years grace, and for the sins of the world, some of
those shall be cut off to hasten the judgment.

Others reason from Peter, one day with 2. Pet. 3. 8, Quae opinio Papia^,
Iustinum, Irenaum, Tertullia nu^ et Lact antium, fe fellit.
the Lord is as a thousand years, Ergo ye seventh thousand year shall be the
Saboath of rest and resurrection, and in that seventh thousand year, the
Chiliasts hold, me^ shall live and enjoy this earth with Christ but in the
eight thousand, they shall be caught up and reign with him in heaven for
ever* Jerome was not far from that opinion, and whereof read Augustine upon
the sixth Psalm, but Stipholius of Wittemberge and Hosiander did mightily
defend it.

I pass by, as too to curious, that vnnecessarye search of Seauens from Adam
to Enocke in succession of persons, and from Adam to Elia in succession of
ages, whereby they would prove the seventh thousand year to be the year of
glory, when God should come in the clouds with his fiery deludge, as Elias
went up in his fiery Charret.

But of all others who are in the Calender of Christians: our adversaries (I
mean the Our adversaries dream of doomes-day by the coming of their
Antichrist.
Papists) are most foolish in this point, who determine of the day of Christ,
by the coming of their Antichrist: In discovering of whom, least happily they
might discover their Pope to be the man, driven they are to many gross
absurdities.

1. First, that Antichrist should come of the Tribe of Dan: Rhemist 2 Thessalonians.
2. sect. 8 and trow you, will it be possible to distinguish of tribes in this
so great a confusion of Israel: for if in Ezra his time after the captiuitye,
their generation was not perfectly known, how much more now after so mighty a
dispertion in the world of full sixteen hundred years, will it be impossible
to find out the descent and search the petigree of Dan?

2. Again, Antichrist (say they) shall have his Imperial seat at Jerusalem,
and reedifie again the Temple there. Bell: lib. 3. de Pontific. cap. 13. and
this is an absurdity likewise contradicting the truth of Scripture, for Haggai
the Prophet calls the Temple builded by Zorobabel, the last Hag* 2. 10
house.

3. Thirdly, they hold that he should reign but three years and a half, and
yet in that space he should fight with the three Kings of Libia, Aegipt, and
Ethiopia, and persecute the Christians through the whole world* Bell. cap. 16.
but this is more gross, for let any man imagine, how ever it is possible, that
in so short a time, Antichrist being but a mere man, should so conquer and
subdue the whole world, in which time and space hardly the flightest Ship can
sail it circuit.

4. But the last, and whereat principally I aim for my purpose, is, that they
determine of the very day of Christ his coming to Judgment, and set it down
to be just 45. days after the death of their Antichrist: Bell: de Rom:
Pontifi: Lib: 3. cap. 9.

Nay, nay my brethren, had I time, and were it to my Text, easilye might I
prove that this their device is but a drift to shift from themselves, what they
have, and what they are, I mean Antichrist and Antichristian, for Rome is the
place, if Rome be Se^ti-collis; Reave, 17. 9
to wit, The City built upon the seven Mountains whereon the woman sits,
And then he entered the world, when the Apostle said, There be many
Antichrists, 1. Ioh. 2. 18.
whereby we know that it is the last time: but more fullye he encountered the
world when 666* did calculate the year, Reave. 13 18.
and decypher his name and nation: and here is wisdom, Let him that has wit,
count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is
(as I have said) 666. whereof Ireneus gave a Lib. ^. c. 2^
touch and taste, when in these two titles (...) and (...): in the one he
discovered his nation and language, in the other his pomp and pride: both
numbered aright acording to the Greeks, make 666. About which time likewise,
whole Italy fell from the Emperor to the Pope, when Boniface the 3. by Ph^cas
was advanced in tytles, And Stephen the 2. by Pipin was preferred to dukedomes,
since when, and especially in these last five hundredth years, he had wel-nere
conquered the world, if the Spirit of the 2. These. 2. ^.
Lord with the breath of his mouth, had not beaten him back, when his
innumerable and filthy Locustes, blasted the growth of Reave. 9. 3. etc.
true Religion in the greatest part of Christendom, when Kings became his
vassels, and Emperors held his stirrup: when above all that was called God, he
did advance 2. These. 2. 4.
himself, as God to reign and rule, in foro poli, inforo pluti, inforo
conscientiae. In the Court of heaven, in the court of hell, and in the court of
each good conscience.

But leave we here his judgment to the day of try all, and all curious spirits
to the search of their own follyes, in seeking that they shall never be able
to find: I mean, the times and seasons which the Father has put in his own
power. Paul was taken up 2 Cor, 12. 2. etc.
into the third heaven, and heard words which cannot be uttered, yet heard he
nothing of that* The Angels behold the face Mat. 18. 10
of God, they stand in his presence and know much, yet nothing of that: God
gave unto Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding 1. King. 4. 29. etc.
much, yet it was too short of that: he spoke 300. Proverbs, and yet he never
mentioned that: his songs were a thousand and five, yet he never sung of that,
otherwise then in this harmonye: There is an appointed time for all things
under the S^^ Eccles. 3. 1.
Nay, in check of al (since Christ has said it, I may not pass it) of that
day and hou^^* the Son himself is ignorant: I say with Mark. 13. 32.
Chrysostom, according to his diuinitye he knew it, but according to his
humanitye he knew it not, for reserving (as Hillary In imperfect: opere in
Mat. 24 in his 9. Book of y^ Trinitye.
has it) to the only begotten Son in him self his true veritye, yet
according to the infirmitye of flesh, he wept, he slept, he hungered,
thirsted, was wearyed and fearful: and also it is agreeable unto his humane
nature, of the day and hour (as himself professes) to be ignorant.

So then for conclusion of all, this is the sum: true it is, the coming of
our Christ is the Kingdom of our Christ, and if you mark it well you shall
find it never came by observation: his first coming in the Luke 17. 20.
flesh long expected of us, but not determined by us: and when he came* he fell
like Psa. 72. 6.
a shower of rain upon a fleese of wool, in softnes and in silence. Likewise,
the promise Luke 24. 49
of the Father concerning the spirit out in deed and irreuocable, but when to
fall, the Disciples wist not, they must to Jerusalem Act, 1. 4.
and wait with patience, tarry the time and expecte the good hour: Even so
his coming to judgment in majesty and great power, it must be expected of us
at al times, but when, it may not be determined by v^ at any time.

And for the cast awayes of this our nation, who by the deceit of Balaams
wages, Iud^. 11.
have ever since the first year of her late Majesty's most blessed and happy
government, dreamd of a dry Summer, still breathing out destruction to her
person, change of Religion, and desolation to the state and Kingdom, now by a
black Fleet from Norway, then by a ^^^ell Dragon, whose head must be in
England and tail in Ireland: this year by an headless cross, and that year
by a popish curse: yea, and erst while (a wonder of all wonders) our Lord
lights in our Ladyeslap, and therefore England must have a clap: I say of all
these, they 1. Sam. 28 7. etc.
have sought too much to y^ witch at Ender* and were there no more to prove,
that our God stands for us and against them, this were sufficient, that their
wy^ardes have fayl'd them, and their wits that way a(...) worn out: their
Popish Prophesies are a(...) an end, and their ^lattering diuinations o(...)
better times, have still proved their dis(...) days: their c^rssings have been
our blessings, and their plotting Achitophels hau(...) 2. ^am, 17. 23
pulled the halter over their own heads.

Curssed be the man before the Lord Josh, 6. 26
(says Joshua) that rises up and buildes the City Jericho: so have you built
up your Babel of all confusion, with a curse to your selves, and a plague to
your posterity, for most of you have laid the foundacio^ thereof in your eldest
Son, and in your youngest Son reared up the gates: that is, you have built
to the destruction of all your stock, as Hiel did in Bethel: 1. Kin. 16. 34.

Yea and to you be it spoken, a curssed crewe of popish repyners, maugre all
your spite and poison, the state yet standoth, religion grows, we increase
and you decrease: our Prince lives a blessed Prince, and you are scattered a
rebellious ^out, for yet God is good unto Israel, even to those Psalm. 73. 1.
that are of pure hearts, And he that keeps Psa. 121. 4
England, does yet neither slumber nor sleep: Our Sons grow up as the
young Psalm. 144. 1^.
plants, and our Daughters as the polished corners of the Temple: yet our
Garners are full and plentious with all manner of store, Our Sheep bring forth
thousands and ten thousands in our streets: our Oxen are yet strong to labor:
yet there is no decay, no leading into captiuitye, no complaining in our
streets, and happy are the people that be in such a case: yea blessed are the
people which have the Lord for their God: multi habent in Deum, pauci in
Dominum: many have him for their God, but few for their Lord to rule in the^:
o God establish with us the Kingdom of thy Christ, with the Scepter of thine
anointed: Amen Amen.

And now my brethren for the last part of my Text, and in caution of the
second ^. Security
sin, I mean the great sleep and slumber of all flesh in great securitye: it
stands us upon to be watchful until the time of this our changing shall come,
least when the Lords judgments shall fall upon us, our sins be found with
us, and so we dye in our securitye. The knowledge of which, day to us, is
bounderd in with these banks, as it were Nylus Flood from it vndation, to make
us the more watchful. 1. that it will come and that speedily, for there Reu.
22. 12. 1. These. 5. 2, 3. Reu. 6* 17.
is an assured day of evil. 2. That it will come at an unset steyne, and then
when th(...) world is most secure. 3. That it is ine(...)uitable, and none
shall escape: for all shall(...) appear before the Tribunal seat of God etc* 4.
Lastly, that every man shall be accountant 2. Cor, 5^ 10.
for himself and receive doom according to that he has done in this life, be
it good or evil. For proof of all which, mark when and where the Scripture
speaks of that great day, and you shall find it always draws it on with
such expedition and seueritye, as and if it were at hand, even over our heads
and in our necks, to make us the more watchful. Enocke (says Jude) the
seventh from Adam, prophesied 14, 15.
of it, saying: Behold, the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to give
judgment against al men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among the^, of al their
wicked deeds. Daniel says, I beheld til the Thrones were set, Dan, 7. 9* 10,
and the fierye streams issued out, till the judgment was prepared and the
books were opened, with thousand thousands ministering unto him, and ten
thousand thousands standing before him. Ezekiel says, an end is Eze, 7, 6.
come, the end is come, it watched for thee, behold it is come: Paul says; we
are they upon 1, Cor, 11,
^home the ends of the world are come: John ^aith, Nouissima hora est, we know
that it is 1. Ioh, 2, 18.
(...)he last time. And Peter says for all, Now the (...)nd of all things is
at hand, be sober therefore 1, Pet, 4, 7.
(...)nd watchful in prayer: whence I infer the (...)ore to move that all
things have an end, may move much: that the end is at hand, may move more: but
that even now the end is at hand, and upon us, may move most of all.

Nor do these scriptures only press us with the certainty, expedition and
seueritye of the last day, But with all y^ du^me creatures, groan Romans 8, 19
and travail in pain together unto this present, and to hasten the judgment,
do cry to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, wherein they are into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God: yea, certain it is, that heaven,
earth, hell, all Saints and sinners, hasten the day, and hale on the
judgment: God has set it, our sins have deserved it: the grave(...) are
pregnant, and they desire to be delivered hell gapeth to devour the reprobate,
and th(...) heavens open to take in the elect: as for th(...) prophesies they
are past, and the signs spoke(...) of by Christ himself, they are near
accomplished, for error, seduction, and heresy, are fa(...) spread in the
world: wars, plagues, and pr(...)digies, are all abroad: the godly are
grieved (...) Math, 24. 4, 5. etc.
persecuted, the godless prosper and go on Faith is geason upon the earth,
iniquitye is (...) it growth, and the love of many is key cold(...) And surely,
surely, if the Gospel of the king dome be preached through the whole worl(...)
for a witness unto al nations, And if Israel (...) Rom, 11. 25, 26.
fully called to grace* from which it is fallen, I see no reason or rule in
religion to cross it, but that the final fire may flash in our faces ere we
can depart the place. Look upon the John* 4. 3^
harvest and view the fields, are they not (as Barnard says) Albae ad
messem, siccae ad ignem, white for the sickle, and dry for the fire?

But if all these were silent and said nothing, the great securitye of sinning
wherein the world slepeth, were enough to prognosticate the Lords near
aproach, and stir us up to be watchful: for certain it is, when we are
most secure, the Lord is most severe, and his judgments are nearest, As it
was in the days of Noah, Luk, 17. 26 etc*
so likewise shall the coming of the Son of man be: Our days are as the days
of Noah, for the fiery flood is upon us and we know nothing: we eat, we
drink, we marrye, we build, all arguments of our securitye: and though
lawful in those, yet unlawful in the abuse, and then are they most abused,
when they do secure us in our sins, and make us careless of our God.

And here observe an argument drawn from the stronger, that if these lawful
things in (...)he abuse, deserve a just reproof, how much 2. sam. 12. 11, 12.
2, sam. 16. 22.
more our shameless sinning hand over head (...)n the sight of this Son*
like Absol(...)n is worthy conde^natio^: I mean our excessive bellycheere, 1*
Pet* 4. 3.
idle drinkings, and endless drunkenness: our foul adulteryes, filthy
fornications, and gnawing vsuryes: our great avarice, garish pride, and
grynding oppression, with a mighty profanation of the Lords Sabbath, by Phil.
16. 1.
neglect of his holy word, Sacraments, and blessed work of Ministry, both in
us that Preach, and in you that hear: I say, if in these sins we solace and
secure our souls, saying peace and safetye, when nothing can be more expected
then a dreadful fire, that shall devour the aduersarye: what can we look for
but sudden destruction, where none shall escape?

And here give me leave a little to plead the cause of the Innocent, who
grieve (God wots) under a heavy burden, and dare not speak* yet will I go
in, since it is in a plea of deliverance, and say with Ester, I dye, I dye: I^
Ester* 4. 16
greeueth me to think of the tears o^ Psalm, 56. 8 The plaint of the poor
oppressed.
the poor put into the bottle of God, which one day he will power out in
judgment against many, who crave a debt where none i^ due, and will needs
reap where they did never sow: other men's sweat must be their sweet: and the
liuelyhood the Lord has lent for the relief of the poor wife, poor child,
poor familye, is so winnowed and boulted to the branne by endless fyning and
needles refyning, as nothing is left them, but wind and water to feed upon,
with sobs, sighs and tears, the best companions of their broken hearts: Woe is
me to tell, the rich are mercylesse, and the poor are not pittyed: we can go
to no Pulpit, but they pierce our hearts, to provoke our speech, and so ye have
it.

Now, if any shall reply to veil his sin, and say in the silence of his soul,
My land is my 1. Cor, 6. 19, 20. 1. Pet, 1. 18 19.
own: I answer nay, thou art not thine own, even thou art not thine own, but
bought with a price, even with the dear blood of Jesus Christ, which thou
tramplest upon, if thou treadest his poor members under thy Psalm, 24 1
feet: and for that earth of thine, Domine est ^erra and plenitudo eius. The
earth is the Lords Luke 16. 2 Rom, 2. 5. 6
and the abundance thereof: It is not thine otherwise, then as thou art a
steward to use it till he ^ome, and say, give account of thy stewardship, and
the^ shall thou have according to that thou have done in this life, be it good
or evil.

In the mean time, I advise thee with the Dan. 4, 24
Prophet, to break off thy sins by repentance and thine iniquity by mercy
toward the poor. ^et there be an healing of thine error: o Isaiah. 42. 14
^empt not the Lord, because of his long and exceeding great patience, least he
turn upon you as he did upon Israel and say Tacuinunquid semper tacebo: must
I always bear? I have borne enough, long have I holden, I can hold no more,
I have been still and refrain my self, but now will I cry like a traveling
woman, I will destroy and devour at once.

But alas, (and woe therefore) Babylon is Iere. 51. 9.
wounded, and will not be cured, The world is desperately sick and has no
feeling, either ^osea. 4, 4 Iero. 8. 21. 22.
of it sin, or of it judgments, for let noncreproue, is the proud poesy of
this sick age: wherein, no treacle at Gilead, no Physicians there, no hand of
the magestrate, no tongue of the Minister by Prayer or Preaching, no
remembrance of passed miseries, no fear of future calamities, no present
blessing, no deserved 2. Pet. 3, 10
curse can cure the malady, til y^ great fire of Gods heavy wrath and
indignation fall upon us, and then will it be to late.

For it is an assured ground, you may build Take the oppertunitie when it is
offered* heb, 12, 16 17 Ge, 18, 13,
upon it, he that will not lay hold on grace when it is offered, he shall
seek and sigh for it, when it is to late: Esau could not obtain the blessing
though he sought it with tears, i^ was to late: Abraham could not prevail
with God for Sodomes safety, though his prayer were many and his pleading
powerful, it was to late: Noah preached repentance to the old Gen, 6, 3*
world, by the space of an hundredth and twenty years, for so long was the
Arc a making before their eyes, and all that while they contemn grace: but
when the windows of heaven were opened, and the flood was out, then Gen, 7, 11
they run to the Mountains, they rom'd at the trees, they caught at the
highest bows, they hung, they clonge thereby to save themselves but it was to
late. This our Savior makes good unto us in the parable of the ten Mat, 25, 1
Virgins, whereof five were wise, and five were foolish: the wise were
provident, but the foolish slept, and therefore upon the sommons they fail to
enter, for that they were found wanting of oil to their lamps: they would
have borrowed, they could not: they ^ried Lord, Lord, open unto us, but he
would not it was to late: Lastly to conclude with the Reu. 10, ^*
^ast pageant that ever shall be acted on the Theater of this world, The
wicked shall ^leade when time shall be no more, Lord Math. 25, 41*
when saw we thee an hungered or a thirst, or ^arborlesse, or in prison etc.
But al to late, for ^hey may not enjoy him in glory, whom they ^aue contemned
in grace, And therefore must ^eare this earnefull voice of their endless
separation: Item. depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is
prepared for the devil and his Angels.

The use of the Doctrine is familier (my dear Brethren) and to my Text, for
now is the appointed time, even the happy day of grace, and ours it is to
watch in, nor can our changing be far off, even the blessed day of glory, and
thine it is O Lord to work in: had I therefore a thousand eyes they should
watch for it, had I a thousand ears, they should harken Reu. 6. 17. Z^p. 1. 14,
15. 1. Ioh 4, 17 Luke 23 30
to it, had I a thousand feet they should be shod to the preparation of that
day: a great day, a fearful day, a day of changing indeed, wherein the Godly
shall change all evil into all good, and have boldness: but the Godles, Mark.
1^, 33 Luc, 21, 36
all good into all evil, and cry to the Mountains for fear, fall upon us,
fall upon us: watch therefore and pray, ye know not when the hour will come:
death and doom are as the Cockatrise, if they see us, ere we see them, we To,
8, 37,
die in our sins, but if we see them first by true faith, hearty prayer and
repentance, we are more then conquerors, and may boldlye say, death where is
thy sting? hell where is thy 1, Cor, 15, 55,
victory? thanks be unto God which has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus christ. I might further prease the decayed doctrine, and exiled practice
of watchfulnes in these our days, then the which there is not a more
continual current in the word of God, ever in the mouth of Christ, watch and
pray: and never Math, 26* 41
from his practice when (as it is in the Gospel) by day he taught in the
Temple, and at Lu, 21, 37 Mar, 6, 46
night went out and abode in the Mount of Olives to pray, but because the time
is spent, I leave it to your further search, only with this sighe from the
soul of Christ, as a challenge to his Disciples, and all the elect: could ye
not watch with me one hour? it will not be long Math, 26, 40,
but the hour will be out, Judas is at hand, and Judgment I fear is over
your heads, then To, 13, 11, Ephe, 6, 18
may you sleep on, and take your rest: It is nearer my dear Brethren then
when I last spoke, and therefore I say again watch, watch: Gen, 41* 24, 20
Twice have the blasted ears eaten up the full corns, and twice have the lean
Kine devoured the fat: Pharoes dream is doubled for the certainty thereof and
expedition: The famine is upon Egypt, judgment is upon all the world, and will
ye sleep on? o that men were Deuteronomy, 32, 29,
wise! then would they understand this, then would they consider their latter
end, and so for end: The very God of peace sanctify you 1, These, ^, 23
throughout, and I pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body, may be kept
blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ faithful is he which
has called you, which will also do it.

And now my Brethren to close with the dead for a conclusion of all. The Lord
has answered me this day, as he did Habacucke, and Habae, 2, 2, 3,
made it plain upon tables what I have preached, that he may run that reads
it? The vision upon this Gentleman was for an appointed time, and now is the
time, and at last it shall speak to every one of you (who hear me this day)
and not lie: though it tarry, wait, for it shall surely come and not stay.

It is not long since he was in life, and liking as you are, he sat as you do,
in place and credit of this world, he heard where you now hear, he prayed
where ye now pray, and in lowliness of heart, he lickt up the dust of the
^^aiah, 49. 23
sanctuary, which dust has now devoured him: nor was it either the favor of
his prince, the credit of his place, the love of his friends, the faithfulness
of his folowers, his tennants tears, or sighs of the poor, could beg him of
God, or keep him from the grave, but down he must to demur^e with death,
thereby to bring unto himself a state of inheritance, indefeazible, with a
crown of glory that wythereth not.

And now o death what have thou done? Occidisti possedisti. Thou have slain,
thou have possessed, but what? only the grass and flower of flesh: as for the
Spirit euolauit, it is gone to God that gave it, and that very body thou
seem here to detain it shall be taken from 1. Cor, 15, 26,
thee, when thou the last enemy shall be destroyed, and swallowed up in
victory.

For the only Son of God shall come with power and great glory to seek the
saint whom thou have shamed, and even those dead corpse will he fashion like
unto his glorious body, by the mighty power whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself.

Nor is our friend Lazarus here dead, but sleeps, This is Dormitorium the
house of sleep; Or as the Germans call it Gods acre, wherein do rest and are
sown the bodies of Gods Saints, till their joyful spring of their
resurrection: nor does yt which is sown quicken except it die: Et qui granum
tritici suscitat 1, Cor. 15 36
propter te, ipsum te non poterit suscitare, propter se, that raises up the
seed of wheat for thy good, can he not raise up the fallen flower of thy
flesh, o man for his own glory?

Go to then devouring death, and drink thy fill, spare him not, whom thou
have spilt: stop his breath, cover his face, tie his hands, bind his feet,
imbalme his body, bury his corpse, lay on the stone, and seal up the
sepulcher, yet Christ is at Bithinia greeuing at the grave, and me thinks I
hear him cry with a loud voice to him and all the dead, arise and come to
judgment.

Evomuit prophetam marina bestia quem deglucierat et tu Humbertum reddes quem
videris Bernard. de obitu Humberti ^on, 2, 10.
in tuo vastisimo ventre conclusisse: So said Barnard of his friend Humbertus,
and so may I, of this our dear deceassed. The Maritine beast picked up Jonas,
whom he had devoured, And you earth shall redeliuer this flower of gentry
whom thou seem to have closed up in thy vaste vault* In the last day, o
Death thou shall stand like a fool beguild of the dead, when the Saint here
fallen shall ever live, and thou his destroyer shall ever die.

And now to that which thou can not spil, which is the sweet perfume of his
life past, I will be the more sparing to speak thereof, for that love can
keep neither mean, nor method, The rule is good, say nothing but well of the
dead: it is better say nothing, but truly of the dead.

And the truth is, he has bin true to this my text, for he has bin
watchful, watchful of his place to perform it with good conscience to God,
and loyalty to his Prince, watchful of his family to govern it withal
descretion and godliness: watchful of his Gold, that the canker thereof
should not rust his Iame 5, 3 4. ^ob. 31, 38 39 Hab. 2, 11. 12
soul: watchful of his ground, that the furrows should not complain against
him: the unjust detaining of ye laborers wages: watchful of his building, that
neither the stone out of the wall should cry, or beam out of the timber should
answer it, with oppression.

And for this place and charge where now I stand, my self can witness, how
watchful and careful he has been of it good, with whom he often dealt to
furnish him of an able man, as an assistant to aid and help the pastor here,
which I know ere this had bin effected, but that the Lord dealt with him as he
did with David in the Fabric of the 2, Sam 2 7. 12. 13.
Temple, Even put it of to Solomon his Son, by him to be perfected, which I
doubt not but he will perform, and that readily in the fear of God,
according to the zeal of his heart, and good conscience toward this great
people, for thou o Lord have put fire in his Luke. 12. 49
heart, and what is thy desire but that it should burn?

Besides all these: the sweet balm of his hospitality, was an honor to God,
a relief to the poor, and a credit to his place and calling whereof I may say
he was watchful, watchful as Abraham who lay in his Tent door under Genesis 18.
1.
the oak at Mamre to gather in strangers, and at the last God was his guest:
watchful as Lot, who sat in the gate of Sodom to call in pilgrims, and at
last he received Genesis 19. 1
Angels.

Rich Christ is in his poor members, and hi^ joyful message, is tied to his
word and Ministry: he relieved the one and countenance^ the other, A good
advertisement to al christians that they beware against whom they bar their
doors, least happily cui Domum Aug: con^ra heretico^.
clauseris, cui huminitatem negaueris, ips^ sit deus. Least happilye as
Augustine says it be God himself, against whom thou shuttest thy door, and
denyest thy curiosity, The rule is Apostolic, be good to all but especially
to those that are of the household of faith. Gal. 6. 10.


And now to wind up all with the watch of his last farewell at what time with
good Ezekias, King. 20
and seven years before to my knowledge, he set his house in order, and
prepared to die, recomme^ding, then as now, his soul to God, his body to the
earth, his Land to hi^ heir, his goods to the world, with much kind
remembrance of his friends, and many prayers for his enemies, if he had any:
Not 1. Mac. 9. 55. 56
so wicked Alcimus of whom it is said, that at the time of his death he was
plagued, so as he could neither speak to God, or give order concearning his
house.

And for his Funerals now next in place, and last in action, you see they are
not without form, like Ioachims of whom the Lord said by the Prophet. They
shall not lament Ieremi. 2^. 18. 19.
him saying: ah my Brother, or ah my Sister, neither shall they mourn for him
saying: oh Lord, or ah his glory!

For this so great a concourse of Christian people honoring his burial,
following his hearse, and giving him the last duty of obsequi, does argue
they loved him living, whom they honor thus dead: nor is it done without
compassion, for oh husband, oh father, oh master, oh friend! is in the
lamentatio^ of all: ye see their tears, ye hear their groanings, and God
knows their grief, To whom I leave them, as to the alone comforter, and do
further pray that the Lord would teach us to Ps. 90. 12.
number our days yt we might apply our hearts unto wisdom, and so at his
coming may be Mat, 25. 6^
found watchful with our oil ready, and our Lamps light. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

