A RELECTION OF CERTAIN AVTHORS That are pretended to disauow THE CHVRCHES
INFALLIBILITY IN HER GENERAL DECREES OF FAITH.

BY F. E.

Acts 15. It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. AT DOWAY By the
widow of MARK WYON at the golden Phoenix. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT-WORSHIPFVLL MY WORTHY FRIEND M. S. N.
MVCH HONORED SIR
WHEN I received from you the last rich token, I promised to return a letter
full of thanks. But being then upon a journey, found not means to send; and so
failed in my duty. Whereby my obligation was doubled: to pay the debt, that
first; and then, to satisfy for the fault. In discharge of both which, if you
please to accept of these few printed leaves, you shall oblige anewe

Your thankful friend and servant F. E.

To M. S. A.
SIR
WHen a doubt is proposed out of a desire to know the truth, I must not (being
called upon) be wanting to profess what I have learned and do believe: but if
it comes out of a curious humor of contradicting, I can dispose of my time
better then to spend it in disputes. What your mind is, you reserve as your
secret; yet not so secret neither but that I perceive something of it. Your
deliberation, might I be of your counsel, should quickly be concluded.

He takes the safe way that follows the direction of the Church. That Church I
mean, which all times could point at; and which all Heretics have opposed.
You know that neither Mar. vlt. Joan. 3. Apoc. 21. Tim. 3. Galat. 5. vide S.
Aug. li. 4. con. Donat
Heretics nor 1. Cor. 12 Col. 2. Gal. 5. Vide S. Aug. Ep. 152. and de unit.
Eccl. c. 4. Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites, non solum omnes Paganos,
sed etiam omnes Iudaos, Haereticos, atque Schismaticos, qui extra Ecclesiam
Catholica^ praesentem finiu^t vitam, in ignem aternum ituros, qui paratus est
diabolo and angelis eius. S. Fulg. de Fide ad Pet. c. 38. inter Op. S. Aug. t.
3. Of the grieuousnes of the crime of Schism see S. Aug. li. 2. contra
Donatistas.
Schismatiks (one wanting charity, the other faith too,) be in state of
salvation. These, and such like things, you can weigh, your self. And, where
the mind is not ill disposed, the resolution is most easy. Prudence never
sticks at such a matter.

If your hinderance be that only which is insinuated, I shall willingly show
you how you may remove it. Go the Catholic way: that, is secure. Seek no
by-waies.

Suppose you might be made Archbishop of Canterbury, upon condition that you
would go to La^beth on foot; and that there were some danger, yet no great
danger neither, of loosing your purse (without further harm) if you took the
common way over the bridge. Would you stay, till winter, that you might go
without that difficulty, in greater peril: and then, hearing Themse to be
frozen, presently (before they durst venture who told you so,) take your
journey over the ice? A wise man would not ve^ture his life and all, in that
manner; to save two or three, ten or twenty pieces: being presently to
receive a thousand if he came to Lambeth safe, and ever after to live in great
abundance. Yet your case is more desperate. You know that in heaven you shall
receive at your entrance the possession of an eternal kingdom, with a crown
of glory amongst Angels in immortality. The common way thither is the
Catholic, which way if you take, you conceive the danger of being a little
taxed in your purse; and you think you hear some tell you, there is an other
way, but nice and ticklish: wherein those who speak, themselves durst not
venture; because if it miscarrie, soul and body and Heaven and all, is lost,
by a fault of Quisquis ab hac Catholica Ecclesia fuerit separatus, qua^tumlibet
laudabiliter se viuere existimet, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi vnitate
disiunctus est, non habebit vitam; sed ira Dei maret super eum. S. August.
Epist. ^52.
Schism, which opens into a downfall that ends not but (where there is no end
at all) in Hell.

To venture your body over a deep river upon a bridge of thin brittle
glass, and to venture your soul over Hellmouth upon a ticklish opinion, which
is worse? He that loves danger (the Scripture says) shall perish in it.
Eccles. ^.
What speak I of an opinion? When your imagination does cease from working, no
bridge at all appears: you are but in a dream.

But, were there two or three, who did (against the rest, and against the
known practice of the Church,) avouch what you pretend, would you venture your
soul (whilst worlds of learned men bid you take heed) upon their word?
Perpetual torment among the damned spirits, is a matter of that horror, that
wisdom would seek the safest way to decline it: and he that could see
heaven a far of, with those inexplicable ^oyes that are in it, would think on
nothing else but the securest way thither; and fear nothing more then to miss
it.

Were you to purchase a temporal estate or inheritance for your child, you
would not venture your money upon a title, which the practice of the kingdom
does dislike and which Lawiers commonly say is naught; though two or three
should tell you that it were a good title: much less in securing to your own
soul an eternal inheritance, should you be contented to rely upon the
Authority of two or three (were there such) the rest, with the general Spirit
Gods people, contradicting and anathematizing such as proceed in that manner.

That Catholics are against you, generally, in this point^ you know. They
communicate not with those who d^ openly oppose themselves to the decrees of
Councels oecumenicall. The Councels themselves excommunicate and anathematize
them also. And, as many grave Prelates and learned Deuines as ever esteemed
their authority sufficient to determine a Controversy and oblige men to
conform their judgment thereunto, (who be innumerable,) so many do counsel
you not to trust unto these few, (suppose you found them;) telling you that if
you do you forfaite heaven.

When a few, reputed Scholars, (were they many, were it a whole Nation,) hold
a tenet that is against the Church, their Authority does not make it
Probabilia sunt quae vide^tur omnibus, aut plurimis aut sapientibus; and his
vel omnibus, velplurimis, vel maxim familiaribus and probatis. Arist. li. 1.
Topic. c. 1. Nonomne quod videtur probabile, est probabile. Ibidem.
probable. The truth of her assertions depends not upon the approbation of
every one that is in her Communion: Much less, of others. The Pastors are to
teach; and if some of them do chance to forgo the truth and leave it, there is
power in the You remember the practice of the Church in her first Counsels,
against Arians, Nestorians, etc.
rest to define the matter and condemn the^. Docete. Matt. vlt.
This Catholics do know; they be grounded; they take the secure way.

The way which you take is temerarious: it is the same which Heresy does
usually take to spread it self. And in making choice of it you show in your
self the disposition of a Sectarie. The Sectarie finds an opinion avouched by
two or three, against the common, and against the Spirit of the Church
generally: yet, because it likes him, (for that it is easier to be conceived,
or more agreeable to some fantasy that he has, or better suting to the
liberty which he could wish,) he is content to ^hink the authority of those
^^o or three (though the ^^st contradict) sufficient to ^ake is probable: and
then, iud^ng of the reasons and moti^es which they bring, as his ^^fections
incline him, he thinks (...) at last, certain. So did the ^rians; depending
upon the ^uthoritie, first of their lea^ers; and then deeming their ^otiue (as
that, pater mayor me (...)) to be manifestly against the Church, and for them.
Neither be the Leaders themselves (Arch-heretickes) wi^^out pretense of
authority; they cite the Fortasse aliquisinterroget, An and Haeretici, diuinae
Scripturae testimonijs vtantur? Vtuntur plane, and veheme^ter quidem; nam
videas eos volate per singulaquae que sanctae legis volumina: per Moysi, per
Regum volumina, per Psalmos, per Apostolos, per Euangelia, per Prophetas. Sieve
enim apud suos, sieve alienos; sieve priuatim, sieve public; sieve in sermonibus,
sieve in libris; sieve in conuiuijs, sieve in plateis: nihil vnquam paene de suo
proferu^t, quod non etiam Scripturae verb^s adumbrare conentur. Vinc. lirin. c.
35. Si quis interroget que^piam Haere^^corum sibi talia persuadentem, vnde
probas, vnde doces, quod Ecclesiae Catholicae Vniuersalem and antiquam fidem
dimittere debeam? Statim ille mill testimonia, mill exempla, mill
authoritates parat, de lege, de psalmis, de apostolis, de prophetis; quibus
nouo and malo more interpretatis, ex arce Catholica in Haereseos barathrum
infoelix anima praecipitetur. Idem c. 37. vbi ostendit eos a diabolo modu^
istum didicisse; Scriptum est enim.
Scriptures, ^^d gleane obscure speeches ^t of ancient, good writers, which in
show do make for them.

When a man once takes this ^ay, he squares out his Religion to himself; or
rather he runs out of all: from one thing to another, from more to fewer
points or articles from that he calls probable to less and yet less and less
probable; till at last is he finds himself, most certainly, in Hell. Faith is
a firm assent but his, (if well examined) is not so. It is not divine faith;
he does but flatter himself and deceive others, with a shadow If two or three
tell him that^ Council may mistake (though the rest avouch the contrary, he
is content to think it may and hereupon, presently doubts of all, that is so
defined Then further, proceeding i^ the same (silly) motive; if the whole
Church avouch a thing yet so, as some two or three at some time or other, held
the contrary; he will not belee^^ the Church neither, No, nor the Apostles, if
any tell him they might err. A Rainolds, a Whittakers authority, makes the
contrary to him probable; and by that time he has read their books, he
thinks himself certain of it. But in the mean while, where is the faith of
such a man? whereunto does he give a firm assent? To the Scriptures? No: their
authority who denied them, makes him doubt. To the Creed? nor so; the
authority of two or three serves his turn, and there is nothing in the Creed
that more then two or three have not refused. Arianisme, Nestorianisme,
Sabellianisme, Eutichianisme, Pelagianisme, Lutheranisme, Swinglianisme, all
great Heresies have had multitudes of abbet^ors; whereas two or three, serve
his turn. Where then is his religion? in his mouth peradventure: but in his
heart, well examined, there is none.

Others there be, not so ready to rely indifferently upon the Authority of
any whatsoever esteemed learned; but determined extremely unto one. The
Puritan for example, to John Calvin; whom he prefers before the rest all
together. Wherein he shows himself as extrauagantlie peccant against the light
of nature as the former. Amongst the many principes or Axioms which reason
dictates to the Prudent, this is one, that, in matters of belief the greatest
Authority must sway our understanding. He will not deny that this is true, he
might as well deny the sun shines at middaie; but his manner of proceeding
does inuolue a denial of it. The authority of a Council entirely
oecumenicall, is greater then the Authority of one single man. The greatest
^chollers have ever stooped to (...): yet the Puritan rather believes Calvin,
then such a Council. Yea rather, then all the known Churches in the world,
though Though some now disse^t, as you for example, yet these points have had
the consent of all Christian Churches as many as believed that our B. Savior
had true flesh and blood.
consenting. As, in the matter of the Mass, unbloody Sacrifice, real
Presence. And what way is there, think you, to deal with such a man? or to
what end is it to dispute with him? If you cite Scripture, he will rather take
the comment of his Master John, then the definition and tradition howeuer
ancient, of the whole Church, delivering the sense of it. It is so in the
point of the Real presence. And, in admitting the Books of Scripture too, he
will be his own chooser; and will judge, himself, which is good and sound and
which ought to be discarded.

Vide disput. de Eccles page 304.
But who shall decide the controversy betwixt the Church and him, touching the
meaning of that Scripture which he pleases to let pass for current? The
Spirit, no doubt. But, in whom? in the Church or the university of believers
before his time? Not so. They might err he thinks; and so might all the
Counsels of Bishops that ever were; and all the Pastors of the world, though
consenting; they might all, he thinks, be deceived. Where then speaks the
Judge he means to stand to, when the Controversy is about the sense of
Scripture, or about the sincerity of the letter? in whom speaks the Spirit
which he will permit to be his Master? In Master John. So he believes; rather
the^ he will believe that he speaks in the Church.

Now tell me, is not this a strange manner of proceeding in matters
appertaining to our eternal estate? to challeng to ones self, or his Master
John, authority to teach and interpret Scripture, and to deny it to the
whole Senate of Catholic Bishops and Pastors, whom God has given to teach
divine doctrine, and to keep the Church from wavering in such matters? and not
only to them, Ephesians. 4
in what age soever, but absolutely to the Church, without exempting the first
Disciples, and Apostles? These for sooth, be the men that in the pulpits cry
so loud, who disesteeming the whole world besides, obtrude themselves as
masters of mankind, each an Oracle.

I know you wash your hands; your words condemn their insolency: you will not
seem to participate of their fault. But what is in your heart? Are not you
too, one of those that abbet a private judgment against a public?

You plead against the power of the Church to determine matter of faith in her
general assemblies; that I see. And I know too, that you punish men for not
conforming themselves to the determinations of one not general. Reconcile
these if you can. And tell me, if I be not bound to conform my judgment to the
judgment of a Council when it is perfectly oecumenicall, what shall bind me
to conform it unto one that is only National? if the Decrees of the whole
Church may be lawfully refused, what obliges me in conscience and before God
to receive the Decrees of your Convocation? Is every subject bound to be of
his Princes Religion? or is it lawful for him to subscribe against that he
knows to be the truth?
Is England, since you began to teach, grown bigger then all the world? is a
part (is was not of old so,) bigger then the whole?

In way of excuse for your not subscribing to decrees oecumenicall, you plead
the Authority of some few men; (how unjustly, heareafter it will appear;)
and shall not the Authority of far more, and those great Scholars, excuse
us in conscience for not subscribing to your private Articles wherein be many
things generally condemned in former ages? To give instance in one point, that
contains many. In your 23. article you determine thus, The Sacrifices of
Masses in the which, was commonly said that the Priests did offer Christ for
the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, were blasphemous
fables and dangerous deceits. So you. Yet was this Sacrifice, frequented Missa
abominatio in calice aureo propinata, omnes reges terra and populos a summo
vsque ad nouissimum sic inebriauit, vt proram and puppim suae salutis in hac
vna voragine statuerint. Calvin. Instit. li. 4. c. 18. See the Protest. Apol.
tract. 3. Sect. 1. and in the Conclusion; to the Judges; Sect. 6. and 10.
generally, when Luther began to make your Schism. It was auowed in the S.
Iren. li. 4. c. 32. Noui testamenti Nouam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab
Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. Council. Nicenum 1. can 14. S.
Cyrill. and cum eo Council. Ephesians. in Anathem. 11. S. Augu. Conc. 1. in Psalm.
33. Nondum erat sacrificium Corporis and Sanguinis Domini quod nunc diffusum
est toto orb terrarum. S. Ambros. de Sacram. li. 4. and 5 S. Cyrill. Catech.
mist. 5 S. Chrysostom. lib. 3. and 6. de Sacerdotio, and Hom. 17. in Epist. ad
Hebraeos. His Liturgy is yet extant. And so is S. Basils too. S. Gregor.
Nyssen. Hom. 1. de Resurr. Praeoccupat impetum violentum, ac sese in oblationem
and victimam offert pro nobis Sacerdes simul and agnus Dei. Vide Disp. li. 5 c.
9 and Coccium in Thesanro, t 2. li. 6. a. 4.
times primitive. And our Saviors This is my body which is broken for you.
This is the blood of the new testament which is shed for you.
words, registered in the 1. Cor. 11. Matt. 26. That it was offered for the
quick and the dead, it is also testified abundantly. S. Epiphan. Haeres. 75
where he says also the Church received it by tradition. S. Cyrill. Cathec 5.
Pro omnibus oramus qui ante nos vita functi sunt, maximum credentes animarum
iuuamen pro quibus offertur obsecratio sancti illius and tremendi quod ante nos
iacet Sacrificij. S. Chrysostom. Homil. 3 in Epist. ad Phil. Non frustra hac ab
Apostolis sunt legibus constituta vt in venerandis inquam atque horrisicis
mysterijs memoria little fiat qui decesserunt, nouerant hinc multum ad illos
lucri accedere, multum vtilitatis. S. August. in Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 110.
lib. de cura pro mort. c. 1. etc. 4. Non sunt praetermittenda supplicationes
pro Spiritibus mortuorum, vt quibus ad ista desunt parents aut filij, ab vna
is exhibeatur ^ia matre Ecclesia. Lib. 9. Confess. c. 13. Meminerint ad altar
tuum Monica famulae tuae cum Patritio quondam eius coniuge, etc. S. Joan.
Damasc. Orat. quod defuncti Missis inuentur. Quod quidem citra vllam
controuersiam Catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia sine vlla ambiguitate retinet
etc. Vt consuetudinis testem ^llum cito. The like appears by the Liturgies.
Where observe that I reflect preciselie, upon the terms of your Article, which
condemns unbloody Sacrifice offered by the Priest for the Quick and the Dead
to have remission of pain or guilt. If this be a blasphemous fable, the whole
world was in Error. So commonly was it said and esteemed lawful; and so
universally frequented See further Gualterius his Chronographicall table,
verit. decima. The Protestants Apol. tract. 1. Sect. 3. subd. 4. and Sect. 7.
subd. 6. The Conference of Cath. and Prot. doct. li. 2. c. 24. angl.
Bible, being understood in their native, proper sense, do What necessity
there is to enquire into the true sense of these words (This is my body) will
best appear in the after-examination of the diverse consequences of your own
sense, to wit, your doctrine of transsubstantiation, corporal and material
presence, propitiatory sacrifice, and proper adoration: all which depend upon
your Romish exposition of the former words of Christ. The issue then w^ll be
this, that if the words be certainly true in a proper and litterall sense,
then we are to yield to you the whole cause. Morton Instit. of Mass. li. 2.
c. 1. I omit to note how Luther who did impugn the Sacrifice of Mass, had his
instructions from the Devil. as does appear still by his own book de Missa
Priuata, p. 228 Ego coram vobis And p. 230 ^. ^n summa. Edit. Wittemb. anno.
1558. where he puts d^wne the Devils arguments; amongst which one is against
unbloody Sacrifice; Contra institutionem Christi, Missa vsus es pro
Sacrificio, etc.. quarto.
confessedlie make for, and confirm it. Now, should we subscribe to your
Article, we should contradict all this. We should contradict open Scripture,
interpreted by the whole Christian world, and by the And this Spirit is the
Holy Ghost, Ioh. 14. and 16.
Spirit in it. And whilst you solicit us so to do, what do you but abbet a
private Spirit? and this too, importunelie, vnseasonablie; then, when you deny
to the whole Church power to define the verity, even of this cause; or to
declare the sense of Scripture touching it, in her Councels oecumenicall.

I am not disposed to believe that a part is greater the^ the whole. The
Authority of England also before Calvin was borne, believed the Sacrifice of
the mass; and offered it for the quick and the dead. See the Prudentiall
Balance.
all Nations Christian, moves me more then the Authority of one Other
Protestants admit not your Confession.
only, now divided and apart. Neither can I be persuaded that corpus does
signify a sign or figure only; or that bread properly, was crucified for my
sins. I am not wiser then heretofore men have been; not wiser then the
Church. I reverence her decrees, and am ready to be directed by her. Whether
those you pretend unto, were so too, will appear in the discussion of the
Controversy we now deal ^n, which does concern the general Counsels
wherein she declares herself.

Of such Councels, your fellows have questioned many things: as first, who
has power to call them? secondly, what persons are to be in them? thirdly,
who is to preside? Fourthlie, whether they be infallible in their decrees?
fiftlie which be such Councels? The Controversy we are to speak of is none
of these; but only what learned men, Catholics, have delivered and taught
about the infallibitie of a Counsel, supposing it be entirely oecumenicall:
which supposition being premised, The four first, your selves honor with the
title of oecumenicall.
[and it is confessedlie a possible supposition,] the Question is this, Whether
any Deuines of the Catholic communion, have openly and to the knowledge of
those to whom it appertained to look unto the Church, avouched and maintained
of Councels entirely ^ecumenicall, such as were general and approved, that in
decrees of Faith, they might mistake and ^rre? We dispute not, you and (...),
now, whether this, or that, Council, be such a Council. That is another
matter. Nor, whether such a Council [sup^ose it be, and define,] be infal^ble.
But; what, men, Catho^ike Deuines, have auerred ^ouching the privilege of a
Council general, entire, and ^pproued.

The terms of the Question ^e remarkable. Councels; not whatsoever; but,
general and ^pproued, or entirely oecume^icall. Deuines of the Catholic
^ommunion; not Heretics. We know that Heretics re^use entire approved
Councels. Matters of Faith; not matters ^f Fact. Avouched openly; the
knowledge of the cause goes before the sentence of the judge.

Your pretense is that some Deuines have avouched their fallibilitie in matter
and manner above specified in the Quaere. Which if it were true, [that I note
this by the way,] the tenet of their Infallibility would notwithstanding,
continue firm. The Church does not at all times punish what ever she does
abhor: and negligence of discipline in a Superior, is a distinct thing from
the laws or principles of a community Much less could it be ouerturned by
their doubtful speeches if any could be found: and least of all by obscure
passages. Dark and hard speeches may be found in Vide S. Hieron. Apolog. adu.
Ruf. li. 2. Fieri potest vt -- vel certe antequam in Alexandria quasi daemonium
meridianum Arius nasceretur, innocenter quaedam and minus caute loqun^i sunt,
and quae non possint peruersarum hominum calumniam declinare. vide S. Aug. de
Praedest. Sanct. c. 14.
Ancient Writers, that seem to make against such tenets of Religion as you
call fundamental; and some Fathers have doubted of, some ^aue denied, Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. li. 3. c. 19. Origenes apud eundem li. 6. c. 19. S. Hieron. de
Script. Eccles. and in Ep. ad Dard. Bilson Suru. p. 664. See the Disp. page 431.
books of Scri^ture, which all now believe ^o be Canonical; wherefore if
(...) this matter of Councels-au^^oritie the like should have ^appened, the
tenet of Assistan^e given to them in their de^rees of faith, being grounded
(...) Scripture, and having for it (...) more evident perpetual tradi^^on then
you can show for di^ers parts of Scripture which ^ou do believe to be divine,
^ere still (even by you in like ^anner] to be admitted and ^aintained: unless
you think it ^wfull to reject those Books al^^, because once doubted of or
^enied; and never to believe ^at, which might with a pre^nce of authority, be
oppo^^d or contradicted.

Thus I could answer, and ^are the labor to talk further of the matter: Vide
S. Aug. li. 2. contra Donat. c. 5.
but because you wrong some that be lea^ned worthy Authors, and some Fathers
too; least you fin^ adherents that will beleeu^ you [to the prejudice of
themselves, and others] upon yo^ bare word, when they s^^ none contradict and
confu^ that you boast of, I will suru^^ the citations.

Our dispute in this matte^ is to be of Catholics; it is [as before was noted]
impertine^^ to talk of others; and of suc^ as in plain terms have auouch^
and maintained what you pr^tend they did. We know the some have been mistaken
(...) great matters, and yet cont^nued in the Church, either because the thing
was not suff^cientlie brought to light, [(...) matters appertaining to diuin^
faith be not at all times equa^lie proposed) or because they were ready to
submit themselves, As in the Questions of the Canon of Scripture, of Baptism
given by Heretics, etc.
and conform their judgment, as soon as the Church declared her self. We
know ^oo, that diverse have been tempted in their faith; and of these, some
have fallen into Heresy or Atheism, whereof we have examples in Luthers preach;
and before, in all ages, ^uen the primitive. Others have discovered their
tempta^ions, with all the motions of their understanding, to and ^ro:
concealing only the final ^esolution or event. Of which ^nfirmitie, some,
(and not without scandal) have exhibited ^hemselues by their writings,
^ublicke spectacles to the ^orld. With those you and (...) need not meddle;
being to ^peake of such only (if any can ^e found,) as have openly denied,
the infallibility above specified, and yet enjoyed the communion of the
Church, notwithstanding such a known denial.

She does not thrust out of her communion, one, who does only propose his
doubts, to be resolved; nor yet, if by way of disputation, he venters to far,
but without auouching, especially when this is done with submission to her
judgment: or, if he so conceal his mind, or utter himself so, that nothing can
be directly proved against him. Secret and concealed thoughts, she cannot look
into. Every one is to be presumed good, unless the contrary may be proved. As
many as have exteriorlie communicated with the Church, are lawfully presumed
to have received her tenets, unless it be made appear otherwise.

Though it be true that some who live amongst us o^herwhile, be not of us. Some
^o bear themselves for Ca^holikes, who be in their hear^es Atheistes, or
Heretics. There be, no doubt, Ipse Satanas transfigurat se in Angelum lucis.
Non est ergo magnum si ministri eius transfigurentur velut ministri iustitia.
2. Corint. 11. Nonne ego vos duodecim elegi: and ex vobis vnus diabolus est?
Joan. 6.
ravening wolves in sheeps-clothing some; and the Pastors drive them ^ot away,
because they know them not. The Disciples knew ^ot that one in the company was
a Devil. We are here to ^reat of things manifest; and to ^he Church; and so
far, that ^hey might be legallie proved against the men when they we^e ^e
living, and exteriorlie en^oyed the benefit of Commu^ion: or, are now to be
seen (...) their books, (books not ^ensured,) so cleerlie that it is
^nexcusablie undeniable. Your ^elf, I suppose, would require no less evidence
to condemn a man (and in so great a matter,) after death when he can speak no
more for himself, then was necessary to Reus non ante condemnandus est qua^ si
idoneis testibus, vel apertissimis documentis, vel indicijs indubitatis and
luce clarioribus co^uict is fuerit; aut propria co^fessione, etc. Vide legem fi
C. de Probationibus. and l. Qui sententiam 16. C. de poe^. Neq^e manifesto
constet incurrisse in sententiam excomun: quod nullo modo potest occultari, aut
per aliquod re^^ edium iur^s excusari: etc. Extra. Mart V. Adeu^anda.
condemn him when he was alive.

To undertake this Question in the latitude that I do, is more then was
necessary for the defense of a general tradition^ more then can be shown for
diverse parts of the New testamen^ by you received: but the power of the
verity will appear the better when it is found to hau^ been so universally
manifest and so commonly received that none, by the Church esteemed Orthodoxe
in their ^^mes, have been ever known^ (though there were still occasion to
look upon the authority of such Councels) openl^ to contradict it and avouch
the contrary. Neither could I well refuse (it is a duty in him that has
reaped benifit by their ^abours) to come abroad, and defend the just honor of
Persons wronged, who be not a^iue now to maintain their own credit.

APPROBATIO.
IN hoc libro, cui titulus A Relectio^ etc. nihil est fidei Catholicae, aut
bo^^s moribus contrarium, sed multa quae ^eritatem Catholicam confirmant.
Qua^opter dignum censui, qui praelo com^ittatur. Actum Duaci 22. Maij 1635.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theol. Doctor, and eiusdem regius ordinariusque
Professor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri Praepositus, Vniuersitatis Duacensis
Cancellarius, and librorum Censor.

Ex Disput. li. 4. c. 5. page 377.
OFfer not to cite any known Schismatike, whose opinion is generally by all
Deui^e^ rejected; cite no book but what is at least tolerated in the Church:
and have a care you prove that the man whom you cite, does, himsef, directly
and openly, asseuere and affirm the thing in Question. Because it were but
loss of time to speak of others: such as either had their writings censured
when they came to be known; or durst not openly avouch what they would, to
you, seem to say. There are degrees in leaving the communion of the Church;
and the same party, at one time may be in it; and at other time, either out;
or in such an error, as, if obstinacy were added to it, would take him out.
Neither can the subtle dealing of any discontented person, if he chance to
step over shoes, preiud^ce our cause, or be taken for the tenet of the Church,
unless the Church approve it: and error it never did or will approve. So there,
by way (...) prevention; howbeit you were not pleased to take notice of it And
in the end of the leaf are cited some (...) Ockams words, Whose authority you
scan first; a^ so will I, for a reason (not yours) Which Will quickl^ show it
self.

THE QVESTION. Whether any Deuines of the Catholic Communion, have openly and
to the knowledge of those to whom it appertained to look unto the Church,
avouched and maintained of Councels entirely oecumenicall, such as were
general and approved, that in Decrees of Faith, they might mistake and err?
YOU have undertaken the Affirmative and will be Plaintiff. Your instance is in
Austen, Vincentius Lirinensis, Athanasius, amongst the Ancient: and in O^kam
and Waldensis amongst the later. To the same purpose others do cite
Cameracensis, Panormi^^^ Stapleton, Cusanus, Clemangis, and Canus, and Baro who
professedlie disputes the matter, ioynes Optatus and Antoninus.

Franciscus Picus is alleged some where too by the said Minister, reciting the
Opinions of some of these men. What Councels he speaks of, I do not intend to
dispute: being to look into the Authors them selves; and out of their own
Writings; not out of other men's, to learn their mind.

You will not be displeased if I put the places down as Baro cites them: that
such as have hi^ book, which is public, may compare, and iudge^ as they see
cause.

. I.
1. Ockam (in a book of his that is prohibited) says that some Christians,
comprehending Heretics under the name, seem to think general Councels, some,
might err. 2. F^ brings in behalf of those men, an argument^ prove it: which
argument is manifestly de^cient. In like manner he brings arguments prove that
which he confesses to be false; as thought this also to be. 3. He recites an
op^nion whereof he says he knew no abbettor, the speaks doubtfullie of the
manner of assistin^ (...) and himself avouches the Authority of sincere
general Councels. He touches obiter the question, who does approve and how,
and who declares them to be general. 4. His proceedings in this work
discommended.

QVia omnes Christiani sentire videntur quod tota multitudo Christianorum
haereticari non potest; quidam autem secundo quod nec Concilium generale:
aliqui vero tertio quod nec Romans Ecclesia: nonnulli autem quarto quod nec
Collegium Cardinalium: aliqui vero quinto quod nec etiam Papa potest hatetica
pollui prauitate. Ideo de istis quinque quid sentiant Christiani cupio vt mihi
reueles. Baro. p. 359. ex Ockam, dial. li. 5. c. 1. 1. OCKAM. All Christians
do seem to think that the whole multitude of Christians cannot become
heretic: but some (Christians do seem to think) that neither a general
Council.

Here first is not determined what general Counsels those people mean;
whether approved, or not approved by the sea Apostolic. Se^ondly it is not
said absolutely that they do think and maintain that Counsels oecumenicall
may propo^^e and teach heresy; but that some ^oe seem to think that General
Councels (whether some, or all, is not here expressed) may haereticari, or
haeretica prauitate pollui; haereticate, (to keep his terms) or, be stained
with heretical prauitie. Thirdly it is not expressed who these Christians
were; whether Catholics, or Schismatickes: And, in case an excommunicated
person (seeking how to maintain Schismatic proceedings) in a book not
tolerated, but Index lib. prohibit. Conc. Trid.
expressly forbidden, should, not avouch, but seem to think that Councels,
though general, might err; this could not make good what yo^ profess to
prove, vzt, that men (...) our Communion, have, in their curra^ works, openly
denied infallibility to the decrees of approved general Councels. Much less
can the passage alleged serve your turn, if the word Christians be not here
taken so strictly as your inference does suppose; but so far extended that
heretics come under the name too; for then it may be true that some
Christians do seem to think so, and ye^ no Catholics think so: there being
other Christians in the world beside Catholics, even in his opinion that said,
(and was it not the same Quaeso vt mihi reueles, an aliqui sentiant quod tota
multitudo Christianorum valeat haeretica prauitate foedari. Mag. Iudaei,
Sarraceni, and etiam Pagani firmissime tenent fidem Christiana^ esse erronea^.
Disc. Non intendo quaerere de illis sed de Christianis; sub Christianis etiam
Haereticos comprehendendo. Mag. Nescio aliquem Christianum qui hoc teueat.
Ockam. dialog. par. 1. li. 5 c. 35.
Ockam think you) that under the name of Christians he did also comprehend
heretics: who desired also in this Dialogue to hear the contrary Opinions,
of whomsoever, Catholics, or Heretics; yea and sometimes others, that no Nolo
vt quod tenes in mente, reueles: sed respo^siones aliquas quae cogitari vel
teneri potuerint a quocumque, non differas recitate etc. sententias contrarias
quorumcumque Catholicorum and Haereticorum, and interdum alia quae a nullo
Christiano tenentur, licet possint habere Catholicos and Haereticos
defendentes, te desidero recitare: sic enim multiplicius and efficacius
exercitabimus studiorum ingenia. Idem c. 34.
Christians hold. This for your argument, of omnes and quidam Christiani, some
Christians and all Christians.

VNa sola est Ecclesia militans quae contra fidem errare non potest, quia de
sola universally militante inuenitur in Scripturis authenticis quod errare non
potest. Concilium autem generale licet sit pars Ecclesiae militantis
vniuersalis tamen non est Ecclesia vniuersalis. Igitur temerarium est dicere
quod Concilium generale contra fidem errare non potest. Baro. p. 361. ex Ockam.
dial. 2. THe next thing objected is an argument of those some Christians,
whereby they imagined that perhaps the thing which they did seem to think
might be proved; The universal diffused Church only i^ vnerrable: but a
general Council i^ not the universal diffused Church Ergo. In which argument
the proposition or is Mayor false, as our Deuines do prove by plain
testimonie^ of scripture; and our adversaries (...) necessity must acknowledge
a^ much, unless they will oppose them selves to the Apostles and Father and
Pastors of the Church, all together. For, if only the Symbolica^ or universal
Church, diffuse through all Nations and times, hat^ the privilege of not
erring in matter of divine Faith, it follows, tha^ the Pastors and Fathers and
Apostles, all consenting, are not to b^ relied on, as a proponent infallible
since these be not the whole ((...) they never so glorious a part of the Church
universal. Howbeit t^ Question here is not of that argument or proposition;
but, whethe^ Ockam does deny the infallibility of approved general
Counsels; or, whether he does name, or give other sufficient notice of, any
Catholic that denied it. He names here none ^t all; neither does he say that
they were Catholics who seemed to think etc. and least any should suspect
him, he professes in the person of the other Dialogist to be of the Quamui^
firmissime pute^ quod Concilium Generale haereticari non potest, tamen rations
pro assertione contraria libenti animo auscultabo. Mag. Quod Concilium generale
possit errare contra fidem rationibus and exemplis videtur posse probari. Prima
autem ratio talis est. Vna est sola vniuersalis Ecclesia etc. ( vt page 5.)
Ockam. li. 5. c. 25. argumenti vero solutionem apud ipsum innenies cap 9. and
habetur inferius ad lit h.. ad vndecimam.
mind that a general Council cannot ^rre in faith.

The like proceeding you may observe in him els-where; as, in the last Chapter
of this book, where he bringes reasons (and leaves them without answer too,)
to prove that the whole multitude of Christians having use of reason (pastors
and people, men and women) may err against the faith; and that it is
teme^arious to say they will never do so; though he there confess this which
^e goes about to prove, to Nescio aliquem Christianum qui hoc teneat. Disc.
Licet nescias Christianum aliquem hoc tenere, tamen pro hoc al quas rations
excogitare nitaris. Mag. Ad quaestionem falsam nulla ratio nisi sophistica
potest adduci. Disc. Concedo quod pro assertione praedicta nulla valet ratio
nisi sophistica allegari; tamen saepe rations apparentes and difficiles ad
soluendum pro falsis inducuntur. Vnde qualescunque inuenire coneris. Mag. Quod
tota multitudo Christianorum vsum rationis habentium possit contra fidem
errare, tali ratione probatur etc. Ockam li. 5. c 35. Ergo temerarium est
asserere quod nunquam tota multitudo Christianorum vsum rationis habentium
contra fidem errabit. Ibidem in fine.
be ^^lse (as it is indeed, and manifestly against the Scripture, Daniel 7. I
say 49. Mat. 18. Io. 14. Ephesians. 4. Apoc. 20.) and that he knew no Christian at
all (he lived before the Protestant Religion) that held it.

ESt quaedam opinio quae viam eligens mediam praedictis omnibus in aliquo
aduersatur: tenens quod Scripturae diuin^ contentae in Biblia, and eiusdem
sacrae Scripturae scriptoribus, and Universal Ecclesiae, atque Apostolis,
absque vlla dubitatione in omnibus est credendum. Nullis vero alijs
quantacunque doctrina vel sanctitate praepolleant, est in omnibus absque omni
exceptione fides necessario adhibenda. Ita quod nec in Concilio Cenerali si
esset congregata vniuersalis Ecclesia, no^ decretis aut decretalibus vel
assertionibus summorum Pontificum, nec Doctorum dictis, (sieve fuerint ab
Ecclesia approbati sieve non fuerint approbati) est necessario credulitas in
omni dicto and casu absque omni exceptione praestanda: Licet in multis negari
non debeant, and quoad multa Christiani ipsis credere teneantur. Baro p. 361.
ex Ockami dial. 3. par. tract. 1. li. 3. c. 4. 3. THe third thing objected is,
that he mentions an Opinion holding amongst many other things, that credit is
not to be given to a general Council in every thing it says, and in every
case without exception. Were this his own tenet, our cause were not hurt, for
we do not maintain in Counsels of the Church, approved, much less in all
Councels that are styled general, such an unlimited and universal
infallibility as these words import, in omni dicto and casu, absque omni
exceptione, in all they say, and in all cases without exception, neither indeed
does Ockam there mention that cited page praeced.
opinion assertiue as holding; but recitatiue as relating it: and this too, not
as the opinion of any Catholic Divine (for he says there in the person of the
other Dialogist, that he never before heard or Si est aliqua opinio quae
omnibus obuiet supradictis, ipsam audire desidero, vt mihi detur occasio
intelligendi profundius veritatem. Mag. Est quaeda^ opinio quae viam eligens
media^ etc. ( vt page 8.) Disc. Istam opinionem alias non audiui, nec legi.
Ockam. 3. p lib. 3. cap. ^
read it,) but as an opinion which a searcher of curious questions Vt mihi
detur occasio intelligendi profundius vertatem. Ibidem vt supra. Vt cognoscam
quod aliquid apprentiae vel veritatis contineat, ipsam intendo aliqualit tecum
discutere. Ibidem. Nolo vt quod tenes in me^ reueles, sed responsiones aliquas
quae cogitari vel tene potuerint a quocunque, non differas recitare. Mag. Hoc
p^cto vt omnia quae narrabo non aliter accipiantur (...) quod aliquis
quaestionum difficilium indagator po^ dicendo computare consona veritati,
quomodo ad pr^dictas instantias respondere contingat, ostendam. Vo^ enim quod
dicenda Fratri Magistro (Michaeli de C^na, Generali Minorum. vide prolog) and
eius sequacib (Ockamo, caterisque) nequaquam imponas. Sicut praecedentibus
multas recitaui sententias quae assertio^bus Domini Ioannis and suorum
sequacium obuiant ^^nifeste; quas tamen Frater Magister and sui sequaces
schismate contra Ioannem illi adhaerentes) minime opin^tur: imo nonnullas
impugnare nituntur. Ita in parte^ tura operis huius (si tu volueris) plura
referam q^ Frater Magister and sui sequaces satagunt improbare. D^ Quod istum
modum teneas a principio acceptaui. Q^ sententias contrarias quorumcunque
Catholicorum and (...) reticorum etc. (vt supra ad lit. c.) Ockam p. 1. li. 5.
c ^ Personam recitantis assumas, nec tantum vnam sed pl^res quando tibi
videbitur, ad eandem interrogation^ narra sententias. Sed quod tua sapientia
sentit, mihi^lis nullatenus indicare. Idem in Prologo Dial. Affectas video)
quatenus ex serie dicendorum nemo possit coll^ quam partem dissentientium circa
fidem catholicam (...) putem iustiorem, quod tuae satisfaciens voluntati^ cum
alijs quae vel efflagitas vel affectas, seruare cura^ Ibidem.
might invent and bring into discourse as an occasion to penetrate the deeper
into the truth, which is most diligently sought when it is most cunningly
contradicted; and appears more clearly in the understanding when all errors
are distinctly remou^ from it.

In proposing the grounds of that ^pinion (whose arguments himself ^ppon
another occasion and in a li^^e matter, had before 1. p. li. 5 c. 9. Nec ex
sanctitate nec ex fidei firmitate Cardinalium (Episcoporum) maiori quam
habuerunt Apostoli, est quod Collegiu^ Cardinalium (Concilium Episcoporum)
errare non potest, sed ex promissione Christi. Ibidem. Dignitas ecclesiastica
nec sanctificat nec inobliquabile^ in fide instituit aliquam personam, tamen
Christus praeseruat ab errore contra fidem aliquod collegium habens aliquam
specialem dignitate^; que^ ad modu^ regio Christiana nec sanctificat nec
inobliquabilem red^^ aliquam personam, Christus tamen praeseruat collegium
suscipientium religionem Christianam ne erret contra fidem. Ibidem. Ad decimam
dicitur dupliciter, vn^ modo quod Collegium Archiepiscoporum and Episcoporum
non potest contra fidem errare, and isti conced^^ quod praeter congregationem
fidelium sunt plura colleg^ particularia, quae contra fidem errare non possunt,
scilice Collegium Cardinalium and Collegium Episcoporum. Aliter dicitur quod
Collegium Cardinalium quantum (...) aliqua est eminentius Collegio Episcoporum
licet qua^^um ad aliqua sit inferius ipso; and ideo licet Cardinal^ valiant
eligi ad Episcopatus, poterit tamen Collegiu^ Episcoporum vel ipsorum
Cardinalium esse confirmatum in fide. Ad vndecimam dicitur quod de sola
Eccless^ militante in generali asseritur quod non potest con^^ fidem errare,
cum hoc tamen stat quod sit aliqua Eccles^^ particularis quae non potest errare
contra fidem; Sicut conceditur quod congregatio fidelium errare non potest,
(...) tamen simul cum hoc conceditur: quod Concilium generale contra fidem
errare non potest. Ibidem
answered) ^e discouers it to apprehend that ^^e infallibility, (such as it
does im^^gne) depends upon some new Eugen^ ab Ammedera dixit, and hoc ego idem
censeo haeretic^ baptizandos esse. (Augustinus) huic respondetur; Sed no^ hoc
censet Ecclesia, cui Deus iam plenario etiam Concili veuelauit. Quod tunc adhuc
aliter quidem sapiebatis, se^ quia in vobis charitas salua erat in vnitate
permanebat^ S. Aug. li. 6. de bapt. contra Donatist c 39.
^^uelation; and then brings argu^ents against this way; whereas ^ckam knew and
had himself noted ^^at Catholics defend infallibility ^therwise. And that
same Opinion, for of it I must speak and not of him, since he does not own
it, that same Opinion I say, maintayning as it does, the universal Church
present to be infallible, and the decrees approved by it to be of authority
uncontrollable, so far that none may Est quaeda^ opinio tene^s quod
Scripturae diuinae contentae in Biblia and eiusdem sacrae Scripturae
scriptoribus, and universally Ecclesia, atque Apostolis, absque vlla dubitatione
in omnib^ est credendum. Nullis vero alijs quantacumque doctrine vel sanctitate
praepolleant est in omnibus absque om^ exceptione fides necessario adhibenda.
Ita quod nec i^ Concilio etc. ( vt supra page 8.) Ockam. dial. p 3. li 3. c. 4.
doubt of the^, must acknowledge another way; for neither can this
infallibility in matter of faith ^e attributed to humane industry; ^or will
it (the opinion I mean) ad^itte a continual dependence upon ^^uelations, to
be made always to his purpose.

True it is that it seeks an answe^ to the argument of Gods providence and
protection, grounded in ou^ Saviors promise; ever laboring to ^^de new
ways; but the issue is ^^ch as makes any wise man afraid to ^^bscribe. So
little faith it has in Jesus Christ, and his promises, that it ^eth (and by
the mouth of Ockam) ^^at the whole Multitudo Christianorum (dum tamen alij vel
saltem vnus fidelis remaneat) potest inuoluenti periculo haeresis and erroris
(alijs exigentibus peccatis ipsorum) exponi. Quibus in haereticam prauitatem
labentibus valet ille qui de lapidibus potest suscitare filios Abrahae, vel de
aliquibus ipsorum aut de alijs quando voluerit numeru^ Christianorum augere.
Idem 3. p. li. 3. c. 13. Est quoddam periculum tantummodo imminens seu
circumstans; and est periculum inuolue^s seu prosternens. Ibidem.. Cum autem.
multitude of Chri^ans, so one man remain sound (himself perchance) may be
exposed not (...) circumstant and imminent only, ^^t to inuoluing and
vanquishing or ^^erthrowing danger of Heresy and error. In which case (quibus
in Haere^^am prauitatem labentibus) it will have God, who of stones can raise
Abraham sons, of these or others to make up his Church anewe.

You may further observe if you read Ockam, how the blind Opinion knows not
where to take footing, or which way to proceed whilst it ^es stumbling on: We
must not bel^^ue a Council supra page 8.
in all things; so it ^gins: then, especially c. 7.
if they be f^^e in it, as there have been some ty^ ten or twelve: then, it is
not necessar^ c. 8.
of every Council; then, it is not ne^essarie to believe that a question of ^h
is Ibidem
always ended by revelations; then; neither c. 9.
perchance (...) there be always a revelation made (...) often as a general
Council will be he^ etc. with so many limitations a^ cautions, forte, and
semper, and q^ties. And again; it cannot be pro^ by this (an argument there
brough^ that it is c. 11.
necessary to believe the the determinations of general Counc^ touching the
doubtful meaning of h^ Scripture have the origin of their true that way by
which they were inspi^ to the writers of holy Scripture, wi^ much more of like
nature. And t^ enforced answers which Ockam fein^ for it, to the grounds of the
comm^ tenet brought in there in part again that new-conceaued blind error
(whereof I have related p. 13.
one,) (...) so unworthy of a learned Christi^ that you may see looking on
the^ well, how, pretending to nouris^ he (on better advise) leaves it an^
^bortiue; and makes against it the confession: First Concilium generale non
debet regulariter occul^e seu secret paucis scientibus celebrari: sed
vulgandum est per vniuersale^ Ecclesiam, hoc est per omnes regiones in
prouincia in qua seu in quibus Catholici co^morantur, generale Concilium
conuocari debere, quatenus omnes Catholici tacit vel express co^sentiant, and
quasi authoritate^ tribuant vt ad concilium profecturi, eorum nomine circa
ordinanda and definienda in Generali Concilio canonice and catholice atque rite
procedant; vt merito quicquid catholice and licite statuerint vel definierint,
universally statuatur and definiatur assensu. p. 3. l. 3. c. 13: quando igitur
Concilium Generale rite co^uocatur, and in omnibus catholice procedit, quicquid
fecerit, ab universally Ecclesia fieri est putandum. Ibidem.
when a gene^ Council is rightly called and proce^ in all things Catholikely
and holily (n^ther am I defending others) quicq^ fecerit what soever it shall
do is t^ ^eemed done by the universal Church. ^he Catholic Church then, it
see^es in his judgment, or in the iud^ment of the Opinion, for so we must
speak of it since it wants an author; ^engaged in the Counsels decrees; and
consequently it much concerns him who has the care of her, (doce^t vos) to
take order, the Council mistake not; and so much' that the ^edit of her (cui
in omnibus supra page 8.
abs^e vlla dubitatione credendum est, if ^^e opinion take place which you tell
us Ockam held) is ruined with the same lapse, if in estimation both are one.

In the same place he says that Postquam acta Generalis Concilij per vniuersos
Catholicos populos fuerunt promulgata, si nullus contradicens aut impugnans
apparet, sunt putanda ab universally Ecclesia approbata. p. 3. li. 3. c. 13.
autem acta Generalis Concilij non fuerunt apud om^ populos Catholicos
diligenter exposita, non est dice^ dum quod tale Concilium Generale sit
explicit ab Ecclesia approbatum, licet si sancte and catholice fuerit
celebr^tum, possit dici implicit ab universally Ecclesia approbat^^ Ibidem.
Quod statuitur vel definitur in Concilio Genera^ non ligat vniuersalem
Ecclesiam, nisi per vniuersale^ Ecclesiam fuerit legitime diuulgatum: and ideo
non est co^^ sendum explicit approbatum ab universally Ecclesia, a^ tequam
taliter publicetur. Non oportet autem taliter definitum singulorum auribus
inculcare, sed sufficit ^ali^ publicare quod nullus se possit, si in contrarium
vene^^ per ignora^tiam excusare Ibid.
after the acts of a general Council have been promulgated amongst all
Catholic people, (to promulgate them amongst Heretics he did not esteem it
necessary) if then no man ap^^ares (he speaks still of Catho^^kes)
contradicting or impugning, they (...) to be esteemed approved of the
vni^^rsall Church. Secondly, Iuxta Sanctoru^ Pat^^ sententiam, Concilia
Generalia, quae rite, just, sancte (...) canonice celebrata fuerunt, sunt ab
omnibus Catholicis (...) notissime suscipienda, amplectenda and veneranda.
Ock^^ 3. p. li 3. c. 9.
those Counsels which have been celebrated, ^^derlie, rightly, holilie, and
canoni^llie, are according to the judgment of the holy Fathers (mark those
Authors) most devoutly te bo receaue^ embraced, and reverenced by all
Catholics. Thirdly; if Aut Concilium generale catholice def^^ aliquid esse
credendum, aut erronee. Si catholice, nulli li^ public negare, vel etiam
public dubitare taliter defi^^tum. Nulli etiam licet pertinaciter occulte vel
etiam motaliter de tali definito dubitate. Ibidem.
a general Counsel do Catholikelie (that is in his e^plication rite, just,
sancte, canoni^ define something to be believed, it (...) lawful for none to
deny publikelie, (...) publikelie to doubt of the thing so de^ned. Neither is
it lawefull for any m^ stubbornly, occulte, vel etiam men^ ^^ter, secretly,
or as much as mentallie (...) doubt of the thing so defined. He is ^o^ne
farther now by much then you ^n suffer; neither will you find ^herein these
words differ from our ^^net; for we maintain not the in^^llibilitie of such
Counsels as pro^^ed against that order which is es^ntiallie required in a
Council.

By the way; you must here di^^inguish Councels; (if you will not ^ake this
Opinion to contradict it ^^lf:) those which be sincere and ap^^oued be certain
in their decrees; those that are not, may mistake. And if there be doubt of
any, to which sort they appertain, it will ^^t have them obaid. It does also
di^^nguish about the decrees of the for^^er sort, as others do toward
Scri^ure; an explicit, and an implicit ^th. There is none in your parish
^eeues the Scripture all in every ^t and every literal sense distin^^e,
explicit: no not your self ma^^ Parson. And finally it distingui^eth a double
approbation of de^^es, one is authentical, done by (...) Pope: another
private, by any that is a Scholar: Consentiens subscrips^ but I should not
anticipate.

SI quaeratur quis habet iudicare an concilia fuerint catholice celebrata?
Respondetur, quod quia non definirent aliqu^ nisi quod potest elici ex Scriptu
is diuinis, ideo periti in Scr^pturis, and habentes aliarum sufficientem
intelligentiam script^rarum, habent iudicare per modum firmae assertionis, quod
(...) finita abijs sunt catholice definita Ba^o. ex Ockami dial. 4. Lastly you
take occasion o^ of his words, to question wh^ shall judge whether the Counc^
have defined canonicallie or no; (...) which case we are not so ignora^ as to
run out of the Church to H^retickes to learn of them. Neith^ do we esteem
William Ockam great an oracle, that, were his doct^ne herein singular,
neglecting bo^ the Quamuis omnes Episcopi orbis terrae praesentes fuissent 3 p.
li 3. c. 9. per congregationem quae a multitudine fidelium Generale Co^cilium
aestimatur. Ibidem.
Council, and the Chur^ Et si quaeratur quis habet iudica^e an fuerint
catholice celebrata? Respondetur, quod quia non definierunt aliquid nisi quod
potest elici ex Scripturis diuinis, ideo periti in Scripturis and habentes
aliarum sufficientem intelligentiam scripturarum, babent iudicare per modu^
firmae assertionis (forte, assentionis) quod definita ab eis sunt catholice
definita. Summi autem Pontifices si non fuerint praesentes, sed tantum modo
authoritate eorum praesentibus legatis ipsorum celebrata fuerunt authentice,
iudicare habe^t quod catholice extiterint celebrata. Si autem Summus Pontisex
praesens fueri^, sufficit quod authenticet ipsa. Ibidem.
adherent to it, we should g^ learn of him what conditions (...) necessary
to the subsistence o^ Council, and whether all were (...) or no. Yet this is
not the Question It is one thing to dispute whethe^ Priest can consecrate; and
another dispute whether you be a Priest. O^ thing to dispute whether a gene^
Council can define infalliblie, another to dispute which is a general
Council. The controversy we spe^ke of is about the former, wherein
^atholikes maintain the affirma^ue, and you shall never prove that ^kam held
the contrary by his Dia^gues whilst his Dialogues are extant. (...) fine if it
be objected that he has ^t expreslie and professedlie answe^d diverse arguments
which he bringes ^ainst Counsels, this will not con^de that he held against
such as ^ere lawful and approved, and consequently that he did herein
contradict himself: for l. 5. c. vlt. he beings arguments to prove that the
^hole multitude of believers, as ^any as have use of reason, may er^ concluding
supra ad lit. d vide etiam quae habentur, l^t^h
it is temerarious to ^rme that it will never be: and ^se arguments as I told
you once ^ore he leaves unanswered; not ^hstanding that in the beginning (...)
did acknowledge none but So^ticall could be brought: and ^t the thing was
false, and that he ^ewe no Christian at all, Catholic or ^etike that held it.
If you think that in his mind he was of that opinion, you cannot approve the
Spirit, opposing all Christians and his own conscience too: If you do not
think he was, then let not his seeming want of answer, or indiscreet and
scandalous proposing of doubts, move you to judge, (neglecting the caveat he
gave in the supra ad lit. f.
beginning) that in them he delivered his own mind. Much less^ should you
adore this unhappy work as a piece heauenlie-inspired for the worlds
learning, considering how in it, like a serpent, h^ rowles himself into
windings striving still to hide his head; and tha^ having turbulentlie snatched
pen i^ hand to maintain a Schism, he begins the work with the commendation
of his own great Quod tua Sapientia sentit. Ibidem.
wisdom. For my part I should no^ wonder to find in such a work^ fouler
errors then we speak (...) hitherto. S. Hier. in Tit. c. 3.
There is no scisme which feignes not unto it self some Heresy (S^ Jerome
says,) that it may seem iust^ to have departed from the Church.

. II.
1. Petrus Cameracensis recites diverse opinions, out of Ockam: whereof one is
that of Councels, allreadie handled. 2. He said, in his younger age, disputatiue
not assertiue, that the infallibility of other Church besides the universal
could not be co^uinced out of Scriptu^re. What, he thought of the point it
self, he declared afterward. 3. He did not hold that the whole multitude of
Christians, Clerks and (4.) Laics, might fall from the true faith.

OMnes fideles in eo communiter consentire videntur, quod tota Ecclesia sieve
multitudo omnium Christianorum, hae^eticari non potest, sieve contra fidem
errare. Baro. p. 363. ex ^lliacens^. Octaua assertio est, quod etiam Concilium
generale ^otest contra fidem errare, quia ipso sic errante adhuc staret
^^liquos extra concilium non errare, and per consequens fidem Ecclesia non
deficere. Ibidem ex eodem. 1. PETRVS CAMERACENSIS. This man (if the v^speriae
and the Resumptio^ of it, be his) is brought, first, to bear witness that in
his time there were contrary opinions about the authority of Counsels. The
reason why they call upon him is, because amongst assertions which he relates
in his Vesperiall Quaestion, one is, that a general Council may err against
faith. Whereunto I answer, first that we maintain not the infallibility of
all that bear the name. Seco^dlie he does Recitandae sunt quaedam assertiones
circa istam materiam plurimum differentes. Prima est in qua co^muniter omnes
fideles videntur co^^enire quod tota Ecclesia sieve multitudo omniu^
Christianoru^ haereticari non potest, sieve co^tra fide^ errare. Secu^da quod
nec etia^ Concilium Generale. Tertia quod nec Romana Ecclesia Quarta quod nec
Collegium Cardinalium. Quinta quod nec Papa canonice intrans. Aliae autem sunt
quinque assertiones praedictis valde repugnantes. Vna est quod Papa intrans
canonice, haereticari potest etc. Octaua quod etiam Concilium Generale etc.
Nona est, quod tota multitudo non solum Cardinalium, sed generaliter omnium
virorum potest sic errare, and fides Ecclesi^e in solis mulieribus conseruari
Decima est, quod tota multitudo Christianorum no^ solum virorum, sed etiam
mulierum vsum rationis habentium potest errare contra fidem; quia hoc stante
adhuc in paruulis baptizatis possunt saluari omnes promissione^ Christi de fide
Ecclesiae vsque ad consummationem saeculi. Petrus Cameracensis Quaest. Vesp.
recite assertions only in that place, and not approve them, as appears by
his words recitandae sunt assertiones circa materiam istam plurimum
differentes, I mus^ recite certain assertions about thi^ matter that are much
different; or, as after he does expound it, repugnantes, some repugnant to
other, and, if in his judgment they be repugnant, you have no reason to
conceive he does approve them all. Thirdly, he does not name any Catholic
author holding that assertion, which you speak of, or the rest which follow;
but took them out of Ex 1. p. li 5. capitibus 1. 2. 3. 7. 22. 25. 32. 35.
Ochams Dialogues, whence he Confer capita 28. 30. 31. 32. 34. and 35. cum
Quaestione Vesperiali and Quaestione de Resumpta Petri Camer.
transcribes, and some times verbatim diverse pieces of these questions which
you would make use of. Neither does he omit to recite that opinion of all
Christians as many as have use of reason erring possibly all together against
faith, which Ocham himself had said was false, and the reasons for it, those
which Ockam gives, he calls apparentes, seeming, yet himself in the end of
this Question Ex praedictis sequuntur aliquae propositiones corollariae: Prima
est, quod semper in Ecclesia universally erunt plures adulti illustrati veritate
fidei. Secunda est, quod semper in Ecclesia Universally erunt plures iusti
formati virtute spe^. Tertia quod semper in Ecclesia Universally erunt plures
electi inflammati charitate Dei. Prima propositio patet quia etc. Quast. Vesper.
contradicts it, and maintains the contrary.

EX sacra Scriptura non conuincitur quod sit aliqua Ecclesia particularis quae
regulae legis Christi semper conformetur. Baro p. 363. ex Alliac. Quaest. Vesp.
Concilium generale pote^ defformari legi Christi. idem p. 364. ex Quaest.
Resumpta. Ecclesia Romana quae distinguitur a tota congregatione fideliu^ sicut
pars a toto, potest haereticari. Ibidem ex eadem quast. 2. THe second thing
objected is, that he thought it could not be convinced out of Scripture that
any Church distinct from the universal, is always free from error; whence is
inferd that in his opinion it cannot be convinced out o^ Scripture that a
general Councel^ is always free. I answer, first, we^ maintain not all
Counsels which go under the name of general. Secondly it is one thing to
say lawful Counsels are free from error in definition, and an other thing
to say that we can prove this by Scripture* it is one thing to say the
Epistle of S. James has sacred authority, and another thing to say that by
Scripture you can prove it. Wherefore suppose this Author had said in his
younger days that he thought the infallibility of full and lawful Counsels
could not be proved ex ^acra Scriptura, by Scripture, it does ^ot follow that
he denied their in^^llibilitie. Thirdly what he says in that Question is
delivered (they be Haec dicta sint de tertia conclusione and suis adiunctis:
and de tota ista quaestione solum disputatiue and non assertiue. Petrus Camer.
Quaest. de Resumpta, sine.
his own words) disputatiue, ^^on assertiue; by way of dispute, not ^y way
of affirmation; wherefore, if ^ou wrong him not, you must not ^ie he held that
Counsels infallibi^tie (such Counsels as had all con^tions necessary) could
not be pro^ed (yea and against a stubborn ^^uersarie sufficiently convinced)
^ut of Scripture. Fourthlie, this which ^as said not assertiue but only
dis^^tatiue, he submitted to the iud^^ment Non est ergo quo securius fugiam
qua^ filius ad matre^, filius Ecclesiae ad matrem Ecclesiam; etc. Ad hanc
igitur co^fugiens and sua lege regulari ^^piens, me and dicta mea omnia suae
and suorum filiorum tam ^sentium quam absentium charitatiuae correctioni
committo: ^sub hac and alijs protestationibus fieri consuetis quas sup^co
haberi pro repetitis, gratia breuitatis, ad quae^onis responsionem accedo. Idem
Quaest. Vesper. in prin^^.
of the Church, therely re^acting or disauowing (according (...) the manner of
the schools, yet in ^^e) what in this disputation might ^^rchance escape
amiss, either for ^^e substance, or the manner of his speech. And finally,
being after much more study and reading of Scriptures publikelie in the nature
o^ Professor, made Bishop and Cardinal he was called to the Counce^ of Acta
Conc. Constant. Sess. 20.
Constance, and there wit^ the rest of the Bishops, he sufficiently made
known that he though all were bound to believe what (...) general Council,
and particularl^ that of Constance, did declare touching faith. If you read
the interrogatories made Interrogetur vtrum credat, quod illud quod sacrum
Conciliu^ Constantiense vniuersalem Ecclesiam repraesentans approbauit and
approbat in fau^^ fidei and ad salutem animarum, quod hoc est ab vniue^^
Christi fidelibus approbandum and tenendum; and quod (...) demnauit and
condemnat esse fidei vel bonis moribus ^^trarium, hoc ab eisdem esse tenendum
pro condemnato; ^dendum and asserendum. Martinus quintus, approbante Ce^
Constantien. vtrum credat sententiam sacri Constable. Con^ supra 45. articuli,
Joan. Wicklef and Joan. Hus, latam (...) re veram, Catholicam etc. Ibidem.
there by the Pope sacro approbante Concilio, y^ will not urge him any more in
the matter.

TOta multitudo Clericorum and Laicorum virorum p^ a vera fide deficere. Baro
p. 364. ex Alliac Qua^^ Resumpta. Intentio autem mea conclusionis sicut patuit
^ctis ^eis erat quod data quacumque Ecclesia certae den^ ^ionis quae non sit
toti congregationi fidelium generalis, verbi ^au^a Ecclesia Clericorum,
Ecclesia Italicorum, Ecclesia Galli^orum etc Ex Scriptura sacra non conuincitur
quod semper sit ^liqua talis, sieve consimilis denominationis quae Christi legis
re^ulae conformetur. Idem ex eadem Quaestione. 3. YOu conceive withal what is
to be said in answer to the rest ^biected out of him, and particular^^e unto
that of the Clergy where he ^eemes not to have then well reflected on those
words of S. Paul who ^oth testify (and his testimony is in ^he Scripture)
that our Savior co^sti^uted and Ephesians. 4.
gave Pastors; and Doctors ^o the consummation of the Saints, unto ^he work
of the ministry, unto the edi^ing of the body of Christ, until we ^eete
all into the unity of faith, that ^e be not children wavering and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine. The like we read in Esaie, upon Esaias 62.
thy walls o Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen: all the day, and all ^he
night for ever they shall not hold their peace. And other places there ^re to
this purpose very plain, that ^^nnot be avoided.

Neither did he find himself able (...) satisfy the argument, taken from the
nature of a Hierarchy, and the acts pertaining to it, that are always to be
found in the Church whilst it lasts, that is, all days till the consummation
of the world, which argument is there brought, and he does endeavor, but could
not find an answer for it. First he says that supposing the whole Clergy
should err against the faith, some one of them might have power to give
orders, to excommunicate or bind in way o^ jurisdiction, to consecrate, and
administer Sacraments: and so says he praelationis ordo remaneret in Ecclesi^
the Order of Prelacie, which is, of Ecclesiastical Superiors to their
inferiors, would remain in the Church as, also distinction of degrees;
Sacraments and other rights. But his opponent would ask him instantly, ho^
the distinction of degrees of Prie^ and Bishop, of Pastor and people how the
order of Prelacie, and power to consecrate, absolve, bind, an^ preach; be
within, if the Priests an^ Bishops, if the Prelates and such (...) have this
power, be without? He answers; licet forte non actu, tamen in p^entia
propinqua, though perchance not ^^ctuallie, yet in a near power; and this,
(...) passive power, for if the Priests and Bishops be without, the active is
not within. How then is there actuallie (...) Hierarchy, and the ministration
before spoken of in the Church? he ^eaues it here, and goes to try Secundo
loco probat iste Magister secu^dam parte^ antecedentis sua principalis, sc.
quod tota multitudo Clericorum non potest difformari legi Christi, quia Deus
ita statuit Sacerdotes Leuiticos etc. ^o^ firmat per aliqua superius tacta,
quia sequitur quod pos^et cessare in Ecclesia ordo praelationis and distinctio
gra^uum and caetera contra Apostolum (ad Ephesians. 4. vbi de Christo loquitur sic.
Et ipse dedit quosdam Apostolos, ^uosdam autem Prophetas etc. ad aedificationem
corporis Christi, sc. Ecclesiae, donec occurramus.) Imo quod defice^e posset
sacerdotium Christi; Sacrame^ta and alij ritus Ec^lesiae etc. Ad ista potest
probabiliter dici etc. Ad confirma^one^ licet supra tactum sit de materia
argume^ti tamen ad^uc potest dici dupliciter. Vno modo quod licet tota mul^tudo
Clericorum contra fidem erraret, tamen aliquis ^acerdos remaneret habens
potestatem ordinandi, ligan^^, conficiendi, and alia sacramenta conferendi: and
sic re^anent in Ecclesia ordo praelationis, distinctio graduum, ^cramenta, and
alij ritus. Et licet forte non in actu, tamen (...) potentia propinqua. Petrus
Camerac, Quaest. de Re^^mpta.
another way, which is, though no Clerks, at all remained, no Bishops, no
Priests, in all the world, to consecrate, ordain, govern, preach, or exercise
any Hierarchicall acts, yet the Church thereby should no^ loose the power to
have them, an^ why? if none remain to consecrate preach, or make a priest?
because though she could never have them b^ humane power, yet by Gods
miraculou^ operation she might. And in fine h^ concludes, that, though it be
te^rarious to affirm that ever it shall come to this, yet to deny that Go^ by
his omnipotency can thus resto^ Alio modo dicunt aliqui quod licet omnes
Clerici haereticare^tur aut omnino nulli remanere^t, propter hoc Ecclesia
potestatem habe^di praedicta nequaquam amitteret. Licet illa nunquam habere
posset per humanam potestatem: sed per miraculosam Dei operationem: qui sc.
diuersis modis posset de aliquibus laicis Catholicis, Sacerdotes and Episcopos
ordinare, and hoc suae Ecclesiae reuelare. In quo casu omnes Catholici debere^t
taliter ordinatos a Deo, sicut veros Episcopos and Sacerdotes habere. Et licet
temerarium esset asserere talem casum de facto aliqua^^ euenire: tamen esset
etiam temerarium huius casus ^testatem negare. Quia hoc esset de futuris (in
hypothesi per ^iraculum tantum possibili) temere diuinare: and contra ar^culum
de Dei omnipotentia impudenter impingere. Ibi^em. vide Ockam. Dial. 1. p. li.
5. c. 32. and 3. p. li. 3. c. 13. ^dmiratione per move or quod isti praesumunt
asserere, to^m Clerum posse falsitate haeretica irretiri: and quia vix ^nquam
aliquis sine motiuo assentit errori, aperias vnde ^ti mouentur pro opinione
praedicta. Ockam. p. 1. li. 5. c. ^9.
a Hierarchy, or that he would if there should be need, were also
temerarious. And no doubt he tha^ of stones can raise up seed to Abraham, can
without the ministry (...) men if he think good, make infidels believe, and
ordain the^ Priests and Bishops; the question i^ not of his absolute power;
but whether by virtue of the present institution, there shall be, Hierarchical
power in the Church ever till the consummation of the world (Past^res and
Doctores in opus ministerij do^^ occurramus omnes.) The Scriptu^ affirms it;
and the same was intended by that argument for which h^ could not find, though
he we^ about to seek, an answer. And therefore finding himself in those
^raites, he thought it necessary to ^ublish his protestation, that what ^e
said, was supra ad lit. c.
only disputatiue ^ot assertiue: leaving us withal to ^onsider how dangerous
a thing it (...) for scholars to read Ockams Dia^gues, where is unhappily
ministered ^ccasion of error, and whence he ^ooke many things which you fin^e
in this writing.

TOta multitudo Clericorum and Laicorum etc. vt supra page 26. IT is objected
further that he defends in his resumption, that ^he whole multitude of Clerks
and laymen may fall from the true faith Wherein he is much wronged; h^ defends
it not; as appears in the resumption of the several parts (...) that ratio
quinta. supra ad lit. l.
Secundo prob^ secundam partem antecedentis prin^palis, sc. quod tota multitudo
Cler^^rum non petest difformari legi Christ where comes in the argument before
mentioned of Hierarchicall orde^ and acts; and in the solution yo^ shall find
always laics remainin^ in the Church: and the same is al^ manifest by his
three propositions before supra ad lit. d.
cited, wherein he says the^ will be always in the Church plu^ adulti
illustrati veritate fidei, plu^ iusti formati virtute spei, plures ele^
inflammati charitate Dei, many ado^ned with faith, hope, and charit^ which all
will not be women, (...) less you will learn of Ockam the explication which
he suggests ((...) he does many strange ones) el^^ that is Ad secundam rationem
(vt in errorem ducantur, si fieri possit, etiam electi.) potest dici quod
electi co^prehendunt viros and mulieres; and ideo per hoc quod iuxta
promissionem Christi tempore Antichristi remanebunt electi, non potest concludi
quod illi electi ^nt viri, quia mulieres tunc poterunt esse electae. Ockam ^al.
p. 1. l. 5. c. 34.
electae; men, that is, woe^ chosen or elected: and then, as a ingenious
proficient in his Dia^gues, make the like explication adulti, and iusti.

You will recurre to the print or ^ppie, for an excuse; which plea ^ight be
admitted in some others; ^t in a scholar that pretends to ha^ read the
Question in him, and ^^th urge his authority against the church of God, such a
pretense ^th no place.

. III.
Waldensis yiedling to the Scripture a preminence in Authority, will have us
depend ^on the Church for the sense of it. 2. She is ^o to declare which books
are Canonical ^ripture. A speech of Canus touching Wal^sis his Opinion,
examined. 3. When he says (...) Fathers testimony has abolished all He^^es,
he does not exclude the Authority of (...) Church, symbolicall, or
representative. 4. ^e symbolicall Church (he says against Wi^ef) is not the
Predestined people only, but (...) University of right believers spread over
the whole world. 5. He held that the Church of Rome cannot fail. 6. and that
perfect oecumenicall Councels be infallible in their decree.

HAecipsa fides and authoritas Ecclesiae, quantum homi^^ supergreditur rationem
tantum fateor diuina legis ^^thoritati succumbit. Baro p. 365. ex Waldensi
Media est (...) inter supremam authoritatem Scripturae and infimam ratio^ fides
Ecclesiae; Scripturas venerabiliter attollens and exhibeus, rationem vagam
hominis ad hanc geminam authorita^ alligans zona Pauli. Idem ex eodem. 1.
WALDENSIS, says, the autho^^tie of the Church is inferior the authority of
Scripture. What this? will you infer that we therefore need not obaie the
decr^^ of Counsels; or, that the Ch^^ches authority is fallible?
Infallib^^tie may be in others besides Sc^^pture. The Apostles were not
Sc^^pture, yet were they infallible ^nesses of the truth. The Church the
pillar and ground of truth, tho^ the Church be not Scripture. 1. Timoth. 3.
The may be diverse Authorities infall^ and one of them Subordinate to (...)
other. And so are these two, acc^^ding to this Author, as you may ^by the
places represented in the Quamuis fides vniuersalis Ecclesiae inuenitur per
Scripturas expressa ficut est paene tota, non tamen est ei^n authoritate par
sed subijcitur. Waldensis de principijs fidei Doctr tomo 1. li. 2. c. 21. Fides
vt est Ecclesiae Catholicae in hoc accedit fidei Scripturarum; quod non licet
de ipsa dubitare, eo quod testimoniu^ Ecclesiae Catholicae est obiectu^ fidei
Christianae, and legis latio scripturae canonicae. Subijcitur tamen ipsi, sicut
testis iudici, and testimonium veritati: sicut praecon^zatio definitioni, and
sicut praeco regi. Ib^dem Quod aliquis pater vnus singulariter per se sensit
potes aliquo, saltem color tuo decredere: quod autem poene omnes quasi vnus
homo loquuntur, fidei robur habet, quia vnitas ipsa in Ecclesia hoc loquitur
omnium gentium linguis. Idem c. 25.
margin. One only, I will putt here, because it serves also for that which
follows. In the 18. Chapter of his 2. Book. Doct. Fid. he declares how the
sincerity of the Churches testimony in matters of faith is believed in the
Creed, (there, where we profess to believe the holy Catholic Church) and
amongst other things to this purpose, has these words; Before the written
Gospel, this (in the heart of the Church) was the Gospel which Jesus Christ
wrote, and which the Apostles wrote in the hearts of men; and to whose
testimony every one must stand (in the controversies) whether the text of the
written Gospel be understood or taken by the faithful, or subverted by the
Heretic: whereof the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians, saying ^ow are our
Epistle written in your hearts, which is known and read of all men, declared
that you are the Epistle of Christ manifested by us, and written not with ink
but by the spicit of the living God, not in tables of stone but in fleshly
tables of the heart. And a little after. Though the law of nature which men
bear written in their hearts, be most certain, yet much more has the law of
Christ certissimum interpretamentum, a most certain interpretation, in the
hearts of the faithful succeeding one another from the beginning of the rising
Church and the Apostles times, forever, according to that of the Prophet, this
is the testament which I will make to them, giving my laws in their hearts,
and in their sense or mind I will write them.

I must not omit to putt you further in mind that in the place by you cited
he says, Haec ipsa fides Ecclesiae and eius authoritas, quantum hominum
supergreditur rationem, tantum fateor diuin^ legis authoritati succumbit, sed
tamen qua^ minoris esse authoritatis fidelibus si eam Ecclesia non praeferret
Wa^d to 3. de Sacramentalibus tit 7. c. 63. Si verum sem per sit testimonium
Ecclesiae, semper credenda est si quandoq^^ fallere consueta, in omnibus est
suspecta. Ibidem.
the divine law were unto the faithful, Non licet de ipsa dubitare, etc. vide
in Addit.
of less authority, if the Church did not prefer it. And Hoc est quod
superius dixi, quantumlibet eminent Scriptura diuina sanctioni Ecclesiae, ipsa
tamen taxabe^ se sum eius quo aliter sentire non possis, and cuius
interpraetationi resistere capitalis est culpa, dicit Origenes Ibid^^.
howmuch soever the diuin^ scripture is higher then the decree of ^he Church,
ipsa tamen sensum eius ^axabit, she notwithstanding shall de^ne the sense
wherein thou may not ^old otherwise, and whose interpreta^^on to resist is,
as Origin speaks, a ^apitall offense. So he.

AD Concilium universal praecipue pertinet definire qui liber sit canonicus
Quam quidem propositionem aequo ani^o paterer ab haereticis non admitti, sed
illud tamen doleo vehe^enter quod eam nonnulli fideles inficiantur, in quibus
Tho^as Waldensis esse videtur li. 2. doc. fid. c. 19. Baro. p. 365. ex ^no.
Addit. Baro, c. 20. and 21. Secondly it is objected that he denies to the
Church now ^^esent, power to determine which ^^e books of scripture. And for
this ^^e cited three Chapters of his 2. ^^oke Doct. Fid. the 19. 20. and 21.
^ut there I find it not. He does in^ed hold that the Catholic Churh ^^d no
other is able to Et hoc est secundum dictu^ gloriosum de Ecclesia, quod sc.
ipsa sola est cuius testimoniu^ est tantae authoritatis and praeconij vt ipsos
libros diuinarum scripturaru^ taxare, and decoru^ authoribus certificare possit
fideles, nec fas erit tanto testimonio contraire. wald. li. 2. doct. fid. c.
20. Incertum ergo esse non potest cos esse libros canonicos and habere pondus
authoritatissuae quibus Ecclesia declarata per omnes gentes and ab Apostolis
propagata, testimoniu^ certum reddit. Ibidem. Dico quod Ecclesia eam doctrinam
docet esse crede^dam sub poena contumaciae. Ea dico quae praesens est, quae
iudicia directa decreuit a temporibus Apostolorum vsque ad praesens, vel vsque
in praesens per successiones Patrum id ipsum sapie^tium atque docentium; ei
inquam credi debet sub poena perfidiae. tom. 1. doctrina 2.
certify which books are scripture, and that ^^e can commend none in this
na^^re, but such as were written in ^^e Apostles Ipsis patriincumbebat qui tunc
praesideba^t Ecclesijs, ducere scripturaru^ volumina ad perfectum: tunc enim
fuit temporis plenitudo, and non dubium libri non reciperentur in authoritate^
sacri canonis nisi qui de illis te^poribus Apostolicis agere^t, and tunc
temporis essent, quia aliter non facerent de diuinis rebus fidem summam. Idem
li. 2. c. 20. vt supra.
days: but this is ^t to deny the present Church or Council, power to
propose again the same. There were, notwithstanding the Apostles approbation
of diverse parts of the new testament (which approbation came not, at least so
manifestly, to the notice of all,) some who doubted of, Vide Disp. pa. 431
or denied, them; as for example, the Apocalypse and S. Iudes Epistle, and the
later o^ S. Peter: yet you your selves do, and Waldensis did receive them a^
the hands of the Church by tha^ part which then lived when he did Neither does
Canus say that h^ denied a Council power to propose books in the manner we
no^ speak of; but he says only, tha^ he seems to be of those who deny the
power to define which book is Canonical, to belong chiefly to a gener^
Council. It is one thing to say the a Council can do it; another, t^ say
the power belongs chiefly (...) the Council; as you will percea^ by the
declaration of the next plac^ objected. Waldensis, as Canus wor^ import, seemed
to deny, not the fo^mer, but the later: neither does (...) say that he denied
it, but that (...) did seem to do so, some things (the ^hilosophers use to
say,) do seem (...) be, and are not; and some thing ^emes to one, otherwise
many ti^es, then to an other. Had it been so ^deed, I make no question but that
^ou who have been diligent in your ^inde to seek in him what might ^e brought
against us, would not ^aue omitted to relate the words.

When you seek for them next, ^ou will find in him, first (as I said before)
that in his exclusive he spea^es of books not written in the A^ostles time or
before; to which pur^ose he Waldens. li. 2. fid. doc. c. 20.
brings the place of scri^ture, Dominus narrabit in scripturis ^opulorum and
principum horum qui ^uerunt in ea, with S. Ieroms Comment on it, wherein are
these words, vt exceptis Apostolis quodcunque aliud ^ostea dicitur,
abscindatur, non habeat ^ostea authoritatem. And to the same ^enour he himself
a little after, let us ^ote the differences of Scripture, because the scripture
or writing only of ^he Princes, that is, of the Apostles, has after our lord,
the crown of authority; I mean, of canonical authority; for the saying of
the Saints which followed them have their authority, b^ not canonical.
Secondly whereas (...) might be objected that the Church in a general
Council might wri^ a book and put it into the canon (...) scripture to be
among other book^ of holy writ, since S. Gregory the great does profess to
honor the^ as the Gospels, in those words, S. Greg. mag li. 1. Regesti, epist.
24. and citatur in Decret. d. 15 Quintum quoque Concilium pariter venerot.
Ibidem.
Sicut Sancti Euangelij quatuor libros, (...) quatuor concilia suscipere and
venera^me fateor, Waldensis there answer to this argument, and expounds the
words of S. Gregory. Thirdly, because it might again be obiecte^ (out of the
decrees whence the former objection was taken) that Gelasius c. Sancta Romana.
d. 15. Nec obstat Pelagiana epistola de libr^s recipiendis and non recip^e^d^s;
vbi scripturaru^ libros in authoritate ple^^r^a quomodo sint habendi denunciat
no^ ad authoritatem per seipsum in instaurat. walden. vbi supra.
Pelagius the Pope seems to determine what books are to be received into the
canon, and what not; he answers with a distinction, which does explain his
mind, and dot^ suffice to stopp your mouth when occasion require, Scripturarum
lib^ says he, in authoritate plenaria qu^ modo sunt habendi denunciat, non
(...) authoritatem per scipsum instaur^ That is, in brief; he does not give
but declare, their sacred and diuin^ ^thoritie. And the same, the Church (...)
all times, might and may do, ^hensoeuer there shall be cause. ^hey were by the
holy Ghost in^red, and written by the Apostles ^d Princes of the Church, qui
fue^t in ea; and were approved by them (...); but it has been since necessa^
to declare some of them; to give ^timonie that they be divine; and ^s
testimony the Church still can ^e. Neither is our Savior offen^d with her
testimony given to (...) word, who was pleased that she ^ould give testimony
of him^fe. Of which matter this author ^th much in the former Chapters,
^eciallie the eighteenth. Fourthlie, (...) does esteem the judgment of (...)
Pope, and of a perfect Council ^e infallible as you will hear be^e we leave
him; and therefore ^ch more is he to be esteemed to ^eld this honor to the
whole, when they be. All which being con^ered, that which you did urge out
(...) Canus so appears, that it is but a ^ere videtur; without an est, vn^ it.

HAec est sola machinae Christiana quae cunctas haereses mel aboleuit, ipsa sc.
professio concors sanctorum Patr^ secundum suorum temporum interualla
reddentium testi^nium Christi verbis, and consuetudini primitive. Baro p. 3^ ex
wald. to. 3. de Sacramentalibus; doct. 3. 3. Thirdly, it is inferred that
(...) takes infallibility from Cou^cells, and from the present Church because
he says that the vnanim^ profession of the holy Fathers giu^ testimony
according to the distance^ their times to the Latius patet verbum, quam
scriptura.
words of Christ (...) the primitive custom, is the o^^ Christian engine which
has once ^^lished all Heresies. Whereunto I a^swere, first, that he speaks
with exclusion of the Church present^ each heresy; for it is well know^ that
the Church which did abo^^ Arianisme, and Nestorianisme, (...) the rest of the
heresies before (...) times, was that Church wh^ knew of them; and that she
di^ by her Pastors; and for the most p^ in Counsels, though not without (...)
censent of that part of the Chu^^^ and those her Pastors which li^^ in the
precedent ages; which o^ (...) or agreeable profession, was and, partly by
their books, as in (...) acts of the Counsels appears ^his day; and partly
by the tradi^ of the particular Churches when they had lived and died. Which
^^nner the Church does still obser^ in condemning heresies, as they ^se,
joining her present Authori^ to that of the precedent ages; ^^ose mind she
does enquire in ^^e manner; that so, by consent of (...) whole, still, errors
be condem^d. Neither is it necessary to find ^at which she does at any time
^opose, universally professed by all ^fore, in plain terms, and explici^ or
to find it in all books of tho^ times; the Church informer ages ^d not so;
we take the same course ^at she then did. Secondly you must ^tend unto the
words cunctas abole^e has abolished all; No one Coun^ll, no one part, as that
which lived (...) the second age, or that which li^ed in the third, or fourth,
has abo^hed and destroyed them all; but ^^e whole has done it. Thirdly that
^la, is not If sola be taken as you would have it, what will become of your
trial by scripture only.
captiouslie to be stood upon, least you wrong the same A^thor, who never
excluded the Symbolicall Church for whose testimon^ so. 3. doc. 3. and tomo 1.
li. 2. ca. 18.19.20. etc.
he pleades so earnestly, both i^ the same place, and in his secon^ book
Doct. Fid. in many chapter^ proving it (it is testimony I mean to be contained
in the Creed: y^^ the Fathers (of whose consent (...) speaks in the place by
you hee^ urged) be not the symbolica^^ Church properly; but only, a part of
it. And in like manner, when speaking of the Church symbolical he says it is
she only whose testimony is of so great To. 1. li. 2. c. 20. vt supra ad lit.
d.
authority tha^ she can certify who are authors o^ the books of scripture,
that so^ does not exclude another authority that is within; (for example, the
unanimous consent of Fathers whereof he speaks here in the words objected;
their authority were sufficient to certify the same as you may see by him,
To. 1. Doct. 3. and li. 2. eiusdem to. c. 26. and Apudomnes Catholicos valet
and ligat vna sententia concors patru^: maxim autem temporis longaeu^ and
patrum successione sirmata, ita vt locu^ fidei habeat. De quacre ^enda sub
poenae perfidiaein symbolo scribetur Credo sanctam Ecclesiam. walden to 1.
doctrina 2. Vere enim ad omnes haereses compescendas, and omnes tractatus and
definitiones terminandas in materia fidei sola via est in qua errare non
contingit concors patru^ sententia ab ipsis Apostoloru^ sedibus vsque ad
nostratempora fideliter compilara. In hoc enim simile erit regnum caelorum, id
est, ecclesia catholica homini patri familias qui profert de thesauro suo noua
and vetera. li. 2. c. 25.
else where,) but it excludes authority Without. Fourthlie he does no^ exclude
general Counsels* by the Christian world approved; and h^ ^t should, in
Saint Augustines ^es, have refused to subscribe to ^h authority, or disputed
against ^t which the universal Church that age believed and tought; he ^t
would not have believed what ^s by so great authority proposed, ^d been
thought mad rather then ^rthie the name of man. Fiftlie, ^her does he exclude
from infal^litie, and power to abolish he^es, the Gospels, and other parts
scripture; and yet these be not ^t instrument or engine which he ^akes of; so
that you cannot build (...) argument on those words, to ^e infallibility away
from all but (...) Fathers. Sixtlie, notwithstan^g that Counsels, and the
present ^urch, are infallible, it may be said ^the consent of the Fathers or
^he whole symbolicall Church, ^h abolish all heresy; because faith ^re
readily gives assent unto that ^ch is so universally proposed. ^derstandings
(not so well dispo^ before,) do quickly stoop in (...) case, to give
reverence to the ^h; and such as do not, are condemned of all; and so
confound^ that they dare no more openly p^fesse their error: whence it co^ to
pass, that none making este^ either of the doctrine or of the who stubbornlie
do persist in it, degrees it is abolished. And this one of those glorious
prerogati^ which Waldensis so much co^me^ in the Church. Besides the fores^
readiness in the understanding wh^ it is by grace well disposed, or (...) less
repugnance to render obedie^ when it cannot with any show p^tend reason for the
refusal, there d^ appear too more fully in t^ proponent the power of vni^
which is in it self a disposition more plentiful participation of (...)
spirit; and brings with it great force to conquer opposition. Vnd^standings
well disposed, yield p^sentlie when the Council speak^ when the present Church
has ^ceaued, and universally appro^ the Council, there is ex part s^cti,
more adhesion; and yet m^ when the consent of all former a^ is added and
united: and more (...) there was in those that had, Gradus adhaesionis ex part
subiecti.
as the ^choolemen speak, euidentiam in ^ttestante. S. Mark knew the Gos^ell
which he wrote, to be true, yet, that the faithful more easily might ^eleeue
it, he had it Vide to. 1. doct. 3. and to. 3. li. 2. c. 20. and S. Hieron.
Catol. script. in Marco.
approved, ^s S. Hierom does relate, by S. Pe^er. S. Paul knew the truth in the
^uestion moved at Antioch about ^ircumcision, yet to make the cre^ibilitie more
appear and more con^incing, he went with it to the Cou^^ell at Jerusalem
where it was Act. 15.
^efined. And the Pastors there knew too, what was the truth, yet ^or the
greater weight of Authori^ie they added testimonies of Scri^ture. The scripture
many times ^rings testimonies of scripture for confirmation, as this Author
shows excellently to. 1. l. 2. c. 20. and our blessed Savior himself in
con^irmation of his resurrection cited Moses and the Prophets. When parts ^re
united, Bishops in Council, particular Churches in the universal; whole ages
in the Symbolicall; ^ater with most Ancient; all under ^one eternal Word
becoming one speaker, and uttering in the language of all Nations, as it were
with one mouth, in one spirit, one and the same thing; no man that perceaue^
it, morallie can, dissent. This proponent has a commanding power over a wise
man's understanding; an^ it is a great engine to confound error; in which great
engine he tha^ should deny there were many pa^ticular engines able to confoun^
Heresy, wrongs diverse particula^ in the company, unless you esteem it no
wrong to deny that honor and ability to Prophets and Apostles.

ECclesia vniuersalis habet fidem indefectibilem, non q^dem in generali synodo
congregata quam aliquoties err^ percepimus, etc. Baro p. 366. ex wald. to. 1.
li. 2. c. 19. 4. FOurthlie, to the same purpose^ of removing infallibility
from the present Church, and Councell^ he is cited out of another place
speaking thus. The universal Chur^^ has faith which cannot fail, not indeed
assembled in a general syn^ which we have understood to ha^ failed sometimes
etc. In which cita^n, abruptly broken of for aduan^ge, the Authors speech is
man^d, and the parts (such as be re^rsed) are ill putt together; so that (...)
intent and meaning cannot be ^ceaued; as the learned reader ^y observe by
looking on his ^rds, related in the (p) addition. Etsi lex naturae certissima
est quam ge^t homines scriptam in cordibus suis vt refert Apost. ^. 1. multo
magis lex Christi habet certissimum inter^amentum suum in cordibus fidelium
succedentium sibi (...) ab initio nascentis Ecclesiae and temporibus
Apostolorum vs^in sempiternum, secundum quod per Prophetam dicit ^minus, hoc
testamentum quod testabor ad illos dando leges ^s in cordibus eorum and in
sensibus eorum scribam eas. Quod ^onens Ambrosius, o vere inquit testator
aeternus qui ^ris in cordibus leges affigit suas, and scribit in sensibus,
^ihil aliud cogitare nisi diuina praecepta possimus, (...) aliud sentire nisi
Dei oracula debeamus. Walden. li. ^ 8 and continuing his discourse; Haec est,
says he, Eccle^ ^ymbolica, Ecclesia Christi inquam Catholica, and Aposto^
^mater credentium populorum, quae fidem habet indefect: bi^ ^ecundum promissum
Christi ad Petrum qui tunc fi^m gessit Ecclesiae. Ego rogaui pro te Petre vt
non deficiat ^tua. Non est ergo specialis Ecclesia non Africana vt ^atus dixit.
Nec vtique particularis illa Romana; sed ^ersalis Ecclesia, non quidem in
generali synodo con^ata, quam aliquotiens errasse percepimus, velut illa
^ninensis congregata sub Tauro praefecto, and illa Con^inopolitana sub
Iustiniano minore tempore Sergij Papae secundum Bedam, and quaedam aliae: sed
est Ecclesia^ Christi Catholica per totum mundum dispersa a baptismo Christi
per Apostolos and caeteros successores eorum a^ haec tempora deuoluta, quae
vtique veram fidem continet, and testimonium Christi fidele, sapientiam
praesta^ paruulis, inter extremos errores stabilem retinens veritatem. c. 19.
in principio.
That others also may conceive the same; it is to be observed that Waldensis is
disputing there against Wickleff, about the Church which is the Creed we
profess to believe and is therefore by him called the Church symbolicall.
Wickleff considering that the faith of it is to be indeficient, it being still
true to say there is such a Church or congregation would have it to be the
Quod Ecclesia nostra symboliba est Ecclesia Catholica. Titulus Cap. 17. li. 2.
Mugit acriter (wickleffus) contra Papam and Pastores Ecclesiae sub titulo
iustae app^lationis Ecclesiae Christi quae est obiectum fidei Christ^nae, de
qua articulus est in symbolo Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam. Difficultas
autem eius est ista. Quan^ credere debemus Ecclesiam Sanctam Catholicam ta^quam
fidem, and iterum credere debemus quod quodli^ membrum istius Ecclesiae sit
praedestinatum ad gloriam, credere debemus quod iste Papa vel Episcopus sit
me^brum Ecclesiae, credere debemus quod repugnat ipsum peccatum finalis
impoenitentiae cadere. Haec Wicklef. Actor. Sub hoc globo verborum, vna cum
praesumpto s^^ Ecclesia symbolica etc. Initium capitis 17. Prima ergo
di^cultas, de quidditate huius Ecclesia symbolicae, quam vti^ credere debemus
etc. Ibidem.
Predestinate only who do finally persevere in the faith. Waldensis over and
above an indeficiencie, does avouch (and according to Scripture, Matt. vlt.
Luc. 10. Joan. 15. and 21. Act. 20. Cor. 1.12. Ephesians. 4. etc.) that it is to
teach and give testimony of the truth, in that sort that all may learn of it.
And therefore it is to be a visible Congregation Ecclesia est fidelium
congregatio. It inuolues a Hierarchy, Ephesians. 4 Who told Wickleff that all the
believers, the predestined only excepted, do fall from the faith before they
die?
or Society, Hierachicallie disposed. Whence he determines it to be, according
to the words of the Creed it self, the Catholic or Universal Church, that is,
the wholeranke or company of the faithful people successively descending
from the first assembly made by Christ in the bank of Jordan, until our
times, and from henceforth until the end of the world; and reaching into all
parts of the world wheresoever the shining testimony of the faith of Christ
the head and author, is kindled. Ibidem.


In which description, by him there proved out of scripture, and confirmed by
the testimony of S. Augustine, he has comprehended a twofold universality;
one loci, of place; another temporis, of time: as is more distinctlie there
specified in the same chapter by himself. And the benefit of this
universality he^ says, is, vt (t) sciamus discrete quae sit vera Christi
Ecclesia veramque haben^ doctrinam fidei; that we may know distinctlie (as, a
community so universal is found easily) which is the true Church of Christ
and having the true doctrine of faith. Heresies are limited, as he shows, for
time; and place: but the Symbolicall Church, is both ways universal. And to
it when heresies arise, Ad hanc Ecclesiamergo quae per totum mu^dum vnam habet
doctrina^ Apostolicam, omnes fideles intonante noua haeresi debent habere
recursum; ipsi enim (Apostoli) cu^ vna sana doctrina, adhuc manente, imbuerunt
totam Ecclesiam, and ob hoc tota Ecclesia Catholica etiam Apostolica nominatur.
Walden. c. 18.
fideles omnes debe^ habere recursum, all faithful must have recourse, as he
says in the next Chapter. The reason is, because she has c. 18. vt supra ad
lit. q.
in her heart the Gospel, written by the holy Ghost, together with a most
certain interpretation of the Christian law; and also gives Addit adhuc
Ecclesia symbolica, id est, quam tenem^ in dubijs credere sub poenae perfidiae:
addit enim Ecclesi^ sic dictae communiter (id est, communi rationi Ecclesiae
(...) omnibus Ecclesijs abstracta) rationem vnius fidelis and indu^bitantis
testimonij: and hoc ratione qua est vna. Sic enim ^credimus vnam sanctam
Ecclesiam, non quidem gente vel patria, sed professione vnam and fide, de qua
(fide) vnicum ^cunctis gentibus reddit testimonium. cap. 18. Nam and hoc est
credere Ecclesiam Catholicam, credere eam habere veram ^fidem de Deo and vera
Sacramenta. Ibidem. Ratione ergo qua Ecclesia est obiectum fidei Christianae,
sic facit testimonium abundanter de Christo cuilibet eam vel secundum eam
credenti. Ibidem. Definita veritas antequam habeatur pro definita plus exigit,
sc. vltra authoritatem Scripturae and Spiritus sancti reuelationem, fidem in
dictis assumentis quod non extorqueat, and industriam quod per elusionem non
seducatur aut non fingat; and hoc ipsum est quod sponsus ille Ecclesiae sponsae
reliquit in dotem dicens. Ecc^ ^go vobiscum sum omnibus diebus. Non dixit recum
sum, sc. cum aliqua singulari persona, sed vobiscum sum, cum to^a Ecclesia
Catholica and Apostolica quae seduci non potest ^ec seducere, and habet fidele
testimonium de Christo, and no^it omnia mysteria Sponsi sui. cap. 19. vide
etiam supra page 49.
certain testimony to the truth.

We cannot address our selves to the Predestinate, for instruction, ^or
absolution, for orders; we know not who they be, nor how to find the^ out.
They be not the Symbolicall wickliffs Argument, The predestinate do persevere in
the faith, Ergo they be the Symbolicall Church; Is like this; A man's soul is
rational, Ergo a man's soul is a man.
Church, they have not all ^he conditions of it. Neither is any ^articular
Church, or Congregation; The Church symbolicall: no, not a Ge^erall Council. A
Council is not ^till in being; they be celebrated only sometimes, whereas the
Symbolicall Church, is to be still. So likewise is, the Church diffused or
Universal, Dan. 2. Matthew. 16. Joan. 14. Ephesians. 4. And, against a Council, or
a particular Church, he that were disposed to cavil would pretend that faith
were not allwaies in it, and it therefore at that time, no Church; (for
Ecclesia is fidelium congregatio;) whereas the Church symbolicall is in (...)
times, never failing: which thing notwithstanding does agree well unto the
Church universal; which is in (...) times existent, and in faith, indeficient
Esaias 59. Ierem. 31. Ezech. 37. Dan. 1 Matthew. 16. and 28. Joan. 14. and 16. Ti^
1. ep. 3. c. Ephesians. 4. She only, has The predestined preciselie have them
not all. See the Disp li. 1. c. 5. 6. 7. li. 2 c. 2. 3 li. 3. c. 1. 6.
(...) the conditions of, and indeed is, the symbolicall Church.

This construction of the word^ of Waldensis, to one that reads the whole
discourse in him, is plai^ and obuious. This, which hitherto I have described,
This, I say, the Catholic and Apostolical Church (...) Christ, the mother of
believing people which has faith indeficient, accordin^ to the promise of
Christ to Peter (...) ^hen did bear the figure of the Church, (I have asked
for thee Peter that thy faith does not fail) is the symbolicall Church. Having
established this tenet, he presently draws from it an inference, Non est ergo
etc. that, being the universal Church, it is not any particular; as the
African, or the Roman particular Church, or Dioces. vide Disput, page 619. ex
Innoc. 3.
These are no more the symbolicall Church then particulars are the universal.
Neither it is a general synod; such have erred sometimes, one at Ariminum;
another at Constantinople; and some others. But it is the Catholic Church of
Christ dispersed over all the world, come down from the baptism of our
Savior by the Apostles and others their successors to th^se times; which
Catholic Church verily does contain veram fidem true faith (there is one
thing, required to the Symbolicall Church, and that which Wickleff also thought
necessary; but that is not all:) and testimonium Christi fidele, the faithful
testimony of Christ: (there is an other: and the exercise of both follows)
giving wisdom to the little ones, amongst extreme errors retaining the truth
firm. The Devil by wickleff suggested pestilent inventions to abbet Rebellion,
and Schism. Praescitus non habetpotestatem, etc. Nullus est Dominus ciuilis,
nullus est Praelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in peccato mortali.
Recitantur in Concilio Constant. Sess. 8. and apud Wald. passim. See above,
page 50. lit. r.
Here is the sense of his words to the full: and for my part I see no more in
them.

But you that can gase upon chimeraes, would persuade us there are two things
for your purpose; the one, that the Church of Rome may fail or err; and the
other, that no General Counsels have infallibility. The former of these you
ground upon that part of his inference; nec vtique particularis illa Romana;
neither also is it the particular Roman Church: the later upon those other,
quam (Synodum) aliquoties errasse percepimus etc. which (Synod) we have
understood sometimes to have erred, as that of Ariminum gathered under Taurus
the Prefect, and that Constantinopolitan under Justinian the younger, and some
other. These two parcels then, and his opinion in these two points, are next to
be considered. I take them in order.

5. Nec vtique Supra ad lit. q.
particularis ill^ Romana. The form of speech is negative; and the author by
it denie^ something of the Roman Church a^ ^s a particular Church; the Que^on
(since you will needs make a ^estion of it) is Whether he denies ^o be the
Symbolicall Church; as it ^eares he does by what has ^ne said of this place
hitherto; or, ^ether he denies it perpetual con^ncie in the faith, and
indefectibili^. In answer to which question if ^u turn to the 48. Chapter,
whose ^e is, de praerogatiua perpetuae immu^atis Romanae Ecclesiae in fide
Christi ^ab omni (bb) contagione haeresis illibatae; Locus ergo vnde fluxit ab
exordio sapientia Chri^na, Romana est Ecclesia. Ab hac enim praestatur hu^nae
inertiae dirigendae assistri^ sapientia sedium diuina^n, vt nobiscum sit and
nobiscum laboret, vt sciamus quid ^eptum sit coram Deo omni tempore. Walden.
to. 1. li. c. 48. Quomodo erit vna fides quando pro captu suo ^squisque varia
meditatur and inuenit, nisi vno magistro ^ante vnus doceat paedagogus. Ille
puta, quem ad hoc ^cium prae caeteris Christus elegit dum diceret. Ego roga^ro
te Petre vt non deficiat fides tua. Ibidem. Et quid mi^ si Christo rogante,
Romana Ecclesia non potest in fide ^cere? non est magnum, Haeretice, non est
magnum vt ^od per se caderet, Christo sustentante non possit cadere. ^dem. Ergo
audacter dico, in Christi nomine and Christo ^ante, Romanam Ecclesiam in
doctrina Christi esse im^cabilem. Ibidem. Interrogat quis vnde Romanae Eccle^
tanta authoritas? Mihi videtur ex concessione Chri^ ad confessionem Petri primi
Pontificis. Primus enim confessor fuit diuinae generationis etc. quomodo ergo
(...) dubijs fidei ad illam de fide consulendam non curritur, (...) per quam,
totam Ecclesiam suam Christus fundasse co^uincitur? Ibidem.
you shall find avouched, an^ proved, that Ecclesia Romana non p^test in fide
deficere, the Church (...) Rome cannot fail in the faith. A^ further, I
affirm boldly in the na^ of Christ, and Christ aiding the Rom^ Church, that
it is in the doctrine (...) Christ impeccable. The origin of the he refers
there to our Sauiou^ prayer and his grant: and concl^ding the Chapter he
says, Ibidem. vide Sixth. Sen. in Cyr. and Pits. de biblioth. wald.
Cy^ not without cause extolles the Rom^ faith, when expounding those w^
(portae inferi non praeualebunt;) te^ Peter quoth he, it is said the gates
(...) Hell shall not prevail against it; ((...) Church:) according to this
promise^ our Lord the Apostolical Church of ^ter remains clean from all
mislead^ and heretical circumuention above (...) the Prelates, and Bishops,
and above Primates of Churches and of Apos^ in her chief Pastors in most
abund^ faith, and in the Authority of Pe^ and whereas other Churches are
comp^d with error, she alone established ^moueablie does reign, imposing
si^ace and stopping the mouths of all He^tickes: and we by necessity of
salvation, not by pride deceived nor inebria^d with the wine of pride, do
acknowledge and profess openly with her the ^me of truth and Apostolical
tradition. Hereby appears what Wal^nsis thought of the Church of ^ome; and by
those words secun^m Domini professionem, and those ^abilita inquassabiliter, he
saw which himself had professed Non potest in fide deficere. vt supra.
before) that this immunitie and ho^our was to continue. And by this, and much
more which you may ^ade in that Chapter where the thing (...) professedlie
discoursed of, I ^aue as manifest, that you did mistake him in your first
preten^e, which was about the Church of Rome.

Non quidem generali Synodo con^egata, quam Su^pra ad li. q.
aliquoties errasse ^rcepimus, velut illa Ariminensis ^ngregata sub Tauro
praefecto, and illa ^onstantinopolitana sub Iustiniano mi^ore tempore Sergij
Papae secuudum Bedam, and quaedam aliae. Here again you will have the thing
disputed, what he denies of a synod, and what he affirms. He denies that it is
the symbolicall Church; this is plain by the coherence of the discourse, as I
declared before. He affirms of general Synods that some have erred, as the
Constantinopolitan under Justinian; the Ariminian under Taurus, and some
others. Whence it follows that the Church so assembled is not the symbolicall
Church; for that never erreth. Holy, divine faith, is in her essence; and
therefore as her essence or being cannot fail, no more can her faith. She has
fidem indefectibilem, such a faith as by reason of our Saviors Matthew. 16.
care cannot be deficient: and without exception of any time, without admitting
corruption to the prejudice of her integrity, she retains the truth ever
Supra page 49.
steedfast; whereas a Council or assembly may be corrupted and want
integrity; as appears in those which he speaks of.

Moreover there are under the name of General Counsels (as appears by him in
this place, and elsewhere) some that are sincere; some that are not. That of
Nice was sincere, and was general: that of Constantinople under Justinian, was
not sincere, yet is it here putt in the number of those, which he calls
general. The infallibility of such as are sincere, and approved by the
successor of S. Peter, the Pope, we maintain; the infallibility of all that
are under the name of general, we do not. Neither does Waldensis contradict
us in the former part, which is of the sincere and approved. He says indeed
that some which go by the name of general have erred; you may add if you
please, that others (like them) hereafter may. But your argument will not hold;
Some, therefore all. Some men stagger in their faith, men deny God sometimes;
you are not wise if you understand this of all men, or of wise men.

When Wickleff objected as you do, walden to. 1. li. 2. c. 26.
Peccauit scimus Ariminense Concilium, peccauit and Nicenum Thraciae, the
Ariminian Council we know did amiss, and so did the Nicene of Thrace; The
author (the same whose authority you are meddling with) answers, peccauit
vtique magnus exercitus Angelorum etc. a great army verily of Angels did
amiss, yea and the holy number of Apostles, even in apostacy, after they had
received the faith, (before the coming of the holy Ghost, the spirit of
truth, to teach them all truth;) and yet neither is the company of other
Angels therefore deprived of their felicity; nor the assembly of the
Apostles, regularlie without doubt, of the principality of the Church; nor a
general Council, of its authority. Thus in the 26. Chapter; and in the next,
which is the 27. he delivers his mind touching the matter whereof we are
disputing, in these words, Non dubitat Ecclesia sancta Dei, toties assistere
sibi Spiritum sanctum quoties congregati fuerint authoritate plenario in nomine
Christi ad fidei dubium resoluendum; The holy Church of God doubts not that
the holy Ghost assistes her as often as they by full authority be assembled in
the name of Christ to resolve a doubt of faith. This was not only certain,
with him; but it is, he says, a thing which the Catholic Church holds as a
matter out of question; non dubitat; she doubts not of it. And a little after,
Plenarijs Concilijs Ecclesiae, si tamen maneant incorrupta, Spiritus sanctus
adest, and definit de fide. The holy Ghost is present unto plenarie or
general Counsels of the Church if so they continue sincere or perfect, and
does define of faith. And if this be so; then, not exterior only, as some
would shift it of, but interior obedience is due to the decree; for such
obedience we owe to the holy Ghost, who is present assisting as was before
said; and, as it is further here expressed, does make the definition, definit.
And consequently this Author had reason to say (as he does in the same
Chapter afterward) that it Multitudini ergo credentium est potius adhaeredu^,
quae cum claruerit quod in Christi nomine co^gregetur, ab eius decreto vnanimi
non nisi cum periculo declinatur. c. 27.
is dangerous to swerve from such decrees.

To this purpose, in the Chapter whence you dispute, he ponders those words of
the first Council assembled in Jerusalem, (which gave the form to all others
and taught them how to understand our Saviors Ioh. 14. and 16.
promise) It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us. waeldendens. to. 1.
li. 2. c. 19.
mark; says he; they said not, it seemed good to the holy Ghost and the
Church, but to the holy Ghost and to us who here do represent the Church:
and yet, not to us without the holy Ghost, but to the holy Ghost in himself,
and to the when this authority comes in, the forte sic, and forte no^, have no
place, The Holy Ghost cannot be deceived. What he does avouch is most
certain. Remouentur dubitationes. Be mindful of this note when you come to S.
Aug.
holy Ghost in us in the Church, who in doubts of faith is never wanting to
the Church, Christ promising to her, the holy Ghost shall teach you all truth.
And therefore what seems good to him, the same also by his instigation,
seems good to us.

That he did acknowledge infallibility in sincere approved Counsels, it is
further manifest by that he held of the Popes judgment. If he thought the
resolution of doubts in faith were to be made by him, and that his decision was
a truth so certain that it could not be gainesaid, he without question made no
less esteem of a general and approved Council wherein the Popes judgment
and determination is included; and consequently, when he questions or reiects
the authority of Counsels, he means not those wherein the Pope defines, or
such as he approues; and so, not all that are under the name of general, but
some only as has been said before. Now, that he had that estimation which I
have mentioned, of the Popes judgment and dedefinition, it is manifest by the
47. Chapter, where professedlie he does undertake to prove it, bringing to this
purpose many testimonies out of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Rufinus, Origin, the
Bishops of Africa, and others. The title of the Chapter is, Quod Papa habet ab
antiquo potestatem insringibilem ad determinandum fidei veritates and
debellandum and cancellandum omnes falsitates haereticas. And in the very
Orthodoxi omnes ad iudices Christi currunt vicarios, and ordinate requirunt vt
tandem planam teneant veritatem. Propter hoc enim vt vere credunt, licet
Doctores, and vltra eos Episcopos, and inter omnes mortales singillatim
acceptos petere Papam, cuius moderame^ and decisio pro irrefragabili vero
tenebatur a Patribus. Apud ipsum enim pie credebant totius fidei nostrae latere
mysteria, and pectus eius imbutum butyro illo prophetico, quo sciret reprobare
malum and eligere bonum. Walden. to. 1. li. 2. c. 47. Nouit (Hieronymus) apud
Papam Romanum authoritatem este ad emendandum fidem incongruam, vel ad
probandum Catholicam: and postquam a tanto Apostolatu haberetur vt recta, sine
dubio foret per null ^maltum violanda. Ad eiusdem quoque Damasi Papa doctrinam
tanquam ad infallibilem fidei regulam Catholici Episcopi illo tempore suos
aduersarios haereticos coegerunt. Ibidem: vbi etiam refert illud quod supra
dictum est ex Hier. de Sancti Marci Euangelio per Sanctum Petrum approbato.
beginning he says, Papae moderamen and decisio pro irrefragabili vero
tenebatur a Patribus, the Popes direction and decision was by the Fathers
(mark that, by the Fathers) held for a truth which cannot be contradicted.

To the same purpose are many things added in the next Chapter, which is of
the prerogative of perpetual immunitie in the Church of Rome; where among
other things he says, that Propter hanc incorruptionem and claritatem famosam,
omnes viri Catholici, quantumcunque magni, quantumlibet sancti, simul and
authoritate territi magnae sedis, ab hac susceperunt in dubijs fidei documenta
terrifica, cap. 48.
all Catholic men, how great, how holy soever, have from that See, received
documents in doubts of faith; and that it is, as he speaks in the words of
Cyrill, stabilita inquassabiliter, so established that it cannot be moved or
shaken; and more to the same purpose, which in the additions you may read. So
that I may leave this as sufficiently demonstrated out of his book, that you
were mistaken in the sense of the words objected.

Out of that which has been related from him, it appears also (that I may
leave a note for such as upon this occasion may chance hereafter to look on
him) first that he puts diverse degrees of adhesion (deuines express it by
certitudo mayor and mayor ex part subiecti,) respectiuelie to verities
diversely proposed. Secondly thar, with him these proponents are infallible,
vizt: the Church symbolicall; that part of it which is now present, including
both Pastors and people; a perfect and sincere general Council; and the
Church of Rome as it is head, or the Pope defining. Thirdly that the Pope,
Council, and present Church, when it will seek the verity of any point of
faith, called into question, or the authority of any writing or scripture to
know whether it be divine or no, is to look into the symbolicall Church which
has all the Christian law, with the meaning, written in her heart, by the
spirit of the living God, and there to find it: not in every page of this
great book, not expressed in the faith of every part; but in the book. And,
if after the search made, it be proposed, by the Pope in a general Council by
the present Church received; or by the Pope in Council to the Church, all are
according to his principles to receive and to believe it. Fourthlie, that the
present Church finding and proposing the verity, and the symbolicall (in whom
she finds it) believing and testifying the same; do make up one organ, where
by the holy Ghost the spirit of truth does avouch it to the world. Fiftlie
that besides the authorities before mentioned, all contained in the Church,
(wherein our savior Ego vobiscum omnibus diebus. Mat 28. qui loquitur in me
Christus. 2 Corim. 13. Parecletum dabit vobis vt maneat vobiscum in aete^nu^,
spiritum veritatis Ioh 14. In vobis erit. Ibidem. Non enim vos estis qui
loquimini sed Spiritus Patris vestri qui loquitur in vobis, Matt. 10.
likewise and his spirit be,) there be in it also diverse other degrees of
authority; as, of general Counsels not including the Popes approbation; not
by the Church, or him, disapproued; of particular Churches, especially
Ecclesiarum Catholicarum, inter quas sane illae quae Apostolicas seeds habere,
and epistolas accipere meruerunt, etc. S. Aug. 2. Doct. Chri. c. 8.
such as the Apostles have lived in; and amongst them chiefly the Roman,
(though considered with abstraction from the Popes authority.) by reason of
the traditions left in her by the two great Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul: of
national or provincial Synods, and the like: all which according to this
Author, have their weight; though not the same with the Pope in Council. I
omit to plead further that Waldensis was at Constance in the Council whereof
I spoke before treating of Cameracensis; and pass unto the next.

. IV.
1. Panormitan the Lawier, speaks of a Council not approved by the Pope, nor
by the Church diffused: which Counsels the Question meddles not withal. 2. It
were possible, he thinks, for God, considering his absolute power, to conserve
the true faith in one man or woman. 3. Antoninus his mind touching Counsels.

PVto tamen quod si Papa moueretur melioribus rationibus and authoritatibus
quam Concilium, quod standum esset sententiae suae. Nam and Concilium potest
errare, sicut a^ias errauit super matrimonium contrahendum inter raptorem and
raptum. Et infra Nec obstat si dicatur quod Concilium Generale non potest
errare, quia Christus orauit pro Ecclesia sua vt non deficeret etc. Quia dico
quod licet Concilium Generale repraesentet totam Ecclesiam vniuersalem, tamen
in veritate ibi non est vere Ecclesia vniuersalis, sed repraesentatiue; quia
vniuersalis Ecclesia constituitur ex collectione omnium fidelium. Vnde omnes
fideles orbis constituunt istam Ecclesiam vniuersalem, cuius cap^^t and sponsus
est Christus. Et infra. Et ista est Ecclesia qua no potest errare (credendo
scilice^; controuersia autem est de errore in docendo; sieve de infallibili
assistentia ijs exhibita quibus incumbit officium docendi, congregationem hanc
vniuersalem) Vnde possibile est quod vera fides Christi remaneret in vno solo:
ita quod verum est dicere, quod fides non deficit in Ecclesia; sicut ius
vniuersitatis potest manner in vno solo, alijs peccantibus. Baro p. 367. ex
Nicolao Panormitane. 1. PANORMITAN. This man is called from the Canon-lawe to
say some thing in a matter appertaining to Deuinitie, and two things are
wrunge out of him whilst he Vide 36. q. 2. and Almain. Pot. Eccl. c. 17.
mistakes a Canon of a particular Council, which we must answer unto. One is,
that a Council may err; another, that it is possible the faith of Christ
remain in one only.

Concerning the first; it is one thing to say that a Council may err, and
another thing to say that a general Council may; he says a Council may,
and in proof thereof makes instance in that of Meaux, which was a particular
one, not a general. Again; it is one thing to say that a general Council
may; another thing to say that a general Council confirmed by the Pope or by
the universal Church received, may err.

Now that the Council which he speaks of (be it that he may be understood of
a general) is not a Council by the Pope approved or by the Church received; I
argue from hence, that he compares the Pope and Council together as distinct,
considering the Pope without the Council and the Council without the Pope,
touching which comparison he has two positions, the one, that Panor. de
electione cap. significasti.
in his quae sunt iuris positiui, Papa est supra Concilium, in things
appertaining to the positive law the Pope is above the Council; that Council
sure, which includes not him; or his authority. The other (which he did not
himself adhere to much less prove; vide supra page 70.) in concernentibus
fide^ Ibidem.
Concilium est supra Papam, in things appertaining to faith the Council is
above the Pope; and presently he begins to tell how the Pope is to conform
himself, unless perchance his reasons be better; where again it is manifest
that the Pope was not included in the Council which he spoke of. So that if
any thing be collected out of him to contradict us it is by virtue of the
second part. Unless perchance you think this a good argument, the universal
Church cannot err, as he affirms, therefore an approved Council may. And if
you should admit the form (which Logicians will not do) you must admit this;
the universal Church is that Church which cannot err, therefore S. Paul might
err, and so might the Evangelists and all the Fathers and Bishops that ever
were. For they were not the universal Church; though they were in it.

Neither will the second part, or assertion of his, serve the turn; since it
is only de possibili, an assertion of a possibility; and this too, not de
lege ordinaria, since the coming of the holy Ghost and establishing of
Pastors and doctors that we be not wavering; but de potentia absoluta; if the
power of al mighty God (removing in our mind, all suppositions and promises
now made,) be considered absolutely, in it self. In which case, the lawier
makes this Argument; once the faith remained in one (so he thought it did in
the time of the passion; as if all Christians there present besides our B.
Lady, and those also which our Savior had persuaded all the time and in all
places that he preached; and all which Reuersi autem 72. etc. Luc. 10.
the disciples had instructed in what part of the world soever, had at once
lost their faith: yet the lawier who takes it upon trust, will suppose it;)
once according to that imagination, the faith remained in one, therefore it is
not a thing impossible in it self, therefore it may be (though not according
to the course which our savior has established, yet) according to Gods
absolute power. If he has not insinuated this absolute power under these
terms so far as Cameracensis Quaest. de Resumpta, vt supra lit. m.
Cameracensis and Ockam. Dial. p. 1. li 5. c. 31. fine. and 3. p. li. 3. c. 13.
Ockam, whence he superficially gleaned it, in the like occasion have done;
you are too bear with him, as being a Lawier, not accustomed to the terms of
schoole-deuines.

For my part I cannot think so poorly of him as to imagine that he did not
know the Church is a kingdom which Dan. 7.
shall not be corrupted, that the gates of Jerusalem shall be Esa. 60 and 62.
open still, and the watchmen which God has placed on her walls shall never
hold their peace, that our Savior has established a Hierarchy Ephesians. 4.
till all meet in unity of faith, that even in the hardest times of all there
shall be Matthew. 24.
electi chosen people, and that the Apocal. 20. vide Disp. p. 53.
camp of the Saints and beloved city shall be diffused over the breadth of
the earth, Matt. 16.
and constantly (to the glory of her Prince and Founder,) in that extremest
trial maintain her faith and allegiance against Hell gates, when the devil
is let loose, and does oppose her with all his art and fury.

The infere^ce Panormitan makes upon the case which he said possible in the
sense before declared, is a strange one; for he will have it in that
supposition to be true to say fides no^ deficit in Ecclesia faith in the
Church fails not; as if one man were fidelium Congregatio, a Church, a
Hierarchy; subject and superior, priest and clerk. That it should begin, or
end, or be continued in one, as a line is begun or ended or continued with a
point, a diuisible by an indivisible, were something; but one person to be a
Church, is as strange as it is for unity to be multitude, or an indivisible to
be divided.

ANtoninus p. 3. tit. 23. c. 2. 6. haec omnia quae a Panormitano dicta sunt de
Papa, Concilijs, and Ecclesia universally, amplectitur. Baro p. 368. 3. IN
confirmation of the Lawiers supposed testimony, there is cited Antoninus (the
Question being not of lawiers but of Deuines) as subscribing to Panormitans
doctrine of the Pope, Councels and universal Church; or, as the Minister
speaks, embracing it. Whereas he does only recite Panormitans words, Notat
Abbas de Sicilia quod etc. and having repeated them, concludes, haec ille. So
passing immediately to another, Petrus de Ancharano etc. without more ado. Yet
since you will needs confound their opinions in this matter and make them both
one; one, and the Divine rather, (the matter appertaining to Deuinitie,) may
deliver it for them both; which he does in this tenor.

Antoninus. Ad illum pertinet Sanctum canonizare, ad quem pertinet quaestiones
fidei determinare. Quod quidem planu^ est spectare ad Summum Po^tificem. S.
Antoninus in summa p. 3. tit. 22. c. 5.. 5 lege etiam si placet. 3. eiusdem
tit. Apostoli in Euangelijs and Epistolis affirmaueru^t in omni doctrina Petrum
esse loco Domini. Idem c. 6.. 7. ex Cyrillo. Quaeritur vtrum authoritas
vniuersalis Ecclesiae in determinatione fidei principaliter resideat in Papa.
Respondet S. Thomas affirmative 2. 2. q. 11. a. 2. ad 3. Postquam aliqua essent
authoritate vniuersalis Ecclesiae determinata, si quis tali ordinationi
pertinaciter repugnaret, haereticus censeretur. Quae quidem authoritas
principaliter residet in Summo Pontifice. Dicitur enim 24. q. 1. Quoties fidei
ratio ventilatur, arbitror omnes fratres nostros and coepiscopos non nisi ad
Petrum, id est, ad sui nominis authoritatem referri debere, and caetera vsque
finem vt habentur in S. Thoma loco cit. S. Antoninus c. citato. 19. Sancti
Patres in Concilio congregati nihil statuere potuissent, nisi authoritate Summi
Pontificis interueniente; sine qua etiam Concilium congregari non potest.. 20.
ex codem S. Thom. li contra impugn. relig.
To him appertains the canonizing of Saints, to whom it belongs to determine
questions touching the faith: which manifestly appertains unto the Pope. (n)
The question is whether the Authority of the universal Church in
determination of faith reside principally in the Pope, Saint Thomas (they be
Antoninus his words which I relate) answers affirmatiuelie, that, after things
be determined by the authority of the universal Church, if any stubbornly
resist or withstand that ordination, he should be esteemed an Heretic. Which
Authority is chiefly in the Pope. And to this tenet of Saint Thomas,
Antoninus there subscribeth; denying to the the Bishops power to ordain in
this manner, or to call a Council to this purpose, without the Popes
Authority. Concilium non solum comprehendit Papam vt caput, quod est
principale in Concilijs: sed etiam and reliquum corpus Ecclesiae, vt alios
Praelatos: de quo Concilio inquit Propheta; Non abscondi misericordiam tuam and
veritatem tuam a Concilio multo. Idem tit. 23. c. 1.
A Council does not include only the Pope as Head, which is chief in
Councels; but the rest of the body withal, as other Prelates. Of which
Council the Prophet says I have not hid thy mercy and thy truth from a great
Council. A Concilijs vanitatis and malignitatis abscondit Deus misericordiam
and veritatem: sed non abscondit a Concilio multorum, sc. tendentium ad vnum
etc. Ibidem. 1.
From Councels of vanity and malignitie God does hide his mercy and his
truth: but he hides them not from the Council of many tending unto one etc.
Ea quae statuuntur in huiusmodi Concilijs generalibus omnes fideles astringunt.
Idem, eod tit. cap. 2. in principio.
things constituted in such general Councels oblige all the faithful.

. V.
1. Cusanus held the infallibility of general decrees. 2. The words objected
out of him against us, are indeed plainly for us; as in the reading of them
(they are at leingth in the Addition) it does appear.

CArdinalis Cusanus in Concilijs generalibus ad hoc vt eorum decreta a nobis
acceptentur tanquam certa and infallibilia, quasdam conditiones requirit etc.
Ba^o. p 368. 1. CVSANVS. This man is brought to teach us, and to teach the
whole Church, the conditions of a general Council; as if none were good, but
such as he liked of, and approved he was a young man when he wrote his book,
and Finit collectio etc. quam sacro huic Basiliensi Concilio cum omni
humilitate offero, nihil in omnibus veru^ aut defendendum pro vero iudicans seu
assere^s nisi quod ipsa sancta Synodus catholicum and verum iudicauerit.
Cusanus in fine Co^cordantiae suae Catholicae.
earnest for the Council of Basil, though he changed his mind Vide eiusdem
Epist. ad Rodericum da Treuino.
afterward. Neither is the Question here what be the conditions of a
Council; but, Whether a general Council which has all conditions that are
necessary, and is by the Pope approved, be assisted to the definition of the
truth and be infallible? in which matter we shall easily know Cusanus his
mind.

In the third chapter, which you cite, he recites the words of Nicolas the
first, terming such decrees Idem li. 2. de Concord c. 3.
diuinitus inspiratas sententias, sentences inspired by God. And after, of
himself he says, Ibidem,
si concordanti sententia aliquid fuerit definitum, per Spiritum Sanctum
censetur inspiratum, and per Christum in medio congregatorum in eius nomine
praesidentem, infallibiliter iudicatum. If any thing be defined by an agreeing
Sentence, it is esteemed inspired by the holy Ghost, and judged or determined
by Christ praesiding in the mids of them that are assembled in his name. This
he declares in the Council of Nice, whereof the great Conc. Chalc. act. 1.
Council of Chalcedon says, that, the holy Ghost did did there certainly
remain or sit amongst the Fathers, and ordain the things which were there
ordained. And then concludes Cusan. c. 3. vt supra.
talia fuerunt omnia orthodoxa Concilia, such have been all Counsels
orthodoxall.

As for the conditions he speaks of, none which he thought necessary, be
wanting in those general Counsels which we maintain. The presence of the
five Patriarchs he does not require but when they be Catholic, nor then
neither, but for the more fullnes of the Council. Others may be perfect which
have not all; but that which has all, is, he says, synodus Ibidem.
perfectissima, most perfect in that kind. One may have the whole essence of a
man, all the essential parts; and yet not be most perfect. Our Counsels are
not made in secret; they be assembled, and openly, from all parts of the world
wheresoever the Catholic Church is; and such as come may freely speak and
are heard. They look into scriptures, and former Counsels, and Antiquity, to
find the truth; and, though in the search it might appear to some sooner then
others, yet all in the end approve and propose, it.

DEbet sacrum Concilium universal, regulis Sancti Spiritus, tam in Canone
Sacrae Scriptura ac praeteritis Concilijs apertis, dirigi, maxim in negotio
fidei, quae vna and inuariabilis necessario sicut fuit, permanebit: and
scripturas rimari in dubijs, sicut in sexto universally Concilio actum fuit, and
alijs multis; and tunc definitio ex allegatis sumpta, absque errore necessario
erit Vnde si ea non seruantur maxim libera omnium audientia, ac vbi atiqua
attentarentur in synodis quae obuiarent fidei Romanae Ecclesiae; protestatio
just, ac simul and appellatio ad futurum aliud Concilium fieri potest. Baro p.
369. expunctis tamen ijs quae diuerso charactere notantur. 2. NEither is there
cause to fear that a Council, assisted by the holy Ghost and defining, will
contradict, either scripture, or the Ex hoc etia^ elici potest, fide^ Romanae
Ecclesiae, in nulla synodo universally retractari posse. Cutan. Conc. li. 2. c.
4. Dicit Augusti^us li. 1. con. Donatistas, volens stabili fundamento ex
de^isione vniuersalis Concilij fidem probare, Iam ne videar ^umanis argumentis
id agere etc. Idem c. 5. vid^s quanta ^niuersalibus Concilijs authoritas inest,
dum recte cele^antur. Vnde Augustinus l. 1 Sermon. con. Pelagianos, di^, matris
Ecclesiae hanc esse authoritatem, quod quisquis ^ntra hunc inexpugnabilem murum
arietat, ipse confrin^ut. Ibidem.
faith of former times; he that ^s chiefly interessed in the business,
understands all things clearlie, and cannot contradict a verity.

That which is objected upon oc^asion of S. Augustines words, that de verbis S.
Augustini cum aliquo experime^to rerum etc. fusius agemus suo loco.
a plenarie Council may fail in the experiment of things, and in that case
judge amiss, makes nothing to the purpose; for we dispute not of
infallibility in things which may be found out by trial or experiment; but in
matters revealed, and of faith.

. VI.
Clemangis professed, to reverence the authority of Counsels; and only to
propose some doubts for his instruction in some things touching them.

NIcolaus de Clemangis in disputatione cum scholastico Parisiensi, quaedam
etiam tradit quae cum doctrina Pontificiorum de Conciliorum infallilibilitate,
manifest pugnant Baro p. 370. Dicit Concilium generale errare posse in
controuersijs morum Baro Ibidem. CLEMANGIS. His work i^ Index libr. prohibit.
Conc. Trid.
forbidden; and his frind t^ whom he directed it, perceived i^ came from
Quanquam Deum ac conscie^tiam testari liceat, nullatenus stomachato animo illa
fuisse scripta quod miror tibi visum esse, quia tamen vndecun que hoc euenerit,
ita tibi visum est, vt tuae quantum fas fuerit volu^tati ac petitioni morem
geram, dulciora ac sedatiora enitar. Clemang. ad scholast. Paris. p 599. edit
Parisiensi, anno 1576.
discontent; being forced as appears by his own Epistle Opressus na^que (vt
nosti) ante aliquot annos aemulolorum insultatione me tunc grauissime
persequentium, ex vrbe illa fui excedere compulsus latebrasque a facie
tempestatis co^tra me unjust admodum illic saeuie^tis alibi quaerere. p. 600.
latebras quaerere, to play, least^ sight. He writes bitterly against the
Clergy; belike they made him fly. Touching Counsels; he does not contradict
their authority; (howsoever he mistakes the manner of defending it:) but only
writes unto a friend to be informed better in it; protesting both to honor
them, and to be ready to amend what in his writing should be thought amiss.
Hear some of his own words. Idem pa. 587.
Verily I reverently receive, and faithfully embrace, all Counsels, as well
such as long ago have been duly celebrated, as also those which are
celebrated now adays: and God forbid that I should think or speak any
sinister thing of them. Neither should I therefore be calumniated as less
sincerely esteeming them, in that for the instruction of my ignorance I seek
to know, and desire to have declared unto me, some things; that I may not only
think of them well and faithfully, but also according to the capacity of my
little wit, truly and wisely speak of them. And a little after. Clemang. pa.
588.
I desire to be taught by thee, whether thou think it must be believed as a
Catholic verity, that in those things which be of fact, or of manners, or of
judgments, a general Council can never be deceived, as well as it is
faithfully believed that it cannot err in faith. And in the end. Idem pa.
598. alioquin temerariu^ esset minus intellecta velle a sapientoribus discere;
quamuis etiam certe paratus sim, si ea quae me mouent dubia explicando aliquid
in radice veritatis minus fundatum aut alicuius fortasse scandadali illatiuum
nimis astruere viderer, aut fideli admonitu illud eradere, aut ad lineam
rectitudinis lima exactiori emendare. Ibidem.
I intend (as I have often already said, neither am I loath to repeat it) in
these or other writings to affirm nothing but that which may be altogether
agreeable to the Catholic integrity. But in case I have proposed, not
affirming, but doubting; or arguing; any thing, less certain or true, whereby
I may be the more fully informed of the certainty, I think that should not
be thought rashness in me. And the rest which you find cited in the Addition.

DIcit Christi assistentiam etc. ad solos sanctos and spirituales pertinere
Baro p. 370. Non obscure innuit eam persuasionem seu fiduciam de conciliorum
infallibilitate qua multi tumescunt, esse Ecclesiae admodum perniciosam Idem p.
371. ANd whereas he proposes by way of doubt, that holy me^ only were to be
heard speaking out of a Council; he seems not to have remembered what our B.
Savior said of Scribes and Pharisees teaching out of Moses chair, quae
dicunt facite, imitate not their works, but practice what they teach.

That such as do celebrate a Council should not, nimis inniti, to much insist
or presume, on this, that they are a general Council, as if therefore they
might freely do quaecunque libuerit, does not make against us; it denies not
to a Council, infallibility; as he denies it not to Prophets and Apostles,
who says they should not rely to much thereupon, as if therefore they might
do what they listed. Moreover his speech is qualified by himself if you mark
it, non debent vt videtur, and Clemang. pa. 597.
non vtile crediderim illos inniti; me thinks they should not; I should not
esteem it profitable for them to rely etc.

VII.
1. Canus defends the infallibility of approved Counsels. 2. His opinion of
others which are not confirmed or approved Counsels. 3. It is a sophistical
proceeding, to impugn one verity with another verity.

FAteor equidem quodcunque Concilium generale vniuersalem Ecclesiam
representare. Sed dum vrges Ecclesiam errare non posse, verum est in eo sensu
qui a fidelibus accipitur. Intelligimus enim totam simul Ecclesiam, hoc est,
fideles omnes non errare: at nihil obstat cur mayor Ecclesia pars non erret.
Baro p. 381. ex Cano. loc. 5. c. 5. CANVS, Is pretended to contradict us;
though he be known to maintain the Counsels infallibility, such as we
speak of: adding withal, that the contrary is heretical. In the fourth
Chapter of his fifth book, where he treates of that controversy, his third
conclusion is, Tertia Conclusio. Concilium generale confirmatu^ authoritate
Romani Pontificis certam fidem facit Catholicorum dogmatu^. Quam quidem
conclusione^ ita explorata^ habere opus est vt eius co^trariam haereticam esse
credamus. Canus li. 5. c 4.
A general Council confirmed by the authority of the Bishop of Rome, does
make certain the faith of Catholic tenets. Which he there proves with many
reasons; resolving also the doubts which Heretics object against it.

2. Having established that authority, he disputes further, whether (...)
Council not confirmed by the Pope, hat^ certain and firm authority or no?
some learned men Dubium excutiendum est, an Concilium per legatos su^mi
Po^tificis celebratum, firmam certa^que habeat authoritatem; an potius episcopi
Romani confirmatio expecta^da sit vt certa habea^tur decreta Co^cilij. Idem c.
5.
viri doctissimi, do affirm it; because it represents the universal Church,
which cannot err. Whereunto Canus answers, that the whole Church or an
approved Council, (which does perfectly represent it,) cannot err; but a
part of either, may. Ibidem.
The judgment (says he) of the greater part (of the Council) though the
Legates follow it, is not certain: certum autem esset si a summo Pontifice
confirmaretur, but if it should be confirmed by the Pope, it would be certain.
And in the same manner he does answer to a second argument of assistance, made
for the same purpose. Ibidem:
even as (says he) that which seems good to the whole Church, the same also
seems good to the holy Ghost; but not presently what the greater part of
the Church shall have judged, the same is the judgment of the holy Ghost: so
if anything be judged by all the Bishops, it is verily judged by the spirit of
God; but not presently if many fathers of the Council agree into one
sentence, shall it be to be believed the sentence of the holy Ghost unless it
be confirmed by the Pope.

3. By the way I observe here two things; one is, that if an author interpret
those words Ecclesia errare non potest, the Church cannot err, of the whole or
universal Church, it does not follow that he denies therefore infallibility
to general approved Counsels, which are perfect representations of the Church
diffused; for this Simile, in S. Antonino obseruare licet de quo supra. Et
nota, post verba ab aduersarijs citata (vt supa page 86.) seq^i immediate in
authore, sic igitur non ego admitto, vt totum Concilium cu^ legatis errare
possit: at errare poterit mayor p^^s Conc^lij, and e^^nti illi poteru^^ le
gatis subscribere. A^ que id est quod nos in praesentia dicimus, ^udicium
maioris partis etiam si legati sequantur, non esse certum; certum autem esset
si a summo Pontificeconfirmaretur. Nec enim opus est, quemad modu^paulo ante
docuimus, sententia^ Concilij omnes simul patres approbare. Canus li. 5. c. 5,
q. ^.
man whom you cite for the former part, does also maintain the later. And the
manner of arguing, is indeed absurd; because it would impugn one truth by
another. As if I should say; the whole Gospel of S. John is the undoubted
word of God, therefore the first Chapter of it is not. And were it admitted, it
would prove, as before I said on the same occasion, that every Apostle, yea
all the Apostles and Fathers might have consented in a gross, yea and in the
most fundamental error: because they be not the whole and universal Church.

The other thing which I observe, is, that without sincerity or conscience you
do make use of men's words, contrary to their known professed meaning and
intention; which proceeding, especially in matter of religion, is inexcusable.
The like observation I might have made in Antoninus, who is alleged against
that which he did openly maintain.

. VIII.
1. Stapleton did acknowledge degrees of extension in divine assistance; and
maintain the infallibility of the Church in her public decrees of faith. 2.
To be obnoxious to error in matters not revealed, does not any way impeach the
promise of assistance and infallibility in all that does intrinsecallie
appertain to the substance of divine faith.

QVando de ijs quaestionibus quae vel non necessario ad fidem pertinent, sed
salua fidei compage vary a varijs intellig^ possunt etc. consulitur vel obiter
disputat Ecclesia aberrare aliquando poterit etc. ex Stap. 1. STAPLETON, is
brought, as if he gave no more to the Church and her Counsels, then
Protestants do; because he does not maintain their infallibility in curious
subtilities, and questions indifferent unto faith; nor think it so ample in
object as was that of the Apostles. Where, first it is to be considered, that
as in faith or science, so likewise in assistance or infallibility, more or
less extension does not change the nature of the thing. Mathematical science
in one is more extended then in another; one knows more conclusions then
another does; yet is it in both, of the same nature. The light of glory in all
the Saints is of the same Species and kind, as the Deuines teach; though one
by it knows more, another less. Faith, in us, and in the Apostles; before,
and since the Incarnation; is of the same nature: but more extended in the
Apostles, then in us; and since the incarnation, more generally, then it was
before. The like we say of assistance or infallibility in judgment; it has
been more extended, in some, then in others; more at one time, then at another.

Secondly it is to be considered that the Apostles, who did write scripture;
had infallibility in Singuli Apostoli de omnibus plenissime a Deo
instructierant, ita vt eorum quilibet de quocunque dogmate ad fidem sieve
necessario sieve no^ necessario pertinente, pronunciare potuisset: idquetanta
certitudine, vt non solum pastores essent fidelissimi, sed etia^ magistri
peritissimi, omniaque etiam subtilissima circa fidei mysteria penerarent.
Staeplet, de princip. fidei Doctrinal. li. 8. c. 15. Quod autem de Apostolis
modo diximus, vt non solum in doctrina, sed etiam in forma docendi infallibili
veritate niterentur, peculiare hoc Deus esse voluit etc. Ibidem.
all they did affirm; whether the matter were dogmaticall, or historical;
whether substance, or circumstance: whatsoever they did affirm, and put into
the Scripture, it is a truth. But the infallibility of Counsels is not so
ample; it is not so far extended. This Stapleton does prove in the place
objected; where, having given the prerogative to that in sacred writers and
Apostles, he concludes, Natura nihilominus ac substantia potestatis ac
certitudinis, eadem est Ecelesiae nunc, and illius Apostolorum: sicut fontis ac
riuuli inde fluentis eadem est in specie and bonitate naturali aqua, nisi ab
aliquo extrinseco immutetur: quod his fieri non potest quia semper eundum
Spiritum Sanctum magistrum (tanqua^ formale^ rationem puritati^ and
synceritatis tam fontis quam riuuli) successores habent que^ Apostoli ipsi
habebant: licet in alio diuerso gradu. Ibide^.
the nature notwithstanding and substance of the power and certitude, of the
Church now* and of that of the Apostles, is all one. All one in substance; but,
In the Apostles every way exact, as reaching to the decrees, and to the
means o^ proofs; and to the consequence o^ form; and to the circumstances
all; and this, in all kind of matter* In the Successors, not so far exact;
nor in that extension or fullnes; but in alio gradu; in another, an inferior, a
more limited, and contracted, degree.

In the same Apostoli hanc certitudinem omnimodam and sapientientiam habuerunt
tam in medijs quam in fine. Conseruare autem prius tradita etc. quia non tam
praeclara and exacta sapientia indiget, sed satis habet si diligenter acceptis
and ^emel traditis insistat; indefit quod Ecclesia succedens tan^a certitudine
in ipsis medijs non dirigitur. Neque enim ^nta argumentorum certitudine opus
est aperire and expli^are quod virtute in semine fidei later, aliudque ex alio
^e lucere, quam de nouo rem penitus ignoratam explorare (...) docere. Sic enim
Philosophi etc. atque haec vna causa ^st quare tantam infallibilitatem in ipsa
forma and ratione ^ocendi, successorum, Ecclesia non desideret, quantam ^psi
Apostoli. Stapl. doctr. fidei cont. 4. li. 8. c. 15.
place (to satisfy by the way another doubt) you may find cleerelie
delivered, what some have mistaken touching his mind, in the Metere quae alij
seminauerunt, exacta and omnimoda infallibilitate non indiget; sed satis est
semel acceptis diligenter insistere. Neque tanta certitudine opus est aperire
and explicare etc. quam de nouo rempenitus ignoratam explorare. Ex Staplet.
Relec. contro. 4. q. 2.
Relection: those words, tanta, and omnimoda, or exacta; which are ^ound there;
import in him, a comparison; not in the substance of the ^ertaintie, or
infallibility, or assistance; that, as he said before, is, eadem, the same;
but, in modo, in the quantity, manner, and degree, which ^s diverse. Out of
which diversity in the manner, and quantity, or extension, it comes, that the
successors do not reach unto the means or ^rguments, and consequences, and
^acts, and circumstances, so universally, with as ample, and in every ^ne of
those respects as immovable a ^ertaintie, as the first Masters and Planters of
Religion, and writers of the scripture, did; who were to ^aie the foundation,
and by way of ^euelation to deliver, what the Church in after times was to
insist upon.

Thirdly it is to be considered, that, the Pastors in Council, according to
this Author, (and, as by their Acts you may perceive) do proceed, Sometimes as
Deuines, deducing or inferring one thing out of another, and Sometimes as
Witnesses of the faith and judges of controversy, deciding and testifying the
truth, and proposing it to the world to be embraced and believed. The former is
a preamble to the later; in which later, it is always infallible whether it
be, or be not so, necessarily, and always, in the former, from which further
Question we do here abstract. The reason is because their decrees are
generally proposed to all, not to be seen or known scientificallie, that
way were very singugular; the most part of Christians is not able to conceive
it: but, to be believed. The Ibidem.
Church (says the Author) does not teach, ex art, sed ex authoritate, not by
art, but by authority, neither does she conclude as it were by Theological
science, of God and divine things, but by the Pastoral pow^ which from God she
has received, s^ does give sentence or determine. Our Savior did not open a
school of science but of faith; neither did he send his disciples to prove the
Gospel, but to preach it, And, teach indeed he bid them; but so, as by
testifying and preaching they should do it; not by proueing or disputing.
Ecclesiae pastoribus and magistris decerne^tibus creditur, non quia legitime
probarunt quod decernu^t; sed quia aperte decernu^t and tradunt sic esse
credendum; sieve decretu^ suum ex legitimis medijs probasse nobis co^stet, sieve
non. Haec enim est obedientia fidei de qua disseruimus. Ibidem.


Fourthlie it is to be considered that the infallibility of the
Church-decrees, depends upon the Joan. 14.
promised assistance; which was not to all verity possible, nor to all that is
actual neither; but to revealed only, docebit vos omnia, and suggeret vobis
omnia quaecunque dixero, is the promise. The spirit of truth, the holy Ghost,
shall teach you all things and suggest unto you all what soever I shall have
said unto you. To things not revealed, the promise was not extended. The course
was taken for bearing in mind and understanding, the lesson which Gods
eternal Word has given: and whatsoever, in this kind, the Church does
determine and propose to the faithful to believe, is true. Neither can she
propose any thing in this manner, which is not indeed such as she declares it
to be; she having divine guidance and assistance, in every such act. This,
which you deny, Stapleton does teach. Stapl. Relect. cont. 4. q. 2. not. 4.
Ecclesia in conclusione fidei semper est certissima and infallibilis. Mark
that, semper; the Church, in the conclusion of faith, is always most certain
and infallible. So that if you find any thing declared by the Church to be de
fide, it is, according to his tenet, most certain; and may no further be
disputed. And in another Staplet. de princip. si. contr. 4. li. 8. c. 15.
place, Ecclesia, quia non ratione, sed authoritate, assistentia, and
prouidentia diuina, nititur, eamque infallibiliter promissam habet, nec prater
veritatem, nec erronee, nec contra Deum, vllo modo decernere potest. The
Church, because it relyeth, not on reason, but on the divine authority,
providence, and assistance, and has it infalliblie promised unto her, can in
no sort or manner, nullo modo, determine besides the truth, or erroneouslie, or
against God. Whence it follows, as before, that if the Church does apply her
testimony unto any book, auouching and publikelie declaring it, to be
scripture; or to any proposi^ion, determining it to be a point of ^aith, and
proposing it unto the world for such; there can be, accor^ing to this author,
no further que^tion made of it: since the divine ^rouidence does so guide her,
that ^n such definitions, she, in no sort, ^an judge erroneouslie, or determine
^esides the truth.

^. Neither is this integrity in de^^nition violated, or our saviors promise
of assistance broken, if, not in matter of divine belief, (such as ^or the
good of his Church God ^ath revealed,) but in Long aliter se habent
quaestiones istae quas esse prae^er fidem arbitratur (Celestius,) quam sunt
illae in quibus ^lua fide qua Christiani sumus, aut ignoratur quid verum (...)
and sententia definitiua suspenditur; aut aliter quam est, ^umana and infirma
suspicione conijcitur. Vel^^^ cum quae^^tur, qualis vel vbi sit Parad^sus; cum
tamen esse illum ^aradisum fides Christiana non dubitet. Vel cum quaeri^r vbi
nunc sit Elias etc. vel cum quaeritur vtrum in cor^ore vel extra corpus in
ter^ium caelum sit raptus Apo^olus etc. vel quot sunt Caeli, etc. vel vtrum
elementa ^undi huius conspicabilis quatuor, an plura sint etc. vbi ^otuit
Methusalem viuere etc. Quis non sentiat in his at^e huiusmodi varijs and
innumerabilibus quaestionibus, sine ad ^bscurissima opera Dei sieve ad
Scripturarum abditissi^as latebras pertinentibus, quas certo aliquo gener^
complecti ac definire difficile est, and multa ignorari salua Christiana fide,
and alicubi errari sine aliquo haeretici dogmatis crimine. S. Aug. li. 2. cont.
Pelag. and Celest. c. 23. vide Canum li. 5. c. 5. qq. 3. 4. 5.
other questions which it has not pleased him by revelation to discover; (as,
where is Elias, where Paradise, how many heavens, etc.) not in definition, and
attestation; but in some particular It is one thing to argue out of revealed
principles; and another thing to argue out of others. Of this later kind of
deduction I speak here.
deduction and conjecture, she does infer amiss. Not every consequence
orillation, not every thing syllogisticallie inferd out of premises, in matter
of that nature; has infallibility, according to this Author; but, the
definitions and decrees, all, have it. If you know not yet the difference
betwixt the one and the other, you may read him, or Canus; or look upon the
Acts of the Counsels, where you may, with little study, discern it.

If it be replied, that in his fourth Controversy, he seems to limit and
contract the object of assistance, to points only fundamental, excluding all
other: I answer, that even Docendi infallibilitas in causa fidei Ecclesiae
data, ta^tummodo in illis fidei dogmatibus infallibiliter definiendis, and
fideli populo ce^ta veritate trade^dis locum habet, quae vel in co^trouersiam
vocantur, vel alioqui ad publica^ Ecclesiae fidem necessario pertinent.
Staplet. fid. doc. li. 8. c. 15. Quando de ijs quaestionibus quae vel non
necessario ad fidem pertine^t etc. vel non ad publicum aliquod and commune
dogma explicandum (quod vel omnes fideles explicit credere debent vel in
publico religionis vsu versatur, vel saltem maiores explicit credere tenentur,
populus autem implicit, in maiorum fide) sed ad priuatam alicuius etc. Ibidem.
there, he does extend it to all points of faith, which, either are called into
controversy (at any time wherein the Church is) or otherwise do necessarily
appertain to the public faith of the Church. In which compass, is contained,
all, that is in the Council of Trent defined, against you: or in any other
oecumenicall Council proposed, to be believed. Your masters, Luther, Calvin,
and others, called into question diverse things, appertaining, and
intrinsecallie as parts, to the substance or object of divine faith and public
exercise of Religion, as, books of holy scripture, justification, Sacraments,
and the Mass. And therefore, if according to Stapleton, the Churches
infallibility does reach vn^^ all points of faith called into question, it is
according to the same tenet, extended unto these; which he believed so to
pertain to faith. But, in questions that are impertine^t, or Such as some
above, page 97. litter. i. in marg.
indifferent; or, that appertain only to the direction of some one, that is
weak in judgment, and in some private case; or, to the satisfaction of some
proud man's curiosity: to conclude; in questions, that appertain to the
explication of those things which are (appendices,) additions, rather then
contained in, or appertaining to, the substance of faith, if the Church should
mistake, it were not (he thinks) any prejudice to the grant of assistance, or
the promised infallibility: not, if in matter of this nature, she should
affirm, or (discoursing as a Divine, which in her examination of difficulties
otherwhile she does,) should infer, and logicallie Vel asserendo vel etiam
concludendo. Ibidem.
conclude, amiss. But, to make a public decree of that which is false, and
propose it, openly, to be believed of Christians, as matter of faith; that she
cannot; being in her public decrees (...) definition, infallible, as you heard
him say before. And the same he has proved at large, both by Scripture, and
Theological reasons, in diverse Doc. fi li 8. c 12. 13 Relect. cont. 3. q 4
cont. 4. q. 2. and alibi.
places of his book.

. IX.
1. Saint Augustine will not have any other books equalled with Scripture in
authority.

2. Other witnesses, or testimonies of other nature then that of Scripture, and
not recommended by it or by the author of it, we be not obliged to in that
manner as we are obliged to believe the Scripture. 3. The comparison of
Scripture with other writings, in authority. His forbearing to press an Arian
with the authority of the Council of Nice. 4. The Donatists refusing to yield
unto the authority of the whole Church Catholic, and consequently of her
Counsels too, and admitting Scripture, he does challeng them to show there the
decision of the Controversy which was betwixt them and him. 5. He did both
avouch and rely upon the authority of plenarie Counsels, esteeming them to
be, in their decrees of faith, infallible. What mending that is which he
speaks of.

EGo solis eis Scriptorum qui iam ca^onici appellantur, didics hunc timorem
honoremque defer vt nullum eorum scribendo errasse audeam credere, alios
autem ita lego vt qua^talibet sanctitate doctrinaque polleant, non id^o verum
pu^em quia ipsi ita senserunt, sed quia mihi vel per illos authors canonicos
vel probabili ratione, quod a veritate non abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt.
Baro p. 333. ex Aug. Ego solis eis Scriptoribus qui canonici etc. Ibidem. 1.
OVT of that which has been observed from Stapleton, will appear the sense of
S. Augustine; wherefore he comes next. There are four or five places cited out
of him, against the authority of Counsels; but, for the most part, very
impertinentlie; and, altogether against his mind. We know, there is a great
difference betwixt the canonical writers, and others; betwixt the Epistles of
the Apostles, and those of Bishops after them; betwixt their Acts, written by
S. Luke, who in all he affirms or relates is infallible; and the Acts of
general Counsels, whose writers had not that assistance. We do not
equalize, or parallel, one of these writings with the other. We give the
sovereignty to the scripture, as being infallible in all; so far, that it
does no where at all, mistake, in any thing. This reverence we give to the
testimony of those writers, in what ever they auerr; and give not the like to
any other, testibus, aut testimonijs, be they witnesses or testimonies. Albe it
we believe other witnesses, in diverse things also; though not so generally,
in all, without exception. But I come to your exceptions. The first is out of
the 19. Epistle, where

S. AUGUSTINE tells S. Hierom, to whom he writes it, that he does not imagine
he would have him so read his books, as if it were a heinous thing to doubt,
whether perchance, in them, some error might be found; that privilege was
reserved to sacred writers. I confess, says he, that unto those books of
scripture only which are now called canonical, I have learned to defer this
fear and honor, that I most firmly believe, none of those Authors, to have
erred any thing in writing; and if (in eis literis) in those writings I find
any thing which may seem contrary to the truth, I make no doubt but that,
either the book or coppie is faulty, or that the interpreter has not
understood what was said, or that I my self do not conceive or understand it.
In Baroe who does urge this authority, against the Church and Counsels decree
or sentence, and impertinentlie, you may note these corruptions; first that for
Si cum doctiore amico sic disputemus vt quicquid dixerit necesse sit approbare,
nec quaerendi saltem causa liceat aliquantulum reluctari: tum vero sine vllo
timore offensionis tanquam in ca^po luditur, sed mirum si nobis non illuditur.
Ego enim fateor charitati tuae, solis eis Scripturaru^ libris qui iam canonici
appellantur, didici hunc timorem honoremque defer, vt nullum eorum authorem
scribeodo aliquid errasse firmissime credam. Ac si aliquid in eis offendero
literis, quod videatur contrarium veritati, nihil al^ud quam vel mendos^m esse
codicem, vel interpretem non assecutum esse quod lictum est, vel me minime
intellexis^e non ^mb^gam. Alios autem ita lego vt q^a^ta ^be^ sanctitate
doctrinaque praepolleant, non ideo ve^^m p^^^m quia ipsi ita senserunt; sed
quia mihi vel per illos authors canonic^s vel probabili ratione, quod a vero
non abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt. Nec te, mi frater, sentite aliquid aliter
existimo; prorsus inquam non te arbitror sic legi tuos libros velle, tanquam
Prophetarum vel Apostolorum; de quorum scriptis quod omni errore careant
dubitare nefarium est. S. Aug. Epist. 19. ad Hier.
Scripturarum libris, to accomodate it the better for his purpose, he puts in,
Scriptorum; and Scriptoribus; urging the word against us. Secondly he omits
aliquid, in that part, nullum eorum authorum scribendo aliquid errasse, whereas
the force of the speech, and prerogative is by that word specified. Thirdly,
because in the words immediately following, if they had been put down, his
corruptions had been laid open to the reader, by another aliquid, and litteris,
he leaves them out; immediately joining others which he thought to be more for
his purpose: as by comparison of his citation put above, page 101. to the words
themselves in this Addition, it will appear.

QVanquam sicut paulo ante dixi, tantummodo Scripturis canonicis hanc ingenuam
debeam seruitutem, qua eas solas ita sequar vt conscriptores earum nihil in eis
omnino errasse, nihil falliciter posuisse non dubitem. Baro p. 335. ex S. Aug.
and ad eundem sensum plura. S. Augustines mind is further opened by another
place, brought, as against us, out of the same Epistle. S. Hierome had objected
against him seven authors for his opinion in the matter whereof they dispute in
that conference made by letters: and demanding whom he followed, he, ( S. Aug.)
shows first that S. Hierome did not approve of four of his own, so that he
was to find out only three to set against the three that remained; to which
purpose he mentions, as favoring him, S. Ambrose, and S. Cyprian, unto whom
(because be did not himself esteem so of their authority, as if there might
not exceptions be taken against their writings or opinion in some matter,) he
adds a third, of authority incontroulable, namely S. Paul. His Flagitas a me
vt aliquem saltem vnum ostendam, cuius in hac resententiam sim secutus, cum
tutam plures nominatim commemoraueris, etc. cum sint ferme sex vel septem,
horum quatuor authoritatem tu quoque infringis. Nam etc. tres igitur restant
etc. Si quaeras quid hinc senserit noster Ambrosius, quid noster itidem
Cyprianus, inuenies fortasse nec nobis defuisse quos in eo quod asserimus
sequeremur: quanquam sicut paulo ante dixi tantu^modo Scripturis etc. vt supra,
page 105. S. August. epist. 19.
words objected, which are by him uttered on the foresaid occasion, be these, I
owe to the canonical scriptures only this ingenuous service or subjection,
whereby I follow them only so as I firmly believe that their writers erred
in them nihil omnino, nothing at all; nor put any thing in them deceitfullie.
It is the very same that was before delivered out of Stapleton. And the rest
of the citations wherein he compares writings with the Scriptures have all the
samesence. Neque enim quorumlibet disputationes quamuis Catholicorum and
laudatorum hominum velut Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus, vt nobis non
liceat salua honorificentia, quae illis debetur hominibus, aliquid in eorum
scriptis improbare atque respuere, si forte inuenerimus quod aliter senserint
quam veritas habet diuino adiutorio vel ab alijs intellecta, vel a nobis. S.
Aug epist. 111.
Other books have not, in every part, that infallibility; other writers have
not such ample assistance, as the Sacred writers had.

SI diuinarum scripturarum, earum sc. quae canonicae in Ecclesia nominantur,
perspicua firmatur authoritate, sine vllae dubitatione credendum est. Alijs
vero testibus vel testimonijs, quibus aliquid credendum esse suadetur, tibi
credere vel non credere liceat, quantum ea momenti ad faciendam fidem vel
habere vel non habere perpenderis. Baro p. 336. ex Aug. epist. 112. 2. THe
Second exception is, that S. Augustine in an other place ( Epist 112.) speaks
not of writings only, but of witnesses; and leaves it, as it is pretended, in
our choice, whether we will believe or not believe any but the Scripture.
Whereunto I answer, that he does not either there or in any other place of his
writings, reject all authority or testimony that is other, in your sense;
binding us only to the scripture so as you pretend. For it is manifest that he
does admit the testimony of the Church, as infallible; esteeming it S. August.
epist. 118. c. 5.
most insolent madness to contradict it; yet the Church is not scripture. To
this purpose there be many places in him, whereof I will cite one. In his book
de Unit. Eccl. disputing with an heretic about the Question of rebaptizing
such as out of the Church had been baptized, and urging the custom of the
Church which did receive such as were penitent into communion, without
rebaptizing, he makes this discourse; S. Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 19.
If some wise man to whom our Lord Jesus gives testimony, should be consulted
of us in this Question, we ought no ways to doubt of doing or putting in
execution what he told us, least we should be esteemed to repugne not so much
him as our Lord Jesus Christ, by whose testimony he was commended: now, our
Lord Jesus does give testimony to his Church, wherefore, as that Church
(diffused) thorough all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, does receive such
(penitents,) so without all windings and tergiuersation thou art to be
received. And if thou will not, thou do, most perniciouslie, contrary to
thy own salvation, strive against, not me or any man, but our Savior
himself, whilst thou will not believe that thou art so to be admitted, as that
Church which he (whom not to believe thou do confess to be detestable)
commends with his testimony, does admit. The same is confirmed out of the
Gospel, wherein our blessed savior says to his Apostles, and Disciples, and
in them to the Church, that they should bear Matthew. 24. Joan.15.
testimony of him; yet the Apostles, the Disciples, the whole Church, be not
Scripture. Again, Luc. 10.
he that hears you hears me, (says our Savior) he that contemns you
contemns me. There is therefore an authority alive, and distinct from the
written word, which we must yield unto; by S. Augustine also confessed; and
consequently, it is not in our choice, to believe or contemn, any but the
scripture. Nor were the primitive Christians without obligation of believing
the Gospel proposed unto them by the Apostles, before it was written down; as
you know by those words which immediately follow their commission, Marc. vlt.
he that believes not shall be condemned.

To the place objected, Supra page, 107.
alijs testibus vel testmonijs quibus aliquid credendum esse suadetur, tibi
creder^ vel non credere liceat quantum ea momenti etc. Page 108.
his words above cited, do suggest an easy answer: as, this Others, not
commended by this authority, believe or not believe, as you see cause; but,
others, commended by this authority, you must believe, as far as by it they
are warranted and commended. Our Savior proved that those who believed Moses
and the Prophets and the Psalms, must believe him, for of him they give
testimony. The like it is of the Church; if you believe the Prophets, you must
believe the universal Church, for they give testimony of it, and (as S.
Augustine says) more clear, then of our S. Augu. Enarr. in psalm. 30. conc. 2.
Savior himself. One testimony may warrant another, and so they will become,
in a manner, one. He that obaieth the magistrate, does therein, honor the
Prince by whom he is put in authority. And he that yeildeth all due reverence
to Princes, does therein a duty unto God, who commands it. We stoop to God,
when with all reverence we receive his word written or unwritten; and we
submit our selves to the written word or Scripture, when we listen to the
Church which the Scripture does commend.

When S. Augustine in his dispute with Cresconius about rebaptization, was come
this S. Aug. li. 1. contra Cresco c. 31. and 32.
quia nec vos potestis proferre de Scripturis, quarum nobis communis est
authoritas, ab haereticis venientem denuo baptizatum, nec nos ita susceptum;
quantum ad hanc remattinet, par nobis causa est. Since neither you can produce
out of Scriptures whose authority is common to us, one coming from Heretics
again baptized, nor we one so received, for as much as concerns this matter
(that is, producing out the Scripture an example of the one or the other,) our
cause is equal; he shows notwithstanding, how, even in this point, the Church
in his time and he with it, followed the most certain authority of the
Scripture, Ibidem c. 35.
neque enim parui momenti etc. for it is not of small regard or moment that,
when among the Bishops of the age precedent to the time when Donatus part (or
faction) began to be, this Question did waver and had the different Opinions of
compartners or colleagues amongst themselves without breach of unity, it was
thought good that this which we now maintain should be observed by the whole
Catholic (Church) spread over all the world. And a little after. wherefore
though truly there be not any example of this thing brought out of the
canonical Scriptures, yet the truth of the same Scriptures is held of us, and
even in this thing, when we do that which has now seemed good to the
universal Church, whom the authority of the same Scriptures does commend;
that because the holy Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be
deceived with the obscurity of this Question (and of any other obscure
Question pertaining to faith it is the same) eandem Ecclesiam de illa consulat,
let him require, in it, the judgment of the same Church which the holy
Scripture without ambiguitie does demonstrate.

There is yet a further Answer in the word Alijs. You know that actions done
with ones own hand, by the motion of his own spirit, a man reputes not
aliene: but his own. So does our B. Savior esteem the actions of his
mystical body, done by the motion of his Spirit. Settle it in your hearts
not to meditate before, what you shall answer; for I will give you a mouth and
wisdom, which ^ll your adversaries shall not be able to gainesay nor resist.
Luc. 21. It shall ^e given to you in that same hour what ^ou shall speak: for
it it not you that ^peak, Cum venerit ille Spiritus veritatis, docebit vos
omnem veritatem. Non enim loquetur a semetipso: sed quaecunque audiet loquetur,
etc. de meo accipiet, and annu^ciabit vobis. Joan. 16. Mea doctrina ^o^^st mea,
sed eius qui misit me. Joan. 6 T^es sunt qui testimonium dant in caelo etc. and
hi tres vnu^ sunt 1. Joan. 5.
but the Spirit of your Father that ^eaketh in you. Matt. 10. My words that I
have put in thy mouth, shall not ^epart out of thy mouth, and out of the ^outh
of thy seed, etc. says our Lord, ^om hence forth and forever. Esaie ^9. He
that hears you, hears me. ^uke 10. Since you seek a proof of christ
speaking in me. 2. Cor. 12. The spirit of our Lord has spoken by me, and his
words, by my tongue. 2. Kings ^.

Again. The decrees which we ^eak of, have the testimony of the ^olie Ghost;
and the Scriptures ^ue the testimony of the Holy ^host. Now, the Holy Ghost
giving testimony to both these, i^ not thereby in himself divided into two: He
is still the same testis.

Saint Gregory our Apostle, reverenced the four first general Councils, li.
1. Regest. ep. 24.
vt quatuor Euangelia, as he did the four Gospels. Saint Augustine whose
authority is here objected when he speaks of the sentence against the
Donatists, li. 6. de Bapt. c. 39.
says Deus plenario Concilio reuelauit. The Church Waldensis above told you,
make no doubt but that the Holy Ghost assists her, li. 2. Doct. fid. c. 27.
in her sincere oecumenicall assemblies: He is present to them, and defines in
them. So d^ the Apostles believe too, Act. 15.
attributing their decree to the Holy Ghos^ whose assistance was Suggeret
vobis omnia. Ioh. 14. In vobis erit. Ibide^. Docebit vos omnem veritatem. c. 16.
promised It has seemed good to the Holy Ghos^ and to us. This for Councels.
No^ for Scripture.

Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esa^ the Prophet unto our Fathers. A^ vlt. God
who at sundry times and (...) diverse manners, spoke in times pas^ unto the
Fathers by the Prophets. He^ 1. He spoke by the mouth of his ho^ Prophets which
have been since (...) world began. Luc. 1. Holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1.

In a word. There are divisions of graces, but one Spirit: and there are
divisions of operations, but one Lord: and there are divisions of
ministrations, but one God; who works all in all. And the manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every one, to profit. To one etc. Vide Disput. li. 3
vbi agitur de Spiritus Sancti assistentia.
And all these things works one and the same Spirit, dividing to every one
according as it will. 1. Cor. 12.

I forbear to note that Saint Augustine speaks in the place objected of a
point Cum enim petiuisses vt de inuisibili Deo, vtrum peroculos corporeos
possit videri, prolixe aliquid copioseque ad te scriberem, negare non potui. S.
Aug. Epist. 112. Quod non sic ostendero, vt aut corporis, aut animi sensu,
visum perceptumque teneatur, and tamen dixero aliquid quod aut verum quidem aut
falsum esse necesse sit sed nullo illorum duum genere videatur, restat vt
tantum modo credatur vel non credatur. Sed si dininarum Scripturarum, earum sc.
quae canonicae in Ecclesia nominantur, perspicua (quod dixero) firmatur
authoritate, sine vlla dubitatione credendum est. Alijs vero testibus etc. vt
supra. Ibidem. Dico itaque quod visuri sint Deum in ipso corpore; sed vtrum per
ipsum, sicut per corpus nunc videmus solemn, lunam, stellas, mare, ac terram,
and quae sunt in ea, non parua quaestio est. S. Aug. li 22. de Ciuit. Dei c.
29. Ratiocinatio illa Philosophorum qua disputant ita mentis aspectu
intelligibilia videri, and sensu corporis sensibilia id est corporalia, vt nec
intelligibilia per corpus, nec corporalia per scipsa men's valeat intueri, si
posset nobis esse certissima, profecto certum esset per oculos corporis etiam
spiritalis nullo modo posse videri Deum. Sed istam ratiocinationem and vera
ratio and prophetica irridet authoritas. Ibidem. Tametsi nec Scripturae, nec
Concilioru^, nec Patru^ testimonijs express definitu^ sit, no^ posse Deum
oculo corporeo videri, id tame adeo efficaci ratione naturali etc. Vasquez 1.
p. disp. 40 c. 2.
not determined by the Church: whence arises a third Answer. And he that can
but English his Inspiciatur codex manuscriptus.
words, will himself epsy a fourth; and a fifth.

Quasi Episcoporum Concilia Scripturis canonicis aliquando fuerint comparata.
Baro. p. 336 ex Aug.
3. The third exception is, that Counsels according to S. Augustine, be not
equal to the Scripture. But I see not how any thing can be drawn hence
against their infallibility in decrees. We do not equal the Apostles or the
Prophets to our Savior Jesus Christ; nor the written word, with the eternal
and increated word; yet, the Prophets and the Apostles, and the Scripture or
written word, are infallible. Moreover; the Canonical Scriptures are
infallible in all what ever they avouch, of what argument or matter soever it
be, which latitude of infallibility we find not in the acts of General
Councels; nor in any other book or writing, as you were told before; and,
though I do not, your self will, repeat again out of S. Augustine, quis S.
Aug. li. 2. de bapt. contr. Donat. c. 3.
nesciat Sanctam Scripturam canonicam tam veteris quam noui testamenti certis
suis terminis contineri, eamque omnibus posteriorum Episcoporum literis ita
praeponi, vt de illa omnino dubitari and disceptari non possit vtrum verum vel
rectum sit quicquid in ea scriptum esse co^stiterit? That quicquid, does import
an amplitude of infallibility, which Counsels have not; and therefore they
are not equal unto Scripture. The Donatists excepted against a Council,
because it had in it registered the day and the Consuls. Etiam hinc gestis
ipsis Cirte^sibus calumniabantur quia ibi dies and Co^sules legebantur; and
exigeba^t a nobis vt aliqua Ecclesiastica Concilia proferremus, vbi dies
recitarentur and consules, etc. etiam hoc exigebant vt de Scripturis sanctis
ostenderemus alicubi dies and Consules esse conscriptos: quasi Episcoporum
Concilia Scripturis canonicis aliquando fuerint co^parata, aut possunt etiam
ipsi de Scripturis sanctis proferre Co^cilium vbi Apostoli iudices sederint and
accusatum aliquem damnauerint vel absoluerint. Et tamen respondebimus eis etiam
Prophetas libros praenotatis and definitis commendasse temporibus, quo anno,
cuius regis, etc. S. Aug. li. cont. Donatist. post Collat. c. 15.
Requiring of the Catholics to show any where out of Scripture, where the
days and consuls were registered and enrolled. Whereunto S. Augustine answers,
that Counsels are not parallelled with Scripture; the one (to wit, the
Council) may do well, in registring both days and Consuls, though the other
do not so; or, they may be added, and not by the authority of the Council;
though nothing be registered in the Scripture, but by the direction of the holy
Ghost. The acts of Counsels are not equalized in exactnes, and extent of
infallibility, to the books written by Gods Secretaries; we give the
prerogative to the Scriptures, and so do the words objected out of S.
Augustine; which are cited in the margin.

In the same place whence they were taken he tells how the Catholics, did
forbear to examine, why in one Council the day was noted, and in the other
not, quia illi (Donatistae) vanas moras volebant innectere; and all heretics
are of the same condition, they hinder with impertinent Cauills the process of
the Catholics arguments, and catch at all occasions to trifle out the time.
For the same cause, disputing in another place with an Arian, he did forbear
to urge against him the authority of the Council of Nice, against which the
heretic took exceptions, opposing the Ariminian Council. The examen of which
two points, thereby called into controversy; I mean, the lawfulnes of the
one, and the vnlawfullnes of the other; would have taken up the time, and
transferd the dispute into another question; which heretics greedily desire
when they cannot answer. but S. Augustine would not permit that scope to his
adversary: and therefore, having mentioned the two foresaid Counsels, and in
honor of the one which had defined the thing he was disputing of, said, it S.
Aug li. 3. contra Max. c. 14.
was there veritatis authoritate and authoritatis veritate firmatum,
established by the authority of truth and truth of authority; and
contrariwise, of the other; that there were multi paucorum fraud decepti, many
deceived by the fraud or circumuention of a few, whereby heretical impiety
endeavored to weaken what the Catholic fathers in the power of truth and
authority had established; Sed nunc nec ego Nicenu^, nec tu debes Ariminense,
tanquam praeiudicaturus proferre Concilium; nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu
illius detineris. Scripturarum authoritatibus, no^ quorumque proprijs, sed
vtrisque communibus testibus etc Baro p. 337. ex Aug.
having I say mentioned these two Counsels, he forbeares to urge his argument
out of the authority of the Nicene Council, and makes it out of that
authority which his adversary did admit; thereby the sooner to conclude,
being so to dispute only about the meaning of the words he was to bring, and
needing not to argue for his authority whose words they were. But now (for
both of us be content with this course) neither do I, the Nicene, neither
ought thou as by way of prejudice, produce, the Ariminian Council: neither
am I held in with the authority of this (the Ariminian,) nor thou, of that,
(the Nicene.) thou do assume to thy self, the liberty not to obaie it, and
out Infra, in fi. huius relectionis ad sextum.
of thy malice art not held in, with that great authority, though thou, and
all others, ought to be; since Hoc est illud homousion quod in Concilio Nicaeno
aduersus haereticos Arianos a Catholicis Patribus Veritatis authoritate and
authoritatis veritate firmatum est: quod postea in Concilio Ariminensi propter
nouitatem in verbis minus quam oportuit intellectum, quam tamen fides antiqua
pepera^, multis paucorum fraud deceptis, haeretica impietas sub haeretico
Imperatore Constantio labefactare tentauit. Sed post non longum tempus
liberate Catholicae fidei praeualente etc. S. Aug. li 3. contra Maxim. c. 14.
Sed nunc nec ego etc. ( vt supra in marg.) Ibidem.
the authority of truth it self, which cannot lie, does there establish the
thing which we dispute of. See what S. Athanasius has testified of the
authority of that Council to convince Heretics. Efficax ad omnem impietatem
euertendam etc. infra in Addition: ad Athan.

PEtit Augustinus a Donatistis vt Ecclesiam suam demonstrent Non in sermonibus
and rumoribus Afrorum, non in Concilijs Episcoporum suorum, non in literis
quorumlibet disputatorum, non in signis and prodigijs falla^ibus etc. sed in
praescripto legis, in Prophetarum praedictis, in Euangelistarum
praedicationibus. Baro. p. 337. and in eandem sententiam plura p. 338. 4. THe
fourth exception out of S. Augustine is, that disputing with the Donatists he
urged them to show by Scripture how theirs and not the Catholic or
universal, was the true Church; and would not have the matter tried by their
Counsels. I answer that though the Church once known, and her authority
admitted, that will serve to determine controversies, as you heard S. Augustine
say before; yet, when the Question is of the Church it self, Whether it be a
thing in the intention of our Savior confined to one Nation, or extended over
all, and, with an Adversary who does admit Scripture; the way to demonstrate
against him (vt ex tuis concessionibus etc. S. Aug. li. con. Cresc. c. 33.) the
way I say, to demonstrate against him, is, to look upon the Prophecies and
see the description of it there; and, to harken withal what our Savior in the
Gospel has delivered, of it. The Donatists, with whom S. Augustine deals,
admitted the canonical books wherein these two things are; and they being
once admitted, the Question might be defined out of them. And, of the
testimonies of the Law and Prophets and Psalms; and, of our blessed Savior
himself; in this controversy of the Church, S. Augustine said unto the
Donatists S. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
haec sunt ca^sae nostrae documenta, haec fundamenta, haec firmamenta; the
cause he speaks of, was, Whether the Donatists i^ Africa, or the Catholics in
all Nations, were the Church; whether (...) were a thing confined unto the
limits of that country or extended over all the world, according to Gods
intention? and, the testimonies of our Savior, and of the Law, and of the
Prophets and Psalms, these testimonies he says, were documents and
foundations and establishments of this cause. He was not to prove it out of
Counsels; for he that denies the whole, does withal reject the authority of
each part, or what ever is within the whole; they who condemned and opposed the
whole Catholic Church did withal slight the authority of her Counsels, as
Pagans also do; but he was to prove it by a principle, which they rejected not.

Neither does it follow that Counsels therefore in themselves are not worthy
of belief, or infallible in their assertion; or, that S. Augustine did not
esteem them so when to convince the Donatists he took his arguments from the
Prophets to confirm or prove the foresaid point. S. Peter heard a voice from
2. Petr. 1.
heaven testifying of our Savior, yet he confirms it the same way, firmiorem
babemus Propheticum sermonem, we have the prophets words which yet confirm us
more: and our B. Savior, though most worthy of credit, as being the truth it
self, confirmed his resurrection, and other mysteries, to the Disciples, by
the same Ipse Dominus Jesus cu^ resurrexisset a mortuis, and discipuloru^
oculis videndum, manibusque tange^dum corpus suum offerret, ne quid tamen
fallaciae se pati arbitrarentur, magic eos testimonijs legis and propherataru^
and psalmoru^ confirmandos esse iudicauit, ostendens ea de se impleta quae
fuerant tanto ante praedicta. S. Augu. de unit. Eccles. c. 16.
means. One testimony, as I said before upon the like occasion, does
illustrate another; and many joined together, do more easily master our
understanding, and make it yield obedience to the truth.

For the better comprehension of S. Augustines mind in this matter, I will
add a word or two more touching this way of discovering a truth in Religion;
suppose it be, whether Jesus be the Messiah and Redeemer of the world? or,
whether this or that congregation, be the Church of the Messiah? For the notice
of the former of these two, read the Prophets, where you shall find that a
Messiah shall come, that he shall be borne in Bethlem, preach, do miracles; be
resisted and rejected by the Jews, who were keepers of these books of
Prophesies; be persecuted, scourged, put to death, pierced; and after death
rise again; and be acknowledged and adored by the Gentiles. This you read
there; and it is a good direction; but this is not all. You must find out the
man, to whom this description does agree; and, in the comparison of them both
together, the man Jesus with the circumstances of his birth, life, and death,
to the prophetical description; and the Prophecy to the man, in this
comparison I say you know that which you look for, vizt. that, Jesus is the
Messiah and redeemer of the world, when you would get knowledge of the later,
viz. which company is the Church, you first take notice of a company of
people, professing one faith, in all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem:
defending it, by her Pastors Vt omittam sapientia^ (syncerissima^) qua^ in
Ecclesia esse Catholica non creditis, multa sunt alia quae in eius gremio me
iustissime teneant. Tenet consensio populorum atque gentium; tenes authoritas,
miraculis inchonta, spe nutrita, charitate aucta, vetustate firmata: tenet ab
ipsa sede Petri Apostoli, cui pascendas oues suas post resurrectione^ Dominus
co^mendauit, vsque ad praesentem episcopatum successio sacerdotum: tenet
postremo ipsum Catholicae nome^ etc. S. August. cont. Epist. Fundamenti c. 4.
Ego vero Euangelio non crederem nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoueret
authoritas. Ibid. c. 5. Cum igitur tantum auxilium Dei, tantum profectu^
fructumque videamus, dubitabimus nos eius Ecclesiae co^deregremio, quae vsque
ad confessionem generis humani, ab apostolica sede per successiones
episcoporu^, frustra haereticis circumlatrantibus, and partim plebis ipsius
iudicio, partim conciliorum grauitate, partim etiam miraculorum maiestate
damnatis, culmen authoritatis obtinuit? cui nolle primas dare vel summae
profecto impietatis est, vel praecipitis arrogantiae. S. Aug. de vtil credendi
c. 17.
in Counsels, and otherwise; offering to God, every where Sacrifice or
oblation, leading an innocent life in exterior profession; and, confirming,
with miracles, her belief and doctrine; but this alone, so abstracted from the
increate authority, does not breed an act of divine belief that this company
is the Church of God; wherefore you go further, and in the Prophets, and other
parts of the Bible, read a description of the Church, diffused over all the
world beginning at Jerusalem, with power to meet in Council, and assistance
of the Spirit; offering to God, in all Nations, a clean oblation^ disposed
Hierarchicallie, with her watchmen ever on her walls; he^ Pastors ready to
maintain the truth, and attending carefully to the flock that by Error they
be not circumuented: and then, comparing one of these unto the other, vizt. the
company to the prophecy, the prophecy to the company; in the comparison you
find, and believe, (with an act of divine faith) the true Church. It is this,
as I conceive which S. Augustine points at, in the place before cited, when he
says our Savior confirmed the faith o^ his resurrection by testimonies o^ the
Prophets, S. Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 16
ostendens ea de s^ impleta, que fuerant tanto ante praedicta, showing those
things to be fulfilled of him, which so long before were for^told. And to this
end he showed hi^ hands, and side, when he did appear after his resurrection.
Which brought his disciples in mind of, foderunt manus meas and pedes meos;
aspicient ad me quem confixerunt, they have dug my hands and my feet; they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced; and the rest moving them to faith;
and S. Thomas putting his hand in to the wound, in his Master found God.

How to find the Church in this manner, you have been told Disp. li. 2.
els-where. Looking all about, on the world, and into monuments of antiquity,
you see a great company of people, reaching from the Apostles time, and
stretched out into all Nations, communicating with the Sea Apostolic in the
profession of one and the same Religion, and holding out a book to all that
will read it. You read; and observe. And considering the company, you
percaue the book is a prophecy; for, being written long before the company
was extant, it does describe it perfectly; and foretells the coming of it;
with diverse particulars that come not of necessity but of election and free
choice: considering the book, you perceive the company to be the Church; for,
there you find it so delivered and affirmed by him that made the book, Disp
p. 177.
who foreseeing things future, (many ages before they came to pass) certainly
foretold of it; and is worthily believed, as having such an infinite foresight
and certain comprehension of all kind of things future.

ET ipsa concilia quae per singulas regiones vel prouincide fiunt plenariorum
conciliorum authoritati, quae fiunt ex vniuerso orb Christiano, fine vllis
ambagibus cedere; ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus emendari, cum
aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod clausum erat, and cogno cit^r quod
latebat. Baro. p. 339. ex Aug. 5. IN the fifth place are objected out of S.
Augustine those words, Provincial Counsels without all tergiuersation give
place to the authority of general Counsels assembled out of all the
Christian world, and many times the precedent plenarie or general Counsels
are mended by the following (plenarie Councels) when by some experiment of
things, that is opened which was shut, and that known which was unknown. For
the understanding of which words, it is to be noted, first, that S. Augustine
is there disputing with the Donatists, who amongst other things had objected
against the Catholics, for their error, Saint Cyprians au^horitie, and his
writings or Epistles; and a Council which he made, whe^ein their tenet of
rebaptization was ^ffirmed. To which three points he ^here answers: first, if
the example ^r authority of S. Cyprian were of ^uch esteem with them, they
should ^ather follow him in embracing ^he communion of the Si authoritas
Cypriani seq^e^da est, magis ea sequenda est in vnitate seruanda, quam in
Ecclesiae consuetudine commutanda. Si autem Concilium eius atte^ditur, huic est
vniuersae Ecclesiae posterius Conci^^um praeponendum S. Aug. li. 2. de Bap. c.
9 vide etiam c. 1. eiusdem li.
Church; which he did; and not break into ^hisme, which was a thing he
de^ested. Secondly the letters and wri^ngs of S. Cyprian (and it is the ^me of
other Bishops writings) are ^ot to be presumed so entire for ^uth, that nothing
in them Certe nobis obijcere soletis Cypriani literas, Cypriani sententiam,
Cypriani concilium. Cur authoritatem Cypriani pro vestro schismate assumitis,
and eius exemplum pro Ecclesiae pace respuitis? Quis autem nesciat Sancta^^
Scripturam canonicam tam veteris quam noui testamen^ti certis suis terminis
contineri, eamque omnibus posteriorum Episcoporum literis ita praeponi vt de
illa omni^ no dubitari non poss^t vtrum verum vel vtrum rectum f^ quicquid in
ea scriptum esse constiterit? Episcoporum a^tem literas quae post confirmatum
canonem vel scripsunt vel scribuntur, and per sermonem forte sapientiore^
cuiuslibet in ea re peritioris, and per aliorum episcoporu^ grauiorem
authoritatem, doctiorumque prudentiam, (...) per concilia, licere reprehendi si
quid in eis forte a verita^ deuiatum est. Et ipsa concilia quae per singulas
regiones and (...) ( vt supra page 128.) S. Aug. li. 2. de Baptis. con. Donat^
c. 3.
may ^e reprehended: such integrity of an ^pistle or other writing (vt de illa
^nino dubitari and disceptari non pos^ vtrum verum vel vtrum rectum (...)
quicquid inea Scriptum esse constiterit,) is the prerogative of hol^ Scripture.
Thirdly provincial Synods (such as that of S. Cyprian) yeel^ unto general
Counsels, which a^ assembled out of the whole worl^ S. Aug. li. 2. cont.
Donat. cap. 9.
vniuersum partibus, semper in^ optimo praeponitur, the whole is deso^uedlie
preferred before the part. Such (...) Council, has now determined the
controversy; the world subscribe^ and S. Cyprian would have yeeld^ too;
wherefore you have no reason to stand any longer, upon his Counsel, or his
writings; or to pretend (...) example and authority.

By this S. Augustine has fully answered the Donatists objection. Yet, having
by that occasion, mentioned general Counsels, Our B. Savior sometimes in his
answers taught more then was demanded, as Matthew. 21 36. Queadmodu^ in
superioribus cu^ de resurrectione interrogaretur, plus docuit qua^ tentantes
petebant: sic in hoc loco de primo interrogatus mandato, secundum etiam non
valde quam primum inferius spo^te attulit. S. Chry. Homil. 72. in Matthew.
of him self he goes further; and says, that some of those, otherwhile, may
be ^mended also; Supra page 128.
when by some experiment of things that is opened which was shut up before, and
that known which was unknown. Where, advisedly, (treating of so great a
matter,) ^he has balanced his words; and not ^eft the speech, absolute; as he
did the other next before, of provincial Counsels; but limited it, with two
qualifications; the one restraining it from being extended unto all; saepe; not
always this; but, often: the other contracting it to the case or matter, when
that which was shut up, is opened by some experiment of things. Which metaphor
of opening, he does expound presently in other words, not adding another case,
but expressing more the same which was before delivered under the Metaphor of
opening, and cognoscitur quod latebat, and (by the same experiment of things)
that is known which was before unknown.

Secondly it is to be noted, that S. Augustine does urge against these
heretics the definition of a general Council, wherein by the consent, as he
speaks, of the whole world, the S. Aug. de Haeres. n. 69.
controversy was decided; and the truth established, so, that now the men were
heretics who resisted the verity; though before the definition they were not
(for holding what they did in this matter of rebaptization) guilty of so great
a crime. In this sort he does excuse S. Cyprian; and accuse, or charge the
Donatists. S. August. de Hares. n. 69.
They presume, says he, to rebaptize Catholics wherein they did further
confirm, the they were heretics; it having seeme^ good to the universal
Church, not (...) reuoake (or as another lection has it, not to repeat) the
common baptism, even in heretics themselves. And S. Aug li. 1. cont. Donat.
c. 7.
the obscurity of this question, (of baptism, disputed with the Donatists,)
has in the former times of the Church before the schism of Donatu^ compelled
great men and those endowe^ with great charity, Fathers, Bishop^ so to contend
amongst themselves, without breach of peace, and so to waver, that the
different decrees of Councels in their several Countries did long time shake,
until that which was most wholesomely judged, was, (remotis dubitationibus,)
all doubts removed, established by a plenarie or general Council of the whole
world. Again, Ibidem cap. 18.
before the consent of the whole world had established by the decree of a
general Council what was to be embraced of all in this matter, S. Cyprian
with almost fourscore of his fellowe-Bishops of the Churches of Africa, thought
that every one who was baptized out of the communion of the Catholic Church,
was, when he came to the Church, to be baptized or christened again. And
again, S. Aug. li. 2. cont. Donat. c. 9. Consuetudinis robore tenebatur orbis
terrarum, and haec sola opponebatur, etc. Ibidem.
as yet there had been no general Council assembled in that behalf, but the
world was held in by the strength of custom, and this custom only was
opposed to those which endeavored to bring in that novelty (of rebaptization)
because they could not apprehend the truth; yet afterward, whilst amongst many
on both sides it is spoken of, and sought, it is not only sound out, but also
brought to the authority and strength of a general Council, after Cyprians
passion indeed, but before we were borne. And a little after the words objected.
c. 4.
Neither durst we affirm any such thing if we were not well grounded upon
the most consenting or agreeable authority of the universal Church, unto
which undoubtedly he (S. Cyprian) would have yielded if as then, the truth of
this question, being cleared and declared, had been established by a general
Council. Hence it follows, first that he did acknowledge in general
Counsels, authority to determine controversies; and this controversy
particularly of rebaptization, (which you Error de rebaptizatione hereticorum,
qui certe fundamentalis ^o fu^^, no^dum erat in concilio plenario damnatus etc.
Baro p. 348.
confess was not in a matter fundamental;) and that, therein the truth was
established by authority, (not of scripture, this matter was not so resolved;
but) of the world, in a Council; and so far established, that all, were to
believe it, and, remotis dubitationibus, without as much as doubting of it.
Whence it comes secondly, that to resist such a decree it is diabolical,
which word he does use upon another occasion, and that such as maintain the
contrary, are indeed, heretics.

Thirdly it is to be repeated (which has been said often before) that though
we maintain the infallibility of sincere and approved general Counsels, in
their decrees of faith, yet we do not believe that their infallibility is
extended unto all they write or speak, and in all kind of matter; as not
equallizing their acts with books of Scripture; and consequently, there may
be something in such a Council, sometime, that may need mending. Neither yet
do we maintain or believe, that all Counsels which go under the name of
general, have infallibility in their decrees; some have, as those which are
approved; some have not, and these later may need mending, even in the decree
they make touching faith. Moreover, though the Council that is plenarie and
approved, cannot command a vice, or condemn virtue by decree, yet may it
command that which after may prove inconvenient, or forbid what after may be
admitted when circumstances are changed. And, if a law which at first was well
made, (the circumstances of time and persons being afterward other then they
were before and notably changed,) become inconvenient, (and consequently not
good in these circumstances, though good in it self, and in other
circumstances, such as those were wherein it was first made,) it may be
changed, by power equal to that which made it. The Apostles, by decree, did
forbid the eating of suffocata, things strangled; yet afterward, when the
circumstances were charged and fear of scandal quite removed, the Church
began to do the contrary. To frequent the ceremonies of the law, now, it
were a Sin, peccaret mortalitersi quis nunc ceremonias obscruaret. S. Tho.
1.2. q. 103. a. 4. though you know by what authority (for the time) they were
commanded. If you be sick, physic is good; if you be well, the same is bad
for you. The same thing, may be convenient, and inconvenient, good and bad, in
diverse circumstances. When the commonwealth is distempered, a law may be
necessary; and at other times, not useful, yea inconvenient; and therefore to
be annulled. And the commonwealth in anulling of it, mends her Statute-booke,
respectiuelie to these later circumstances; though when she made it first she
did not commit a fault.

Fourthlie it is to be noted that by the doctrine of S. Augustine before
delivered, there be some kind of Counsels which in their decrees of faith are
not to be mended, nor to be doubted of; that it is heretical to oppose them;
and consequently, that they have nor exterior only, but interior obedience
also (remotis dubitationibus) due, to such, their decrees: which being manifest
in him, you labor in vain to be extend his words objected, unto all: which
were to make him contradict, both the truth, and the Church of his time, and
himself. He says, and we too, that some general Counsels may be mended,
when by trial or experiment that is opened which was shut up, and known which
before was unknown; but some general Counsels cannot be mended; no, nor
questioned or doubted of, in their decrees touching faith. Now to your
objections in particular.

First you say that he speaks of mending in matter of faith; I answer that
those words, in matter of faith, be your addition. He speaks indeed, of
mending in such matters as by trial or experiment may be known, but, divine
verities which are the object of our faith, be not of this nature. Neither if
there had been expressed in that clause, (which is of general Councels,)
matters of faith, were you able to conclude any thing against us, for we
grant that some which bear the name, may be mended in that, also. Of all we
cannot grant it, without contradicting S. Augustine, and making him withal to
contradict himself.

Secondly you say that his scope or intention was to distinguish the
authority of Scripture from all other authority, wherefore since no general
Council whatsoever, is Scripture, he means them all; and will have all
subject unto mending. I answer, that he intended to satisfy three things
objected. 1. S. Cyprians sentence or example. 2. S. Cyprians writings. 3. S.
Cyprians Council. The comparison of Scripture, is with writings; and it is a
part of his answer to the Second point; as I have related it. And it is true,
that this writing has the prerogative above all writings, vide supra, page
130. and page 106. marg.
that nothing at all can be questioned, which it affirms. To S. Cyprians
Epistles, or any other man's, we owe not that service or honor. Of Councels he
speaks afterward, in the third place; and you know that, it is not
essential to their decrees, to be written. There is also great difference,
betwixt Counsels and the Scripture, in infallibility, (as has been shown
many times;) although the decrees in faith, (of such as are approved) are
infallible. But if you will have him aim at this, that all general Councels
whatsoever, may be mended, and in their decrees of faith, you make him, as
before was observed, to contradict himself. For, these are contradictorie;
some may not, as that of Nice; and, all may. Moreover by that saepe, it is
manifest that his speech is not general, as you would have it; saepe, is short
of Semper. And the qualification which he does use, is another argument of the
same.

Thirdly you say that unless S. Augustine speak in the words principally
objected, of amendment in matter of faith, he leaves unanswered, the Donatists
objection. But neither will this make any thing to your purpose; for, before he
comes to speak of amending plenarie Counsels, he has fully satisfied the
three points of their argument, taken from S. Cyprians example; from his
writings, or Epistles; and, from his Counsel: his example should have moved
them rather to adhere unto the Church; his writings were not canonical
Scripture; they might have something in them liable to reprehension; Supra in
marg. etc. in additionibus.
and his Council; being only national, was to give place to a general.
There stays their argument, wholly satisfied. The rest was added for a fuller
illustration of the matter of Counsels, whereunto that occasion had led him.
They be not all of one nature; some kind of mending or other, they be subject
to, sometimes; though not all unto the same. We do not, of necessity, so
adhere unto them all, as if nothing, in any, Saepe priora, a posterioribus
emendantur. But I pray you what amendment had he seen in the Decrees of faith,
of approved general Councels? show me the saepe there. Name, out of him, the
Cou^cells; and the decrees so me^ded.
might be better then it is. The Ariminian was general, but he would not
maintain it; the second Ephesine was general, yet the Council of Chalcedon
did anull it. Yea, suppose the decrees of faith be all right, and the Council
lawful and approved, yet something otherwhiles may be mended; as, when by some
experiment of things that comes to light which before was unknown.

Moreover, in that you say the Donatists argument is not answered, unless it be
granted, that any general Council whatsoever, may be mended in their decree,
touching faith; you seem to call their heresy again into dispute: for, that
which S. Augustine so much urges against them (and it was the thing indeed
which choked that Heresy,) was the decree of a general Council. And it is
strange you should imagine that he does here in the same book disauow the
same decree; as if his answer to their weak objection could not have place,
but by cutting the throat of his own Argument, which they durst not look
upon; and, that his own forces, of necessity must be ruined and oppressed,
with the fall of their cause.

Look better on his words: and in them you shall find that he resolved as we
do. He says touching this Controversy with the Donatists, that it was taken
into consideration, and the Nec nos ipsitale aliquid auderemus asserere, nisi
vniuersae Ecclesiae concordissima authoritate firmati: cui and ipse (Cyprianus)
sine dubio cederet, si iam illo te^pore quaestionis huius veritas eliquata and
declarata per pleuarium Concilium solidaretur S Aug li. 2. de Bapt. c 3.
truth declared, and Postea tamen dum inter multos ex vtraque part tractatur
and quaeritur, non solum inuenta est (veritas,) sed etiam ad plenarij Concilij
authoritate^ roburque perducta. c. 9.
established, by the vt supra number. 1. and 2.
authority (not by plain Scripture, there was none; but by the authority) of
the Si autem Concilium eius (Cypriani) atte^ditur, huic est vniuersae Ecclesiae
posterius Concilium praeponendum. cap. 9. vt supra. Totus Catholicus orbis
amplexus est. li. 1. c. 18.
universal Church: and this authority not in the Laietie, or diffused; but in
supra. plenario totius orbis Concilio c. 7.
a Council, wherein the Antequam plenarij Concilij sententia quid in hac
resentiendum esset totius Ecclesiae consensio confirmasset. li. 1. c. 18.
whole Church did in Ibid.
a Decree, express her mind. So that (although before, men perchance might
Salua pace disceptare atque fluctuare, vt diu conciliorum in suis quibusque
regionibus diuersa statuta nutauerint, donec. li. 1 c. 7.
doubt or stagger in the matter,) it was now to be believed Donec plenario
totius orbis concilio, quod saluberrime sentiebatur, etiam remotis
dubitationibus firmaretur. Ibidem.
remotis dubitationibus; and nutauerint, donec. Ibid. Cui and ipse sine dubio
cederet etc vt supra.
obedience to be given to the decree, (whereof Ammedera dixit, Et hoc ego idem
censeo Haereticos baptizandos esse. Huic respondetur; Sed non hoc censet
Ecclesia, cui Deus iam plenario etiam Concilio reuelauit; quod tunc adhuc
aliter quidem sapiebatis, sed quia in vobis charitas salua erat, in vnitate
permanebatis. S. Aug li. 6. de Bapt. c. 39. vide disput. p. 404.
God had been author,) by all who would not expose themselves to be
Scripturarum etiam in hac re a nobis tenetur veritas, cum hoc facimus quod
vniuersae iam placuit Ecclesiae. li 1. cont. Crescon. c. 33. quisquis falli
metuit eandem consulat etc. Ibidem. vt supra.
deceived, and most perniciouslie strive against Quod si non vis, non mihi aut
cuiquam homini, qui vult ita suscipere, sed ipsi Saluatori contra salutem tuam
perniciosissime reluctatis, qui te sic susciptendum esse non vis credere
quemadmodum suscipit illa Ecclesia quam testimonio suo commendat ille cui
fateris nefarium esse non credere. De unit Eccles. c 19.
our Savior himself; and confirm or assure themselves to be Audent etiam
(Donatistae) rebaptizare Catholicos, vbi se amplius Haereticos esse firmarunt,
cum Ecclesiae Catholicae vniuersae placuerit nec in ipsis Haereticis baptisma
rescindere. S. Aug. de Haeres number 69. expende verbum illud (amplius) quod
indicat gradum, in eodem genere.
Heretics. This, I trow, does import as much as we teach of a Counsels
authority. And the grounds whereby S. Augustine could have defended himself,
at that time and in that case, be the same whereby we now defend our selves in
other causes of no less importance; as, of the real presence, propitiatory
Sacrifice, prayer for the dead; and the like: the divine assistance being not
tied peculiarly unto that Age wherein S. Augustine lived.

Fourthlie you say, those words and cognoscitur quod latebat, and that it
known which was before unknown; be meant in matter of faith, because matters
of faith do come to light after they have been unknown. As if this were a
peculiar thing in matters of faith, and not common to diverse other matters,
even those which by experiment may be known, to come to light after
inquisition. there are many other verities which may so come to light, besides
matters of faith, and therefore unless you will argue from the genus to the
species, affirmatiuelie, as thus; it is aliuing creature, therefore it is a
man; which manner of discourse is absurd, you cannot out of those general
words, make it good or prove, that he means matter of faith; not, if this part
were disioyned from the former with a vel; for, there were yet other things
which might so come to light besides matters of faith; all other verities are
not manifested by trial and experiment, though some be: much less can you do
it ^f you consider that the later part and the former be coupled into the same
sense, by the coniunctiue and. (...) answer secondly that, were mat^ers of
faith expressed in that part, (...) for of that part only which con^ernes
plenarie Counsels I speak,) ^s it is manifest they be not; still ^ou were
short of your aim; for, some kind of general Counsels, such as are
unlawful, or such as are lawful but not approved, (though you would never be
able to prove so much out of this place) might need mending; and yet, approved
and confirmed Councels need none.

I know that some of yours do slight the distinction of confirmed and not
confirmed Councels, as a thing not known to S. Augustine and other Ancients;
but they be mistaken much. If you look into the tome of his Epistles you will
see that S. Aug. Ep. 90.
he, with many other Bishops, in a Council, wrote unto Pope Innocentius, to
confirm their acts and decree made against those errors which Pelagius and
Caelesti^^ had avouched; vt statutis nostrae mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae
sedis adhibeatur authoritas; that to the decree^ of our mediocritie, the
authority of the Sea Apostolic be added. And afterward, error and impietas
quae tam multos assertores habet and per diuersa dispersos, etia^ Apostolicae
sedis authoritate anathematizanda est. The error and impiety (of those men)
which has so many abbetters, and those disperse^ in diverse parts or places, is
to be anathematized also by the authority of the Sea Apostolic. Whereunto the
Pope answers, (and his Epistle is there Apud S Aug. Epist. 91.
also) first, commending them for requiring, as they ought to do, the judgment
of the Sea Apostolic, scientes quid Apostolicae sedi debeatur; Secondly,
confirming this obligation, the Fathers says he non humana sed diuina
decreuere sententia vt quicquid de disiunctis remotisque prouincijs ageretur,
non prius ducerent finiendum nisi ad huius sedis notitiam perueniret, vbi tot a
huius authoritate iusta que fuerit pronunciatio, firmaretur; the fathers have
decreed by a sentence not humane but divine, (mark the words) that whatsoever
should be done in dis^oyned and remote provinces, they should not esteem it
to be ended, unless it come first to the notice of this See, where the
proposition or sentence which is just should be established with the whole
authority of this. Thirdly, he declates, quisquis huic assentiens videtur
esse sententiae (speaking of the the Pelagian error) nimium se Catholicae
fidei, and Dei beneficijs profitetur ingratum, who soever seems to consent
into this opinion, does profess himself an enemy to the Catholic faith, and
ungrateful to gods benefits. And in fine, he cuts the faction of, from
communion, separetur ergo etc.

Neither does S. Augustine omit to give notice of this answer, for in the 106.
Epistle, having signified the sending of the acts of the foresaid Council, and
of another also, against the same errors; together with letters to the same
purpose, to Pope Innocentius; he says, S. Aug. Epist. 106. vide eundem Epist.
104. item sermon. 2. de verbis Apostoli and li. 2. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. c. 3.
ad omnia nobis ille rescripsit, eodem modo quo fas erat, atque oportebat,
Apostolicae sedis antistitem. He wrote us an answer to all things in such
manner as a Bishop of the sea Apostolic lawfully might before god, and ought
to do. Adding also els-where, that by those letters, dubitatio tota sublata
est, al^ doubt in that matter was taken away. I omit to put you further in
mind that the Council of Relat. Conc. Chalc. ad Leonem Papam.
Chalcedon asked of Leo the great, as their Head and Father, confirmation of
their decrees; which he also gave, though Leo Papa Epist. 55. ad Pulch. Aug.
not in all they desired, and thereby did manifest the fullnes of his
authority. It were easy to bring many examples in this kind, were I
professedlie to treat of it, but keeping my self (as I have done hitherto) to
those authors you object, it suffices to satisfy by S. Augustines authority
the difficulties which you bring out of S. Augustine. The necessity of the
Popes approbation you find elsewhere, Disput. li. 4. c. 4.
and it is a thing so manifest by the Scripture ( Matthew. 16. and Joan. 21.)
that he, in his Predecessor S. Peeter, is peculiarly designed as Chief of
those Pastors on whom the Church is to rely for the knowledge and meaning of
Gods word, according to the Apostles doctrine, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 2.20. Epist.
Iudae. v. 20
(which Pastors are therefore assisted accordingly, to support the faithful
built upon them,) that all other interpretation which would exclude it, is
violent unto the text; and, Disput. li. 4. c. 1. and 2.
inasmuch as it labors to remove the foundation which our Savior laid, does
endeavor (though vainelie, for it is more then Hell can do,) to ruin the whole
Church.

The pretense of plain Scripture, or of manifest reason (such as an
understanding man considering, cannot but assent unto,) against the consent of
all the Pastors in a Council, is openly insufficient, because it does suppose
(and without, yea against all reason) that they, (the Pastors) with all their
Exercise in Divinity and diligent inquisition, looking into and considering
the words of Scripture, comparing texts together, examining the traditions of
the Church, perusing former Councels, with the writings of the Fathers, and
other monuments of antiquity; and assisted by the Holy Ghost their interior
Master; be not as able (as their adversaries) to conceive plain Scripture,
Innumerabiles sunt qui se videntes non solum ^acta^t, sed a Christo illuminatos
videri volunt. sunt autem Haeretici. S. Augu. in Joan. tract. 45.
and reason so manifest: or, that conceauing and understanding it, they should
be, all, so malicious, (and our Savior so unmindful of his promise) as to
propose unto the world and oblige it to believe as our Saviors words, the
contrary. But it is familiar in such Opponents as want them selves that
Authority which the Son of God has established to keep us from Error, to
pretend evident Scripture and manifest Illi, qui cum in vnitate atque
communione catholica no^ sint Christiano tamen nomine gloriantur, coguntur
aduersari credentibus, and audent imperitos quasi ratione traducere, quando
maxim cum ista medicina Dominus venerit vt fidem populis imperaret. Sed hoc
facere coguntur quia iacere se abiectissime sentiunt si eorum authoritas cum
authoritate catholica conferatur. Conantur ergo authoritatem stabilissimam
fundatissimae Ecclesiae quasi rationis nomine and pollicitatione superare.
Omnium enim Haereticorum quasi regularis est ista temeritas. Sed ille fidei
imperator clementissimus, and per conuentus celeberrimos populorum atque
gentium, sedesque ipsas Apostolorum, arce authoritatis muniuit Ecclesiam, and
per pauciores pie doctos and vere spirituales viros copiosissimis apparatibus
etiam inuictissimae rationis armauit. S. Aug. Epist. ad Diosc. 56.
reason against the Church, to the end they may seem to bring something
greater for to oppress or overcome her authority, as S. Augustine well
observed long ago. And by the like stratagem did the paga^s heeretefore strive
to withdraw men wholly from the Creed, by showing the contrary so cleerelie
that no doubt, as they pretended, could be made of it; which was a way they
thought, to get In Catholica me tenet consensio populorum atque gentium etc.
apud vos autem vbi nihil horum est quod me inuitet ac teneat, sola personat
veritatis pollicitatio, quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur vt in dubium
venire non possit, praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus quibus in catholica
teneor. Si autem tantummodo promittitur and non exhibetur, nemo me mouebit ab
ea fide quae animum meum tot and tantis nexibus Christianae religionis
astringit. S. Aug. contra Epist. Manich. Fundam c. 4. Promitteba^ scientiam
veritatis, and nunc quod nescio cogis vt credam. c. 5. Multo iustius and
cautius facio si catholicis quoniam semel credidi, ad te non transeo, nisi me,
non credere iusteris, sed manifestissime ac apertissime scire aliquid feceris.
Quocirca si mihi rationem redditurus es, dimitte Euangelium. Si ad Euangelium
me tenes, ego ad eos me teneam quibus praecipientibus Euangelio credidi, and
his iubentibus tibi omnino non ctedam. Quod si forte in Euangelio aliquod
apertissimum de Manichaei apostolatu inuenire potueris, infirmabis mihi
catholicorum authoritatem qui iubent mihi vt tibi non credam. Qua infirmata,
iam nec Euangelio credere potero etc. Sed absit vt ego Euangelio non credam.
Ibidem.
scholars, but it proved a mere brag.

. X.
1. Optatus cited his Adversaries, who refused to submit them selves to the
Church, to be tried by the Testament, admitted by themselves. But the cause it
self, was, in the judgment of the whole Catholic world, to be decided in a
Council: and was, in fine, so determined.

2. For finding out the truth, in matter of faith, recourse is to be made to
the fountain.

VOs dicitis licet; nos, non licet. inter licet vestrum and non licet nostrum
nutant and remigant animi populorum Nemo vobis credat, nemo nobis: omnes
contentiosi homines sumus. (Esto.) Quaerendi sunt iudices, si Christiani, de
vtraque part dari non possunt, quia studijs veritas impeditur. Deforis
quaerendus est Iudex: si paganus, non potest nosse Christiana secreta; si
Iudaeus inimicus est Christiani baptismatis. Ergo in terri^ nullum de hac re
reperiri po^erit iudictum, de caelo quaerendus est Iudex. Sed vt quid palsamus
ad caelum cum habeamus hic in Euangelio testamentum. Baro p. 328. ex Optato. 1.
Having answered what was objected out of S. Augugustine; he, will undertake,
for us, to satisfy that you bring from Optatus. and where he looks about for
a Judge to decide the controversy moved by the Donatists, this great Doctor
does answer, yea the S. A^g. contra Donati^tas passim. Specialiter vide li. 2.
de Bapt c. 7 li 5. c. 23. and li. 1. co^t. Cresc. c. 31. and 32
whole Catholic world did agree, that the matter was to be defined in
Council; and that, not by clear scripture; there was none; but by tradition.
By the testament; yes. not the written, but, the nuncupatiue. By the holy
Ghost, S Aug supra inter citat. ex Ock lit. 1.
a judge from heaven; but, speaking (b) in a Council. The whole world did
judge, that this very Controversy whereof Optatus speaks, was to be
determined so; and accordingly it was so determined and ended.

Neither does Optatus deny, that which all Catholics when Saint Augustine
wrote, granted, (and he himself yielded as much of the Serpit little sermo
v^lut cancer. dixit hoc de haereticis quorum caeperat esse illis temporibus
vitiosa doctrina, etc. Dictum est hoc and de Arrio, cuius doctrina nisi Nicaeno
Concilio a 318. Episcopis dissiparetur, pectora multorum sicut cancer
intrauerat. Optat. Milleu. li. 4.
Nicene Council, of whose authority we shall presently hear more from S.
Anathasius who was in it,) that the Church, which has promise of assistance,
or the Pastors, all assembled in a Counsel, those whom the holy Ghost has
placed to govern, and our Savior has given to keep us from being borne
about with every wind of doctrine, have power to determine a controversy in
Religion: But, the Donatists excepting against the Catholics, as parties in
the cause, he betakes himself to scripture; against which (being admitted on
both sides) that pretended exception, had no place. children that contend about
a Legacy, both admit their father testament; and, if there, his words decide
the controversy; they rest: and so, he pleades, the Donatists must do when the
words of our Saviors will or testament be showed; unless they proceed (as they
had denied Church-authoritie, so) to deny that, and him. So on he goes to
show the thing, inscripture. But what if the words of the testament be
obscure? The matter then requires a Judge; and this Judge must have authority,
and assistance; if the case be, as this was, about divine faith: which
assistance, none has, but by virtue of our Saviors promise; and his promise
was made to none but to the Church; not to Pagans, nor heretics; but, to the
Church: wherefore, the Church is to judge. Yet further: what if the words of
the testament have it not at all? the question was, Whether one baptized by an
heretic was to be baptized again when he came into the Church. The answer to
which Question, you do not find in scripture; the Qui lotus est etc.
place which Optatus brings does not mention such as were baptized by
heretics. There is not in all scripture Saint Augustine says, an Quamuia
huius rei certe de scripturis canonicis non proferatur exemplum etc. S. Aug.
li. cont. Cresc. c. 33 vt supra. Apostoli nihil quidem exinde praeceperunt, sed
consuetudo illa quae opponebatur Cypriano, ab eorum traditione exordium
sumpsisse credenda est; sicut sunt multa quae vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, and ob
hoc ab Apostolis praecepta been credu^tur, quanquam scripta non reperian tur.
li. 5. de bapt. c. 23. Cum in Scripturis non inueniamus aliquos etc. De vnitate
Ecclesiae c. 19.
example of it. Shall the matter then rest; and the Donatists, against the
custom and practice of the Church, obtain the cause? There is yet a remedy;
and this is, to call a Council, from all parts of the world; and there, by the
promised assistance, to decide it. Which was done accordingly, and in the
heart of the Church symbolicall, the book wherein Christian Religion is
written by the spirit of the living God, it was found, and brought to light;
and proposed. And to this judgment, all Catholics afterward did subscribe, and
S. Cyprian also who in his time thought the other more probable, would, if we
believe Saint Augustine, most willingly have done; and such as would not
(having notice of it) were, and are, accounted Heretics.

2. Hence (that I note this by the way) we take an Argument against you to
prove by the judgment of Antiquity, two things. 1. that the Church can propose
and oblige us to believe that which she has received only by word of mouth.
2. that our Savior did not limit his promised Assistance, to fundamentalls
only. Not only to fundamentals, nor only to the written word. We have, I
say, in these two things, the judgment of the Church which was in, and before
Saint Augustines days, against you. They did inquire, diligently, what had
been taught formerlie, what tradition had been left in the Church by those who
first planted Religion in it; they made recourse to the fountain. Which kind
of proceeding for the resolution of difficulties, had been commended to them
from the Quid enim and si de aliqua modica quaestione disceptatio esset, no^ne
oporteret in antiquissimas recurrere Ecclesias, in quibus Apostoli conuersati
sunt, and ab ijs de praesenti quaestione sumere quod certum and reliquidum est?
Quid autem si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne
oportebat ordinem sequi Traditionis, quam tradiderunt ijs quibus committebant
Ecclesias, cu^^ordinationi assentiunt multae gentes Barbarorum, eorum qui in
Christum credunt sinc charactere vel atramento scriptam habentes per Spiritum
in cordibus suis salutem, and veterem traditionem diligenter custodientes etc.
S. Irenaeus adu. Haeres. li 3. c 4. cuius capitis initio Non oportet, inquit,
adhuc quaerere apud alios veritatem, cum Apostoli quasi in depositorium dives,
plenissime in ea (Ecclesia) contulerint omnia quae sint veritatis, vti omnis
quicunque velit, sumat ex ea potum vitae. Et Optatus in hanc sententiam Nam and
fontem, inquit, constat vnam esse de dotibus, vnde Haeretici non possunt vel
ipsi bibere, vel alios potare. ita li. 2. Caeterum lege in Irenaeo c. 3. li. 3.
vbi de traditione praeclare disserit. In compendio est apud religiosas and
simplices mentes, and errorem deponere, and inuenire atque cruere veritatem.
Nam si ad diuinae Traditionis caput and originem reuertamur, cessat error
humanus; and sacramentorum coelestium ratione perspecta, quicquid sub caligine
ac nube tenebrarum obscurum latebat, in lucem veritatis aperitur. Si canalis
aquam ducens qui copiose prius and largiter profluebat, subito deficiat, nonne
ad fontem pergitur, vt illic defectionis ratio noscatur, vtrumne arescentibus
venis in capite vnda siccauerit; (siccata sit;) an vero integra inde and plena
procurrens, in medio itinere destiterit: vt si vitio interrupti aut bibuli
canalis effectum est, quo minus aqua continua perseueranter ac iugiter flueret,
refecto and confirmato canali ad vsum atque potum ciuitatis aqua collecta eadem
vbertate atque integritate representetur, qua de font proficiscitur. Quod and
nunc facere oportet Dei Sacerdotes praecepta diuina servants, vt si aliquo
nutauerit and vacillauerit veritas, ad originem Dominicam and Euangelicam, and
Apostolicam Traditionem reuertamur; and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, vnde
and ordo and origo surrexit. S. Cyprianus Epist. 74 ad Pompeium. De qua ep.
vide S. Aug li. 5. contra Donat. c. 23 and 25. Vide etiam de modo veritatem
inuestigandi, Tertullianum, lib. de Praescript. c. 19. 20. 21. etc.
beginning; and was in after-ages still approved, as appears by the Sea the
Tomes of Councels
practice of the Church upon all occasions of importance.

. XI.
Saint Athanasius esteemed it a vain thing for those who would not stand unto
the Nicene decree, to call for Councels. He did esteem the decree of it,
infallible. Of diverse infallible Authorities, one may he more powerful and
commanding then another.

FRustra igitur circumcursitantes praetexerunt ob fidem se Synodos postulare,
cum sit diuina Scriptura omnibus potentior. Quod si ad hanc rem vsus Synodi
desideratur, supersunt acta patrum: nam neque in hac part negligentes fuere
qui Niceae conuenerunt, sed ita accurate scripserunt vt qui sinceriter eorum
scripta legate, facile reminiscatur eius in Christum religionis quae a sacris
literis annunciatur. Baro. p. 327. ex Athanasio. S. ATHANASIVS was at the
Council of Nice, where the Arian heresy was anathematized, and the Catholic
faith established; yet he is also brought against the authority of all
general Counsels; first because he tells the Arians, (who would not stand to
the judgment of that Counsel which was oecumenicall, and yet cried out for
Counsels,) that in vain they run about the world pretending they required
Counsels for the faith, whereas the divine scripture is more powerful then
all. Secondly because he says that, who so reads the writings or acts of the
Nicene fathers, they will easily call to mind that Religion which is showed
in holy scripture.

I am not yet so learned as to conceive how, the infallibility of Councils is
any way contradicted in these words; so far I am from thinking that this
great Saint did forget himself, and undo what with others he before had
done. The decree of the Nicene Council, together with the Acts, did so bring
to mind the faith commended in the scripture, that withal it had force, he
says, enough to Quis vsus quaeso Conciliorum, quum Nicaenum Co^cilium aduersus
Arianam caeterasque haereses satis valeat? S. Athanas. de Synodis. Indecens and
nefarium aliquid ex recte and just decretis, and ex rebus Niceae public cum
illustrissimo principe Constantino patre tuo per accuratam deliberationem
constitutis immutare velle, etc. per quam (Synodum) non illa sola, sed and
reliquae haereses sublatae sunt, in qua certe and addere aliquid temerarium
est, and auferre periculosum. Ibidem epist. Synod, ad Constantium. August.
^ufficiunt ea quae Niceae confessa fuere, satisque per se vi^um habent, tum ad
subuersionem impij dogmatis, tum ad ^telam vtilitatemque Ecclesiasticae
doctrinae. Idem in E^st. ad Episc. Africae.
overthrow the contrary, and to put the matter Ego arbitrabar omniu^ quotquot
vnqua^ fuere haereticorum inanem garrulitate^ Nicaeno Concilio sedatam esse.
na^ fides quae inibi a Patribus secu^du^ sacras Scripturas tradita, and
confessionibus confirmata est, satis mihi idonea, efficax que videbatur ad
omnem impietatem euertendam, and pietatem eius quae in Christo est fidei
constituenda^ Atque ideo diuersis Concilijs per Gallia^ and Hispanias, and
Romae celebratis, omnes qui in eo conuentu fuere, istos luci fugas qui sese
etiamnum occultant and quae Arrij sunt sapiunt, comm^ calculo vnius Spiritus
incitatu anathemate percusserunt, e^ quod isti sibi nomina vendicauerint
Synodorum etc. (...) Athanas. Epist. ad Epictet. Qua igitur audacia fit vt post
tanti Concilij authoritatem disceptationes aut quaestiones inf^tuant? Ibidem.
out (...) question; and so far, that, who (...) did oppose themselves, were
Ego autem demiratus sum tuam pietatem haec sustinuisse, quod non simul and
istos compescuerit, and piam^dem (in Concilio Nicaeno traditam vt supra) illis
propos^erit, vt ijs auditis vel in quietem se darent, vel si inquieti
intradicerent haeretici homines iudicarentur. Ibidem.
^ereticks. It was a vain thing so he steemed it, in the Arians by other
Cou^cells, to seek to reuerse what was ^^ere established; the definition of ^^e
holy Ghost, there made, the word ^f God, by that Council, remains fo^uer;
Vanus eorum labor qui contra illud (Nicenum) ali^ subinde concilia moliuntur,
quippe qui plusquam december synodos iam instituerint, in singulis semper aliquid
innouantes etc. ignari interim omnem plantationem qua^ non plantauerit pater
caelestis cradicandam esse: verb^^ autem illud Domini per oecumenicam Niceae
Synodum in aternum manet. S Athanas. Epist. ad Episc. Africae.
verbum illud Domini per ^licaenum Concilium manet in aeter^um.

As for the comparison which he ^akes, with scripture; it Catholici Scripturam
Sacram non subijciunt sed anteponunt Concilijs: neque in hoc vlla controuersia
es^ Bellarm. li. 2. de Concilijs c. 12. Quod si interdum aliq^ Catholici dicunt
Scripturam pendere ab Ecclesia sieve (...) Concilio, non intelligunt quoad
authoritatem and secundum se, sed quoad explicationem and quoad nos. Ibidem.
hurts ^ot. He that says, the scripture where it is plain and universally
^eceaued, is more powerful then a Council; or that, the eternal ve^tie
ope^lie revealed, as it is to Saints, (...) more powerful then scripture; ^oth
not prejudice infallibility. Both ^ay have it, and yet one be more ^owerfull.
And this supposed, visit that both scripture and the Coun^ell, be infallible;
but the power of cripture more; the discourse of S. Athanasius is conuincing.
He tha^ will not submit his judgment to tha^ authority which is most
powerful* does in vain pretend he will be ruled by the less; he does easily
contemn a Council, who contemne^ the Scripture, proposed by the universal
Church; as the Arians did, who contradicted open Scripture, and all Antiquity.

Neither does this make any thing against the decision of controversies, by
Counsels; for, though the way of Counsels be a certain way to determine
what we must believe, yet may there be another way to find it out; and that
certain too. And doubtless, he that sees in scripture that, which he knows
the whole symbolicall Church (that which holds out the book wherein ^he reads
it,) does believe, is more powerfullie moved to give assent, then he that
hears a Council on^ie. And our assent is more prove when the Prophets and
Apostles all, propose the same, then when one alone does avouch it; though one
Prophet or Apostle by himself be sufficient and infallible.

. XII.
Vincentius Lirinensis will have Church-authoritie relied upon in matter of
faith, as certain and undoubted. How a man is to carry himself, when matter
of faith is questioned. The way to find the Catholic sense. General
Councels, infallible in their decrees; and those are Heretics that contradict
and oppose them.

SAepe magno studio and summa attentione perquirens a quaplurimis sanctitate
and doctrina praestantibus viris quonam modo possim certa quadam and quasi
generali ac regulari vi^ Catholicae fidei veritatem ab haereticae prauitatis
falsitate disc^nere; huiusmodi semper responsum ab omnibus fereretuli. Quo^
sieve ego sieve quis alius vellet exurgentium hereticorum fra^des deprehendere
laqueosque vitare and in fide sanus atque integer permanere, duplici modo
munire fidem suam Domino adiouante deberet; Primo scilicet, diuinae legis
authoritate: tu^ deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae traditione. Baro p. 349. ex
vincent Lycin c. 1. VINCENTIVS LIRINENSIS* The argument taken from this Father
is, that in his golden treatise entitled Aduersus prophanas haereseo^
nouationes, he has omitted to specify general Counsels and their decrees,
and diverse leaves are spent t^ prove that he did not give unto them any place
in the direction of our belief. But no pains will serve. H^ does more then
once or twice mention them, and has testified wha^ he thought of their
authority. Two general Vicent. Lyrin. c. 1.
ways there are to distinguish the truth from error in mat^er of Religion;
the one by Scripture, ^he other by Tradition: but the scripture is profound and
obscure, whe^evpon it has come to pass that diverse heretics have interpreted
it ^iuers ways; so that, to know the ^ight meaning of it, it is necessary ^o
recurre to tradition; and, (as he ^aith in the second chapter of his book)
Idem c. 2. vide Disp. li. 5. c 1. and li. 4. c. 8. page 405. and page 395 fine,
that the line of the prophetical and Apostolical interpretation be directed
according to the rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. Which
Catholic sense, may be found three ways chiefly, according as he conceaues
it; one is to see if it be held by the symbolicall or universal Church; a
second is, to see if it be held by the Fathers, each writing in his own time;
a third, to see whether it be defined in any general Council. By these three
ways principally, a man is directed to the Catholic or true sense of
scripture: and all three are not necessary, but any of the three will serve
the turn. V^i^nt. c. ^.
In the Catholic Church, says he, we must have a great care we hold that
which has been believed every where; that which has been believed ever; that
which has been believed by all, for this is truly and properly Catholic as
the power of the name and the definition does declare, which truly does
comprehend all universally. And this is done in fine if we follow
universality, antiquity, consent. Universality we shall follow thus; if we
confess that one faith to be true which the whole Church thorough the world
does acknowledge: And antiquity thus; if we do not in any sort go back from
those senses which it is manifest that our holy Ancestors and Fathers have
celebrated and commended: and Censent likewise, if we follow the definitions
and decrees of all, or near all, the priests and masters in Antiquity. And
Quid igitur faciet Christianus Catholicus, si se aliqua Ecclesiae particula ab
vniuersalis fidei communione praeciderit? quid vtique, nisi vt pestisero
corruptoque me^bro sanitatem vniuersi corporis anteponats quod si nouella
aliqua co^tagia non iam portiunculam tantum sed totam pariter Ecclesiam
commaculare conetur? (locum hunc corruperu^t Wittaker and Vitus, haeretici,)
tunc item prouidebit vt antiquitati inhaereat; quae prorsus ia^ non potest vlla
nouitatis fraud seduci. Quid si in ipsa vetustate duorum aut trium hominu^ vel
certe ciuitatis vnius aut etiam prouinciae alicuius error deprehendatur? Tunc
omnino curabit vt paucoru^ temeritati, vel inscitiae, fi qua sunt vniuersaliter
antiquitus vniuersalis Ecclesiae decreta praeponat. Quid si tale aliquid
emergat vbi nihil huiusmodi reperiatur? Tuuc operam dabit vt collatas inter se
Maioru^ co^sulat interroge^que sententias; eorum du^taxat qui diuersis licet
te^poribus and locis, in vnius tame^ Ecclesiae Catholica communione and fide
permanentes, magistri probabiles extiterunt: and quicquid no^ vnus aut duo
ta^tum sed omnes pariter vno eodemque co^sen^^, aperte, freque^ter,
perseueranter, tenuisse, scripsisse, docuisse cognouerit, id sibi quoque
intelligat absque vlla dubitatione credendum. Vinc. Lyrin c. 4.
more he has to the same purpose.

He lived in the year 440. and before he wrote this book, there had been
three general Counsels; whose decrees, though not made, the Nicenum anno 325.
first of them, much more then a hundred years before him, he ^umbers amongst
the records of an^iquitie which are to be looked into. And in like manner, the
decrees ma^e 200. 500. 1000. years before us, ^ake place and order in the
records ^f antiquity, respectiuelie to our times: the distance of precedence
^eing more, then was the distance of any Council precedent, respectiuelie unto
him.

You are further to observe, that, ^o the universality of a truth he does not
require, that it be distinctlie believed of all that profess Christian
religion; some have professed it who believed not the blessed Trinity, others
denied the Incarnation; the greatest mysteries were not Catholic in this
sense, neither does ^he require that a point or verity which is Catholic, be
such that it has been expreslie and distinctlie believed of all Catholics at
all times; the Catholic Epistles in this sense Vide Disp. page 431. An
excellent lesson for these times.
were not all, Catholic: but his meaning is, (as I insinuated before,) that a
sense or verity appertaining to faith, which is believed by the Symbolicall,
that is by the universal catholic Church, either allwaies, or at any time,
(for it can never err in divine faith;) or, which the Fathers have uniformly
in their times and ages taught, and professed; or, which has been defined by
all, or near all the Pastors, (those which are to teach,) in a general
council; is to be received as a Catholic sense.

Twice, in that little book, herepeates again this matter of finding out the
Catholic sense by antiquity consenting, either in Council, or out of
Council; and, by universality; and in both places the definition of general
Counsels, and their authority comes in. As, in the 38. chapter, where giving
direction how to avoid heretics, who like the Devil urge Scriptures against
the truth, in this case, says he, Catholics shall take great care that they
interpret the divine canon according to the traditions of the universal
Church, and according to the rules of the Catholic doctrine or decree; wherein
likewise it is necessary that they follow the universality, antiquity, and
consent of the Catholic Church. And if at any time a part does rebel against
the whole, novelty against antiquity, or the disagreement of one or some few
erring persons against the consent of all, or at least of far more
Catholics; let them prefer the integrity of the whole, before the
corruption of the part. And in the same whole, the religion of antiquity
before the profaneness of novelty: as also in antiquity it self, let them
prefer before the rashness of a very few, primu^ omnium generalia, si qua
sunt, vniuersalis co^cilij decreta praeponant; tu^c deinde, si id minus est,
sequantur quod proximum est, multorum atque magnoru^ consentientes sibi
sententias magistrorum. Vincent. Lirin. c 38.
first of all if any be, the general decrees of an oecumenicall Council: then
after, if that be not, let the^ follow that which is next, (to wit) the
sentences or opinions of many and great masters consenting among themselves.

In the next chapter, he tells what Fathers those must be, whose opinions we
take; they must be Idem c. 39.
orthodoxe, such as living piouslie in the Catholic faith and communion, and
remaining constant, have died in Christ; or happily been put to death for him:
and those he says are so to be believed, that what soever either all, or the
greater part, have established or confirmed, receiving, holding, or delivering,
with one and the same meaning, manifestly, often, constantly, as it were in a
certain council of masters agreeing among themselves, the same is to be
esteemed certain and undoubted. And again in the Idem c. 40.
next, Hos, in Ecclesia Dei diuinitus per tempora and loca dispensatos,
quisquis in sensu Catholici dogmatis vnum aliquid in Christo sentientes
contempserit, non hominem contemnit sed Deum. He that contemnes these (fathers)
diuinelie distributed, according to times and places, in the Church of God;
agreeing in Christ in the sense of a Catholic point of doctrine, he contemns
not man, but God. So great he esteems this authority of the fathers and
masters, which God has dispensed, not at one, but in several times; and yet,
the general decrees of an oecumenicall Council, with him, have c. 38. vt
supra.
the precedence; primum omnium generalia, si qua sint, vniuersalis Concilij
decreta praeponant; tunc deinde, si id minus est, sequantur quod proximum est,
multorum at que magnorum consentientes sibi sententias magistrorum.

Again in the 41. chapter he repeates a second time the same matter, of
finding out the Catholic sense by antiquity, consenting, in Council or out
of Council: where he speaks yet more home. Diximus in ipsa Ecclesiae
vetusta^e duo quae^am vehementer studioseque obserua^da, quibus penitus
inhaerere deberent, quicunque haeretici esse nolunt. Primu^ si qu^d antiquitus
abomnibus Ecclesiae Catholicae Sacerdotibus vniuersalis Concilij authoritate
decretum: Deinde si qua noua etc. c. 41. Exe^plu^ adhibuimus Sa^cti Co^cili^
quod ante trienmum ferme in Asia apud Ephesum celebratum est etc. Vniuersis
Sacerdotibus, qui illo ducenti fere conuenerant etc. omnes vero Catholicos
sacerdotes fuisse etc. c. 42.
We have said that in the antiquity of the Church two things are greatly and
with great diligence to be observed; (quibus) whereunto, all those must adhere
steedfastlie, that will not be heretics: (why do you start?) first of all, if
any thing should be auncientlie defined with the authority of an oecumenicall
Council, by all the Priests of the Catholic Church: and next, if any new
question should arise wherein that were not found, recourse to be made to the
opinions or sentences of holy Fathers, those only who every one in their
own time and place were found to be approved masters, continuing still in the
unity of communion and faith: and what soever they be found to have held with
one and the same meaning and consent, that without all scruple should be judged
the true and Catholic (doctrine) of the Church. Here besides the faith and
profession of the Church symbolicall or universal, be two other rules,
whereunto all, that will not be flat heretics, must of necessity conform
themselves; the decrees of oecumenicall Counsels, and, the uniform consent of
Fathers. I leave you now, to compare your condition, with his opinion. What he
delivers in this matter, is not his doctrine alone. c. 1.


That you conceive him the better, he presently brings, for instance or
example, the proceedings of the Council of Ephesus (held c. 42.
three years, no more, before he wrote this book,) wherein Nestorius was
condemned; the anathematismes of the Council you may see when you please. It
is worth the noting by the way, for it is your practice too, and indeed, of all
heretics, that Nestorius, as he relates in the end of the chapter, renounced
the authority of the Church in deciding controversies, affirming c. 43.
totam etiam nunc errare, and semper errasse Ecclesiam, that the whole Church
even now, (in the time of the Council) does err, and always has erred. In
the last chapter of all, he brings in the authority of the Sea Apostolic and
in fine, concludes his book, If neither Apostolical definitions, nor
Ecclesiastical decrees, whereby according to the sacred consent of
universality and antiquity, all Heretics ever, and in fine Pelagius,
Caelestius, Nestorius, have been deservedly condemned, be to be violated, it
is necessary verily that all Catholics hereafter, which have a care to show
themselves lawful children of the Mother Church, be associated and close
joined unto the faith of the holy Fathers, and, so insist, that they die, in
it: and that they detest, abhor, speak against, persecute, the profane
novelties of profane men.

. XIII. Exceptions against a text, or two, refuted.
THE last Opposition which you make, is against two of the places of Scripture,
which our Deuines bring to confirm the Councels infallibility. These also,
least you conceive there is difficulty, I will consider as far as your
Opposition goes, (though otherwise not meddling with the Question de Iure,
which you find in our Deuines discussed at large,) and then make an end. The
one of these places contains our Saviors promise of the Holy Ghosts
assistance, made unto the Church; The Spirit of Truth when he comes, shall
teach you all truth. Joan. 14. and 16. The other of the places represents unto
us the interpretation of the forsaid promise, as it was understood by the
Apostles, who relying on it, met in Council and there defined a Controversy;
It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us. Acts 15.

Against the former place, you say, first that it is meant of the Apostles
only. This is false: for it is, forever; I will ask my father, and he will
give you another comforter, that he remain with you for ever, the Spirit of
truth. And, apud vos manebit, he shall remain with you, Io. 14. the Catholic
Church is his mystical body, which cannot subsist without his Spirit; and,
for confirmation and illustration of her faith, not only in the Apostles time
when our Savior was gone, but ever since, after they be gonne, she needs
assistance of the Spirit. Neither was it his mind to leave the faithful
without such comfort, non relinquam vos orphanos, Ioh. 14.
I will not leave you orphans. O father, establish, confirm, sanctify them,
in the truth. I ask not for them only, Ioh. 17.
(the Apostles) but for the Church, for those which by their word shall believe
in me. That, by thy providence, for my sake, in our Spirit, all be, as it were,
one; and agree (to their proportion) as we do; who do judge, and approve,
still, the same.

But tell me; has the Spirit left the Church, or is he still in it? if he has
left it, how has she supernatural operations? how does she believe the divine
word? how does she subsist? as the Gospel says she shall, notwithstanding all
the endeavors of hell it self. Mat. 16.
If he does remain in it, it is then true that the promise holds still, even
that, which was made unto the Church, in the Apostles time, and began first to
be fulfilled in them.

The greatest promises in all the Scripture be two; one of God the Father, to
send his son to redeem the world; the other of God the Son, to send the
holy Ghost, his spirit, to teach and instruct his Church: if you do not
believe the later is performed, you will give us cause to think that you would
euacuate the former too, and not trust God, at all, in his promise; nor in his
covenant neither; (though so far you trust one another. Ierem. 35. Ezech. 37.
) I will give my law in their bowels, and in their heart I will write it, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. My Spirit that is in thee, and
my words that I have put in thy mouth, Isa. 59.
shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out
of the mouth of the seed of thy seed says our Lord, from this present, and
forever. See the Disp. li. 3.

Secondly you say, that it is not to be understood of all the dogmaticall
points, or doctrine, by our Savior revealed, and delivered unto the Church;
but of some points only; those which are expressed in the Apostles Creed; and
not necessarily of all those neither. Here again you do manifestly
contradict the text of Scripture; and open the way to let error and heresy
into the Church. For, if the holy Ghost teach no more, by the promise of our
Savior, then those few points; it is impossible for men to know the truth
touching other revealed verities; though they be necessary to be known. And
the judge of controversies, the holy Ghost, being put ^o silence, error, in
all other matters of that kind, is remediless.

For example; if a man denies the Sacrament of Baptism; this error were
pernicions to the Church; and should it prevail in all, (as it might ^f the
holy Ghost taught nothing but what is expressed in the Apostles Creed,) both
infants, and others inmumerable, would be ruined thereby: for, unless a man be
borne again of water and the holy Ghost, Ioh. 3.
he shall ^ot enter into the kingdom of heaven. The Eucharist is not expressed
in the Apostles Creed, yet you say that it is necessary to receive it, and,
by the divine command, in both kinds. The commandments and the interpretation
which our Savior gave of them, be not expressed there; yet the Church has,
them, and the whole Christian law, written in her heart by the spirit of the
living God. Our obligations toward superiors, of all sorts, (in conscience,
and by divine precept, to be performed,) and the rules of Christian
conversation, be not expressed there, though the Church may not be ignorant of
them Pastors and Bishops are necessary and, by God ordained for her direction;
and the Prophecies be necessary for confirmation of her faith; and therefore
she is to know both the one and the other, though they be not expreslie in the
Apostles Creed.

I speak of that Creed, because you name it; as also, because the certainty
of other Creeds, set out in Counsels; or, of the explication made and proposed
by the Church is the thing here disputed. I acknowledge it, as proceeding from
the assistance of the holy Ghost, to the Church, in more then is expressed in
the Apostles Creed. Hence it is that I believe the Nicene, or that of S.
A^hanasius. if you believe it too, then ^ecall your answer; for whilst it
stands, there is no remedy for errors in these matters, and many more; nor
way of assurance for many things, which it is necessary for the Church to
know.

Moreover it is certain by the Gospells, that our blessed Savior ^aught many
things to the Church, ^oth before his passion, and after his ^esurrection,
which are not expres^ed in the Apostles Creed, whereun^o, you think, only,
assistance is ex^ended. Read the Gospel of S. ^ohn all over, or of S. Luke,
or S. Ma^hewe; and you shall find this to be ^ue. And these things also, the
Spirit, according to promise, does suggest. I have yet many things to say unto
you, which you cannot bear now; ^ut, when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, ^e
shall teach you all truth: for he shall ^ot speak of himself; Ioh. 16.
but what things soever be shall hear, he shall speak. This before his
passion; and after it, for forty days he appeared to them, speaking of the
kingdom of God. Act. Apost. c. 1.
Now, that all this, whether written, or not written, otherwise then by the
holy Ghost in the mind and heart of the Church, is included within the object
of the promised assistance, I prove by no less authority then of our Savior
Jesus Christ; upon whose promises, all that acknowledge him to be true God,
Ioh. 14.
should rely, believing them and him, as most faithful. He, (the Spirit of
truth) shall teach you all things, and suggest unto you, all whatsoever I shall
have said unto you.

It is also necessary for the Church to know the Scripture, and the se^^^,
which without assistance of the holy Ghost cannot be done, as I could easily
show were I to treat of that matter: Vide Disputat. li. 3. c. 4. and 5.
but forbearing that discourse, (...) demand Whether it be necessary for the
Church to know that o^^ Savior did ordain Baptism, and Eucharist, and
Order? (if perchanc^ you think the institution of Bishop to be Acts 20.
divine;) and, how a man may know the meaning of those passages of Scripture
which do mention these things; or, that the texts, indeed be, Scripture; if
the holy Ghost, does by promise, teach the Church no more then what is
expressed in the Apostles Creed? I demand also, how you come to be certain
that he does teach that which in the Creed is expressed? or, that he does teach
any at all? if by the Scripture; the^ he teaches more then is expressed in the
Apostles Creed; for, the Scripture is not expreslie there. And my demand
returns again with a greater difficulty then before; If he teach none but
what is expressed in the Apostles Creed, how be you certain that the Gospells
be divine Scripture? who taught you that? The same Question I will ask, and
you must answer (mark well) of every Cha^ter; and of the meaning of every
verse which you pretend to be against any part of our whole doctrine; or to
make for any piece, of your Religion.

Thirdly, some perchance will object, that though he teach the Church all the
dogmaticall points, or heavenly doctrine which our Savior taught and
commended, yet this is not verified of the Bishops and Pastors, but only of
the symbolicall or universal Church, which may retain it, though the Bishops
and Pastors all should err. You know, out of the beginning of this Relection,
where this evasion is insinuated; and being beaten from your own heretical
tenet of the whole Church erring, you seem to make an offer, in the end to
repose here. But, none that believes the Scripture, can rest in it; First
because our Saviors words are directed to the Apostles and their Successors,
who were to teach; and needed assistance in it; Ioann. 14.
he shall teach you. And so they did understand it, as appears by their decree
whereof I am to speak afterward. Secondly the symbolicall or universal
Church does include Pastors and people; and the people are to learn of the
Pastors, whose office is to teach; how shall they believe unless they hear? and
how shall they hear with out a preacher? Romans 10. Teach all Nations, was said,
Matthew. vlt.
not to the people, but to the Pastors; Ioann. vlt.
and S. Peter and his successors in him, were bid to feed the flock of Christ:
wherefore it was requisite the Pastors on whom the people, and among them the
predestinate, depend for instruction, should be assisted in their teaching:
especially then when they speak all, the same. Thirdly, our Savior ordained
Pastors and Doctors in the Church, Ephesians. 4.
to the end that we be not wavering and borne about with every wind of
doctrine, in the circumuention of error; and if this means, which is
established till the worlds end, be fit for this purpose, (as no Christian can
think otherwise of our Saviors providence, whom he believes to be God,) it is
assisted so, that it never errs in the doctrine of the faith which it delivers
to the world with obligation to believe it. Fourthlie, if ever we are to
believe that Christ speaks and resolves doubts by the Pastors of the Church,
according to that, He which hears you hears me, Luc. 10.
he which contemns you co^temneth me; we must believe, that when all,
deliver one and the same thing, as Gods word or meaning, unto the world; then,
without all doubt, our Savior speaks by them: and he who hears or contemnes
them, does hear or contemn Jesus Christ, whose ministers and Ambassadors they
be. 2. Corint. 5.


Neither do you satisfy this argument by saying that you will hear them if
they speak according to the word of God; Disput. li. 3. c. 1. and 2.
for, therein you challenge unto your self, without warrant, that, which you
deny to the whole clergy, who in the Apostles were bid teach, and had the
promise of assistance: and, in the Question, Whether they or you have the true
sense of Gods word, (as of this, This is my body,) you, most arrogantlie, do
make your self the judge. Your self I say, without the Spirit; denying in the
mean time, and impugning the power of judging in this case, in and to them,
which have and show, the promise of the Spirit. Vt Diodorum ac Theod. non
expellere^t PP. aut inuenerunt eos iam mutasse sententiam, aut quod extremum
est, admonitos mutate fecerunt. Nam aliter co^ in Ecclesia Catholica manner
potuisse quis sapiens Catholicus credat? Cum vero tanta quae dicta sunt, ego
indoctus and Latinae linguae, de causa apud Graecos habita, post centum annos
pro meo captu and facultate, vel intelligere vel explicare potuerim, quanta
credendum est illam Sanctorum Patrum Congregationem in causa penes se and
recenti memoria cognoscere potuisse, illo etiam reuelante qui dixit, Vbi sunt
duo vel tres congregati in nomine meo, ibi in medio eorum sum? Nam fideliter
inuocatus non solum a Sacerdotibus, sed ab omni quoque populo suo, cuius fides
and expectatio ex illorum Authoritate dependet, dat omnibus congregatis vnum
cor and animam vnam, vt nullus eorum suam velit esse sententiam, nisi quae
fuerit veritatis. Quo^ies ibi doctiores indoctioribus, and plures paucioribus,
illo eorum medio cedunt? Q^oties etiam per nescientes scienter operatur ipse
qui potest omnia facere supra quam petimus, aut intelligimus; qui promisit quod
nobiscum sit omnibus di^bus vsque ad consummationem saeculi? Vtinam sibi
nunquam saecularis potestas, quod ei creditum non est, in his negotijs
vsurparet, quae nunquam faeliciter vsurpauit. Caeterum congregatis in suo
nomine Christus deesse non potest: quia cum sit omnipotens Veritas, mentiri
nullatenus potest. Facund. Episc. Defens. Chalced. Concilij li 8. c. 7. Et in
eandem sententiam plura, li. 12. c. 2. inter alia vero, de sancto Leone dicit,
Neque vlterius retractare neque discutere se posse professus est ea, quae semel
fuerant Chalcedonensi definita Concilio, velut quae nosset non tam humano quam
diuino Spiritu constituta. This Father, as also S. Aug. when they say God
reueales unto the Council, use the word something largely, in the sense
imported in the promise of Assistance; docebit vos. suggeret vobis. See the
Disput. page 404.
See the Disput. l. 3. c. 6.

Fourthly, he that sees the truth of this, and would yet fly Counsels, will
imagine perchance, that, although the Pastors all dispersed, when they consent,
have the warrant of the Spirit; yet, not when they be gathered in a Council.
But this imagination argues a weakness in co^ceauing the terms which are spoken
of; for, in this congregation or Council, there is the whole teaching-power:
which teaching power, (as has been showed) has, and by promise, divine
assistance; and is to establish the rest, predestinate and all, in faith and
true belief.

Fiftlie, you will say that in general Counsels all the Pastors or Bishops
be not present; if they were, you would believe what they propose; because the
whole exterior teaching-authoritie is there obliging; and they show their
warrant, Luc. ^0
he that hears you hears me. Would your fellows do this, there were but
one thing more to be disputed in this matter, that is, Whether it be necessary
to the generality of a Counsel, that all the Pastors and Bishops without
exception, be actuallie present in it; the resolution of which Question we
have in the practice of the Apostles, and of the primitive Church. so that no
further difficulty can be pretended, if the truth be reallie our desire, and
heretical obstinacy put aside. See the Disput. li. 4. c. 7. and 8.

Against the later place, which brings with it the Apostles interpretation of
the promise registered in the former; it is said first that, although that
Council had the assistance of the holy Ghost in making of their decree, so
that it was, his also, as their words import; yet others after, have it not, it
was, (you think) a privilege in them, and lasted no longer in the Church, but
wilst they lived. This evasion is precluded, both by the words, and the
circumstances of the grant; it was made unto the Apostles as Pastors, for
establishing of the Church, (dedit Pastores, Ephesians. 4.
vt iam non simus paruuli fluctuantes, and circumferamur etc.) which Church
needed it, not only in the Apostles time, but afterward, The Arian,
Sabellian, Nestorian, and other Heresies.
as other difficulties (whereof some were about the most fundamental points,
in the very Creed,) did arise: and the devil has not yet done, suggesting
heresy and oppugning the doctrine which our Savior left unto the Church; and
thereby, impugning Him, and Her; wherefore, still it is necessary. And
accordingly, the promise was absolute; without limitation of years; or ages.
Yea the text it self, has in aeternum, Ioann. 14. Ephesians. 4.
for ever: and, donec occurramus omnes, until we meet all.

Secondly it is said, that unto Pastors so assembled, the holy Ghost by
virtue of the promise, is present assisting to fundamental points; but no
further. Before, you would have detracted from the grant and wiped out of it,
the latitude of time: now you limit it for the matter. If a Lawier should use
your lease so, you would exclaim that he did corrupt it. When our Savior had
prayed to his Father that he would establish or Sanctify his Apostles (and
those who by their means were to believe in him, that is, his Church,) in the
truth; he did presently, unfold what he meant by that truth, and said sermo
tuus est veritas, thy word (the word of God) is the truth; and in this, which
comprehends not the Apostles Creed only, he would have the^ established. This
sanctification is according to S. Cyrill, a participation of the holy Ghost, ad
intelligendas recte Scripturas, and Ecclesiae dogmata, Cyrill. Alex. in Joan.
li. 11. cap. 25.
to understand the Scriptures well, and the doctrine of the Church. In a like
fullnes does our Savior himself express the latitude of this assistance, the
shall teach you all things and suggest unto you all what soever I shall have
said unto you. Ioann. 14.
So did the Apostle understand it also, in saying that Pastors are given to the
end we do not waver, Ephesians. 4.
nor be borne about with every wind of doctrine. Such a giddines, happens in
other things also, besides fundamentalls.

The Church likewise believes the grant to be thus universal; to all our
Saviors doctrine: as appears by the matters which she defines in general
Councels; as in that of Trent. And so much you will acknowledge of the primitive
Church, if you reflect upon that which has been said out of S. Augustine, in
the Donatists case about Baptism; which controversy (not being expressed in
the Apostles Creed,) was in a Council, defined; and, in virtue of this
assistance; by the whole Christian world. Neither do you find the
difficulty, which was resolved by the Apostles in their Council, put into the
Creed.

Thirdly you say that out of a general assistance, such as God gives every
man toward every good work, infallibility cannot be inferd; and more you
will not grant. But our Savior granted more; he promised the holy Ghost
should teach the Church all truth; Ioh. 14. and 16.
and his lessons must not be doubted of; he cannot miss the truth, or teach a
lie. The sense which he does inspire, teach, affirm, is certain; and the
falsitie of any one thing (were it possible he should teach a falsitie,) would
infinitely prejudice his authority, in the estimation of his creatures, yea,
the whole Scripture would be questioned, if this ground were not firm; ^.
Petr. 1.
if that were not certain, which men, inspired by the holy Ghost, and
affirming, as from him, or he, in them; might be false.

Fourthlie you say that if the Council follow Scripture, it has assistance
and is infallible; but not else. This supposes that the Church without
assistance can understand the Scripture, or teach and define matter of faith;
whereas our Savior in the Scripture says, Ioann. 15.
without him we can do nothing; and therefore he has promised assistance,
that we may know his will, and our duty; and left the holy Ghost in the
Church to teach her all truth. The Jews, and Pagans, and heretics, look on
Scripture; but they do not understand it. The Church has a Master the Holy
Ghost, left to teach her; and by his help, does understand. What need a
Schoolmaster, if your child does by himself understand his book? or will you
call it instruction, if he never tell him any thing, but what the child
himself knows before? you know moreover, that when the Controversy is about
the Scripture, the written word; or, about the Apostles Creed; or general
tradition; assistance is necessary: and also, for the sense of Scripture, more
then is by your definition, fundamental. To omit, that in your answer you
allow the Church no greater security from error, by the promised assistance,
then you grant to be in pagans and heretics without it: for, they dot not
err, if they follow Scripture, and judge as it is there. So little is the
discretion of this answer, and so small a benefit, or rather no benefit you
conceive to be bestowed in that fair promise. Whereas we, believe our Savior
to be God who neither mocks his Church nor breaks his word: he can, and will,
make and bring to pass, Ezech. 36.
that she walk in his precepts. He writes his laws in her heart; Ierem. 31.
what hinders him? and keeps his words, Isa. 59.
in her mouth. He has opened a School, and put a Master in the chair.
Docebit says he, he shall teach; and, if the lesson be forgot, suggeret, Joan.
14.
he shall bring it to mind again: he is not to stay till men find it of
them selves; he is Master, and shall teach it.

Fiftlie, you say that you are content exterior obedience be given to
general Counsels, but no more. Yet more must be given to the holy Ghost, and
in Counsels He defines. Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis, Act. 15.
were the words of the Council, it seems good to the holy ghost and to us;
not to us only, but to him, in himself; and in us, here assembled, with his
assistance (promised in cases of this nature, and we are certain that he who
promised will perform,) to decide a controversy: our act, is, his act; 2 Cor.
13.
to Him it has seemed good. In S. Paul Christ spoke; the Apostles words, 1 Thessalonians. 1.
were acknowledged to be, and were indeed, the words of God; Luc 10.
the holy Ghost speaks in the Church; the definition is his: you must believe
it; and, Matt. 18.
remotis dubitationibus to use S. Augustines words; S. Aug. supra.
there is no more doubt to be made of it.

In the conclusion of your discourse you repeat again what you said in the
beginning, Alij fatentur opus esse iudice loquente^e^ homine. Volunt tame^
posse ab eo prouocari in foro in ^erno sea conscientiae. Si^ Wittakerus etc.
Sed hoc facile refellitur, tum quia in hac materia gratis confingitur haec
distinctio fori: tum etiam quia pax Ecclesiae sita est potissimum in foro
interno, scilicet in fide; ergo non licet in eo foro prouocare a Iudice
Ecclesiae, alioquin nunquam pax esset conscientiae: tum praeterea quia praxis
Ecclesiae in Concilio Apostolorum, and aliorum generalium Conciliorum plane
declarat quod Iudex Ecclesiae habeat potestatem dirimendi lites in foro
conscientiae: tum demum quia si quis teneretur obedire iudicio Ecclesiae in
foro externo and non in interno, teneretur aliquando silentio sepelire
veritatem Dei, eamque non confiteri coram hominibus, nempe si Ecclesia
sententiam ferret contra Dei veritatem. Accedit quod potestas Ecclesiae est
spiritualis and in animas ipsas, ergo potestas illius iudicandi se extendit
etiam ad forum internum. Reuerendiss. Chalc. in Collat. li. 2. c. 28.
that we believing the Councels to be directed in their Decrees by the Holy
Ghost in virtue of our Saviors promise made unto the Church, attribute more to
them then Antiquity has done. The vanity of which your pretense
sufficiently appears by that which has been answered to your exceptions in
particular. You find none that denies what we believe. Yea those whom you
produce to speak against us, affirm it, constantly. And who more Ancient in
the rank of Christians, then the Apostles themselves, whose testimony you
have heard in our behalf. You have been told also that in Saint Augustines
days the Catholics universally, and amongst them the greatest scholars
submitted their judgments to the judgment of the Church in Council: and this
too, though the point so determined were neither fundamental, nor found in
Scripture. You shall find also (as has been likewise insinuated by occasion
of your discourse) in the Council of Chalcedon, six hundred Fathers together,
acknowledging divine assistance to the Nicene, so far, that the Decrees, they
said, could not be retracted without Si ergo Spiritus Sa^ctus co^sedit
Patribus, vt manifest consedit and ordinauit que ordinata sunt, qui retractat
ea Spiritus Sancti cassat gratiam. Sa^cta Synodus dixit, Omnes haec dicimus.
Anathema qui retractat. Conc. Chalced. Acti. 1.
making void the grace of the Holy Ghost. And others accordingly say they
were S. Leo, Epist. 53. and 54. vide etiam S. Aug. li. 6. de Bapt. c. 39.
diuinelie ordained, Si quis fidem illam a sa^cta and magna Synodo optime and
diuino afflatu definita^ ac expositam, dicere voluerit basim animarum
nostraru^, fundamentum que inconcussum and munitum, is vtique probatissime
loquitur. Lib. 1. de Trinit apud Cyrill. Alexand. Suis aute^ verbis a nobis
scribatur, diuinu^ and sanctissimum Synodi illius Oraculum. Ibide^. Vide S.
Ambros li. 1. de Fide, ad Gratian.
oracles of faith. It suffices to make instance in that one, being the first
oecumenicall that was celebrated after the Apostles days; to show that it
stopped not in them, but was continued after their (the Apostles) time, unto
the Church. And in like manner it was affoorded afterward to the second, and
the third, and fourth; the decrees of which li. 1 Regest. Epist. 24. Quintum
quoque Concilium pariter ve^eror. Ibidem
S. Gregory, our Apostle, did honor as the Gospels; and so also to the rest;
by virtue of one and the same Promise; made absolutely, to the Church. Upon
which promise that also of the Apostles did rely, as before has been observed.

Moreover the Fathers held, that the definitio^s of oecumenicall Cou^cells
might not be called into Conc. Chalc. acti 1. anathema ^^qui re^ractat. De
rebus apud Nicaea^, and apud Chalcedonam definitis, nullu^ audemus inire
tractatum, tanqua^ dubia vel infirma sint, quae tanta per Spiritum sanctu^
fixit authoritas. S. Leo epist. 78. vbi plura in eandem sententiam.
doubt; that they were rather to loose their S. Ambros. epist. 32. S. Hier.
contra Luciferian.
lives then to deny them; that those who did oppugn them, were Nullo modo
fieri potest vt q^i diuinis a^dent contradicere sacramentis aliqua nobis
communio^e socientur S. Epist 78. Pat^facie^tes in omnibus and probantes non
esse omnino inter Catholicos computandos, qui definitiones venerabilis Synodi
Nicenae, vel sancti Chalcedone^sis Concilij regulas no^ sequuntur. Ibidem.
not Catholics, but S. August. de Haeres. nu 69. S. Basil. epist. 78. S.
Athanas. epist. ad Epict. Vincent. Lyri. c. 41.
heretics. And the Councels themselves did Conc Nice. Ephesin. etc.
anathematize all, that rejected, or dissented from them. Now by these
anathematismes and excommunications; by the deep censure, and branding with
the note of Heresy; by the denial of the name of Catholic, to such as did
stubbornly contradict oecumenicall definitions: by the known custom of the
Pastors, in all ages, and cases of greatest difficulty, (when soever they
could with safety meet in Council,) to define sub anathemate, and to oblige
all to conformity without further dispute or doubt; (they being the men whom
our Savior has given to teach his people and establish the^ in the truth:) by
the general obedience of the Symbolicall or universal Church, in all times,
to the Pastors, so teaching; ( manifested in their acceptance of such Decrees,
and conformable profession of the faith:) by the esteem which holy Fathers
had of Counsels, whereof in Saint Augustine I gave an instance, in the case of
S. Cyprian, and, by the Apostles practice, in regard and contemplation of the
promise; together with their real interpretation of it: the meaning of those
words, The Spirit of truth shall teach you all truth; and He gave Pastors and
Doctors, that we be not wavering or borne about with every wind of doctrine;
is so discovered; and the tradition of assistance and direction, afforded to
Councels oecumenicall, in their decrees of faith, so confirmed; that a weaker
sight then yours may discern it.

You may further call to mind, that the Councels wherein the Controversies
betwixt the Protestants and us are defined, be received by the whole Church,
and by it universally approved. Wherefore, had any of those you name, told you
that an oecumenicall Council might mistake, and err; the decrees of faith
made in these Councels, as in that of Trent for example, had still been,
according to their judgment, notwithstanding, to be admitted; because the
Universal Church, has received and approved them. And you, opposing them, do
oppose, not a Council only, but the Catholic and Universal Church; and the
Spirit in her, the Spirit of truth, remaining in, and with her, to teach her
all truth.

That this is the Catholic Church, and not yours, nor the whole company of
such as profess themselves Christians as it includes both the Orthodox and
Heretics, you see proved and defended Disp. of the Church.
elswere. If your Spirit be disposed to contradict it, bring your Catalogue of
men that held your Articles, all: men, purelie Orthodox according to the new
strain, without any defect or superstruction; whose tenants entirely be The
Universality of the Church, and the long Communion of the Graecians and other
Nations with it, is demonstrated at large by C. Baronius in his Annals: and
briefly in the Disputation of the Church page 145. 146. 147. and 148.

By the Church thus Universal, in her flourishing time, the Nestorian and
Eutychean Heresies, which made against the fundamental articles of
Christianity and the common Creed, were you know, condemned: and such as
abbetted the^ were cut of from Communion, lawfully and oecumenicallie in the
Councels of Ephesus and Chalcedon. Wherefore in the Catalogue which you are to
make do not put under the titles of Orthodox or Members of the Catholic
Communion, any Nations or People (howeuer great) approving and maintaining
either of these Errors. Such as were the Nestorians, Armenians, Iacobites,
Abassins, and Egyptians or Cophti; as appears by Photius, Damascen,
Euthymius, Nicephorus, Prateolus, Guido, Baronius, Miraeus, Godignus, and
others.

Neither can you challeng them as yours when they were reunited to the Church
and See of Rome, as the Grecians, Armenians and others were in the Council of
Florence, ( Acta Conc. Flor. in Decreto Eugen. Aemilius, Platina; Chalcondas,
Gordonus. See also Miraus, Not. Episc. li. 1. c. 18.) but you must find a time
when they neither held with us, nor abbetted either of the foresaid Heresies;
but were entirely Protestant or Orthodox in your sense. And the Catalogue must
represent unto us in all Ages some of these, so many as may challeng from all
other Communities the title of the Catholic and Universal Church.

If you look upon the whole aggregation of Christian Churches that ever were
in the world before Luther, you shall find the Society of believers in
Communion with the Sea of Rome to be without all Controversy the greatest and
most Universal. And, that Arians, Nestorians, Iacobites, Armenians, and others
going out of it to subsist by themselves, never could arrive any of them, to
that Universality.

Where you will find or feign your Protestant more Universal Congregation,
or of what kind of men or what fantoms rather it does consist, we shall know
when your description of the Spaces Imaginary comes out in print. What is to
be observed in the drawing of your Catalogue has been partly told you in the
Disp. lib. 1. c. 1. 2. 3. and 4.


current there, and justified by you their children: and this continually,
ever since the Apostles days; with Pastors, lawfully ordained. Prove that
yours was, and that ours was not the Church which has celebrated Councels,
condemned Heresies, converted Nations, etc. Mean while (and ever, for this
task will be never done,) we do securely subscribe to the Decrees of
Councels oecumenicall, approved and received generally by that Co^munitie, out
of which your Father Luther, went: and do not doubt at all, to imbosome our
selves in that Church, which, by Successio^s of Bishops from the Sea
Apostolic, has, even to the acknowledgment and confession of mankind,
obtained the top of Authority; Heretics in vain barking round about, and
condemned; partly by the judgment of the very multitude or common people,
partly by the gravity of Councels, and partly by the majesty of miracles.
To which Church not to give the prize, it is verily, either extreme impiety,
or foole-hardie presumption.


