A Learned and True Assertion of the original, Life, Acts, and death of the
most Noble, Valiant, and Renoumed Prince Arthure, King of great Britain.

Who succeeding his father Other Pendragon, and right nobly governing this Land
six and twenty years, then dyed of a mortal wound received in battle,
together with victory over his enemies. As appears Cap. 9. And was buried at
^laste^bury. Cap. 1^. An. 543.

Collected and written of late years in lattin, by the learned English
Antiquarie of worthy memory John Leyland.

Newly translated into English by Richard Robins^^ Citizen of London. Anno
Domini. 1582.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, over against the
Sign^ of the Castle. 1582.

Insignia Illustrium Patronorum, huius opusculi selectorum.
ARTVRVS BARO

Gray, de Wilton.



D. HENRICUS SIDNEY, Illustrissimi Ordinis Garterij Miles, vnus Consiliariorum
D. Reg. and in Principatu Walliae Praesid.



Magister Thomas Smith D. Reginae Custumarius Principalis, in Portu London.



To the Right Honorable Lord ARTHVRE GRAY, Baron of Wilton, Lord Deputy and
Liefetenant General for the Queens Ma^estie in Ireland: To the Right
Honorable Sir HENRY SIDNEY, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, and
President for her Majesty in the (...) of Wales: To the Right worshipful. M.
THOMAS SMITH, Esquire, and Chief, Customer for her Majesty in the Port of
London: and to the Worshipful Society of Archers, in London yearly
celebrating the renoumed memory of the Magnificent Prince ARTHVR^ and his
Knightly Order of the Round Table:
Grace, mercy, and Peace in the Lord Everlasting. HAVING in mindful memory
(Right Honorable, and Worshippfull) that merciful covenant of peace, by our
omnipotent Creator toward all flesh thus manifested (I do set my Rain Bow
in the clouds, Genesis 9.
and it shall be as a toke^ between me and the earth) promising hereby never to
destroy the same any more by waters: how much ought mankind specially, enjoying
by this peaceable pact, from Heaven, Earth, and the Sea abundance of
benefittes: fear God in his holiness, love one an other in righteousness, and
use these benefittes with thankfulness to the advancement of his glory. For
this Bow, this Rainebowe I say of his covenant, Arist met^^ liber 3. Cap. 1.
and pledge of his peace, left unto us from the deluge (as Aristotle affirms)
Naturally appears by reflection or giving back of the light of the Sun,
Trac. 2.
from a cloud opposite, or against the same. So our heavenly God, the Father
of light, and giver of grace, departs with the light of his manifold mercies
unto mankind, from the opposite cloud of his displeasure. Again, this Bow
of his covenant and pledge of his peace, (as it is said by Albertus) To be so
much less in appearance, as by how much the Sun is higher in the Heavens,
and contrary wise so much greater, as the Sun is lower to the earth: So much
less be the mercies of God minded of man, as his mighty power appears out
of our sight, and again so much greater seem his mercies unto us, as his
mighty power is nere us in sight. Thirdly according to Aristotle, this
Rainebow of his covenant and pledge of his peace, As it appears in the Spring
time, in Summer, in Autumn and in Winter, evening and morning, but specially in
Autumn: So is the performance of his merciful covenant, and peaceable pacte
at all times apparent, but specially in Autumn, that is when mankind
labors most to leave sin, and bringforth fruits of good life as I said,
fearing God in his holiness, loving one an other in righteousness, and using
his benefittes with thankfulness. Thus and to this end granting his covenant,
our omnipotent Creator and gratiouse God ordayning Man ruler over his Creatures
in earth, yet under his protection in heaven, has not only bound unto him
all human society, but has also substituted even his liuetenauntes godly
rulers over the same to the foresaid effect for the advancement of his glory,
confirming the same covenant with the authority of his holy word on this
manner. ^ Reg. 7
I will ordain a place for my people of Israel. I. And I will plant him, and
I will dwell with him. II. And he shall be no more troubled. III. And the
children of iniquity shall not vex or afflict him any more. IIII. By his word
here he promised that which by his deed he performed to our forefathers* Adam
in Paradise, Genesis 1. Noah and his children, Genesis 9. Abraham and his seed Genesis
12. But loving his ^lect, and hating their enemies, he performed his promise
unto Jacob in his providence, and unto Laban in his judgments, Genesis 30. So did
he in like manner unto Joseph, and his unnatural brethren, Genesis 37. Yea in his
providence laying his right hand upon Ephraim, and in his judgment his left
hand upon Manasses. Genesis 48. Whereby as he prospered and protected his holy
ones in peace and wars against their enemies, we read also in the divine
histories from time to time how and by what ordenarie means of power, force,
and defense, he reached unto his feeble flock his mighty arm to the
discomforture of the enemy and utter subuertion both of their power and
policy, according to his promises aforesaid. Here then memorable and
praiseworthie is the providence of this most mighty God, who promising help
unto the Jews against the Gentiles, used no kind of speech so much as this,
Deuteronomy 32.
That he would bend his Bow and dye his shaftes in blood. As who say, God will
make the Jews shoot strong shootes to overthrow their enemies: or at the
least, that shooting is a wonderful mighty thing, whereunto the high power of
God is likened. This bow a weapon of defense, the Rain Boe a token of truce:
This Bow in peace a pleasure, the Rain Bow a sign of serenitie: this Bow in
wars a pain to the enemy, the Rain Bow at al times and to all people Gods
toaken between him and the earth. The one an instrment of mercy, the other of
destruction: the godly have both as their comfort and sauegarde by Gods
protection, the ungodly either wanting the one or having both, have them to
their confusion and subuertion by his reiection. Reg. 3^.
As we read of King Saul, that he was slain of the Philistians being mighty
bow men: and with him also his Son ^onathas who as the scripture says never
shot shaft in vain. And that the kingdom of Israel after Saul's death came
unto King David: who after he was King, decreed by the first statute which he
enacted. 2. Reg. ^
That all the children of Israel should learn to shoot in the bow,
according to a law made many a day before vt patet in libro iustorum, a book
not now in use to be ^ounde. In his book of Psalms as he said He was at
peace with them that hated peace. So named he the bow and arrows in diverse
manners and meaninges* as in his Psalm. 7. verse 13. and 14. Psalm. 11. verse. 2.
Psalm. 18. verse. 13. Psalm. 21. verse. 12. Psalm. 45. verse. 6. Psalm. 49. verse. 9.
64. verse. 3. and 4. 76. verse. 3. 91. verse. 5. 127. verse. 4. and 5. Finally in
his 147. Psalm. verse. 6. Praying to God for deliverance from his enemies and for
their destruction. He says, shoot thine arrows and consume them: So yet that
He neither trusted in bow nor sword, but in the power of God. He affirms
it Psalm 44. verse. 6. And to conclude that he had rather live in a godly peace
the^ to war against the wicked, he says in the 119. Psalm. verse. 15. As at a
mark he will aim to walk in the ways of the Lord. Of this mind was not
King ^osias, who though leading a godly life at home in Judah, yet going
unjustly to fight against Nichao King of Egypt, ^ Reg. 23.
was rather friendly dehorted by him from his purpose then otherwise, saying:
Leave off to work against the Lord which is with me least he do ^tay thee,
which admonition Josias not regarding as spoken from God, tasted in deed of
Gods just judgment: for being shot through with arrows he was wounded to the
death incontinently. I could at large here call to mind the commendation of
this peaceable practice of shooting which once I as a raw scholar read over
in Toxophilus, and at times by tasked lessons interpreted in latin here and
there: but for brevity, I refer your honors, and worshipes unto the Histories
there, of the Ethiopian king, and Cambyses king of Persia. Of Sesostris and his
archers. Of the Messagetanes which never went without their bow and quiver
neither in peace nor in wars. Of Policrates and his one thousand archers. Of
the Scithians (whose whole substance and riches of a man being a yoke of Oxen
and a plow, a Nagge and his dog, his bow and his quiver) were invincible
against Darius and other Monarckes. To be short, the Grecians, Persians,
Athenians, and the Romans, whose shooting in peace and wars was worthy of
praise and fame. Neither here ought I nor will I omit with silence the deserved
fame of our Ancestors in fauouringe this exercise in this our little England
long ago^e living and of latter time, though breefly, referring your honors
and worshippes unto the histories at large, as of Brute and his Troianes the
first Britains, before and after the ariuall of Julius Caesar, Claudius, and
Vespasian Emperoures and they Romans: after them the Saxons until the time of
Vortiger, the usurping murderer, who (Gods providence so working for them, and
his judgment upon him) by the two Brethern and valiant Britains Aurelius
surnamed Ambrose, and Other Pendragon, being burned in his Castle in Wales,
was occasion of the Britains more happier estate afterward. But here yet by
the way (Right honorable and worshipful) as I applaude in this their well
doing, so it had been a thing of Britain most worthelie to be wished, for
that Prince him self less opprobrius of all me^ more praise worthy, and most
pretiouse in the sight of God: if the serpent Tyrus had wanted here his vennime
incurable, though his flesh proved medicinable against all other poisons (as
says Cardanus in his book of Comfort.) I mean if Other Pendragon had wanted
that serpentine poison of adultery, Nigromancie and murder (things odible to
God and good men:) when that most incomperable King Arthure of great Britain
for his princely prowess, valiant virtues, and triumphant victories yet
proved more Royally renoumed throughoute all the world in his time and to his
posterity. The Hebrwes with great and not undeserved titles extolled their
Judas Maccabeus. Homer the glory of all Greek Poets left Hector and Achilles
most commendable unto the world. Neither by less diligence did the Grecians
adorn with praise Alexander the most mighty conqueror. And the Romans
advanced the noble acts of their Caesar to the Skies not enough. The
Burgonians profoundly praised Godfrey of Bulloyn (for his noble valiancy) as
the scourge of the Sarazens in his days. And as every one of those are
commended with due desert: so in like manner there were never Britains
wanting of excellent learning and exquisite knowledge to leave with careful
diligence and credible commendation, the progeny, life, prowess prosperity,
and triumphant victories of our said ancient Arthure worthily published unto
the world. And as Alexander would have none to purtract him but Apelles, nor
any but Lysippus to engraue him in bras^e, nor any but Pyrgotiles to work him
in pretiouse stone: So where in not three, but many Artizans as learned Gildas,
William of Malmsbury, Nennius, Diuionenses, Graius, Josephus, Geoffrey of
Munmuth, Siluester Giraldus. etc. performed their worthy workmanshippes in our
Arthure Maur (to use the Britain phrase:) even one English Leyland for his
learned labor laudable, has perfectly polished him in all points. Choosing a
chief and most perspicuouse, a valiant and most victoriouse, a couragiouse and
most conquerouse, a religiouse and most redoubted Royal sovereign King Henry
the eight, as sole supreme Patron and protector thereof against the cankered
currish kind of caueling carpers. Because his elder brother being named
Arthure, he him self a most christian King for all heroical virtues
commendable, the rather seemed to favor and further the advancement of the
fame of his most renoumed auncestor this same our ancient Arthure and the
knightly train of his round table. Hereupon by patent of his princely
prerogative ordained, granted, and confirmed he unto this honorable City of
London, free election of a Chieftaine and of Citizens representing the memory
of that magnificent King Arthure, and the Knights of the same order, which
should for the mayntenance of shooting only, meet together once a year, with
solemn and friendly celebration thereof. So much in his noble mind prevailed
all provident care of princely prowess, 2 Reg. 1.
valiancie, cheualrie, and actiuitie, that he not only herein imitated the
examplers of godly K. David for his Israelites as before, A^^o ^30
and of that noble Emperor Leo in overthrowing idolatry, and exalting
archerie maugre the malice of that Roman Antichrist, and all his members: but
also inuincibly maintained the praiseworthie practice of this shooting in peace
and wars by the examples of his princly progenitors. As after the conquest, of
K. Henry II. alias Beauclerck so surnamed, the first furtherer of K. Arthures
benificencie, valiant Edward surnamed long and first vizitor of the said
Kings tomb, valiant and victorius Edward III* and IIII. bountious and
liberal Richard II. good and gratiouse Henry the V. wise, po^itique, just,
temperate, and grave King Henry the V^I. his father. Neither has this ceased
in the branch, that flourished in the bole: but by the mild, religiouse, and
gratiouse King Edward the VI. and now last of all by the Phoenix of feminine
sex, our most redoubted Hester and gratiouse sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth
laudably lasts in force and effect: Hest. Cap. (...)*
whose highness so many years humbling, not exalting her self the more by
reason of her power, wholly sets her subjects in peace, preferring the same.
Now therefore (Right honorable and worshipful) as duty binds every degree
to further the welfare of this blessed peace, and the profit of this excellent
practice: proceed I humbly beseech you with noble Nehemias and those godly
superuisors with dutiful diligence, 2. Esd. 4,
with the one hand holding your boes, and with the other hand as good laborers
for your Prince and public wealth, to bear the burdens of your vocation,
toward the buylding of this earthly Jerusalem, even from the morning spring
till the Stars come forth. Continually I say accustom your selves to seek
this peace of the gospel and to ensue the same, ride on I say with renoume
upon that White Horse whose sitter having a boe and a croune given him has
promise from the mighty power of God, Revel. ^.
that he shall go forth conquering and shall overcome. That Christ our King of
the v^^iuersall Church with his croune and septer, and with the shaf^es of his
mouth or word and gospel of peace may pearce throughout the world to the
advancement of his glory which shall sit on the raineboe in his majesty to
judge all Nations, (as the fear of his holiness, mutual love in
righteousness, and thankfulness for his benefits may move all men) I have
trauieled in the translation of this book out of Latin into English, with all
humble and true hearted reverence, beseeching God to assist you right honorable
Lord Deputy with his omnipotent power, that as an invincible Joshua you may
continually bring in the people to the due knowledge of God, Deuteronomy. 31.
and obedience of our Prince: and as a notable Nehemias in true fear of God
without fear of foe build up this earthly Jerusalem to the perfection of that
perpetual peace, promised in the heavenly Jerusalem. Finally that you right
honorable Lord President, and you right worshipful Master Thomas Smith with
your worshipful associates, Psalm. 121.
Daily praying for the peace of this Jerusalem, as the amity thereof is sweet
by the unity of your minds: Psalm. 132.
So that, Hoc sit longissime vt periucundum sic cohabitare fratres in vnum, I
according to my humble duty heartily do pray unto God, craving pardon of your
honors and worshippes generally for this my bold dedication. And beseeching
you favorably to accept the same in furderance of my poor study of dutiful
well wishing toward my Prince and country: I humbly and heartily beseech the
eternal and omnipotent God to multiply his manifold mercies upon your honors
and worships, that being all of one dutiful mind in God toward the majesty
of our most sacred sovereign lady (under her long living in peaceable
prosperity) we may after this life attain unto that peaceable and perpetual
kingdom of Heaven to reign as coheires with Christ our Lord in the glory of
his Father. AMEN.

Your Honorable Lordships, and worthy Worships most humble and faithful
poor Orator, RICHARD ROBINSON, Citizen of London.

I. L. Ad Candidos Lectores.
Delituit certe multis Arturius annis,
Vera Brittannorum, Gloria, Lumen, Honos:
Dispulit obscuras alacer Lelandius vmbras,
Sydereum mundo restituitque iubar.
Plaudite Lectores studiosa caterua diserti,
Prestitit officium candidus ille suum:
Hinc procul at fugiant Codrino fell tumentes,
Ne proprio crepitent ilia rupta malo.
I. L. To the Sincere Readers.
Many years surely Arthure hidden lay,
Of Brittons, the Glory, Light and Honor true:
Cheerely has Leyland driven dark shadows away,
And yields the world bright shining Sun to view.
Of Learned Readers, rejoice ye studious Crew,
He sincere did his Duty bounden fulfill:
Far hence flee those their spyte which spew,
Least their Intestines burst with their own ill.
The Table of the names of those Authors, whose testimonies this present Book
uses.
Foraine writers.
Poets. Lucanus. Iuuenall. Martial.
Historiographers Cornelius Tacitus. Paulus Diaconus. Claudius Gallus. Ioha^nes
Anneuillanus. Valerius. Boccace. Diuionensis. Ponticus Virunnius.

Britain writers.
Theliesinus. Ambrosius Maridunensis. Merlinus Caledonius. Melchinus. Patricius
Glessoburgensis. Gildas Bannochorensis. Anonymu^. Nennius. Samuel. Beda
Girouicanus.
Britain writers.
Asserius Meneuensis. Gulielmus Meildunensis. Galfridus Monemuthensis. Aluredus
Fibroleganus. Henricus Venantodunensis. Josephus Iscanus. Siluester Giraldus.
Matheus Parisius. Johannes Chysistoriographu^. Gulielmus Paruus. Johannes
Fiberius. Thomas Vicanus. Ranulphus Higedenus. Mattheus Florilegus. Johannes
Burgensis. Thomas Melorius. Scalechronica. Chronica Durensia. Chronica
Glessoburgensia. Chronica Persorana.
2. Cor. 13. Nihil contra veritatem agere possumus, sed pro Veritate. Prou.
12.Labium Veritatis firmum in perpetuum. Prou. 21. Testis autem mendax peribit.
Esdra. ^. 9. Super omnia autem vincit Veritas. Certain memorable Notes
inserted into this Assertion since the Translation thereof. By Ric. To.
AS Pliny says, Ingenui pudoris est fateri per quos proseceris: So I must
freely confess the friendly helps of those which profited me in this purpose.

First by conference with Master Steven Batman, a learned Preacher and
friendly favorer of virtue and learning, (touching the praise worthy
progeny of this K. Arthure) he gave me this assured knowledge on this manner
taken out of his Ancient records written at Aualonia.

Uerses found in certain Cronicles, wherein were discourses had of Aruiragus
king of Britain 45. years after the nativity of Christ.

Twelve men in number entered the Vale of Aualon:
Joseph of Aramathia was the chiefest flower of them.
Joseph the son of Joseph, his father did attend,
With other ten: and Glaston did possess.
There al^^*, this writing did witness, that K. Arthure of great Britain
descended of the stock of y^ said Joseph viz. Helarius the Nephewe of Joseph
begat Iosue, Iosue begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Castellors, Castellors
begat Manaell, Manaell begat Lambord and Vrlard, and Lambord begat a son
that begat Igerna of which woman, king Other Pendragon begat the noble and
renoumed King Arthure. Whereby it plainly appears, that K. Arthure descended
of the stock of Joseph.

Again, like wise of the same kindred (whereof K. Arthure came) proceeded
these ancient Britains also.

Peter the Cose^ of Joseph of Aramathia, king of Arcadia, begat Erlan, Erlan
begat Melianus, Melianus begat Arguthe, Arguthe begat Edor, Edor begat
Lotho which married to wife the sister of K. Arthure, of whom Lotho begat 4
sons, to wit, Walwanus Agranaius, Guerelies, and Garelies: all which were
noble men of authority in Britain where they dwelt.

Moreover he showed me ^ut of his ancient records the interchaunges of king
Arthures arms which he gave in three chiefes, from the first to the third:
viz.

His first arms he bare in a shield Gules, (red) three Serpents, Or. gold

His second he bare in a shield Vert, (green) a plain Crossargent: in chief
the figure of the Virgin Marie with Christ in her arms.

His third and last in a shield Azure, (blew) three ^ownes. Or. (gold.)

But after knowledge of these several arms, I had intelligence of a certain.
French book, wherein he is reported to aue given a shield Azure (blew) 13.
Crowns. Or. gold

This book being in an English man's hands, I was not so desirous to see it,
but he as willingly showed it and lent it me. There was in it portracted both
the several names, shieldes, and several arms in colors also depainted of
all K. Arthures knights and under every one the commendation due unto him by
his cheualrie. Which because the engrauing of their arms was very chargeable,
and the circumstance of matter more then I could in so short time publish in
the English tongue: I was enforced to content me with this brief collection
concerning K. Arthure. and with the names of 16. kings, one Duke, and 149.
knights, so many as were therein printed. viz.

Of King Arthure himself it says Directly under his shield thus.
King Arthure did bear in his shield Azure (blew) 13. Crowns of gold. He was
a great conqueror, and of noble and valiant prowess, he instituted the
order of the round Table in the kingdom of great Britain: Unto the which
he appointed all his chosen knights at Whitsontide yearly to come, and hold
their Homage of him by the same order.

Now ^^^oweth the names of those knights, and first how many kings
Kings.
1 Le Roy Meliadus. 2 Le Roy Ban de Benock. 3 Le Roy Boort de Gauues. 4 Le Roy
Karados. 5 Le Roy Lac. 6 Le Roy de Clare^. 7 Le Roy Vrien. 8 Le Roy Lo^tho de
Orchany. 9 Le Roy Ryon. 10 Le Roy Pelinor. 11 Le Roy Baude magu^, de Gorre. 12
Le Roy Pharam ondo. 13 Le Roy Galganoys de Norgalles. 14 Le Roy Aguisant d'
Escosse 15 Le Roy Malaquin d' outre les marches de Gallounne. 16 Le Roy
Claudas.
I ^Le Duke de Clarence.
Knights.
1 Messier Lancelot du Lac. 2 Boort de gauues. 3 Gawain d' Orchany. 4 Messier
Tristran de Lyonnoys. 5 Lyonet de Gauues. 6 Helias le Blanc. 7 Hector des
Mares. 8 Bliomberis de Gauues. 9 Gaherriet. 10 Keux le Seneschall. 11 Messier
Yuaine. 12 Bruor le Noir. 13 Baudoyer le Conestable. 14 Agruall de Galls. 15
Segurades. 16 Patris le Hardy. 17 Esclabor le Messoniez. 18 Saphar le
mescognieu. 19 Sagremor le desree. 20 Gyron le Curtoys. 21 Seguram le Brun. 22
Galehault le Bla^c. 23 Le Morholt de Ireland. 24 Danayn le Roux. 25 Amilan de
Sessougn^. 26 Brallain. 27 Brallain que lon disoit le Cheualier an duex espees.
28 Gallehaulte. 29 Lamorat de Lysth enoys. 30 Brunor de Gauues. 31 Le bon
Cheualier de Norgalles. 32 Henry de Ryuell. 33 Messier Gullat. 34 Gueherres. 35
Aggrauaine le Orguilleux. 36 Mordrec de Orchany. 37 Gyrfflet. 38 Dodvnel le
Sauaige. 39 Yuain le Auoutre. 40 Ozement Coeur hardy. 41 Gualegantine le
Galloys. 42 Gaherriet de Lemball. 43 Mador de la port. 44 Bamers le forcene.
45 Dynadam de Estrangor* 46 Herret le filz de lac. 47 Artus le petit. 48
Cinglant Rochmont. 49 Artus lesbloy. 50 Guallogrenant de Windezores. 51
Kandelis. 52 Merangis des portz. 52 Gauuaine le franc. 53 Gnades le fort. 54
Pharas le Noir. 55 Pharas le Roux. 56 Iambegues le Garruloys. 57 Taulas de la
mountain. 58 Abandam le fortune. 59 Damatha de folim^t. 60 Amand le bell
Iousteur. 61 Ganesmor le Noir. 62 Arphin le Dire. 63 Arconstant le adures. 64
Le Beau couranr. 65 Le laid hardy. 66 Andelis le Roux serr^e. 67 Bruyant des
Isles 68 Ozenall de Essra^^^^. 69 Le Cheualier de Esther. 70 Le Varlet de
Glayn. 71 Heroys le ioveux. 72 Fergas du (...). 73 Lot le Cou^enr. 74 Meliadus
del Espinov. 75 Meliadus an no^r aeil. 76 Avglius des vaux. 77 Iamburg du
Chastell, 78 Messire Clamorat. 79 Surados des sept fontanes. 80 Le Varletan
Circle. 81 Kaedins de Lonizein. 82 Lucane le Boutellier. 83 Brumer de la
fountain. 84 Lenfant du plessies. 85 Persides legent. 86 Sibilias aux dures
maius. 87 Sinados le Esile. 88 Arphazat le groz coeur. 89 Le blonde Amoreux. 90
Argahac le Beau. 91 Normaine le Pelerin. 92 Harmaine le felon. 93 Toscane le
Roman* 94 Landone le Ledger. 95 Le fort troue. 96 Le Noir Perdu. 97 Le fortune
de lisle. 98 Le see des Dames. 99 Le Forester de De^newich, 100 Le Chasseur de
on^re les marches. 101 Ieyr and Landoys de Rufe. 102 Geoffroy le Lancoys. 103
Randowin le persien. 104 Froyadus le Gay. 105 Rousse lin de la autre mo^d^ 106
Gurrant le Roche dure. 107 Arm. on. ouuerd serpent. 108 Ferrand du tertre. 109
Thor le filz de Arez. 110 Iupin des croix. 111 Ydeux le fort Tyrane. 112
Bolinian du Boys. 113 Le bon Cheualier sa^s paou^ 114 Brouadas le Espaignoll.
115 Brechus sans Pitye. 116 Malignain. 117 Le Cheualeur de Scallo^ 118 Melias
de l' Espi^^. 119 Agr^erle ^el Patride^ (...) Circle d' Or. 120 Mandius le
noir. 121 Perceuall de Gallis. 122 Aeuxdestraux. 123 Lamant du Boys. 124
Melianderis de Sansen. 125 Mandrin le Sage. 126 Kalahart le petite. 127 Sadocde
Vencon. 128 (...) 129 Verrant de la Roche. 130 Le Brunsans joy, 131 L^sterin le
grand. 132 Le Cheualier des sept voyes 133 Gryngaloys le fort. 134 Malaquin le
Galoys 135 Agricole Beaugrand. 136 Gualiandres du Tettre. 137 Margondes le
Rongo. 138 Kacerdius de la Vallce. 139 (...) 140 Tal^mor le Volan^ 141 Alibel
de Logres. 142 Dalides de la Ryuier. 143 Arain du pine^. 144 Arganor l^ rich.
145 M^has le Beau Cheuali^^* 146 Mehadus le Blanc. 147 Malaquin le gros. 148
Me^^^er Palamides. 149 Alexander le Orpheli^.
Summa totalis 166. Knights.

Whereof

Kings 16. Dukes 1. Knights 149.
Besides notice of these I used in my translation from time to time, the help
(of Master John Stow, and M^ster Camb^e^ dilligent searchers in antiquities*)
for the interpretation of those hard british and Welsh ^ownes or names of
places, which neither Master Leyland the Collector of this Assertion had
expounded perfectly, neither I my felfe the translator c^^ld otherwise of my
self have performed. For the which I am to gratify them as the others also
before recyted.

The Assertion of K. Arthure.
EVIDENT It is, by the special agreement of Greek and Latin writers, that
Hercules was borne of Alcmena, by the adultery of Jupiter. But what manner of
person, or how mighty in times past he was, I suppose is even of the meanly
learned better known, then that at this present needs any further
Insinuatio^. And very many others there were borne in adultery, (as by the
Ancient History largely appears) whose prowess at home, and in wars,
notably excelled. Amongst whom also our Arthure, the chiefest ornament of
Brittayne, and the only miracle of his time, flourished famously. May I
therefore be so bold by good leave of Gulielmus Paruus, William Paruus and
Polidorus Virgilius, two adversaries of K. Arthures fame.
yea and so of his most mighty successor in place, Polidorus, even with
condign praises to commend my countryman Arthure: and with the same diligence
to lean unto the British history interpreted by Geoffrey of Munmouth a man
not altogether unlearned, (what soever otherwise persons ignorant of
antiquity, which think themselves to have knowledge, shall say) as unto a
firm defense, rather then unto the fond fables or base stuff of foreign
writers. Truly, in fables which have crept into the history of Arthure, I do
not more delight, then Polidorus, the Judge. But to be afraid of any man by
reason of his great age, or eloquence, or authority, finally as like a
foolish forsaker of the truth, I should so leave her parts undefended: that
certainly will I never do: The Authors good purpose in this work.
An other way, do equity, honesty, the rule of fame, and heerehence a just love
to my country, yea truth it self (the^ which one thing, nothing more dear I
love) fully move me. But yet neither think I to wage battle with yt Learned:
In mean time, yet by good reason it shall be free for me, to make most famous
the state of my country, and specially the parts of truth, even with singular
diligence expedyte industry, cheerful labor, prompt counsel, quick
judgment, yea, and finally by all means. Therefore, trusting in the good will,
humanity, and courteous favor of the honest readers, I will now attempt
somewhat more, circumspectly to find out Prince Arthures Original, even from
the very egg, Est locus Abrini sinuoso littore ponti,
Rupe situs media, refluus quem circuit aestus,
Fulminat hic late, turrito vertice Castrum,
Nomine Tindagium, veteres dixere Corini.
A place there is in the winding shore of the Abryne Sea by name,
Situate in midst of a rock, wheare ebbing ride the same
Enuironeth. A Castle here with towery top shines bright,
(By ancient Cornish me^ so called) which Tintagill tho hight.


A Constant same is there given out by the voice of many, and also confirmed
with the wrytinges of Learned men, that Gorloys the Governor of Cornewale had
here his habytation for him, and his. He had to wife Igerna, a woman no doubt
of most lovely Feature, but of an Improbate or vicious Chastity. Hither
somewhat oftener for recreation of his mind, Other Pendragon, king Art. father.
repaired Other, king of the Britains, and surnamed Pendragon: So called for
his Serpentine or subtle wisdom, (as I suppose) whose friendly wellwiller
Gorloys also was.

Architrenius in his fifth book (if I count aright) writes these verses.

Hoc trifido mundum, Corinei postera sole,
Irradiat Pubes, quartique puerpera Phoebi,
Pullulat Arturum, facie dum falso adulter
Tintagoll irrumpit, nec amoris Pendragon aestum,
Vincit, and omnificas Merlini consulit arts.
Mentiturque Ducis habitus and Rege latenti,
Induit absentis presenti Gorloys ora.
The after coming youth, lightens the world of Coriney
With his three cloue^ son: and she that brought forth at that day
The fourth Phoebus, brought forth Arthur, whilst the adulterer he
Even Tintagol so false of face brake in most wickedly.
Neither Pendragon vanquished the flaming fire of Love,
But Merlins arts so manifold by counsel seeks to prove:
And counterfeites the Dukes attire (as while the King did gles^
Thus) He put on the present face of absent Duke Gorloys.
Custom, acquaintance, and companying together, do set love one sire. Ovid.
Epist. ^
And because as a certain Poet says (Lis est cum forma magna Pudicitiae: that
is, Twixt Comeliness and Chastity, great Debate there seems to be.) Lust
got the mastery over Igernaes Chastity: Whereupon also afterward Arthure
was begotten of her, together with a beautiful virgin, Other Pendragon begat
Arthur of Igerna the wife of Gorloys, Governor of Cornwale, and also a Virgin
named Anna.
named Anna. It must not here be omitted whereof Hector Boethius makes
relation: namely that Other at length slew Gorloys, as he was fighting in the
behalf of Nothaleos Governor, against the Saxonnes, and forsaken of him, that
even the rather he might more freely obtain his will of Igerna. But the name
of Arthures is known to be noble with the Romans, yea and also familyer
amongst them: that from hence Iuuenall the Poet in his third Satyr writes
these. Cedamus Patria, Viuant Arturius istic, and Catulus. From our Country
depart let us: Original of Arth. name.
There Arthure live and Catulus. Samuel the British writer describes the
star Arcturus so called Per Cappa ad vrsam, alluding, that he takes his
name or signification thereof from the Greek Original. But here it ought not
to redounde unto Arthures prejudice or reproach, that the father being an
adulterer did leave after him a son borne to valiant courage, prosperity,
and triumphant victories: seeing he was not in fault, that he the less
proceeded from lawful matrimony, seeing that he afterward proved both a
valiant and honest person.

Nam genus and Proauos, Ovid. 13. lib. Metam. Fibis.
and quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra puto.
For kindred and forefathers, eke which we
Have not begun, I scarce think ours to be.
How greatly also the child prospered in virtue, it then appeared, what time
his father (who had flourished in strength, Counsel and Judgment also not
without Glory) dedeparted out of this life at Verolamium, John Stowe.
having ordained before, Then an ancient City, which was near saint
Albones, the fou^dations where of are yet apparent.
the dignity Royal unto his base gotten son, because he had none borne in
lawful matrimony.

CHAP. II.
K. Arthures Coronation.
THe history of Britain affirms that Arthure began his Reign over the
Islandes of this kingdom in the xv. year of his age, and was crowned of
Dubritius Bishop of the City of Caerlegion upon Vske in Wales. John Stow.
Johanues, What time Arthur was crowned. A. D. 316. Graius a writer his
testimony. John Stow.
y^ writer of the golden history seems to accounte upon xviii. years when
Arthure ascended up to the Roayll seat. Scalaecronica, of which book (as I am
moved by conjecture) one Gray, was Author, do say, that Arthure received the
dignity of his crown at Venta alias Caerguent now called Winchester. The two
rulers of the Pictes and Scots viz. Lotho, unto whom Anne the sister of
Aurelius Ambrosius, king of Britains was married, and Conranus, unto whom Ada
the sister of Anne was espoused, began to envy at the same so joyful
prosperity of Arthure: for both of them, but especially Lotho aspyred unto the
Dominion of Britain. Two Rulers of the Pictes aspire unto Arthures kingdom.
Heereuppon followed afterward, that he joining unto him Osca, otherwise
Occa, a most filthye person, made war against Arthure. At length the matter
came to hand strokes, and the Pict being overcome, had the worse success,
partly by the help or furtherance of the most invincible Hoel, who played the
Captains part there. The little book of the Empire of the Brittaynes and
English men upon the Scotts their friendly wellwillers, Battle and victory
over Arthur his enemies by Hoel his friend.
affirms this victory to be obtained at York by the said Hoel. And that
(the Scotts being vanquished) Arthure left the ancient Dominions (by
petitions being so moved) under the rule of his friend Augusellus, whom he
made Governor over them. Neither did better fortune happen unto the Saxonnes:
when as Colgrino the Duke was slain, and Baldricus with Childricke fled
away. After victory ensewed Concord. Lotho yielded him self unto the
Brittaynes. Mordred and Galloambieuinus the Sons of Lothon by Anne, besought
Arthure of favor and pardon by wonderful means, and at length were made
friends. In the mean season had Arthure married Guenhera daughter unto
Cadorus the Duke of Cornwale, Arthure married Guenhera the daughter of Cadorus
Duke of Cornwaile.
a woman of rare beawtie. Afterward also he subdued unto him the Saxones with
most bloody battles.

CHAP. III.
The XII. Battelles fought by Arthure.
NEnnius the Britain a writer of good and ancient credit, amongst many
others makes most lightsome mention of his battles: whose words although by
the negligence of Printers and injury of time, they be somewhat displaced, yet
notwithstanding because they make much for our present matter, and bring with
them a certain reverent antiquity, I will here set them down, and in their
order. Arthure fought in deed against those Saxones, with the governors of the
Britains, but he himself was general. The first battle was at the entrance
of the floude Gleyn, alias Gledy. The second, third, fourth, and Dugles, which
is in the Country of Lynieux. The sixth was upon the flood which Bassas. The
seventh was in the wood Caledon, Catcoit Celidon. The eight in the Castle of
Gwynyon. Caerlegion Vske. John Stow
The tenth on the Sea shore, which is called Traitheurith, Rhydrwyd. The
eleauenth in the hill Agned Cathregonion. The twelfth in the Badonis, Some
judge this to be Bathe*
wherein many were slain by one assault of Arthure. Thus far witnesses
Nennius.

Johannes the writer of the golden history ratifyeth the self same truth
touching the twelve battles fought against those Saxones. John the writer of
the golden history.


Aluredus Fibroleganus the historeographer also declares the like.

And so these are the words of Henry surnamed of Huntington Henry of
Huntington.
in the second book of his history. Arthure the warrier, in those days the
Captain general of soldiers, and of the rulers in Britain, King Art^ure
Xij times General, and Xij. times Co^querour.
fought most valiantly against the Saxons. Twelve times was he general of the
battle, and twelve times got he the victory, And there also. But the battles
and places wherein they were fought a certain historiographer declares.

Henry of Huntington seems here to have hitte upon the brief history of
Nennius, the name of whose exemplar (as it seems) was not set down.
Herehence came that silence. Neither was that book common in men's hands at
that time, and in this our age is surely most rare: only three exemplars do I
remember that I have seen. John Rhes^s a lover of Antiquity.
John Rhesus a lover of Antiquity, and the same a diligent setter forth
thereof, has a little book entitled Gilde, which book (so far as I gather
by his speech) had not to Author Gildas, but Nennius.

The Elenchus or Registered Table of the library at Batle Abbey, John Stow.
accounts the history of Gildas among there treasures, I have diligently
inquired for the book: but as yet have I not found it. The Report is, that
the exemplar was translated or carried to Brecknocke there to be kept.

Now must we report the Battles.

THe writer of the life of the reverent Dubritius, Archbishop of the City
Caerlegion upon Vsk, John Stow.
not vnelegantly, does co^memorate such like matters. When at length Aurelius
the King was made away by poison, (and that Other, What time Arthure succeeded
Other his Father.
his brother ruled a few years) Arthure his Son by the help of Dubritius
succeeded in government, who with bold courage set upon the Saxones in many
battles, and yet could he not utterly root them out of his Kingdom, For the
Saxones had subdued unto them selves the whole compass of the Island which
stretches from the water of Humber unto the Sea Cattenessinum or Scottish Sea.
Arthure could not clean root all the Saxones out of Britain.
For that cause the Pears of the Realm being called together, he determined
by their counsel what he might best do, against the irruption of the Pagane
Saxones, At length by comm^n counsel he sends into Armorica, (that is to
say, the letter Britain, H^el King of Britain aides him with a powe of
15000. men.
) unto King Hoel his Ambassadors, which advertised him at full, touching the
calamity of the Britains, who coming with fiftene thousand of armed men
into Britain was honorably entertained of Arthure, and D. Dubritius: going
unto the City of Lincoln beseeged of the Saxones, Lincoln beseeged by the
Saxones.
having fought ye battle, there were six thousand of Saxones which either
being drowned or wounded with weapons, dyed. Their slaughter and fight.
But the others flying away unto the wood of Caledon, being beseeged by the
Britains, were constrained to yield themselves: and pledges being taken for
tribute yearly to be paid, he gave them leave with their ships only to
return into their Country. Afterward within a short time the Saxones were
ashamed of the league made: and having recovered their strength, they made
their league as void, and beseeged the City Badon round about, Bath
beseeged by the Saxons.
which now is called Bathe: this when Arthure heard of, having gathered his
host together, and beholding the Tents of his enemies, he spoke thus unto
them.

Because the most ungodly Saxones, K. Arthure seeks to be adue^ged of the
Saxones.
disdain to keep promise with me, I keeping faith with my God, will endeavor
to be aduenged of them for the blood and slaughter of my Citizens: His words.
Let us therefore manfully set upon those Traitors whom by the Mediation of
Christ out of all doubt we shall overcome with a wished triumph. And he
rushing upon the ranckes of the Saxones, being helped by the prayers of
Dubritius in overthrowing many thousands, His victory over them.
obtained the victory: and the few which fled this garboyle, he caused them to
yield to his mercy.

Boccace in his book of Lakes and Marshes, thus writes. Murais that Lake so
called famous is, by the victory of Arthure, King of Britain: for men say
that the Scotts, Pictes and Irishmen being by him beseeged, were compelled to
yield themselves there. Boccace mentions of Arthure.
The same Author in his viii. book of Famous Personages makes a notable
mention of Arthure being moved with a certain Godly zeal, to the end he would
not with unthankful silence ouerpasse, so mighty a personage, and so worthy
a man. M. Camden.
Neither here are those things which appear in the Cronicles of a certain
writer of Digion differing from our purpose. Cerdicius the Saxon held war
with Arthure.
Cerdicius having more often conflict with Arthure, if he were one month
vanquished, he more sharply assaulted in another month. At length Arthure,
with irksome toil so being awearied, after the Xii year of Cerdicius his
coming (by fealty to him sworn) gave him the Country Auonia Southwarde,
Arth. friendly to his foo.
and Somaria: which part Cerdicius called West saxony.

Gulielmus a Medulphi curia both a gallant writer, William of Malmsbury
and also a learned, and which thing first in his history (he as most
faithful) in his first book of the Kings of Britain mencioneth, Arthure
sore distressed had it not been for Ambrose a Roman.
brings in by the way these testimonies, of Arthure. And now truly had it
come to an evil pass with the Britains (as he understood) had not Ambrose
only of the Romans been left alive, (who after Vortigerus, was Monarke or
King, with the surpassing exployt of warlike Arthure, repressed the outragiouse
barbarouse enemines of the Kingdom.

Moreover hetherunto seem these things to pertain, which in the fragmentes of
Gildas the Britain are read after this manner. Gildas.
The Britains like conquerours take courage to them, prouocating their
enemies to fight, unto whom by the Lords good pleasure the victory fell even
to their desire. From that time, otherwhiles the Citizens, otherwhiles the
enemies got the upper hand, that in this people it might be approved, how the
Lord after his accustomed manner, dealt with this present Israel, and whether
he loved the same, yea, or no, even unto the year of the seege of the mount
Badon, and lastly almost of the petty spoylers there, in no little hurlyburly,
whereas even I my self was borne. These says Gildas. Behold the slaunderer is
now present, and as one cruel of eye sight, requires a reason of me, why
Gildas remembers not Arthure, Adversaries quarrel against Arthure.
if he were then living. To these I answer, that I will hereafter speak of
Gildas. In means time the adversary calls to mind, that Gildas when the
battle was fought at Bathe, was but an Infant: By reason whereof even his
Acts done or not done of him, somewhat slenderly are understood by the
adversary.

Gulielmus a Medulphi Curia, William of Malmesbune a friendly writer.
a little before, bears so honorable a testimony of Arthure, that smally it
shall differ, whether, if not superior, yet as equal he reputed him with
Ambrose. But Nennius an Author of no bad credit, Nennius another.
so much performed in favor of Aurelius Ambrosius, as Gildas in the favor of
Arthure: Uiz. that leaving out the name of the one, he might attribute
uprightly by just cause unto the other all honor, concerning the battle fought
at Bathe. But neither do these alone perform this: There are a number of good
authors, which confirm the self same matter with a certain just Authority.
Except in mean time, he be so unjust a Judge, that he allow of nothing, be
it never so credible, which smells not of Tullie or Liuy, when he him self
in mean time smells I know not what of Aemilius: Which thing shall not
displease me, when I shall understand, that he franckely confesses this
matter. In the mean while I will recyte the testimony of that John which
concerning Arthure write the golden history. This year being the tenth of
Cerdicius, king of the West Saxones, did arise Arthure among ye Britains, a
most valiant warrier.

CHAP. IIII.
K. Arthures expedition toward the French.
THe sixte book of the History of Britain speaks copiously touching things
done by Arthure in France: unto which country he went not, before he had
foreseen (as it seemed then in deed) with advised counsel, the immunitie or
disburdenance of Britains troubles. Mordred Arthure his Nephewe, put in great
trust.
He had to Nephewe one Mordred by name, son of Lotho, king of the Pictes and
of Anna sister of Aurelius Ambrosius king of Britain. Unto this man, because
he was most nearest in bloodde, and familiar in acquaintance, did he commit
all his kingdom, together with Guenhera his most loving wife. For Mordred, in
respect of fortitude or magnanimity, was most commendable, and besides this
for his quick and prompt wit, in accomplishing his affairs: His virtues
mixed with vices.
which virtues, had he not obscured with most ardent lust of ruling, and
offense of adultery, (but in mean time at first kept close for fear) he had
in deed been worthy to have been accounted amongst the most famous
personages. Now had Arthure entered into France, and the Governors being
subdued, he had left a notable testimony of his prowess there. Hoels niece,
viz. Helen, stolen out of Armorica.
Behold, now comes a savage Tyrant, cruel and fierce, who had ravished
Helen the niece of Hoel of Armorica, or the less Britain (stolen away and
brought out of Britain) at the coaste of France, and where upon she died.
Arthure could not take well this so heinous a repreach done unto Helen, and
straight way got the Tyraunte by the throat, Arthure reuengeth that injury.
that he utterly destroyed this great and horrible Monster. And not long
after did Hoel cause to be erected a sacred Tomb for Helen in the Islande
where she died, and a name fitly given unto the place where Helens Tomb was
made, which serves even till this day. The Cronicles of the writer of Digion
in Burgonie, Diuionensis.
do with great commendation extolle Arthure warring in France, by these like
words.

Arthure for nine years space, Arth. subduing France, his Nephewe Mordred in
mean time betrayeth him co^federating with Cerdicius
subdued France unto him, having betaken his kingdom and Queen unto Mordred
his Nephew. But he desiring ambitiously to reign (yet fearing only Cerdicius)
gave him, to the end he should favor his doings, seven other provinces.
viz. Sudo Saxony or Southsex, Sudorheia^ or Southery, Berrochiam or
Barckeshyre: Vilugiam or Wiltshier: Duriam or Dorcetshire: Deuoniam or
Deuonshier: and Corineam Cornwale. And Cerdicius co^senting unto these (se^ding
for ye englismen) restored his provinces, Anno. 516. Mordred crowned.
and was crowned after the manner of the country at Wintchester. But Mordred
was crowned over the Britains at London. And so Cerdicius, when he had
reigned three years, died, while Arthure yet remained amongst the French:
unto whom Kinrichus succeeded. In the Seventh year of whose Reign Arthure,
returned into England. Arth returned into England.
Thus far out of the Cronicles. These which I have now recited, have not
only their antiquity, but also credit, and with a certain circumstance are
consonant to the History.

And that I may somewhat more friendly speak in favor of Athures Tryumphes
over the French, there are (besides these) many things, which I with a
certain zeal do omit altogether. But yet, that must I as it were touch by
passing over the rest: viz. that it is manifest by the inscription of Arthures
great Seal (concerning which we will in place convenient speak
circumspectly) that he was made famous by the surname of a French men. And
neither was this done without manifest occasion, at any time. For, as touching
the Antiquytie and even most sure knowledge of the Seal, so evidently, I doubt
not, but that I may assuredly believe (so their appear upright Judges herein,
and which are skillful in ancient monumentes) that I shall prove by notable
reasons, the same was proper, peculier and natural, and proceeding from the
workemaster. But these things more rightly appear in there place. I will at
this instant only heereto adioyne one Valerius, Valerius reporting that K.
Arthure vanquished 30. kingdoms.
which remembers us of thirty kingdoms vanquished by Arthure. For in those
days a great company of Gouernoures held under their Jurisdictio^ the
Islands together with France and Germany.

CHAP. V.
K. Arthures Familier Cheualyers, or knights.
SOme man would peradventure here look for, that I should also with a
mighty praise blaze on the victoryes of Arthure, touching which the history
of Britain reports. Historiographers do contend in this behalf, and the
controversy, as yet rests under the Judge. But I will declare nothing
rashly: For so much as it appears most evidently, that both obscure and
absurd reports have crept into the history of Arthure: which thing is of the
curious sort easily sound fault with. But this in deed is not a cause
sufficient just, why any man should neglect, ^abiect, or deface the History
otherwise of it self, lightsome and true. How much better is it (casting
away trifles, cutting off old wives tales, and superfluous fables, in deed
of stately port in outward show, but nothing auayleable unto credit, being
taken away) to read, scanne upon, and preserve in memory those things which
are consonant by Authorytie. For, that which now a long time is embraced of
Learned men with great consent: ought not in what soever moment of time
barcking against it, together with faith or credit thereof, to be quite taken
away.

Otherwise the History had not hitherto remained in so great reputation.
Therefore, because it is a work of greater importance, then we presently
are in hand with, K. Arthures knights of his round Table.
exquisitely, curiously and perfectly to displaye all the deeds of Arthure:
let us for this season omit the Romans, and let us advance with pen his
famylier friends. Hoel the first knight.
Hoelus Governor of Armorica, or the less Britain in this famous company of
Nobles, by a certain right of his, requires the next place from the first:
Concerning whose coming into Britain, and warlike prowess, we have formerly
written in the chapter of the wars accomplished by Arthure.

Hetherunto ensewe Mordred and Gallouinus, Brethren Germaynes unto Arthure by
bloodde and familiarity alyed. Gallouinus the second knight
Of which two, this first at length, like a perjured person and the same a
Reuoulter never enough discommendable (that I speak nothing of the crime of
his adultery) was slain in battle. One Hector Abrinus being thereof scarce a
true witness, and as I gather with judgment, more rightly surnamed Alaunicus.
But the second, being always a man constant, performed most faithful
diligence both in all foreign wars, and also specially in that conflict at
Dorcester, about the return of Arthure out of France into Britain, who was
chief next unto him against Mordred. Melchinus the British Poet blazseth the
fame of Gallouinus. (...)
The same does Johannes Anneuillanus in his book entitled Architrenio a work
not vnelegant, namely by these verses.

Et Walganus ego qui nil reminiscor auara
Illoculasse manu: non haec mea fulgurat auro,
Sed gladio dextra: recipit, quo spargat, and enses;
Non loculos stringit, nec opes: in carcere miles
Degener and cupide, tumulato rusticus aere,
Et me bella vocant Et tua forsitan vrget
Solicitudo: vale.
And Walgan I with covetous hand naught distribute which have
This my right hand shines not with gold but with the sword so brave
It takes that it may distribute, even swords not bags it bendes.
Nor wealth, though I a Knight distressed, yet not untrue to friends,
Ne yet in country lived I like a couetouse muck^scrape:
But now the wars away call me unto my wonted state,
And thine affairs also,
Perhaps urge the thereto: Farewell.
ALso that History of Arthure, in deed Fabulus (which commonly is carried
about written in the mother tongue) affirms that Gallouinus was buried in a
certain Chapel at Dorcester. Gallouinus buried at Dorcester.
In which point what manner book soever it be, it misseth not the mark
altogether, as the book entitled Scalaecronicon makes manifest relation: His
bones Gian^like.
and ye inhabitants of ye Castle do now repute his bones almost Gyanllike in
stead of a miracle. According^ to the record of Glastenbury the name, are
Fugatius and D^mianus. This Lucius being created the first Christian King in
England lived about the year after Christ 182 William of Malmesbury his
judgment of Gallouinus.
And that long since in the time of Lucius Magnus there was a Chapel founded
in the Castle of Dorcester and dedicated unto our Lord and Savior Christ: what
time Fugatius and Damianus Britains preached the Gospel as by the Annals or
yearly records of the same City (hearing a reverent figure and resemblance
of Antiquity) it does plainly appear. That it may be most acceptable, and
besides that most true which I have above inferred, touching both the death and
burial of Galouinus: it shall not through me stand, that the judgment of
William de Medulphi Curia as touching the death and burial of this Gallouinus
(by reason of his fortitude never enough commended) should either wear out of
memory or utterly perish. Wherefore, I esteem it worthy the labor here to
set down his words out of the third book of the Kings of England that
herehence the discreet Reader might even fully try as it were at a tutchstone
the sincere brightness of true gold, from that which is counterfeite.

Then in the Province of Wales which is called Rossia was found the Sepulcher
or Tomb of Gallouinus or Walwine, H^s words of report.
which was the Nephewe not degenerate of Arthure, by his sister. He governed
(in that Coast of Britain which to this day is called Waluuthia) as a Knight
most famous in prowess: but being (of his brother, and the Nephew to Hengistus
concerning whom I have spoken in the first book) driven out of his Kingdom,
did first to their great detriment recompense his banishment, justly pertaking
praise with his Uncle, for that he put off or avoided the downfall from his
Country then ruinouse. But Arthures Tomb was at no time seen, whereupon
Antiquity of foolish dreams and fables, did vainly surmise that he would yet
come again. But the burying place of the other (as before I set down in the
time of William the first King of England) was found fourteen foot long upon
the Sea coast, The manner of Galouinu^ his death, after the report of W.
Malm^b.
where (as some men affirm) he was wounded of his enemies and cast out of
shipwrake: certain persons have said, he was slain by the Citizens at
public banquet. So says the Author Gulielmus Meildunensis, Wi^liam of
Malmsbury.
as concerning Gallouinus. But I (if it might be lawful for me as a puny)
would make trial of my strength with these weapons, John Leylands opinion to the
contrary.
against this author Meildunensis so old and most beaten Soldier, to bestow
and bear of the blows. viz. It is not like to be true, that men of Gyantlike
height (as I gather by y^ grave 14. foot long) were then living in the days
of Gallouinus. Wherefore undoubtedly in mine opinion it is more credible that
it was the grave of some Giant inhabitinge the country. For that first such
did inhabit Albion, it appears both by authority of foreign and of our owns
writers. His proof out of a british Poet named Ioseph^^.
The one of which two his credit I following, namely Josephus of Devonshire a
British Poet, most absolutely elegante by all means, (having taken out of his
Antiocheides a work immortal, these few verses) I will use them as testimony
for brevity sake.

His Brutus auito
Sanguine Troianus, Latijs egressus ab oris
Post varios casus consedit finibus, orbem
Fatalem nactus, debellatorque Gigantum,
Et terrae Victor nomen dedit.
A Trojan Brute by ancient blood, arrived from Roman road
After sundry hazardes, and, here in these coasts aboade
And having got his destned land, subdued the Giants fell
As Conqueror he left his fame upon the earth to dwell.
Architrenius in his sixth book of Gyantes inhabiting Albion recyteth these.

Hos auidum belli Corinei robor auerno
Praecipites misit: cubitis ter quatuor altum.
Gogmagog Herculea suspendit in aere lucta,
Antheumque suum scopulo, detrusit in aequor.
These Corineus his puysant strength (of eager mood to fight)
To hell sent headlong: Gogmagog of twelve cubits height,
By him (like Hercules wrestling) into the air was thrown
His Antheus eke and from the rock in seaes was cast adowne.
Neither am I ignorant that in times past there was on ye sea shore a Castle
called Galouine, touching which the Author M^ildunensis as above has written:
whose footesteppes are as yet apparent. But that was not the habitation of the
Giant, as neither perhaps of that Galouine of Arthures, but of some latter
vycegerent bearing the same name. But y^ which he me^tioneth of Arthures Tomb
at that time, is most true. William of Malmsbury a most curious and painful
searcher of Antiquity.
No one man more curiously searched forth, at any time all the treasures of the
library at Glastenbury. This only was here wanting in him toward knowledge,
that he dying about the first year of the Reign of Henry y^ second King of
England, knew nothing of Arthurs tomb. For so much as y^ same tomb was found
afterward in ye beginning of y^ reign of K. Richard coeurde lion. William of
Malmsbury.
But I return with William Meildunensis into fau^ur, out of the which as yet I
have not openly fallen: By whom a man as in his age most learned in all kind
of Good letters, and of singular wit, diligence and care in searching forth
Antiquity, I confess and in deed that franckly must a^^irme my self to have
been oftentimes helped in the knowledge of Antiquity. Undoubtedly it is a
point of honesty to acknowledge by whom a man profits. It likes me well,
here, unto the conclusion to add the notation which I my self gather of the
name of Gallouinus out of the British language. The interpretation of
Gallouinus his name.
Wall signifies strangers or walsh. Guin, Album, or white. Like as if a man
by this phrase would dedescribe a comely, elegant and beawtifull personage:
except a man more rightly think that he took his original from the Saxonish
rude language, as Walwine signifies Gallus Amicus, Leoflwyn Charus Amicus, and
Aldwyne Vetus Amicus.

Now approaches Augusellus, Augusellus the th^^d knight.
of whom we have above spoken a few words. Who was in so fervent favor with
Arthure, that he was deseruingly made a beneficial Governor over the
Scotts. This man ^endered like for like.

Being sent for amongst many other Princes to the end he might perform him
self a companion with Arthure in his expedition toward France, John Stow.
so ^arre refused he not his enjoined charge, An ancient City in Kent nere
Sandwich the ruins of it yet remain* The Prowess and valiant adventure of
him, one Graius a wri^er witnesses.
that with great example of valiancie there manifested, and retorning home on
the Coast of Richborow with much more prowess, (Mordred being overcome in
civil wars and there put to flight) he falling amongst the Hoastes with blood
and life endaungered, valiantly behaved himself: as y^ Author of those books
Schalechronica (one Grayius as I suppose) is none evil witness at al thereof.
And because touching the choosing out, or election of those Princes (unto
Arthure being obedient) we have formerly made promise: it avails here to
signify that there were many and notable elections, not spoken of by him. But
that was most notable of all, John Stowe.
which appeared in Isca or Exceter otherwise in the City of Caerlegion, or
Chester upon Vske. What time it was proclaimed unto wars against ye French. But
what have the Muses to do with Mars? undoubtedly* either little or nothing. And
yet if there were a just familiarity between them, they should rather wish
well unto Mars, that for his sake they might deseruingly give Arthure great
thanks, who either restored or instituted a Learned Quier of Ecclesiastical
persons in the said city of Caerlegion: Writers. Geoffrey of Mu^mouth. John
of ^orow.
if Geoffrey of Munmouth, John Burgensis, and Rossus Verouicensis declare the
truth. This in mean time appears plain by the history of Anonimus the
writer, that Amphibalus, Rossus of Warwick. Anonimus a writer.
Julius, and Aarona martyrs did worship Christ, and also had learning in
estimation, in the said city of Caerlegion or Chester upon Vske. From whom
again credible it is that others received the same letters from hand to hand.
There is also (if we may believe credible report) in the treasuries at
Cambridge at this day, a Table of the privilege by Arthure sometime confirmed
to the furdera^ce of stude^ts. But as yet have I not searched out the credit
of this deed.

Iderus sometime a special favorer of K. Arthures court comes now to the
number of those Cheualyers. Iderus the 4. knight, near of blood unto Arthure.
This man being near alyed in blood unto Arthure, performed many valyant
examples of prowess, and continually did cleave to his Princes side. And at
length, by what hap I know not, (he dying,) left a special welwishing unto
Arthure: who also carefully accomplished his funeral at Aualonia. I have read
at Glastenburie a little book of the antiquity thereof, gathered very
dilligently by a certain Moncke of that place: In which book he declares
many things of Arthures good will toward this man departed: and of y^
liberality or beneficial goodness (for y^ same his cosens sake) bestowed
upon religious persons there inhabiting. His benefice^^ toward the Church at
Glastenbury.
Of late there did hang a Table at a pillor within y^ Church of Glastenburie,
which accounted Iderus amongst the Benefactors and restorers of the Church at
Glastenburie. Lancelot the fifth knight.
Lancelot a man most famous requires place even amongst y^ most excellent
Cheualyers to be given him. Unto which desire I easily grant as one ready to
speak this in his commendation: that he was a certain upright and faithful
friend of Arthures. His valiancy appeared largely at y^ battle which was
fought between Mordred the traitor and Arthure. A faithful friend and valiant
aduenger of injury done by Mordred unto Arthure.
He lived in deed after the battle, and as I read once or twice, conveyed
unto Guenhera (mourning at Arthures death) the body from Ambersburie unto
Glastenburie. But Gyraldus seems sincerely to attribute his burial in one
place or other at Glast^bury, Syluester Giraldus his testim^nie of his burial
at Glastenburie.
as in his Speculo Ecclesiastico: and in his work De Institutione Principis,
appears. Although it rather seems to me in mine opinion y^ he took his
first tomb at Ambersburie, Carodocus ^ sixte knight Whose fame the Cronicles
at Dorcester ^^toll.
Caradocus a name of noble prowess martial, followed Arthure in his
expedition toward France. And returning homewarde was slain, as it seems
on the coast of Richborowe, in the civil battle. The Cronicles of the port of
Dorcester, a work sauouring of antiquity makes mention of Caradocus. The
inhabitants of the Castle there even at this day after a sort renew the
memory of Caradocus, affirming that they have in their Custody I know not
what Lyneamentes of his. And not so contented, they set forth Arthures
Court, and Guenheras lodging. Now ruffleth in the number and train of
Arthures noble warriors. But I* (so y^ it be done without offense to them,
because I have only taken upon me to name the most excellentest of them and to
praise them) have purposed to ouerpasse the residue, Cadorus the 7. Knight, of
the most noble proge^ie of the kings of England.
yet otherwise praise worthy, and last of all to adioyne that Cadorus of
Cornewale. He was of the most noble progeny of the kings of Britain, and
governed the people in the Mountayny soyles of Cornewale. A stout defe^der and
preferrer of his princes dignity.
Undoubtedly he was a stout defender of his princes dignity and had
perpetual familiarity with the Britains. At length when he dyed, he left
after him a son named Constantine: (who after the Death of Arthure) was made
Ruler over Britain. Constantine his son succeeded Arth. ^ldas his testimony
of Constantine a degenerate child a murderer of Innocents.
He, (to the end they following their fathers example in times pas^e should
not aspyre unto the kingedome) caused the sons and Supporters of Mordred the
traitor and Nephews of Gallouinus to be slain with the sword. But either
this fact or the like does Gildas the Britain show in these words. Of which
so wicked a mischief, Constantine the Tyrants unclean whelpe of Damonia was
not ignorant, who this year after y^ horrible oath made, from which he again
swarued (that he would not work any injuries unto the Citizens, swearing first
by God, then by the mother of Christ, and therewith taking all the companies of
holy ones to witness) did notwithstanding by blooddie sword and spear rush
into the tender breasts of two mothers and cruelly perced the bowelles or
intrayles of two princely youths, under y^ same religious Amphibalus and of
so many overseers even standing at y^ very Alt^r, whose arms (being without
armor which no one man at y^ time more valia^tlier used then they) he cruelly
cut off even standing at the Alter, and with his Spear violently tear them in
pieces. But they shall cry for revenge unto God, before the high throne of his
Majesty in the day of judgment and at the Gates of thy city (Oh Christ) shall
they hang up their reverend banners of patience and of faith. He^herto have
we spoken of his Knights or Cheualyers.

CHAP. V^.
^. Arthures Round Table.
Now is there very convenient place to bring in amongst other things, a
few, but chosen, excellent, finally magnificent testimonies of Arthures round
table and of his good cheer. Unto these had not all noble men access: But
only they. viz Lucida quos ardens euexit ad aethera Virtus,
Virtus sola virens nullis moritura diebus,
Whom Virtue clear advanced to the skies,
Even Virtue alone which flourishing never dies.


THis stately stir (as they say) he somewhat more often solemnized. John Stow.
But specially in the city of Caerlegion, Usual places where K. Art^, kept
his (...) table.
or Chester upon Vske which place he notably esteemed of. The same did he at
Ve^ta Simenoru^ alias Winchester, and at Camalet in Somersetshire. The common
unlearned sort of writers supposes, that Venta to be called by another name,
that is to say, Camelet. But I pass not upon the judgment of the common
sort. The public report of them which dwelt at the lowermost part of the
hill Cancaletum, On this side Somerto^ near unto Glastenbury is the village
Surton and Camelet an old forte.
or an old forte, is, that Murotrigum or the Town now called Somerton,
spreads, aduaunceth, and solemnly settes forth the fame of Arthure sometime
inhabiting the Castle. Which Castle of old time was both most stately and
also most strongly builded, and in a most high or lofty prospect. K. Arthure
inhabited a castle at Somerto^
Good Lord, what and how many most deep Ditches are there here? How many
vallyes are there here out of the earth delued? Again what dangerous
steepness? And to end in few words, truly me seems it is a mirackle, both
in Art and nature. At seges est vbi Troia fuit stabulantur in vrbe,
Et fossis pecudes altis, valloque tumenti
Taxus, and astutae posuere Cubilia vulpes,
But corn there is where Troy did stand, and cattle there abound,
Stalled in town with ditches deep, in tre^ch mounting from ground,
There Yew trees grow, and subtle Foxes made their cabbins round.


ANd in deed this is the interchaunge of humane affairs. Heerehence had
Ilcester that ancient Town this calamity. Hereupon does the customary
traffic there behold the clear welspring with heavy eyes, and weep their
fill. There the inhabitants plow the ground, and every year find by seeking
for them, Golden, Silver, and Brazen pieces of money, expressing the images not
very lively of the Romans. Whereof even I my self have had a few given me of
those inhabitants. Frau^cis Lord Hastings Earl of Hu^tington an excellent
orname^t of those noble youths about the king of England, and sometimes my
benefactor in good learning, as heir of y^ Piperells, Bottrells, and of the
Hu^gerfordes, has in his possession the ruined old cotages of Camelet,
together with ye large grounds adiace^t. Johannes Anneuillanus, a writer,
extolleth K. Arth. round table.
Ioha^nes Anneuillanus ye writer in his Architrenio extolleth Arthures round
table for ye excellency thereof. The same does Volateranus in his third book
of Geography, in these words. He also being plentiful at home, used amongst
his nobles a round table that there should be no co^te^tio^, through ambition
for seats. At Ve^ta Symeno alias Winchester in ye castle most famously known,
K. Arthures round table where it stands.
stands fixed ye table at the wall side of ye kings Hal, which (for ye
majesty of Arthure) they call ye round table. And wherefore? Because neither the
memory nor fellowship of the round Trowpe of Knights as yet falls out of
Noble men's minds, in the latter age of the world. King Edward surnamed the
long, K. Edward the first made much of that round order of Knights in his
time.
as fame tells, made much of that round order of Knights. To those uses was
the round table instituted and framed, (if it be worthy of credit) and that it
was with three feet made of perfect gold. There be which write that one
Mortimar by name, spent and consumed away those treasures. That thing yet by
the way is most certain out of the history of Thomas Vicanius, that Roger
Mortimer held a very great feast or banquette at Kenelworth, Roger Mortimer,
solemnished the same order at Kenelworth.
whether as he of noble mind sent for most excellentest Cheualiers, or
Knights, as it had been unto Arthures round table of Knights: Hereupon were
very many tokens of knightly prowess set forth in deed: which the diligent
posteritis shall with great desire read expressed in wrytinges. But now so long
a while, from this Cheualris of Arthure and his train, I pass over to his
godly disposition.

CAP. VII.
King Arthures Godly Disposition.
WIth how great and how sincere devotion he was enclyned toward the
Christian Common wealth, it appears plainly by the authority of ancient
writers. He used the familiarity of Dubritius Bishop of the City of
Caerlegion or Chester upon Vske, Two Bishops religiouse favorers of K.
Arthures welfare.
a man both of singular learning and also of continency in life: so far
forth that he throwly felt as victor in the battle at Bathe, his prayers
auaylable. Furthermore David Meneuensis a man no doubt of exquisite holiness,
as then felt both the favor and liberallitie of Arthure: Of S. David.
so far forth that the people Meneuenses, Iltutus a Godly and learned father
an other religiouse favorer of Ar.
report the Bishops sea to have been by them received as by Arthures means
translated from the City of Caerlegion or Chester upon Vske unto them.
Iltutus a man of incomperable life being companion of these two, hearing of
that singular magnificence of his, and zeal toward God, was bold (as the
setter forth of his life writes) not only face to face to go see Arthure,
but also to salute him and have communication with him. Through which (in deed
boldness) much less offended he the Prince seeing that he both gave him very
great thanks and also an honest reward. Arthure (if ancient writers and
constant same de report the truth) had depainted in his Martial target, the
stimlitude of the virgin Mary: which target he used in many battles, and
specially in that battle at Bathe. In such tryfling matters I do not much
force to write. But by the way, that is not a thing unworthy to be heard of
the godly, which Samuel the writer of Britain, and Disciple of Elbodus the
Bishop, (who flourished about nine hundredth years ago) thus makes mention
of, concerning Arthures expedition or rather peregrenation. Arthure went unto
Jerusalem when as he took with him the sign of the Cross of wood in memory
of his Savior, K. Arthure his journey to Jerusalem.
whereof the fragmentes are at this day reserved in Wedale a town of Lodoneia,
six miles from Mailros. Finally he exceedingly esteemed of those Church men at
Glastenbury, His zeal and special good will toward the Church men of
Glastenbury
as partly I have above said in Idero, and as I will here more largely show.
Siluester Gyraldus in his book De Institutione Principis thus writes. For
above all the Churches in his Kingedome he favored and bear best good will
unto the Church of our Lady S. Mary at Glastenbury, and with greater devotion
advanced the same before other Churches. Polidorus (according to his equity
and judgment, and so far as his authority serves him) declares there was
no Monastery at Glastenbury, in Arthures time: So exquisite a judge is he of
Antiquity and specially concerning Britain. He also contendeth that even all
the whole world by this rule (but in deeds a most unjust rule) is constrained
to embrace, maintain, and believe that which is spoken of him touching
Antiquity, as that which is pronounced for an Oracle. John Layland a bearer
with Polidorus.
To that he says and writes in truth, will I as Virgill says. Ense leuis
nudo parmaque inglorius alba. That is, (With naked sword and sclender bright
sheelde without boasting easily defend his authority and judgment so
ancient. So far as he bringes forth the truth, and other wise his enemy.
But what he falsely or untruly declares, (which thing he does somewhat oftener
through all parts of his History) I may not bear with all, I can not abide
it, neither will I suffer it, but the truth, (so much as it shall stand me
upon) will I restore to her comeliness, fame, and glory, as one cheerful and
nothing fearful in so doing, though the enemies of truth burst them selves
with inward malice. For, unto this most honest opinion that I should
courageously clea^e in this behalf, Alias ^^ganus and Damianus.
the thing done by those two Apostles of the Britains, namely Fugatius and
Damianus, and the Epistle of Patritius the great which I have in my custody
confirming the same (to omit for brevity sake the testimonies of many others)
do will me, This was king Henry the 2. Son of Geoffrey plantagenet, brother
to king Henry the first succeding him. An. 1154. reigned 3. years. 9.
months. and 12. days, and was buried of Founteuerard in France.
or rather command me. Henry Pla^tagenet (the Nephew of Henry Beauclarcke King
of England by the daughter of Mathilda) affirms, by prescript and manifest
words in a certain deed of gift, that he saw, (and that it should not want
upright credit) that he read the covenants and articles concerning a certain
benevolence of Arthures, extended toward the religiouse persons inhabiting
Aualonia. But I will hereunto annexe the very words of King Henry's gift, out
of the original deed.

Moreover what things so ever have been given me from my Predecessors. Words
contained in king Henry the 2. his deed of gift proceeding from king Arthures
benevolence toward the Church men at Aualonia.
William the first, William the second, and Henry my Uncle. Yea of their
Ancestors, namely of Eadgar the father of Sir Edward of Edmond, and of his
father Edward, and of Ealfred the Grandsire of the same, of Brinwalchius
Kenwinus, Baldredus, Ina, Cuthredus, and of Arthure, and many other Christian
Kings. And also of Kenwalchius the Pagan King, whose privileges and writings I
have diligently caused to be searched and to be presented and read in my
presence. Thus far the deed of gift. If these witnesses of sure credit make not
sufficient for most apparent knowledge of the truth, surely there can nothing
at any time auaylably serve. For not to be satisfied with these being received
and known at full, is neither the part of a wise head, no nor yet of a good
judgment.

CAP. VIII.
King Atthures Seal.
ANd because I have again entered into the Mysteries of sacred Antiquity and
am descended a curious searcher into the bowels thereof, it likes me to bring
forth to light an other matter, namely Arthures Seal, a monument most
cunningly engraven, ancient, and reverent. Concerning which, He means
Robert Caxto^ who translated the history of K. Arthure.
Caxodunus makes mention, yet breefly and sclenderly in his preface to the
history of Arthure: which the common people reads printed in the English
tongue. Being moved with the testimony of Caxodunus whatsoever it were, I went
unto Westminster, to the end that what so as an ear witness I had heard, K.
Arthures Seal kept at Westminster in John Leylandes days.
I might at length also as an eye witness behold the same. Pondering well
that saying of Plautus, in my mind. Pluris valet oculatus testis vnus quam
Auriti december. Of more force stands eye witness one,
Then ten ear witnesses among.


The keeper of those secrets being requested of me to show me this monument,
by and by delivered it both to be seen and handled. His report in praise
thereof, describing the properties
The sight of the Antiquity pleased me at full, and for a long time the
Majesty thereof not only drew away but also detayned mine eyes from me to
the beholding thereof. Of such force it is for a man aptly to chance upon a
thing with great care desired. The substance which took the most lyuelyest
figure of Arthure imprinted upon the Seal, (and which as yet does firmly
keep the same still) is ware of read color, which by some mishape, or
injury of long time perished, is crazed here and there into pieces. But so yet
notwithstanding as no part of it is altogether lacking. For the fragmentes or
little pieces thereof being before time by some mischaunce crazed, are so closed
up together with silver plates which is of round form, such as is the utter
side of the Seal, that no part of them may fall off. For upon the vtterside
of this seal it is thus engraued with these brief, but in very deed most
excellent, most hauty, and most magnificent tytles. That is to say.

PATRICIVS ARTVRIVS BRITTANNIAE, The Insculpture of K. Arth. Seal and the
Inscriptio^ thereof,
GALLIAE, GERMANIAE, DACIAE IMPERATOR. And of truth this inscription circleth
the outermost compass of the Seal. The former part thereof is most bright
shining by a circle of crystal, which being taken off, streightway may any
man touch the war, which by reason of the Antiquity is most hard. But the
Portracture of Arthure printed thereupon, K. Arthures majesty represented on
the seal.
resembles I wotte near what Heroyicall Majesty. For the Prince as it were
invested with purple, royally sits upon a half circle, such one as we see
the rain boe is. Nota.
Having a crown upon his head he shines like the sun. In his right hand
rises up a scepter wrought with a Flowerdeluce at the top: And his left hand
holds a globe adorned with a cross. His bearde also grows comely, large,
and at length, and even that is a majesty. The other side of the Seal is
altogether covered over with a thin plate of Silver. By means whereof also it
is uncertain of what fashion it is. There hangs down at the same a string
chainefashionlike twisted of Silver. Certes Reader, I pray God I be dead but
thou would desire to see the same, such and so great is both the antiquity
and also the majesty of the thing. At length the keeper of those secrets was
there requested by me to signify unto me, if he had learned any thing over and
besides this, as touching the seal hanging thereat. For, amongst very many
ornaments which glittering with Gold and precious stones did adorn the tomb
of Edward the Simple, The seal, one of the ornaments which were about ^ tomb
of K. Edward the simple.
King of England, even this also was worthy of memory. But he could say
nothing to these demaundes saving only this, that he thought the same was by
ye king laid in ye place to ye perpetual memory of the most high and mighty
prince Arthure. Surely if a man might lawefully by any conjectures gather and
set down the truth in writing, I would not think that such a seal had benee
translated from Glastenburie: It was translated from Glastenbury to Westminster.
upon which monastery (by misfortune of fire most filthily debased) the most
bountiful prince bestowed such rewards, as he for his excellent godliness
might more easily give, then those mo^ckes might hope for. K. Henry himself
as I have above mentioned, made testimony of Arthures free gift, and so far
forth as he both saw and read the same. By means whereof also it might come
to pass, that the parchment being eaten out with little worms, and meathes
by long tract of time, so famous a monument of antiquity being found, he
delivered the same to the Monastery of first fame, there to be kept safe, and
to be seen for ever of the nobylitie in all posterities. Certes (except my
conjecture fails me) the expenses or charge is small in deed, yea, none at
all. This yet in the mean time pleases me, that while we entreat of Arthure
and of things done by him, Glastenbury is always at hand and most friendly
promises his endeavor toward assured knowledge of things. From whence in
deed all ye fruit of our labor at this present is to be fetched, He means
either ye records there, as Chronica Glessobur gensia, either else Patricius
^lesioburgensis.
as it were from a most plentiful running fountain. Neither surely is there
any thing apparent, (that I do know of) which more evidently approves that
Arthure was living, the^ the same Seal does. Which thing, if God so would,
some persons (leaning rather to their opinion, self will, and finally
rashness, then unto any upright reason) doubt not to deny. But after this we
will choose a place, wherein by full and whole abundance of arguments, we may
overthrow the violent rabble of slaunderers. In the mean season we must more
subtilely discuss the inscription of the Seal. For, this has her mysteries,
which when they shall receive light, shall both with greater pleasure, and also
apter grace fill ye ears of honest readers, and being filled shall wonderfully
delight the^: which thing is worth the travel, and that in deed largely.

The name PATRICIVS, Patricius whence it has original.
is taken as from the majesty of the Romans. The noble men of Rome are called
by that name. viz. such as are come of the first Senators: That seems
Tacitus to signify by these words. In those days Caesar took into the
number of Noble men, every one most ancient of the Senate, or which were of
noble personage. Liuius makes this me^tio^. Romulus created 100. Senators,
which were called Patres or Fathers, Patres and Patricij why so called.
by reason of honor done to the^ and also Patricij or noble me^ by reason of
their progeny. Therefore it is evident that Arthure received that same notable
same of his name from his parents and Auncesters. From whence the name of
Arthure was first derived.
Whereupon also it appears that as yet, the glory of Roman Majesty
(translated or applied unto the Britains, in their titles) waxed not cold in
those days. I have also believed that the name of Arthure took his beginning
from the Roman Arthures. For Iuuenall the Poet in his third Satyr writes
thus. Cedamus Patria, Viuant Arturins istie, and Catulus.
From our country depart let us:
There Arthure live and Catulus.


ALthough Britain was by Claudius brought into one only country, Anno
Christo nato. 44.
it was yet a thing most familier amongst ye noble men of Britain, partly to
take unto the^ ye names of the Romans, and to give them most often unto their
children, by this persuation (as I verily believe not foolish) so moved, that
herehence they would procure honor unto them and theirs, and gain themselves
favor of the Romans. Lucius whom the Britains surnamed the great,
Constantine and he also the great, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Arthure unto these
not inferior, do mightily ratify this mine opinion. The same thing also is
performed in ye attribution of names unto noble women. For example, such were
Claudia Ruffina a woman sincerely learned, Pero^^s in Cor^ucopia names her a
Nymph, and one of Jupiters noces.
as Martial the Poet witnesses. Helena the most holy matron, and Vrsula that
Cynosura or glittering Star so called. And where as the inscription of ye
Seal by a certain circumstance of words calls him Emperor of Britain,
France, Germany and finally of De^marcke. This also comes to pass through
ye custom of the Romans and their dillige^ce, yt together with their triu^phes
the titles also of nations conquered might accrewe or increase unto the
co^queror. Bows used for triumphs at Rome.
For a token hereof the Bows were used in triumphs at Rome, and the Coins of
Caesar with their figures were with like care stamped. But the name of the
Emperor, as by Auncientie, Arthure aptly called Emperor.
(after the testimony of Caesar, Cicero, and Liuius apparent) pertained unto
the governors of y^ legions: whereupon Arthure is called Emperor by dest servant
of all understood before, the coming of his gracious Lord, Mordred meets him.
and with a full appointed Host not without counsel and help of Pictes,
Scotts, and West Saxones, most boldly meets him, returning home. The Coast of
Kent ratled with all manner noise of weapons: and now the Captains stood
orderly before their ensigns: the troop of Cheualliers also conquerours of
the world with cheerful assault tossed their weapons, The armies of them both
ensamped.
part of them drew out their si^^e slashing blades, and part shaked their
shiuering sp^ares with strong hands. They had all one voice. The battles were
warrelike fightes. Arthure most ^^eund with this prompt alacrity and stout
courages of his Soldiers, as the miracle both of all manhood, and also of
ripe wisdom by experience, made such a like Oration unto them by lifting up
his eyes from the earth unto heaven, and with cherefulnesse of countenance
together with a certain majesty mixed, saying on this manner.

Ye Cheualiers the most noble lights of martial prowess, K. Arthures noble
Oration unto his soldiers and subjects going to fight against Mordred and
his company.
and you the other multitude of most approved valiancie, do see whither our
fortune and associate of so great victories has brought us, as what we have
with most strong hand gotten abroad, we may not only keep upright, but also
get us more greater booties with some strange and large increase: the which
thing that it may at this instant be brought to pass and more easily, such
occasion is now offered us, as all good happes could not in deed, if they
would, more plentifully, nor more prosperously offer themselves to favor us
friendly. Let us therefore go to this gear with most manly courages, whither as
Fortune, Valiancie, and finally victory calls us. Now is the most impudent
Mordred at hand, yet one most nearest to me in blood, whom I have brought up
and loved in hope of great fame, and so far forth made much of, and that in
very many booties bestowed upon him in deed, and those no less beneficial as
when I should pass into France to aduenge me of mine enemies, he so seeming to
be then undoubtedly of profound counsel, unto him I did both commit my wife
and state, (and that which is much more) my native country to keep, and to
govern our affairs as our deputy, finally to defend the same most valiantly
from the daily assault of Saxones, Scotts, and Pictes. But he in mean time
forgetful of my most bountiful liberallity toward him, and of our
familiarity, (which for most part in human affairs, has undoubtedly
cheifest importance) and not remembering the solemn oath of warelike order,
whereby he is to me most deeply bounden, Nota.
like a false perjured and mighty contemner of God and man, Their first (...)
in Kent.
yea an adulter also, (as Fame reports) now entertayneth me, a King and
Conqueror of Nations, and his Liege sovereign Lord returning into mine own
Country (if God so would permit him) even with open hostility, having ready
for his co^plices the Pictes his kinsmen, the Scotts their neighbors, and
last of all the Saxones to help him.

And neither does this so notable mischief only touch me, but in deed it
touches you all. Wherefore you most invincible Champio^s, my only care, and you
most valiant fellow soldiers, with present prowess, handle your comune cause,
and let virtue now shine forth in you, which I have hetherunto perceived to be
ready, valiant and wonderful always. Sir Gallouinus you the most praise worthy
garland of warlike prowess, Sir Gallouinu^ his charge.
whose glory for many causes, and chiefly this, is most commendable unto the
world (in that you have set at naught, Mordred our common enemy, and in
respect of equity and oath of your alegeance to us made, have despised him
your brother in Law.) Stand you here on your right hand, as the most apt
furnished horn with strength of Soldiers. For the first shares of hand
strokes and of renome shall light in this troop of yours. Sir Augus^llus his
charge.
Sir Augus^llus as the bulwark of most approved valiancie shall cast himself
to encounter with our enemies at the left wing. I my self (and God to friend)
will in the midst of you fight it out continually and will be present as your
only safeguard, but to the enemies will I be a terror, a scourge, and a
deserved destruction.

But what need many words, which neither in deed add nor take away valiant
courage. Your valiancy is enlarged by custom, exercise, and sustayning of
labor, watchinges and penury, yea finally by shedding of the enemies blood,
and spoiling the same enemies: For the which considerations both I to you, and
you to me again (God favoring so just a cause) do promise assured victory. Go
to, make immortal trial of your manhoodes, and slay down right those
traitors at a pinch. When he had thus said, The apparent promptitude of king
Arth. his soldiers.
they altogether at their Governors commandment showted aloude, and with a
cherefull onsette, bestowing in order their ensigns, far and wide showed forth
the valiant tokens of warlike attempt. So at the length partly their enemies
being slain, and partly put to flight, His victory.
Arthure obtained the victory with an horrible overthrow of his enemies. But
there were slain in that battle fought at the haven of Dorcester, Two of his
Cheualiers, or knights shine.
both Gallouinus and Augusellus the two thunderbolts of the battle, as Graius
makes mention in his book called Scalecronica, and as other Authors of fame
not to be despised, do witness. Mordred blaming Fortunes untowardness, with a
Navy recovered, and the remnant of his Host therein, got him with shame enough
to the haven of Ta^meroth on the Sea coaste of Cornwaile. The noble coarse of
Gallouinus was entombed in a certain Chapel within the Castle of Dorcester.
But Arthure; (the death of two so excellent famous men being fully known to
him) sore bewailed the same: and with often prayer, as also with very deep
grief of heart, suppressing sorrow from their hands, (nobly minded and of
Godly disposition as he was) fatherly took care over them. And then in deed
having a fresh prepared with incredible expedition a full Host and army, he
determined with long iorneyes to pursue his lewd enemy, and as it were upon
the snappe to overthrow the fugetiue. Mordredes preparation against king
Arthure, the second time.
Mordred yet was more crafty, then of power able to withstand: hereupon found
he out a mean for unaccustomed inventions. He had manifest knowledge given him
by espyals, that Arthure most absolutely furnished for the battle, was coming
at hand. Wherefore he commanded every soldier wearied upon ye la^d, and again
with toil upon ye sea, as also penury of corn, to depart for a season, and
having refreshed their industry, labor, and diligence, as also furnishing
them with munitio^, so well as he could through ye mou^tayny soiles of
Cornwale, by ye way yt leads to the banckes of Seuerne, not far thence
dista^t co^ducteth he his host with easy iornies: and in a place which of ye
common sort of writers is called Cambla^ (where as are waste grounds and
partly a natural moist plain, and a little hill rising up to yt use of a watch
or prospect) did he pitch his tents. Here am I compelled to interpose or set
down by the way my judgment concerning the place where it was fought by both
parts: and for yt cause yt I should not think to bring hither any thing
amongst ye rest, as if it were out of Jupiters brain, but that with ye good
leave of ye learned sort I might explane my conjecture, without all bitterness
or disdain as it were touching it by the way. In which behalf I freely co^fes
my self hardly to hold opinion with Hector Boetus the Scot, which (as his
manner is) applies all most famous facts of antiquity in Britain to yt
co^mendatio^ of his own country, beyond all mean and measure. And here he
boldly affirms ye Arthure (with his last ensigns) fought it out not far from
ye great flowing river of Seuerne, which he barbarously calls Hu^bar not
knowing the circumstance of the phrase. Nota.
But the history of Britain believes otherwise, Arthures second battle with
Mordred, and the place where, Graius a writer in the favor of Arthure.
and affirms that he scourged his enemies in his last battle in Cornwale: so
yet notwithstanding as he me^tioneth how Mordred was ye second time vanquished
and put to flight by Arthure at Winchester.

Graius undoubtedly an excellent cha^pion in behalf ot ye truth and a stout
assertor of Arthures glory, holds ye same opinion. Neither sings the sound
censured society of learned witnesses any other Song. But truly our conjecture
is not of the places, but of the name of the place. Surely I am almost brought
to that point, to believe that the River Alaune is easily changed by the
fault of unlearned Lybraryes into Camblan. M. Cambden.
This River ryseth in Cornewale a few Miles above the Town Athelstowe
otherwise Padstowe, a fisher Town not so far situate from the Salt water
of Seuerne: by means whereof, (but yet mixed with salt waters) it runs
down lower into the country. About the head springes of that Original in
Champion ground, and a certain waste plain, there is a famous place,
somewhat more fruitful of grass the^ of corn. The report (amongst the
inhabitants so many ages preserved) declares that of old time, there was made
a notable garboile by fighting in yt place, but in mean time the truth of the
history is unknown unto ye common sort. Many things no doubt even in this
our age are found out of ye same place by ploughmen and those that delue at
the River: such as are these quoynes which show the governments of ancient
personages, ringes, fragments of harness and brazen ornaments for Bridles
vnguilte, for trappers and also Saddles for Horses. This is my conjecture, both
by reason of the situation of the place, and also for ye name of ye river of
Alaune, running hard by, yet not far dissonant (if a man behold it more
thoroughly) from Camblan. Arthure now draws near, and passing over ye river
of Tamermouth, M. Cambden.
by known passages, yet otherwise a stream most violent in many places and
most deep (the enemy fugitive not being regarded) he pitcheth tents against
tents. Behold, desperation (as often times it happens) restores unwonted boldness
to the ouerco^med part. And whereupon both parts provoke battle, burning with
hope of spoil and of victory, as also fearing nothing less then death.

Quis cladem illius pugnae, quis funera fando
Explicet? aut possit lachrymis aequare labores?
Who shall that bloody broyle express or the dead corpses name?
Or who can justly tell the toils with just tears for the same?
MOrdred the first forman of all mischief (this battle being attempted) and he
thrust through with y^ sword, received a just reward for his breach of faith
or perjury. Mordred sl^^ne outright.
Let him be an example, and that for ever, to such as for desire of government
infringe and violate their faith. There was slain together with ye tyrant a
great number of noble personages and of old beaten soldiers: But neither was
the victory without bloodsheddebefallen unto Arthure. For in that broyle and
fierce fight, K. Arthure received his deaths wound, and yet had the victory.
himself was either slain outright, or wounded past recovery, so that a
little while after with public lame^tatio^ of all Britain (but specially of
his heavy hearted cheualyers for the mischance of so noble a Prince) he was
carried away from thence. And this in deed was the end or death of the most
puissant Prince Arthure.

CHAP. X.
K. Arthures Commendation.
ARthure is now dead (if so he may be said to have dyed well) whose fame,
memory, and praise fully and wholly live, and shine forth in the world.

Our ancestors, Ancient Arthors, as Poets, and Historiographers, writing in
commendation of K. Arthure.
both Poets and also historiographers were so friendly, honest, and thankful
toward Arthure, that they both enobled his fame and factes, and also adorned
them with eternal memory and commendation. Theliesinus Melchinus, who is also
called Meuinus, Ambrosius Maridune^sis, and Merlinus Caledonius the most
excellent stars of Britains antiquity have performed this effect. Nennius
and Samuel, historiographers of Britain have performed no less memory
bestowing their stately st^les of commendations accordingly. Touching whom
and others also we have before fitly spoken in their places,
Chrisistoriographus.
affying in the authoryty of Galfredus, Aluredus, Henry of Huntington, John
termed the Golden Historiographer, William of Malmesburie. Graius, and Boccace.

But if it now avail any man to know anything as yet more in matter and
larger discourse: I will not refuse (in the best dillige^ce that I can) to
restore to light a fe^^e words taken out of the most approved Authors. Is^^^.
Josephus the writer brought up at Exceter in Devonshire, and the Golden flood
of Greek and Latin eloquence in his days, extolleth Arthure to the very
clouds, not only for his excellent prowess, as in his Antiochides appears
by these verses, contending for the victory with the Roman antiquity.

Hinc caelebri fato faelici claruit ortu,
Flos Regum Arthurus: Cuius cum facta stupori
Non micuere minus, quod totus in aure voluptas,
Et populo narrante fauus, Quaecunque priorum,
Inspice: Pelleum ^omemndat fama Tyrannum.
Pagina Caesareos loquitur Romana tryumphos,
Alciden domitis attollit gloria monstris.
Sed nec Pinetum Coryli, nec sydera solemn
Aequant, Annals Latios, Graiosque reuolue.
Prisca parem nescit, aequalem Postera nullum
Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes.
Solus, praeteritis melior, maiorque futuris.
Hence flourished by famous fate, and origin prosperous
Arthure the flower of kings, whose deeds shined no less merueilous
The^ that both peoples ears and tongues did in his praise delight:
As. If thou view of former wights, what ever books recite.
Fame does Pelleus tyrant blaze: and Roman histories
Extol their Caesar's tryumphes great, after their Victories.
Renoume aduanceth Hercules subduing Monsters great:
But not Coryli, Pinetus, nor Stars the Sune his heat.
Coequate* Search the Cronicles of Greeks and Latins both:
Ancient age knows not his like, ne yet posterity does
His match declare. All kings, alone in deed surmounteth he,
Better then those are dead and gone, Greater then any shall be.
THere has been seen lately at Giastenburie a little Book of matters
touching Antiquity, gathered by a certain most studious Moncke of ye same
Cloister: who by exercise of Rethoricall color as it were handling an other
matter* does famously me^tio^ of Arthure in these words. I pass over with
silence also to speak of Arthure the noble king of Britain buried with his
wife between two Pyramedes within the churchyard of those Mo^ckes, and many
princes also of ye Britains. Siluester Giraldus Meneue^sis, a chief fauoueer
of Antiquity in his book entitled the Institution of a Prince, enobleth
Arthures fame with this manner speech. Siluester Giraldus his testimony of K.
Arthure.


The memory also of Arthure y^ noble king of Britain ought not to be buried
or utterly trode^ under foot, whom y^ histories of ye monastery of Glaste^bury
(whose chief patron, factor and mighty supporter he also was in his days) do
much advance. (...) no doubt a (...) the Poet of his time, (...)
and no less elegant, (...) Arthures praise in these verses, which even at
this day (...) in his book Architrenio.

Alter Achilles
Arthurius, teretis mensae genitina venustas,
A Ramo Phrygius, dandi non vnda led aequor.
An other Achilles
Arthure was, whose first grown grace, through out his table round
Him Phrigius made as of a Branch with fruits which does a bound
For liberal hand, not River he, but a maine sea ^ found.
BUt here if over and besides this I should endeavor largely, to adorn Arthure
with praise as the multitude of Authors do most truly write and agree upon
him: sooner should copy of eloquence fail me, then magnificencie of lightsome
testimony howsoever. Be it sufficient then that we use at this present the most
famous commendations, Trittem^us his testimony* who was famous Anno. 1484.
though of few writers. I pray you, what is the cause that Trittemeus in in
his brief Crounicle makes so excellent mention of Arthure. Ddoubtlesse the
cause is plain enough. For by reason he learned the same of others in plain
troth, therefore did he as thankful commit it unto posterity: which thing
doubtless he would never have done, had he doubted of the verity of the
cause, Trittemius his words in commendation of king Arthure.
But now let Trittemius him self in presence speak. Which Arthure excelling
in great humanity, wisdom, clemency and manhood, studied by all endeavor to
show him self beloved and reverenced of all, and to excel all: because also
he abounded in valiancie of mind with wonderful liberality toward all men,
and specially toward Church men, unto whom for zeal to Godwardes, he gave
very many benefittes, yea and also rewards. He drove out of Britain both
Saxons and Pictes. He mightily subdued, the Scotts, Irishmen, and Orcades unto
his kingdom.

Volateranus Volateranus.
in his third book of Geography honors the fame of Arthure and diligently
celebrateth his valiant acts.

Furthermore also Iacobus Philippus of Bergoma in his 9. book of Cronicles,
Iacobus Philippus Bergomas.
aduanceth Arthures valiancie even with most condign commendations.

And neither does Nauclerus, in his history make any less relation of him.
Nauclerus his testimony
These testimonies doubtless (men both most learned and most exercised in
Antiquity would never have set down) if they had not first been fully
persuaded, that Arthure in times past was abundantly notable by all ornaments
of valiancie. But such is the lewdness of many men, and their disdainefull
mind, that they altogether being seduced with ignorance, (and that in deed
very rude) do not manifestly see at full, but blindly neglect, contemn, and
altogether reject the truth. Such Censors or Judges in ancient histories let
them go a Gods name, and let them enjoy their foolishness at full, I will not
say their madness. What if I should bring forth am^ngst the rest, that notable
testimony of Hector Boaetius, Hector Boaetius a Scottish writer.
a writer in our time, touching ye immortal glory of Arthure? Surely by this
account nothing shall fall from his dignity, but very much shall be added
thereto for this cause, that y^ Scots in old time (I know not by what instinct
of nature) hated the Britains as y^ Proverb says. Odio Vatiniano.
Whereupon, to be praised of an adversary, enemy and even a deadly foe,
stands in place of a reward for victory. Hector Boaenus his commendation of
K. Arthure.
These are then his words. King Arthure was no less famous in glory for
notable exploytes, and for majesty, then the Kings of Britain, which lived
before his days: whereupon the Britains during his reign very much
increased in riches and power. Thus far says Boaetius. What just occasion wish
I here to be given me of Polidorus the Italian, Polidorus Virgillius a corrupt
witness of King Arthures worthiness.
that eue^ by some memorable testimony of his, I might also advance Arthures
countinance, and make him look aloft? He handles Arthures cause in deed, but
by the way, he yet is so fainte hearted, luke warm and so negligent y^ he makes
me not only to laugh, but also to be angry (as while he is contrary to truth,
and filled with Italian bitterness) I know not whether he smile or be angry. For
he wresteth him self wretchedly in the aptness of the history, which yet that
he might frame after a sort, he is compelled, will he nill he, to come in
fau^ur with Geoffry of Monmouth: whom before (as it seemed unto him) he had in
many words (proceeding mightily rather of bitter stomach, then of good
disgestion) corrected also at his own controleme^t. Whom for y^ as an
interpreter I have once or twice only defended in a cause as no doubt most
just. (A danger in deed great might red^u^d upon my head) if I should pass
beyond ye bounds of equity. I will take heed therefore, and trusting only in
ye ver^tie of the cause, I will continually bear the same about with me for a
bulwarcke and sure defense. Though Polidore hold his peace it is not needful
by and by for the whole world to be mute: And although Italy in times past so
esteemed of Arthure, and yet still does, when books printed both of his
prowess, and victories (as I have learned) are read in the Italian tongue yea
in y^ Spanish, Books printed of Arthure in foreign language^.
and also in the French tongue: whereupon also the English collection of Thomas
Mailerius his travail, is published abroad. The adversary I know will say,
that many lies have crept into those books. Wherefore this is nothing else, but
to Teach him which is fully taught. As I contemn fables, so I reverence and
embrace ye truth of the history: neither will I suffer this to be taken away
from me at any time, but with loss of life. Unthankful persons I utterly
eschew and I betake me unto those Rocks and momuments, the true witnesses of
Arthures renoume and majesty. And in this behalf, Siluester Gi^aldus in his
Itenerario touching Brecknocke.
Siluester Geraldus Meneuensis, entertayneth me coming to him with these words
taken out of that work of his called Itenerariu^. He understands conclusiuely
that Brecania or Brecknock round about is the Land so called as it were by
reason of the lostis blastes from ye North wind. From Zephirus or the Westerly
wind, it has the mountain places of Canter Veha^, alias ye less Vehany,
from Auster or the sontherly wind, it has hills southwarde, whereof the
principal is called in the Britain language Cair Arture: Cair Arthure or
Arthures Castle.
that is to say Arthures Castle, by reason of the two tops of the hills
ascendinge vpwardes shewinge them selves in manner of a Castle. K. Arthures
Chair of State.
And because the Chair of State is there erected in a high and hard place it
is by a common name assigned unto the high and mighty Arthure King of
Britain. These says Siluester, Baldwinum ali^s Mountgomery.
Giraldus. Now must I take my journey from the hills of Brecania unto
Baldwine, a Town in old time famous, which for four hundredth years and
more agone, (of Roger then gouernoure of Mountgomerie, and Earl of Shrowsbury,
was called Mountgomerie. Here amongst the ruinous old Cotages of the walls,
King Arthures Gate there.
is a place by common report known, which the remnant of the citizens of
later age do call Arthures gate. Truly the people of Wales have always been
and as yet are with a certain Gentlemanly fervent affection bent to set forth
the praises of their Princes. Gentlemen of Wales praise worthy in praising
their Prince studiously addicted.
Through which title even at this day shyneth forth the fame together also with
the commendation not vulgar of Arthure surnamed the great: who is also called
in the Britain language Arthure Vaur. Maur In the British tongue signifies
great: King Arthure surnamed Arthure the great
but the fond pronunciation of the welsh tongue (in the word Copulative Maure)
turns M. into V. Like as also in other words by reason of their proper
tearming, B. is oftentimes turned into V.

CAP. XI.
The Antiquity of Aualonia.
THe circumstance of speech, here admonishes me that I express somewhat
touching Arthures burial: whereof as I have made sufficient mention, so judge
I it specially (for the lightsome order) convenient that I should first with
exquisite diligence consecrate unto posterity the Antiquity of that place,
Diffinition of Aualonia the place where King Arthure was buried.
whither unto the dead corpse was carried. Aual in the British tongue
signifies Malum, (or as I may with a more common phraise interpret it) Pomum,
an Aple: and Aualon signifies Pomarium, or Orcharde. By reason whereof also,
of Merlinus Caledonius, (as Geoffrey Arthurius of Monmouth interprets the
same) it is called the Isle of Apples, Geoff^y of Monmouth his testimony
^hereo:.
in these words.

Insula ^omorum quae fortunata vocatur,
^'x re nomen habet, quia per se singula profert.
Non opus est illi sulcantibus arua colonis:
Omnis abest cultus nisi quem natura ministrat.
Vltro foecundas segetes producit and Vuas:
Nataque poma suis, praetonso germine syluis.
The Isle of Apples, which called is fortunate,
Of effect has name, for it bringes forth all things:
The seeded ground no need of Plowmen has,
All tillage wantes, save that which Nature bringes.
Of it own accord it bears both Grapes and Corn,
And apples grow in woods, first grafts being pruned and shorn.
MElchinus the Britain makes mention of Aualonia and of the religious place
there. Melchinus.
Siluester Giraldus in his book De Institutione Principis, thus speaks. And
y^ island which at this day is called Glastenbury, was called in ancient time
Aualonia: For it is an Islande altogether environed with moorish or fenny
grounds: Siluester, Giraldus and
Whereupon in the British tongue it is called Aualon, that is, an Island
fruitful of apples: For with apples (which in the British tongue are called
Aual) this place abounds.

Patricius the Apostle or teacher amongst the Irishmen in a certain Epistle
makes mention of this place, Patricius, all 3. witnesses of Avalonia.
but by another name, whose words also I will hereunto annex.

I have converted Ireland unto the way of truth, and when I had grounded them
in the christian faith, I returned at length into Britain, and as I believe
(by the guidance of God, who is the way and the life) I chanced into the
Island Iniswitriue, Alias Ciuitas, ^^trina, nunc Glastenbury.
wherein I found a holy and ancient place chosen of God, and consecrated unto
the Virgin Mary, and there also found I certain Brethren instructed with the
rudiments of the Christian faith, Supposed rather to be (...).
which succeeded the Disciples of Fugatius and Damianus.

Thus far says Patri^ius: who in that place of his epistle also recyteth the
names of twelve religious persons: where of two were noble personages: Of all
which twelve, he had chief Rule, as by these words it is manifest.

So they preferred me (though against my will) before themselves. And again,
in the same Epistle the brethren showed me writings of those holy men Fugatius
and Damianus, F^ga^tis and Dir^aianus.
wherein was contained that the twelve Disciples of S. Philip and Jacob the
Apostles had founded and erected that ancient Church: and that three Pagan
kings had given so many possessions of land unto those twelve.

And last of al how that Fugatius and Damianus had builded a chapel on a high
hill, Vt ante dixi, Fagaunt and Diruuianus.
not far from Aualonia in the honor of God and S. Michaell. Here is enough
at this present (even touch and go) to have understanding of the reverend
father Patricius his Epistle.

Gulielmus Meildunensis, W. of Malmesburie his testimony.
in his book of the antiquity of the religious house at Glastenburie, and in
his first book of kings unto Henry Blesensis otherwise Soliasensis Bishop of
Venta* Simenorum or Winchester, writes not unlike matters. Whereupon also by
good conjecture it may be scene that this William, took his translations out
of the Epistle of Patricius Siluester Giraldus in his book De Institutione
Principis, Siluester Giraldus his testimony and explanation of Glastenburie.
not inconueniently explaneth the Etymo^ or true interpretation of the name. It
was also in times past called in the british language ^niswitrine: by ye which
word the Saxones which came thither afterward called that place Glastenbury.
For Gles in their tongue signifies Vitrum or glass, and Bury signifies
Castrum or Castle, and is called together the city of Glastenburie. These does
he affirm. Truly unto me this seems to be a ^cule fault in writers of
books that they here do recite Byry for burg or berg: Byry in the Saxon
tongue is in Latin Curia: As for example, Aldermanburie, that is to say
Seniorum Curia. Also Litlebyry, that is Parua Curia. Canonbyry commonly called
Canbyry. Burg otherwise Borow, signifies a hill, and high places of earth cast
up. Finally Beng is in the Latin tongue called Castrum: by reason whereof I
more truly believe we must read Berg or Burg, for a Castle: which word
Giraldus uses or makes it to serve for a Town: although as I may freely
confess, I find the name written diversely amongst the ancients viz.
Glessenbyry Glesto^bury and Glesse^burg. And there are which pronounce Glass for
Gles: Although Gles is more perfect and more Ancient, as by the name of the
Islandes of Glastenburie it appears plainly.

CHAP. XII.
K. Arthures Burial.
NEither can I, nor will I publish for truth, whether Arthure dyed out right in
the battle fought at Alaune, Writers of Britain affirming where Arthure died.
which is commonly called Cambla^, or at Aualonia, while his wounds were in
healing. The writers of Britain with one voice hold argument, that he dyed
at Aualonia, through grief of the same wounds: But touching the place of his
burial, they do all agree as one.

This one thing dare I be bold to affirm, The Britains sorrowful for the
death of K. Arthure.
the Brittanes were so sorrowful for the death of their Sovereign Lord, that
they endeavored by all means to make the same famous, and to leave the name of
their Governor even for ever fearful and to be trembled at amongst the
Saxones: So far forth as they with a certain plausible and strange
invention did spread abroad Rumors both of his coming again, and of his
ruling again. Touching the again coming (of Arthure so wounded to death)
into Aualonia aforesaid, certain Britains did blindly write. Merlinus
Caledonius a writer his verses of K. Arthures death
But none more at large nor more lightsome, then Merlinus Caledonius being
instructed (as some men suppose) of Theliesinus the Poet: whose verses also I
will here annex, selected out of his little book of prophecy, Geoffrey
Arthurius being interpreter thereof.

Illuc post Bellum Camblani vulnere laesum,
Duximus Arthurum, nos conducente Barincho.
Aequora cui fuerant, and coeli Sidera nota.
Hoc Rectore ratis, cum Principe venimus illuc,
Et nos quo decui^ Morgan suscepit honor,
Inque suis thalamis posuit super aurea Regem
Fulcra, manuque sibi detexit vulnus honesta,
Inspexitque diu: tandem redire salutem.
Posse sibi dixit, si secum tempore longo
Esset, and ipsius vellet Medicamina fungi.
Gaudentes igitur, Regem commissimus illi,
Et dedimus ventis redeundo vela secundis.
The English.

Thither after the battle was at Camblan fiercely fought.
(Barinchus so conducting us) we Arthure wounded brought.
Who knew the seas, and of the stars the Clymats perfectly,
By this guider of the hel^e with Prince we thither ply.
And Morgan us received as it behouea with honor dew,
In Chamber his on Golden hearse, Morgan a faithful friend and true subject
unto Arthure.
and laid the king to view.
And with his frie^dly hand forthwith did Arthures wou^d vnhill,
Long looking thereon, said, may be life come again yet will.
If he along time were with him, and would his medicines use,
Therefore with joy the king to him we did betake to choose,
And hoist our sails with prosperous wind* by our return our port to find.
SYluester Gyraldus writes in his Speculo Ecclesiastico, that Morga^s noble
wife made provision for Arthures ^uriall. Morgans wife made provision for
Arthures burial.
And again, in his book De Institutione Principis he makes relation of these
things. Whereupon also the noble wife of Morgan, and Gouernesse of those
parts again as Patroness there and also near of blood unto Arthure, after
the battle at Kemelen caused him to be conveyed into an Isle (which now is
called Glasconia) to cure and heal up his wounds.

The interpretor of the British history, writes of the death of Arthure,
Brittannicae Historiae Interpres testimonium dat de morte Arthurii.
on this manner, as in his sixth book appears. Arthure being wounded unto
death at the battle at Camblan went unto Aualonia, his kingdom being left unto
Constantine the son of Cadorius Duke of Cornwale.

Johannes Burgensis Abbot, in his Annals has left these words in credible
writings. Johannes Burgensis testimoniu^ de eodem.
When Arthure was at the point of death, he kept him self secret, that his
enemies should not insult at such and so great a mishap, nor his friends be
disco^forted as troubled in mind. Thus farhe.

Now must we speak of the relious place at Aualonia, wherein Arthure was
buried.

Melchinus specially makes mention of this and also of Arthure buried there.
Aualonia commended by 3. writers. viz. M^lchinus, and Malmsbury Giraldus.


Gulielmus a Medulphi curia both else where, and specially in his book De
antiquitate Glessoburgensi, religiously celebrateth this place where Arthure
was buried.

The same thing does Giraldus Meneuensis also in his Speculo Ecclesiastico, and
in his book De Institutione Principis, religiouse houses were not at that time
so common, and in so many places of Britain, as they be in these days.

Saxons of noble lineage, a people without knowledge of God if happily being
sick they dyed at home, were buried in pleasant gardens: if they were flame
abroad, and in battle, they were then buried in graves dug out of the
earth, which they called Burghs, Burying place^ how and ^or whom in those days.
near unto their tents: but the base common people were buried even in
meadows and open fields. There was at that time a religiouse place near unto
the old Church, in very great estimation. By which title and of the whole
nobility in all the west Provinces of Britain, it was chosen as a place
allotted for their burials. The same was afterward often done by such Saxons
as had the knowledge of God. As at Dover of the Kentishmen, at York of the
Brygantes, at Lindiffarna or Lyland and so forth in other places. Concerning
the place of his burial it is now sufficient manifest.

It remains that I make declaration of the ceremony and manner of his
burial. Ceremonies used at King Arthure his burial.
There was present (but secretly) a Troop of Noble personages which mourned
for ye death of their sovereign Lord bereft from them by such sinister fate.
The wife of Morgan alone provided for the burial things needful: Morgans
noble wife alone provided for King Arthures burial.
a woman doubtless of incomperable godliness, who performed all ceremonies
and services with grief of mind, and floudes of tears. The manner in those
days was to bury in the graves, and to lay them as a surceasing from sorrow to
the use of Tombs or sepulcres great boules or bodies of Alder trees, whereof
the places about Aualonia near adjoining were most fruitful. For the Alder
tree has I know not what property with the natural moist ground, such as is
a Churchyard: so far forth as the substance thereof laid on this sort,
more deep in the Earth, should be reputed for everlasting not only. The body
of Arthure thus bewailed and mourned for, How he was interred in the earth.
was buried in a grave of sufficient depth, with the great boale of Alder tree
therein laid hollow. And because he lived most magnificent in fame, factes,
and rule of his kingdom (they following diligently the custom and integrity
of Christians in this point) bestowed upon the Tomb of Arthure so buried,
Monumentes of him.
a toaken of perpetual memory namely a Cross, signyfyinge Mnemosynen vitae
perpetuae: that is to say, the remembrance of life everlasting. It was made of
a leaden plate, one foot long more or less, which I have beholden with most
curiouse eyes, and handled with fearful joints in each part, being moved both
with the Antiquity and worthiness of the thing. It conteyneth upon it these
words in those not so great Roman letters, but indifferent cunningly graven.
viz.

HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLITVS REX ARTHVRIVS, IN INSVLA AVALONIAE.

But here peradventure some curiouse person would search out for what purpose
the inscription was commended to our memory upon the leaden plates. It was a
most usual manner in that age, and endured even until latter times to bestow
upon Noble men's Tombs leaden plates engraven. Of which not a few have I seen
in every place throughout all Britain. Lead of his nature is easily
engraven, and when it is once graven continues both a very long time, and also
most firmly, as witnesses experience. This was set up in places where enemies
were vanquished by the Emperor.
The mine hills where lead grows much, are scarce five miles distant from
Aualonia. The Romans as Lords of riches, were not ashamed to set up a standard
of stone unto Claudius Caesar by a very long table of lead, almost in the very
bottomes of those hills at the head^ springes of the fabulus little floude*
Ochides within the jurisdiction of Fontanus the Bishop, engraven on this
manner. TI. CLAVDIO CAESARI. AUGUST. P. M. TR. P. VIIII. IMP. XVI. DE BRITAN.
This Standard of Stone a few years past was turned up out of the earth by the
plowe, In tempo re regni (...) Reg. ^.
and translated unto the house of Thomas Howarde, Duke of Northfolke at London.

CAP. XIII.
The two Pyrameds in that religious place.
WIthin the burying place which was consecrated at Aualonia stand two Pyramedes
of most ancient buylding, Within the burying place were set up ^ 3. Pyrameds.
bearing a show of figures and letters, but the winds, storms, and time which
consumes all things, finally envy of man from time to time have so defaced
the notable figures and inscription of ancient works, that they can scarce be
discerned by any never so sharp sight of the eye. Ancient writers commending
the same.
The continual travel of writers commends these, and specially the
diligence of Gulielmus Meildunensis that great Antiquary: whom also Siluester
Geraldus even he a lover of Antiquities, does follow at an inche. Doubtless
both of the^ handle their matters learnedly: The one whereas by exquisite
labor he restored to light a fresh, both titles and figures which were not
altogether raced out of knowledge for four hundredth years before, according
as in his famous and elegant little book De Antiquitate Glessoburgensi,
appears. The other in that he leaning unto sound arguments and relation of
ancient writers, proves that Arthures Tomb was in times past either erected
between the two Pyrameds, or in a place not far distant from them. King
Arthures Tomb where it was erected.
Of Giraldus we will say more in the Tomb of Arthure found.

In the mean time, I will hereunto annex the description of the Pyrameds,
artificially purtrayed out by the very pencilles of the same Gulielmus, as it
were in a plain table to the eyes of the beholders. And where as that no
doubt is unknown unto all men, I would willingly publish it, (if I could
possibly express the truth) what those Pyrameds do mean, The meaning and
description of those two Pyramede^
which being erected in a little space from the old Church do after a sort
include the Churchyard of those religiouse persons.

Undoubtedly the more statelyer, Tabulatus
larger, and nearer Pyramed unto the Church has five stories height or flooers
boorded, and is in height, 26. foot. This although it foreshewed some decay by
reason of ye too much oldnesse, yet has it a few apparent spectacles of
Antiquity, which may be plainly read, although they can not fully be
understood. Note the blindness of that time in preferring a Bishop before a
king.
For in the upper story or floor boorde is made an image in likeness of a
Bishop. In the second is an Image expressing a Kingly state, and letters:
Her, Sex, and Bliswerh. In the third nevertheless are names. Wem Creste.
Bantomp. Winewegn. In the fourth. Hate* Wulfredi and Franflede. In the fifte,
and which is the lowest, an image and this writing. Logwor. Weslielas and
Bregdene. Swellwes, Huyrgendes berne. But the other Pyramed has 18. foot
height and four stories or flooers boorded wherein these words are read,
Hedde, Episcopus and Bregorred and Beorwalde. What these may signify I do not
rashly define: but I gather by suspicion, that within or about the same place
are laid in hollow stones the bones of them whose names are read on the
outside. Surele Logwor for certain is affirmed to be the person by reason of
whose name Logweres Beorh, was so called, which is now called Montacute.
Beorwalde nevertheless was Abbot after Hemgiselus. These says Meildunensis
(unto whom the learned ought to refer these Pyrameds) as from him by all
means borrowed, and most famously set forth. Now ye lady Guenhera offers her
self to be joined with A^hure her Husband.

CAP. XIIII.
What manner Person Guenhera was.
I Have easily believed, that Guenhera was descended out of the progeny of the
Dukes of Cornwale: both leaninge unto other arguments, and also for this cause
specially, that the History of Britain makes mention yt she was brought up in
ye Pallas of Cadorus ^uke of Cornwale, Where the Lady Guenhera was brought up.
and also from hence taken unto wi^e by Arthure. The conjecture is, and that
not altogether uncertain this name of Guenhera sounds in the British
language the same that Bella Dona does in the Italian and in french. Belle
Dame, no doubt the name was given for some fame: as Guenllean, that is White or
fair Leonora, Her description.
or of conjecture Helena: so as ye word White may signify fair, beautiful,
or amiable. ^ut as it is sufficiently apparent ye she was beautiful, so it is
a thing doubted, whether she was chaste yea or no. Truly so far as I can with
honesty I would spare the impaired honor and fame of noble women: But yet the
truth of ye history pluckes me by the ear, and wills not only, but
commands me to declare what the Ancients have deemed of her. To wrestle or
contend with so great authority were in deed unto me a controversy and that
great. Beauty and Chastity seldom agree inuiolably.
The history of Britain affirms, that she had not only carnal knowledge
of Mordred the Pict, but also that she was joined to him in marriage. O
mischief, O lewd life, O filthy days.

The writer of the history of Gildas is in deed an Ancient Author, Anonimus.
(but in mine exemplar that same Anonymus) declares these things of Guenhera
the adultresse. A writers testimony touching Guenhera.


Arthure in despite of M^lua the ruler, beseeged the fenny countries near unto
Glesconia: which noble man had defiled Guenhera being stolen away and carried
thither. This testimony as touching a Queen, though he say she was stolen
away, is scarce honorable. Women of such beauty are now and then stolen away
by their own good will. Howsoever it was, most assured is this, that she lived
no long time after the Death of her Husband, and the Adulterer. But whether
through any disease of the body, or with unfeigned sorrow she dyed (which I
do sooner believe) it appears not plainly. Writers make mention, that the
being moved with repentance did put upon her a holy Veyle at Ambrosia, and
that there she dyed and was also there buried, until both the diligence and
also Godliness of Sir Lancelot the most courteous and most invincible knight
had translated the bones and ashes afterward unto Aualonia. Sir Lancelot,
knight, a friend of Guenhera^ after her death.
Here aryseth a doubt against the suspicion of this Adultery.

Whether so notable a Lover or friend of Arthure, and the same a reuerencer of
his royalty had committed such a fact that he would bury the Adultresse in
the most Religiouse place so near her husbands grave in the earth. Nota. where
she was buried.
The history of the cloister at Glaste^bury which was dillige^tly collected,
fully shows that Guenhera was buried in the religious place near her
husbands Tomb, and that her bones and ashes were found the same time that her
husbands were.

Siluester Giraldus Menene^sis confirms this in his book De Institutione
Principis speaking of Arthure in the^e words.

For he had two wives, whereof in deed the last was buried with him,
Siluester Giraldus his testimony both of Arthure and of Guenheraes dead corpses.
and her bones found at one time with her husbands bones, so yet separated
that the two parts of the grave toward the head, namely (which should
contain the bones of her husband) had been ascribed unto him: But the third
part at the feet contained the bones of a woman vpwardes. Where as also a
yeallow lock of a womans hair, with the former integrity and color was
found, which as a certain Moncke desirously caught up in his hand and lifted
it up, it altogether streightway perished into dust or powder.

The same Giraldus recyteth such like matters in his book entitled Speculo
Ecclesiastico: He doubtless might well with some authority speak concerning
this gear, for so much as, even then he (being established in the favor of
K. Kichard coeur de Lion, king of England) came the very same time that the
Sepulcher was found at Glastenbury, and as an eye witness (by co^duction of
Henry de Soliaco nephew unto K. Henry by Adela and cosen german of K. Richard
being the president of Glastenburie, De Soliaco.
but afterward Bishop of Winchester) learned full and whole all things which
unto Arthure appertained.

Yet notwithstanding, if it were lawful for me here to speak all things
which I think, I would surely affirm that those things are of far better
credit, which are delivered us of Arthures buryall, then of Guenheras. And yet
would I not do any injury unto the Authorytie of Ancient writers, that even
the posterity in time to come might not handle mine Authority or allegation
in a worse manner. At Glastenbury upon the Tomb of Lydias Marble or
Touchstone Artyficially engraven (and erected for Arthure and also for
Guenhera) these two little verses, Arthures and Guenheras Tomb ercted at
Glastenbury.
savoring of that his time, are written in this manner.

Hic iacet Arturi coniux tumulata secunda, Her Epitaph.

Quae meruit coelos, Virtutum prole faecunda.
The second wife of Arthure here, entomed lo does ly,
Who for the fruits of Virtuous life deserved the heavens on hye.
THere be which say that Henry Suynesius Abbot of Glastenbury was the composer
of these verses: Except any man think that Henry Blesensis alias Soliacensis
changed his name into Suynesius, in whose time the bones and ashes both of
Arthure and also of Guenhera were found.

But what Giraldus and Henricus do mean by the name of Second wise, truly I
do not sufficiently understand. For so much (as I ca^ remember) I have neither
hard of the name nor memory of a second wife until this day.

But let credit remain with Authors: by the latter part of the second little
verse (Virtutu^ prole faecu^da) it appears y^ Guenhera was more virtuous the^
apt to bear children. Neither am I ignorant what Boethius writes here, Nota.
How Guenhera was stolen away of the Pictes.
that in times past there was a sharp battle fought between Arthure and
Mordred, at the river of Hu^ber, and yt Guenhera being eue^ there carried away
of ye Picts, into their tents, afterward died and was buried at Horestia in
the street Angusia. But I leave Hector to the report of Veremu^dus and
Turgotus those obscure writers. And it might so be, that the Tomb was there
erected for another Guenhera not Queen.

CHAP. XV.
K. Arthures Tomb found. After Arthures death, the Saxons flourished, but the
Britains perished

WHen the Saxones power grew to some force after Arthures death, and that the
Picts and Scots by and by were put to flight, and chased away beyond the vale
of Seuerne, The same Saxones began not so much to fear, and much less to
esteem of, but rather openly to set at naught the remnauntes of those
vanquished Britains. Wherefore, the glory of them began to floorish, but of
the Britains to decrease and fade away: Saxones were negligent in the fame of
Britones* their posterity.
Yet so, as the Saxones left almost nothing (touching affairs passed between
them and the Britains) at that time perfectly written for the posterytie.

For, those things which were written (after Christ was known unto them)
concerning the first victories of the Saxones, are delivered by the reports of
the common people, and so received, and in writings so committed: or else the
Britains being utterly worn away by so many battles, bestowed scarce any
just or right diligence in writing of the history. Only there are extant
certain fragments of Gildas the Moncke of the City Bangor rather flaying
alive, John Stowe
dismembring, and wounding to death the Britains, then allowing them with any
value of virtue, so far forth as he seems a Rethorician thoroughly moved to
make evil report. By this means were the affairs of Britain, through
calamity of battles left obscure or vnrebayled. The historical singers only
studied to preserve also with musical means the famous memory of Nobles in
those days. Bardi were such as sung to the harp, the famous factes of noble
personages.
They sung the famous facts of noble personages upon the harp. This study or
practice wonderfully profited knowledge, as it were delivered by hand unto
posterity. Whereupon in deed it so comes here to pass also, that the name,
fame, and glory of Arthure might so be preserved after a sort.

O factum been.
Si quid mea Carmina possunt,
Aonio statuam sublimes vertice Bardos.
Bardos Pieridum cultores, atque canentis,
Phoebi delitias, quibus est data cura perennis,
Dicere nobilium clarissima facta virorum
Aureaque excelsam famam super astra locare.
The English.

O well done.
If any thing my verses may avail,
These stately singers then advance Will I,
That high Parnassus mount for to assail.
As singers honoring the Muses friends duly,
And Phoebus his delights singing sweetly.
The famous acts of noble men to blase,
And stately fame In The golden heavens to place.
WIlliam A Norman had conquered the Nation of Englishmen by permission of God,
Anno. (...). a Christo nat^.
and now came the kingdom of England, 1154. Regni. Anno. 1.
unto Henry the second of that name, Nephew by Matildes the daughter of Henry
Beauclercke, and the Son of Geoffry Plantagenet, Duke of Gaunt. This man
endeavoring by all means to enlarge the limittes of his kingdom, 1154. Regni.
Anno. 1.
applied also his mind unto the kingdom of Ireland. Richard of Clare Earl of
Chepstowe, (so called by reason of the wanderinge River) a man both most noble
by birth, fortune, and virtue, went into Ireland, being before requested of
Deronutius the ruler of Lagenia, so to do: in which expedition he behaved him
self so valiantly, Giraldus. C^^^brensis calls him Richard Strongbow^ Earl
of C^^pstow.
that (they being cast out by heaps put to flight, and vanquished which
withstood the Ruler) he purchased him self fame an immortal glory and (if
this also might any thing avail to the purpose) he obtained besides great
riches unto him self thereby, John stow.
taking to wife Eua the daughter of Deronicius, and heir by right nougth. King
Henry had understanding of the success of Richard the Earl of Chepestowe, and
whether he enuyed his glory, or (which is most like) that he earnestly sought
the pray of this rich kingdom, he forbad this Richard in the mean time to
^eare rule in Ireland, not disdayning yet to proffer him reward. He being wise,
fully knowing the Princes purpose, gave place unto this right. In the mean
season Henry having prepared no small part of an Host, came into Cambria or
Wales, 1157. Regni Anno. 3.
and purposing there to appoint the residue, he thence straight sailed from
Menenia or Sanct David's into Ireland, John stow.
with hope of which kingdom to obtain, he burned as hot as fire. Whiles he
busieth him self here aboutes being (for his worthiness as befitted) received
of the Gouernoures of Wales, at h^s banquettes there (using an Interpreter) he
gave ear not with out pleasure unto the historical singers, which singe to
the Harp famous acts of noble men. Truly there was one amongst the rest most
skillful in knowledge of Antiquity. King Henry the second for his valiancy
compared to* K. Arthure and was inquisitiue after his monument.
He so sunge the praises and noble acts of Arthure comparing Henry with him as
Conqueror in time to come for many respects, that he both wonderfully
pleased, and also delighted the Kings ears: at what time also y^ King learned
this thing especially of the historical singer, that Arthure was buried at
Aualonia in the religiouse place. Whereupon sending away the said singer as
witness of such a monument most liberally rewarded, he had conference with
Henricus Blesensis, alias Soliacensis his nephew, who even then or a little
after was made of an Abbot in the Isle of Bermundsege, chief Magistrate over
Glastenbury that he might with most exquisite diligence search out thoroughly the
Tomb or burying place of Arthure within the compass of that religiouse house.
It was assayed by him other whiles and at length found out with great
difficulty, in the last days, King Arthures Tomb found Anno Ric. Regis* 1.
as some suppose of Henry the second, King of England: but as others think
(unto whom I easily assent) in the beginning of the reign of Richard the
first, his Son.

Touching both this searching for, and finding out of the bones, two persons
specially amongst others have written their minds: of which two one was a
Moncke of Glastenbury, and by name unknown to me, but the other was Siluester
Giraldus. Siluester Giraldus
Furdermore there had been hereunto added also Gulielmus Meildunensis, as the
third witness to be conferred with them both, M^lmsbury.
but that death had taken him away in his aged years before the Scpulcre or
Tomb was found. The testimonies of these men will I use especially, and at
this instant I will bring hither the words of Annonymus the Moncke. The place
where King Arthure his Tomb was found at that time and the manner thereof
King Arthure was entombed, like as (by K. Henry ye second) Henry y^ Abbot had
learned, whose cosen germane and familier friend he of late was. But ye King
had often times heard this out of the acts of the Britains and of their
historical singers, that Arthure was buried near unto the old Church in the
religiouse place between two Pyramedes in times past, nobly engraven, and
erected as it is reported for the memory of him.

And King Arthure was buried very deeply for fear of the Saxons, whom he had
often times vanquished, and whom he had altogether rejected or cast out of the
Isle of Britain. And whom Mordred his mischeeuous Nephew had first called
back again and brought thither against him: least they (should also with
malice of mind raige in cruelty toward the dead body) which had labored
by tooth and nail even now to possess again the whole Island after his
death. Again for and in respect of the same fear, he was laid in a certain
broad stone, (as it were at a grave) found of them which dug there, of
seven foot as it were under ye earth: when yet notwithstanding Arthures Tomb
was found more lower, of nine foot depth. There was moreover found a leaden
cross not set into the uppermost but rather neathermost part of the stone,
Nota His inscription and the subtle devise of the Workmen in those days.
having thereon these letters engraven. HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLITVS REX
ARTHVRIVS IN INSVLA AVALONIAE.

And the Cross taken out of the stone, (the said Abbot Henry showing the
same) we have seen with our eyes, and have read these letters. But like as
the Cross was infired to the neathermost part of the stone: So that part of
the cross engraven (to the end it might be more secret) was turned toward
the stone. Doubtless a wonderful industry and exquisite wisdom of the men
in that age, who by all endeuoures desired to hide in secret manner the body of
so great a personage, and their Sovereign Lord, especially the Patron of
that place, by reason of the instant troubled state: And who yet had further
care that at one or other time afterward (when the trouble surceased, by the
perfect order of those letters engraven in the Cross and found out other
whiles) they might make apparent testimonies of his burial.

And as the foresaid King Henry had before declared all the matter to the
Abbot: so the body of Arthure was found not in a marble Tomb (as it befitted
so notable a King)

NOw in fit time comes forth Siluester Giraldus, Siluester Giraldus his
testimony of Arthure his Tomb found.
that same eye witness of Arthures bones and ashes found, and aptly adioyneth
his accounte unto these words.

And his body (which as it were fantastical in the end and as it were by
spirits translated unto places a far off, and not subject unto death, fables
so fully had feigned) was in these our days by wonderful and as it were
marvelous tokens found out buried more deeper in the earth at Glastenburie
between two Pyrameds, in old time set up within the religious place, and by a
hollow Oak marked or known, and was with honor translated into the Church,
and dece^tly bestowed in a Marble Tomb. Whereupon a leaden cross being
engraven in the stone not in the upper part as it is accustomed (but on the
lowermost part rather) which we also have seen (for we have handled the same)
contained these letters engraven and not eminent and extant, but rather
inwardly turned to the stone.

HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLITVS REX ARTVRIVS IN INSVLA AVALONIAE.

And these words follow even there. And seeing there were some evident tokens
of finding the body there by his inscriptions, and some by the Pyramedes
engraven (although as very much defaced and ouerworne by too much oldnesse of
time:) yet most chiefly and most evidently did Henry the second king of
England declare and manifest full and whole unto those Monckes, according as he
had hard of that ancient historical Musician the Britain: namely that they
should find him buried deeply in the earth for xvi. foot at the least, and
not in a Tomb of stone, but in a hollow Oak. And therefore his body (being
laid and as it were hidden so deep, to the end that it might not be found of
the Saxons, inhabiting the Island after his death, whom he in his life time
had so puissantly subdued and almost destroyed) might sarcely at any time be
found. A wise pollycy of workme^ in those days.


And for this cause were the letters as testimonies of truth engraven upon the
cross turned inwardes to the stone, to the end they should at-that time keep
in secret, what they contained and that sometime also according to the place
and time requisite) they might discover or manifest that same meaning. Moreover
also he writes these words even in the same place. We must also know that the
bones of Arthures body which were found, were so great, that eue^ that saying
of the poet might seem in these words to be fulfilled, Grandiaque effossis
mirabitur ossa Sepulchris.
And the Tombs being dug forth right:
He shall marvel at the great bones in sight. The largnesse of K. Arthures
Lineaments.



FOr the bone of his shinne being laid to the shinne of a most tall person
(which also the Abbot showed us) and as it was fastened unto that ground near
unto his foot, retched it self largly, three fingers over his knee.

Also the scalp of his head as it were a wonder or spectacle, was capable and
gross, in so much as between the eye bryes and the eyes it largely contained
a hand bigness. Nota. Ten wounds discerned in his scalp.
There appeared in this, ten or more wounds: all which (except one only
greater then the rest which gaped wide and which only seemed to be a deadly
wound) grew together into one whole scarre. A relation to a further testimony
of Giraldus. in Speculo Ecclesiastic^ yet parley doubted.
Now if it shall avail any man either to repeat y^ very self same things
which I have ere while recited out of Giraldus, or not much unlike to these,
let him read his book viz. Speculum Ecclesiasticu^, where as two chapters
lightsomly entreat of this matter. In mean time yet I have somewhat which helds
me doubtful. For Giraldus affirms yt his burying place was of Oak, which as
I do not straight way affirm to be false: So I will insinuate those things,
which vehemently persuade me to y^ contrary. First, Alder trees in Aualony.
the number of great Alder trees which by a certain nature are growing
commodious for the ground there. Moreover again, I think the inhabitants of
Aualonia, were not so ignorant of natural things, y^ they should believe y^
Oak would continue longer in somewhat a moist ground, then the watery Alder
tree, which is growing in the ground.

They which have written of Trees, willingly attribute somewhat moist grounds to
be apt both for Alder and Elm trees to be brought forth in the^. Where
Giraldus affirms K. Arthures Tomb to be found.
There also remains another doubt, which, (if I any thing rightly judge)
shall rather seem a plain error, then any doubt at all. Gyraldus confirms
that Arthures Tomb was found between two Pyrameds in the religious place,
viz. between two Pyrameds at Aualonia alias Glastenbury
at Aualonia: In which opinion, (as it were, so confirmed with testimony of
ancient writers) even I also remain. But I am so far from believing any
thing to be engraue^ in the^, which thing Arthures tomb (as Giraldus declares
y^ very same) should show, express, or make famous, that in deed unto me may
appear nothing less like to be true. A doubt.
If there had been any such thing, I pray you who more truly or more plainly
should have manifested y^ same, Malmesbury.
the^ Gulielmus Meildune^sis? unto whom alone all posterity ought to refer
both their portractures and inscriptions. But he in deed speaks not so much
as one word of Arthure, whom elsewhere he diligently extolleth. Doubtless it
is a conjecture probable, that Giraldus was utterly ignorant what inscriptions
those Pyrameds contained, seeing he says the letters were worn out by
antiquity or oldnes of time.

But I let pass Giraldus (a man truly otherwise learned and a great and greedy
deuourer of ancient knowledge) as I am provoked by another care not
unprofitable for the purpose: Namely that I should not only by the testimony
of two, whom I have above named, but also by a full number of writers,
confirm, establish, and persuade as it were ratified, Arthures Tomb found.
John Leylands insertion of famous men for proof of Arthures Tomb found.
Also to the end that that thing may more commodiously be done, I think there
are causes agreeable why I may more profoundly repeat all and singular
testimonies of famous men within a certain convenient and euydent scope of
matter. Claudius a Frenchman.
In which behalf Claudius a fre^chman (to the end the reader may understand
that the credible report of Arthures Tomb found happened even unto strangers
upright and perfect) shall be a great witness in matter abundant.

Anno 1217. The body of Arthure that Noble king of Britain, (which had lain
buried. 600. and more years) was found in the Church of S. Mary at Glastenbury.

Here, in computation of the years, either by the Authors negligence (or as
more sincerely the Interpreter says) by the negligence of the book writer,
did there creep in a faule error. For, Henry the Second of that name king of
England dyed about the year after Christ's birth a thousand one hundredth and
nyntie: Anno Domini 1190.
and the Tomb was found in the first year of the reign of King Richard the
1. his son. The Cronicles of Persor Abbey do make relation of these things.
Perso^ana. John Stow.


Anno Domini 1191. the Tomb of Arthure King of Britain was found at
Glastenbury: Anno Domini 1191.
the leaden cross upon his breast, declaring that his name was there written.
Johannes Fiberius who is also commonly called Beuer, writes these things most
briefly, and by way of running it over.

Anno Domini 1191. were found at Glastenbury the bones of Arthure. Matthew
Paris Moncke of the Monastery of S. Albane at the racing and seege of that most
ancient City Verolamium, nere unto S. Albones in the County of Hartford,
thus mentions of the Tomb. The bones of the most famous King Arthure were
found at Glastenbury, laid up in a certain most ancient Tomb there, about
the which stood erected two most ancient Pirameds wherein the letters were
engraven, but by reason of the too much rudnesse and deformity they could not
be read. By what c^aunce Arthures Tomb was found (as Matthew Pari^ says)
which (...) John Leylan de affirme^ he never heard of to be true.
And they were found by this occasion. For as they dug there, to bury a
certain Moncke, which with a vehement desire in his life time, had before
wished for this place, as to be therein buried: they found a certain close
Tomb, upon the which was put a lead cross, wherein was engraven: HIC IACET
INCLITVS BRITONVM REX ARTVRIVS, IN INSVLA AVALONIAE SEPVLTVS. But that place
being round about encompassed with Marish grounds, was in times past called
the Isle of Aualon, for truth that is the I Will of Aples.

Like as by Good right I favor very much the authority of this Matthew, so I
am sorry that a few words chanced redounding to this declaration in the
inscription. Certes that which he mentions of the Moncke, Ranulphus Higeden
of Chester mentions of Arthures Tomb
I never heard of before, neither does he so far forth persuade me of the
truth.

Ranulphus Higeden of Chester also makes mention of King Arthure his Tomb. I
omit to mention other Authors, and that with employed diligence, because I
would not seem to affectate the number of witnesses in a matter so manifestly
known and credited.

CAP. XVI.
The Translation of King Arthures bones.
I Remember that in my Epistle dedicatory, I have spoken of Arthures
Lyneamentes, three times translated. Whereof, which was the first, (because it
appears not evident enough by the greater Church at Glastenbury, from whence
they write these were first of all conveyed) I will somewhat more manifestly
and more lightsomely notify. I learned of the Monckes at Glastenbury most
diligent reseruers no doubt of the Antiquity pertaining to their Cloister,
that Arthures Lyneamentes were translated into the great Church (which work
was greatly augmented by the liberallitie of Henry Plantagenet) from the
religiouse place: Arthures bones and ashes translated into the great Church at
Glastenbury.
but not laid in that place at that time where they now be. There is a porch
toward the South part, and a Chapel from whence they go into the Treasury.
The remo^ing of them into the middle Isles of the Queare.
In this place men affirmed that Arthures bones remained for a certain season:
after that again, that they were translated into the middle Isles of the Queare.

By which interchaunge of time, a new, stately, and magnificent Tomb out of
black Marble (such as we see the Lydian or tutch stone) was both heawne and
cut out, and at that time together framed, by unaccustomed workmanshippe and
witty devise: concerning which, and also the translation thereof, to write at
this present, it were undoubtedly a needless thing, seeing that in the
chapter before going touching Arthures Tomb found, The third translation of
King Arthure in the days of King Edward, surnamed the long, alias the first of
that name.
all those matters appear together in their order. Therefore let our history
apply it self unto the third translation: which was made in y^ days of
Edward, surnamed Longshanke, K. of England not only the cheifest patron of
Arthures praise, but also ye lover, and great reuerencer of his fame, when as
all ye Lyneamentes of them remaining in the most stately Tomb (where they
took their rest together before) saving the shinne bones of the King, and of
the Queen, which he commanded to be kept abroad, it was no doubt a
spectacle of Antiquity very acceptable unto the nobility thither resorting.
And to the end now that so noble a deed of King Edward (who never enough can
be commended) may enjoy eternal fame: I will recyte al and singular such
testimonies hetherunto pertaining, as were most faithfully taken out of the
Arches of the Monastery of Glastenbury, Author of which things also was the
same Monck of Glastenbury, who had in him a most earnest care to extol Arthure
with due commendations, and with a sound faith to advance unto the posterity
these acts done by him. The writer neither wanted lightsome order, nor wit in
handling his matters: But that age had neither familierly Greek nor Latin
eloquence. What manner things so ever these be, as he write them, so will I
recyte them in order, yet pondering by the way, that point in time convenient:
not with how great elegancie, but how worthy and how true those things are,
which he makes mention of.

Anno Domini 1276. King Edward, The same King and his wife. viz. King Arthures
Tomb.
the Son of Henry the third came with the Queen his wife unto Glastenbury.
But upon Tewsday next following the King and all his Court was entertained
there at the Monasteries chardges. On which day in the twylight time he caused
to be opened Arthures Tomb, where, (in two Coffines their portractures and
Arms being depainted thereon) he found the bones of the said King, of a
wonderful thickness and largeness separated. King Edward the first, and
Queen El^anor his wife behold King Arthur^ Image and the Queen's his wife with
their inscriptions.
The picture of the Queen in deed was made with a Crown upon her head. The
Crown of the Kings picture was made lyinge down, with the abscision of his
left ear, and with the evident signs of that wound whereof he dyed. Upon
every one of these was found a manifest plain inscription.

The day following, namely being wednesday, the King shutting up the Kings
bones, and the Queen his wife the Queens bones, folded up in several
wrappers of precious preservatives and putting to their seals, Their
commandment made for preser^atio^ of the Lyniamentes of K. Arthure and his
Queen entombed, and for continual* reservation of their memoria^.
commanded that the same Tomb should be with all speed placed before the hye
Alter, outwardly retayning still the heads of them both to be seen, engraven
by reason of the zeal of the people, inwardly setting therein such a like
sentence. Haec sunt ossa nobilissimi Regis Arthurij quae Anno Dominicae
incarnationis. 1278. Decimo calend. Maij per. Dominum Edwardum Regem Angliae
illustrem hic fuerunt sic collocata, praesentibus Leonora serenissima eiusde^
Regis consorte, and filia Domini Edwardi Regis Hispaniae: Magistro Gulielmo de
Midleton, tunc Noowice^si electo Magistro. Thoma de Beck, Archidiacono
Dorcetensi and predicti Regis Thesaurario, Domino Henrico de Lascey comite
Lincolniae, Domino Amadio comite Sabaudiae, and multis magnatibus Angliae. Thus
far mentions the Moncke of Glastenbury.

Go now William Paruus together with thy successor in place, William Paruus an
enemy of K. Arthures fame.
and stoutly deny thou that either Arthure lived not, or was not victoriouse in
times past. Surely thou shall neither have me partaker, nor favorer, no nor
yet one in love with thine opinion, nay rather error, at any time. Undoubtedly
it were a great and greeuouse crime, not only worthy of stripes, but also of
all kind of punishment, if any man should derogate from her the glory due to
his Cuntrie, should envy the fame of his Princes, which have most justly
deserved well of the common weal, and should not finally stand up with
valiancy and famous acts by all means to adorn and illustrate the same.

Truly, I hope (most friendly Readers) it will fall out, (that the equity of
the cause being known) and also ye truth, I shall have you my friendly
healpe^s herein: and that (such is your good will, humanity, and integrity)
you will also willingly render me thanks for my duty toward the commen
weal. John Leyla^des pention to the friendly Readers.
In the mean time I trusting to this good fortune will doubtless endeavor all
that I may, so as having taken a fresh courage unto me, and that most
confirmed, I may bodly enterprise to ^uckle with hand to hand, and by might and
maine ouermatch the brood of backbyters which importunatly, grievously, and
enuiously murmr at, and inueigh against the commendations of Arthure, for so,
as it were to make an end of my work, have I by all means determined with my
self.

CHAP. XVij.
A confutation and overthrow of Slanders rashly affirming that Arthure was not
living.
HIstoriographers do contend, Writers varying what time K. Arthure lived.
and as yet the controversy is before the judge, at what time Arthure
flourished. And this contention has so increased, and gathered force, that
doubts, (concerning universal credit of the history, which declares his
exploits done) as yet stick to the feoble concepts of the Readers.

But this is so weak a slander, Valerius. Hector Boethius.
that if needs not any diligent answer. Valerius says that he flourished in
the time of Zenon the Emperor. But Hector Boethius reports in the time of
Justinian the Barbarians then inhabiting Italy. Finally others write otherwise:
concerning the time I do not much force upon, Paulus Diaconus.
were it even now. Although yet from hence, the time is easily gathered, namely
from the reign of Aurelius Ambrosius, of whom also Paul the Deacon makes
mention. Perhaps some of the adversaries will say, Now comes it to pass, that
Paul remembers not Arthure? I answer, Paul had other matters to busy
himself with, then doubtfully to make famous the Britains, which were not as
yet forsaken of the Romans. In y^ mean time he takes away nothing from
Arthures dignity or history because he is not named of him: seeing by the way
a good number of noble perosnages throughout the whole world are of the same
Author passed over with silence.

Undoubtedly y^ seems to have great effect, whereas Gildas the writer of
Britain wrytes nothing at all of Arthure, There be which cite the testimony
of Gildas, both in his favor and praise also. Gildas a fable^.
But that Gildas in deed is a fabler, and laid forth as an open pray unto
filly worms and Moathes, (...).
at Oxenforde, in the Lybrary.

Gildas his history is published abroad of Polidorus, undoubtedly a fragment
of y^ old Gildas, but it is lame, out of order, and maimed, so far forth, as
if he were now again restored to life, the father would scarce know his
child. It is evidently known that he wrote books which by him were entitled
Cambriedos, found out eight handreth years and more agone in the Islandes of
Ireland, and carried over in to Italy. Admit the History of Gildas be true:
How could he as an eye witness declare any thing truly of Arthure, when he
him self says, y^ he was borne in the year when the battle was fought at
Bathe, where Arthures victory (and that in deed most famous) fell unto him,
as Nennius witnesses. The enemy gathers. Gildas makes no mention at all of
Arthure: Ergo he was never living. Undoubtedly a subtle gathering, such a one
as this is: Gildas remembers not Aruiragus, Lucius, or Constantine the great,
and therefore they were not living* O strange force of Logic! And yet being
hartened with this so weak argument (as it seems to him in deed) he thinks
he has easily gotten the best game. Is this an Italian reason? For certainly,
now can I hardly any longer abide to be called Vltramo^tanus, or one that goes
beyond his bounds: And surely why?

Caelum non animum mutant, qui trans Mare curru^t. The air, not mind change
they,
Which take their voyage over the Seay.
I know yet in the mean time, what y^ Wealch Writers do judge of Gildas his
silence, Gildas an unthankful person and reproachful toward his country of
Britain.
so much as unto Arthure appertains: namely, for that Hoel the cosengermaine
of Gildas was slain of Arthure: this was ye cause his name was neglected. But
I will not so much rest upon this help or sauegard: being rather ready to
fight out the battle with him, because (as unthankful and the same scarce
wise, I will not say ungodly) he has blemished his countrymen the Britains
with this blot or error of his.

Britanni nec in Bello fortes, nec in pace fideles. Surely but that I should
seem to favor mine own affection, or feed the choler of my stomach, I my
self would here coragiously enforce my weapon and that in deed sharp
against this sla^derous enemy of ye Britains. But I will moderate mine anger,
being ready to bring hither from another place (amongst these) most valiant or
stout defe^ders of ye truth, least mine affection may seem to have injured
any man.

Siluester Giraldus (in his Topographia or description of Wales) promises that
he will answer this slander of Gildas, Siluester Giraldus promised to confute
the slanders of Gildas.
in his Topographie or description of Britain: which book y^ he has so
written in times past, I doubt not; but so far as I know it is not in these our
days extant in any place. What he in mean while writes in his 2. book of
y^ Description of Wales, Nota. Siluester Giraldus his praise of the Britains.
I will now amongst others bring forth to light. But for so much as Julius
Caesar, who was such a manner of man, as ye testimony of the whole world under
Cassiuilane ye Duke shows, viz. when, as Lucane ye Poet says.

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. Anno. ante Christ. natiui^. 50.
Unto the Britains by him sought,
He showed his trembling back for naught.
Were not those Britains valiant and coragious persons? Again, An. ante
Christ. natiuitat. 401. Post Christum 107.
what were they when Bellinus and Brennus added y^ Roman Empire unto their
victories? what were they in y^ days of Constantine the Emperor, and son of
Helen sometime here Queen? Britains always approved valiant persons, and
en^ in Arthure his time. An. 140. Is^ae*
what were they in ye reign of Aurelius Ambrosius Anno, post Christ. 466. whom
also Paul the Deaco^ extolleth with praises? And to conclude, what fellows
were they in ye days of our famous Arthure. An* post Christ 516. Josephus the
writer brought up at Exceter in Devonshire in his book Antiochiedes, thus
sings.

Inclita fulsit.
Posteritas Ducibus tantis, tot dives Alumnis,
Tot faecunda Viris praemerent qui viribus orbem,
Et fama veteres. Hinc Constantinus adeptus,
Imperium, Romam tenuit, Bizantion auxit,
Hinc Senonum ductor, Lands veter^ Heroum* and Regis Arthuri^ praecipue.
captiua Brennius vrbe,
Romuleas domuit, flammis Victricibus arts,
Hinc and saeua satus, pars non obscura tumultus.
Ciuilis, magnum solus quimole soluta
Obsedit, meliorque stetit pro Caesare murus.
Hinc celebri fato foelici floruit ortu,
Flos Regum Arthurus: Cuius cum facta stupori
Non micuere minus, totus quod in aure voluptas,
Et populo narrante fauus, Quaecunque priorum,
Inspice: Peleum commendat fama Tyrannum,
Pagina Caesareos loquitur formosa tryumphos,
Alciden domitis attollit gloria monstris.
Sed, nec Pinetum Coryli, nec sydera solemn
Aequant. Annals Latios, Graiosque reuolue.
Prisca parem nescit, aequalem Postera nullum
Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes
Solus, praeteritis melior maiorque futuris.
The English.

Noble Posterity.
With so great Princes richly shined, The praises of ancient Potentates, and
amongst them of K. Arthure especially.
and Patrons so many.
So stored with men which conquered the world with valiancy.
And fame extolleth ancients. Hence had Constantine possessed
The Empire, Rome he surely kept, and Bizance eke encreast.
Hence Brennus the Italians guide, (in City captiued so)
With co^quering flames the stately towers of Rome did overthrow.
And hence those cruel Impes, a part (of ciuil^roile) not base,
Alone besiedge their mighty Prince, the huge hoaste letting p^sse.
Defense and sauegarde so, whereby to Caesar was.
Hence flourished by famous fate, and origin prosperous
Arthure the flower of kings, whose deeds shined no less marvelous!
The^ that both peoples ears and tongues did in his praise delue:
As, if thou view of former wights, what ever books recite.
Fame does Peleus tyrant blaze: and Roman hist^ries
Extol their Caesar's tryumphes great, after their victories.
Renoume aduanceth Hercules subduing monsters great:
But not Coryli, Pinetus, nor Stars the Sun his heat
Coequate, Search the Cronicles of Greeks and Latins both:
Ancient age knows not his like, ne yet posterity does
His match declare. All kings alone in deed surmounteth he,
Better then those are dead and gone, Greater then any shall be.
HOw or in what manner these may not answer the praises by Gildas before
recyted, the discreets Reader at large fully sees: Gildas his former dispraise
of the B^ittaines here ouermastered with praise worthiness.
and perceyueth Arthures commendations hereunto (amongst the rest added) to
agree so well unto this place, that I almost have no need to reckon them as (I
trust) with any fault of mine, but in deed (good Readers) if I judge aright,
with your very much pleasure and delight. For the verses before going have
their right father or author that he in deed should then be living. Moreover
again they so pleasantly allure the ears of vncorrupt sense, with a certain
apt continnitie or proper agreement, with pure elegancie and equal Majesty
(that except fancy fail me) they shall fully and wholly please the Reader,
Ponticus (...) an Italian, comme^ding the Britains.
yea were it so that I reckoned them over ten times. Ponticus Verunnius an
Italian but yet one that loved the Britains well, being justly angry with
Polidorus the Italian, thundereth forth these words.

O admirabile tunc genus Britonum qui eum, (Caesare^ ^^ntelligit) bis in fugam
expulerunt, qui totum orbem submiserat occidentis: Cui quasi totus mundus
postea nequiuit resi^tere illi etiam fugati resistunt, parati pro patria and
liberate mortem subire. Which may thus be englished.

O wonderful nation of the Britains in that age, which twice put him (he
means Caesar) to flight, who had conquered the whole west part of the world:
whom as it were, when the universal world could not resist afterward, even
they them selves being put to flight, resisted, being ready to die for their
Country and the liberty thereof.

Hereupon sings Lucane the Poet unto their praises, Lucanus.
(writing of Caesar) as before is said.

Territa quaesitis oftendit terga Britannis. Unto the Britains by him sought,
he showed his trembling back for naught.
IF in this place I should rather endeavor to mende the matter with multitude
of testimonies, Johannes Anneuillanus in Architrenio also commending the
Britains.
then with upright truth of effect, I could also take out of Johannes
Anneuillanus his Architrenio (that little book wittily in praise handling the
same) certain little verses concerning the valiancy and prowess of the
Britains. For so should I shut up the mouths of brabling backbyters
against the praises of these Britains, and that with a sufficient frontier
framed for the purpose. But me seems that I make more a do about these
bablers then is convenient. Let them with shame enough come to naught and burst
them selves in their envy: for so much as the honor of Britain neither
stands nor falls by means of such foggy mistes. But by the way, least I
should seem not mindful enough of my promise, I come again to the encounter
ready to vanquish the force of arguments which the adversaries have gotten.
The Roman writers (say they) made no mention of Arthure, wherefore, like it is
to be true, that he was not living.

If no thing be true, but that which appears by truth of Roman writers, it
should go evil to pass with the history of the whole world. The infinite
force of things worthy of memory, and of noble effect consists rather of
eye witnesses at home resident and inhabiting, then of the uncertain relation
made by foreign writers. Romans careful for their own fame, but negligent
in all other men's.
For the Romans made almost all the whole world bond slaves: and writers
which proceeded amongst them, and were there borne applyinge their minds to
the study of eloquence, made their own exploytes even admirable or wonderful:
but the enterprises and acts of other Nations they dyed even so obscure and
debase, that almost they made them none at all.

For the matter was so handled by them, that they would elegantly and not
truly plead their cause. They painted out such things in writings, which
they might rather lawfully hope for, then see at that time, done by the most
prudent Governors. And undoubtedly marvel it is not, that they made no
remembrance at all of Arthure. The Goathes at that time had invaded Italy, and
barbarouse style with phrase of writing and speaking was brought in, in stead
of eloquence, Honor unto learning in times past rare.
so far forth, that honor unto learning was rare, and rewards for the same,
were most rarely under stood off. And ye matter was not handled by writers but
by warriers. Wherefore if any certain thing were written as touching Arthure
the same might rather be done of the Britain writers what manner persons so
ever they were, then of the nouicy and ignorance of the Romans, not only
declyning from the function or office of writing, but also carefully thinking
upon their own wretched estate and calamity, daily faling upon them by many
means, lettinge pass all other things.

An other brabler after this alleges, more vain matters are in Arthures
History contained then that they may tollerably be allowed of him that is of
ripe judgment, and discreet knowledge. If he mean touching that History which
is read amongst the common sort in the Italian, Spanish, French and English
tongues, I do not much strive with him. Although the upright reader shall call
to mind, the same thing has been often times done, even in the History each
where foreign of Charles, Rowlande, Godfrey, Guy, and Bellouse, Most puysant
Personages have been parcyally praised in truth.
that I may let pass many others. Neither yet notwithstanding are their names,
or credit of the true History taken away the more. It is no novelty, that men
mix triflinge toys with true things, and surely this is even done with a
certain employment that writers might captiuate y^ simple common people with a
certain admiration at them when they hear of marueylouse matters. So was
Hercules, so was Alexander, so Arthure, and so was also Charles commended. But
there is an other far greater reason incident to the History of Arthure, then
I do conceive of. For those things which are not apparent in course of ages,
which are not probable, which as aliable helps agree not with the credit of
Authors, which are not embraced in long exercise of y^ ages, and furderance of
learned men, and by them comprobate or fully ratified I do not unadvisedly
allow off. Graius the Author of that book Schalecronic^ had much a do with
suc^ backbiters
Many years again, Graius the Author of the book Schalecronicon (as I
suppose) had great contention with this rabble of backbyters. Unto him was Beda
objected, who passed over Arthure with great silence. Paraduenture this holy,
man refused to mention ye Prince, because he was borne in adultely. And it
might also be, y^ when he had heard some one or other prophecies spoken of him,
by those historical signs y^ it alienated his mind utterly from the whole
history. Beda more religiously then Historically addicted.
But they neither add, nor take away credit. That is most true, whereas Beda
other wise a good man and a learned, did not only sienderly esteem of the
glory of Britains name, but also despised or neglected it. For, there was
some what a do between them and the Saxons concerning the rule over
Britain. Nota The tyranny of the Romish Bishop between the Saxons and
Britains of old time.
The Romish Bishop practiced by all means to keep under his jurisdiction
(which he had most wickedly obtained) the English Saxons. For this cause the
Britains cursed him. He again with a certain hatred moved, set the Saxons
and them together by the cares. Then, I pray you what praises might the
Brittans hope for at the Saxon writers? Undoubtedly, cold co^mendations or
rather none at all. Add hereunto, that Beda also was ignorant in y^ affairs
of Britain before the days of Gildas: so far forth as he neither knew of
y^ monument in meniory of Arthures Coronation at Ambrosia, nor of y^ same
thereof. A thing credible it is, that the calamity of those wars which had
consumed and destroyed Churches, together with libraries infinite, had utterly
raced out of knowledge, manifest or evident monumentes of Antiquity. Whereupon
to him that should then take in hand to write of Antiquity touching Britain,
all things were most obscure and unknown. There are which think many things
have been translated into Armorica or the lesser Britain, although at this
day very few things may be hoped for from thence, saving that a few notes
are extant in most ancient exemplars of the lives of holy men thither
reparing, and which intermixe light with darkness.

Gulielmus Paruus of Bridelington, in his Prologue before his History thus
thundereth out his error.

Gal^ridus Hic dictus est, William Par^us (...) ^^under of Arthure
cognomen habens Arthurij, qui diuinationum illarum nenias ex Britannica lingua
transtulit, quibus vt non frustra creditur, ex proprio figmento multa adiecit.
William Paruus there says: This man is called Geoffry bearing the surname of
Arthure, who translated ye Fabulus Dreams of those prophecies ^ut of y^
Britain language: whereunto he (as men do not credit vainelie has also added
many things after the device and imagination of his own brain. These words
utters he upon a stomach and contempt. But I will sing him a contrary song
even for ever and a day. That men believe him in vain, except he prove this
rather by reason, then by naked or plain words.

Well I know, and that too well, many fables and vanities are disperced
throughout the whole history of Britain. Yet, therein are matters (if a man
behold the same more thoroughly) such as might not be desired without great
hinderance of ancient knowledge, and which being rather read then understood
by William Paruus bear not any show at all of commodity. Again, I will also
here set down another honorable testimony, namely not only touching the
Interpreter of the history, but also concerning Arthure him self. Plainly it
appears, that whatsoever things this fellow published in writing (concerning
Arthure, and Merline to feed ye curiosity of the not so discreet persons)
were fainedly invented of lying and dissembling Authors. Let him cogge and
foyste sixehundreth times, if he will. Merlinus was in very deed a man even
miraculously learned in knowledge of things natural, and especially in the
science Mathematical: For the which cause he was most acceptable and that
deseruingly unto the Princes of his time, and a far other manner of man, then
that he would repute himself as one subject unto y^ judgment of any cowled
or loytering grosseheaded Moncke. But I will let pass Arthure and Merline, the
one more valiant, the other more learned, then that they ought to regard
either the prattling or importunity of the common people. And that seems unto
me a thing most unequal and against all right, Monacus Monaco I^uidet.
that one Moncke bears envy toward another Moncke, which is even dead and
gone. William Paruus might have hoped for greater victory of the living, then
of the dead Persons. This yet by the way did he count for advantage, to
strike him that would not strike again.

But if the Spirits of dead men have any knowledge of humane matters, he shall
so far perceive that beyond equity and honesty he bears away no victory
from Geoffrey, that dead is, but that by his wound he has procured him self
a perpetual wound and bloodshedde. Neither is there cause why he should hope
for the present help of that Physician Polidorus from the City Vrbinas, for
as much as he him self also languishing of like disease has very great
need of a cunning man's cure. And there remains as yet another wound,
wherewith W. Paruus supposed that he had even quite dispatched Geoffrey out of
this life. For, so he insulteth. Nec vnum quidem Archiepiscum vnquam habuere
Britones. Neither (says he) had the Britains in deed so much as one
Archbishop at any time.

Did thou learn this amongst the Brigantes?

Asserius Meneuensis, sometimes the Schoolmaster of Alfredus surnamed the
great, king of England, taught me another manner of matter in these words,
in the book of his Cronicles. Vixit Alfredus circiter. annum. 842. and post
28. ann.
Qui saepe depredabatur (Hemeidum Regulum intelligit) illud Monasterium and
Paraeciam S. Degwi, id est, Dauidis, aliquando expulsione Antistitum qui in eo
praeessent, sicut and nobis Archiepiscopum propinquum meum and me aliquando
expulsit, sub ipsis. Which did oftentimes spoil (he means Hemeidus the Duke)
that same Monastery and parrish of Saint Degwy that is S. David, in times past
by banishing of the Bishops which bare sway therein, like as he banished
sometime from us the Archbishop my neighbor, and me also under them.

Gyraldus makes mention and with very good credit that Dubritius was
Archbishop of Exceter. Iscanus and Iscae.
For Isca so called is the most noble City of Deuonia, and most ancient of
others, (by reason of the Ryuers and floude bearing the same name) there
edyfied, which also was called of the Romans, the city of Caerlegion or
Chester upon Husk. The Bishops Sea being translated from thence unto Saint
David's, where the most holy and the same most Learned David flourished in the
dignity of an Archbishop. John Stow.


Sampson a man of famous memory, Archbishop of S. David's in Wales shunning the
sickness or disease of the Jaundice, went unto Armorica, or the less
Britain: whereupon came the original of the Archbishopricke of Dolence. And
from Sampsons time unto y^ victories of y^ Normans over the Welchmen all the
Bishops beyond Seuerne as yt were of solemn orders were consecrate by the
bishop of Saint David's their Primate: who when the Paul failed him, with
tooth and nail retained still all his title and interest.

Moreover, it appears by y^ Dialogue of Siluester Giraldus that the Cannons
at S. David's (in the time of David the Bishop which succeeded Bernharde) had a
treaty with Richard the great, Archbishop over the Kentish men (in presence
of Hugucion the Cardinal) concerning the Metropolitan title of their Church:
whereof the same Giraldus, handled earnestly an entreatie at Rome, being
afterward chosen Bishop of S. David's.

And that I may recite more Ancient testimonies, Ptolomeus Lucensis, (who wrote
the lives of the Romish Bishops) declares y^ in Eleutherius his time three
chief flammins in Britain were converted into so many Archbishops. 3.
Bishops Sees. London. Yeorcke, and Ca^tlegion upon Husk in Walls.
London, in old time called Troynouant, and Yeorcke then also called Brigantum,
without doubt flourished famously with this dignity or prerogative. Where then
is the third Bishops Sea? Where else but in Wales.

In which point that I my self say nothing, Trittemius surely in his
abridgment of Cronicles is also a lightsome and plain witness. May not then
William Paruus the Schoolmaster be ashamed to have inculcate into the ears of
Polidorus his scholar far better Learned then himself such vain tales.
But, behold, by one evil another evil chau^cing. The ingrafted error so far
forth has now infected a number, y^ scarce is this disease curable by any
Helleborus, no though they sail into Anticyria for ye same. And yet for sooth
are they compelled, I know not by (...) violent Authority in the mean time
to have a good opinion of thie their Schoolmaster. These I say before hand are
hard points to believe. Surely I wish all things prosperous unto my
Schoolemasters. But when the matter is in handling concerning truth and credit
of the cause, doubtles^e I bear no partial affection toward any of them: No
certainly (...) I should by and by know that they would even catch and
conquer for me all mine enemies at once.

A Peroration or brief Conclusion To the Readers.
Hitherto (most courteous Readers) have I described Arthure in his colors,
not without diligence, labor, and finally a ready good will: but yet in mean
while, whether with like eloquence, grace, and good success I have done this,
let that by the judgment of honest and learned persons be determined. For I
know very well, How slender Furniture I have at home: For the which cause I
challenge not any thing at all unto my self: Undoubtedly I might soon appear
both rash and unwise, if I should so do. Only I purposed of good will to make
trial of my wit in a matter honest, to help the history languishing, to
advance the glory of my country, hindered by envy, and being enthralled unto
the crafty deceiptes of evil willers, restore the same honestly unto liberty.
I know it will come to pass, that most mighty enemies will assault my
doings: Let them overcome with power, if they can, so the truth be ours. I
will imitate the Noble Palm Tree, which being pressed down with heavy
burdens yet falls not to the ground at any time. And neither at this instant
do I seek for any reward: so you vouchsafe me your courtesy, good will and
favor, truly I may persuade my self I have al things that I rightly look
for. And for amends, on my part also shall hereunto ensue most requisite
promptitude and expedite alacrity, enflamed also by virtue of enment unto like
enterprises not only, but also to imparte you greater matters which shall
stir up your learned ears, and being stirred up, may long detain them, and
so de^eyned as it were by a certain land floude of pleasant delight therewith
bring them unto fragrant fields. And all these things do I easily promise my
self, trusting in your honesty and help, as one doubtless fully bent upon
hope thereof. Surely my muse (such as it is) altogether is youres: neither
tends ^he to any other purpose at any time, but unto your behoof, and the
commodity of all men. I count it a base service to satisfy the common peoples
humor: but to perform you my continual industry differs not far from a
kingdom, such a one as by a just cause I may prefer even before the kingdom
of Alexander. For what more reserved he unto him self wholly (when he dyed) of
so great Riches, possessions and dominions, saving fame only. This, (though
by many accomptes in example inferior) obtained by your mean shall I yet so
earnestly advance, that nights and days shall she watch for your welfare and
emolument. And at length (those same most thick mistie clouds in deed of
ignorance being shaken off, and utterly dashed aside) the light of British
Antiquity with displayed beams far and wide shall shine forth. God give you
long life and welfare, most sincere favorers of virtue and good learning.

FINIS.
LONDON. Imprinted by John wolf, dwelling in Distaffe Lane over against the
sign of the Castle. 1582.


