The Pedegrewe of Heretics. Wherein is truly and plainly set out, the first
root of Heretics begone in the Church, since the time and passage of the
Gospel, together with an example of the offspring of the same.

Esaias. 47. O Babylon sapientia tua and scientia tua haec te decepit.
O Babylon thy wisdom and conning has deceived thee.
Perused and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Lucas Harryson. Anno. 1566.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Lecester, Baron of
Dinghby, of the noble order of the Garter Knight, and one of the Queens
Majesty's most honorable privy Council, and master of her Majesty's Horse. I.
Barthlet, minister of the Lord Jesus Christ his poor Church, wishes the
zealous love of God in Christ.
IT thoroughe al ages has been a laudable Custom (right honorable) that
writers, in dedicating their travails to ye worthies of their time, did
thereby, not only shield and succor their cause, but also advance their
Patrones name, with high renoume, thorowout al posterity. Wherefore as it is
lawful for me, in this so good a cause, to use this benefit: so I especially
wish to accomplish the same, by your honor, to whom as many good men hold
themselves diversely bound: So there is not any that does not commend the
same: For having compassion on the distressed: for pardoning of your foes: for
succouring of the needful: for furthering poor suitors: and amongst other,
your honors virtues (which I do ouerpasse, least I should seem to be over
curious, either in rehearsing those things that are most certain to all men,
or such as your Lordshippe lists rather to practice than to hear speak of)
for that you are a special Mecaenas, to every stude^t. The which the
University of Oxforde, a nourcerie of good letters, flying to your protection,
euidentely declares: but especially for that your Lordship is so favorable and
zealous a friend to the ministry: Hill. in Ps 68.
who standing in the fervent zeal of their God and his church, in the
indignation of a godly love, are by the pieuishnesse of many (that think they
have gotten advantage at will) diversely molested. Go forth my Lord (Zelo enim
Dei irascitur, Idem in Psalm. 118. Zadik.
qui insolentem in fratres ministrosque conspexerit) for from the zeal of God
does it proceed, to be displeased with those that are malapert against the
brethren, the ministers of God. God shall make you a most redoubted and
triumphante Gedeon over his enemies. Go on therein amongst the soldiers of
zeal, and assure your self, right honorable, that there is not, amongst all the causes of perpetual fame, any one more just, or apt therefore, than a true
report for doing well to the household of faith, and maintenance of the
Churches right. And commit your name to the perpetual memory of Gods
eternal Church, who does already acknowledge your loving kindness toward
her, and will not forgette the same. By reason whereof, when as it first came
in my thought to seek some shelter, from the showers of Zoilus, which are ye
sharper, in this age, for that they are less shame less, and from the
injuries of our time: your honor above other, was bruted most brimly amongst
them, as fittest for the same. To whom I do most humbly sewe, to receive this
little treatise, with ye accustomed, and cheerful countenance, which you
were wont to bestow on others: which if you, of your bounty do, I dare
boldly think, that it shall be sufficiently consecrated to the church the
mother of us al. That aiger Eriphia shall be sufficiently appalled. And that
Momus shall move laughter, but with Mydas long ears. If any man, shall think
that it is not worthy for the baseness thereof, to be dedicated to your honor,
such a one shall seem an unthrifty nigarde of your honors gentleness, or else
envious of your fame, and of my unfeigned good will to your Lordship. For I
grant that (how uneasy so ever my travail was in this frosen seas, no man
having cut the yse therein) it is now so simple, as I doubt not, but then, when
I shall, by the lustiness of other be constrained, I my self shall not only
amend this, but set it forth with greater gain, and increase: and therefore
the better learned might not only, have done the same much more commendable,
but amend this, which I freely submit to the controlement of every wind. In
the mean time, I recommend your honor to the tuitio^ of almighty God, who
increase in you his love, and feruente zeal, in knowledge. Amen.

Your Lordships humble Orator. John Barthlet.

L. G. Cantabrigiensis ad Lectorem. S. D.
INcola qui coeli, viuis peregrinus in orb:
Et cupis ad patrios, tuto penetrare Penateis:
Huc ades. Et quae monstra viae superanda supersunt,
Vt fluctumque regas, extra firmumque carinam,
Hic tibi non magno, licet intueare libello.
Hoc iter Herculeis, nequaquam viribus impar.
Iure labor poterit, vel Iasone dignus haberi.
Quaerit Vlissaeos animos, vireisque viriles.
Intus erunt Cicones, extra quoque pocula loti
Dulcia, quae secum, reditus obliuia ducunt.
Antiphates metuendus, and vno lumine Ciclops,
Scylla cauenda tibi, Scyllaeque propinqua Charybdis,
Caeteraque vt taceam, quibus est agitatus Ulysses,
Et Sireneos cantus, iramque Deorum
Euitare, tibi magnum est medicamina Circes.
Monstrorum quae terra tulit, pelagusue profundum,
Vna quidem nobis cenfebitur, haeresis instar,
Quam tu quo melius fugias vt pocula Circes,
Hoc tibi Moly dedit, noster Cyllenius album:
Quo retinere potes, vel ad huc reparare figuram.
Tu modo iam dictis dicas contraria verbis.
Quod si Sirenes metuas, tibi cera parata est.
Et si Scylla ferum est, and inexpugnabile monstrum,
Cum monstri vultum rabidi cognoris ad vnguem,
Est fugisse salus, quando superare negatur.
Si sis tutus ab his, facile tibi caetera cedent:
Tutus ab his fueris, haec tu modo mente recondas.
Ad eundem Dicolon Tetastrophon.
QVem non liuor edax, nec genius malus,
Nec concepta prius, fallit opinio:
Quam nullo minui, far potest modo,
Solus iudicat integre.
Huius si liber hic, incidat in manus,
Author vult operis, ponere iudicem.
Si discutiat singula, calculum
Addet spero laboribus.
Nam, si magnanimi laus viget Herculis,
Monstrum vulneribus, quod domuit pote^s
Et nascens toties, edocuit mori
Speluncae face subdita.
Cur non mo^striferam, qui domat haeresim:
Qua non Hydra malum fert numerosius,
Expectare potest iure probarier?
Aequus si datur, arbiter.
Alcidis labor, hoc non magis arduus.
Et nobis labor hic, non minus vtilis.
Ergo par ratio sit: nisi forsitan
Praesens detur honestior.
Succincte Haereseos cornua, commouet:
Demonstrat breuiter, quae retinenda sunt:
Papismi sobolem prodit adulteram.
Hanc prudens, nisi nescias.
Attentum faciat te, grauitas rei.
Aras causa sacras continet, and focos:
Et quando pariter res agitur tua:
His caeptis, etiam faue.
The Pedegrewe of Popish Heretics.
AS no Trauayler does depart from his quiet home, but to some certain place,
and for profitable purpose: even so writers (gentle Reader) have always some
end, wherefore they travail with such pain: which ever is to be considered,
and they credited, according to the same. And as the estate of private persons,
is much inferior to public: so the cause of a common wealth is much sooner
to be heard, than a private or singular. Yea and among the causes common to us
all, there is none more excellent and public, than those of religion: which
touching both God and man, challenge of very right, each man's study and whole
power. In the which cause, the end ought to be, the trial and defense of the
truth: because the God of truth is not to be known but in truth. Unto which
end, The affectis on of writers.
I would the writers in these our days had plight their pains. Then should
we not have just cause to credit or esteem of them, as Demades of Draco his
laws: Non atramento, sed sanguine esse conscriptas, That they are not written
with ynke, but blood. Some gaping for gain, some perverted by friends or
affection, deal in this pitiful cause of the Church (which concerns all
countries and kingdoms alike) after such sort, as the.30. Tirannes of Athens
did each of them for other, or alone for himself, but none for the whole.
Justinius Libro. 5.
By means whereof, if in these our troubled days, any man moved with hope of
the glory of God, purpose of setting forth the truth, and care of the commonwealth, publish his studies, he shall have an harder stoure (O malicious world)
than ever Thrasibulus in those days of Athens, against the same Tirannes, had:
For that there is not thorowout the whole body of Divinity, any one common
place, that has not a number such sort of writers, that exceed the said
Tirannes, who will address themselves to thencombraunce, both of the common
cause and wealth therein. As in this matter of heresies, by Hosius,
Shackelocke, Rurimondes Euans, Staphilus his Stapleton. etc. appears. Who
being but translaters of other men's trauayles, besides that they do communicate
with them in their ill purpose: thinking that not to suffice, for the heaping
full of the measure of their wickedness, colourably hyding their private case
under public titles, as of the betraying of the beastliness of Heretics:
and Hatchet of Heretics, do only seek their revenge by thapplying of the
public titles, to their own private and personal affairs, receding as it
were from their original writ, alter their first action. Wherefore thou
ought (gentle Reader) in sca^ning of the same, as a wise Judge, seeing which
way they walk, rather scorningly to laughe at them, than to be occupied with
such lawless Logique, or moved with such reasonlesse Rhetorique as they use.
What has Hosius being an alien, and ignoraunte of our Land, Folio. 68. Folio.
69.
I pray you, to do with Trinity College in Cambridge, among all other the
Colleges there? yea and among all other Offices, with the Chapel Deane of
the Divinity students of that house? Forsooth it pleased M. Shacklocke, in
tempring of his Hatchet, to fordge Hosius to his use: least being toolelesse,
as he is causeless, he might in the hacking at this common wealth, seem
personlesse. He saw pardie, by right at Common law, he could not convent the
Deane in an action of unkindness: and therefore he would make Hosius author
of his famous libels, under the Maystership of whose Cardinals Hat, he thought
he might both satisfy his stomach, and pay his grudge without peril, both of
Law Civil and Canon, c. Qui alterius. 5. q. 1. L. Diffamari. C. De Ing and
Manumiss.
which would have him whipped at a Carts tail. Surely I can not think, that
Hosius wants that wisdom in him (who is a personable man as his
counterfeict shows) as to take in good part, that M. Shacklocke should so
abuse him for his purpose: yea, beyond all honesty, not regarding his
reverence: unless Hosius by falsehode under fellowship, having like quarrel
diversely mayntayned against the truth, is contented to hyre out his honesty to
work in M. Shacklocks husbandry. For Hosius entreating of Heresies, has made
the root of such tree and fruit, as he entreats of, to be, Covetousness.
Folio. 5.
But M. Shacklocke being but a translater, has made (not without some
suspicion of controlling Hosius) it Railing: a thing clean contrary to
Covetousness, Hosius root. And so he sets it out, deceyuing the simple
man, under ye name of Hosius Hatchet: as that he should strike at that root in
his book, who there talks and means of it never a word. Whereby it is
evident, that he adultereth and mysuseth both Hosius person and pen, to his
purpose: and is to be punished as a Falsarie, a corrupter, an abuser, and a
marrer of Hosius, if a matter of it self so ill, may be marred. Undoubtedly
(gentle Reader) it had been the part of M. Shacklocke, upon the pain of
shame, to set that in the front of his book, which Hosius pursues thorowout,
and not to place Hosius at another work, than he list himself to choose. Yea,
with what face could he dedicate unto the most learned Princess in all Europe,
Impudency of Shackl.
the same painted out with one of S. Anthonies dreams, or a matter of like
wayght? I pray thee reader, how may thou persuade thy self of the truth, that
M. Shacklocke dreameth (I mean) that the Devil vvhipped Luther and Calvin, or
that wearied came out of hell? Parhaps the raging humor which so much disquieted
him in the day, made a dream of the Devil in the night time: or else for such
a matter, so meet a counsailor made his apparition, to instruct him in his
rhyme and tree. For otherwise I think he would not have passed both modesty
and piety: especially, toward the dead. The wise man's saying is true, in you
M. Shacklocke: that a living Dog, is better than a dead Lion. For if M.
Calvin had lived to see of you, this effect: I think it would have happened
much worsse to you, than it did to Albertus Pighius: who as soon as Calvin his
aunsvvere came to his hand, caught such a quaume at his heart, that he never
threvve it of. But leaving for a while M. Shacklocke to a better aduisement,
let us see how Rurimondes Euans writes of the Root of Heresy, in his
betraying of the beastlynesse of Heretics: for I willingly ouerpasse his
blastes, he blovveth against Heston, for dishonor of his repulse. Forsooth (he
says) it was fylthy lust in Luther: in whom Hosius says, it was
Covetousness. Contradiction of writers.
Which both disagree so one with the other, as they also do with Shacklocke,
who says it is Railing. By which uncertainty for the Root, it is evident,
how they err in the body, branches, leaves, and fruits. Every one of them
laboring to set out their peculiar devise, of their brain sick minds,
bewrays his cause, to be only private and personal: and not religion common
to us al. Against the which, if any fact by Luther had been done, it could not
be, but they should have agreed upon the cause and circumstances of the same:
and not to have lied, so lowdely on Luther, contrary to the testimony of the
most credible Chronicles, that pourge him. In which several devise of every
of them, thou have a lively pattren of the deceiueablenesse of affection. For
M. Shacklocke, stirred at the earnest preaching of the Ministers in Cambridge,
because it touches the quick, calls it Railing, making it the root of his
tree: that under a public title and cause, he might the stylier shoot out
the poison of his tongue. And in the same blindness of affection, he falls
into an absurdity of his devise. For be it that I grant, Shacklock his folly.
(which thing Hosius and Euans do not) that railing is the root, and that
that root brings forth Rebellion, the trunk or stock: and Rebellion,
bloodshed the branches, (which happily it may do:) yet, how can such branches
bring forth for leaves, lies in Religion: which sith it is not consequent, his
Klimax is there broken, and fails: and enters into an absurdity, or non
sequitur. But this thing is proper to that sort of writers: because they
stand upon a wrong ground or principle, as both Hosius and Staphilus do:
persuading the people, that until these.40. years, there was no question, but
silence of Religion. Hosius speaks thus: Before these.40. years last past,
Folio. 1.
such was the state of the whole world, False ground of Papists.
so far as Christian faith took any force, that the sentence which we read
in Genesis, might well, be reported of it. It was a land of one lip. The
which thing they ymagine (as truth shall in the end of this book declare, the
contrary to have been thoroweout every seculum or age) only because they
would bring Luther into hatred with all me^, A wicked purpose.
as a peace breaker, who in deed did take that quarrel in hand, which other
had justly begone: but is more renowned, than they his predecessors, for that
he continued longer in the field than other: and God guarded him in his time,
with the aid of temporal Magistrates, whose hearts, by his spirit, he
lightened and inclined toward the truth. Which continuance and aid, sith the
former writers wanted, their labors in this cause abridged, are partly as
smothered, and raked up in the heap and multitude of years, partly forgotten
and hydden, till need caused the old wife to trot, and rake the heap a
down, that she might find the quietness of conscience (which is true peace)
in the knowledge of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. But such a continual
or universal consent as they surmize, was never. I except dreaming Endymion
with his like, and the days of the general Apostasy, whereof Paul speaks,
wherein the end being proper and agreing to our infirmity (being a departing
from God) concord therein may soon be had. As in the days of Noah it was,
when as the old world agreed in wickedness, saving poor Noah and his small
family: The true Church not of one lip.
and therefore was derided. Surely if thou would consider the time of our
savior Christ, and after him, the estate of the primitive Church, thou
would conclude, that even the very Church was not of one lip. And not to
remember the time of the Apostles Nouiceship under Christ: Consider Paul his
encou^tring with Peter, in a matter of no small wayght, which does testify,
that as the elect children of God did increase, by the use of the word in
knowledge, so they disagreed in opinion the one from the other: as each
abounded in understanding above other: yea, and if thou will enter further
into this matter, thou shall see the like from time to time: to weete between
the East and Weast Churches. Also about Anno. 200. between Irenaeus and Pope
Victor, and so forth on, the deeper thou drawest, thou find the more. And
all (though in love) for Religion. So that, partly because of such discord
between the religious and godly Bishops: and partly, for the variety of
Heretics calling themselves Christians: Blindness bredeth consent.
the Jews and Ethniques (as Clemens says) defamed Christian religion: saying
it was not of God. Which thing to be otherwise in any congregation, it
remaining the Church of God, were great marvel: for that the holy spirit of
God, ye very light and kindler of their hearts, the increaser of knowledge,
and mayntayner of prophesying, interpretation, and questioning upon the
Scripture, is not quenched, but kindled: and on the growing hand. Wherefore
Hosius in saying, that their Church agreed and was of one lip, does openly
confess, that to be in it, was not to be in Christ's Church, as before is
manifest. Popes Church no Church of Christ.
And so the consequent that must follow, is, that Christ's Church and theirs
are twain. The cause of which universal quietness in their Church, must be,
want of interpretation, that breeds argument, which comes of the want of
knowledge: which proceeds of ye lack of the spirit of God, who is the very
light of our hearts. This only, the Israelites have in Gozan a corner of
Egypt: and walk, and stir up and down in the same. The whole country of
the Egyptians besides, for want of light, walk not, but sytte quietly in
their chaires, not without fear.

Popish consent.
Returning then, it is evident, what consent or concord Luther brake: namely,
their dreaming sleep, wherein the wealth of the world, and ignorance of God
lullied them, and not the concord of truth and knowledge of God. Wherefore
they are much to be blamed, that so arrogantely dare defame so worthy an
instrument of Gods glory, as to make him author of Heretics. And thou,
gentle reader (let me be bold to tell thee the plain truth) if that thou will
credit them, art not faultlesse: for that it is not matter, but affection,
that so subdueth thy reason. From which thou seuerest thy self the further,
the nearer that thou approchest to consent with them, who have not determined
among themselves to join in concord. And certainly if folly cause thee of
those dysagreing opinions, to fantasy any one, let the other contrary to it
call thee back. If the devise of the betrayer Euans, who says that lust is
the root of Heresy, like thee, let Hosius and Shacklock cause it mislike
thee, who say the contrary. If that railing M. Shacklocks root please thee,
let Euans and Hosius alter thee. Finallye, be not pleased in them: for that,
they are not pleased among themselves: as their sundry devises contrary to each
others, declare.

In Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 15. Cap. 1.
If not other, yet S. Augustine Bishop of Hippon, ought to be the Method
teacher to him, that will perfectly entreat of the Church malignante. Who
considering that ever since, that God by Adams creation, had manifested his
Church among earthly creatures, the Devil also (having no Church of his own
creation) did pervert so in the beginning Gods creature, as ever since,
thoroweout all ages, his Chapel has ietted cheek by cheek, and yet does
with the same: rayseth ye building of that Church at Cain, who was in the first
beginning of the world, and so proceeds on until this time. Wherefore, I
think it labor worth, that I (meaning to display ye heretical church in our
days) begin only at those, that in Christ's time, and afterward in the
Apostles, did first seek the overthrow of the Church. As at such whom the
Devil in that time first planted for root, even as Irenaeus and Tertullian
have done, upon the like Theme or matter. So that thou, having the root and
offspring of the old Heretics, may thereby, better know their posterity
in our days. In which deed I shall both avoid the vice Kakozelon. 1. evil
affection, that has led those men besides all judgment, to aim their force
at special persons, and deserve of thee (gentle Reader) thy further pacient
passage herein with credit: True Root of Heresy.
as also justly call them Heretics, that by proof shall be found to have
deserved the name: and agree, after a sort, with Hosius, who says that
Covetousness is the rote or cause of departing from the Church. Wherein, if I,
as satisfied should stay, thou might justly think, that I left out in
the raising of this site, one of the principalles, whereon the malignant
Church stays, who is built upon self love, which is direct contrary to
charity, whereon Christ's Church is set: and therefore is root or cause of
another effect or branch, namely Ambition, which is an inordinate desire of
honor undeserved, sought only, for a man's own sake, and not for Gods glory.
But because that Covetousness and Ambition, are rather by ymagination to be
understood of the learned, than by view of the simple (who are to be
satisfied) apperceyued, as especially, for the truth and modesty before spoken
of, I must in the root, for Ambition set Simon Magus: for Covetousness, Judas.

Judas what
Judas Iscariot, that traytoure, was son of one Simon, as S. John's Gospel
witnesses. But whether, he was called Iscariot, either of the tribe of
Isachar, or of the town, where he was borne, or else of the treason, it does
not well appear. And no less uncertain, is the truth, of his manner of
living, and condition, before his calling, An Apostle.
to the office of Apostleship, and number of the twelve. The which was, the
chiefest, and nearest office, among those that were with Christ: and were to be
accepted as his dear friends, daily taught and trained up under Christ's own
hand, in the knowledge of the true doctrine of the kingdom of God: and
heartened by the daily sight and use of our Sauiors miracles, to work the
like, by the power of his word: as well in the days of the same our Sauiors
presence and abode among them: as also after his departure from them, and
ascension to his father. The which company of the Apostles, is of more
estimation: because that the number is not only small, but also for that they
thereof, are chosen, and special persons. And as touching Judas him self
(being of that company as is said, one) his estimation was (by ye means of his
office) equal with theirs. And in regard of his stewardship (for he was
Treasurer of the Lords temporal things) I guess, Judas Christ's steward
he was among the vulgar people, yea, and of other, not of the less
estimation: as he that above the rest was credited with that, which the world
esteems chiefest of al, and for it, terms every man, Master. But
notwithstanding the estimation, that Judas, by the same his spiritual and
temporal charge had, he having by experience tried the trauayles and
paynefulnesse, of his spiritual office, to fall out much otherwise, than his
expectation of the earthly, sensual kingdom, that he and the Jews dreamed to
obtain, by the Messiah coming, was: Jews Alse opinion.
did (ita vt ingenium est omnium hominum a labor procliue ad libidinem) after
pain seek pleasure, after labor, loytering, and after righteousness,
riches. For casting his eyes to Christ's purse, was caught, and sought for
temporalties, by what means so ever he might: and spared not, as he
conveniently, might accomplish his desire, for price, to plight his Masters
blood, by a traiterous kiss, delivered his Lord. So that in him, Judas what
pattren.
is the image and pattern, of al those, that neglect, or give over the truth,
and sincerity of Jesus Christ's Gospel, for temporal gain: do they it in
part, or in all. For even as Judas, by betraying Christ for thirty Pens,
ouerthrewe the Church, striking the shephearde, brake the fold, and chased the
flock: even so, ever since our Sauiors time, have Heretics for the like
cause, dealte with the Church, after the same sort: like as Judas in his deed
toward Christ, did in him our head foreshew, what we ought to look for,
toward his members. The Church was then, and so since overthrown, by, Quid
vultis mihi dare, and trada^ illum vobis? What will you give me, and I will
deliver him to you? And he agrees with Simon, in that, they were both, Simo^
Magus Irenaeus li. 1. cap. 20.

Epiphanius li. 1. to. 2. c. 21


greedily given to gain: only differing from him, in that, Simon was stricken
with ambition of knowledge, and of doing miracles, whereby he thought to clime
to the reverence and honor of a God: the other contented with a temporal
dignity. What pattren Simon is.
And therefore Simon puffed up by science, is the example or form of such, as
challenge to themselves much learning: ambiciously coveting to be advanced
unto godly honor, arrogate the authority of yoking religion and superstition
together: framing one sect, more monstrous than all. For being borne in the
town (as Justinius says) called Triton, His cuntrie
or as Eusebius says, Gitton, in the countreye of Samaria, was seasoned with
that mad medley of his Nation, being a mixture of the Persians Ethnisme,
brought from Chus: and of the religion of the Jews proper people of Samaria,
(as Josephus declares) he growing in years, increased both in understanding,
and practicing al manner of Philosophy and Arts, subtle in Logique, and in
Rethorique mighty. Whereby he deserved the name of Magus. But at last by
means of Philip the Deacon, who by Saules persecution, was driven into
Samaria, Simon a false Christian.
he became a Christian, and was baptized, ye rather, for that the miracles
wrought by the same Philip, and the Apostles, Peter and John, enticed him
thereto, supposing the same to be done by Magique, as yet, by him not learned,
offered money for the spirit of grace: to the intent that he might maintain
thereby his name and estimation, which he before their coming had. For small
and great had him in much reverence, naming him the power of God which is
mighty. But when as he perceived that his decayed, and Jesus name began to be
renowned, and the Apostles, the workers and instruments of our Saviors glory,
began to be received. Also, that neither by grace he could obtain, Wicked
policy. Fruit of Ambition. Tertulli. de prescripti. Hereticoru^. Epiph. to.
2.1. lib. c. 21.
nor for price bye the same power of working miracles: paste all hope of
further thriuing there, practices policy, to apply the Evangelical doctrine
of our Lord Jesus Christ (wherein he was a Nouice) and of man's salvation, to his
purpose: but not without discretion. For he that before among the Samaritans
called himself God, now among the Jews calls himself the Son: and among
the Gentiles, the holy Spirit. With which device this Pilgrim passes
(daunted by Peter) thence: as out of danger of shot to Rome, where in short
time he attained, Irenaeus vt supra.
if not to more, yet to as much godly reverence, as he before had: to whom the
Religious Romans consecrated an Image with this inscription, Simoni Deo
sancto, Romish superstition.
to Simon the holy God. In all this ruff, it happened (as Nicephorus says)
that Peter came to Rome, where this Runagate settling himself to stand to his
tackle, Nicephor. lib. 2. c. 36.
determined to play the pretty man, gaged the field, and gave his glove to the
Apostle, contending by miracles and other his skill with him for godly honor
and reverence. And this is he that before all other, sought by Heresy, to
stayne the true religion of Jesus Christ, Nicephorus ibidem.
and justly, is to be placed in the root with Judas: as both destroyers of
the common wealth of the Church, peruerters of gods order, and breeders of the
wicked tree as Ireneus says: Ex eo omnes substiterunt Hereses, that all
Heresies are grounded on him. Thence comes Menander, thence comes
Valentine, Elimas, Offspring of Heretics.
Manes, Tatian, Donatus, Montanus, Pelagius, Marcion, Carpocrates, with the
rest in this Treatise to be spoken of, and an infinite number ouerpassed: some
holding Heresies of one man, some composed by many. This is the Bore, these
are the Foxes, that to their power destroy the Lords vineyarde, and make
havoc both of soil and souls. He is the root, these are stock and trunck
to the same. Before the days of their father the Sorcerer, the Church was a
people not of one lip, but heart, as S. Luke testifies, Act. 2.
abiding in the sincere truth and obedience of Christ's Gospel only* Then
factions were not known, scismes not practiced, lies and Heresies not
embraced, defended or out faced. Then the will of man not esteemed, and Gods
neglected. This unhappy man has begone all. This body of Heretics, has
continued the same hitherto.

But for as much, as the Church in those days, was stored with valiant
soldiers, in the vaward, and in the front, Victory of the old Fathers.
of every battle, that courageously did handle ye svvorde of truth, they
little prevailed. For as Peter against Simon, so Irenaeus, Clemens, Epiphanius,
Augustinus (every one in his time) against the rest, have left learned
Volumes, monumentes of their triumphs. The which thing, the subtle Serpent
apperceyuing, durst not afterward, openly assail the Church, with proclaimed
war: The subtlety of the Devil.
but transforming himself into an Angel of light, under color of devotion,
through hypocrisy entered the same. As Dame Artemisia Queen of Caria did
Latmu: who minding to get the same City (laid in embush) her army under the
covert, nigh thereto. She her self, accompanied with Maidens, Women and
Eunuchs, with all kind of minstrelsie (as Pipes, Tabers, Timbrels, and such
like) openly, in the face of the City, entered ye Wood dedicated to
Berecinthia, ye mother of the Goddess, Hypocrisy brings in heresies.
after the manner of religion, and devotion (than ye which there is no mean
more sure to deceive the ignorant and blind zeal) to sacrifice. Where with the
Latinians (desirous to see her new kind of serving the Goddess) deceived,
issued out. The fencelesse city and careless people, were by the lurking
army, taken. So that under countenance and cloak of religion, Artemisia
achieved the victory, which by all likelyhode, in open war, she might have
myssed. After the like manner, the enemy has behaved himself: For he did
set aside, the use of the old Heretics his, vowed soldiers, odible to
the Church through all ages, the bare names of whom, were a sufficient All
Arm for Christ's Knights, to take spear and shield in hand: The Popes Geldings.
and has under a Veil, a Coule, a Cardinals hat, and a triple Crown (as an
Artemisia and her rout) deceived ye world, and possessed their hearts and
consciences (which should be the seat and city of God) under the name of Gods
service and devotion, in deed, with Heresy. It sprang in Samaria, and flowed
into Palestine, but is at Rome, gathered together into one lake, more perilous
and noisome, than Asphaltis. Asphaltis is the noyso^ lake of Sodom.
With the streams whereof, al Christendom is infected.

But to speak of the stock, or body of this our tree, occasion requires: for
thou parhaps may muse, why I place Gratian with his brother Peter Lombard
there, they being so long, after Simon Magus his days. Forsooth, that thou may
know, that although the Church had gotten for a while, an honorable peace, and
valiant conqueste (as I before declared) yet notwithstanding, the Devil, that
never ceased to profane the Church of Christ, with Heresies, devising to
build his Babylon, in the Church, by hypocrisy, stirred these two persons,
brethren, to follow the manner of the old Heretics. Who always seeking, to
have a cloak for their folly, The property of Heretics to eschew the
written word
and manifest errors, used (for that they durst not stand, to ye fire of the
Canonical Scriptures) to have certain Apocrypha, or faythlesse writtes of
men's devise, to bolster and face out the same: the which they painted out with
certain glorious titles: as, To use false Scriptures.
the Gospel of the Hebrews, the Gospel of Eve, the Gospel of Philip, the
Gospel of Nicodemus, the Gospel of perfection, the Questions of our Lady, the
more and the less, the Revelation of Adam, the stock of our Lady, etc. Of
which sort Marcion his scholars, had an innumerable many. These they used to
set out, with such fair titles, not only to the end aforesaid, but also that
they might sequester the simple souls, from the certain sure and lively
word of God. Epiph. lib. 3. tom. 1. c. 46. Eusebius. histo. lib. 4. ca. 28. A
mark of Heretics.
For so also Tatian, not pleased with the four Canonical Evangelists,
composed out thereof his Diatesseron as a Quintessence of the same, whereby
they are surely convinced to be Heretics, that choose to defend their cause,
or edify themselves with any tradition or doctrine of men. For the true mark
of the Church, is the open and only use of the word, only whereunto they
have recourse in the time of need, for their own succor and trial of other.
But the Church of Rome, having gotten great possessions and wealth, as well by
the Donation of Constantine, (so claim they it for themselves) about Anno.
320. as of one Lucinia, Primo tomo Conciliorij. wealth wears out true religion.
a very rich damosel (as Polidorus notes) having long before that, begone to
pranke her self up in her ceremonies, which yet, were but as ragged cloutes:
then as richlier marted, did above all modesty and simpleness of the Gospel,
attire hirself with the vain pomp and outrageous preciousnesse of Jew and
Gentile, to whom she is not inferior. And being thus set a loft, forgetting
the bread and water of affliction, wherein her heart remained chaste and true
in love to Christ her spouse, followed the steps of Simon, of Judas and al
other Heretics: forsook the pains of the Cross, for pleasure of the world,
and honor of the same: and has thenceforth begone (for after pride follows
Leacherie) to make hirself common to the device of all men. The which chiefly
she accomplished, The Charters of Apostasy. Metr. Kra^t. lib. 4. c. 6.
when the charters thereof were drawn out by the same Gratian, a Monk of
Bononie, Anno. 1120. or thereabout, who collected the decrees of men (before
his days little or nothing esteemed) and Peter Lombarde his brother, who
devised the schole Divinity about.xx. years after. For when as ye youth
began whollye to study the decreed laws of Rome, Peter Lombard, moved with
themulation thereof, devised the schole Divinity: lest his brother should in
honor of that travail, over run him, whom in honor of birth he had
overtaken. Whose base progeny I willingly ouerpasse. But surely it seems,
that Peter Lombards travail was nothing so esteemed, as Gratians was: which
does most of all establish ye Pope, defend him, and make for his purpose. As a
thing wherein they are judged by themselves. And little Divinity would serve
them, yea, although it were very homely. The end of Popisp Divinity.
For surely if it were not for mayntenaunce of Purgatory, Auricular
confession, and such like other gear gaynfull to them, they would not only
have utterly condemned Lombarde, as in some points here after mentioned, they
already have, but also have utterly forgotten the name of Divinity. If the
successors of Lombarde had as severely followed him, as Gratians ympes did
their captain, their schole would have been cleaner from error, than it is,
even as now the Popes consistories abound with wickedness.

In the naming of Lombarde and Gratian, I hope (gentle Reader) thou art not so
gross, as to think that I mean their persons, but volumes and doctrines.
What the author means by decrees. Cardinalis Alexandr. distinct. 10. c.
Certum: Et Doctores ibidem.
And when I speak of the Decrees, which otherwise are called Cannons, I mean
a Law of so sovereign price to the Popistes, as that, that they count him an
Heretic, that knows not the same. And the breaker thereof (dicitur
blasphemare Spiritum sanctum) is said to blaspheme the holy Ghost. And under
the name of the Cannons, I comprise Decretall Epistles, Sextes, Clementines,
Extrauagantes, etc. and such like. The which Decretall Epistles, Did. 19. c.
in Canonicis.
are esteemed Canonical Scripture, although Christ and his Apostles never
spoke the same. But even as the stock or Trunck of the tree, continues and
coupleth the upper part and Root together: The commodity of Cannon Law.
likewise heresies of the old Heretics, are continued and taught in the
Church of Rome, by those two doctrines and glosses on the same, as in passage
through this book, thou shall in part apperceyue. If once it please God to
hew this stock away, the whole tree beside would decay and perish. If in
their Consistories they rule any case over, be it for life or death, for truth
or judgment, it must be (as they cry) the law, the law, which is only in
deed the Cannone law. If they persuade any man to come to their Church, they
deal as Cardinal Julian did with Procopius and the other Ambassadors of
Bohemia, persuading to give no less credit to the Councels and Decrees, than
to the Gospel. If they determine any thing in their Councils, it must be first
concluded on, by the Canonistes and Sententiaries: although this latter name
is almost worn away, and eaten out, with the Thomistes, Occamistes, and such
like. Wherefore since it is evident, that their Councels and Consistories are
only thus governed, and al men persuaded to credit man's law and order, and
not only Gods word and truth: since in their doings they fashion themselves to
the conformity of man's decrees: sith they obtrude and thrust into the
conscience of all men, reverence and religion of man's authority, and not of
Jesus Christ our only Prophet: that they follow the steps of the old
Heretics, and policy of the Devil in them: thereby to sequester the souls
of men from God (as is beforesayde) under the title of Councels and Fathers.
Undoubtedly (gentle Reader,) it differs not whether we have any of the
Apocrypha writings aforesaid, The Cannons and Heretic Apocrypha all one.
or in stead of them the Canons and Sentences of Lombarde. For as the common
saying is: In neither barrel is the better Herring. The Apocrypha writings
teach errors: the Canons and Sentences do so: as before this book end, thou
shalt confess. The Apocrypha serve to entice men from the only word of God:
the Canons and Sentences do so: For who has not in times past been counted an
Heretic, for reading of Scripture. The Apocrypha are contrary to their
selves, variable, foolish, and not to edification: the Canons and Sentences
are also such. And least I should seem a defamer, behold, I yield thee here
certain errors and contrarieties out of the Decrees or Canons.

Error.
Did. 13. Parag. 1. Gratian says, that if a man be set in the brakes of.ij.
euyls, he may choose, and do the lesser. By which doctrine Origene his fall is
allowed: who being commanded either to offer his body to the lust of a Verlet,
or else to burn incense before an Idol, did commit the latter, for avoiding
of the first: which were a doctrine more licentious, than any of the Cynicks.

Error.
QVest. 16. Paragr. 3. Potest etiam alter. Post. c. Dilectio. Gratian there
talking of prescription, says to this sense: That when a man does purchase a
chattell real, or any other goods, moveable or immovable, and at the time of
purchasing thereof, suppose ye same by lawful title conveyed to him, the which
notwithstanding afterward, he understands and believes to be otherwise: may,
for all that just information of his conscience, proceed forth on in his
possession and title, unto time prescriptible: which is a doctrine contrary to
all reason and conscience.

Error and Folly.
2. QVest. Sepe contingit. Where he says, that if theft be committed or done
in a monastery, the doer whereof is unknown: the purgation must be done in
this sort: that at Mass all must communicate under this obtestation: the body
of our Lord be this day in trial against thee. Oh abuse and tempting of God.
I could recite false allegation of Scripture: and horrible exposition of the
same. False fathering on the fathers. Which things I omit, until my next
labors. etc. because my purpose is to be only summarie and brief at this time.

Contrarieties.
Did. 4. C. Statuimus, cum duobus sequent. There Gratian entreating of Fast in
Lent, does say, that the clergy ought to begin the same, straight upon
Sexagesima, according to the ordinance of the Elders. Contrary thereto is the
Custom. And yet the Clergy is not said to sin, as appears in the same
Did. Paragr. vlt. Distinct. 23. c. In nomine. Nicholas the Pope ordained by
that Decree, that the Popes holiness, should be chosen not only by the
Cardinals, but also by other religious Clearkes. But contrary to it, the same
election is only done by the Cardinals: as appears Tit. de elect. per totum.
etc. Vbi periculu^ Did. 63. c. Obeuntibus. Pope Innocent did appoint in a
Council holden at Rome, that Bishops should be chosen, not only by the
Chanons of the mother church, but also by other religious Clearkes: but now
contrary to the same, the Popes reserve the provision of ye dignities: as of
Bishops, Archbyshops, Patriarchs, Abbots, and such like, to himself. The age
of persons that receive orders now a days in the Popes Church, although it be
done according to the will of the title, De aetate and qualitate ordinandorum
in Clement, yet is contrary to the.77. and.78. Did. Let this as touching the
Chanons, suffice, for briefness sake, which I in this behalf busily
endeavor. Is this the book that we must believe as the Gospel? Be these the
mates to Canonical Scriptures? Is not this to be repugned that repugneth it
self? Or is it to be esteemed or credited, Distinct. 19 c. Sic omnes
as if it were spoken of Peter's own mouth? As they for their selves crave
credit? Undoubtedly if Peter's sermons or epistles had been as various and
contrary, as Heretical, and hypocritical: as lewd and licentious, as the
contents of these Decrees manifestly are, the fathers would never have
received the same as Canonical, but reconed them among the Apocrypha. And yet
dare the Popistes presume to count them Canonical, and of as great force, as
the words of Peter. The change ling brother to the gospel
And these do they thrust into hearts and consciences of men, under the
glorious names of Church, Fathers Councels, Why Popistes fly to Cannons.
Peter, Paul, and spirit of God: only to the intent that they may throng in
after, and wring in with their errors, supersticions, and myssegouernement. To
this end has Gratian been occupied in their Church. To this end has before
him, the Heretics deuisers of the elder Apocrypha writings, ben of their
father the Devil used. Wherefore he is their Ape or son, that can so
handsomely imitate and follow them. Therefore I pray thee gentle Reader, let him
attain to equal honor with the rest of that preasse.

And as for Peter his brother, author of the four books of the sentences: and
therefore commonly called by the name of Master of Sentences, he has many
faults, as they themselves confess, and have condemned at Paris. To weete, in
his first book 4. In the second as many: and.3. in the third: but in the
fourth.15. Which in all make.26. What they are, I ouerpasse: because there is
none that is studious, but knows the same. And surely how bad so ever Peter
Lombarde his Divinity is (as it is bad enough in many places more) yet it is
much beter than the fruit of Gratians travail: for that it preaches
Justification in Jesus Christ, by faith and obedience to the Gospel. So that it
is no marvel, that in judgments and opinions of the Popistes among
themselves, in Councels general, in writings, volumes and schools, they are so
divided and at square: for those branches must brawle, that borne are upon
such a brawling body.

If M. Stapleton has reason or authority to say, that a Calfe signifies
Luther, I do (better) say that this monster in the scutchion of this tree does
signify Gratian and Lombardes works, persons, and Hell hound harmonte. Of
which monster before I do speak. In these four lines I answer Staphilus,
that his Calfe signified their Calves of Rome.

A Cowle for a Calfe.
The Calfe borne in cowle, it carried to his grave
Then Luther is no Calfe that cast the cowle away.
For the Calfe in the cowle must signify ever
Such Calfe and such cowle as go both together.
Peter Lombarde came to the pride of his estimation 20. years after his
brother Gratian: who (as before I said) was in his ruff Anno. 1120. The which
two twe^ties put together, make.1140. In the mean season, that these two men
thus flourished with their works, there happened to be borne in the Country of
Albania, Anno. 1126. of a base woman, this monster: the which is a man child,
and a dogs whelpe, wholly furnished with all their members growing together by
their backs, whose faces stand clean contrary ways. The application whereof
I will not stand now on, lest I should seem envious against the^, or vain in
preaching that to thee, which thou gentle Reader, being a child and scholar,
brought up in Natures schole, long since have learned, can confirm by
experience of the like, and by the case present apply. Therefore I pass from
this that thou art more perfect in, to the branches which thine expectation
and attentiveness do justly call for. Wherein regard two things: Heresies, of
their ancestors, the elder Heretics, and of their own proper devising.

Sacramentarie Donatistes.
Anno. 331.
THe Heresy of the Donatistes, has had two special maintayners and nourishers
of the same, called by the name of Donatus. Aug. lib. 2. con. Cresc. c. 1. tom.
7. August. de here. Hae. 69 to.6.
The latter, had to syrname A casis nigris: he was the most contentious and
sternest in this cause. For the first was a Numidian, as the same author
declares, who at the beginning moved this contention and scisme, in the Church
at Carthage, against Caecilianus, chosen, maugre his will, Bishop. But at the
last, this envious and ambitious quarrel, turned to an Heresy, (for commonly
such broils are not without part takings) and to diverse perilous sects and
phanatical factions: which among other lores (for they had not one only as
Augustine notes) taught.

De Baptis. contra Dona. li. 4. c. 20 De vnico Baptism. c. 14. contra Petill.
liter. li. 1. c. 1.2.3.
That a good Minister consecrateth and makes a good and profitable Sacrament,
and an evil Minister a naughty unholy Sacrament, and unprofitable to the
receyuer.

All which happened about the reigns (as Hierom notes) of Constant and
Constantine the Emperors, to weete, Anno Domini. 331. or there about: some say
after.

I mean not, that it so then began, as that now it should be ended. For that
devotion, which has always received the erroures of every age, with other
filthiness also drunk the same: or else how could Babylon be a cage of
foul spirits? Apoca. 18.
And does expressly teach it, to those that will view and mark their
doctrine, if but lightly. For Gratian testifies in the Decrees that Pope
Gregory has written to all Churches in the kingdom of Italy and Dutche
land, Popish Donatisme. Did. 81. c. Si qui presbiteri.
on this wise. Si qui Presbyteri sunt Diaconi vel Subdiaconi, qui in crimine
fornicationis iaceant, Interdicimus eis, ex part Dei omnipotentis, and sancti
Petri authoritate, Ecclesiae introitu^, vsque dum peniteant and emendent. Si
vero in peccato suo perseuerare maluerint: nullus vestrum eorum praesumat
audire officiu^: quia benedictio eorum vertetur in maledictionem: and oration in
peccatum. etc. The which to interpret, means thus.

If any Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon, does rest in fornication, we on the
behalf of almighty God, and by the authority of Saint Peter, forbid such the
entrance into the Church, until they repent and amend. But if co^trarywise
they had rather abide in this their sin, then, look that none of you presume
to hear any such man's service: for their blessing will turn to a curse, and
their prayer to sin. etc. In which words it is evident, how plainly they
conclude with their predecessors Donatistes, persuading as the other
Donatistes do, that prayers, service, sacraments, yea and blessings, which in
their own nature be otherwise good, for want of a good Minister, leese not
only their effect, but also are hurtful to the receyuer.

The reason why this doctrine of the Donatistes, is of the old fathers
condemned for an heresy is (to let other pass) Quia spem baptiza^dorum
auferunt a Domino Deo, and in homine ponendam esse persuadent. Augustinus
contra liter. Petilian. lib. 1. c. 3.
Vnde fit omnino, vt non incerta, sed prorsus nulla sit salus. That is: Because
they take away the hope of such as are baptized, from the Lord God: and
persuade to bestow the same upon man. Whereof it comes, that not only our
salvation is uncertain, but also none at all.

Epistola. 48.
And again Augustine in another place says, Quid enim aliud and vos, quam
vestram iusticiam vultis constituere, quando non dicitis iustificari, nisi eos
qui a vobis potuerunt baptizari. Which interpreted, means: And what else do
you (O Donatists) but advance your own righteousness: when as you say, none
are (that is) profited by the sacrament.
justified, but such as have been baptized of you. The old Donatistes
therefore, whiles they brag themselves, to be only the Church, and therefore
holier than the rest (for that was the only cause, why they said, the
sacraments were better with them) advance themselves, and saying that the
sacrament works with them because they are of the Church, and not with those
ye are out of the Church, take from God the faith due to him, and by the
Sacrament ought to be applied to him, are therefore Heretics. And the
Popistes consequently, doing the like, are also such.

Objection.
But they always ready (as Cain) to pourge themselves, will happly say, the
Donatistes were worthyly condemned for heretics, in having such opinion of
their Sacraments, not being of the Church.

Answer.
Grant we (for arguments sake) that the Popists are of the Church, yet, in
that, that they think, the sacraments are the holier, because that they of
the Church ministered them, they depart from Christ's Church, and are
Donatistes. For it is all one, whether a Catholic or a Donatist say, they
make an effectual Sacrament, for that, that they are of the Church. And such
saying is clean contrary to the nature and institution of a Sacrament, which
is always holy, and is therefore a mean or medicine to make us holy: as
baptism in opening the Church to us, and the Lords supper, in applying Christ
to us by faith. Distin. 32. c. Praeter hoc. Parag. Ad hoc.
Wherefore I marvel the Romanists would say, as Gregory in the aforesaid
Chapter has said: considering they all conclude, it makes the receyuer holy,
and especially Cardinalis Alexandrinus says, that baptism so justifies a
man, that if he died immediately thereupon, he shall be quite from all
punishment. It is therefore against the truth and natural reason, that the
thing of such force, should so by the evil Minister, sometime his subject,
or pacient be marred. Yea and it differs not to say, that an Heretic
defiles the Sacrament, and makes it hurtful: or that malus Catholicus (I use
the words of D. Bellam.) a naughty and evil Catholic does even so: for both
conclude that the holy institution ordained to a wholesome end, is become
unwholesome, yea, hurtful, which is the Gospel of the Donatists their
predecessors. I pray thee gentle Reader, Nota.
understand my meaning. I entreat of the sacraments which Heretics or
naughty Christians minister in the form of ye Church, and sacramental manner
of Christ's institution. For if they that are without, (whose Church always is
the Ape of Christ's spouse, co^unterfaicting her, as a light person does an
honest matrone) minister not according to that institution and sacramental
form, it is not to be called a Sacrament. But I reason with the clergy of
Rome, as Augustine does with the Donatists clergy: And that only so far as
their church retains Christ's institution and sacramental form, and no
further (for otherwise I were in another predicament) which since I may not
depart fro. I leave to entreat of their Sacraments, until a place more fit
and meet therefore.

Distinc. 32.
Some possible will think to stop a gappe with the Decree of Alexander,
(Gratian says the second) praeter hoc autem praecipiendo. Popes brawle.
etc. and set him against Gregory in the aforesaid Chapter. But Gregory is
too well aided, for he has Pope Leo in the Chapter Manifestum. Pope Martine in
the Chapter Non liceat: 1. Quest. 1. Ibidem.
and many other Canones. I marvel with what spirit these Popes speak, that
thus jar. Is this the Harmony? Surely if either I were of mind or purpose to
prick their Music out, thou would think it were a black chauntes, or a
concord of Devils. But yt their sentence, opinion, and agreement with the
Donatistes, Did. 32. c. Preter hoc. Par. ad hoc.
may out of this barking better appear, mark what Cardinalis Alexandrinus
recounteth of D. Bellem, who serving in place of a bad minstrell, after much
and long tempring and tuning, plays this bad brawle. Concord of the various
Canons.
If the question be asked (says he) touching the minister of the Sacrament,
then must you mark two kinds of them: namely, he is either an Heretic, or
else a naughty Catholic, that makes and consecrateth the same. Then such
persons have no effect of the Sacrament as touching themselves: for as the
Heretic wants the same, so in like manner the naughty Catholic, (be he
tolerated by the Church or not) has no effect thereof so long as he is in
deadly sin: as al such offenders intermedling with holy things are. But if
the question be asked, for the behalf of the receyuer, then thus destinguishe
the same. Either he receives the Sacrament of an Heretic, Scismatique, or
naughty Catholic. If of the hand of an Heretic, then answer that it is
done either knovvingly, or ignorantly. If ignorantly, then, because he was
probably ignorant, that the minister was an Heretic, he does enjoy the
virtue of the Sacrament by faith. If he receue the same of an Heretic
vvittingly, in the time of necessity, because there is no other, and peril of
death is at hand, then the Sacrament of Baptism can only be received of him:
and he ministers both Sacrament and effect. And so must the aforesaid
chapter of Alexand. Praeter hoc, be understood in the end. But if there be no
necessity, then no Sacrament must be received of him. For who so receives,
sins, and has no avail nor effect thereof. If the question be asked of a
Scismatique or naughty Catholic, the^ answer according to the distinction
abouesayd. etc. Here, thou may gather the sum of the doctrine and mind of
the old Canons, as touching this their error. Wherefore none can deny, but
the Popes clergy agrees with the Donatistes, as this harmony of Bellamere,
declares. Then, as the old Donatistes, devising that the Sacrament did
depend on the soundenesse and holiness of the minister, do thereby conclude,
that he was the root of the grace (I allude to their ignorance) therein given:
So also the Popes clergy, in teaching those to be boyde of the effect of the
Sacrament, that receive the same of the hand of him that is known to be
naught, or an Heretic, do the like. Against the which, and also that
doctrine, which says the effect of the Sacrament of Baptism is received of
the Heretic or naughty man, which is unknown, because faith then in
ignorance works deserte, hear Augustine. Contra. lit. Petiliani. li. 1. c. 1.
Ait enim (Petilianus) conscientia namque dantis attenditur, qui abluat
accipie^tis. Quid si lateat dantis co^scientia, and fortasse maculosa sit?
Augustine against the Popistes.
quomodo poterit accipientis abluere conscientiam? Si quemadmodum dicit
conscientia dantis attenditur, qui abluat accipientis? Si enim dixerit ad
accipie^tem non pertinere, quicquid mali latuerit in conscientia dantis, ad hoc
fortasse valebit illa ignorantia, vt de conscientia baptizatoris sui non possit
nesciens maculari. Sufficiat ergo vt alterius co^scientia maculosa cum
ignoratur, non maculat, nunquid etiam abluere potest? Ibidem. c. 2.
Vnde igitur abluendus est qui accipit Baptismum, cum dantis polluta
conscientia est, and hoc ille qui accepturus est ignoret, praesertim cum addat
and dicat. Nam qui fidem a perfido sumpserit, non fidem percipit sed reatum.
Ecce slat perfidus baptizaturus, at ille qui baptizandus est, perfidiam eius
ignorant, quid eum accepturum esse arbitraris, vtrum fidem, an reatum? si
dixeris fidem, concedes posse fieri, vt a perfide fidem quisque percipit, non
reatu^, and falsum erit illud quod dictum est: qui fidem a perfido sumpserit,
non fide^ recipit sed reatum. Inuenimus enim fieri posse, vt etiam a perfido,
fidem quis accipiat, si perfidiam dantis ignorant. Non enim ait: qui fidem a
perfido manifesto vel cognito sumpserit, sed qui fidem inquit a perfido
sumpserit, non fidem percipit sed reatum, quod vtique falsum est, quando quis a
latente perfido baptizatur. Si autem dixerit, etiam cum baptizator perfidus
latet, non ab eo fidem percipit, sed reatum: rebaptizent ergo illos, quos ab eo
baptizatos esse constiterit, qui diu apud ipsos cum scaelerati latuerint,
Ibidem. c. 3.
and postea proditi conuictique damnati sunt. Eo quippe tempore quo latebant,
quoscunque baptizauerunt, non eis potuerunt fidem tradere, sed reatum, si
quisquis fidem a perfido sumpserit, non fidem percipit sed reatum, ergo
baptizentur a bonis, vt possint fidem percipere non reatum. etc.

So says Bellem.
The sense whereof is. For regard is had (says Petilian) to the conscience of
ye minister, that must purge or make clean the receyuers. But what if the
conscience of the minister be secret, and yet perhaps vnpure, how can he wash
clean the receyuers conscience? It being (as Petilian says) the conscience of
the minister that must purge the receyuers, is to be regarded. So says Bellem.
But if he will say, that the evil what so ever is hid in the minister his
conscience, touches not the receiver: then perchance to this, is that
ignorance auayleable, that thereby such an ignorant person cannot be defiled
by the baptizers evil conscience. May it therefore only suffice, that the
defiled conscience, when it is unknown, stayneth not, or does it not also
cleanse? Whence is he to be cleansed that receives Baptism, when as the
ministers conscience is vnpure? And it is unknown to the receyuer, the rather,
So concludes Bellem
for that Petilian adds and says: For he that receives Baptism at a
dysloyall hand, receives not the Sacrament, but hurt. Put the case. Here
stands a naughty person, ready to baptize: but he that is ready to be
baptized, knows not the same, what iudgeste thou he shall receive at that
ministers hand? the sacraments effect, or judgment? If thou do say that he
receives the sacrament, then is it granted a man may receive it, and no
evil, of a naughty minister: and so shall that be false, which is said: For
he that receives Baptism at a dysloyall hand, receives not the Sacrament
but hurt. Against Bellem. So says Bellem.
We have found forsooth (says Augustine) that it is possible for a man to
receive the effect of the Sacrament at a naughty man's hand, so that he be
probably ignorant thereof: for Petilian says not, he that receives the
Sacrament of an open and manifest naughty person, but simply, he says, he
that receives the Sacrament of a naughty man, receives not the effect, but
hurt. Which must algates be false, when the naughtiness of the minister is
not known. But if he will say, that when the baptizers naughtiness is
unknown, he the^ also receives not the Sacrament, but hurt: then let them
baptize those again, which were baptized of the naughty minister, whose
secret naughtynesse at last brake out, and was thereof conuicte and
condemned. For in that time, in the which their naughtynesse was secret, they
could baptize none, because they were naught, though secret, (if it be true,
that he which is baptized of the naughty, receives not the Sacrament but
hurt) therefore let them be now baptized of such as are good, that they may
receive the Sacrament, and no hurt.

Hitherto Augustine against the Donatistes: who does therein so plainly reason
against Pope Gregory, Alexand. the other Popish Canons, and D. Bellem, that
they are condemned by his judgment, for Heretics. And that the more manifest
of the twain. For whereas the Popistes will teach when the holy minister does
make an holy sacrament, or the contrary, they will seem to do it, not as
Donatistes: and yet they do it more plainly than they, so that the proverb is
true in them: Sorex perit suo strepitu: the Rat is bewrayed by his own noise.
In that they by Bellams distinction grant, that which Augustine is feign by
drifte and pursuit of argument, to drive the elder Donatistes unto. For upon
their general proposition, their field was so large, that they might
distinguish and limite as they list. But Augustine chaseth them so hard to the
wall, that they are berefte of that scope. For in these his former words, he
drives this issue, that they must grant either none to be baptized within
their Church, or else that such as are baptized of ye secret naughty minister,
The Popists manifest Donatistes. They grant thumaior.
are notwithstanding his naughtiness baptized, and have the effect of the
sacrament, not hindered thereby. Thus in sum, he proves their reason false, and
opinion heresy. No naughty person ca^ minister ye sacrament wc effect: But
every minister is a naughty person, Ergo no minister can give ye sacrament with
effect. Then must both these Donatists save their cause, by distinguishing
their quid dity, of an open naughty man, and secret naughty man: ye which the
Popists do to Aug. hand, and therefore are more manifest. Then he replyeth
thus. But every secret naughty minister, can minister the sacrament and
effect, though he be naught (for secretnesse purges no man's conscience) ergo,
a naughty Priest may minister the sacrament and the effect, by your own saying.
The Canonistes boxed at August. hand.
Thus the Canonists receive the foil, and are at Aug. hands boxed together
with the elder heretic Donatistes: for he proves, yt the sacrament and the
effect thereof works, caused by God, and not by the minister. That the which
doctrine of Augustine may stand assisted by another, hear the testimony of
Optatus Mileuit. Episcop. who flourished as Hierom says, Hierome. in Catalog.
in the reigns of Valentinian and Valent. which was about the year of
grace.368. who was also in that time an earneste enemy to Parmenian, an
Archdonatist, as his.6. books declare. In which works (talking of the effects
of baptism) he says: Mileuitan. lib. 5.
Has res vnicuique, non eiusdem rei operarius, sed credentis fides and Trinitas
praestat: that is, the which things (to weete, the effects of Baptism) are
done therein, by the holy Trinity, and the faith of the receyuer, and not by
the minister of the Sacrament. S. Chrysostom is not here to be omitted, whose
authority and judgment also shall overthrow these Donatistes, and drive
back the judgment of the forsayde reverend Fathers: who answers as it were
to a secret objection of the people of Constantinople, made as touching such as
were baptized, Homelia de regressu ex Asia.
in ye time of the disordred estate of their church, during his exile in Asia,
in this manner. Sed multi inquiunt, te absente baptizati sunt: and quid tum?
Nihil minus habet gratia, non claudicat donum Dei, praesente me baptizati non
sunt: sed praesente Christo baptizati sunt. Nu^quid homo est qui baptizat? Homo
dexteram porrigit, sed Deus dexteram gubernat. Noli de gratia dubitare
charissime, quia donum Dei est. Atte^de diligenter quae dicuntur. Si forte
aliqua causa sacra explica^da est. Cum obtuleris preces and subscripta^
acceperis sacra^, non requiris quali calamo subscripserit rex, neque in quali
charta, neque quali quoue attramento, sed vnum solummodo quaeris, si rex
subscripserit. Sic in Baptismo: charta conscientia est, calamus lingua
sacerdotis, manus gratia est spiritus sancti. etc. that is: But say they, many
have been baptized since thy departure. And what then? the grace is not
diminished: the gift of God is not maimed, they are baptized, not in my
presence, but in the presence of Christ: is it man that baptizeth? The man in
deed reaches out his hand, but God governs the same. Doubt not dearly
beloved of the grace, for it is the gift of God. Mark what is spoken. If
perhaps any holy Scripture is expounded. When thou shall offer thy supplication
to the Prince, and receiuest it again subscribed: thou ask not, with what
pen the Prince subscribed the same, neither in what parchimente, nor do
thou also enquire of the yncke: but this thou only demaundest, whether ye
Prince has subscribed or not. So is it likewise in Baptism: the conscience is
the paper, the ministers tongue is the pen, the grace of the holy Ghost, is the
Princes hand. These fathers also have on their sides the sacred Scriptures, to
prove God only to be ye worker of the effect in all means used, both for
planting and increasing of the Church, be it either in dyspensation of word or
sacraments. As Paul says to the Corinthians: Ego plantaui, Apollo rigauit.
etc. 1. Cor. 3.
I Paul have planted, Apollo has watered, but God does give the increase:
neither is he then any thing that planteth, neither he that waters, but God
that gives the increase, he that planteth, and he that waters is all one.
etc. Where now is their truth, where is their brag of the perfect faith, and
boast of their holy Church, yt erreth never. If Augustine be of the true
Church, the Popistes are Apostataes. If Optatus and Chrisostom be true
teachers, then they are Heretics: if ye scriptures are true, then are these
Popists false. Yea where is also their harmony, their feigned agreement and
concord? Is it that the Canons of Alexand. Leo, Gregory and Martine their
Popes, thus brawle and disagre not only each with other, but also with the
truth? For if they agree, it is as Donatists. If they teach any thing in this
behalf, it is as the Donatists. Yea if they know their root, it must be of the
Donatists. Biel lib. 4. did. 5. con. 2. and ibidem.
Neither can it prevail, for the purgation of their Church to bring Biell,
Beatus Thomas, Duraud, Richardus, Scotus, and P. de Palu. of opinion, contrary
to the Canonists and other of their Divines, Peter Lomb a Donatist.
whom Biell alleges in.4. li. No not though they brought the whole
University of Paris, condemning Peter Lombard for an Heretic, being of
opinion with Bellem, Lomba. lib. 4. Did. 13. Sic illi vero. C
and Cardinal Alexandrinus, writing thus. Illi vero qui excommunicati sunt,
vel de Haeresi manifest notati, non videntur hoc Sacramentum posse conficere,
licet Sacerdotes sint. etc. That is: but it seems that such as are
excommunicated, or manifestly noted of Heresy, can not consecrate this
sacrament (that is the Euchariste) yea, although they are Priests. etc. For
that will make rather to their open shame, since those Divines and Canonistes,
thus standing in the heresy of the Donatists, been Papists (not Protestants)
birds of their own nestes.

Wherefore they must first prove (if they will purge them selves of Heresy and
discord) that they agree with the Scriptures and fathers, and also among
themselves in the truth, or else must they deny their Doctors: that is, that
Peter Lombarde is none of their Church, that Bellem. is none of their Church,
that Cardinalis Alexandrinus is none of their Church, that the Popes Leo,
Gregory, and Martine were not possessoures of Peter's perfect chair: or at the
least accuse Gratian for falselye fathering the Decrees on them: which if they
them selves do, who shall afterward credit the same? not I.

Matrimony Tatians.
Anno. 175.177. in Catalog.
IN the time of the raygnes of the Emperors Marcus Antonius verus and L. Au.
Commodus (as Hierome says) ruffled one Tatian, a Sirian borne. Eusebius says
in the.xij. year of the raygne of the same Antonius Verus, which was about the
year of our Lord.175. Some other write that it was in the.14.02.15. year of
the same Emperors reign, which is of the year of our Lord.177. or there
aboutes. This man being first a professor of Rhetorique, gained thereby no
small glory. Euse. eccles. historia. li. 4 cap. 28.
The acquaintance of Iustine the martyr (whose scholar in Christian
Philosophy it seems he was) stood him in good stead. For so long as he
lived, he flourished in Christ's Church, as a sound Christian: But after his
death, of a membre of Christ, he became a rotten branch and an Apostatate. So
that we may say of him, though in this world he suruiued Iustine, yet that he
lived and died with him. For immediately upon his death, puffed up with pride of
his eloquence, he broke credit with the Church, and became an Archeheretique
and father of the sect called Encratiton, that is Abstayners, a poison,
Irenaeus says, Li. 1. c. 30.31.
drawn partly from the Valentinians, partly from the Gnostiques, partly from
the Martionistes.

The Heresy of the Encratistes, after the death of their first founder
Tatianus, In Catalog. In eccl. hist. li. 4. c. penu.
was by one Seuerus well settled and so furthered, that after him also, they
are called as Hierom says, Seueriani. A part of the Heresy was this, as
Eusebius recounteth out of Irenaeus. Vitandas nuptias praedicarunt, The
doctrine.
antiquam Dei formationem reprobantes, and sensim eum repraehendentes, qui
maris and foemellae generationem fecit. that is, They taught the shunning or
eschewing of marriages, dysalowing Gods ancient fashioning of man, and priuyly
therein rebuking him, that appointed the generation of man and woman. Augustine
adds: Hares. 25.
Nec recipient in suorum numerum, comugio vtentem, sieve marem, sieve foemina^.
They admitted none to be of their number, that used marriage, be he man or
woman. Nuptias damnant, and omnino eas pares fornicationibus, aliisque
corruptionibus faciunt: For they slander Marriage: making it equal with
fornication and other fylthynesse. In Galat. li. 3. cap. 6.
Hierome notes, that to confirm this their doctrine ( Omnem coniunctionem
maris and foeminae immundam esse. All copulation of man and woman unclean)
they used to allege these words out of Paul: He that sows in the flesh,
shall thereof reap corruption.

The sum of Tatian.
This doctrine of Tatiane (which in effect is, that they are cleaner, holier,
and perfecter, that abstain from marriage, than the rest that use the same,
and therefore commend the vowed and single life, above the natural couplement,
teaching as I noted out of Hierome, Omnem maris and foeminae coniunctionem
immundam esse. That al copulation of man and woman is unclean,) is by the
Church of Christ, for two special causes that follow and depend of the same
doctrine, The reasons why it is an Heresy.
condemned. First, for that they that so blame and discommend that holy
institution of Matrimony, which God alone has ordained and commanded in
Paradise before man's fall, and Christ has in Cana of Galile honored with his
first miracle and presence, do set God to schole, Sensim cum repraehendentes
qui maris. etc. Secretly finding fault with him, that appointed the copulation
of man and woman.

Secondly, because they make God not the author thereof, but the Devil: which
they do plainly but on this wise. Whatsoever God commands, yea if it be to
kill man, woman and child: yea if to rob the Egyptians of their proper
goods, yet he that perfourmeth his will and order, does not sin or commit
uncleanness, but works virtue and holiness, for that our virtue and
holiness consists in obeying of him: and whatsoever we do contrary or
besides, is no virtue. But sith they say to marry, and man and woman therein to
join, is to commit uncleanness: which if it were vnpure in nature, yet, for
that God has instituted the same, it is then sanctified: therefore the fathers
conclude, that the Tatianists deny God (whose will can not be unclean) to be
the author thereof, and say it is of the Devil, who is the root of all
impurenesse. For Clemens Alexandrinus takes it so: who aunswering to a part
of Tatians work entitled, Clemens. 3. Stromat.
De perfectione secundum seruatorem writes thus: Nam cum rursus permisit simul
conuenire propter Satanam and intemperantiam, pronunciat eum qui pariturus
erit, seruiturum duobus Dominis: per consensum quidem Deo, per dissentionem
autem intemperantiae, and fornicationi, and Diabolo: For when he (that is
Paul) licenceth man and woman after separation for Prayer, eftsoon to meet
together, for fear of Satan and incontine^cie, he therein declares, that
they which shall so obey his doctrine and counsel, shall serve two masters.
By their consent, in the same separation and continence, God: and by the
breaking of that consent, Ibidem.
intemperance and the Devil. Thus far Tatian. To the which Clemens. Haec autem
dicit Apostolu^ exponens, sophistice autem eludit veritatem, per verum falsu^
confirmans: intemperantiam enim and fornicationem diabolica vitia, and
affectione^ quoque nos confitemur. These things Tatian writes, expounding the
Apostle: but he does subtilely scoff the truth, and confirms by a lie, that
which is sound. For we grant that intemperaunce and fornication are
Diabolical vices, and naughty affections. etc. In this discourse of Clement
and Tatian, it is evident, that the fathers, when they say that Tatian teaches
that matrimony is of the Devil, mean it, because he says, that therein
incontinency and fornication is commanded: which are the will of the Devil,
for else I think Clemens, having so good occasion against him, would have
reasoned more strictely, as touching these words: per dissentionem autem,
inte^perantiae and fornicationi and Diabolo. etc. By breaking their consent of
continency, they serve intemperance, fornication and the Devil. For he had
therein great occasion to note, that they thereby obey God, and not the Devil,
and that therefore matrimony differs from fornication, which is the
institution of the Devil.

The Popists doctrine.
It ensues now to consider, whether the Popish Donatists are infected also
with this heresy of Tatian, or no: which I will briefly (in one word as it
were) declare. The Popes angelical doctor, if the additions in the supplement
of his third part be gathered out of his own works (as it is noted) Thomas
Aquinas, canonized (for his good demerites) a Saint, teaches: that Matrimony
is unclean, and that for the vnpurenesse thereof, the minister in holy orders,
ought by abstayning from a wife, to keep him holy and clean. These are his
words. In add. 3. partem. q. 53. ar. 3.
Sacer ordo de sui ratione, habet ex quadam congrue^tia, quod matrimonium
impedire debeat: quia in sacris ordinibus constituti, sacra vasa and sacramenta
tractant. Et ideo decens est, vt munditiem corporalem per continentiam seruent.
etc. that is: There is in holy orders, that of their special nature and
requisitenesse thereunto due, ought to hinder and forbid matrimony: because
that they which been in the same orders, do handle the consecrated vessels and
holy Sacraments. And it is therefore behoueable, that they should keep bodyly
cleanelinesse, through a single life, and abstayning from marriage. etc. Much
after the same sort Pope Innocent says. Distinct. 82. c. Proposuisti.
Neque eos ad sacra officia fas sit admitti, qui exercent etiam cum vxore
carnale consortium: quia scriptum est: Sancti estote, quoniam ego sanctus sum,
dicit Dominus Deus vester. Nor let it be lawful for them to be admitted to
holy offices or roumes, which use carnal company with their wives: because it
is written: Be you holy, for I am holy, says your Lord God. In the which
doctrine it is evident, how Marriage is discommended and counted vnpure.
Wherefore their holy greaselings must not use the same, for polluting the
Sacraments and consecrated stuff. For he that says, that a married man may
not touch a Chalice, or such like consecrated stuff, as here Aquinas teaches,
means that it is not, because he is a man, but because he is coupled in
marriage, that defiles. Is not then Aquinas a Tatian, that says, Matrimony
defiles the man coupled therein, and the man the holy things? And secondly,
do not then the Thomists also, yt which Irenaeus says of Tatian, Vt supra.
Sensim reprehendentes eum. etc. They privily therein reprehende him, that
appointed the generation of man and woman: for he might have devised a more
holy way for generation? And do they not consequently conde^ning the same
for naught, or be it, that they do but disalowe it, appoynte it rather to the
Devil, who is properly and only the author of al naughtiness and
vncleanelinesse: than to God, from whom no such order can proceed?

But here the Popistes will obiecte, Objection.
that the old Tatians did condemn matrimony in all men: and they do but
dysalowe it in a certain sort. To answer of the which shift, (for it is no
reason) I will proceed thus. First proving that it is an heresy, Answer.
not to leave matrimony indifferent. Secondly, that they dysalowe it in all
men, 1. Timoth. 4.
and count it unholy. First of all mark, that the question is not, whether the
Popists are further over the shoes in this error than are the Tatians, but
whether they are in it at all. For although it be a more horrible error, to
discommende or forbid matrimony in all men: yet to do the like to a few or
special sort, is also an heresy, albeit it seems ye gentler. For those
seducers that Paul speaks of, who shall have their consciences marked with
an hot burning iron, 1. Timoth. 4.
and shall forbid to marry, are not said, that they shall forbid this sort, or
that sort, but simply forbid to marry: so that as therein Tatian the elder is
foretold, so likewise his babe young Tatian and that Church: for I dare say
they found no such doctrine in Luthers books. Let us mark the words more
deeply. Paul in ye third chapter gave Timothe instruction, of good bishops
and ministers duties: and in this fourth, he is bent especially in these
words, to paynt out, what naughty and ill ministers and teachers shall do, as
it were by Antithesis to give it more life: and wills among other things,
that he should assertaine the brethren, what intolerable burdens the
erroneous spirits in the latter days shall bring in, without care, love and
regard of the congregation, and weakness of the flock, and that in
hypocrisy. For as the nature always of Heretics stuffed with false hearts,
and heresy, is, seming holy in outward appearaunce, wolves in sheep
skins, so they themselves will not set their hands to any such burden.
Unto this sense does Origin upon the words of Christ fytly speak with the
said text of Paul: In Mathe. Hom. 24.
Repraehendit huiusmodi praeceptores, qui non solum quae docent, non faciunt,
sed etiam crudeliter and sine misericordia, and non secundum aestimationem
virium vniuscuiusque audie^tis, sed maiora, virtute ipsorum iniu^gunt. Vtpote
qui prohibent nubere, and ab eo quod expedit, ad immoderatam immunditiam
compellunt: that is, Christ reprehendeth such teachers which do not only, not
that which they teach, but do also cruellye and without compassion, not
according to due estimation of every of their auditors strength, enioigne
greter things, tha^ they are able to bear: as they which forbid to marry,
restrayning that which is expedient, compel men to immoderate uncleanness.
Thus far Origin: by whose words it may evidently appear, that it is a
doctrine contrary to the truth of the Scripture, an heavy burden and doctrine
of wicked spirits and tirannes to forbid marriage, or restrain it, not only in
all men, but in any man that can not abstain. When as certain in the general
council at Nice, which began Anno. 315. would have marriage forbidden to the
clergy men alone, as unclean: then Paphnutius (as Sozo. li. 1. cap. 23.
says) start up saying, Concubitium cum propria vxore castitatem esse. that it
is chastity for a man to accompany with his own wife: whereunto the whole
counsel agreed. Eaque in re nihil statuit, sed eam in vniuscuiusque arbitrium,
no^ necessitatem reiecit. And determined nothing thereof, but left it
indifferent to every man's own will. S. Paul also leaves it free and
restrayneth no man there from: only he says to the woman, quae nubat, in
Domino nubat she that marries, let her marry in the Lord. Wherefore the true
doctrine is, to let matrimony remain in all men indifferently, that those that
will, may marry, even of the clergy. And so it should seem it was practiced.
As in.56. Distinct. c. Osius. There is.7. Popes rehearsed that were Deacons,
Priests, and Subdeacons sons. etc. Therefore the first point is plain,
Marriage must be free
that matrimony is to be left indifferent. And that it is doctrine (as
beforesayd) of erroneous spirits, to restrain the same in any wise.

This notwithstanding, all the Popes kingdom, that is his clergy, (for they
are his proper and immediate subjects) as the Monks, Chanons, Nuns, with all
seculare Priests and Regularies, could not be to their orders and rules
admitted, unless matrimony contracted and now and then solemnized, were
broken and also forbidden and restrained, as in libr. 6. c. quod votum: and in
the Decretalls de conuers. coniug. per totum, may appear. Of these the very
Church and kingdom of the Pope, immediately consisted. So yt all men whom he
could pervert with his error, were only admitted to his immediate
jurisdiction. And yet though this cursed Cowes horns were so short, that he
could not sequester all men, but only those shauelings, from matrimony, is
he therefore of any better mind, yea holier or sounder, than Tatian was, who
admitted none to his special sort, but such as would not marry? Pardie his
will was so. For if a married man was chosen a bishop, he must put away his
wife, swear continency, and his wife must become a Nun, though she were his
first wife. I would ask this question: whether they counted them not the
holier that vowed chastity and abstayned matrimony. Aquinas says yea, Then
whether they wished not, yea and taught all men to pursue the same holy estate
as best: which if they did, then they condemned matrimony. But if it was not
such a thing, that they wished all men to embrace, as an estate holier than
matrimony, they then deceived those that embraced the same, above al other
conditions and estates of calling and life, for the best. Of whom there is no
small number, as in the Chapter of Psallians hereafter shall appear. But it is
most evident, that they so did, seeing they prayed that al men might lead that
single life: as their Collect, on the day of the Nativity of S. Mary the
Virgin (wherein they make mention also of S. Edith) declares: They plucked
therein the congregation forward, Legend. 135.
to imitate our Ladies sole life. Also their Legenda called Lombardica in the
Legend of S. Mathevve, brings in Matthew extolling Ephigenia her single life
above Matrimony. A notable lie. And in the Legende Omnium Sanctorum. Besides
that they extol Virginity, with four principal commendations, they with the
fifth beat matrimony flatly down. Thus, Primo sunt sponsae Christi. Secundo,
comparantur Angelis. Tertio, Legend. 158.
illustriores sunt fidelibus vniuersis. Quarto, multis gaudent priuilegiis.
Quinto, praeferuntur coniugatis. That is. First, the abstayners from marriage
are the spouses of Christ. Secondly, they are compared to Angels. Thirdly, they
are more excellent than all other of the faithful. Fourthly, they enjoy many
privileges. Fifthly, they are preferred above the married persons. Mark in these
words, whether matrimony and those that live in that state, be not blamed,
reprehended and condemned as vnpure, or at the least less holy. To the first.
The first point is, that they that abstain from marriage, are Christ's
spouses: the which (if it so be) it must be because they are not married. Then
must one of these two points follow, that they that are married, are either
no spouses of Christ, or not so fully coupled to Christ, as the abstayners are.
Wherein matrimony is both condemned and abhorred. To the second.
The second is, if they that abstain are compared unto Angels, then it must
follow, that matrimony is to be abhorred, because man thereby is abased. To the
third.
Thirdely, if the abstayners are more excellent than al other estates of the
faithful, then what profits it me to be a Christian, if I be not an
abstayner? Surely little or nothing: Whereunto I will say as Clemens
Alexandrinus says. 3. li. Stroma.
Quid vero, non etiam iusti veteres creaturam cum gratiarum action
participabant? Aliqui etiam liberos susciperunt cum continenter versati sunt in
matrimonio? Et Heliae quidem corui alimentum afferebant, panes and carnes.
Quinetiam Samuel Propheta armum quem exijs quae co^medebat reliquerat, allatum
dedit edendum Sauli. Hi autem qui se eos dicunt vitae institutis excellere, cum
illorum actionibus ne potuerunt quide^ conferri. That is: What I pray you, did
not the righteous elders use the Clemens has creaturam.
woman with thanks giving? and some of them after sacred and continent use of
matrimony, enjoyed children? And to married Helias the crows brought food,
bread and flesh. And did not that married Prophet Samuel give to Saul to eat
of a shoulder remaining of the former repast? But these marriage shunners, that
think themselves in that estate of their life to excel them, shall not be
equal ne able to be compared with their works. Fourthlye, if they, because
they are not married, To the fourth. Legend. 158.
shall have those special privileges (which be as the book says) They alone
shall sing the praises of God and the Lamb, in the world to come: They shall
have the self same apparel, that Christ has, What shall the married do?
and shall walk next unto the same Lamb. Do they not herein say, that
these abstayners shall be best accepted with Christ, chiefest in office, and
like to him arrayed: which all shall happen to them, because they are not married?
Is this to the encouragement of men to marry? Is this to the cohonesting
thereof? Is this to teach matrimony to be equally holy with abstayning, as
Paphnutius did? But hear their last point. Fifthly, the abstayners are
preferred before the married. To the fyft.
Why? because they abstain from marriage. Return we now with due
consideration of all these things, and then tell me, whether that matrimony is
not condemned and dysalowed in all men. Perhaps they will say, they do not
simply discommende marriage, but in regard and comparison of abstayning there
fro. Is not that to discommend marriage? for is not every thing rejected in the
comparison of another, condemned? Omnis co^paratio odiosa. Every comparison is
odious: which is understood as touching ye thing, yt is forsaken. Where then
is Paphnutius saying? and the general councels consent, to weete, It is
chastity to join in marriage.
concubitus cum propria vxore castitas est, as before is declared. Peradventure
they will say, that they do yet prefer it, before fornication and adultery.
What shall this their liberality mean (considering that Thomas Aquinas says
in ye place above mentioned, that ye married minister, is by marriage unclean:
and therefore polluteth the Sacraments and holy vessels) but that marriage, is
in regard of fornication, the less uncleanness: the which is as much to
say, as that it is lawful in the ordinance and institution of God. (as Tatian
says supra) Seruire intemperantiae and fornicationi, and Diabolo: To serve
intemperance, fornication, and the Devil. For if the acquaintance of man and
woman in marriage, is uncleanness, (as Aquinas and the places aforesaid
declare) then it must be all one with fornication: since the deed it self, and
agentis and patientis, and the effect that comes of it in matrimony, is all
one with that, which is in fornication. Wherefore it is most evident, that they
condemn Matrimony in all men: though they can restrain it but in a few. And
the only difference they make of matrimony and fornication, is, that in the
one it is lawful for a man to be unclean, and in the other not. Whereby they
extol continency, none otherwise than Tatian (for the condemning of
matrimony) does. As Epiphanius notes, Epi. li. 1. to. 3. Haer. 46.
Continentiam vero hic praedicat, Nuptias autem scortationem and corruptionem
putat: asserens nihil differ a scortatione, sed idem esse: that is: Tatian
extolleth abstayning from marriage, which he thinks to be whordom and
uncleanness: saying that it differs little therefro, yea to be the same.
But let us return to S. Thomas, who expressly teaches, that the Priest must
abstain from marriage, least he lose his cleanenesse and holiness by the
same. So as the Popistes can not deny, but that he is a Tatian, for that he
being facultatis Theologiae Doctor, does teach it not Scholastice, or
argumentatiue, but doctrinaliter in his conclusion. Wherefore without all
controversy S. Thomas must at the least be infected or enco^bred with the
Tatianistes heresy. If (as it may fortune) that they will say, he is not an
Heretic, as full simply the faculty of the Divines in Paris would save and
purge his credit, which by no means they shall justly do, since that of their
special Doctors holds opinion, that Woman is not the Image of God.

Diuorcing Montanistes.
THe time when as the Heresy of the Cataphrygians sprang, In An. 174 189.
is diversely written of among the authors. For where as Epiphanius says, it
began about the.19. year of Antonius Pius: contrary to that Eusebius says, it
rose in the eleauenth year of Marcus Antonius Verus, which is of ye year of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 174. Other say that it was in the seventh of Commodus,
which is of the same our Savior. 189. The cause and manner whereof, Eusebius
most plainly declares to be, on this wise. Eu. li. 5. c. 16
It is said yt in Mysia a city of Phrygia there is a streate called by the name
of Ardabau, in the which one Montanus, who but of late arrived at the christian
faith, in the time of ye Proco^sulship of Gratus in Asia, surprised with the
immoderate desire of government, gave him self open to the Devil, and being
distraught and mad, began to speak in trance of mind, as if it were under
color of Prophesying, against the ancient custom and tradition of succession
used in the Church. etc. The which Sectaries of their first author Montanus,
are called Montanistes, (or if thou had rather) of the country soil where
this weed first grew, thou may call them Cataphrygians. There were diverse
aduauncers and setters forward of this Heresy, as Theodo. Alcibiades,
Themistona, Alexander. etc. with diverse other.

Among diverse errors which they taught, The doctrine.

Lib. 5. c. 18.


this is also mentioned of Eusebius. Hic est qui coniugia dissoluere docuit,
that is: This Montanus is he that has taught that Matrimony may be losed and
broken of. Which notwithstanding, he did not without some color of reason. For
in the same place, he says: Ostendimus igitur primas istas prophetissas: ab eo
tempore quo spiritu impletae fuerunt, maritos suos reliquisse. We have showed
heretofore, that those first Prophetesses, from the first time that they were
filled with the same Phanaticall spirit, forsook their husbands to whom they
were coupled. The which wicked deed Montanus allowed, teaching, that for zeal
of vowed religion, it was lawful so to do. The sum.
The sum therefore is, that it was lawful for a woman, because of zeal and
vow of religion, to forsake her husband.

The reasons why it is condemned. Mark. 10.
This doctrine for diverse reasons is condemned. First, because it is direct
contrary to the decree of Christ. Quod Deus coniunxit, homo non separabit.
Secondly, because, that if it be so that Matrimony co^tracted, and whereof
faith is plighted ( per verba de praesenti, by words sufficient of the
present time) may be dissolved, then they do wholly dishonor and profane the
christian religion: whereupon the firmitie of every contracte in faith
plighted, stands.

The Popes doctrine.
Here then it rests to declare, how the Popish Tatianistes agree also with
Montanus, and teach his Gospel Pope Alex. the third (as the Decretall
Epistles record) writes thus to the Bishop of Exon. Co^missum and infra.
Ex. de spon. c. Co^missu^.
Significauit nobis fraternitas tua, quod quidam cuidam mulieri de contrahendo
matrimonio fidem dedit: and se cum ea infra biennium per verba de praesenti
co^tracturum praestito iuramento firmauit. Nunc nutem priuata lege ductus, ad
fruge^ melioris vitae suspirat. and infra. Fraternitati. t. tali. ro^. quod
tutius religioni iuramenti seruata: prius contrahere: and postea si eligerit ad
religionem migrare, si tame^ post dispensationem: copula non dinoscitur
interuenisse carnalis. That is: Your brotherhode has assertayned us, that a
certain man promised a woman, that he would contracte matrimony with her: and
that within two years next following, he would by words of the present time
perform the same with her: he assured her by an holy oath. But now rather
regarding his private estate, he does pursue the commodity of a better life.
etc. Thus we do answer to your brotherhode, that the surest way is (for
avoiding of Perjury) first to contract matrimony, and afterward (if he so
choose) to enter into religion, if that there appear after the same contract,
to have been no carnal copulation. The Romanistes agreement with the Donatistes.
Letting further circumstances pass, I pray thee reader mark two special
instances in this case of contracte: and the mind of the said man, at both
instances. First is, when he swore and made a solemn oath to contract
matrimony with her, and make her his wife, (for that is ye nature of verba de
praesenti.) In which time his mind was simple to do as he spoke: which if it
was not, what needed Pope Alexander to have caused him for sauegarde of his
oath, after to contracte? If before that, he had forsworn himself? as
undoubtedly if he meante not as he swore, he had already done. But, that when
he swore, he swore with intent to marry: both ye Letter of the Decretall, the
Doctors themselves therein, and case, are plain. The second instance is, when
he according to his oath, did contract matrimony. At which time of contract, if
he will (seruare Iuramenti religione) keep his oath without Perjury, his mind
must be as it was at the time of his oath made: namely, that those words spoken
de tempore praesenti, might be so meant as spoken. Which if it was not then so
meant, at the time of pronouncing, as at the time of swearing, then (as before
I said) he is wylfully perjured: because he promised to contract matrimony,
which is not performed, unless his heart mean the pronouncing of his mouth.
In addi. ad 3. q. 45. ar. 4.
For Aquinas says: Consensus exterioribus verbis expressus, absque interiore
consensu nullu^ matrimonium facit. That is: Consent given by outward words and
not inward consent, is no contract of matrimony. Yea, and then, the Pope
counselling him to swear with a mouth hipocritically consenting, and an heart
disagreing and meaning contrary to his words, should be author of that man's
renouncing of God and All hallovves, if he then swore by any of their Relics.
But that he performed his oath, contracted very matrimony, and made her his
wife, both Pope Innocentius, Cardinalis Alexandrinus in Lectura. Ab Panor. Dom.
Anto. super eodem, with the rest of the glossers and Doctors conclude. Yea,
albeit, that he then should have secretly meant, immediately to have entered into
religion. Wherefore, seeing that they were man and wife only by contract, as
also the.c. Omnes res per quascunque. 27. q 2. c. Matrimonium.

Et ideo non soluit illud separa. corp. sed voluntatis.

Ibidem. c. Coniuges.


etc. Matrimonium quidem non facit coitus, sed voluntas. Carnal copulation
makes not matrimony, but the will of the contracters. Coniuges verius
appellantur a prima desponsationis fide, quamuis adhuc ignoratur inter eos
coniugalis concubitus. They are of right called man and wife, from the time of
their first troth plighting: although as yet, they are vnexperimented of the
sacred bed. And many other places of their Canons declare. Then has not ye
wife right of her own body, but her husband: neither the husband over his
own, but the wife. As Paul declares saying: Likewise the man has not
power over his own body, but the woman. 1. Cor. 7.
Therefore Pope Alex. has here taught Montanus heresy, declaring that it is
lawefull for this man, though he be not his own man, but his wives, to depart
from his wife, if he will enter into religion and vow chastity, which Montanus
counsels and teaches his Prophetesses to do: as before is declared. And
this thing Pope Alex. does not reasoning scholastice, or argumentatiue: but
autoritate suprema diffinitiue. The aforesaid Chapter of Alex. does also well
serve to my purpose laid in the Chapter before going, to prove him a Tatian:
But I remit it to thy applying, gentle reader.

Here the blind moles of our time, both in nature, Objection.
and will sightlesse, will (keeping themselves in the dark earth) root up the
wholesome herb of truth, roots (if they can) and all. Or at the least, heave
at them by false argument. And because the said Decretall Epistle of Alex.
has: Si tamen post desponsatione^. etc. If notwithstanding it appear that
there has not ben carnal copulation between them after the contracte, they
will thereupon defend him to be no Montanist: for that Montanus Prophetesses
had (as they will guess) copulation carnal: and after that, severed they them
selves from their husbands. Which the Church of Rome (say they) admits
not, as also here the Decretall seems to mean. And therefore will conclude,
the Montanistes had marriage because of copulation: But in this case there is no
matrimony, because there is no copulation. Which shift is only in effect to
say, that this party, who stands in the case of the Decretall, Answer.
has not exercised that office in marriage, paid that debt, and used the
right, which he might, ought and was lawful to do. For it is proved before in
ye three chapters alleged, that as soon as the parties have consented, to hold
and to have each other, they then from that time, are husband and wife: though
copulation follow not. By reason whereof, they can not conclude: they have not
coupled their bodies together: Ergo, they are not man and wife: no more than if
the Pasquil should say: Pope Joan has coupled her body with her Cardinal or
Secretary, or horse keeper: Ergo, they are man and wife. For as by ye latter
conclusion, we should make a whore Pope, an honest married wife: so by the first
we should esteem the blessed Virgin no wife: because she never joined her
body. Ibidem.
etc. which is contrary to the chap. Beata Maria. Seeing then marriage begins,
and is full and perfect matrimony, from the giving of the consent, and
speaking of ye words (de praesenti) then must also ye right of matrimony, and
due to married persons in that moment begin, and forth on hold. I mean the
right of each of their bodies apertayneth to the other thenceforth, according
to Paul's doctrine before specified. For as S. Thomas says: Et si matrimonium
non est essentialiter, In sup. ad. 3 q. 48. art. 1.
ipsa coniunctio carnalis: tamen est quaeda^ associatio viri and vxoris in
ordine, ad carnalem copula^ etc. That is: Although matrimony does not
essentially consist in the intercourse it self of the persons bodies: yet is
it a certain coupling of the man and wife in order and disposition to the
same. So that as soon as they consent, each of them are invested with the right
over the others body. Whereby he cannot, as the Decretal says (Priuata duci
lege) be persuaded with consideration of his private estate or person, for that
he is not Monodicos, at his own pleasure or liberty, as Paul, says in the
place of the Corinthes before mentioned: Vir no^ habet potestatem sui corporis,
sed vxor. etc. And so likewise, the man has not power over his own body, but
the wife. So that, that will wherewith once she or he moved by private care, of
either of their own persons or estates, might have vowed, willed, and at
pleasure and liberty consented, is altered, made bound, and becomes by the
contracte, such a subject, that it depends, (as touching the altering of the
state, of either of their bodies or minds) upon the yea or nay of the person
entitled and befaythed therewith. (S. Thomas) De illis tantum bonis potest
esse votum, In sup. q. 64 art. 4.
quae nostrae subiacent voluntati, qualia non sunt ea, in quibus vnus alteri
tenetur: and ideo in talibus non potest aliquis votum emittere, sinc consensu
eius, cui tenetur. Vnde cum co^iuges sibi inuicem tencantur in redditionem
debiti, per quam continentia impeditur, non potest vnus absque consensu
alterius continentiam vouere, and si vouerit, peccat, and non debet seruare
votum. etc. In those only things, does a vow hold, which been simply
subject to the vowers own will. Of the which sort, those things are not, in
the which we are indebted and in danger to other. And therefore of such things
no man can promise or vow: without the consent of the other party, to whom
the right appertains. Hence therefore is it, that because man and wife hold
each to other (as in a Reciprocal sort) in a mutual debt and payment thereof, by
the which continence is broken, A phrase of a Tatian.
the one can not without the others consent, vow chastity. Which if he yet
should, he sins, and ought not to keep his vow. etc. Thus far Aquinas. I
doubt not but now that these two things plainly appear. (de praesenti) spoken.
matrimony does only and essentially consist, though there were never
copulation had therein. So that if we grant that the elder Montanistes had
carnal copulation in their marriages, and that the case of the Decretall had
none: yet because marriage is the consent and not the act of. etc. by the which
consent once given, the right of their bodies is transferred to each other: yea
though there follow no copulation: therefore Pope Alex. for vow of religion
seuering them that are married (as are the consenters, though abstayners) must
be a Montanist. And the most shift is, to say that he is not with the vulgar
people, so open and manifest, as the elder, who is more gentler of the twain.
But what need I to answer the same frivolous shift, considering, that the
same clause, Si tamen. etc. wherein Pope Alex. forspeaketh the mutual access
of their bodies, is not added to the intent, to declare that matrimony thereby
is made: but only to this end, that by not using his wife, he may seem still
to abide in his purpose of entering into religion, and not to starte therefro:
as otherwise, he enjoying his wives body, should do by that deed, which is
direct contrary to the purpose of abstayning, which the religious men vow. For
as Dominus praepositus says, Sup eodem. The sense of the Decretall.
though the young man (in the case of the Decretall) meant to enter into
religion: as yet he had not firmly and wholly determined the same, nor vowed
it. Wherefore ye Pope willed him, least that the two years in this uncertain
and variable debating should ouerslippe him, and so should incur Perjury, to
contract matrimony, and betrouth himself according to his oath. The which
notwithstanding, he afterward might enter into religion and vow if he would.
The clause, Si tamen, which thereupon follows, is then only added, because
he thereby should declare, that he starteth not from that purpose: and as they
call it (non conuolat ad vota direct contraria continentiae,) did not
establish himself in the state of matrimony: which is direct contrary to their
Tatian rules and religion, as S. Thomas in the authority next before alleged
says.

If they shall object, that in the case of the Decretall the woman consented to
relinquishe the right: and in Montanus doctrine, the separation and vow is
done without any such consent: then to answer the same, I allege that the
true meaning and interpretation of the same Chapter (according to the common
opinion of the Doctors) is otherwise: who allege it, to prove that the party
married, may perform his vow made before copulation. And maugre the will of
the other, and without ye consent enter into religion: Distin. 32. c. Scriatim.
as the same D. praepositus Cardinal. declares thus: Distingue post Gemi. and
Car. Quandoque coniuges contraxerunt non tamen est copula consummatu^, and tunc
alter inuito alio etiam remanente in saeculo potest religionem intrare, and
remanens in saeculo cum alio co^trahere, and est casus extra de sponss. c.
Commissum. ibidem de conuer. coniug. c. Ex publico. That is, distinguished
after the opinion of two Doctors Gemi. and Card. that sometimes the husband
and wife have contracted, and not used copulation, and then the one may without
the others leave, yea, though repugning and tarying in the seculer and worldly
estate, enter into religion. And the party remaining behind in the seculer
estate (they call it the world) may marry. As a special case in the chapter
Commissum, etc. and Ex publico, declare. In ye which allegation appears how
the same chapter or Decretall Epistle of Alex. is understood. And to make the
practice of these Popists more plain, I will here briefly rehearse the case of
the same chapter Ex publico, by the said Doctors alleged, Ex. de co^uers.
which is thus. The same Alex. 3. writes to the Bishop of the Diocese of
Brixien. whom he deputeth his delegate in this matter: that by a certain
public instrument it appears to him: that whereas the Bishop of Verone took
in hand to determine and end a cause of matrimony depending between a
certain man, one A. on the one party, and a certain woman, one M. on the
other party: A faithful Bishop against a false Pope. All men were not of the
Popes mind.
he, by his diffinitiue sentence approved ye matrimony: and thereupon enjoined
the woman, that she should betake her to her husband, and use him with all
wifelike and mariageable affection. The which thing since she denied to do, she
was, by the same Bishop excommunicated. The which notwithstanding, we command
thee (says the Pope) albeit she is married to the same man, and yet remains
(as she says untouched of him) that if it appear that he has not had
company with her, and that she will enter into religion, taking of her,
sufficient warrantize or surety, that she shall within the term of two
months, either go to her husband, or leaving him, choose religion: then
absolve her from the sentence of excommunication wherein she stands: in such
wise, that if she will enter into religion, they shall restore each to other the
gifts on either side given and received. etc. It is most plain that the Pope
Alex. so favors ye vowed life, yt although the parties are by god (who
works the consent of the mind) coupled together, yet he dare separate them,
contrary to the faith of Christian religion, wherein it is plighted and
fastened. Surely Paul dares not do so. For he says: Let not the married
persons defraude each other, 1. Corinthians. ^.
unless it be perhaps for a season, and that by both their consentes. Again
Vnusquisque ergo, in quo vocatus est, fratres, in hoc, maneat apud Deum. that
is: Brethren let every man abide before God, in that estate of life, unto the
which he is called. But it is no marvel that this Pope spoke so, for he had
not the spirit that Paul spoke by, as their diverse behavior declares. For
Paul called to the office of the Apostleship of the Gentiles, neither shouldred
with Barnabas, Apollo, Crantz. 6.
or any other. Contrariwise the L. Alex. shouldred out Victor, Pascall,
Calixte, Innocente (or four other, by what name so ever the writers name them)
all called thereto by Gods ordinary mean, the Emperor. Paul, for the
quietness of the congregation, remitteth of his very right: Plat. Sabellie.
Decad. 1. Lib. 7. Sigess. Contin.
Alex. for his honor resists Frederick the Emperor by force of Arms. Paul
honors all estates of Princes, and humbles himself before Agrippa. etc: But
Alex. rides from the City of Totiacu^ to Lingerim, with Jews the French
king, and Henry of England waiting upon foot as his Pages, leading his Horse
by the bridle, the one on the right, the other on the left hand, in great
pomp and iolitie: yea, and causes the Emperor to lie prostrate before his
feet. Sabell. Ibid


But to return to our purpose: it behooved the Pope so to council and entice al
men by right and by wrong to the vowed life, because, that many withstode him:
as the said Bishop of Veron did. Also because that else, he should seem to
condemn the abstayning life in others, and restrain the same in the clergy,
in whom he (above all others) allowed the same, and compelled those that should
receive orders to enter into.

Finally then to conclude, for as much as Pope Alex. teaches the departure of
the man from the woman in the c. Commissum: Decret lib. 3. tit 3.123.
and the woman from the man, in the said c. Ex publico: when as gladly the man
would keep his wife in the one case, and the wife her husband in the other
case: and that because, they will profess themselves a Monk, or a Nun:
which is an heretical sect, as shall be declared hereafter. No indifferent
reader can deny, but that the Romanistes or Popistes holding his steps, are
Montanistes: breaking Gods ordinance, and dishonoring the Christian faith,
whereon the same contracte is plighted.

Pelagianes.
In epistola ad Ctesiph.

Epistola. 106.


THe Heresy of the Maniches, was the ground (as Hierome writes) to this which
arose of Pelagius, also called by surname Brito, or Briton, for difference sake
of Pelagius Tarrentus, as Augustine declares, who being a man of a most hot
and earnest zeal, was first a godly and good Christian: promoted to diverse
dignities by the Church, is in Syria likewise made Monk. But afterward fell
from the Church and became an Archeheretique: and began to sow the seeds of
that weed, about the year of our Lord, as Prosper says.415. But as
Martianus says, 414. in the.5. years of Honorius and Theodosius the Emperors
raygnes. In diverse places, in the East, in France, Lutzubburg.
Rome, and thence, he himself came into this realm of England to ear our
land with the same. The principal and chiefest aduauncers of this sect, to
let other pass, was Celestius and Iulianus as Augustine declares: and are of
the same Celestius (who is very famous therein) called Celestianes. And in this
realm, (besides Pelagius himself) one Seuerianus and Agricola his son, set
forward the same, about the year of our Lord, as Prosper declares.432.

The Heresy, that first took hold of Pelagius, Their Heresy. Aug. liber. 1.
q. 2. epistola. Pelag. c. 13. Ibidem. Liber. 4. c. 2. Et de gratia and libro
arbio tr. ad valent. c. 5.6. and. 15. Prosper de ingratis.
was yt he taught that man notwithstanding Adams fall, had not lost his free
will: but fully and naturally enjoys the same. Of this, as of their first
beginning and whereof they are most famous, I call them in their blazone
Free Will Pelagianes: and not because it is their only sole heresy. For out
of it, there springs diverse: but specially two notable errors, no less
horrible then hurtful: As first, concerning original sin, secondly
Justification. Of which two perilous branches, and rank root, because I
determine to entreat, I will proceed on this manner. First setting and laying
a part the doctrine of ye old Pelagianes in order as they stand, I will
secondely couche seuerallye the doctrine of the young Pelagians (the Montanistes
before gone) next after every of their fathers faults: so that by each of them,
fo coupled together, thou better may mark how the young Cockatrice croweth
after the elders note. Entering thus upon the error of free will. Free will.


Pelagius dicit in libro de libero arbitrio. Habemus possibilitatem vtriusque
partis a deo insita^, Aug. de gratia Christi q. Pelag. and Celeft. c. 18.
velut quadam (vt ita dicam) radicem fructiferam atque foecundam, quae ex
voluntate hominis, diuersa gignat and pariat, and quae possit ad proprij
cultoris arbitrium, vel nitere flore virtutum, vel sentibus horrere vitiorum.
Pelagius (quoth Augustine) says in his work that he made for free will in
this wise. We possess a certain ableness and possibility to both ways.
Which God has planted in us like (as I may say) unto a certain fruitful
root, which of man's own will brings forth and bears diverse fruits. And
the which even at the pleasure of the tylther thereof, can either be comely and
beawtifully arrayed with flowers of virtue, or else do the contrary, by
bearing briars or weeds. Whereas in the former part of this treatise I used to
gather the sum of ye Heresy, I shall not need here in this place to do so
now: for that it is summary, brief and plain enough. But as I before promised,
so I will here annexe the opinion of the Popists, after such manner, as they
accusing and confuting one another, shall both bewray their Fellows, and
condemn themselves. The year, anno. 1563. there came forth a book printed in
the shop of Ziletus at Venetia entitled de quadripartita Iusticia. The bispops
accuses Soto the Emperor confessor, also the Deane Ruard. Lusitane. Li. 1. c.
25.
The author whereof is one Lusitanus Lyriensis Episcopus, who has dedicated ye
same his work to the late Council holden at Trent. In the which he accuses
Dominicum Soto the late Emperor Charles ye fifth his Confessor or Ghostly
Father, and Ruardum Tapperum Deane of Louaine, of this heresy of Pelagisme, on
this sort. Magis ergo placet modo sententia Augustini Hippo. episcopi, and
Gregorij Ariminensis, quam alia opposita, nec soli sunt Augustinus and
Gregorius, sed multos habent asseclas grauissimos quos memorabimus. Nunc recens
plurimu^ reuerendus Dominicus Soto Philosophus and theologus doctissimus, and
in studijs bonarum scientiarum plurimu^ versatus in suo opere de natura and
gratia, multis innixis rationibus censuit. The Popish Pelagianisme
Absque auxilio speciali gratiae posse hominem been moraliter agere. Vt
interius latius ponitur atque explicatur ex ipso. Quantum autem pertinet ad
questionem prese^tem, refert Gregorium Arimine^sem in eo quod Gregorius negat
vllum esse opus bonum, antequam in vltimum finem referatur, qui est Deus. Addit
quoque Sotus quod non immerito Scholae omnes theologorum Gregorio reclament.
Again, Ad dicta doctoris Ruardi, Lusitanus cot, quadripart. Iusti. li. 1. c. 7.
quae profecto non placent iam nunc dicamus in speciali. Docet itaque in tertia
propositione, quod voluntas praeuenta a deo per amorem finis, in rebus fidei
imperare potest mediorum inquisitione^, disquirere, quod sit conuenientissimum,
and eligere quod commodissimum iudicauerit. Docet in quinta, quod voluntas sic
praeuenta si plura sint media vtilia post inquisitionem libere elegit, aut
potest eligere, medium sibi magis conueniens. Docet in.6. quod fidelis homo in
lumine fidei diuinitus accepto, sic praeuentus potest cogitare, cognoscere,
credere ea quae sunt fidei, operare opera salutis, and alijs habitibus vti. Vt
declarat statim antequam illam sexta^ conclusionem ponat in forma. Docet in
septima quod homo non fidelis, sed sufficienter instructus voluntate per pium
affectum a domino preparata, potest velle credere. Et intelligit, vt declarat,
quod omnia ista potest in potentia propinqua voluntas ita praeuenta and
preparata sine alio auxilio prius natura voluntate^ flectente qua^ voluntas
ipsa credere velit, imperare, aut eligere sine alia motione speciali, cum solo
auxilio generali. Vt volu^tas praeuenta per piam affectionem, per suos habitus
a Deo, per amorem finis, sit iam sufficiens principium ad credendum, ad vtendum
suis habitibus, ad praecipiendum de medijs inquirendis atque eligendum cum sola
generali influentia: tanquam ad credendum ad bonis habitibus, iam habitis
vtendum, ad praecipiendum de medijs and ad eligendum, Non indigeamus vllo modo
immediate adiutorio gratia Christi sed solu^ mediate, id est vt det nobis illa
principia, piam affectionem, amorem finis, bonos habitus. Cum enim ille doctor
positis hijs principijs in voluntate, seu in homine, non requirat auxilium
speciale gratiae dei. Vt voluntas velit secundum illa principia operari, and
operetur atque dicat generalem influentiam ad id sufficere: manifestum est:
quod ad opera volu^tatis and illorum principiorum: Excludit necessitatem
gratiae Christi immediatae etc. The which in our tongue means thus. Augustines
and Gregory Ariminensis, The Papists else had wrecked on their carcass long
ago.
judgment better likes me than the other that are contrary to the same. Ne
yet are Augustine and Gregory alone of the same mind: but they have on their
sides many, yea and those worthy champions, of whom I will make mention. Now
very lately the reverend M. Dominick Soto an excellent Philosopher and divine,
and very much exercised in the studies of good arts, Soto a friar Pelagian.
in his work entitled de Natura and gratia persuaded by many reasons, is of
this mind. That man of him self, without any special help and grace, is
able to work that thing which is morallie good, as hereafter is declared out
of his own work. But as touching that which belongs to this present
question, he does rehearce the said Gregory Ariminens. in that matter:
wherein the same Gregory denies, that any work is morally good, before it be
referred to the uttermost end and mark, which is God. And further, Gregory
Arminensis, against Soto, The Popes schools Heretics.
the same Soto adds, that all the Schools of the divines are (not without
cause) against Gregorye therein. But now let us speak in special to the
sayings of Doctor Ruard, the which truly done nothing like. For in his third
proposition he teaches thus. That a man's will prevented of God, by love of the
end, can in matters of faith govern and rule the inquisition and searching
out of the means, find out what is most meetest, and choose that which he
shall judge most commodious. In the fyft conclusion, he teaches yt a will so
prevented, if in any profitable means after reasoning and searching had,
appear: may of it self freely, or is able, to choose that of those means,
which is most fyttest. In the syxt conclusion, he teaches that a faithful
person, who is in the light of faith, given him from above, can so prevented,
think, know and believe the things appertayning to faith, work the works of
salvation, and use the other habites, or natural qualities, as he immediately
before the fashioning of of his sixth conclusion declares. A Turk may believe
if he list.
In the seventh he teaches, that an Infidel (but one sufficiently learned)
his will first prepared by God through a godly affection, can of himself have
the will to believe. Lusitan. expounds Ruarde.
And he understands (as himself declares) that man's will so prevented and
prepared (as aforesaid) can without any other help and aid, of her own
faculty, power and ability work all these things: nature first bowing the
will, before will her self lists to believe, to rule, or choose, without any
other special motion, by the only general aid. So as man's will prevented by a
godly affection, by his habites or qualities from God, by love of the end,
should now be a sufficient beginning to believe, to use the said habites, to
order the searching out of commodions means, and to choose them by an only
general influence. As though to the act of believing, to the using of good
habites and qualities already received, to the searching out of means and
choice thereof, man's will by no means needed the immediate and direct aid and
grace of Christ: But that Christ should after a sort, far of, all only lay
that ground, a godly affection, a love of the end and good habites or
qualities. The application to the Pelagian.
Whereas therefore, this Doctor (those beginnings set in man's will) requires
not the grace and special help of God, that will forth on, may lust to work
according to the same beginning: in this he trauayleth to show, that the common
general influence of nature, is thereto sufficient. So that it is manifest,
that he excludes from the works of man's will and their beginnings, the
immediate necessity of the Lord Jesus Christ's grace.

Thus have thou heard (gentle reader) how Lusitanus a Bishop and father of the
counsel, indicteth, yea and conuicteth Dominicus Sotto, by his own words a
felon. For what playner confession can be had of any Pelagians mouth, than to
say as Sotto before has said (unless Lusitanus beelye him) that man of
himself without any special help and grace, is able to work the thing
which is good. Soto a flat Pelagian.
Is not this all one with that which Pelagius says? That man's will, that
fertile tree, can either flourish with virtues, or do otherwise with vice, at
the tilthers own pleasure? And no less does he to Ruard Tapper the Deane of
Louaine, at whose face he so aymeth the vow and bolte, that it seems, he, by
his ouertaking of the Pelagians, is of ye twain, Ruardus a Pelagian.
the brimmer mark. For, which of the old Pelagians, has been so impudent to
say, that if a Turk and Infidel knew, and had learned the Articles of the
belief without book, he might believe then in Jesus Christ, if he listed, or
if he would: as Ruarde in his.7. conclusion declares? Although he (for shame I
guess) adds this, that he must be prepared by God through a godly affection:
the which in effect is no more to say, but the Turk who unawares is a sleep in
his dronken error, being waked after his slumber, told or advised that he was
drunk, may, now at his own will, receive from the officers hand, either the
sweet comfortable water of the Gospel Jesus Christ, being taught what it is,
or else his first strong wine. So that the uttermost that he grants to God,
is no more, but to be as the waker of the slumbring man, being now neither
drunk nor sober. But be it that they teach God to prepare so the mind of man,
as that he works therein an alteration, yea, a forwardenesse in the man, as a
ground laid, whereon he may further build, if he will, or if he will not: are
they not yet Pelagians? yes truly: unless they will grant, that all our will
and deeds to God, must be continually governed and stayed by Gods special
grace in Jesus our Christ. For otherwise how could it be true that our Savior
has said? Sine me nihil potestis facere. without me ye can do nothing. Joan. 5.
For the Pelagians themselves, though they grant so much, are yet Pelagians
and Heretics: as S. Hierom notes. Ita Dei gratiam ponunt Pelagiani, In
Epistola ad Ctesiph.
vt non per singula opera nitamur and regamur eius auxilio, sed referunt ad
liberu^ arbitriu^ and ad praecepta legis, ponentis illud Esaiae: Legem Deus in
adiutoriu^ posuit, vt in eo Deo referendae sint gratiae, quod tales nos
condiderit, qui nostro arbitrio possumus eligere bona, and vitare mala. On this
wise do the Pelagians, place the grace of God, that we are thereby, not in
all, but in some of our works, stayed and governed by the help thereof, but
they refer the same to our free will, and to the commandments of the law,
pleading the authority of Esaias: the lord has given a law for the aid of man:
So that then we shall praise God, for that he has created us such, as can by
our own freewil, choose good and eschew the evil.

That the Pelagians grant as much in our will, to the grace of God, as Tapper
does, it is evident.

If they now (convicted with the manifestnesse of their heresy) will say, it
is not their Churches doctrine, but Schole doctrine, what shall they in so
saying mean? Whence comes their Church men, but from their Schools? If it be
so that they are learned, as they brag, where have they learned it? Not at
Geneua, not at Franckfort. etc: if in their own schools Louain, Paris or such
like, whose those schools be, and what doctrine therein is taught, Soto and
Tapper declare. Soto says, all the schools are on his side, Lusitanus with
Aug. Greg. Ariminensis, and the valiant host of champions following them, are
their professed enemies. Wherefore sends Soto his books out of the schole
doors? To what end does Deane Ruarde send his doctrine from his university
of Louaine, approved with the glorious privileges of schools and Monarchs?
But because they will have their Church doctrine (and not schole questions)
known to simple men: otherwise, they were but braggers and vaynglorious
persons. Whereof I would our Popists by their foresaid shift, should rather
than I, accuse the^. Be not amazed, gentle reader, to hear this their
distinction of schole doctrine and Church doctrine, which is as much to say, as
schole truth, and Church truth. But stay a while, let me with thy patience,
somewhat digress, and thou shall briefly see ye factions of their schools,
wherein they are brought up, and whence they brag them selves to be good
Schole men.

The chiefest founder of them, and the only father that made their unnatural
concord for Divinity, The faction of the Popistes schools.
as the arbor declares, was Peter Lombarde who is partly received of his
children, partly refused, as the 26. errors (whereof the university of Paris
has condemned him) declares. From him the rest of the Divines come. Some are
of the faction of those that are called Terminalles, some Realles, some
Formals, some Thomistes, some Scotists, some Occamistes: yet al these will be
Catholic divines, and in the truth, though they are thus in their factio^s
divided one against another. Qui Thomam sequuntur, Eras. con. Lat.
a Scoto and Gersone dissentiunt, eos pene pro Haereticis habent. They of
Thomas faction disagree, both from Scotus and Gerson, counting them almost for
Heretics. And this thing they do within the schole walls very quietly, A
mock.
and brotherly: though they war abroad, as Erasmus says. In Encheridij
Epistola.
Sed quid futurum arbitramur, si Turcis vt Christum amplectantur. Occamos, aut
Durandos, aut Scotos, aut Gabrieles, aut Aluaros proposuerimus? Quid cogitabunt
aut quid sentie^t (sunt enim illi vt nihil aliud certe homines) vti audierint
illas spinosas and inextricabiles quaestiones, de instantibus, de
formalitatibus, de quid ditatibus, de relationibus? presertim vti viderint de
ijs adeo non co^uenire, inter magnos illos religionis professores: vt
frequenter vsque ad pallorem, vsque ad conuitia, vsque ad sputa, nonnunquam
vsque ad pugnos, inuicem digladientur. Vbi praedicatores pro suo Thoma, cominus
atque eminus pugnantes. Minoritas contra subtilissimos and seraphic os doctores
iunctis vmbonibus tuentes. Alios vt Nominales, alios vt Reales loqui. etc. What
think we (says Erasmus) would come to pass, or be done, if we, persuading
the Turks to Christian religion, should offer them, the Occamistes or
Durandians, the Scotistes, Gabrielistes, or Aluaristes to peruse? The schole
doctrine.
What would they think or judge, (for they are, as no more, so men) when they
shall see these knotty and vncleaneable subtilties, of Instaunces, of
Formalities, of Quiddities and Relations? Especially when they shall see so
much discord amongst those their chiefeste professors of their religion, that
oftentimes they question hotely amongst themselves, The schole concord. Friar
Rush moderator. Tantara tantara tantara tara.
even to reproachful words, spitting one at another: yea, and now and then,
the matter come to fystes? There, upon the one side, the preaching Friars, in
their Thomas his quarrel, first skirmishing far of with shot: at last
aduauncing, set on to the push of pyke and handgrypes: Upon the other side the
Minorits coupled to their targets, shield and defend their most subtle and
Seraphicall Doctors, now calling by the name of Nominals now Reals etc. as
above. Where so many factions, sects, and part takings are, all chalenging the
name of Catholics: and of all, some must lie, who can (having care for his
soul health) justly commit himself, to their credit? Seeing they having so
many factions, never would open the same as yet, to the simple, to whom it
appertains to know, unto what part, they shall for reason and truths sake
incline. How daungerously and with what care, ought we to take their works
into our hands, Homer. odiss.
or read the same? But either as Ulysses passed the Maremaydes, or else lived
within the Witches Circes doors? Wherefore it were well, toward the discharge of
their credit and simple dealing, that those men that of late have feigned names,
and belied sects on others, should truly set so out their own in their proper
terms, so as the simple may know the schole from the Church, or which part of
their schole is of their Church. Of the doctrine whereof, In li. ante. 60.
annos edit. Lutet.
Rupertus Gallus, a man of no less holiness than great learning, about.300.
years past, was by vision ascertayned, that the Divines then, of their
Church, were like unto a man, that having at his back plenty of good and
wholesome bread, not withstanding mambled a flint stone, that he held in his
hand. Now to return.

But that the credit of Erasmus (that Phoenix of our age) may be without
question (omitting Picus Mirandula, Nicholaus Clemangis, The author of this
work retourneth.
In lib. contra Luth. art. 36.
Catherinus Compsanus episc. with others that find fault with these seas and
factions of their divines) I will rehearse (returning to my place from whence I
first departed) the opinion of M. Shacklock his Roffensis, which makes mention
both of the discord of the schole men, and heresy of their Divines in this
very point. Hoc dixi propter Patres, quorum sententiam sequi malui, quam
Scholasticorum. Roffensis against the Popistes.
Cum in hac re mutuo sibi pugnent. Patres enim asserunt, neminem posse quicquam
boni velle, line speciali* Dei auxilio, nec sufficere generalem illum influxum.
Nonnulli contra Scholastici sic contendunt, hunc sufficere, vt quis absque illo
auxilio been moraliter agere, and bonum facere possit, non solum ex genere,
verum etia^ quod debitis vndique circumstantijs ornatum fit. At si
Scholasticorum argutias aduersus Patres, admittimus, sequetur etiam, vt absque
hoc auxilio. Pharao quantu^uis indurati cordis suisset, and ij qui traditi
fuerunt in reprobum sensum, potuissent been moraliter agere, The Fathers
against the Popistes.
mihi sane credibile non est. (that is) I say so, because of the fathers, whose
judgment I had rather follow, than the schole men, the which in this point
strive each clean contrary to other. The Fathers allege, that no man's will
can wish good without Gods special aid: and the general influence, is not
sufficient thereto. Contrariwise, many schole men, so reason, that the said
general influence, is of it self sufficient, without the same special help.
So that man's will of it self, is able to exercise it self morally well. And to
do that which is not only generally good, but also adourned with all kind of
circumstances. But if we shall admit and allow the schole men's subtilties,
against the fathers judgments, it would then also follow, that Pharao,
although he had an hardened heart, and those that are turned over into a
reprobate sense, should be able likewise to do so, which truly seems to
me, not to be credit worthy. Thus far Roffensis: who makes so plain the
matter of the schole men's discord among themselves, and falsenesse of their
opinions in this point, as that I need not further to instruct thee thereof.

Yet that notwithstanding, I thought it my part gentle reader, before I end
this point, to make thee privy to two things. One is, that although the
scholemen say, that man of his own free will, can work and do that which is
good: Yet for all that, some of them will not grant, but man for the entrance
into heaven, must obtain grace. Even with the Pelagians
Because, though his deed is (bonu^, tamen non meritoriu^) good, yet it is not
meritorious. In this they go just together with ye Pelagians, as out of the
same authority of Hierome, ad Ctesiphon. appears. But this is talked of,
upon the point of shame: and as I may say at a dead lift. The second is,
More than the Pelagians
how that they go beyond the old Pelagian, who says, that a man has
need, and is to be aided and instructed, by the law, as is before in ye same
authority of Hierome alleged. Co^trarywise, they conclude, that he has
dictamen natural, rectae rationis, cui se possit naturaliter conformare
voluntas. That man has in him a natural instruction, of right reason, to the
which, will can naturally conform himself. As if thou mark, (to let others for
briefness pass,) Roffensis in the last authority, thou shall well perceive.

The first branch of this root is now to be entreated of: that is, their
error and ignorance of original sin, which must needs be in the Church of
both these Pelagians: because that they err in, and be ignorant of the
doctrine of man, his ability, and inability, as I may say, his poverty and
wealth. Wherout must needs come and proceed, the doctrine and knoweledge of
his original sin and debte. This therefore is their error.

Pelagius per offensam praeuaricationis Adae, Secundum Conc. Aurasiac.
non totum secundum corpus and animam in deterius dicit hominem commutatum, sed
anima liberate illaesa durante, corpus tantummodo corruptioni credit obnoxium.
That is: Pelagius says that by the offense of Adams transgression, the whole
man is not both in body and soul, changed and become worse: but that the body
alone, (the soul remaining yet sound, and in his liberty untouched) is
subject to corruption. In ye which words, well may thou (gentle reader)
see, that he is ignorant of original sin: because he erreth in the effect
that follows the same, the want of wills liberty. Judging Adam sound in
himself, he thinks that the same transgression works corruption, only in
the bodies of us his heirs: which he supposes, we only of the whole man
receive from him. And therefore falsely teach the soul his free will to
remain. For if they did know, that the soul of Adam, had after the fall,
been thereof utterly spoiled, they could (considering his wife was known of
him, but after his fall,) not, but conclude: that we have such poor and
spoiled souls, as we received of his overthrown estate. Unless they will say,
that ye soul comes not (extraduce) of the root of that running vine Adam.
Of al which in deed it is most plain, that they are ignoraunte. The su^me
therefore of their doctrine which I mean here to note) is: that original
sin, is not any thing in any of us: but in Adam: (as touching the empairing
of the power of man's soul) and yet they grant, that we have a blemishe or
hindraunce thereby, which according to their true meaning, Hilar. Arcla. August
de reliq. Pelag.
may rather be called a punishment: that is, a banishment from heaven: and must
have entry of some other (for that corruptible bodies can not enter there,
being in corruption, which they say we have by Adams transgression) as before
may appear. And out of Augustine we may gather, Ep^istola. 89.
yt they taught man to be borne without sin, so that then ye first sin,
which in this life he committed, was his original sin. And then it must
follow, that sin is in us, but by imitation, not propagation. Attend now
gentle reader: for here according to my promise I will join the Popists
doctrine: The Popistes doctrine.
so, as in one word, both the errors shall apeare plain. The same Dominicus
Soto (of who^ before I spoke) that worthy Hercules of the Popists, Soto against
Pighius.
assaulteth egrely, one Albertus Pighius Campensis one of their most famous
Goliathes, De natura et gratia. li. 1. c. 9.
in this manner. Igitur sunt hoc aetatis, qui quamuis non omnia, partem tamem
horum argumentorum contra vetustam opinionem opponentes, ab ea defecerunt,
dice^tes non esse in singulis hominibus peccata singula originalia: sed vnum
illud quod commisit protoplastus: esse originale delictum cuius omnes rei
sumus, and a quo denominamur peccatores. Horum primicerius Albertus Pighius,
vir profecto and pius and doctus, qui nihilo secius male de hoc audit, quasi
peccata in nobis originalia omnino inficietur. etc. (that is) There is also of
this our age, some that deny, though not all, yet part of the arguments: who
opponing against the ancient opinion, have revolted therefro: saying that
every man's own sins, is not his original sin: but only that one sin,
which our first father committed, is our original sin, whereof we are all
gilty, and whereof we are called sinners. The Ensign bearer of these men is
Albertus Pighius: a man truly both godly and learned: yet notwithstanding
herein, is evil spoken of. As if he wholly should deny any original sin to
be in us at all. etc. In the which words it is manifest, that Soto judges
every man to be pure and free from sin, until he has himself committed
sin: and that counts he the original sin of every man. And condemns
Pighius, for teaching the contrary: namely, for that he says men are counted
sinners from the root Adam. And therefore Soto agrees with that last opinion
of the Pelagians, alleged out of Augustine. Controuersiarum Ratisponensium
controuersia. 1.

Ac iux. exe^plar. apd. Carol. Iuill.

Lutet. impressu^. An. 1549. Fol. 32. b.


But Pighius though he says (as Soto recites) that we are called sinners of
Adam, as he says to Pope Paulus tertius* Cuius vnius reatu, omnes constricti
nascimur peccatores, a quo nos liberat, and absoluit regenerationis in Christo
gratia. (That is,) By the offense of which one Adam, al we obliged, are borne
sinners, from the which, the grace of regeneration in Christ, delivers and
freeth us: Yet understands he, this naming of us, to be sinners, borne
sinners, obliged in Adam, and to have need of the grace of Christ: none
otherwise. But that it, which was culpa in Adam, is in us, rather poena than
culpa. Wherein he agrees with that opinion which is first appointed to the
Pelagians. Ibide^. Fol. 8. a.
Unless he be contrary to his conclusion. Sed vnde carentiam eius iusticiae,
aut adultis nobis, aut paruulis proprie peccatu^ demonstrent, and nos esse
debitores illius iusticiae, nihil habent. Immo id ipsum euidenti veritate
aduersatur. But how it should come to pass, that the want of that original
righteousness, should be either of us that are of years, or to the babes
counted properly for sin, and that we are debitors thereof, they can not
show. Yea, the same is rather contrary to the manifest truth. Unless he be
contrary to his conclusion, Nulla lege posse paruulos obligari. Ibide^. Fol. 9.
a.
Fol. 8. or to any other of his conclusions in the first.31. leaves, Discord of
the Doctors for original sin.
(which if he be) or else understand not himself (as it is most like) then
must some take the pain as a good Constable, to agree that eluishe skull with
their brains. That must not be Biell, although otherwise, Lib. 2. distinct
30. q. 2.

Peter Lombards opinion. Anselm. opinion.


he has taken great travail. For Peter Lombard (one of the soundest of all
the rest) who says and that well, that original sin, is a disease of our
nature gotten from Adam. etc. Also for Anselmus whose opinion is, that it is
want of original righteousness. etc. To accord them, each with others, as
also D. Alexandr. Scotus, Thomas, Bonauenture, and diverse other, against whom,
that godly Pighius and worcester- Goliath stands. Otherwise thinking as well of them
selves, as Pighius did of himself, they must devise something, of their own
brains as he did: because their Church has not determined the same. Lib.
p^dict. Fol. 2. a.
As Albert Pighius says in these words: Quid vero sit ipsum peccatum
originis, and in quo consistat eius propria ratio, ecclesiastica definitione
certum non est. etc. that is, Our Church has not yet determined, what
original sin it self is, or wherein the proper reason thereof consists.
God woteth, there must needs be small knowledge of our justification in
Christ, when their Church preaches not a certain doctrine, of the first
growing and arysing of our account, nor teaches what or how much thereby it is.
For as they acknowledge not ye bondage of man's will, Justification.
ne yet the impairment of his whole nature, since the fall: so likewise, they
both err in the doctrine of justification. But first the old Pelagians, thus
as I can briefly gather out of S. Augustine.

Dicimus inquit sanctos veteris testamenti perfecta hinc Iustitia ad aeternam
transisse vitam, id est, Lib. 1. contra Litteras Pela. c. 21.

Lib. 4. c. 2.


studio and obseruatione virtutum transiisse. We say, quoth the Pelagians that
all the Prophets, Apostles and Saints of the time of the old Testamente,
have departed hence and entered into the everlasting life by perfect
righteousness (that is) by the endeavor and keeping of virtue. In su^me therefore
this is their doctrine, (as I may gather the same out of saint Augustine in
both those places alleged) that Justification is a certain virtue or quality
in our selves, by the which, we are in our selves justified, and not all only
in Christ.

To the which very well the Popes Church and doctors agree: The Popistes
doctrine.

Tomo. 2. art. 8.


and especially the general council of Trent holden Anno. 1547. As Ruarde
Tapper the Deane of Louaine (of whom before we spoke) testifies thus. Quare
rectissime definitum est in concilio Tridentino: sessione quinta, capite. 7.
Quod cum iustificamur, Fol. 30.
non modo reputamur, sed vere iusti sumus and nominamur, and Anathema eu^
censit, qui inhaerente^ iusticia^ negat. Aliquanto post, Fol. 37. Ruard
fights with Pighius.
Ex quibus patet, quod nulla^ habet probabilitatem doctrina Alberti Pighij, qua
dicit quod in Christo iustificamur coram deo, non in nobis: non nostra, sed
illius iustitia, quae nobis iam cu^ illo co^municantibus imputatur. That is.
Wherefore the general counsel of Trent has most perfectely determined in.5.
session the.7. chapter. that when as we are justified, we are not so only
reputed, but we are truly just and so called. The same general council
holds him accursed, which shall deny, that righteousness stickerh not in us.
And somewhat after he says. Whereout it appears, that the doctrine of
Albertus Pighius, has no probability therein. In which he says, that we are
before God justified in Christ, and not in our selves, nor by our own, but his
righteousness, the which is now imputed and reckened to us, that hold in
communion thereof in him.

Lusitanus against Pighius.
Also the said Lyriensis the Popes Achilles before spoken of, assaulteth the
same Pighius in the same his work before mentioned, defending the same error
of the Pelagians against Pighius, as Soto for original sin, and as Ruarde
last before, for the point of Justification was. After this sort. Hunc errorem
ex part secutus est Albertus Pighius, qui sicut prius docuerat, omnes homines
peccatores nasci in Adam, non quasi aliquod proprium peccatum seu culpa^
contrahant in seipsis, Lusitanus and Pighius understand not Pighius alike.
sed ex sola imputatione peccati Adae. Ita posterius docuit homines iustificari
in Christo, formaliter a peccatis, non per aliquam iustitiam, quam in seipsis
accipiant realiter, sed per solam imputationem Iustitiae Christi. Id ergo
asserit Pighius, simul docens cum Caluino, quod in Christo, iustificamur in
deo, non in nobis, non nostra, sed illius Iustitia, quae nobis cum illo, iam
communicantibus imputatur: and quod propriae iustitiae inopes, extra nos in
illo doceamur iustitia^ quaerere, a cuius iustitia per imputationem sumus
iusti. etc. That is Albertus Pighius follows this error after a sort. Who as
before he taught, that all men are borne transgressors in Adam, not as though
they did work any fault, or special offense in themselves, but only by the
accompting of Adams sin to them: Even so, last of all, he has also taught,
that men are in Christ formallie justified from their sins: and not by any
righteousness, which they in themselves really receive: but by the only
accompting of Christ's righteousness unto them. That is the same which Pighius
ascerteyneth, and together with Calvin teaches: He belieth Calvin.
that in Christ we are justified in God, not in our selves, by his and not by
our righteousness, ye which is accounted ours, partaking thereof in him: and
that we lacking righteousness of our own, are taught to seek the same without
our selves in him: by whose imputed to us, we are made righteous. etc. In which
fray that Lusitanus and Ruarde have against Pighius, it is evident, what they
defend: namely, that man is justified in himself, by himself and not by
Christ, in Christ, as Pighius says. Wherefore by all likelihode, they hold him
accursed, by ye same council of Trentes authority. But of what force their
curse is, they being Pelagians, Pighius (as I guess) foreseing, spared not to
speak the truth, in this point, as in the same his foresaid work, in secunda
controuersia, may appear.

If thou art minded to see more of their discord read M. Sententiarum
distinct. 19. Li. 3.19. Faith justifies.
Tho super 6.2. ad Cor. super. 11. super. 1. Cor. 1. supper. 3. c. ad Titu^.
lect. 1. c. ad Timoth. c. 1. lect. 3. super. Jacob. 2. In the which places, the
said master of the sentences and S. Thomas prove, that Sola fides, faith
alone justifies. Such a mighty God is our God, that opens sometime the
Devils mouth, in those whom he does possess, to confess the truth: yea if
Balaam be blind with the affections, the mouth of his Ass.

Coluthians.
Lib. 2. tomo. 2. Haer. 69. Lib. 1. c. 4. Haer. 65.
EPiphanius speaks of one Colluthus an Heretic, whose scholars were called
Colluthiani. Also Theodoretus, speaks of the same name: which sect I think
is the same that Aug. reme^breth. These men taught as the same Augustine says,
Deum non facere mala: contra illud quod scriptum est, Ego deus creans mala:
that God did not work the ill: contrary to the saying that is written, I am the
God, In the table of Luthers offspring.
that works the evil. This doctrine does Staphilus and Stapleton, teach in
the explication of their Arbor, and in their book.

Gnostiques.
ABout the year of our Lord 137. as Nicephorus, Eusebius and Theodoretus Cyri
Episco. do witness, one Carpocrates did (among other Heretics) first spring,
of whom, Eusebius says, the sect of the Gnostiques did arise. Of which mind
also Irenaeus is. The horrible doctrine and fylthie manners of them was
universally such, as that we iustlye may judge, the Popistes to be extraught
of that house and lygnage. The thing notwithstanding that I intend to match,
and set them in view each with other, is the manner and rite that they used,
whereof both Irenaeus and Epiphanius speak: that they had Images painted, and
also cast of Gold, Silver, and other metal. Whereof they said some, were
the Images of Christ, made under Pontius Pilate, according to our Saviors
likeness. Some, the Images of Plato, Aristotle and Pythagoras. Before those,
used they to do reverence, after the manner of the Heathen. What the manner and
doctrine of the Popistes, in this case is, the books of master Doctor Harding
and M. Martial, so evidently do declare, as that (it concurring with the
practice of the Church, whereof no man is ignorant) I need not to rehearse
any words more special, than even so to refer thee, to the same writers.
This heresy has had so good success, that every Realm has their special
Idol, as S. George and S. Denise. Every corporation his, as the Merchant
Tailors of London, S. John Baptist: the Grocers, S. Anteline. etc. and every
man his special, and that for every misery and evil.

Anthropomorphites.
A Certain Syrian called as Epiphanius says Audius, Haeres. 50. Lib. 4. c. 10.
or as Theodoretus says Audaeus (Augustine calls them Vaudianos) did sow
this error under Valentinian the Emperor: or else in the time of Arius and
Council of Nice. The Monks of Egypt were favorers of this heresy, who of the
same are called as in their blazon. They taught that God had the shape of man,
and was in limits and members comprised as man is.

Theodor. Ibid
Though the Popistes teach not in their pulpettes this doctrine, ne yet in their
volumes: yet how gross so ever this error is, in their deeds teach they the
same: which is the second kind of preaching. Who has not seen the picture of
God the Father allowed, painted, carved, cast and so forth, occupied in their
Churches, and worshipped?

Chazinzaries.
Nicephor. lib. 18. c. 54.
THese Heretics, spring from those that are called Monosophytae with whom
they in all things agree. But are worshippers of the Cross, and therefore are
called Chazinzaries of the Cross: which among the^ is called Chazus. In our
days these may be called Martialistes of M. Martial. Against whom and his
heresy, view the learned answer of M. Archdeacon Calfhill: and for the
popish cross consecration, look in the Chapter Saincters.

Angelici.
Aug. Haer. 39.
WEre certain Heretics, inclined ( Augustine says) to the worshipping of
Angels. Which sect though in Epiphanius time were worn out, yet the Popistes
have received the same, as S. Michael the Archangell his feast declares. The
office of which day, appointed in the Popistes Church, serves for the honor
of all other Angels: c. 154.
as Bilethus in his Rationale Diuinorum declares: who calls it the feast of
all Angels.

Collyridianes, or Mary men.
THere were certain Heretics so called, as Epiphanius records, who
remained about the parts of Arabia. Lib. 3. to.2. Haer. 79.
They were earnestlye given to the honoring of our Lady, and used at certain
prescribed times to spread a cloth upon a stole, and thereupon to set certain
great Loanes, called Colluridas to the same end. With these heretics the
Popistes agree. In that they catholiquely or generally worship our Lady, as
vsus Sarum binds them. And particularly, as they were wont on Mydsommer, to
have light, and the table spread and furnished with great Loaves, and victualles
all night long, before the Images of S. John and our Lady.

Messalians.
Under the raygne of Valentinian, Lib. 3.4. de Haer-fabulis.
the heresy of the Messalians did sprout forth, as Theodorete witnesses. They
taught that Baptism, shaued from the receyuers, their sins like a rasour.
This, is root to the Popistes doctrine, that Sacraments confer grace. With
these Messalians S. Thomas Aquinas does agree in these words: Per Sacramentum
Baptismi omnia tolluntur. etc. By the Sacrament of Baptism, all sins are
taken away. D. Smith also in the second book of his buckler, Cap. 2. and.3.
concludes therein.

Valentinians.
Lib. 1. c. 18.
IN the year of our Lord.146. or there about, did this sect swarm. They used
(as Irenaeus says) after baptizing of their scholars, to pour oil on them.
Hence the Popistes learned their lesson also of the like practice at Baptism.

Sarahaites.
THese were ancient Heretics whose fashion was to abide in caves, rocks and
woods, clothed with Skins of beasts, and girded with witthes. And wandering
barefoted, used to tie thorns at their girdels, to knock them as they went,
upon their bare heels. Those were examples of the Popistes Pilgrims and
Flagellatores: even as they are to us, the example of the Sarahaites. Against
whom S. Augustine ad fratres in Heremo. Ser. 21.


Apostoliques.
Haeres. 40.
Saint Augustine does make mention of these Heretics. But mark (gentle
reader) I pray thee, how duly this kind of Heretics challenge birth right
over the Popistes. Compare the children by this their parente. The Father
challenged arrogantly above all other, this name Apostolic. The Child
thundereth it out, and will have no Peer: Also menaceth in the name of Peter
and Paul. The Father would not admit to his communion, Monks and Priests
married, or possessing any thing for their propre goods (as the Church of Christ
says Augustine has many.) The Child diuorceth them and such as were once of
his communion, he thrusts them out therefore. If the Child does not resemble
the Father: if he degenerate: or if he be any thing unlike him, it is in that,
he is over the shoes in his fathers humor, and more egerly feeds the same.

Catharistes.
BE certain Heretics* Haer. 38.
(after S. Augustines mind) that suppose themselves the holier, because they
marry only once. Lib. 1. tit. 20. Part. 3. q. 66. in addition.
This doctrine the Popistes teach in the Decretals, S. Thomas in the sum, and
D. Martine in his book.

Marcionistes.
FAmous is the name of Marcion, Tom. 3. lib. 1. Haer. 42.
of whom (among the rest) Epiphanius writes, and (amongst other things)
witnesses of this rite of his Church: 1. Part. trac. 1. c. 4.
That women did Baptize. The Popistes agree therewith, the practice declares.
And look Manipulus Curatorum, for the doctrine.

Sodomites.
IT is not to be thought, that the people of Sodo^, have not their offspring in
this age. That do exercise both Buggery and whoredom: and that as no fault:
or at the lest, as a light one. The which thing ye Popists have don, although
not in writing, yet in deeds, and that commonly. And to let special factes
oureslippe us. The Statutes Annis regni Regis. H. 8.25.28.31. made and
continued against Buggerie, after that in.32. of his reign made perpetual,
declares what both the Prince and the Realm feared. etc. And let wise men
construe to what reason and purpose, so good an estatute was.1. Mariae
repealed. And as for whoredom, the world knows, whileste the stalles of
those geldings stood, what filthynesse has been there. The cleansing of
sinkes, vaultes, and such like places bewrayed it not a little. Yea, about.3.
or.4. years past, at the spoiled house of Waltam Abbey, there was found out a
trough mured in the wall of the Abbots oratorie, full of young childrens bones.
Undoubtedly, although the Cannons call whoredom a trifling sin, yet they
esteem murder more.

Bysleepers.
BE certain kind of Heretics, as M. Staphilus and Stapleton talk of: and
are such, as for tender love of pure holiness and Angelical virginity, have
their ginnes and close wheels in the wall, to turn their Lords Cocks into
the roustes of their Ladies Hens. Of the which, Libr. Monast. Germa. c. Cella
Dei. Fol. 35.
the County Palatine speaking of the Norbertins, gives example to this
effect. Least the Monks should lack the ribbe which once God took away from
man, and after restored again with greater gain, they builte nighe their
Covent, an house of religious women, wal to wal: and called the same
Paradize.

Lady Liers.
THese come of Scotus, and Franciscus de Marionis, both in one heap deadely
belying our Lady: in that they say, Tom. 2. tract. 1 c. 4.
she was borne without the uncleanness of original sin: whose confutation
read in Cardinal Caietane.

Lady Dawers.
ALthough the history of our Savior Christ's precious death and passion, and
the necessary circumstaunces thereof, is by all four Evangelists truly set
forth, in the testament of the same our only Redeemer, and as wholly therein
taught, as our salvation requires: yet this notwithstanding, the superstition
of the Popistes, is come to this ripeness, that they dare presume to add a
Codicil to the same Testament. The which contains, how that at such time as
our Savior fainted, under the heavy Cross (the burden whereof Simon
Cyrenaeus shoulders after that felt, even to the place of Christ's Life and
Death) our Lady there faynted, and fell in sown to the ground. In which place
a Church was built. To. 2. tract. 13.
And also from Passion Sunday until their Palm Sunday following, they (which
belike will dawn our Lady) keep a yearly feast. Against the which see Caietane.

Mercy Marrers.
WHere as David and also Hierome say in the Psalm: Abyssus Abyssum inuocat:
One bottomelesnesse cries out upon another, appoynting God to be a
bottomless mercy. And in another Psalm David says: Si iniquitates Domine
obseruaueris, quis sustinebit? Etenim apud te propiciatio est, and copiosa
redemptio. etc. Lord if thou shall mark iniquity, who shall hold out? But
with thee there is pardon, and plenteous redemption. The which places (omitting
further authorities) do evidently declare, that God will not for his debts
which appertain to our credit, call an audite of the uttermost farthing. Yet
contrary to this most comfortable doctrine, the Popistes teach: that he will
cast us into prison, until he has the last penny of his duty. As
Caietanus witnesses in these words. To. 1. tract. 20. q. 1.

Ibide^. trac. 23.


Poenam canonicam poenitentibus iniunctam si in hac vita non impleatur, exolui
oportet in alia futura vita. If the Penitent does not in this life pay his
penance, it must be paid in the life to come. A most pestilente and ugly
heresy, which they learn of the Devils: who say, that after they have a
certain time in exile and punishment satisfied for their sins, they shall
return again to joy: Where then is manifold mercy, if pains are price of
our pardon?

Plenarie Pardoners.
THese arise of Franciscus de Marionis, Plenarie pardoners.
who teaches, that the sins for which we stand bound, either in this life
or in Purgatory, may by the Pope, Tom. 1. tract 8.
of his own authority and plenarie power be pardoned. This Heresy is
confuted by Caietane.

Faith Flyghters.
WHereas S. Augustine says: De verbis domini secundu^ Lucam. Ser. 30.
Quia and Baptismum quod semel adhibetur per fidem mundat. For Baptism also
once ministered, does cleanse by faith. The which reason ought also of al other
sacraments to be understood. Yet notwithstanding ye same, ye Popistes have a
sacrament of Confession, (if it be a sacrament) in ye which they will not have
faith necessarily exercized, as Caietanus says: To. 1. tract. 18. q. 4.

Fo. 32, b.


Non est necessarium Poenitentem ipsum habere fide^ se esse absolutum. It is
not necessary that the Penitent himself should then have belief that he is
absolved. Unto this also does M. Hosius Hatchet agree. By which doctrine it is
evident, that they fray out of the consciences of men, all living faith, whereby
the lively application of the sacraments of the Church of Christ, is achieved
and wrought.

Prophaners.
WHereas our Savior has committed to his church, under the name of the keys
of Heaven, the sentence of excommunication, thereby to admit or seclude any
man from the kingdom of God: Lib. 3. c. 2. con. Literas. Parmenian.

Ser. de Anathemat.


the which (as Augustine declares) ought not to be done for every light cause,
to the contempt thereof, neither as an occupation or custom: but (as
Chrysostom also says) of great love and as a constrained deed: yet not
withstanding, how the Popistes profane the same, it is evident. For as the
fool in the play, does lightly use his dagger to every trifle and jest, so
they (as plainly appears by their Camera and Consistory, which is their
stage) do. The which doctrine, c. vlt. and au^cte Dei. pris.
they draw out of their Cannons. Lynvvood de sente^tia exco^municationis, and
such like places, whereby they have it of like estimation, as Aesopes frogs
their beam. In that, is it not to profane it?

Saincters.
AS it was very strange in the Primitive estate of the gospel, to have or see
any Images, so was it much more strange, to have any creature called on in
prayer. And in the policy and common wealth of the Jews, the same was wholly
abhorred. Neither was that manner in the beginning of the church, under the law
of nature. Sap. 14.
For as Solomon says: Rich men becoming tiraunts over their underlings and
subjects, appointed in those days of idle wealthinesse, their dead children
and friends to be worshipped: and for the memory of such, erected Images:
neither had every one an Image that would, but such as the rich and mighty men
(whom I might call Nemrods) accorded on. This custom so grew on, as, not only
it was ye nourisher of Idolatry, but a mean that common treasures were
augmented: by reason that the license giving of erecting such Images, belonged
to the Senators. etc. As for example, in Athens and Rome. This practice ye
tiranne of Rome has (although in deed clarkly cloked) left in the Decretals.
Titt. de reliq. et. venerac. sancto.
And in Innocentius to this effect. Although that every man may pray to any
man departed this life, of whom he had opinion of holiness in the time of his
life: yet appertains to the Pope to faincten (for by this he had great
reueunes) and canonize those, that shall be worshipped: be it either by
public or private office or service: or by public and hallowed Image. If
thou markest (gentle reader) this marchaundize of the Pope, thou shall
apperceyue, how gain has plucked into the church, the abuse of the old
Gentiles. And here I will anexe (according to my promise) the manner of
consecration of the cross (although it seems to serve rather for ye place of
Chazinzaries) for this end, that by it, which seems most out of doubt and
fear of superstition, thou may see, how in the residue of Images and this,
they in their consecrating, serve superstition, and not memory of their
pretended mystery. If the priest be not at Mass, then he must put on his
surplice and stole, and begin thus: first sprinkling it with holy water.
Adiutoriu^ etc. domine exaudi etc. dominus vobiscu^. Orato: Exsacerdot. Romani
vsus.
Let us pray. We pray thee O Lord holy father almighty and eternal God, that
thou would vouchsafe to bless this vvood of the cross. That it may be an
healthful medicine to mankind, a massiuenesse of faith. Also a comfort,
protection and defense against the cruel darts of the enemies. Through Christ
our Lord. etc.

Let us pray.
Bless O Lord, this thy cross, by the which thou have berefte and taken the
world out of the possession of the Diuill: and by thy death haste overcome the
informer of sin, who rejoiced in the first man's trangressions, concerning
the forbidden tree. Bless also O Lord and make holy this seal of thy holy
passion, that to thy enemies, it may be a let, and to thy beleuers make it a
perpetual succor, amen. Then holy water must be cast once yet again, with
this prayer. Let this wood be sanctified, in the name of the Father and the
Son, and the holy ghost, that such as pray and bow for the Lords sake
before this cross, may find health to their bodies and souls, thorovve
Christ. etc. Amen.

Catholics.
BE those that so discant out of harmony upon this word Catholicos, that they
will have those people their Church, who are ye multude and most universal
number. Which is as much in consequent to say, Whores, Baudes, Sodomites,
Infidels and all that walk the broad way. This is in every of their mouths.

Visiblers.
ARe those that hold opinion, that the church of Christ, is always visible,
and to be discerned of the world, and is never hid from the view of man. This
doctrine the author of the appologie of private mass has.

Mystery Mongers.
ARe of Durandus, that interpretateth vveathercocks, belles, cappes, and
tippets, to a mystery and secret sense. Look in Rationale diuinorum Durandi.

Aaronistes.
ARise of Pighius Hierarchy, that will have the ministry in the Church of the
Gospel, Lib. 2. c. 4.
be after the fashion of Aaron his Leuiticall order.

Popistes.
BE those that say, Lib. 4. c. 8. in fine.
the Pope can not err from the faith: as Pighius has taught in his
Hierarchy, Pigh. against Caietane.
condemning Cardinal Caietane. Therefore obey they his commandments, with
uttering his spirit, and wear his liuerie coats, be he never so far
distant from their territory.

Gospel facers.
Pighius lib. 1. c. 4.
BE those, that by crying out on the authority and name of the Church,
disgrace the gospel, and diminish the authority thereof.

Politic Popistes.
ARe those, that will all men, only for temporal and worldly causes,
uniformity, and comely sight, to compose themselves to their manner and
fashion of religion. Sozo lib. 1.
As in time paste Julian the Apostatate in his days did. And in Germany the
Interim.

Coniurers.
MAny of the old Heretics hold opinion, that all creatures, as well the
only Vegitatiue, as reasonable, are naught. Some say, they were created
naught. Some say, they are unholy, because they are the dwelling temple of the
Devil. etc. The Popistes have this doctrine: as the fruits of their practice do
declare. For they conjure the Diuill, out of the creatures that they use for
their service. Yea out of the children, that come to baptism thus, after the
manner of the Church of Rome. Ex sacerdotal.
I conjure thee unclean spirit, In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy ghost, that thou go out and depart from this servant of God.
etc. And this deed, agrees with the doctrine of S. Thomas. But perhaps thou
may be seduced in this coniuring case, for that ignorauntlye thou may
suppose, that children borne imperfect, (because of the propagation of sin
original in them,) have the Devil in them. Wherefore to make the case plain
of their drifte. I let three here another coniuring practice, that they use of
creatures, in whom sin neither is by propagation nor imitation, and of such
whose nature can not sin. I conjure thee thou creature oil, by God the
Father almighty, who made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is therein.
Get thee hence and fly away all thou power of the enemy. All army of the
Diuill. All incursion and all fantasy of Satan, from this creature of oil,
that it may be to all those that use the same, health both of mind and body.
In the name of God the father etc. This their practice bewrays their doctrine.

Hallowers.
OVt of the above said heresy of Coniurers, does this proceed: that the
creature after the coming out of the Devil, is to be hallowed. For the which
cause, the Popish priest in baptism, does bealch or blow on the child:
smere him and poulder him, that the Devil coniured out, should not return
again. As S. Thomas in the place last before alleged, teaches. And Epistola
de consecratione etc. per totum. Did. de consecratione.

Creature Swearers.
WHere as Jeremy by the spirit of God, reprehendeth the Israelites for
swearing by creatures, the Popistes notwithstanding do teach, that it is
lawefull to swear by creatures: to weete, upon relics, a consecrated host,
and such like: 2.2. q. 89. art. 6
as S. Thomas, and the Decretalles under a special title, do declare.

Time Seruers.
ARe those, that serve not all the year, but some parts thereof, with their
Matrimony Sacrament: and that is, for the hatred they bare unto it: appointing
more holiness in their time, than in matrimony Gods holy institution, this is
common and needs no reciting of authority.

Formalistes.
BE those, that teach forms, and idle apparayling of things, with manners and
circumstances, that edifye not, but are impertinent. As in building of a
Church, Drrand. lib. 1. c. 1.2.
that the first stone must be laid by the.B. and that they must cast holy
water over the ground. Also, that the first stone must have a cross graven on
it. That the head thereof stand to the east: and an infinite number of such like
toys. Ex. de tempe ordinando.
Furthermore in orders giving, that no patche of the prattling (I would say of
praying) be omitted. For the^ orders are not given: And ye like happens if
their tools of that toye, be not touched: as Caietane says, To. 1. Tract. 26
and also Ray. c. Veniens de presbit. non bapt.

Primacers.
ARe those, that teach the Pope to be Lord over the whole world, glo. et
doct. in prohemio. F. And that he may absolve any man from his alegeaunce,
promise, debt and duty, of his (as they call it Plenitudine potestatis) mere
or full power: whether the same be, of subjects to their Princes, or wife to
her husband, or such like. Inno. art. 9. q. 3. per principalem. C. de qua.
praescript. L. Been Azenone. C. de praeci. Imp. l. quoties. Linvvood tit. de
sententia excommunicationis. Caietane. Tom. i. tract. 25.

Simoniackes, or quid vultis Dariers.
ARe they, that for money break all discipline of the Church: and do let
sin, and ye punishment thereof be ouerpassed. Whereby rich men may sin
pain less, but poor men shall be punnished. I may liken the^ to the hunters
of the Castor, that perilous beast. For when as those hunters find the Cueles
or genitals of the beast, which he purposely byteth of for his sauegarde, they
let the noisome body go, for the filthy part: Even so, besides that, that the
Popistes for the crimes of such offenders, take of their filthy Mammon so
great a grype, that now and then they leave them gelded of their good: yet
notwithstanding, because the noisome nature is not corrected, the man still
following the same, falls into their hands: and then having no more genitals
to lose, must satisfy in body, who before by pursse escaped. The doctrine of
this Heresy is taught in the Decretalles. Ex. de poenas and remissi.
And it shall be necessary to annexe some part of the wares of the Pope, and
price thereof, as they go for, and are sold in his shop or Camera at Rome.

Lechery.
A Pardon for Lechery done by a Clearke, whether it be either with a Nun, in
or without the Cloister, or with one of his kin, or aliance to him: or with
his God daughter, A reasonable chapman.
or any other: he shall pay as well for one as for all these together.36.
Turnois and.3. Ducats: and therewith be dispensed to have orders and benefices
ecclesiastical. But if among these crimes, he ask a pardon for Buggerie (the
sin against nature) or done with beasts, so that he may then be also
dispensed for orders and benefices, ye price then is.90. Turnois.12. Ducates.6.
Carlines. If only pardon be asked for the sin against nature or done with
beasts, with a dispensation and inhibition, he pays.36. Turnois.9. Ducats.

A pardon for a Nun that has often played the good fellow both without and
within the Cloister, with a clause that shall enjoy the dignities of that
order, yea to be Abbess, ye price thereof is.36. Turnois.9. Ducats. A pardon
that a priest may keep a Concubine in his house continually: and retain his
benefice and orders also, is had for.21. Turnois. 2. Ducats. There be like
cases in lay men.

Murder.
A Pardon for the son ye has killed his father, his brother or sister, is in
every of these cases al one. 4. Turnois. 1. Duckat. Carlines. 8. If the father
or mother kill their own child, the price is no more but so. If a woman
drink to destroy her child, the price is. 4. Turnois. Duckatte. 1. Carlines.
8. Thus I might proceed for all sins done against the x. Commandments of
almighty God: against councils, Sinodes, Decrees, and Decretals. But it shall
suffice to touch this, and omit the other for briefness sake.

Patrines.
BE those that contrary to the commandment of Christ (to weete, put up thy
sword Peter into thy sheath) teach Peter to draw it again: and make of sheep
keeping Peter, a temporal Magistrate, Lib. 5.1. tit.
Lord and warrior. Vide Pighium.

Armurers.
ARe those that teach men to defend either body or soul: and to arm
themselves with creatures. As a hallowed written gospel, the length and breadth
of the nails and cross: a Mass: a Friars Cowle and such like. For the
proof of the written gospel, of the nails, the world does know it very
well: and of those same are in my hands to be seen, yet: for more proof,
look the Breuarie of the Franciscanes: Among the which I find this, Franciscus
rogauit deu^ et impetrauit, vt nullus in habitu, posfit male mori. S. Frauncis
asking of God, obtained of him, that none clothed in the holy habit of his
order, should dye an evil death. Again. Quicquid homo edit post auditione^
missae, magis proficit and co^uenit Naturae qua^ ante. In auditione homo non
senescit, nec debilitatur: sicut ex ligno vitae, Adam non infirmabatur, nec
vita eius breuiabatur. Whatsoever a man eats in the day after he has heard
mass, it shall do him more good, and better agree with nature, than before.
Also in the time of Mass hearing, a man shall neither wax weaker, nor elder,
no more than Adam (mark their ignorance of scripture) by eating of the tree
of life. As touching such kind of harness and Philtres the Basilides,
Carpocrates, and such other Gnostiques, were occupiers and deuisers: of whom
Eusebius. writes. So likewise Theodoret. and Epiphan. Lib. 4. c. 7.


Spiritual kindreders.
IF thou gentle reader, look in the Ambrey of the Popes holy wisdom, in the
title de cognatione spirituali, thou shall find out a spiritual kindered (for
so the title does call it) which grows out of two contrary roots: the flesh
and the spirit. A meruellous thing it is to see it, for two reasons. First in
this: that as the mother which bare the child (the throws of whose travail
makes the birth certain, which is as it were ye preching of Natures truth) is
of the kind or blood thereof, after the manner of a mother, and therefore
enjoys the same Natural name: Even so, by the doctrine there taught, the
sureties that hold the child at baptism and bisshopping, are forsooth Pater
and matter spiritualiter. Brother not in Christ but Pope.

c. Martinus.


Father and mother spirituallie: And their children are brethren and sisterne
to the babe baptized. Yea and as a special case in the same title declares of
Lotharius and Theberga, the wife of the man who was surety, is of kind
(though she Christened not the child) to the same child her husband
christened: and can not (which is the second marvel) marry with the Father of
the same babe, they both being free from their first marriages, no more than the
spiritual child can, with any of his godfathers or godmothers children. The
dream that they build this on, Panormitanus in place before alleged does
say, is: Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu sancto: Except a man be
borne of water and the holy ghost. Wherein thou may see, how like blind
Sodomites, they grope after a new kindred, and forget the very birth in the
holy ghost, who is the womb for the childebirth of the Church. Which new
birth in these words meant, since it comes not by the surety, but rather by
the water: and not alone by the water, as the word (and) declares, but
chiefly by the spirit, which in the outward sacrament is to be looked for:
mark whether they mind any thing else, but an holy (I will not say
superstitious) tirannie: a crafty hindering and contemning of matrimony: and
an esteeming and worshipping of Elements. And besides this, in sequestrating
this kindred from matrimony, they evidently declare, that it is not Christ's
spiritual kindred, which the holy ghost works in all the faithful, without
the which it is not lawefull for any of the same stock to marry. For S. Paul
says: Nubat, sed in domino. Let the woman now a widow marry, Hierom con.
Iouinian.
but in the Lord: that is, with a spiritual brother. Let us (gentle reader)
pray to God, that for Christ's sake, he will send his Angel, to keep these
Sodomites out of Lothes house. Amen.

Half Communion Manichees.
THe faction of the Manichees sprang in the year of our Lord God, as Eusebius
says 281. being the.3. year of the Emperor Probus reign. But Epiphanius
says the.276. years: Lib. 7. c. 31.
after some Historiographers account as the same Epiphanius testifies.246. The
author whereof was one Manes, Lib. 2. to. 2.
as Eusebius calls him. Augustine commonly calls him Manicheus, which by
interpretation is to say, Eusebius. ibi.
mad: as he was, ( Eusebius says) of Nature. After the preaching of his
error, and receiving of the same, he chose unto him.12. disciples imitating
Christ. Epiphanius says.22. Out of the which, he chose three most special.
Thomas, Herma and Adda. And they were the most trusty and famous Abbetters
thereof. Their doctrine was large, and extended to the infection of all our
Christian religion. But that which I intend to entreat of, is their abuse in
the administration of the Lords supper, the holy communion.

Their accustomed manner, was to minister ye fame under one kind: yt is to say,
the bread only. Manich. comtannion. In sermo. 4. Quadrag. Ex. Petr. de Soto.
Lect. 10.
And used not to receive the cup. As Leo the Pope declares in these words:
Cumque ad tegenda^ infidelitatem sua^ nostris audeant interesse mysterijs, ita
in sacramento per co^munionem se temperant, vt interdum lateant. Ore indigno
corpus Christi accipiunt, sanguinem autem redemptionis nostrae haurire omnino
declinant, quod ideo vestram volumus scire sactitatem, vt vobis huiusmodi
homines et hijs manifestantium indicijs, and quoru^ deprehensa fuerit sacrilega
simulatio, notati and proditi, a sanctorum societate, sacerdotali auctoritate
pellantur. De talibus. n. beatus Paulus Apostolus ecclesiam dei proinde monet,
dicens: Rogamus autem vos fratres, vt obseruetis eos, qui dissensiones and
offendicula praeter doctrinam quam vos didicistis faciunt, and declinate ab
illis. That is to say: And when as the Manichees, for the clocking of their
unfaithfulness, dare presume to be present at our mysteries, they so behave
themselves in the communion of the sacraments, as that now and then they
escape unknown. With their unworthy mouths, they receive the body of Christ,
but they wholly withdraw themselves from the drinking of the blood of our
redemption. The which thing we would that your holiness should understand,
that such men by those marks of their declaration espied, and whose
sacrilegious hypocrisy shall be betrayed, may by the authority of the
ministry, be separated from the society of the holy ones. For of such, the
Apostle S. Paul has necessarily forewarned ye church of God, saying: But we
pray you brethren, that you vvatch those, that make discention, and work
offenses, besides the doctrine that you have learned, and eschevve them.

In the which words of Leo, these two things been manifest. First, that it was
the peculiar manner and religion of the Manichees, to use only the bread, the
first part of the sacrament. Secondly that in Leo his time (which was about the
year of our Lord.464) both parts were used in the church of Rome. And so to
do, was the special rite.

The manner of Rome.
The doctrine of Rome, and the behauior of their church in this case, is plain
and manifest. For who has not had experience, of ye same their sacrilegious
withholding and robbing of the people of that part of the communion? Yea
Aquinas says: yt it is not decent for the lay man to receive ye same. Part. 3.
q. 80. art. 12.
Solus sacerdos Eucharistiam no^ sine sanguine fumere debet: caeteros autem sub
vtraque speciae communicare non decet. That is, the priest only must receive
the sacrament, not without the blood: but it becomes the rest to communicate
under one kind. And Caietane, commenting upon the same place of Aquinas,
frames three questions. The first, that we are not bound by the commandment
of Christ when we communicate, to communicate under both kinds. The second,
that it is not more profitable for the communicants to receive in both kinds,
than in one only. The third is, that it is not expedient for the church, that
the people should do so. But the practice of this is so common, Lib. 4. did.
12. q. 2.

Art. 3. dub. 1. In inflitutionibus.

Lectione. 10.


that I pass over to rehearse Biell, or any other of them. And therefore end
here with ye saying of their Peter Soto. Donemus igitur illis, fuisse vsu^
vtriusque speciei, quod testimonium illud Gelasij Papae confirmat, and aliud
Leonis in sermon quarto quadragesimae: de quo superius diximus: Vbi Manichaeos
dicit, speciem vini non sumere: ostendens aperto, id contrarium fuisse
consuetudini catholicoru^. Demus igitur hoc haereticis. That is: let us grant
to the protestants, that the use of the church was to minister in both kinds:
the which, the testimony of Gelasius the Pope, and of Leo in his.4. sermon for
Lent, (of the which before we have spoken) does approve: wherein he says
that the Manichees custom is, not to use the wine: declaring that ye same was
clean contrary to the custom of the Catholics: let us then give that
custom to heretics. But because I am here entered into the matter of the
sacrament of the holy communion, I will annexe the special contrarieties and
heresies as touching the same.

Caparnaites or Natural Bodiers.
BE those, that teach that the very body of Jesus Christ, flesh, blood and
bone etc. as it was borne of the virgin Marie, is in the Sacrament eaten. This
though it may be proved by those arguments which are called Atechnois, that is,
by the deposing and testimony of every simple Popist: yet I think it best to
declare their doctrine by their authors. Part. 3. q. 75. art. 4.
Aquinas says: Hoc quod conficimus, corpus ex virgin est: That which in the
sacrament we make, is the body received of the virgin. And afterward: Non
solum caro, Ibid. 76. art. 1.
sed totum corpus, scilicet ossa, nerui et alia huiusmodi. That is: not only
Christ's flesh, but also all his whole body: to weete, bones sinews and such
like. And D. Gardener says in his book against the reverend father M.
Cranmer: Christ gives truly (in the sacrament) to be eaten, Folio. 274. Folio.
81.
the flesh he spoke of before, taken of the virgin Mary. etc. For the scripture
speaks of Christ's body which was betrayed for us, to be given us to be
eaten. etc. The practice of their Church agrees with that doctrine. For by the
Cautele of their Mass, the priest must have his thought whollye bente to do
that in the person of Christ, which Christ in his institution did. And all the
pith of that pageant, lies upon this word Meum. Which of force must be to
consecrate that body which he, at his institution had.

New Sacramentaries.
Folio. 69.
AGainst the which: Doctor Harding in his late work is. As also Gardener is
(though he spoke the same) in another place, against the same in these words.
We receive not in the Sacrament Christ's flesh that was crucified, being so a
visible, and mortal flesh: but Christ's flesh glorified, incorruptible,
impassible, a godly and spiritual flesh. Wherout it appears, that whilst D.
Gardener (and Harding) would have an other flesh, than that which was crucified
to be in the sacrament, that they vary from the first opinion and practice of
their church. And in that, that M. Gardener will not have: that flesh which
was crucified, being so a visible flesh in the sacrament, and yet would have
very flesh therein, it is evident yt besides that he falls from the elder
Popists: he is an hererique, in ye nature of Christ's body in heaven: because he
makes it an invisible body, which can not be accident to our substance,
though it shall be, (as in him, it already is) glorified. But thus much
briefly, remitting thee for the rest, to the plee of the reverend father the
B. Sarum and D. Harding.

Quantitiners.
GArdener says: when we speak of Christ's body in the sacrament, Lib. 3.
folio. 76.
we must understand a true body, which has both form and quantity. And
therefore such as confess the true Catholic faith, they affirm of Christ's
body al truth of a natural body etc. And afterward he says. So as if Christ
be present in the sacrament, without al form and quantity, then is he there
neither as God nor man. Against which doctrine of quantity and form of
Christ's body in the sacrament, al their doctors are. Among other Biel writing
thus, alleges. Lib. 4. did. 11. q. 1.
Et dico notanter corpus tale non tantum, quia non est in sacramento quantum:
cu^ ibi non sit extensum nec circu^scriptiue: vt priori did. tactum. etc. And
I speak notingly or effectually in this saying: A body of such quality and
not micheltie: because that in the sacrament, there is no micheltie or
quantity. When as therein is not any largeness of body or compass for the
limbs. Also D. Smith who in that field fought as he thought for M. Gardener in
that quarrel of the sacrament, is against him in this point of quantity and
form. Fol. 106.


Fashioners.
THe elder Popistes say, that Christ is not in the Sacrament according to
dimension: that is laying out of his limbs, or placing and ordering of the
same: as Aquinas testifies thus. Dictum est autem, quod corpus Christi
comparatur ad hoc sacramentum, non ratione quantitatis dimensiuae, sed ratione
suae substantiae. Part. 3. q. 76. ar. 3.

Ad. 3. object.


It is said before, that the body of Christ is compared to this sacrament, not
according to the measure or parting out of the parts of the same, but according
to the reason of the substance. And therefore Smith says: that the body of
Christ is thus in the Sacrament in substance sacramentallie. So that the hand
is in the substance, In his assertion and defense canon. 44. Fol. 55.
the head is in the substance, and so likewise of the rest of the members. And
that they be not distinct and in deed locallie placed the one from the other,
but be so confounded in the Sacrament, that wheresoever the one is, there is
the other. The contrary thereto Master D. Gardener teaches in the.3. book
thus. Fol. 69.70.
The parts of the which (talking of the body) be in themselves distinct one
from another. And because it else should be (as he gesseth) a monstrous body.
He therefore concludes that it is measured out according to the quantity and
placing of his members and limbs.

Bread Spoylers.
BE those, that say that the words of consecration spoken, there remains no
part of bread nor of wine: but that which is eaten, is flesh and blood.
Impossible est (says Aquinas) post consecratione^ remanere in sacramento, cum
Christi corpore, substantiam panis et vini. Part. 3. q. 75. ar. 2.
It is impossible there should rest in the sacrament after the consecration
thereof, the substance of bread and wine, with the body of Christ. Against the
which, Caietanus the Cardinal, finding himself agreeued with the divines, To.
2. tract. 2. c. 3.
says thus. Hoc caput falsissimum est, quod Theologi dicunt, corpus Christi
corporaliter and praeceptibiliter sumi: quoniam and spiritualiter et non
praecipiendo (sieve sensu sieve intellectu) sed crede^do, corpus Christi sumitur
in Eucharistia, sacramentales autem species corporaliter et perceptibiliter
sumuntur. That is a most false doctrine which the divines teach: namely that
the body of Christ is corporally and sensible received in the sacrament: for
that, that spirituallie and not sensibly (either to sense or understanding) the
body of Christ is in the sacrament received by only believing: but it is the
sacramental kinds of bread and wine, that are received, both sensibly and
corporally.

Accident rotters.
Part. 3. q. 77. art. 5.
Very variable and contrary is the doctrine of the Popistes upon this question,
whereof the moulding, rotting, worms and ashes of their burned hosts come.
Aquinas confuteth.iij. opinions. The first is of those that say, that the
worms come only of the air round about. The.ij. of those that say, that the
old substance of bread and wine before by the words of consecration
affrighted and frayed away, return and corrupt. The.iij. (which he counts
somewhat probable) that it comes of a new matter and substance of bread and
wine created by God for the purpose. Of this last judgment is D. Smith saying
thus. Folio. 64.105.
I say that the consecrated wine turns not into vinegar, nor the consecrated
bread, mouldeth not, enge^dreth worms, nor is burned, nor receives into it
any poison, as long as Christ's body and blood are under the forms of them:
which do abide there so long, as the natural qualities and properties of
bread and wine tarry there in their natural disposition and condition, that
the bread and wine might be naturally there (if they had not been changed
into Christ's body and blood) And also as long as the host and consecrated
wine, are apt to be received of man and no longer: but go and depart thence
by Gods power as it pleases him. And then a new substance is made of God,
which turns into vinegar, engenders worms, and mouldeth, is burned,
feeds men and mice, receives poison. etc. Return we now to Aquinas: Ibidem.
who at the last adds his judgment, which is the stranger, because the
angelical doctor teaches it. It is, that they engender not in the sacrament
after any of the before said sorts: but look what could be engendered of the
foresaid substaunces before consecration, the same (says he) afterward is by
miracle engendered of quantitate dimensiua panis and vini (that is,) of the
first disposition of the matter of bread and wine.

Marcus Antonius says, that the accidents bread the same. Postremo si omnes
excutias panis parts, proprietates omnes, nihil proprietatis decessisse
comperies, sed manner in accidentibus. Appellatur panis, manet effigies quae
erat, manet pondus, color durat, gustus est idem qui fuerat, denique
corru^puntur. Last of all if thou will search in every part of the bread, and
all the properties thereof, thou shall find that all properties thereof are
abiding in the accidents. It is called bread, the shape which before it had,
remains, it holds weight, it keeps color and yeldeth the old taste,
finally it rotteth. Fol. 300. and 400.
etc. And the same Marcus Antonius (I should say) M. Gardener in his book, is
of the same opinion also in these words. And shortly to answer this author,
it is not said in the doctrine of transubstantiation, that there remains
nothing: for in the visible form of bread, remains the proper obiecte of
every sense truly, that is seen with the bodily eye, is truly seen, that is
felt is truly felt, that is sauored is truly sauored, and those things
corrupt, putrify, nourish, and consume after the truth of the former nature.
The diversity of the opinions of Smith and Gardener, being both of one age,
and sworn brethren in this field against the reverend father Cranmer, arises
of this: that D. Gardener leans toward S. Thomas, Lib. 4. did. 12. q. 1.
and D. Smith to Biell a sententiarie, and are thus by reason of their diverse
teachers, diverse.

Estians.
THis poor word (Est) is diverse ways canuassed, shaken and taken among the^:
for Marcus Antonius takes it substa^tiuely, Fol. 171.
for (Is): after the simple manner of the word it self. Sexta consideration
est leuis: nam catholici simplicitatem sermonis sequuntur, vt sit omnino quod
Christus esse dicit, qui quum de vna substantia pronu^ciat, illam esse corpus
suum verbis Christi inhaerentes: illam catholici, vnam esse profitentur, and
quam Christus declarat, videlicet corporis sui. etc. The sixth consideration is
of no weight. For the Cathoilques follow the playnenesse of the words, taking
wholly it to be the same, that Christ has said it is. Who since he has spoken
the words of one only substance, and that it is his body, they profess it
is one substance, and the same that Christ spoke of (to weete) his body. In
this saying of Marcus Antonius, thou may see (is) only taken for it self
as it sounds. But D. Gardener, that Proteus says, Lib. 2. fol. 333.
that (is) is taken for made: Which speech, bread is the body of Christ, is
as much to say, as is made the body of Christ etc.

Uncertain demonstratours.
NO less contrary are those Popistes, Fol. 24. b.
and repugnante in the demonstration that this word (Hoc) means: for Antonius
says thus. Hoc est corpus, substantiam significare corporis, nec de pane cui
nihil erat simile quicquid intelligi. etc. This saying this is my body, does
signify the substance of the body, neither is it al understood of the
bread, with the which the body has no resemblance. And so likewise M.
Gardener says. Fol. 102.
When Christ said (this is my body) there is no necessity that the
demonstration (this) should be referred to the outvvard visible matter, but may
be referred to the invisible substance. And the like he has in another place.
Fol. 284. Fol. 27. and 70.
But M. Gardener in the Devils sophistry has forgotten this doctrine, and the
wise man's counsel: Mendacem memorem esse oportuit. It behooves a liar to have
good remembrance: for there he says. Christ spoke plainly (this is my body)
making demonstration of the bread, when he said this is my body. Fol. 53.
But as M. Gardener is against himself, so is M. D. Smith against him in the
same point.

Metamorphistes.
THe common opinion of the elder Popistes is, that the body of Christ in the
sacrament is made of bread: Fol. 29.
with the which M. D. Gardener in many places, agrees, saying: the Catholic
Church acknovvledging Christ to be very God and very man, has from the
beginning upon these textes of scripture, confessed truly Christ's intent and
effectual miraculous work to make the bread his body and the wine his
blood. Fol. 165.
etc. And again he says, those many hosts, after consecration, be not many
bodies of Christ, but of many breads one body of Christ. (Also) for he gave
that he had consecrated, Fol. 333.
and gave that he had made of bread. Furthermore shows me that of bread is
the body of Christ. And that of bread is made the body of Christ. But M.
Gardener that seeks to contrary the truth, contrarieth himself, agreing with
both alike, Fol. 228.
thus. And Christ makes not himself of the matter of the bread, nor makes
himself so often of bread, Fol. 89.
a new body. etc. Again, in which mystery it was never taught (as this
author willingly misreporteth) that Christ's most precious body is made of the
matter of bread, but in that order exhibited, and made present unto us. Part.
3. q. 75.
And in this latter opinion he is become a Thomist: secretly granting that,
which openly and plainly they would not. So playing wily beguily, he beguileth
himself.

Iudaistes.
Saint Thomas says, that evil persons and the reprobate, eat the very body
and drink ye very blood of Christ in the sacrament. Part. 3. q. 80. art. 3.
Non modo iusti, sed peccatores, Christi corpus sacramentaliter suscipere
valent. So that Judas thereby received the body and blood of Christ. Ibi. 81.
art. 2.
So likewise D. Gardener S. Thomas scholar, as his master taught, so says.
For the learned man will answer, that an evil man by force of Gods
ordinance, in the substance of the sacrament, received in deed Christ's very
body there present, whole Christ God and man. But hearing Hilarie, Augustine
and other fathers, Super Mathe. sermon de Sacramento fidel. Feria secunda
Pasch.
pleading hard matter of nullitie against this marriage, better advised, does in
another place remember himself on this wise. But as we receive him in the
sacrament of his flesh and blood (if we receive him vvorthylie) so dwells
he in us naturally. etc. Wherein it is plain, he means that the unworthy
receiver receives him not. But D. Smith sold to sin, reclaimeth not
himself, running forward out of the way, leapeth over hedge and ditch, never
staying to consider the ways that he has trod, says: Fol. 136.
that the unrepentant sinner has Christ's body (yea) and spirit in him.

Mice feeders.
IF the doctrine of the Cannonistes should be true, the Mice in our days
might be happy: and specially the Church Mice. For some of them waying that
evil men receive Christ in the Sacrament, flesh, blood and bones: and that
by the consecration, he is to the substance of bread. etc. so tied, that he may
not (who would not else dwell with Beliall nor abide with sinners) astarte, but
must be touched of them and remain with them, do conclude that a Mouse,
Ratte. Glos. super. c. Qui been non custodiu^t. De Consec. did. 2.
etc. may eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ in the sacrament, being
holyer and purer than the wicked are. F. Perin is of this opinion, in his book,
and asks with the Canonistes what inconvenience can come thereof. And S.
Thomas is also on that part. Here D. Gardener, Fol. 75.
yet awakened by the last iobbe that Augustine gave, stands for the truth,
saying: that no creature can eat the body and blood of Christ but only man.

While Tariers.
Fol. 64.65.
DOctor Smith says that Christ flies up into Heaven so sone as the bread is
chavved in the mouth or changed in stomach. But D. Gardener forsakes here the
Popistes in the plain field, both D. Smith his sworn brother, saying, Fol.
59.
there was never man of learning, that I have read termed the matter so, that
Christ goes into the stomach of the man that receives, All papists fools
quoth winchester.
and no further. For that which is written co^tra Stercoranistas, is nothing
to this teaching, nor the speech of any gloss if there be any such, were
herein to be regarded. And in diverse other places of the same work against M.
Cranmer, appears: which thou shall find (gentle reader) in M. Cranmers book.
Fol. 60.64.65.

Devotion satisfactours.
SAint Th. says, that the Mass is a satisfactorie Sacrifice, by the devotion
of the priest and offerer, Part. 3. q. 79. ar. 5.
fit satisfactoria illis pro quibus offertur, vel etiam offerentibus, secundum
qua^titatem suae deuotionis. And before that. Sed in satisfactione magis
attenditur affectus offerentis, quam quantitas oblationis. That is: the
sacrament is satisfactorie for those, for whom it is offered, or also for the
offerer, according to the quantity of the offerers devotion. For in
satisfaction regard is rather had to the affection of the offerer, than to the
quantity of the oblation. D. Gardener says against it, Fol. 92.
M. Cranmer burdening the Popists with the same. Which manner of doctrine I
never read, and I think my self it ought to be improued, if any such there
be, to make the devotion of the Priest a satisfaction.

Satisfactories Real.
DOctor Smith says, the sacrifice of the Mass, is the sacrifice that
appeaseth Gods wrath, Fol. 24.148.164.
and is our satisfaction and reconciliation. Priests do offer for our
salvation to get heaven and to avoid hell. What is to offer Christ's body and
blood at Mass? to purchase thereby everlasting life, if it be not the Mass to
be a sacrifice, to pacify Gods wrath for sin, and to obtain his mercy.
Fol. 4.37.
This also M. Gardener confuteth on this wise. The only immolation of Christ
in himself on the Altar of the Cross, is the very satisfactorie sacrifice
for reconciliation of mankind to the favor of God. And I have not read the
daily sacrifice of Christ's most precious body to be called a Sacrifice
satisfactorie. But this speech has been used in deed, that the priest should
sing satisfactorie, which they understood in the satisfaction of the Priests
duty. etc.

Reiterators.
Fol. 431.
DOctor Gardener says: that Christ's Sacrifice by him done on the Cross is
reiterated. And then we must believe the very presence of Christ's body and
blood on Gods bords, and that Priests do their sacrifice, and be therefore
called and named sacrificers. Fol. 436.
Again. The Catholic doctrine teaches the daily Sacrifice to be the same in
the essence that was offered on the Cross once.

But this variable man is against him self for the truth in another place
thus. This is agreed and by the Scripture plainly taught, that the oblation
and Sacrifice of our Savior Christ, was and is a perfect work, once
consummate in perfection, without necessity of reiteration, as it was never
taught to be reiterated, but a mere blaspheming to presuppose.

Propitiators.
THese arise of D. Gardener, who agrees with S. Thomas, That the Sacrament is
a Propitiatory Sacrifice, thus. Folio. 437.
The act of the Priest done according to Gods commandment, must needs be
Propitiatory, and provoke Gods favor, and ought to be trusted on. etc. The
confuter whereof is the same D. Gardener in these words: Fol. 92.
For undoubtedly Christ is our satisfaction wholy and fully, who has paid
our whole debt to God the father, for the appeasing of his just wrath.

Venialistes.
ARe they that teach that this sacrament does purge venial sins only: Did.
32. c Praeter hoc. Parag Ad hoc.
as Barth. Brix. the glosser of the Decrees says. And Pope Pascasius in the
same Chapter the which Iodd. Fan. and Archydiacon thereupon says: Venialia
tantu^, venial sins alone. Fol. 432.
And Cardinalis Alexandrinus says also so, with D. Gardener.

Mortalistes.
BE those, that say it takes away mortal sins also. Part. 3. q. 79. art. 3.4.
Of which sect S. Thomas is. Et sic hoc sacramentum habet virtutem remittendi
quaecu^que peccata. etc. And so this Sacrament has force and strenght to make
straight and blotte out all kind of sins.

Breadworshippers.
DOctor Smith says, that the figure of the bread and wine is to be worshipped,
Fol. 145. b.
D. Gardener says: Adore it, worship it, there is not to be said of the
figure: so likewise Marcus Antonius. Fol. 202.272. Fol. 176.


Iacobites.
THe Heresy of the Iacobites did spring about the time of the raygne of
Heracletus the Emperor. And as Nicephorus writes, Nicepho. li. 18. c. vlt.

Ibi. c. 5.2.


near upon the year of our Lord Gods incarnation.625. of one Jacob a Syrian
borne, an obscure person and of no fame, who for the same his vnlenesse was
called Zanzalus. Ib. c. eod.
This man comprised a sect out of the former heresies, which is as it were the
sink of all the filthynesse of the former ages. And having made a medley of
the errors of Arrius and Apolinaris doctrine, as touching the humanity and
natures of Jesus Christ our blessed Savior, did also in outward ceremonies and
adiaphorois express the same. For always the behavior of any sect is to be
fashioned outwardly according to the inward doctrine: for else were the
fashion monstrous, and not natural. Therefore used they always by their Church
rites, to preach the same effect of Christ's humanity and natures. Their
doctrine
And the lyuelyer to express that Christ receyned not our nature, a perfect
soul and perfect body of Abraham's seed, they used in the time of the
administration of the holy communion, the mysteries of the same very flesh and
very blood of Jesus Christ, not to deliver common bread leauened to the
Communicants, least they should seem with ye catholic church by the use of
the common bread leauened, to confess that Christ received, and they in those
mysteries delivered, a common body of our common nature, leauened as says
Nicephorus: Lib. 18. c. 53.
Iidem ipsi re diuina faciendo azymo non pane vtuntur. Lib. 18. c. 53.
etc. And straight upon it he says, Vnam ea re in Christo naturam designantes:
that is. The same Iacobites in their ministration use paast (or starch) not
bread, therein declaring one only nature in Christ. What rite and ceremony
the Popistes accustom in this matter, it is euidente, and so manifest, that I
need not to remember ye same, but rather just occasion to lament that ever we
learned such a lesson of such teachers But happly they will say that they teach
no such doctrine as the Iacobites did: which is as much to say, as they can not
tell, or remember not what they teach. Be thou mindful (gentle Reader) of the
doctrine which D. Gardener the new Sacramentarie teaches. Gardener says.
They give in the Sacrament the flesh of Christ, but such flesh, as is of a God:
and a spiritual flesh and invisible, he says Christ has in heaven, which
inuisibilitie is not proper to our substance, nor to Christ in our substance
if he has the same. And undoubtedly when he ascended, he carried a visible
body: and unless he left it in the clouds, he entered his fathers mansion
therein, and therein aduocateth for us: exercising as our priest that part of
his Liturgy. And also the immortality of our substance and the glory of the
same, whereby it is in Christ already made spiritual: takes not away the
substance of the same, nor the visibilitie of the same. But Christ at his
appearing shall be visible, as it is said. Apoc. 1.6.
Ecce venit in nubibus and videbit eum omnis oculus, and qui eu^ pupugerunt:
behold he comes in the clouds, and al eyes shall see him, and so shall they
that have pricked him. Yet if it so were that Christ had a body in heaven, of
an invisible substance: is not for all that, our faith, and our hope better
stirred up by remembering in the common bread his common body, once received of
us, and now made a glorified body: than by a wafer and singing sop an other
body? If a man should bring a pore Hind of the country, a box of wafers at
his coming from ye plough to cromme his potage with, he would think his body
as little strengthened by such mocke-bread, as we may think our souls edified
by ye same.

Psallianes.
Haer. 57.
THose Heretics which Augustine ad quod vult Deum, calls by the same name of
Psallians (which is a Siriacke word) he says, may also be called (Euchitai)
that is, beads men: or as we may say, Lib 3. to 2. Haer. 80.
liplabourers, for much praying, or rather pratteling sake. Epiphanius counts
them Messalians, and writes of them and their sects under that name. Lib. 4.
c. 11.
They did rise as Theodorete writes (differing therein from Epiphanius) in the
time of the reign of Valent. the Emperor: and about the year of our Lord 367.
The captains of which sect was Dadoes, Sabas, Adolphius, and others. Whose
guise and behauiours though it seem at the first show holy, yet it is an
heresy, as Augustine notes, thus.

Tantum. n. orant, vt eis qui hoc de illis audiunt incredibile videatur. Nam
cum Dominus dixerit, oportet semper orare and non deficere. Et Apostolus, sine
intermissione orate, quod sanissime sic accipitur vt nullo die intermittantur
certa tempora orandi. Isti ita hoc faciunt nimis, vt hinc iudicentur inter
Haereticos nominandi. Dicuntur Euchitae opinari Monachis non licere manibus
sustentandae vitae causa laborare: atque ita se ipsos Monachos profitentur, vt
tum ab operibus vacent: The Psallians use so much to pray, that it may seem
incredible to the hearer. For where as our Savior says, that we ought to pray
continually, and not to cease. And the Apostle says, pray without
intermission, which surely is to be understood, that no day should pass
without some exercise of prayer: these men do accustom, to over pray so
much, that thereby they are accounted in the beade roll of Heretics. And it
is also said, that they judge it not to be lawefull for Monks to labor for
their living: and therefore many of them profess themselves Monks for easy
lives sake.

In these words thou may (gentle Reader) apperceyue, that men abstayning from
the affairs of this life, and honest trades, either by color of sole prayer,
or also for that cause, be Heretic Psallians, and not Monks. And their
assemblies, factions of such Heretics, and not Colleges of Christians. Of the
which sort the Popes Church has many, thronging out of ye four chiefest
Regular, irregular professions. Volat. 21.
One is S. Basile, the other S. Augustine (with lie and al) the third S.
Frauncis, the fourth S. Benedicte. Of whom (in deed) comes the first ruled
orders or vowed life and scismes of these sects, which ben many. In the
entreatie whereof I will proceed thus. First declaring certain of their orders
for men. Secondly for women. Thirdly the diverse concord of their ordered
discord among themselves, wherein since brevity will not suffer me to be
curious, I doubt not but thy gentleness will discharge my credit therein.

Benedictines. Anno. Domini. 530.
Volat. ibid. Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 2.
COme of Benedictus Nursinus, Abbot of the Monkerie of Cassinenss. who with his
sister Scholastica, first invented this heresy of regular life, when as the
Mo^ks before time hitherto, served Christ without any such bondage of vow and
rule, as after followed. The extent of the revenues of Benedictes Abbey
aforesaid, amounted to the yearly sum of 40000. That is reconing every
Flor. but at. 4. sbil. 8000. pou^des the year.
Florences. Their weed is in these latter days a shaven Pate, a black Cowle,
and under it a white Gown: they wear boots: and their Abbots have a Bishops
Crosier carried before them. In whose rule amongst other things is contained,
That he which does not keep the rule, and is bound thereto, must know that
he is damned of God. Metr. Krantz. Lib. 8. c. 4.


Cluniacke order. Anno. 920.
THis rose about that season under Pope John the tenth, in the county of
Burgundy (some say of one Oddo) other some of one Berno Gallicus, and are
partly conformed to the order of Benedictus. Volat. ibid. Sabel. Aene. 9. Lib.
1.
For yet and a good while after they knew no other. Of later time they wear a
garment of Oxes hair, and a long Scaplar.

Humiliators order. Anno. 1017.
ABout this time Henry the Emperor, the third of that name, Volat. Lib. 21.
banished diverse Mediolaners: and of them rose this sect. In the time of Pope
Benedict the eight, He used to ride in his life time.
who as Platina says was seen to ride upon a black horse, after his death
about the place where his treasure was hid. Pope Innocent the third and diverse
other Popes, approved this order, and granted it their protection.

Camaldulensium order. Anno. 1030.
THen one Romualdus Rauenatus, Polydo. de I^. Lib. 7. c. 2. Sabelli. En. 9.
Lib. 2.
began the same order, which has a certain affinity with the Benedictines*
And whereas before time the Monks used their coats and cowles of what color
they them selves listed. Volat. li. 21.
This Heresiarch appointed his servants and fellows, a white Cowle (and none
otherwise) to wear.

Vallis Vmbrosian order. Anno. 1060.
ABout this time one John Gualbertus a Florentine began this sect, Volat. 22.
Polydo de Ins. Lib. 7. c. 2.
which has his certain agreement with the Benedictes. Gregory the seventh in
his time allowed the same.

Chanons Regularie Anno 1070.
ABout this time one Abbot Arnulphus, began that order in the days (as some
reckon) of Pope Alexander the second, a victorious Champion, Polydo de In.
Lib. 7. c. 3.
who overcame Cadolus Bishop of Parmenion (chosen Pope as his better) in the
plain field. Their weed is a Sarplar of black, tied under their arm.
Metrop. Lib. 7. c. 50.
They are as it were the Bollimon of Monks and Priests, or as Krantz calls
them, Regularum irregulatio, the misserule of Rules.

Grandimontenss. order. Anno. 1080.
Volat. Lib. 21. Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 2.
About that time one Stephanus Gallus, who used to wear next his bare body,
under a black cowle, an habergeon, did excogitate this sect out of the
Benedictines. That crafty Monk Gregory the seventh, after the account of
some writers, being Pope, and Scholar as they say, in Necromancie.

Carthusian order. Anno. 1095.
Pla. Aemil. 5. Pol. Lib. 7. c. 3. Krantz Metrop. lib. 5. c. 19 and. 25.
CAme of one Bruno a Coloner, who took occasion of a certain Doctor (that being
dead, and his Corpse in the Church abiding the obsequies, cried out, I am damned
by the just judgment of God) to devise the same out of the Benedicts. These
eat only fysh, and no flesh, and vow silence by rule.

Cistertiene order. Anno. 198.
ONe Ardinus or as Polydor says, Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 2. Krantz, Lib. 5
c. 19.
Arding an English man, and Robert Molismensis began this order of Monks as
Volateranus and Sigebertus say, Paschalis secundus then being Pope: at whose
death the Evening or shutting in of the night, suddenly became so bright for an
hours space together, as that the Moon which then was at the full, was
altogether vnapperceyued. They wear read shoes, a shirt over their gown, and
their Abbots a Crosier.

Bernhardes order. Anno 1113.
THis order S. Bernhard they say began, and framed that sect out of the
dysorder of the Cistertiens. They wear a black Cowle. In vita Bernhards.
This order went so well forward, that in his life time there were.160, houses
thereof.

Duytch Lords.
ABout the foresaid time, Polyd. li. 7. c. 5
began the order of the Teuthoniks, commonly called Duytch Lords. For they are
for the most part Gentlemen borne, whom in this place I remember, that in
them thou might call to mind the warrelike rowte of religious Ruffians. They
wear a white mantell, and a black Cross upon it. It is lawful for them to
have a beard. The founder thereof was one Gaufredus de Aldemaro. Volat. Lib. 22.
Tyr. Li. 12. c. 7.
This was done in the days of Innocentius the second, who because at his own
lust and pleasure he used to alter the estate of the Churches in Syria, Tyr.
Li. 14. c. 4
stirred up great contention and scismes among the bishops there.

Premonstratenss. order. Anno. 1140.
Volat. Pol. Lib. 7. c. 3.
THe author thereof was one Nobertus Lotharing, Bishop of Laudane, who ordained
them white Chanons to wear a white cowle. They are called Chanons Regulars
exempted.

Wilhelmites. Anno. 1170.
Sabelii. En. 9. Volat. Lib. 21.
THese be a kind of Heremites raised up by one good John of Ma^tua. Their wede
is black. Some appoint it to one Guilihelm. bishop of Aquitane.

Carmelites or white Friars. Anno. 1175.
Polido. de. In. Lib. 7. c. 3.
THe white Friars first began about this time in Syria. They feign themselves
to be folowers of Helias in Carmell Mount. They use a black weed, and a white
Mantle or Cope. These two sects began in the days of Alexander the third, of
whose goodness (in part) I entreated before.

Cross Friars. Anno. 1197.
Volat.
THis order called Cruciferers, that is to say Cross cariers, began in
Italy, the same time they trauayled barefooted and bareheaded, they lodged on
the earth, and were girded with hemp. This was in the days of Pope Celestinus
the third.

Barefoote Friars. Anno. 1205.
Saint Frauncis the Friar of Asininas, Volat. 21. libre
the son of one Peter Barnardine, did devise this order and sect of religion,
called Gray Friars, Begging Friars, Too many names for true men.

Sa. En. 9. li. 9.


Barefoote Friars, Minors or Franciscanes: preaching in a Cowle, of whom
before I mentioned. The color whereof was Millers Graye: on their heads was
shaven a large crown. Their Girdle must be full of Knottes. They go a
limlyfting in the country for their living. etc. Innocentius the third (in
whose days they arose) approved them. This same Innocentius is he, In Phil.
of whom Abbas Vspergens. says that he used to say thus: Either the Pope must
take from Philip his Crown, or Philip from the Pope, his Apostolic Miter,
Keys, and svvorde. And therefore cries out against Rome: Pol. de In. li. 6 c.
14.
Thou have that thou long thristedst for O Rome, sound thy triumph, for thou
have overcome the world by wickedness not by religion. This swarm exceeded
the number of.60000. in the days of Sabellicus.

Trinity order. Anno. 1214.
Under the same Pope this order began by one John Matta and Felice an
Ancherite. Their apparel and weed is white, Volat. Pol. de. In. li. 7 c. 21.
a cross on their breast half red, half blewe.

Dominicke or black Friars. Anno. 1225.
THis order was devised of one Dominicus, Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 4.
and therefore are called Dominicks, preaching or lying Friars, black Friars,
begging Friars. They wear a black cowle. By the means of certain of this
brood, Henry the Emperor was poisoned in ye country of Berna. Pope
Gregory.ix. held the chair of Rome when as they sprang. This Gregory is he
that compiled the five books of Decretall Epistles. This Pope promised life
everlasting to as many of the Emperor Fredericks subjects, Plat. Aen. 9. Li.
6. Volat. 21.
as would fight against their Lord. Sabellicus declares that in his time
there were.4143. houses of his brood. This thing should seem true, as well
because of the credit of the author, as otherwise: and especially because that
Helias, Ioannes and Albertus did by battle strive who should be successor to
S. Dominicke in his Abbey: which they would never have done, unless that their
kingdom were already big and rich, yea and was likelier to be larger and
richer.

Bonne Ho^mes.
Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 4.
THis sect first began here in England, at a town called Ashering, in the
raygne of King Richard of Cornevvall, whose son built the Monastery. They
use girt cowles and blewe hoodes.

Sabelli. En. 9. Lib. 7.

Polido. de. In. Lib. 7. c. 4.


Ladies order. Anno. 1280.
ONe Tudent of Florence began this order, Their apparel is black.

Celestine order.
THis sect arose of one Celestinus Eserimnensis, who was the fifth Pope of that
name He began the same order after his consecration. And after the sixte
month of his enthronization returned thither again. But by the craft of
Boniface his successor; otherwise called Caietanus, who hiering false harlots
in the night times to speak through trunks to him as by oracles, persuaded him
to return for his souls health to the Heremites life. Whereupon he resigned
his Popedom. Plati. in vita Celest.
Notwithstanding, he was deceived of his purpose: for his said successor by
treachery, caused him to be shut up as prisoner, in the castle called
Fumonis, where the siely soul ended his life miserably. This Caietane is that
glorious Monarch and Pope, who one solemn day apparelled in his
Pontificalibus, played the part appertayning to his office, and blessed the
people with the Apostolic blessing. And on an other adourned in the Emperors
robes, had as appertains unto the Emperor a naked sword carried before him:
and sitting cried aloude, behold here two swords. But afterward by Gods just
judgment, this ambitious and covetous man (if it be lawefull to call him man)
dyed miserably in the prison, Plat.
under captivity of the faction of the Gibellines.

Jesuits order. Anno. 1367.
THis order then began of John Colombinus and of Frauncis Vincentius of
Sennens. who instituted their followers to get their living Volat. Sabel.
Polydo. de. In. Lib. 7. c. 4.
with their travail and sweat, Vol. Sab. Pol. de. In. li. 7. c. 4.
gathering this brood but here and there, from house to house, arrayed in
common, and not special attire. But when Urban then Pope, saw them differ so
much from other Monks, both in vow, profession and holy laboring life, he
called them to Rome, not so much approving them, as corrupting them. For then
he prescribed them a white Cowle, a square hoode hanging down to their
shoulder, and are girt with a girdle of a Pissel, wearing on their bare feet
wodden pattens, and that they should wear a cloak made of fine woll of
Canusium. They were at the beginning called Apostoliques, and not in holy
orders, Apostoliques vt supra.
but gave themselves only to prayer.

S. Saluieurs. Anno. 1415.
Volat. Blondus. Plat.
THis sect began under Pope John the xxiij. of that name: a man more fit for
the war and field, than for the Church. Their coats and scaplers are white,
and have on their uppermost garment a spear.

Montoliuetes order. Anno. 1420.
Pol. de. In. li. 7 c. 2.
ABout that time one Bernard Ptolomeus broched this order, cladde in a white
weed: the same was afterward approved by Pope Gregory the twelfth.

Minimorum order. Anno. 1455.
FRanciscus Siculus began this order in France: Volat.
and considering that old Friar Frauncis did call his Minors, that is, the
lesser of al orders: thinking to show a countenance, as humble as his, he
calls this sect Minimorum, which is to say, lesser than the least of al
orders: Pol de. In. li. 7. c. 5.
which in effect is no order. These men vow (beside Mysogamian) not to eat
flesh, but to live with raw fruits, and not dressed meat. I doubt not
Christian reader, but these sects of the Popes Psallians rehearsed, are
sufficient to cause thee to judge and determine of the rest. For I have
mentioned these only, because they seem the chiefest and purest: whereof the
adversary may best affie himself, and brag of the deuisers thereof. Not
because there is no more, or that the rest are not the horribler: or such as
the parties themselves loathe to think on. Therefore I omit overmuch to trouble
thy ears, or move tediousness by rehearsing. The Disciplinals. The shadowed
veil. Jerusalem brethren. Chrovvched Friars. The order of the veil of
Iosaphat. The Heremite Friars. The reformed Carmelits. The Sclauonites. Saint
Anthonies order. The Sheere brethren. The order of the Svvorders. The order of
Starred Monks. The order of Starred Friars. A Rowte of Religions.
The order of double Cross brethren. The order of Constantinopolitanes. The
Gregorians. The order of Wenclaus. Nolharts brethren. Saint Sophies order. S.
James with the svvord. S. James with the shell. S. Helenes brethren. S. Mary
Magdalene. S. Hierome Heremites. S. Ambrose Lords. The order of font Euerarde.
Joseph's order. Sepulcher order. The order of the Keys. The order of the
Hungarians. The Specularies. The order of the Thebans The order of Sarabites.
Recluses. The veil of Cavvline. The Sambonites. The vale of Scholars. Paul's
brethren of Galatia. Honofreans. Rufus Monks. Nevve Ninevites. Cellites. The
Haborites. Chaptre brethren. Begarts order. The Frisonarie congregation.
Reformed Iustines. S. Paul's Heremites. S. John's Heremites. The holy Ghost
order. S. Peter order. S. Loyes order. S. Victor order. S. Thomas order.
And diverse other more, which being rehearsed would make up the full account
of an hundredth. But as touching their Psallians sects for women, I will write so
much as shall be also necessary for thee to guess, as by part, the whole, and
none otherwise.

S. Scholastica Nonnes. Anno. 536.
BEnedict otherwise called Benet (of whom we have made mention heretofore) had
a sister called Scholastica, who learned of her brother Benet the way and manner
of hatching and brooding (among women) swarms of religion. Their veil, cloak
and cowle is black: They wear also a wimple, as all the rest do.

S. Agnes. Anno. 1105.
About this time one Agnes a Virgin began this religion at Jerusalem.

Chanonisses.
THis order began and sprang of the Chanons Regular. Their Mantels are black,
and their Rochets white.

Carmelitiss.
BRocardus the general of the Carmelites, clocked together this flock of
Hens to his rule. Their Mantels are white, their vnderclothes black. Their
Saints be Sibilla and Sibillina, Angela Archangela, Ioanna and Katherina.

Austen Systers.
THe Augustine Friars, because they would not clock without Hens feigned a
rule of Monica Augustines mother, and gathered a covent of women, as their
brethren of all sorts did. They wear a black girt Gown, and white Kirtels.
Their principal Saints are Helene and Clare.

Begynes of S. Frauncis.
THese be the Gray Sisters of the third order of S. Frauncis rule, that trotte
from place to place to sick men's beds, prowling and getting howsoever they
may in sickness and health, for their Covent.

S. Katherine Nonnes.
THese people are clothed in the color of the Dominicks. They are at the
solemnity of their profession, married with a ring. It first began at Senna.

Norman Systers.
BE those that were wont to be in every good town, and pray for their
founders souls.

Penitent Whoores.
THe author thereof was one John Tesseran a Franciscan of Paris, who assembled
common women together, and made a religion and rule of them.

Nonnes of the rosarie of our Lady.
A Dominicke Friar first devised this sect: and their order is to say on
their beads a certain mber of Lady Psalters: which being done they call it
the Rosarie.

Of the ten virtues of our Lady.
THese Nonnes use many colors: their Vayles are black: their Kirtels are
white: their Scaplars are red: their Mantels are gray. This sect first devised
the Chaplette, that is, to repeat. 10. Aue Mary's, a certain number of times.

S. Brigides.
THis Brigide was a noble wydowe of Suetia, who ordained this sect, wherein
Monks and Nonnes dwell together. The women have the upper room, and the men
the nether. They have a ginne or turning wheel in the wall, wherewith
properly they may convey the one sort from the other.

I will of these orders for women also let pass a great number, hoping that
thou (gentle reader) will take this for a sufficient rehearsal, seeing I mind
but summarily and briefly, as it were with the fingers end, to touch the same.
That thereby thou might see the Popes Psallians in both kinds of men.
Judging by the practice, the doctrine. Now briefly mark the contrarieties, and
diversities of such of them, as proceed out of the chiefest sects: from the
which though once they proceeded as out of the root, yet they vary and are
other sects in themselves, whereby thou may judge of the harmony of their
religion, seeing they are thus fallen from their founders, and disagree in
themselves.

White Monks and Nonnes spreading into Clariualenss. Bernardines.
Premonstratenss. White Gilbertines. And such like.


Black Benet Monks spreading into Harmony of the Popes Regulars.
Valisumbrensers. Camaldulenss. who wear white. Grandimontenss. Cluniacks.
Montelmenss. And many others.


There is great discord about the rule of Benet: because the sects agree not
what he has commanded or not. As Friar Angelus de Clauasio says in his summa
Angelica, and therefore needs the Popes exposition to appease them.

Augustine Monks and Nonnes spreading into Black. Blevve. Russet. White. And
many other.


The rule of this sect was changed by Pope Leo de Carato. Anno. 1401. Sabel.

Dominicks Monks and Nonnes, whereof the two first sects vary from the
tertiaries. And this rule needs the explication of the Pope.

Minorite Monks and Nonnes spreading into Obseruancers. Conuentuals.
Reformates. Collectans of ye Gospel, and of the Hoode. Amedees. Tertiaries
which contain men and women together.


Saint Clares order spreading into Obseruantes. Reformates. Vrbanes.


Friar Clauasius declares, that Pope Eugenius the fourth allowed her rule, in
the which five things are under pain of deadly sin commanded The first is
Obedience to the Abbess. The second is, Wilful poverty. The third,
Abstayning from Marriage. The iiij. Election of the Abbess. The fifth, to be
cloystred. etc.

Carmelites Monks and Nonnes divided into Recluses. Begintes. Conuerses.
Donates. And so forth.


Besides Camaldulensers, Iohannites, Jesuits, Carthusians and many other more,
whom for tediousness I omit to rehearse. vi. de rel. do. 4 Religionum glo.
ibid.
For eue^ the Popes their selves were ashamed of this diversity, Quia
diuersitas religionum inducit confusionem, because the diversity of religions
bring confusion, as euidentely may appear by their sects and scismes therein.
And therefore restrained the inuenting of any more. As Boniface the eight
says, Gregory the tenth in the second Council holden at Lions did. For God
stirred the hearts and weakened the wits of men long before that Council of
Lions (which was in the year of our Lord. 1273,) to seek the truth. And
therefore many men mused at the variety of these. Locustes (whereof John in
the Apocalips prophecieth, Apoc. 9. In Ep. de Mo. and Sacerdote
which came out of the smoke of the bottomless pit) as Anshelmus Auelburgensis
about ye year of our Lord.1150. testifies of his age and time. But to
(return to our purpose.) There is none of all these orders of the Regulars
above rehearsed, but as soon as they are professed, are by and by become
Euchites or Psallians, even of bente vow and purpose: both in the
supersticious use of prayer, and abstayning from working for their living. For
every religious person, is bound to the observance of Canonical hours (which
in number are.7.) to wete, the.j. the.iij. the.vj the.ix. with Mattens,
Euensong, and Complin, both in the common service used after the manner of the
Church of Rome, c. fin. 92. Did. et. c. 13. de voto The discord of common
service.
and those of the use of Sarum, use of York, and use of Ba^ger: though these
last are more stuffed with prayer to our Lady and Saints, tha^ that of Rome.
But ye Monks say these hours neither after ye use of Rome, nor Metropolitan
Church, but with certain special Himnes, Versieles, Antiphonies and Collects
of their religion, Gl. in. Cle. de celeb. Miss.
rule and profession. And therefore make not one kind of Psallians, but so
many kinds, as they have diversities of prayers, Henr. Began. in quo alibet.
Clauasius in summa.
orders, and rules of life. All which the hours and service must they not
omit, for then they should incur deadly sin. Yea or if any use at their
pleasure to change the same for other prayers rehearsed in their stead. And if
he should happen by negligence, yt he should omit in saying or singing of the
same, any part thereof, he is bound to make his accoumpt and number up, Pet. de
Pal. in 4. did. 15.
either with a Pater noster, or Psalm, or else he sins. And the like if he
say them not in their due hours: or one in another hour. Therefore must the
Regulars rise at mydnight to say Mattens, at the vprising of the sun to say
the first hour. Clauasius in summa. Pol de. In. Lib. 6. c. 2.
etc. and so forth on, the rest, to the honor of our Lady, after the
institution of Urban the Pope, and discharge of their rule. Whereby it is
evident, that they do a thing almost incredible. Following the advice that
Petrus de Palude gives, to pray an hundredth times by day, and an hundredth
times by night, the observance of their rule and rite of their Romish Church,
become Psallians, with whom as they agree in Battologia, liplabouring and
prattling, so they also do in a loytring life, and in aduouching of the same
doctrine, as so the Psallians did. Witness of Gabriel Biel, Sup. 4. did. 16.
q. 4. prop. 1.
who grants that all strong of limme, and labourlike beggars, ought to
work, or otherwise not to eat. Which notwithstanding he says that Friars,
Monks, and the rest of this brood ought, though they are no preachers nor
church ministers, yet by alms to be provided for and not work: because, Non
solum his modis seruitur Ecclesiae, sed etiam deuotis orationibus, et caeteris
exercitijs spiritualiter, his. n. acquiritur gratia Ecclesiae, placatur ira dei
and impetra^tur omnia necessaria corpori and animae etc. Vnde tota Ecclesia est
vna respublica, ergo quisquis vsibus Christianis necessaria erogauerit, vbique
ea quae sunt sibi necessaria accipit. etc. that is. That ye Church is not only
served by preaching and administration of the Sacraments, but also by devout
prayers, and such like spiritual exercise. For by the same grace is obtained
for the whole Church: Gods wrath is appeased, and all things necessary both for
body and soul are obtained. A falshode.
Wherefore sith the whole Church is a common wealth, it is requisite that
whosoever lays out any thing for the state of the whole, should every where
receive succor for his need. The which reason how unable it is to hold
water, any man may aperceiue, that considers how the reason, in the latter
part, (which is as a Metaphor brought from Syndico a general Proctor) fails,
as well because the godly exercises in the first part supposed, are not (if
the rest were granted to be good) found in the Cloisters according to all the
essentials and circumstances thereto requisite and therein supposed: as also
because that though it may happen, that the way and means how the general
procurer shall provide for his need, may be left to his own consideration, yet
the ways and means how a christian ought to provide, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
is not so. According to Paul's doctrine: Qui non laborat, non manducet. He
that labors not, let him not cate. Whose doctrine, yea, and example is to be
followed. Biel ibidem.
Although ye Alexius (as Biel says) forsook his wife and patrimony, went a
begging throughout the world. Although Benet abode three years in a cave, not
working, but lived of the alms of a Monk of Rome, yea, notwythstanding that
the Church of Rome has licensed, warranted, and defended, these Drones and
Caterpillars of the Commonwealth, or any other example of Dominick or Erauncis.
The which Frauncis rule they their selves follow, even as they list, which is
in deed nothing at al. What and how far they dare presume to break the
other rules, be they elder, or be they later, it may well be judged: Since this
that is one of the last and of the chiefest and principal of rules, is broken
and marred. Of the which it shall not be out of the way, so to entreat, as
seeing the marring of the same, thou thereby may perfectely view the state
of all the other. In reading whereof I pray thee be so indifferent, Franc.
Lamb. Auinioniens. c. 1.
as I for my part shall be in the describing of the same: and judge the best
thereof.

In the beginning of their rules thus stands it written. Regula and vita
Fratrum minorum haec est. Domini nostri Jesus Christi sanctum Euangelium
obseruare. that is. This is the rule and estate of the life of the Friars
Minors, to observe the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in the end:
Sanctum Euangelium Domini nostri Jesus Christi, quod firmiter promisimus,
obseruabimus. that is. As we have promised, so will we keep and firmly hold
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Pope Nicholas the third, Lib. 6. de
verborum sig. c. Exiuit.
extolleth the same rule very highly thus. Haec est apud deu^ and Patrem munda
and immaculata religio. etc. that is: This is the pure and undefiled religion
with god and the father. etc. By reason whereof I judge, that after S. Frauncis
in an earnest desire and pursuit of everlasting life, Volat. Lib. 21.
had tried by four years space the life in the wilderness, as also the
prowling life of beggars, supposing to find (among all) some manner of life
whereby he might attain to the holiest, was admonished to live and be
contented with the common rule of all christians: the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus. For in his Testament S. Frauncis testifies, that he was admonished by
oracle and commandment from the Lord, that he should live according to the
rule of the said Gospel. As if Christ should say. Frauncis, distract not thy
mind to this or that estate of life, think not sometimes to become a
Carthusian, sometime a Bernhardine, or such like. For the rule of righteousness
consists in the Gospel, the common rule and religion of all Christians.
After the like sort Antonius Heremita was admonished, about Anno Domini. 350.
and persuaded (as Petrus Parissie^s. Cantor. says) to receive the Gospels
rule. And therefore when any Monks came to him for rule of life, he offered the
same Gospel to be only followed by them: and infecting them therewith, thought
(as I judge S. Frauncis after him did) to make them Gospellers and preachers of
the same to all men. And the rather, because there were few true teachers in
S. Frauncis time. He therefore bound them to that office: 4. exiuit.
prescribing almost the form of their sermons (as the said Pope Nicholas
says.) Habetur in eadem regula etiam, The Franciscanes must preach.
quod in praedicatione quam Fratres faciu^t fint examinata and casta eorum
eloquia: ad vtilitatem and edificationem populi, annunciando eis vitia and
virtutes, What.
poenam and gloriam. that is. In the same rule of S. Frauncis, is also
contained, that the sermons of those Friars should be of due examined stuff,
true matter and pure: to the perfect edifying of the people, instructing them
of vices and virtues, of pain and glory. They must possess little.
And by the like considering of the covetousness of the Monks, of and before
his time, whom the Council of Cabilion (which was about the year of our Lord
800. in ye great Charles his days, could not restrain: but that they would
persuade men to bequeath lands and goods. etc. to their Monasteries: whereby
it was like it would come to pass (as it afterward did) that the Clergy
should be Lords of all, Math. 4.
and then having the Devils offer, might fall down and worship him, ordained
that they should take no money, be no gatherers of goods or patrimony. But
having meat and drink. etc. should willingly drive forward the Gospel of
Jesus Christ in such poverty, least that while they are Philochremator, that
is, studiers for lucre, the work of the Lord, and building of the house should
be undone. Hagg. 1.
Which Haggei the Prophet cries against: and therefore they are bound to work
with their own hands for their living as the same Pope Nicholas in yt place
aforesaid declares. But this good zeal of Frauncis took small effect, for it
sared therewith, as it does with good herbs, that set in a dry summer and
deawlesse days, sone wyther. I so say, because that the Popes holiness
straight way caught it by the end, pierced the root, and by expounding the
purpose of Frauncis perverted the religion. Gregory the.ix. Nicholas the
third, and Clement the fifth, each in his time began to approve, expound, and
ordain Frauncis: or rather misforme him: as by the example of the unnatural
chaungelings of these late years appears. Where Frauncis would have
obedience to God in Jesus Christ sworn, there must they swear obedience to
Francis. In place of following the rule of the gospel, they must follow the
Popes explication. In stead of such edifying and pure Sermons, they must
preach Legende lies, Ouidius Metamorphosis, an ouerworne Gospel or Epistle in
Latin, and Canonical hours. And for working for their living, they must
loyter. For a poor Covent or Cloister, a Kings palace and wealth. Finally, in
stead of the putting out of one pore hand for a penny, hold a hoode of a
pecke. Well, thereby declared they (to the wise man) their covetous hearts and
larger consciences. Wherefore I dare aduouch if Frauncis saw those that
challenge his name, in these days, he would, marking their fat cheeks and
soft hands, say they are no Franciscanes, but Psallians. And marking their
continual prattling, and small preaching, also say they are no Franciscans but
Psallians. But for all their deformities, he would last of all, say they are
Cerberus whelps: and their Covent a kennell for the same. If the Franciscanes
of our days are mysseshapened: If that godly be so perverted, that they are
become rather the Heretics of their founders than folowers, what ought a man
then to judge of the rest: if the same rule of Frauncis or any other more were
good. And as touching such orders whose rule and profession is naught in the
erection and first foundation of the same: and was never good, I need not to
speak at al. If therefore these regular professors, before briefly passed
over, would examine their Dortour cheer, Canonical hours and loytring life,
I doubt not but that they all would say, that they looked as like Psallians in
our time, as the Psallians in Augustines time, and they all in them, looked like
Heretics.

Encratites.
Haer. 25. Epiph. lib. 2. to. 1. Haer. 47.
Saint Augustine following the judgment of Epiphanius, counts this sect of
the Encratites a scisme or faction of the Tatianistes: appoynting the Tatians
for the chief head and fountain of the same. The account of their first
rising, is contained in the Chapter of Tatians, as in their root of whom they
first about the year of our Lord.175. sprang.

Their name does even at one word declare, what doctrine thou should look
for at their hands. They are called Encratites, which signifies abstayners.
Aug. ibidem.
Nec recipient (says Augustine) in suorum numerum coniugio vtentem, sieve marem
sieve foeminam, non vescuntur carnibus, easque omnes abhominantur. that is. They
receive not into their Covent, either man or woman married, they eat no flesh,
but detest all kinds thereof.

With the which doctrine and manner of those Encratites, the foresaid Regulars,
so in every point agreed, as they may well grant that Augustine has meant of
them: whatsoever he writ as touching the Encratites. For the above said
Regulars received none to be of their number, but marriage forswearers: do not
the Encratites so? They also are bound by profession to detest al flesh: and
do not the Encratites so? These Carthusians vow never to eat flesh: De. In.
li. 7. c. 2.
even so all Monks, or the most part of Benets rule do. Polydorus Virgilius
does give them a pretty scoff: that either the most part of Monks eating
flesh continually against their profession, are Heretics, or are continually
sick. Yea and these holy charterlings are such despisers of Marriage, that if a
married woman come within their cloister, Tatianisme.
it must be washed and cle^sed after her with holy water: as by good proof it
has been seen. But the common proverb is without all doubt true in them: see
sport, not see, no jest.

Carpocratians. Anno. 173.
ABout the year of our Lord God 173. in the.xj. year of the reign of Hadrian
the Emperor: as Theodoretus, Eusebius and Nicephorus declare, gods Church was
assaulted with the egre Heretics Saturninus, Basilides and Carpocrates, of
which latter comes this sect called Carpocratians, Irenaeus. lib. 1. c. 24.
whereof I entreat in this Chapter. These sectaries were so puffed up with
pride, that they (as Irenaeus declares) said some of them were like to our
Savior Jesus in observing of righteousness, and in knowledge. And also that,
part of them was more excellent than Peter and Paul. Li. Conformitatum. Fol.
2. Impress. Mediolan.

Anno. 1510.


The same doctrine do the Franciscanes teach in these words. Franciscus ad
litteram fecundu^ Euangelium obseruaunt, non transgressus apicem vnum and
iotam. Et solam ipse cum suis habet regulam. etc. S. Frauncis has performed
the holy Gospel just with the letter, Fol. 5.
not breaking any one jot or prick. And in another place: Omnes virtutes
sanctorum, tam vaeteris quam noui testamenti, in Francisco posita sunt unitive
and coniunctiue. that is. All the virtues of the holy fathers, especified both
in the old and new testament, are all wholly and together in S. Francis. Also
in the.8. leaf he says. Franciscus similis Adae Abel, Enos, Enoch, Noe,
Abrahae, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Mosy, Aaron, Phinees, Joshua, Job, Samsoni,
Iephite, Gedeoni, Samueli, Eliae, Elizeo, Ionadab, Esaiae, Ieremiae, Job,
Thobiae, Ezechieli, Danieli, Micheae, Petro, Iohanni Baptistae, Iohanni
Euangelistae, Iacobo, Bartholomeo, Paulo, in summa omnibus Sanctis. And in many
other places thoroweout the whole book, which I omit.

Priscillianistes. Anno. 382.
PRiscilianus of the Country of Spain, or as Hierome says, of Galatia, did
begin his famous faction under the raygnes of the Emperors Gratian and
Valentinian, which was about the year of our Lord God.382. First in Spain,
Haer. 70.
then after, in France. They taught, that they should not tell nor open the
secrets of any man be they never so filthy, unrighteous or perilous: as
Augustine notes thus. Iura periura, secretum prodere noli. that is. Swear and
forswear, the secret thing forth show not: and this was percell of their
doctrine. The self same doctrine the Popistes have in these words of
Cardinal Caietane. To. 1. tract. 21.
Nullatenus licet confessori reuelare peccatum confitentis,, etiam deliberatam
occidendi summi Pontificis voluntatem habentis. that is. Et in su^mula Parag.
Confess.
It is not by any means lawful for a ghostly Father to reveal the offense or
wicked purpose of his ghostly child, no, not if his purpose were stoutely
stayed to kill the Pope himself. The practice of their Church doctrine is
partly touched by Fabian entreating of the death of King John. But very largely
and truly, In part Fab.
set out by the no less learned than painful brother M. Fox, in his Acts
and Monumentes of Martyrs. For when as a Monk of Svvinsted in Lincolneshiere
called Simon (the son of Simon Magus) had determined to poison the foresaid
King with wine, wherein a Toade had (by him pricked) vometed by such tormente
her venime, and did before hand confess to his holy Abbot the same his
purpose. The same Abbot most traitorously kept secret the same from the
Prince: yea, and that more is, heartened the Monk to the same murder of the
Prince, and of himself, first drinking thereof to him. For which good deed,
the Monk should have a perpetual Mass for his soul. But who can look of
such roots for other fruits?

Jewish Blastians.
EVsebius makes mention of one Blastus, Lib. 5. c. 14.15.19.
who was (as by him may be gathered) about the year of our Lord god 174. a man
infected with the Heresy of Valentinian. And as Theodoretus witnesses, he was
an elder in the Church of Rome. Tertulian speaks of him under ye name of
Blastrus. His mate in this his error was one Florinus. But that which I intend
to write of, is that which the same Tertulian testifies. In fine Lib. de
praesc. Her.
Blastus latenter vult Iudaismum introducere. etc. that is. The same Blastus
endeavored himself secretly to bring into the Church of Rome ye Ceremonies of
the Jews. By the which saying of Tertulian, it is to be apperceyued, that the
Church of Christ counted it Heresy, to use any one of the Leuitical
Ceremonies, or to conform her self to the manner and fashion of that Church.
Of the same mind also ye general council of Laoditia about.300. and odd years
after our Savior his birth was. Yea, and the church of Rome was once her self
of that mind against the Asians. But she stayed not long therein. For
beholding that her estate and countenance of religion, was in the outward
glory baser than Jew and Gentile, did show her self with a new attire:
fashioned partly after the Iudaisme which she before abhorred, and partly
after the Gentilitie of the Egyptians, Ioannes Boemus. lib. 2. c. 12 Durand and
Beleth. per totu^. Act. 15.
Gretians and Romans. The which was not lawefull: no not for the Jews to do.
For as the Apostles in the holy Synod at Jerusalem, did strike out the
Iudaisme which false brethren would have brought in among the beleners of the
Gentiles, so did they also command them to abstain from the Ethnisme of
their forfathers. Which notwithstanding this, has the Church of Rome broken.
Thus has she revolted. Thus is the thing lawefull by her authority, which is
otherwise unlawful. S. Thom. 1.2. q 103. art. 4.
Nam Gentilitatis ritus repudiabatur tanquam omnino illicitus, and a Deo semper
prohibitus. Ritus autem Legis cessabat tanquam impletus per Christi passionem
vtpote a Deo in figuram Christi constitutus. For the rite of the Gentiles
(says S. Thomas) was of ye Church altogether refused, as wholly unlawful and
always by God forbidden. But the rites of the law did cease, as by the
passion of Christ accomplished: namely ordained of God for a mystery of
Christ. Wherefore in viewing of this ornament of the Church of Rome, thou must
(gentle Reader) mark, first those things that she had from the Jews, wherein
she agrees with the heresy of Blastus. Secondly those that she had from the
Gentiles: wherein she is become a Gentile. For although they are applied to Gods
religion, so far as they can apply the same: yet by no means are they
incorporated: because Gods religion is such as always abhorred the Ethnicke
rites. The which thing thine own travail, (with the help of Durandus and
Belethus and Boemus, their own writers,) easily may do. And therefore I
omit the same for shortness sake. Which also causes me to ouerpasse a great
number more of her toys and trimming.

Mass.
Anno. 235.

POntianus a Roman ordained the Confiteor to be said of the priest before
Mass. Nauclerus. Genesis 8.


Anno. 426.

Celestinus a Campanois appointed the introite to the Mass. Volat.


Anno. 443.

Leo a Thuscane lengthened the Cannon with Sanctum Sacrificium. etc. and Igitur
Oblationem. Sigebertus. Pol. de. In. li. 5. c. 10.
etc. unto Placatus.

Anno. 513.

Synmachus a Sardinian, Volat.
about that time Bishop, fashioned the Mass (cloughted by many of his
predicessors) into a form and more perfect sort.

Anno. 583.

Sigeb.
Pelagius the second a Roman ordained the Prefaces to the Mass.

Anno. 593.

In Decret.
Gregorius a Roman added the Kyrieleison nine times to be said, the
Alleluiah, the Offertorie, and the three Postlacions in the Cannon.

Anno. 690.

Sergius an Antiochen cast to ye Mass Agnus Dei.

Anno. 731.

Sigebertus.
Gregory the third joined the clause, Eorum quorum solemnitas hodie. etc. to
the Canon of the Mass.

Anno. 768.

Stephanus the third provided that Gloria in excelsis should be every Sunday
song at Mass.

Anno. 772.

Adrianus a Roman, least, passing deuicelesse (as touching this thing) he
might seem to be barrayne in the birth of Antichrist, was delivered of.ij.
twins, those repetitions or doublings in the Offertorie.

Anno. 1215.

Ex Lib. 3. c. Sane.
Honorius a Roman ordained, that the Host at Elevation should be worshipped,
and that he should be carried with light and such like to the sick.

Anno. 1484.

Math. Pal.
Innocentius the eight gave license unto the Norvvaies, to consecrate without
wine.

Orders, dignities, and degrees.
Anno. 283.

Did. 24. c. Subdiacon.
GAius a Dalmatian ordained that Priests should be consecrated in their
offices, whether that they were Ostiaries, Lectors, Exorcistes, Acoluthes,
Did. 24. c. Subdiacon.
Subdeacons, Deacons, Elders or Bishops.

Anno. 295.

Marcellinus an Apostatate Bishop, appointed that there should be.xxv.
Paroches and every one to have his governor to baptize the Gentiles and bury
the dead. Whereupon, about.800. years after, Polid. li. 4. c. 9
the device of Cardinals sprang.

Anno. 714.

Gregorius the second a Roman, commanded that no man should mary with his
Gossip. Tom. 1. Council.


Fasting.
Anno. 220.

CAlistus or Calixtus the seventh Pope being a Roman borne, Did. 76. c.
Ieiunium.
appointed the days called Angariae, that is the Imbre four times in the
year.

Anno. 406.

Innocentius an Albanian ordained that Saturday should be fasted. De Consecr.
3. c. Sabba. vero.


Anno. 421.

Bonifacius a Roman ordained yt the Saints eeues should be fasted, whereas
before his time it was not so. Pot. li. 6. c. 4.


Anno. 593.

Gregory a Roman added four days to the beginning of Lent: he forbad
milk, cheese, Ibidem. c. 6.
butter and eggs.

Holy days.
Anno. 318.

SIluester a Roman ordained at the request of Constantine, the feast of Petri
ad vincula. Ibide^ c. 8.


Anno. 537.

Sigeb.
Vigilius a Roman ordained the feast of Candlemasse.

Anno. 626.

Honorius a Champanois ordained the feast of the Exaltation of the Cross.

Anno. 828.

Plat. Sab.
Gregorius the fourth a Roman, at the request of the Emperor appointed the
feast of All Saints.

Pol. de. In. li. 6 c. 8. Volat. Ibidem.
Anno. 1002.

John the.xviij. ordained the feast of All Souls.

Anno. 1260.

Vrbanus the fourth, ordained the feast of the Sacrament, called Corpus Christi
day.

Anno. 1471.

Extravagan.
Sixtus the fourth appointed the days of presentation and conception of our
Lady, of S. Anne and Joseph.

Marriage
Anno. 386.

Did. 82.
SIritius a Roman did first tirannously forbid marriage to the Priests.

Pol. li. 5. c. 4.
Gregory the.ix. about the.1075. year of our Lord took it wholly away.

Burying.
Anno. 220.

Plat.
CAlisius the.xvj. Pope, hallowed special places (which we call Churchyardes)
for burying.

Consecrations.
Anno. 220.

Polid. li. 5. c. 6. and Libr. 8. c. 1.
CAlisius or Calixtus the.xvj. Pope, a Roman borne, first consecrated and
dedicated a Church unto the honor of our Lady, which he did in the country
beyond Tyber.

Anno. 269.

Foelix being Bishop, Plat. Sab.
did ordain that Altares should be consecrated.

Anno. 283.

Gaius a Dalmatian appointed that Christians should bring of their first
fruits to the Altar, Pol. li. 6. c. vlt.
and that there they should be hallowed after the manner of the Jews.

Dedications.
Anno 609.

BOnifacius the fourth a Martian, Blondus. lib. 9 Diacon. lib. 18.
this man altered the temple which M. Agrippa builded to all the Ethnicks Gods,
unto the Church of All Saints.

Anno. 621.

Bonifacius the which was a Champanian, Sigeber. Sab.
did bestow the Church and Altares, on Thieves for their Sanctuaries.

Church Instruments and vtensiles.
Anno. 202.

ZEpherinus a Roman borne, Pol. lib. 6. c. 12. Plat.
ordained that thenceforth the sacrament of Christ's blood should not be
ministered any more in wooden vessels, but in glass.

Anno. 227.

Vrbanus the.xvij. Pope ordained that from his time forward the Communion Cup
(which then was wood or glass) should then be silver or gold. Gratian.


Anno. 256.

Stephanus a Roman, and above.xx. the.iij. B. ordained certain Vestimentes
and apparel for the ministration, Pol. de. In. li. 6 c. 12.
after the manner of the Jews Priests, and for the Altares.

Anno. 258.

Volat. Sab.
Xistus the second of that name, an Athenian, was B. and in number.24. he
appointed that thenceforth it should not be lawefull for a Priest or Leuite to
wear their gay Vestiments, but in an holy place.

Anno. 318.

Plat. Sab.
Siluester a Roman bestowed on the Church, both linen Albes and Corporalls.

Anno 406.

Pol. lib. 6. c. 11.
Innocentius an Albanian devised that the Pax should upon feastful days be
carried about to be kissed: and that the clergy men should kiss one another.

Anno. 420.

Isiodor. Volat.
Sozimus a Gretian, about that time. B. appointed the Paschal taper on Easter
eeuen to be hallowed.

Anno. 463.

Hilarious a Sardinian first published the Cannons for law, Sab. Volat.
and appointed the Church to be trimmed with gold and silver.

Anno. 593.

Volat. Sab.
Gregorius a Roman devised the lights in the Church, and manner of the Queere.

Anno. 606.

Plat.
Sabinianus a Thuscane endued the Church with the devise of the Lamps
continually to burn, and the practizing of Belles.

Anno. 608.

Bonifacius the third a Roman, who first obtained the name of Pope and
universal Bishop, Pol. lib 5. c. 6.
enriched the Church Altares with a license to wear fair lynnen couerings.

Possession Temporalties.
Anno. 227.

VRbanus the.xvij. Bishop ordained and licenced the clergy men to receive
temporal possessions. Pol. lib. 6. c. vl.


Anno. 265.

Dionisius appointed and set out to every Minister his parish and Church, Pol.
lib. 4. c. 9.
commanding them to be contented therewith.

Peculiaritie or exemption.
Anno. 241.

FAbianus a Roman ordaynrd that Priests should be impleaded only in the
ecclesiastical courts: and that none should accuse them but their like. 2. q.
7. c. Sicut.


Annoyling.
Anno. 318.

SIluester a Roman devised that Bishops should be anointed after the manner
of the Leuiticall Priests. Pol. lib. 5. c. 3.


Anno. 406.

Innocentius an Albanian appointed that ye oil which before was for the
Bishops proper use, Sigeb.
should now be also for the sick. etc. Some appoint it to Foelix the fourth
an hundredth years since. Volat.


Translation.
Anno. 253.

Tom. 1. Council.
Cornelius a Roman, about that time Bishop, at ye request of Lucina a noble
lady of Rome, translated or conveyed the bones (if they happened on them) of
Peter and Paul unto a more honorable place: whereby he was the first beginner
of the Ceremonies or right of Translation.

Primacie.
Dis. 17. c. Synnodum.
MArcellus, who as Platina writes, succeeded Marcellinus the Apostata, decreed
that no act, by whom soever appointed, should be of any force, unless it
should by the authority of the Bishop of Rome be confirmed.

Anno. 336.

3. q. 6. c. Dudu^
Julius a Roman ordained, that the Councelles should not be called together or
celebrated without the Bishop of Romes consent.

Anno. 406.

9. q. 3. Nemo Iudicabit.
Innocentius an Albanian exempted to sea of Rome from the subjection of being
judged and construed of other.

Service.
Anno. 368.

DAmasus a Spaniard appointed that the Psalms should be tossed from side to
side: Pol. Lib. 6. c. 2.
and that at the end of every Psalm, Gloria Patri. etc. should be song.

Anno. 404.

De Cons. dis. 1. c. Apostolica.
Anastasius a Roman about that time was consecrated Bishop, he ordained that
thenceforth all people, as well of the clergy as of the laity, should
hearing the Gospel, stand and yield courtesy.

Anno. 426.

Celestinus a Campanian appointed that the Psalms should be song after the
order of Antiphonies. Sab. Sigeber. In prohe^. 5. part.
He also devised the Graduale. Durandus says, Ambrose devised the same.

Anno. 445.

Leo a Thuscan found out (by the advice of Mammertus Bishop of Vienna) the
petie Procession, Pol. lib. 6. c. 11.
or Jack gangs.

Anno. 413.

Symmachus a Sardinian decreed that on Sunday, Plat.
and on every birth day of Saints, Gloria in excelsis should be song.

Anno. 530.

Agapetus a Roman decreed that those Processions should go round about the
Church every Sunday. Volat. Plat.


Anno. 537.

Vigilius a Roman laid out for every holy day proper and fit lessons. Isiodor.


Anno. 556.

Pelagius the first a Roman devised the Canonical hours, Pol. lib. 6. c. 2.
Plat.
who first applied the Mass for Anniuersaries or year minds of the dead.

Anno. 583.

Pelagius the second ordained the seven sorts of Letanies. Sigebertus.


Anno. 593.

Gregorius a Roman devised the manner of the Queere, the Antiphonies to the
Mass, Greg. lib. 4. Epist. c. 88. Pol. li. 8. c. 1.
and the large or honorable Processions. He was the first that pronounced
pardon to such as on chosen and special days resort to Church.

Plat. Volat.
Vitellianus a Champanois, brought in, (himself being a Musician) the
artificial singing and harmony of Organs and instruments.

Anno. 707.

Poly lib. 6. c. 13.
Constantinus a Syrian, because the Images had as simple right, so unquiet
possession and small favor with their Landlordes, decided the cause that
hitherto hong before his predecessors variable: grau^ting them license, to be
painted in the Porch of S. Peter's church at Rome.

Anno. 731.

Plat.
Gregory the third ordained the Images to be honored and worshipped.

Anno. 796.

Pol. lib. 5. c. 10.
Leo the third a Roman ordained the three Procession days before the
Ascension. Also the burning of Frankencense after the manner of the Gentiles and
Jews.

Anno. 1050.

Blondus. 3. dec. 2.
Leo the ninth a Germane drew a pattern for the Church to sing the Himnes and
songs for Saints.

Anno. 1086.

Poly 6. c. 2.
Vrbanus the second, ordained the.vij. Canonical hours, to the honor of our
Lady.

Anno. 1315.

Poly. 6. c. 12.
John the.xxij. he devised that the Sanctus bell should be tolled thrice every
day, at which, the hearers should straight crouch and say the Aue Maria.

Baptism.
Anno. 369.

DAmasus a Spaniarde ordained the Crossing with Chrisme on the browe at
Baptism. Tom. 1. Council.


Confirmation.
Anno. 318.

SIluester a Roman, devised the confirmation of Infantes: we call it
byshopping. Plat. Sab. To. 1. Council.
Some appoint it to Meltiades, and other some to Eusebius.

Excommunication.
Anno.. 772

ADrianus a Roman devised first the Seals of lead, called Bulls. Poli. lib.
8. c. 2.


Let this summarie abstract, be to thee (gentle reader) a sufficient
demonstration and teaching, how the Popes from time to time have bredde this
their monstrous religion, and clowted comeliness.

Rethorians.
THe ancient Philaster and after him August. (out of him) make mention of one
Rhetorius, who held a marvelous vain opinion, to weete: Omnes haereticos
recte ambulare and vera didere. That all the heretics walked aright and said
the truth. Which though perhaps he did, either by expounding of their meaning,
or such like sort to cover their shames withal: yet for that he concluded to
that effect, he is an Heretic with either of them in their several errors.
How much honesty so ever he would do them: he has thereby dishonested
himself. Even so the Popistes in these our days, think that it stands much
with their honors, that they should defend the Apostasy of their Church of
Rome, for whose sake they stick not to damn themselves: I know not by what
compact. For albeit that their Church follows the Heretic Antropomorphites
and Angel men, Catharists and Colliridians, Chazinz^ries and Coluthians,
Montanistes and Messalians, Donatistes and Pelagians, with the rest of the.24.
errors of the old Heretics, To. 1 tract. 30.
yet dare they say with Caietane: Proprio sensu ac germano sacrarum
Scripturarum. Ecclesia semper vtitur in sacris Canonibus. That their Church
does use in the Cannons the proper and natural sense of the holy scripture.
Which saying being true: of these conclusions one must follow: that they are
either Heretics of sound Canons, or else yt they living and teaching
according to their Cannons, are the Heretics of heretical canons. For as it
is most evident: that there is but one truth: so is it (without al doubt)
plain that they vary therefro. Ruardus and Roffensis agree not: Lusitanus and
Soto concord not: neither are they in unity with Pighius. The elder age of the
Popistes, is against the Popistes of this time: And yt Popistes of this age
against themselves. Gardener against Smith, and also against himself, Smith
against Gardener. Not for the standing of a table, kneling, sitting or wearing,
but (amongst other) for the large doctrines of Fre will, original sin,
Justification, and Sacrament of Christ's body: Of the which latter point they
have many contrarieties, and errors: although it be the waightiest ware of
their pedlers pack: For the which they have embrued themselves with the blood
of Gods Saints: who of right they ought to have spared, and first have
turned their tirannie to themselves, and have fierd there own folk, or at
least have agreed with themselves, before that they would compel other to
agree to their discord: which I over pass, since it is more plainly proved
before, than either order or need in this place require again. The proof
whereof perhaps may cause (the astonished at their horriblenesse) to demand
how it then could come to pass that the same should continue till this day,
neither God, nor man hewing it down. To the which I answer, as touching Gods
will working therein (for that the cause thereof is not wholly revealed) we must
say with Paul: O altitudo Sapientiae etc. O deepenesse of Gods wisdom.
Notwithstanding the secretnesse whereof: yet that such a thing should be,
Paul and John the Evangelist, with many other witness. The which John calls
it by the name of Babylon the great City: under which name Peter (as the
Popistes expound the last chapter of his first Epistle) means Rome. Partly
for the present diversity and confusion (For Babylon by interpretation
signifies so) of the Gentiles superstition there used: partlye for that in the
spirit he did with John foresee the confusion of Christian religion, that
should spring thence to infect all christendom. As the ancient and
effeminate Babylonians did in their days the whole world. And though the
world never gave stroke thereat, what then? it stands with his nature, to
foster and set forward superstitions, and to spare no cost. No not their wives
earings nor ornaments, and birth right of their here is. Yea pardie at the
building of Gods tabernacle they will not deal so frankly, as to spare the
same. An easier religion it is, to be saved by Simon Magus mere grace and
plenitudine potestatis and fullness of power (lead his scholar never so loose
a life) then by faith in Christ which demau^deth in obedience a holy life:
which to the carnal and gross world is unsavory, as well for that he can not
abide the spiritualnesse of faith: as also for that, that holiness is against
his decayed nature, it also is against his courage to be brideled, or obey.
Possiblye the author of the Apology for the private Mass, Hosius and the
other of that brood, will think: that I grant their plea of quiet
possession: whereby they will prescribe against the truth: I confess nothing
less: but rather muse that they so fondely reason.

For the Church of Christ in this ease, is much like unto a family or flock,
whose right of long time wrongfully with holden, though all the flock does not
with open mouth claim: yet if any one heir of of nighest kin stand for
the same and obtain, the quiet possession of the defenda^t is empaired. Even
as the Popistes is, whereby they cannot, Bona fide possidere, without mistruste
of forged title prescribe and possess, another man's right and place. And God
in all ages has stirred up some good members, and heirs of grace to pursue
the right of the Church. As Anno 313. the Counsels of Nice and Mileuitane stood
against the appeals to Rome. Innovation of Prayers. Supreme authority. And
for the Marriage of Priests. Secondly, Anno Domini. 430. the sixth general
council of Carthage (which endured five years) against the supremacy. Also
Pope Innocentius the first, for the marriage of Priests. Thirdly Pelagius the
Pope. John Maxentius, Anno. 513. against the supremacy. Fourthly Pope
Gregory the first. Anno. 600. against the supremacy. And the sixth Council of
Constantinople, for Priests marriage. Fyfthly, Anno. 700. S. Hulderich
resists Pope Nicolas in the case of Priests marriage. Sixthly, Anno. 800.
Clemens Scotus, of the University of Paris, against Boniface, for ye marriage
of Priests, and against Images. Seauenthly, Anno. 940. the first Ottho the
Emperor against the supremacy and pride of the Popes. Eyghtly, Anno. 1050
Lupoldus Bishop of Mentz against Leo the ninth, for the supremacy. And
Nicetas for the marriage of the Clergy. Ninthly, Anno. 1120. the clergy of
England and Germany, for their wives. Tenthly, Anno. 1213. Frederick the
second Emperor against the Popes tirannie. Eleuenthly, Anno. 1329. the whole
kingdom of France against the Pope and his Court. Twelfthly, Anno. 1400.
Thomas Rhedonenssis, Nicolaus Cusanus, and Aeneas Siluius (before he was Pope)
against the pride of the Pope, and for Priests marriages. Finally, in this last
hundredth year, God has raised up Laurentius Valla, Hierome Sauanorola, and
the Earl of Mirandula, with innumerable many more of worthy Champions, of whom
some have fought unto their knees in blood for the right of the Church, whose
doughty dintes done, cause this tree to wyther (as thou may view) and to be
without al hope of further fruit. Every man according as God has lightened
their hearts, has dealt in the right of the Church: by reason whereof the
Popists can not (as I before said) plead prescription. Nor we be so blind, as
to think the religion of the Protestants to be a new doctrine, which through
all ages has been thus defended (though I touch but a few, by many more) as I
am ready to prove. Wherefore it is a very loud lie, to say that Luther begone
the same. All which notwithstanding, God has reserved the utter overthrow of
the same tree, The author satisfies his promis made in the beginning, for
continuance of the Church.
to the breath of his own mouth, (which approeheth now at hand) least flesh
and blood should glory in so valiant a conquest. Thus much therefore to them
that demand, why neither God nor the world did hew down this tree, nor
stock the root. The sum whereof is, that he was pleasant and did agree with
the supersticious and filthy nature of the world: and that God though he has
caused his church to strike from time to time thereat, yet has reserved the
same to a greater punishment and seuerer judgment. As he also has done
Mahomet the eronious tree without ye Church, which both are nourished with the
water of ignorance. Even as so to be, is the manner of Heretics. For if
either Simon had well received the doctrine of the holy ghost, or Judas of the
Messiah, it is not to be thought that they would have departed from the Church:
Falling when they seemed to stand, deceived by arrogancy, which I may properly
call ignorance. The which since it was so needeful for the beginning of this
tree, is by the aforesaid Babylonians, the Popists, used as a no less
necessary policy, and licoure for the maintayning and watering of the same.
Neither do the Popistes misseresemble their brother Mahomete whose religion
written under the old Arabical tongue, and commandment of not interpreting and
expounding the same, beyond the literal sense, has under mighty and
thundering terms, being otherwise senseless and spiritlesse, ruled the poor
sely souls, as Jupiters block amongst a number of frogs. He is counted a
learned Priest, that can read his service plainly and turn it into the
Sclauonian. etc. tongue. The which estimation of such learning does rather of
right appertain to the Mahomet Priests, than to the Popistes, of whom the
greater part can not write nor spell in their mother tongue their own names, much
less expound their Latin Portus, or read beside their own. Surely the
Romish cleargies ignorance was such, that within these fifty years (as
common report is) they said in the university schools, when greek words
happened to hand, It is Greek and can not be read. And what Latin they did
understand, write or speak, it is to common now to mind. And yet were they
proud in this their ignorance. But I may not let pass to remember what
grievous and heinous Heretics they were counted that did read, and much more
that expounded or talked of the scriptures, in their mothers tongue. Wherefore
since they were wholly unseen in all good letters, language, and learning,
(as well sheep as shepherd) it is no marvel though they fell into error, no
more than if blind guides or wanderers in the dark, should do into the pit. For
whereas none can give good counsel, the city decays, as it did in the days
of Roboa^ the son of Solomon, who asking counsel at the mouths of the
unskillful, by following the same, perverted the common wealth, and made scisme
in the church of Israel. And if after those days it happen Elias or any other
of the Prophets to speak the truth, in the folish ears of that ignorant and
perverted people, then the husbandman with his forke, (who is winged as thou
see) is ready at hand to strike. Ah alas what a pitiful muster is now before
my eyes, of those whom that subtle serpent (as touching the body has slain)
and as a raging tirant injuriously murdered, supposing to set forward his
tillage by bloudshead, as by Judas he began. But Jesus Christ our Lord, has
set their souls with him on high, out of whose ashes many rise in this our
age, to fight against this tree, whereof the overthrow is at hand, which God for
Jesus sake hasten. Amen.

Of the top of the Tree.
AS the love of God toward us, or his displesure for our sins has always
been pronounced by vocal means in his Church: so has he likewise through all
ages almost, preached the same in certain examples or paternes. His love by
merciful, his wrath and horrible displeasure by means right terrible. Yea,
and when we are either so deaf that we care not to hear, or that our ears
are so tender, that they list not abide the breath of truth, for amendment:
then pleases it him to preach to our enemies, yt those that cannot also hear
for want of true teachers, may anticipate and go before them that can and list
not hear, in amendment, and in repentance of life. And as the same examples
are, after diverse and sundry sorts manifested: so likewise the table or matter
wherein he depainteth or carueth out the same, is not always one. Sometimes it
is in the Sky: as Constantine the great viewed (some say) in heaven, the shape
of a Cross, a sign and sermon of Gods kindness ensuing. 2. Mac. 10.
So armies fighting, and such like, have been doctrines of his dreadful
displeasure. Sometime it is in the earth and fruits, as well of the ground, as
also of creatures wombes, which being delivered, in their right shape and
form, are tokens of his loving kindness toward us continued. But otherwise
being monstrous, either in having more limbs than need requires, or wanting
to satisfy the need of nature, or else having all, be notwithstanding
misseformed in fashion or color, yea or mysseplaced: are after their manner,
either signs to us (out alas) of his anger, or lessons of our blindness,
and to us often times of both. As our ruffed pigs and calves have here in
England, of late days (I fear me) been of both to us. For all be it that the
tokens that God oftentimes does show from heaven to the earth, are now and
then truly expounded, for the use and common case of all ye world: yet is it
not but to be construed as a common rule, that the monsters of England, concern
properly that land: As those of other realms, do the people of ye proper
soil: which is special to them. But because that heaven is the common goal
or base appointed for us all: These therein showed, do (circumstaunces
considered) concern so many, as think to attain and get that same. And it is
an opinion no less probable than common, that the huge monsters breadde in the
intralles and depthes of the maine seas, as long as they contain themselves in
the same, are not any special preachings to any one country: because the high
seas are in Nullius bonis appertain to no man or country properly. But if
that they remove thence and are cast up or ariue in creekes, shoares, or rivers
of any country: then by common assent, they abode or preach to their hosts
something, God turn it to good.

Upon consideration whereof, I have placed in the uppermost top of the tree,
this ugly shape. A thing wherein the horrible confusion of Rome, is
sufficiently and properly preached, and contained in a little su^me: even as
the flower, fruit, or seed, does in a very small bulk, or codde, comprise the
virtue of the root, stock and branches being many.

The description.
ROME the mother of the world, is situate in Italy, through the same there
runs a famous river called Tybre: upon the which, there was in the year of
our Lord.1496. found this horrible monster, the shape whereof is thus. The head
and mane of an Ass. The body throughout is scaled, except the breasts, belly
and womb, and those are the parts of a woman. The right hand is the foot of
an Elephant, the left is the hand of a man. From the buttocks there issues a
Dragons tail, and at the end thereof, a Dragons head. Upon the one hippe
there is an old man's face. The right foot is the foot of an Ox: and the
left, is of an Eagle, or of a Gryphon.

The interpretation.
But for as much as it has pleased God to carue and shape the same, amongst
the entiere lompe and heap of nature, only out of, and from the territory of
Italy, and of all other parts, from the chiefest part thereof. And to fashion
that various and diverse monstrousness, into one body: It can not but be
confessed, that it does appertain both only to Rome, and also signifies a
body politic, risen in that country, to a marvelous and most horrible
confusenesse. The kingdoms of the Medes, Daniel. 7.8.
Persians, and Macedons. etc. is by the holy ghost foreshewed to Daniell, in
the shape of bodies natural. And it stands also with the manner of Paul's
speech, to call the Church by the name of a body, 1. Col. 4.
Vnum corpus sumus, We are all one body, says he, speaking of every Christian
in the Church. So in the Apocalips of S. John, Joan. 12.13.
the holy ghost also foresheweth Antichrist, the eldest son of the Devil,
sometime by a woman. And his kingdom by a beast of many heads. And sometime
by a Cat of the mountain rising out of the seas. And in that this monster is
the body of a woman, whose end natural is to bear children: it must surely
preach unto us, that Church so deformed. For the Church of Christ also is
figured by Esaias and John, Esai. 49.54. Joan. 12.
in the person of a woman: because of the birth and regeneration wherein the
children of God are daily borne a new in Christ: even as the natural sons of
Adam are daily misseshapened in the church of Antichrist, into the society of
the mystical body of sin and perdition.

The Head is oftentimes taken in the scriptures for the Magistrate, or chief
Sovereign. Head.
Then who^ or what people an Asses head signifies in this place, Ose. 1.1.
Sam. 15.1. Cor. 11. Deuteronomy. 20. Deuteronomy. 22. Mat. 21. Ezech. 13.
thou may, gentle Reader, easily judge. Nature teaches us, that out of an
Asses head, there proceeds but Asselike instruction (that is) doctrine worldly,
carnal, foolish, slothful, wanton and gentyle. As the Scriptures do accord
thereto: so the same we find, in the Church of Rome, as the things before
specified declare.

The Scriptures use this word Ceruix, Neck. Job. 13. Deuteronomy. 32.
(which is the Neck) for pride and stubbournesse, which therefore in this
monster signifies the proud and stubbourne minds, that they in their blind
errors have, against the truth and very service of God.

The Scales, wherewith the body is covered, Scales.
signifies their friends and Alies of the world, ayding and succouring the
same. Job. 41. Apoc. 10.13.
For in Job we may see the same sense. The sea, is the world, as the Apocalips
declares: And then consequently, the fyshes, the people, and the Scales are
their defense that they have and use. So that thereby the Pope and his members
are signified to be defended and succored of the world after the manner of the
same.

Breasts. Stomach. Belly.
The Breasts, Stomach and Belly, signify the Cardinals, Priests, and
religious rablement. And the reason is: because these parts are dearest,
finest and most necessary of and to the body, and to ye fruit that comes of
the same. So is their learned clergy, instructers and feeders of their blind
scholars figured therein. And the two breasts are the works of Lombard and
Gratian: whence they draw their diverse nouriture and food. Also it betokens
the volupteousnesse that they are in, and use even past honest and civil
shamefastness: for the same was found as naked from covering, Psalm. 17. 1.
Cor. 6.
as they whom it signifies, are void of grace. Ready to be used of the whole
world.

The right hand.
The right hand is (as beforesayde) the foot of an Elephant. This beast is
very huge, cruel, and of might and courage strong. And therefore the ancient
warriors used them in the field, against their enemies, to break both the
frontes, and ranges of the valiant soldiers, ^. Match. 8.
set in the vauntwardes of their Phalanxes, or Squars of pietons or footmen.
And because of his strength, they used to place upon him more men than one, in
seats builte for the purpose. And though he was very slow of pace, yet he did
not easily wtdrawe himself from the ground that he once had gained, no though
he were withstode or assaulted by great force. Neither was he pliant in his
legs, because he wanted joints therein, and therefore could not be taught to
bow, as mules, horses and such creatures are, whereby also his legs are the
stronger and the sturdier.

And the hand in Scripture signifies men's deeds, and outward life. As Pilate
washed his hands, Math. 2. Samuel. 14.
to declare and dissimule the innocence of his deed. So David says to the
Thecknick: Nunquid manus Ioab tecum? is not the hand of Ioab with thee (which
is) the work or deed. And the same interpretation might I prove by the like
authorities out of both Testame^tes: so that the hand must signify the deeds
of that mystical body politic, being mighty, cruel, sturdy, stubborn,
presuming upon, winning and conquering all men, not easily yelding over the
advantage gotten. And in that, that it is the right hand: it must signify
their clergy, and Canons. For as the right hand is most worthiest in his
place: so it is also the hand, wherewith a man does most nimbly, strongly,
readily, and most accustomably, does his work, and purpose. But whether their
decrees have been the same, and done the like, it may easily appear to him
that calls to mind, the horrible cole curses, of bell, book, and candle,
which the consciences not all only of seely men, but even the imperial thrones,
and crowns of Emperors, have trembled and quaked at for fear: neither could
their puissance, resist the assault of that Eliphants foot, nor yet recover
the damages done thereby, until this day. This right hand is their
spirituality, and grievous missegouernemente of their clergy, which is more
excellent than the left hand: The left hand.
for that is their civil power, sovereignty, and might, over and by the
Laytie. And if thou advise thee well, you shall, gentle reader, assure thy self
that some mystery is in this. That God has placed the man's hand upon the
left side, and spoiled the right side thereof. Undoubtedly to declare by a man's
left hand, a left faythgiuer, promise breaker, and dissembler. For he with
whom the Pope has kept touch, or assurance, has either been to sharp, or to
hot for him. Yea, and the light breaking of his promises, has been a doctrine
authority and example, for subjects to do the like, to their sovereigns and
princes.

The right foot.
The Right foot is the foot of an ox or such like. And it has his diverse
signification. For the foot is ye basest and least honored of the members of
the body. Secondly, it is such as is subject to all the powers and motions of
the mind and other parts of the whole man, and is (as I may say) the page or
groom. Thirdly, it is the membre, that stays, and whereon the whole man does
stand: wherefore in this body politic, it must for the baseness and
inferioritie, for the subjection to the superiors, and for the sustayning and
holding up of others, the worthier parts, signify, in the right foot, the
basest sort of the spirituality, and in ye left, the basest sort of their
laity. For Jeremy does mean by the foot, Ierem. 12.
the baser or weaker sort of men. But of what manner or quality, this their
rablement of subjects, both ecclesiastical and lay are, the sundry kinds of
feet do declare. The Ox foot does signify their simple and doting
Portifarie priests, Charterers, Soulemongers, and such like, their Nuns,
Sisters, Anchoresses, and the rest, Pardone preachers, Ghostly fathers,
Decretaries and Summistes, with an infinite rablement of Idiotes. For by an
Ox, is signified the blockishnesse of fools, and dullerds: such as they are
which in that kingdom do give and occupy themselves in their contemplation,
and amaze themselves in the milne of their inextricable subtilties, and
tiersome quiddities.

The Left foot which signifies their lay subjects, The left foot.
is the foot of a Griphon. The former part of which beast is an Eagle, the
hinder an Ox, this is one of the fore feet of the Gryphon, wherewith he
seazeth upon his pray, as the Eagle does: and signifies those that in that
body politic, give themselves to the life active, and are gatherers, rakers
together, Extortioners and greedy guts. Such are their Bullistes, Dataries,
Copistes, Somners, Notaries, and the like: who in this part, by Avarice
uphold the body: as their clergy does in the other part uphold the same by
ignorance and folishnesse.

But some perchance will obiecte that the estate of the Church of Rome is not
such now, as in all points it has been. In deed I grant that since the
complaynte of Germany, England, and France, and their deliverance from the
tirannie of the same, it is, will it, nil it, somewhat amended: Neither do I
so apply and interpretate the parts, that I have hitherto from head to
foot, gone on, as that it should be the full declaration of all the whole
thereof, or for all the whole time of the continuance thereof. For there
rests, the old man's head upon the hippe, and the tail with the Dragons
head at the end thereof, which stand upon the hinder part of the body: Heb. 9.
and do signify according to holy Scripture, the time of the declination and
latter age of it: wherefore thou have hitherto but heard what it was in the
beginning and chief royalty thereof: Now hearken what it is toward the drawing
on, and the end thereof. And first the head is of an old vplandish man (as it
did foreshewe) the which signifies that the teachers therein, must somewhat
conform themselves to reason, and become more natural than their predecessors:
And that also the doctrine of this body politic in this latter time, must be
altered from the doctrine that the first head did teach, being then both
gentyle and worldly, according to the nature of the Ass: and become somewhat
more natural, and truth like, than it at the first was, according to the
nature of a man, which his head shows. And yet forasmuch as this head has
his place upon the hippe, loking downewarde, it must signify the same doctrine
to be earthly, and not heavenly, even so much differing from the heavenly,
as there is difference, between the right place of the head, and the hippe,
between the Church of God and of Hipocrites. So that a conformity in natural
doctrine and human wisdom, must be one mean, to stay and sustain that
Church in the latter age thereof.

Esai. 9.19.
The Tail in this hinder part of the Church does by authority of Scripture,
signify their flattering, and false preaching Prophets, teachers and writers,
whose pen and tongue stirs and writes for gain, and pick thereby a
quarrel, at their good benefactors pursses, and almose box: being the second
proppe to stay pthe same Church with.

And forasmuch as there shall want no power of Satan to the sustayning
thereof, Psa. 73.90. Esa. 17. Apo. 12.
there is at the end of the tail a Dragons head: which in Scripture is also
taken for the Devil himself, and for the Tirans of this world, wicked and
bloudthristie persons, that then suppose themselves to have done their duty,
when as they may embrue themselves with the blood of the Saints of Christ.

These men if they can not prevail with their carnal and natural reason: then
they use flattery, if not so: then tirannie: which are three means, so
puissant, as that they might if it were possible, overcome the elect thereby.
But be not dismayed gentle Reader, lay thy hope upon Christ our Savior. And
although his truth preached in this monster, does aghast and astonne thee: yet
for that this (the same) was cast up in that river dead (and therefore must
signify an end, conquest, and full delivery of this world, and Gods
saints therefro) rejoice, and with a lively voice preasse to the Heavens
ward, wherein thy joys shall be full, Apo. 12.
and with the saints already delivered in faith say: Now is salvation and
strength, and the kingdom become our Gods, and the power his Christ's: for he
is cast down which accused them before God day and night: and they overcame
him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, and they
loved not their lives unto death, rejoice you heavens and rejoice you therein.
Salvation, glory and honor, be ascribed unto the Lord our God, Apo. 19.
for true and righteous are his judgments, because he has judged the great
Whore, which did corrupt the earth, with her fornication, and has avenged the
blood of his servants, of her hand: Alleluiah. Praise the Lord, good
Reader, with thy whole soul, and help me for Jesus sake with thy fervent
prayers.

August. in Epistola. 7. I confess my self to be of that number one: which
write in profiting, and profit by writing.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by Henry Denham, for Lucas Harrison, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Crane. Anno. 1566.

Faults escaped.
Leaf. Side. Line. Faults. Correction. 5 1 2 this time his time 7 2 15 Latmu
Latmum ibidem 24 Latinians Latmians 9 1 28 as that, that they as that they 10 2
10 2. Quest Sepe 2. Que. 4. Sepe 11 1 18 Chanons Cannons 17 1 32 and drive
back and back 33 1 6 if in any if in many 48 2 3 Epistola Extra 50 1 11 that
shall that she shall 52 2 14 discention dissension 54 1 17 Quantitiners.
Quantitiuers. 55 1 19 praeceptibiliter perceptibiliter ibidem 20 praecipiendo
percipiendo 61 1 8 rather just rather have just 69 2 6 Montelmenss.
Montoliuenss. 75 2 15 did show did shewte 82 2 14 flock stock ibidem 15
flock stock 84 2 18 to our enemies to our eyes 88 2 32 pthe up the

The margin of the second page of the eight leaf has Conciliorij for the
which read Conciliorum.

Also whereas two leaves have the number.33. the first of them is to be numbered
thus.32. the margin in the second page of the said leaf has Arminenss. for
the which read Ariminenss.

In the margin of the.49. leaf, in the first page. for Drrand. lib. read
Durand. lib.


