THE MOST PROFITABLE AND commendable science, of Surueying of Lands,
Tenementes, and Hereditamentes: Drawn and Collected by the Industry of
Valentyne Leigh.

Whereunto is also annexed by the same Author, a right necessary Treatise, of
the measuryng of all kinds of Land, be it Meadow, Pasture, Errable, wood,
Hill, or Dale, and that as well by certain easy and compendious Rules, as also
by an exact and beneficial Table, purposely drawn and devised for that
behalf.

Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsell.

Anno Domini. 1577.

Valentine Leighe to the gentle Reader.
Seeing that J do now at this time entreat, not of any vain fable or
triflyng toye, but of such earnest and serious matter, as touches the profit
of most men, and the benefit and commodity of each manner of person: J
humbly beseech all men (inasmuche, as the thing it self, appertains to every
manne) that in readyng thereof, they will vouchsafe, to harken, attribute, and
grant, such diligent and vvillyng ear, mind, and attention, as they are
accustomed, and use to do, in those, or such cases, which they accoumpt
most weight, grave, and necessary; and which they are most desirous to
know, learn and understand. And first, let this one thing, be well
pondered emongeste you, who is it of us all, that having any thing
(whatsoever it be) which may be made double or treble more profitable, to
him by good gouernemente, usage, and ouersighte thereof, then the same is at
this present, and had rather suffer it to run to loss, and decaie, then he
would once (by giuyng a little earneste attentive diligence) read, hear, and
understand the means by which he may, or might, not only better the thing
which he possesses, but also thereby so much increase his advantage,
grovvyng by the same.

And seeing the science of Surueiyng of lands, is the matter, whereupon this
present book entreats, which teaches the gouernmente of the Mannours,
lands and tenementes of each person, and how to make a perfect Surueye of
the same, to most profit. And also, how to engrosse your terrors and
Rentalls thereof. And finally, how to measure all kinds of land, be it
Meadovv, Pasture, Errable, VVoodde, ill, or dale, and in what form or figure
so ever it is fashioned, or commonly lies, with the form, how to
understand the contents thereof, asvvell by a beneficial Table, already and
plainly made for that behalf, as otherwise by the ordinary Rules to the same
appertainyng. All which things, I have (gentle Reader) not without painful
travel for thy commodity, hereafter described.

J shall therefore, for my revvard, or recompe^se thereof request no more at
your hands, for my travel therein, but only, that it may please you, to
take my poor good will, and intent in thankful part, and the rather,
because J humbly submit my whole work, unto the correction of the learned,
if J have (by oversight or otherwise) mistaken the matter.

And although some perchance shall think, they could have done the same much
better then J have done, J will not much contend, in the confessyng and
grauntyng thereof. But yet seeing I am one of the first, that attempted the
collectyng of the same Art into a volume, to the publication thereof, for the
benefit of the common wealth, J do not mistruste, but every indifferent
person, will think these my labors (joined with some study, and taken in
hand for his instruction) at the least wise, so much worth, as the
deseruyng of a bare good word, and friendly report: alvvaies remembryng,
that although most men, can perhaps amend a devise once begun, yet that
every first devise, in every thing, is most hard, and troublesome: and
therefore albeit here now, not so exquisitely handled in every point at the
first, as it may be hereafter, being (as the Proverb says) much easier to
amend, then to inuente: yet I humbly pray thee, not by carpyng or
otherwise, to deprave the aucthors honest meaning. And J assure thee, by this
thy friendly acceptance of these first fruits of my simple studies, thou
may perchance so animate my vvillyng mind, that thou shall gain to thy
self thereby, the fruition and commodity, of my other like studies in such
behalf. And thus I can say no more, but vvishe every man as much profit, and
benefit in readyng hereof, as my vvillyng attempt herein has intended them.
And so J end biddyng thee gentle Reader most heartily well to fare.

This.xxvij. of October. Anno Christi. 1562.
The true and most lively and perfect description, and instruction, of the
most necessary and commendable Science of Surueiyng of Lands: drawn and
devised by the industry of Valentyne Leighe.
LIke as Lands and Tenementes, and like revenues of enheritance are the cheef
and most principal liuelode, and surety of living, that any person or
persons, of all manner of degrees whatsoever, have or stand seized of, or
possessed, in this life: Even so, the Surueiyng, gouernyng, and prudent
improuyng, preseruyng, augmentyng, and guidyng of the same, is the most
weighty, profitable, and necessary function, or office, that any person can
have, or ought chiefly and circumspectly to provide for, as the mean and only
thing by which, and of the which, every manner of person, yea, with his wife,
children, and family (if they have any) while they be in this world* are
sustained and maintained: and therefore, the same is (...) other things,
requisite most vigilantly to be sought for, learned and known.

And like also, as every other Science, or Art, has some special rules and
grounds, upon which the whole Science depends. Even so also, this faculty
has his distinct natural principles, upon the due understanding, and
obseruyng whereof, all the residue of the Science or office, or in any wise
thereto appertainyng, consists and is grounded.

It behooves therefore him, whosoever coueteth to be a good and perfect
Surueiour (either of his own lands, or other men's) specially to note and
consider, that in taking, or making of every Survey of any Honor, Lordship,
Manor, Borough, Village or Hamlette, or other Lands, Tenementes, or
hereditamentes, he ought diligently to observe the precepts and instructions
hereafter mentioned, which do declare not only the perfect manner and form,
first of vewyng and Surueiyng the same, but also (the same so Surueyed) how to
pen, keep, set out, order, enter, and engrosse the several books of
Survey, Terrors, and Rentalles of the same, every one in their due order and
form, without any disorder or confusion.

Wherefore you shall understand, that there be ten souerall Principles, or
Rules, to be had in memory, which are these that do orderly ensue.

The first Principle, or Rule.
Forasmuch as every manner or parcel of Land, that is called a Manor, is
not properly or naturally a Manor, except it have those things that does
make a Manor: It is therefore most necessary, that he which will be a
good Surueiour, do understand, which be the special notes and grou^des, by
which he may, or shall know or discern, which is properly a true, and very
Ma^nour, and which not. That he do not wrongfully term that to be a
Manor, that of it self is none (and e conuerso) that to be none, which in
very deed is a Manor. I have therefore drawn this breef enclosed
description, and definition of a Manor here now next and immediately
followyng, to inform and enstructe you, both what is naturally a Manor, and
also the division and parts of the same, that ye may readily, even at the
eye, perceive the same described plainly unto you.

The true description definition, and division of a Manor.
Every Manor, that is properly a Manor, must first be known to have been
called and used as a Manor, since before time of memory of man. For no man
can make a Ma^nour at this day, ne join two several Mannours in one, though
the one were decayed, and that the Lord would bring the tenauntes of both to
one Court, and make but one homage of both, or assign one Bailie or
Collectour for both, or let the several values of both, be answered in one
ministers particular acco^pte, yet in nature they are, and ever shall continue
two distinct Mannours at the common Law, what way soever the Lord can, or
would take for the ioynyng of them, by the better opinion of most learned in
the Law, unless the one Manor does hold of an other, and that the Manor,
which so does hold of the other, do excheate to the Lord, and so by that
means it may be united, or annexed to the other, and so both of them
reduced into one Manor. And more over note specially, that every Manor has
properly, and naturally these three several principal things ensuyng (in the
right margente hereof) which always make it a Manor, or else can it never
be properly a Manor.

videlicet
Lands, tenementes, rentes, services, and hereditame^tes, that be parcel in
Demeasne, and they do contain Every Site of any Manor, sometime called
the Halle place, or Court lodge, or Manor house, and also the Demeasne
lands, thereto of old time belongyng, be they reserved still in the Lords
hand, or let out to any Tenaunte or Tenaunces by Copy, Indenture, or
otherwise. And those lands are ever properlye Demaines, which the lord of
any Ma^nour has time out of mind of man used, to keep in his own hands,
or continually to manure or occupy them with his Manor house.
Lands, tenementes, rentes, services, and hereditamentes, that are percell in
service, and they contain, All manner of rentes of assise, of Frehold, or
Custumarie, or Copiholde lands, tenementes, or hereditame^tes which are
parcel of the Manor, and yet no Demean lands, and these (and also
Demaines) are divided into three natures of rentes. Videlicet. Rent service
Rent sack. Rent charge

Also a Court Baron at the least, a Manor ought to have, if it have a Let,
or Lawday to it, then is it of more efficacy, and to a Court do appertain
perquisites, and casualties which are these. Fines Terrarum. Amerciament. Cur.
Herriott. custumar. Releuia. Wauiat. Straia. Forisfactur. Escact. Proficua
plitm^. Curie Baronis, autlete. Curie trium Septimanarum. etc.

These things also are, or commonly may be, belongyng, or appurtenaunte,
regardaunte, or appendaunt, also going out, repried, or deducted, of, or to any
Manor or Lordshippe, and yet the lack of them, or having of them, ca^ never
make, or else unmake any Manor.
Wards, Marriages, Patroges, freegiftes, or Presentatio^s, Nominations, or
Aduousons of Parsonages, Vicarages, Chappells annexed, free Chappelles,
Prebendes, etc. Also Villains, Neifes, and their sequeles, etc. Commons of
Pasture, Moors, marshes, frewarre^s, effouers etc. Customs, liberties,
fra^chesies, and priueledges. Also reprises of all kinds that is to say,
yearly rent resolute, paimentes, or deductions. Suite of Court, te^thes or
services going or repried out of any Manor or lands, to any other Ma^nour or
Lands, or Person or Persons.
The second Principle or Rule.
SEcondarily (The first rule known) he that will diligently, and perfectly,
survey a Manor, or other Lands, must prudently consider, all manner of
Rentes, Issues, profits, and other things whatsoever, does or ought, or may
be, belongyng, or appertainyng, to a Manor, or be part, parcel, or membre
of a Manor, or be appendaunt, or regardaunt, to a Manor or such other
lands, or Teneme^tes. And likewise what Rentes, Resolutes, reprises, or
deductions, may be commonly paid, deducted, or yearly repried, out of any
Manor, lands, or teneme^tes, to any person, or persons, or else he can
never, make any good survey. And for your better instruction herein (although I
have partly, in the first Rule, briefly touched the same) I do now here in
this second Rule, not only more amply, and distinctly, declare the same: but
also plainly, and particulerly describe the several natures and definitions of
every kind of thing, that commonly does, or can belong to any manner of Lands
or tenementes. And therefore you shall understand, that every Honor, Lordship
or Manor that is of it self, properly a Manor, it has commonly, and for
the most part, these Six things ensuyng, belongyng to the same, that is to
say.

1 Rentes. 2 Demaynes. 3 Perquisites or casualties. 4 Things appendaunt, and
regardant. 5 Customs, Liberties, and Privileges. 6 Reprises resolute, or
deductions.
And first J will begin to declare of all manner Rentes.
Rentes of Lands, and Teneme^ts holden at will.
THere may belong to a Manor, Rentes of Lands, Tenements, Mesuages,
Burgages, Cottages, Curtillages, Toftes Roueles, Teneme^ts, milles, Douehouses,
barnes, Stables, Gardeines, Orchardes, Parkes, Warrens, Meares, Waters, Pondes,
Stagues, Fishinges, Meadows, Cloases, Croftes, Fields, Pastures, Woods,
Groves, Heathes, Firzes, Moors, Marshes, Turbaries, etc. Granted, to any
person, or persons, at the Lords pleasure, or will, for some yearly rent,
certain, paiable, at two or four feasts of the year, usual by even
porcions. And such parsons, are commonly called, Tenauntes at will, and these
are remoueable, at the pleasure, and will of the Lord, and these also,
commonly are not chargeable, with repayring their tenementes, or holdynges, but
they are punisheable for waste, by action of trespass, if they commit any in
the same, and are straineable for their rent.

Rentes of Lands and Teneme^ts holden for term of years.
There may also belong to a Manor yearly rentes, of any Lands, Tenements,
Burgages, etc. (as aforesaid) that are demised, to any person or persons, by
Indenture, or without Indenture, or writing (by word or parolle only) for
term of year, or years, for some yearly rent, certain, paiable, at two, or
four feasts, of the year, by even porcions, and such parsons, are called
Tenauntes, for term of years, and are bound, to such reparacions, and other
duties, as the couenau^tes, or promises in their leases do contain, and they
are chargeable with waste, if they do commit any, and are strainable, for
their rent of common right, or may be justly sued for the same, by action of
debte if it be arrere. And such are not bound to appear upon Iuries at
Westminster, nor at Assizes or Sessions, unless they may Dispende.xl. s. of
Freehold otherwise.

Rentes of freeholde Lands.
Also, there may belong to a Manor, rentes of Freeholders, that hold their
lands, Tenementes, or hereditamentes, of the lord of the Manor, some in
Capite, by knights service, escuage uncertain, or Graundsergeauntie, and some
by Soccage or Burgage tenure, by paiyng yearly a Rose, a pound of Pepper, or
Capons, Hens, or such like, and some (both the Freeholders) Tenauntes in
Capite, and Tenauntes in soccage) pay a yearly rent besides their services,
and some time no Rent. And such Lands and Teneme^tes, etc. they have to them
and to their heirs, and the same is commonly called Freeholde, and those
Tenauntes and Tenauntes for term of life, are always called Freeholders. And
sometime also, they hold by certain Services. And every such Tenant, owes
fealty to their chief lord. And such Tenauntes always, if they may
dispende by their said Tenementes, xl. s^. a year or above, are likewise
chargeable upon Iuries at Westminster hall, and at Assisses, and Sessio^s, and
may also impleade, and be impleaded (if occasion so require) for their
Tenementes, at the courts at Westminster without the lords license as
aforesaied. But such Tenauntes are not commonly chargable with wast, if they
do any upon their said freeholde tenementes, tenau^ts for term of life only
excepted. And you must note there are sundry kinds of free holders. Some hold
their land by Charter, some by new Feoffamente, and some by old Tenure, and
by many manner of rents, Customs and services. And some be Tenauntes in fee
simple, and some Tenauntes in tail, and many such like, and may hold their
Lands by diverse customs, services and tenures, as by homage and fealty, and
as I said before by knights service, graundsergeanty, petiesergeauntie,
escuage, Frankalmo^ne, Homage au^cestrell, tenure in Soccage, Burgage, and
villanage: for the further knowledge whereof, I refer you to master
Littleton. And note also, that the Lord of such Tenauntes, if he have any
rentes, customs or services, detained from him, which he can by any evidence,
rentals or Court Rolls, prove a possession thereof, in himself, or his
Ancestors since the limitation, in the statute of Westminster, the second:
Then he may lawfully distraine for the same. And these Tenaunts be straineable
by their Lords, if their Rentes or services be arrere, unpaid, or undone. And
also a writ of Cessauit, lies against them, if occasion so serve. Also the
Lord may have a writ of excheate, if any such tenant do commit felony, or
dye without Heirs general, or special. And such Tenaunts, do commonly pay,
a relief to the Lord at every alienation, exchange or death of any tenant
of the same. And note also, there may be also foreign freeholders, which hold
not of the Manor, and yet hold of the Lord. And it is further to be
specially remembered, that all such Tenauntes as hold any Lands, tenementes
or hereditamentes by charter, deed, or Indenture, for the term of their own
lives, or by le curtyze de angleterre, or for the term of another man's life,
are always Freeholders.

Rentes of Lands holden by ancient demean.
There may be also belongyng to a Manor, rentes of Lands, tenements and
hereditamentes, holden of the Manor, by custom, called ancient Demeasne.
And in some places the whole Manor is Ancient Demeasne. And the tenaunts
also pay some a Rose, some a pound of Pepper, some Capons, some Hens, and
such like, both with an yearly rent in money, and some without a rent, and by
certain homage, and fealty, and such services. And the Tenauntes of such
Lands and tenementes, have the same to them and their Heirs, according to the
custom of ancient demeasne. And such Tenauntes can not impleade or be
impleaded for their Lands or tenements, in any other court, but in the Lords
court of the Manor, without the Lords license. And these Tenauntes, are not
chargeable upon Iuries at Westminster, or at Assizes, or Sessions, unless they
may dispende other freehold lands of xl. s. a year. These Tenauntes also, are
straineable, if their rentes be arrere. If they commit waste, they forfeite
their Tenauntries by their custom. These Tenaunts, pay commonly at every
alienation, death or exchange, a fine certain, by their custom. In some
Mannours such Lands are heritable, in some Mannours not.

There may be also belongyng, to a Manor, Rentes of other Lands, Tenementes,
Mesuages, Cottages, etc. (as aforesaid) that are customary and demised to any
Tenaunts of the same Manor, by copy of court roll, at the will of the Lord,
according to the custom of the Manor there, either by the verge, rod, or
otherwise. And in some Mannours, the tenauntes, hold their said customary
teneme^ts, to them and to their heirs, in fee Simple, or in fee tail, by
copy of court Roll, and in some Mannours, for term of years, and in some
Mannours for term of three lives, according as the custom of every Manor
has been time out of mind of man used. And these lands, be properly called
Copy holds or customarie tenements. And in some place they be called old
aster lands. And in Somersetshire, Devonshire, Cornewal, Dorsetshire and
Glocestershire (where most Mannours have commonly those customarie Rent
service which is properly all such lands as are holden of the lord by Fealty,
and certain rent, or by homage, Fealty, and Rent, or by any other service, and
certain rent, of which nature are these, of customarie Lands and Tenementes
holden by copy of Court Roll at will, according to the custom of the Manor
etc.
Lands. (such lands and Tenements are there called Bargains) and these
cannot impleade or be impleaded, for their tenementes out of the Lords court,
of the Manor whereof they are holden without the Lords license, neither are
they chargeable upon Iuries at Westminster, nor at Assizes, or Sessions,
unless they may also dispend other freehold, of xl.s. yearly or above. Also if
these Tenauntes commit waste, they commonly forfeite their lands, to the Rentes
Lord. And these tenaunts cannot sell, alienate nor exchange, their Lands by
Deed, Fine, or Feoffament. But must surrender the same into the Lords hands
before the Steward (or in some place in the presence of two other Tenaunts of
the Manor) to the use of him or them that shall have the same lands, be it
in fee simple, fee tail, for term of life or years, according to the custom
of the same Manor. And that person that should have it, must in the Court
take of the Lord or his Steward, the same Lands and Tenementes so surrendered
And these Tenauntes are ever also straineable, if their Rentes be arrere. And
they also pay commonly at every alienatio^, death, or exchange, and surrender
of their Tenements a fine (in some Mannours certain and known) but in most
Mannours uncertain and at the Lords will, as he or his Surueiour, or his
Steward being thereto auctorised, pleases to assesse the same, with the
agreement of the Tenant that takes it. And in most Mannours these Lands are
heritable. And note specially for a general Rule, that there may be of
Customarie, or Copy hold Land, all manner of like estates, as there may he,
of free hold land, at the common law.

Rentes of customarie land, holde^ by custom called tenant right.
There are also Rentes, of much like nature, of customary and copy hold
Lands, and Tenementes belongyng to Mannours, in diverse places, and specially
in the Counties of York, Westmerland Cumberlande, Chester, Lancaster, and the
Bishopric of Durham, and some other Counties, dimised also according to the
Custom of such Mannours, to the tenauntes of the same, in some places to hold
to them and their heirs, and next of kin, so long as there is any of the
same stock, kindred or lineage remainyng. And in some Mannours, but only so
long, as there is any left of the name, and they commonly call such holdinges
in those places, Tackes, and in some other places, they are called Tenaunte
rightes. And these also can not impleade, or be impleaded out of the Lords
Court, of the Manor, for their Lands or Tenements without the Lords license,
nor are chargeable upon ^^^ries, at Westminster, or at Assizes, or Sessions,
except they may dispende yearly xl. s. of other freeholde land, as is
aforesaid. These also commonly by their custom, forfeite to the Lord, their
Tackes or Holdinges, if they commit any wast. They are also strainable for
their rents, if they be arrere. And the Fines (upon every exchange or death of
tenaunts is in few of those Mannours also, certain and known. But in most
of those Mannours, uncertain, and to be assessed, as the Lord or his Officer,
and the Tenant can agree for the same. And commonly also their said Tackes,
Tenant rightes or holdings are heritable.

Memorandum, no manner of parson, can make his Lands, Copiholde, or Custumarie
at this present day, unless the same have been custumarie land time out of
mind of man used. But a man may make Copiholde, freehold, even at this day.

Memorandum, Also there may be, belonging to a Manor in one shire or place,
yea and parcel of the same Manor, diverse lands and tenementes in other
Tounes, and sometime in other Counties, a great distance from the Manor, and
aunswerable, and to be valued in the value, or accoumpte of the same Manor,
and as parcel of the same.

And now that I have treated of Rentes, of Lands and tenements, and
hereditamentes at large, in a generality, which do or may belong to a
Manor, I will now touch in a specialtie the nature of certain Rentes, of
several names or kinds which are contained also in the compass of the Rentes
above generally declared, and yet, for your better instruction) hereafter
particulerly touched, which are these ensuing, and such like.

Redditus Agistaments and herbagij.
Rent of Iuistement, or herbage, is where a Tenant holds, or occupies only
the feeding, grasing, or pasture, of a Park, or any other ground, paled, or
encloased, wherein any Dear, or such like are: and commonly the Tenant of
such Iuistement or herbage in some place must put but a number of cattaill
certain, and at some special times of the year, and perchance but the
Tenauntes beasts of the Manor only, and in some other place the Tenant may
put in beasts saunce number, and when he will, and yeldeth a yearly rent for
the same.

Redditus molendinorum, cuiuscunque generis.
Rent of milles, is where the Lord of a Manor has belonging to his Manor
any manner of corn milles, horsmilles, watermilles, windemilles, or quarnes for
grain or other milles, as smithmilles, iron milles, fullyng milles, Sieth
milles, cutler milles, Tin blaste milles, Lead blaste milles, or such like,
and has let the same to his Tenant, at a Rent, or has demised ye Socome,
which is the grindyng of his customarie Tenauntes Corn, at his Corn mill to
any person for a yearly rent, etc.

Redditus Garborum and feni.
Rent of Corn, or Hay, is where the Lord has granted any Lands, or
Tenementes to his Tenant, yelding the yearly rent of some certain number of
corn, or Haie. Also it is properly, where a Tith is impropriated, to a
Manor, and the Lord has demised the same to his Tenant at a rent.

Redditus Piscarioru^.
Re^t of Fishings, is where the Lord of a Manor, has demised to any parson,
any Wears, Garthes, or such like in any Creek, River, Meare, Poole, pond, or
common Sewer or several water, or such like, or ye fishyng called the Kettels
at the sea side, or the dredgyng of Oysters, Muskels or Cockles in any Crekes,
or other places, within his Manor, at a yearly Rent reserved, for the same.
And note, that if any Fish the several waters of the Lord, without the
Lords license, the Lord may bring his action against the party, upon the
statute Westminster the first.

Redditus Cignorum.
Rent of Swannes, or for Swannes, is where the Lord has great Rivers, Meares
or fennes, and has Swannes breedyng within the precinct of his Ma^nour, and
has demised them to a tenant for a yearly rent reserved: this rent is much
in ure in Lincolneshire, Cambridgeshire, etc.

The like Rent, may be and in some Mannours, is of Herneshawes, Shouelors.
etc.

Redditus Mineraliu^.
Rent of Mines, is where the Lord of a Manor, has demised any Mines of Tin,
Lead, Copper, or Coal to any of his tenauntes, therefore reserving a yearly
Rent, out of the same, or any other such like Mines.

Redditus Quarrium.
Rent of Quarries, is where the Lord of a Ma^nour, has likewise demised any
Quarires of Free stone, Hard stone, or of Marble, Slate, Whetstones, or such
like, or of Grauel, Sand or Chalk, or such like to any Tenaunte, reserving to
him out of the same an yearly rent.

Much like this rent, is the Rent of a piece of ground having slimy or Clayie
Earth, whereof Rentes of all natures or kinds.
Brick and Tyle is made, when it is let to a Tenant at an yearly rent. Rent
of free Warre^s, is where the lord of a manor, has in his Park, Wodds,
Heathes, Commons, or other grounds, wast or several, any Warren of Conies,
Hares, Herneshawes, or any other beasts, or fowls, and yt he either keep the
warren in his own hands, or demiseth ye same to any parson, at a yearly Rent.
Redditus liberorum Warrennium.
And note, that if any parson kill any such his game, within the Lords
ground, the Lord may have an action of Trespass against him, at the common
law.

Memorandum, no man can have a free Warren, but he have the same, by the King,
or Queens special grant of Charter, except it have been used time out of
mind and allowed before Justices of Oyer.

Annual rent of pencion, or porcio^, is where, there Redditus pencionum and
porcionum.
is any yearly Rent, or pencion in money, or other Portion going or growyng
due, out of any other lordships or Mannours, Lands or Tenements, Parsonages,
Vicarages or Tithes, belonging to a Manor, and before time granted to the
same Manor by some composition, or for some liberty of way, watercourse, or
such like. Some account this no Rent.

Redditus operum custumariorum.
Rent of works, is commonly where the customarie Tenauntes, of a Manor are
bound by their custom to help the lord in Sowyng time, Mowyng time, or
Harueste, some with three Days work, some with four days work, some with
more, and some with less, according to the custom. And where ye lord is
agreed, or at compositio^ with every of his Tenauntes for a yearly rent for the
same, or else has demised the whole dayworks of the whole manor to some one
tenant, at one certain and entire yearly rent reserved, then is such rent
called Redditus operum custm^. Else is it no Rent.

Redditus pro licentijs.
Rent yearly reserved for licenses, is where the customarie Tenauntes, by their
custom can not let or set their lands above a year, or but from three years
to three years. And that they give the Lord a yearly rent, to license them,
to let or set the same for more years or longer time. And also it is where the
customarie tenant cannot stock a woodde, or till his Lay ground, without the
lords license, and for the license hereof, yeldeth an yearly rent. But in some
Ma^nours the Tenau^ts give but a Fine for the same, and no yearly rent.

Rent called new rent, or increase of Rent, is where the Lord has suffered
his Tenauntes, or any of them to build or Nouus Redditus.
set any Wall, Barn, stalle, or House, upon any part of the Lords wast, or
some, or that the Lord has granted any Tenaunte to encloase any part of his
common or wast ground, or such like, and reserueth to himself an yearly Rent
for the same and such like.

Memorandu^, there are some kinds of Issues, and yearly Profits arising in
some Mannours, which are not properly called rentes, because of there
uncertainty, because some year they may be more, and some year less, and
such are these four ensuyng, and their like, and where they are certain,
they are in nature of rentes.

Proficua nundinaru^ sieve mercatuum.
Rent or yearly profit of Faires and Markets is where there is any Fair kept
within ye Manor, once or twice a year, and the Lord has demised the profits
of Bothes, standinges, Tolles, and such like profits, of the Fair, at a rent,
to any of his Tenauntes. And in like manner of profits of Bothes, sta^dinges,
shambles and tolles or other profits of a wekely market, kept once or twice a
week within the Manor.

Venditio boscoru^ and Subboscoru^.
Profits of woodsale, is where somtymes the LORD of a Manor does make a
yearly sale of his woods, and sometime it may be a yearly rent also, when the
lord of a Manor, has let to Fearme at a rent, to some of his tenau^tes,
the sale of a great Wood, which is perchance growyng in his Common or
waste, or such a Wod whereof he keeps the herbage for himself, or other his
tenauntes, and reserueth an yearly rent, and in like manner may it be of
Bushes, Thorns, and gorsse. etc.

Rent or profit of Heath, Furses, or Turbarie is even like, where sometimes the
lord of a Manor does either make a yearly sale of the same, Venditio
Iampnoru^, Bruere and Turbarie etc.
or else let to Fearme the Furses, Heath, or Turues of some Moore, or enclosed
ground, to some of his tenauntes, for Fuel at a Rent. And in like manner it
is in some Ma^nours of Broom, and Fearne, or Brakens. etc.

Pannagiu^ Porcorum.
Pannage, is where the lord of a Manor has a Park, or some great woods,
that has store of Maste, of Oak, Bech. etc. and has used to take of his
tenauntes, for every of their Swine that shall go there between Michaelmas, and
Martilmas, in some place i. d. a piece, in some Manor ij. d. a piece etc. by
his Bailie or Fermer of the same Ma^nour, who either yeldeth a yearly rent
therefore, or else a yearly account of the said Pannage to the Lord. etc.

There may also belong to a Manor, Rent charge, which is commonly where
the Lord has alienated, or granted some part of Rent chardge
his Manor, or Lands, to any person and his heirs in Fee, by Inde^ture
enrolled, Fine, or Feoff^mente, or otherwise: Reseruyng a yearly rent to
himself, and his heirs, paiable at.ij. or.iiij. Feasts of the year, and in
the same grant thereof, has put a prouiso, or clause of distress, that he
may lawfully distraine, if the Rent be arrere, after any feast of payment,
in which it shall be due. Also every Fee ferme, where the Lord may distraine
for his rent, if it be unpaid, is a Rent chardge. And a rent chardge can in no
wise be apportioned, if the grau^tee or his heirs, do purchase any of those
lands, that are chardged with such rent: the grauntee and his heirs may be
chardged in person for this rent, unless there be express words in the
Deed by prouiso made to the contrary thereof.

Rent secke
There may also belong to a Manor, Rent Secke, which is always where the
Lord or his ancestors, Lords of the same Manor, have granted to any
person, any parcel of Land, to him, and his heirs, in Fee simple, or in fee
tail, with remainder over to an other in Fee or such like, reseruyng a yearly
Rent. And yet in the said grant, or writing thereof made, there be no
clause of distress, or prouiso of Reentrie: that the lord may distraine, or
reentre for non payment of the Rent, if it be behind unpaid after any feast
or day of payment. And therefore it is called a dry Rent, because it can not be
strained for: And if the person and his heirs, to who^ the Rent, Seche is
granted, or reserved, had never season thereof, he is as some men judge, nere
without his remeadie for recovery thereof. But if he have had once season
thereof, he may recover it well enough, by a Writ of nouelle Disseason at
the common law.

Annual Rent.
There is also an other manner of Rent, called annual Rent, which is commonly
when a man grants to an other by Deed, an Annuitie of x. s^. or xx. s^. a
year, or such like, more or less. And that there is in the Deed, no land
charged, with, or for, the payment thereof. This rent is neither Rent charge,
rent service, nor Rent secke: (and it charge the person of the graunter,
by writ of Annuitie) as some men's opinion is thereof.

Demaines, princiyallie is the Manor place, which is sometime called the
halle place, sometime the halle court, sometime the Manor house, etc. with
all the houses, buildings, edifices, Barnes, stables, rooms, courtelages, and
yardes, and courts to the same adjacent, or with in any wall, or preciucte of
ye Site of the same.

Also the Douehouses, and all Orchardes, Gardens, Pondes, Pooles, Motes,
Stagnes, walks, and like places, adioynyng to the Ma^nour house, or near the
Site of the same, are commonly also parcel of the Demeanes.

Also all such Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Feedyngs, Closes Croftes, and
enclosures, as the Lord of the Manor, has commonly used to manure or keep
in his own hands, or occupation, together with his Manor place, is also
commonly parcel of the Demeasnes.

Demaines of a Ma^nour.
In like manner, a Park, or any Woods, or Groves, or any Meares, Rivers,
Pondes, or Fishynges, may be parcel of the Demeanes of a Manor, if the
Lord or his ancestors, have time out of mind of man, occupied the same with
his Manor place.

Also (some exempte) Wastes, Moors, Marshes, Fennes, and also Turbary, which
may be part of the Demaines, if the Lord have used time out of mind, to
occupy them in his own hands.

And finally, for a general rule, all those lands, tenementes, and her
editamentes, are commonly called, known, and taken for Demeisnes whatsoever
the Lords of any Manor, or Lordshippe, and their ancestors have been
accustomed, time out of memory of man, to occupy in their own hands, with
the Manor place or hedde hail house of his Manor.

Memorandum, by the better opinion of the learned in the Law, no Demeasnes can
at this day, be demised by Copy, but by Indenture, unless the same have
been so used to be let, time beyond all men's remembrance. Quaere.

Fines terraru^.
Fines of lands, is commonly where any Copiholde land falls into the lords
hands of the Manor, or into his disposition, by death of tenauntes,
excheate, forfeiture, or otherwise. And the Lord or his officer grants the
same to any Tenaunte, for term of three lives, or for years, or to him and
his heirs, or by tenaunte right, according to the custom of such Manor,
whereof the same is holden, and for such customable re^t, and services as
before has been accustomed. And for such estate to be had in the same, the
Tenaunte commonly gives the lord, some sum of money, which is called his
Fine. And sometime such customarie fines in some Mannours, are always one, and
certain, and never augmented: And in some Manors, their Fynes are most
commonly uncertain, and at the choice of the Lord, how much he will take.

Also when the Lord of a Manor lets a piece of Land customarie, or not
customarie, by an Indenture or Lease, for term of life, or years, to any
person, and reserueth an yearly Rent, and takes a fine, or income for such
grant, or demise: the same is also called Finis terrarum.

Also where one Copy holder, will, or does make surrendour of his tenemente
or holding to an other, and gives the Lord a Fine for the same Surrendour, it
is also called Finis terrarum.

Also where a Tenaunte gives the Lord a Fine, to license him to Ti^^e and
^are his lay ground, or to let or set his customarie Land to an other for
years, by Indenture, or otherwise and such like, it is commonly entered among
the title of Fines terrarum.

Amerciamentes are also parcel of the perquisites of courts, and are diverse,
and they are all Sums, Penalties, and mi^as, wherein the Tenauntes are
amerced, by the Homage or Ferro^s, of every Court, Let, or law day of a
Manor, for lack of suite of Court, and other sondrie faults, and offenses.

And as when they be Freeholders, or Copy holders, and owe Suite of court to
a Manor, and make defaulte, or be absent at the Lords Court, and be not
there, and be therefore amerced.

And some such freeholders, are at their fine certain, for their suite of
Court, and that is called communis finis, which common fine is set on the
heddes of such Suitors, in the margent of the court Roll.

All other Suitors, that are not at their comen Fine for Suite of Court, are
amerced for their absence, by the title of mia^. upon their heads, in the
said margent of the court Roll.

Amerciaments of al sorts, for Suite of court, common trespasses, etc.
Likewise, when any tenaunte has been commanded by the Court, Surueior,
Stuarde, and homage, to amend an high way, or to repair a bridge, or to
repair his custumarie holding, or tenement, by a day assigned, or to avoid
some (...) parson, out of his house, or to yoke and ring his Swine by a day
upon forfeiture of a pain and does it not. And the same, at the next court be
presented by the homage. Then the same default is an Amerciament, when it is
totted commonly over against the^^ heads in the le^ee that gente under the
(...) of ^^^a^.

And Tenauntes being amerced, for not re^^^uing their Mix^ns, or dounghilles,
out of ye high way, by a day or for not making their Hedge or Soyse, by a
day* For not pollyng their (...) hanging over an high way, and letting
carriadge, by a day, or for not avoiding their ho^^des, or grathoundes by a
day (if they cannot Dispend xl. s. by year, according to the Statute) or for
breaking and ca^^yng away the Lords Pales, or hedges, or for Suffering their
beasts to wander in the highwaie, or to destroy the Lords woddes, or for not
^a^yng open again by a day, a way by the Tenant before wrongfullie encloased,
or for ^uenyng of any stream, brook or water, out of his right or el^^
course, or for cutting down, any custumar^ woddes, without the Lords license,
or for removing any marks or me^re stones. All these and many more such like,
are called Amerciamentes when the Tenauntes are amerced by several pains with
the title of mia^.

Also the amerciaments of Bakers, Bruers, Butchers, and Tipplers, for not
keeping the Assise, are totted on their heads, with the title of mia^.

Also all such persons, as do commit fraies, or bloudsheds, in any Manor, and
presented, are amerced with the title of mia^.

You must specially note, that there are two manners of Herriottes one called
by the name Heriot Custom, and another called by ye name of Herriot Service.
Herriot service is ever expressed in a man's grant or deed, and the other is,
whereas Herriottes have been paid time out of mind by custom. And now to the
description of an Herriot.

Parquisites or casualties of Courts, belonging to a Manor.
An Herriott is properly called the best Ox, Cow, Horse, or other thing, that
the Lords Tenaunte holdyng of a Manor, has when he dies. Which Herriot
after the Tenauntes death is commonly seized to the Lords use, by the
Bailife, Reave, Beadle, or Borseholder, of the Manor, and is commonly, or
ought to be presented by the Homage, or Herriottes
sworn Tenauntes of the Manor, at the next Court, Let, or Lawdaie, of the
same Manor to be holden.

And if the Tenaunte have no quick good, then the Lord will have the best
dead good, that his Tenant has when he dies, for his Heriot.

And in some Mannours, if the Tenaunte, do voluntarily depart out of his house,
or ferme, not discharged of the Lord, he shall pay to ye Lord his best quick
good, nomine Heriotte. Also in some Mannours, the Tenant shall pay his
farewell, to the Lord for his departing, which is called his fare fee, or
farewell, and that is in some places two shillinges, and there also the tenant
must before his departing do all manner of reparations.

Relieffes.
A Relief is after the death, change, or alienation of every Freeholder, or of
a Tenant by ancient demaisne, and ought to be paid to the lord, as a
knowledge. And the relief in some place, is the whole years Rent of the
Freeholder, or Tenant so doing and in some place or Manor, it is but half
the years rent by custom. A Relief is always to be paid at one whole
paime^t. Also, for the same the Lord may strain of common right, in every
parcel of land, if it be unpaid.

Also if a Freeholder hold of the Lord of the Manor by knights service, his
Heir being of full age, the Lord shall have of the Heir for every Knights
fee.C. s. noi^e Releuij. And if the Knights Fees be more or less, Then the
Tenauntes Relief to be aportionated thereafter.

Waiues, is commonly where a Thief has stolen certain goods, and
Cattailles, and brought them into a Manor, and then by Waiues.
reason of pursuit, flees awale, leauyng the said goods and cattailes within
the jurisdiction or circuit of the Ma^nour. And then are they the lords of
that Manor, and are to be seized by the Bailife, or Rent there, to the lords
use, and are to be presented at the next court, to be holden within the same
Manor.

Straies.
Straies, is where any Horses, Coltes, Oxen, Rine, Swine, or other cattailes, do
come or straie, and there do tarry one year, and one day, and the owner fetch
them not, and that the same straie have been Proclaimed, three several
Sondaies, in three of the next Parishes, and three times at the next markette
town, next by the Manor, then they are the lords, and they are always
presentable at the next Court, after the straie happens to come into the
Manor.

Forfeitures.
Forfeiture, is whereas any tenant holds any Copy hold, or Customarie Land
of the Lord of any Manor, and for non payment of his rentes, customs, or
services, or by sellyng of the woods of his Copy hold, or by lettyng the
houses go down, or by making waste, or by alienatyng, lettyng, or setting his
customarie Lands, without the Lords license, forfeiteth his Copy hold
Land, into the Lords hand, which is to be so found by the presentment of
the homage, at the next Court thereto be holden, and to be seized into the
Lords use: Also tenauntes by deed indented for life, or years, may forfeite
their estates.

Excheates
Excheates is commonly, where a Freeholder of a Manor commits Fellonie,
then after the King has had the year and day, the Lord shall have the Land
by Excheate. Likewise if a Tenant do dye, without lawful heirs general, or
special, his land Excheateth to the lord of the Manor, whereof the same is
holden, and this is commonly of Free holders, and of Tenauntes by aunciente
Demeasne. And the Excheate is always to be presented by the homage, at the
next court of the Manor then to be holden.

Plees and Process of Courts.
Plees and processes of Courts, or where the Lord of a Manor in his Court,
Let, or Lawdaie, or three weeks Court, holds Plea of his Tenauntes, for
their lands holden of the said Manor, or for any debtes, trespasses, or
sommes of money, under the value of xl. s^. debte and damage.

Memorandum many other things may be accounted, or noumbred amongst
perquisites, if the same grow but casuallie, and not yearly.

Wards.
Is where any Free holders hold of a Ma^nour in Capite, Escuage, uncertain,
Grau^dsergeauntie, or otherwise by knights Service, and dies his heir male,
being within the age of xxj. year, and his heir Female being within the age
of.xiiij. year. Then the King, or Lord of the Manor, or of whom such Land
is holden, ought to have the wardeshippe of such heir: that is to say, the
guard, and custody of the body, and lands of such heir, unto their full
age. And also the marriage of such heir, if they happen then to be unmarried.
And as for the residue of the understanding of this point, I refer you to
the instruction of the law.

Patronage of a Church, is where the Lord of the Manor is very undoubted
patron of the Parsonage, Vicarage, free Chapel, etc. belongyng to his
Manor, and may, or ought to give the same, when, and as often as it falls
void.

Presentation, is when the lord may present any lawful Clerk, to any
Parsonage, Vicarege. etc. continually, or but at every second or third
auoidaunce, by force, or in the right of his Manor.

Patronages, presentations, nominations, and aduousons of parsonages,
vicarages, prebendes, Churches. etc.
Nomination, is where the lord or any other, may in the right of his Manor,
or otherwise, nominate a condign Clarke, to any Parsonage, Vicarage etc.

Aduouson, is where the Lord may, or has granted, or given his right of
presentyng, or nominatyng Such things are appendaunte, regardau^te or
exspectante, to a Manor, are these.
of a Clarke to any Vicarage, or Parsonage, etc. in the life of the Incumbent,
or Parsone of the same Parsonage, or Vicarage, etc. The same grant or Aduouson
to take place, immediately upon, or after the next aduoydaunce of the same, be
it by death, Deprivation, Surrender, or Sequestration of the Parson, Vicar, or
Incumbent of the same.

And note, the lord may grant out two, or three Aduousons of one benefice,
the one to take place after the other.

Villains, and Nieffes, is where Bondmen, and Bondwomen belong to a Manor,
the bondsman is called a Villain, and the bondwoman is called a Nieffe. And in
some Mannours all the Tenauntes are Villains and Neiffes, and then is it said
that land is, a tenure in Villanage.

Villains and Nieffes.
Note, the proper Lands of a Villain and Neiffe, and all his goods, and
cattaills, are the lords, to whom he is Villain, if the Lord so please,
unless he have made the^ a Manumission, or that they be enfranchised
otherwise. There are sometimes Villains engrosse, which are neither
regardaunte, nor appendaunte to a Manor: but the Lord or his Ancestors,
have boughte the same and therefore they are called Villains engrosse: their
lands, goods, and cattalls, are likewise at the Lords pleasure and
disposition.

And as touching other things, that be appe^daunte to a Ma^nour, some manner of
Commons are appendaunte to a Manor, as well as appurtenaunte.

Also Free Warrens, in some place may be appendaunte to a Manor as well as
appurtenau^t.

Also every Manor, has commonly his peculie^ several customs, and
privileges belongyng to the same.

The description, what a custom properly is.
And it is to be specially noted, there can be no custom, unless it have been
used, time out of memory of man: and all such customs as he of that
continuance, be lawful, so long as they be not unreasonable, nor have any
inconvenience that be against reason. And note also, that no man can at this
day make, or bring up any new custom, but the same must be of ancient time
but of mind of man used, as is aforesaid, or else t is no custom.

And for as much, as the sondrie customs of all Mannours, cannot be recited,
yet for enstruction sake (amongst many) I will now note a few, most common.

Some Ma^nour has a custom, that surrendour can not be made of Lands holden
of that Manor, but to the Steward himself: and yet in some Mannours it may
be done to two of the Tenauntes, or Homage of that Ma^nour. And in some
Manor, he Surrendour must be made by the circumstaunce of deliueryng a rod,
straw, or mote, else is it a void surrendour and in some Mannours it may be
done without it.

Also in some Mannours the Tenauuntes cannot lease, or set their lands above a
year, without the lords license, upon pain of forfeiture of the same. And in
some Mannours, for three years or more.

Insome Mannours, the Tenauntes may not fell, ne loppe, the woods growyng
upon their tenementes, no, not to repair their houses, without the lords
license: and yet in some Mannours, they may do both, yea, and sell the wood
away, without the Lords license.

In some Ma^nours, which is commonly in Devonshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire,
Cornwall, Witshire, and part of Glocestershire, the Tenauntes take the
customarie Lands of the Lord, for term of three lives, and not above,
paiyng a fine uncertain, as the Lord and Tenaunte can agree. And commonly in
such Mannours the wives of the Tenauntes, after their housebandes deceasses,
have their widows estate, by their custom, which is as long as they keep
them selves unmarried, and honest, and in some Mannours it is otherwise and
commonly also in these Mannours, the lord has a herriotte, after the death of
every Tenaunte.

In some Mannours, the Tenauntes have their tenementes, to them and to their
heirs, paieyng to the Lord a fine certain, at every change, and there only
the wife, has no widows estate, and also commonly such Tenau^tes pay
Herriottes.

In some Mannours, the Tenauntes are bound by their custom, to serve the
Lord in the Queen's wars, so it be within the realm, against Rebels, or
such enemies, at their own proper costs and charges: And in some Mannours it
is otherwise: But note, that now by a statute therefore made, all customarie
tenau^tes must serve their Lords against Rebels, upon pain of forfeiture of
their holdynges.

Also in some Mannours, the tenau^tes ought by their custom, for three or
four days in sowyng time, and as much in mowyng time, and likewise in
Harvest, to help to tille the Lords ground, to make his Hay, or to help in
with his Harueste, which be called commonly opera custumaria, that is to
say, day works, and such like, and in some place they use to do it, only
with their persons, and in some Ma^nours both with their Teames, Waines,
servants, and persons, and in some place otherwise.

Also in some Mannours, the Tenauntes by their custom, must grind their
Corn at no Mill, but at the lords mill, belongyng to the Manor, and this
is commonly called Socome, as is aforesaid.

In some Mannours, the Tenauntes have their Fuel out of the Lords wooddes,
and this in most places is properly called estouer, and in some Manours but
only timber, for repairing their tenauntries.

In some Ma^nours, their custom is to have common for their beasts, in all
the lords wast ground, and commons. And in some Mannours but in a part of
them, and that only for a certain number, and some special kind of
cattaile, yea, and also in some places, at certain times only accustomed, or
prefixed.

And as touching the description, of the sundry kinds of Common, that is to
say, Common appendaunte, Common appurtenaunte, Common engrosse. etc. I leave
three to the instruction of master Littleton,

And note for a special Rule: a tenaunte that has Common in the Lords
Commons, may have there nothing by reason of Common, but alonely bitte of
mouth with their cattaile, neither may Geese or Swine have common, but by the
lords sufferaunce, without special words in the charter, or copy of the
Tenant.

Sometime customarie Tenauntes in some Mannours, have also common of Fishing,
with shouenettes, castyng neetes, small pitches, and trodde nets, and such
like.

Some Countries have customs by them selves, as the custom of Gauell kind
in Rent, and part of Wales, where the sons of Free holders, shall have their
fathers lands equally divided amongst them, touching the which and all
such like customs, I commit you to the instruction of the learned in the
law.

Privileges, are all such liberties and frau^chesies, as are granted to a
Ma^nour, or town by the King Queen, or Princes great Chartre, or letters
patentes, or by act of parliament.

The description what reprises commonly and properly are.
Also there are commonly going yearly out of most Mannours sondrie Deductions,
Paimentes, and duties, and these are always called Reprises. And of such
there be diverse natures, whereof some go out of one Manor and some out of
an other, as be these ensuyng, and their like.

Suites of Court, or annual fine, for suite and service of Court, to any
other Court.

Rent charge, or rent secke, yearly going out of any Manor.

Sometimes also Rent service, either of Capons, Hens, Peper, Cu^minseede, or
such like, may be yearly paid, out of one Manor to an other.

And also a Rent, or a Suite, may be sometimes paid out of a Manor to a
Hundred, or Sheriues Turn.

Also an annual pencion or portion may be paid out of some one Manor, to
some other Manor, Personage, or Vicuarage.

Item a Rent resolute, may sometimes be yearly going out of one Manor, to
some other Manor or Parsonage, for a high way, or a Water, course, or a
liberty of foldyng, or such like.

Also out of some Mannours or Lands, an yearly tenth is reserved, to the King
or Queens highness.

Reprises of al natures.
Also yearly Fees to any Receiuour, Bailife, Collectour, high Steward, or under
Steward, charged by the Lords Letters Patentes, or otherwise, to be going
out of a Manor, or such Lands, are called Reprises.

Likewise every other yearly Fee, that is paid to any other parson, out of
any Manor, Lands or Tenementes.

Corrodies also for Term of life, or in Fee to any Parsone or Persons,
yearly paid out of any Manor.

Stipendes, Salaries, or Annuities of Chapleynes, men of Counsel in the Law
or such like.

Memorandum, all these Reprises, aforesaied, and their like, are to be
diligently learned, that they may be deducted, when they ought out of any
Manor, in the making of the valewe thereof.

And when these six principal things before in the said second rule set
out and described, are perfectly known, and well understood of him that
would be a Surueiour, then has he some entrance in the knowledge of his
Office. And now here next ensuing, for his further enstruction, shall ensue the
third Rule, which shall contain in a brief rehearsal the sum of all such
parts and duties which does or ought to belong to the Office of a Surueiour,
and which then (after followyng in order) the speciallest points of them are
perticulerlie by them selves, more at large to be touched and declared.

The third Rule.
A Breef Recital of most of the points, duties, and special things, what,
or which are belongyng generally to be done, and observed of every
Surueiour, as the members and parts, wherein generally the Office consists,
and therefore here set together, that they might the better be holde^ in
memory, most whereof be hereafter more at large discoursed and set out.

Also every Surueiour ought to be as skillful, and well instructed how to make
and certify to the Lord, the true and just value of his Lordeshippe, Manor,
Lands, Tenementes, etc. or any part, parcel, or member thereof, when he
shall be thereunto required and commanded, and to make and set out the same in
a plain and breife particular, whether it be for the purpose or intent that
the Lord would sell or leasse out any such Manor, or any parcel thereof to
any parson or parsones, as an Auditour. And truly it were much to the
Surueiours shame and reproach, if he cannot make as true and perfect a
particular thereof to the Lord, when occasion requires (Surueiyng the same,
once or twice in every year as he ought to do) as well as the Auditour
thereof, who makes commonly his Particular of a Survey taken perchance ten
or fiftene years before or such like, or perchance but only by his bare
record of Ministers accoumpte, without survey. And surely, in this case the
Auditour (who in deed is a very needful and profitable member of the common
wealth) is worthy much more commendation (that he is ready and can make a
particular by his President or Ministers accoumpt, or such like record,) then
some Surueiour who neither can, nor has learned how to do it at all.

Also the Surueiour ought to know how to take the survey and perfect vewe of a
Manor, or other Lands or Tenements, and how to butte and bound the same in
due order, and for most plainest knowledge of the Tenauntes, and for most
long continuance, an example whereof you shall have hereafter.

Then also how (when he has surueied a Manor) to enter, and engrosse the
same, which he ought to do, and also to make a terror of the same, in due
form as hereafter shall be declared.

Moreover, the Surueiour should keep a suite roll, wherein all such persons
as ought to yield suite of Court, of the Manor or service should be
written, and a Copy thereof he should deliver to the Steward, that they may
be called at every Court, or Let holden, that the Lord loose none of his
suites or services, a form whereof also ensues.

Likewise, it is the Surueiours duty, to make and keep a Roll or book,
called a customary of the Manor, wherein all the customs of the Manor
should be registered. That the Tenauntes may at no time claim any more, or
other customs then they ought to have, ne the Lord be prejudiced by any new
custom, by his Tenauntes claimed. And this Customarie would be Indented, the
one part to remain with the Lord or his Stewaade, and the other part with
his Tenauntes. And yet nevertheless should the Surueiours have the original
Copy thereof, in the end of the terror of the same Manor, a brief form
whereof also you shall have hereafter.

Also the Surueiours should give to every Bailife, Collectour, or Reave of every
manor, a parfite rentall of the year by Revenues of the same Manor, to
gather it by, which rentall also should be endented, the one part to remain
with the Lord or his Surueiour, and the other with the Bailife. A short
example whereof ye shall see hereafter.

Also the Surueiour should have and keep the Inrollment of all Indentures and
Copies, by which any tenant holds that he may see the Lords duly
answered, of his Rentes, Duties and couenauntes in their writings contained,
and also be ascertainee, of their Estates and grauntes to them by the Lord
made. And let the Surueiour that has to do in the west parties, look
diligently to this one point, that the name of a young Infaunte crepe not into
the place of an old man, for they use much there (I will not say for that
intent) if the Father or Mother who have state for life, in possession or
reuersion, be named Ihon and Agnes, or such like, then if they have ij or
three boys, or as many girls, their names shall be all christened as they or
those, who have state in their holdinges are named. But now this is more
narowly looked to, then in times past.

Also although every Steward is bound by law and conscience, to be an
indifferent judge, between the Lord and his Tenauntes, and also to give at the
Court a true, full and substantial Charge to the Homage, and also to make a
good entry, as well of every Tenauntes particular estates, as of all other
things in his Court Rolls, and to see the Tenaunts Copies truly made out
accordingly: Yet because it is the duty of a Surueiour, to have such skill
in the things before rehearsed, that he may not only keep a note of all the
stewardes doings, but also be able to inform, or peruse the doings of him, I
have also hereafter therefore set briefly out (the charge which a Steward
ought to give in a Court Baron) and also the form of making out their Copies,
as hereafter does appear,

Furthermore, the Surueiour ought to have some sight, or knowledge in ye common
law, or else he shall many times, by his ignorance, deceive both the Tenant,
and the Lord, and also make evil Presidentes and Records, and thereby much
trouble and inconvenience may arise and grow many a day hereafter, to the
peril of his own soul and many others.

Also he ought to grow ripe and perfect, in the Lords evidences, and records
of every Manor, and in the ordering and sorting of them, that he may be
able to answer or inform the Lord of the Manor, or his counsel, when
any title or claim is made or other doubt put, and for this purpose the
Court Rolls would be kept in Chestes made for that purpose, within any
Manor under locks and keys. etc.

Also by the erection of the late Court of Augmentation, and revenue of the
Kings Crown lately in the first year of Queen Marie, dissolved, and reduced
in the Exchequour, amongst other things (there appointed to the office and
duty of a Surueiour) it was thought meet, that the Surueior sitting with the
Steward, after three Proclamations made in the Court, should assesse Fynes,
make grauntes of Copy hold, and customarie Lands, being within the limits of
his Office, according to the custom of the Mannours, thereto such parson or
parsons, as should give best Fine for the same, which the Steward then
furthwith in open court, ought to chardge, and enter into the Court Roll. And
thereof to make out the extractes to the Bailife, Reave or Collectour, that the
same might be justly levied, and gathered accordingly. And also that the
Surueiour should see truly answered, all such Rentes, Revenues, perquisites,
casualties, and other things which may grow profitable or beneficial to the
Lord at the next audite, for which purpose the Surueiour must keep a book of
all such grauntes, to the intent that the same shall and may be the more
truly answered at the said accoumpt: for else may hap the Steward either for
lucre, or for negligence of him self or his Clerk, may conceal, or omit some
of ye same, to the deceipte as well of ye Lord as of his Tenau^ts.

Also the Surueyour should be partly skilled, in the rule of Apportionation,
that he may when need is, apportionate the Land with the Rent, according to
the Acre, a short form whereof shall be hereafter declared, but this rule is
somewhat uncertain.

Also the Surueiour should have some skill in measuryng of Land, that is to
say, what an Acre is, how much it contains, etc. and how most readily, and
truly to meat land by line, or by rod, be it in the plain, in the valley,
or upon the hille, or in woodde, or be it square, triangle, round, or of any
other proportion: A small brief enstruction, he shall hereafter find, set out
with a ready table, for the contents of all manner of land.

And now, as touching the manner and form, how a true breef, and perfect
particular of any Manor, Lands, Tenementes, or Hereditamentes, should be
made, and what things are to be observed therein, I have now (under
correction) here under showed you.

1 You must specially note, that your particular ought, should, and must
consiste in three principal poinctes, or notable things. The first is, that
the true value of all the parcelles of Lands, Tenementes, and Hereditamentes,
be severally (but breefly) described, and set out with their several sommes
at the end of them, and then all in the left margent (all joined in one line)
the total to be set out.

2 The second is, that there under must, immediately, plainly, and breefly be
described, and set out, all the reprises, that is to say (as I have before
declared) all deductions, fees, or paiementes, going out of the said value, to
any person, or persons, and the sums at the end: And then altogether in
the left margente, to be in a line joined, and the total to be set out, as
before in the value.

3 Thirdly, under them both should be set forth, the Remanet clare,
written in Text, and drawn out a long, with the sum in the end of the same.

Under all which, if there be any other thing, needful to be considered, or
remembered for the Lords advantage, or otherwise: either touching the sale, or
leassyng of the said Manor, Lands, etc. to any person, and which is not
in the value mentioned: then the same shall be written under the particular, in
the title of a Memorandum. etc.

NOw forasmuch, as nothing can be by any mean so well understood, as by
way of example, when it is set before the eye: Therefore I have devised, an
example of a very ample particular hereafter ensuyng, and hereunto annexed.
Wherein I have fained, or supposed a Lordshippe or Manor, by the name of the
Manor of Dale, to have all manner of Rentes, and other things, aforesaied,
and in my second Rule specified, or such like, as commonly to any manner of
Lordeshippe, Manor, Lands, or Tenementes, can or does belong: and there out
I have deducted in reprises, all manner of deductions, or paimentes, that can,
or does commonly, yearly, go out, or be deducted out of any Lordship, or
Manor, Lands etc. with the Reamne^t clare there after following, and a memor
and there under, as amply as I can presently also gather, that to such, a
value should, or may appertain.

The Fourth Rule. How a Surueiour should take a perfect View or Survey of a
Manor or such Lands Tenementes or Hereditamentes.
FIrst the Surueiour in taking his Survey, should well remember that he ought,
most diligently and vigilauntly to vewe and survey the Buttes, and Bounds of
the whole Manor, and then the Buttes and Bounds, of every particular
Tenaunts lands, Tenements, Meadows, Cloases, Pastures, etc. within the same
Manor, and every parcel thereof, that it may remain in perpetual
remembrance hereafter, what and which Tenementes, Lands, Meadows, Pastures,
etc. every man had, when the Survey was taken, and where the same then did lie,
and how they were then bounded and butted, and upon whom, and how many Acres,
every parcel did contain, and how much land or pasture did at the same time
belong to every Tenauntes holdyng, or to the Manor house: as well for the
preservation of the inheritance of the Lord of the Manor, as of every
freeholder, Copy holder or customary holder, or other Tenant of the same.

The which Surueiour when he goes about to vewe or survey a Manor, Lands,
Tenementes or other Hereditamentes, should have with him ready provided a
Paperbooke, wherein he may roughly and speedily note as he goes about the vewe
thereof, the first drought of his Survey of the same, lest if it be done in
loose papers, some part may happen to be loss, or else vnsorted or alter
misplaced in the ingrossyng, and so perchance, as good never written. And in
the beginning of the same paper book, let him write the title in this form,
if he please, writing the Mannours name in the margent on this wise.

Manerium de Sale.
Superuil. Maner^ de Sale ibidem cape^, fact et examinat per diligent, et exact
vis. perambulationem, examinationem et mensuratione^, tam A. B. general
superuisor^, terr^ Iohi^s at Style, dn^i Maner^ pred et per mandat eiusdem,
quam per Sacrament R. S. F. H. T. B. ac multorum tenentium, et Homagij Manerij
pred, tunc ibm^ existen^ xij. die Augusti. Anno dn^i M. D. lxij. Annoque Regine
Elizabeth Dei gratia Anglie, etc. Quarto.

Or rather if ye will, you may in your first wast paper book, (so it be not in
English in your engrossed book of Survey) write the title in English in a
shorter form, which is this ensuyng both will serve.

The Town of Dale. The vewe of the Manor of Dale, taken the x. day of May in
the xiiii. year of the reign of King Henry the eight. By A. B. general
Surueiour to the right honorable lord. C. D. Lord of the same by his
Commandment, and also by the oaths of E. F. and G. H. and many other
tenauntes of the same, as hereafter ensues.
Then in mine opinion, (under correction) the Surueiour should first begin
with the Site of the Manor or principal Manor place, if there be any, and
first to set out the bounds thereof by every side, that is to say by East,
Weast, North and South. And then the contents what it contains in length and
breadth. Thou what edifices, buildinges, and houses of offices Barnes, Stables,
Stalles, and Doue-houses are standing upon the same, and whether builded with
Timber, Brick, or Freestone, Tyled, stated, shingled, or thatched. And what
Gardens, Orchardes, Motes, or Pondes, be about the same, or adioynyng thereto.
And then if ye will (though master Fitz Harbert, have not altogether so set
forth) he may go straight to the surueiyng of the Demaines, that is, what
several, or particular Closes, Meadows, Pastures, arable land, etc. they are
of, which be the Demaines. And where they do lie, and if they have any proper
or peculiar names, then what every parcel of ground is called, and how many
Acres every parcel does contain, and how they butte and bound. And what
woo^des be thereof, and how many years grouth: also what Shawes, or good
hedgerowes of wood be about every fence, of any Close of the said Demaines. And
then if a Fe^^our holds it, what is his name, and what yearly rent he paieth,
and at what feasts the some is paiable, and also the date of the Farmours
Indenture of Leasse (if he have any) and for what term of years or lives he
holds it, and under what couenauntes, as by example hereafter.

Then in like manner of the Site of the Parsonage (if there be any) Buttyng,
boundyng, containyng and recityng, the same in all points as is before
expressed in the Scyte of the Manor. Adding who is Person, or Vicar there, to
whom the gift thereof belongs, who occupies it, and what it is yearly
worth. And also likewise namyng, buttyng, bounding, and showing the contents
and names of every parcel of the glebe lands, thereto belongyng accordingly.

Then to take the view of Tenementes, of Freeholders, and of their Lands,
Meadows and Pastures, etc. Always buttyng, boundyng, containyng, and recityng
the contents and proper names of every parcel thereof, according as is
aforesaid. And specially remembryng by what rent, service, relief, Fine,
Herriot, Suite of Court, or custumary works, they do hold the same of the
Lord.

And in like manner to vewe the Tenementes and Lands of all manner of
Tennauntes at will, Tennauntes by Indenture, or by Copy, etc. Always
buttyng, boundyng, containyng, recityng, notyng and declaryng the several
contents and names of every particular parcel of Land, Meadowe, Pasture,
Close, Crofte, Wood, Shawe, etc. And also the several yearly Rentes, suites,
services and works, and the Fynes, Heriottes, and customs, of the same. etc.

And it were good, that ye vewed the Fields, in a general manner, every field
severally by him self. Having if ye be not the skilfuller, a Dial in your
hand (according to master Fitz herbertes counsel) I mean that thereby, who
so takes the survey, may thereby know perfectly, which is East, Weste, North
and South. And the Surueiour should stand in the mids of the field, or
where he may best see every side or corner thereof. And as touching the buttyng
and boundyng of the fields, before he do begin to enter the buttes and
bounds of any particular man's ground, or land in the same field, he should
enter the buttyng, and boundyng of the whole fields on every side, how it does
lie, naming the boundynges thereof, always upon the most notable known
marks, or Mearestones as he can: as these and such like be that follow:
Marelepittes, gravel pittes. Brokes, pondes, Windmilles and Windmill hills,
cross ways, Lanes and such like bounds, not remoueable and of continuance.
And after he has so butted and bounded the whole field, on all parts, Then
to begin at one place certain, and so from thence along to bound and butte
every tenaunts particular furlonges, Lands, Hedlandes, Bawkes and grounds, be
it by the land or by the Acre, as he shall think best, or devise to do the
same, for surer, longer, and men's better knowledge thereof, as in example
hereafter shall appear. Master Fitzherbert would have the Meadows, pastures
and Closes also likewise surueied generally.

And the like manner and form in all points, is to be used by the Surueiour,
in buttyng, and boundyng of the Meadows that be common Meadows, with their
several contents of Acres, by their several marks, and Mearestones, as
example shall show also hereafter.

And as for Closes, Croftes, Pastures, or Woods that be enclosed, he should
butte and bound them severally, entryng their contents of Acres, and names
if he can, with the value what they be yearly worth, and who holds them, as
is before said, whereof ye shall also have an example here followyng in his
place.

And after like manner and form, may the Surueiour, if he will, butte, bound,
and enter the contents of Acres, of all manner of Pastures, where Herdmen keep
cattalle. And also all Commons, Moors, Marshes, Heathes, Common Woods, or
such like.

Hereafter do follow the examples, how the premises should be entered
orderly. And first how the Manor place, or Site should be entered, Butted
and bounded.
SCitus Maner^ de Dale pred Scituatur, et existit, inter Cemiterium Ecclesie de
Dale, super le Borial, et Regiam viam di^cest, a villa de B. vsque villam de A.
super Austral et communem campum eiusdem ville, super Orient, et Tentm^ sieve
Mesuagium R. F. super occident. Et continet in latitudine triginta perticas, et
quatuor pedes terre, vnaqueque pertica existen^ xvi. pedes di^. Super quem
Scitum le Manor place scituat sufficient edificat cum vna Aula, and duabus
cameris, ex lapidibus quadrat construct, cum omnibus domibus, edificiis,
cameris, structur^, et duobus atriis eidem Scitui pertinen^. Necnon vnum
Columbarium, in exteriori Atrio ibm^ voc^ le great Court, scituat, cum vno
Gardino circu^murat cont vna^ acr^ di^. Ac vnu^ hortu^ cu^t quatuor Acr^, vnde
vnum caput abbuttat super Regiam viam predictam, verfue Boreal, et super scitum
pred versus occident, et super campu^ pred versus Austr^, et clm^ rectoris ibm^
super Orient, Ac etia^ cum duobus Horreis, continent quatuor Bays, le piece,
vna domo vocat le Stalle, als le Ox house, continen^ iii. Baies, edificat,
vnum Srabul cont vi. Baies, edific^ Qui quidem Scitus, et cetere damus, et
edificia, sunc coopert, cum tegulis sieve lapi^, voc^ Tyle, preter dict duo
Horrea que coopert sunt cum le Shingle etc. Et qui quidem Scitus, and cetere
domus, ac edificia, ac cetera premiss. cum omnibus et singulis dominicis terr^,
prat, pasc. pastur^, boscis, et subboscis, cum pertin^ (if it be out of the
Lords own hand, demised to a Fermour, ye must say) modo dimittuntur, R. H.
executor^ et assign^ suis, (Some use to specify the Farmours estate, with the
date of his Indenture, and for what lives, or how many years he holds it) and
this is more then is in Master Fitzharbertes presidente (and then must ye say)
Hend et Tenend pred R.H. executor^ et assign^ suis a festo sancti Michaelis
archangeli prox. futur^ (vel vlti^o preterito, as the feast is, and if it be
for his life, say) ad terminum et pro termino vite natural ipsius R.H. (And if
it be for years, then say) vsque ad finem et terminum xxj. annorum (or so
many years as it is) extunc prox. sequend et plenarie complend. And then name
the rent, saying. Reddend inde annuatim dict Iohanni at Style dn^o Manerij
pred xxxi. li. x. s^. (or naming what other re^t he paieth, and the^ at what
feasts as) ad duos a^ni terminos vsuales, viz ad fest Annunciationis beat
Marie virginis, et sancti Michaelis Archangeli, per equal portiones duran^
termino pred. (And then some do touch partly the couenauntes in the
Indenture, on the tenauntes behalf to be performed, in this or like form.)
Et pred R. H. et executor^ fui tenentur omnibus reparationibus premissor^ ad
sumptos suos proprios preter grande meremium, et in fine termini dabit dn^o xl.
s^. nomine Herriott, et habebit sufficien^ Hedgebdote, Houseboote, Fireboote,
Ploughboote, Carteboote, et Haieboote super premiss. crescen^ et ibm^
expendend, et non alibi, duran^ termino pred, et he^it co^muniam in omnibus
communiis et vastis dn^i et continet etiam in Indentura pred vnum promso; quod
si Reddu^s pred aretrofuerit in part vel in tot^ per spatium vnius mensis post
aliquod festum solutionis pred, et litime demandat, quod tunc potest dn^s et
heredes sui in premissa, et quamlibet inde percellam reintrare etc^. And
likewise you may breefly in the same manner, rehearse any other couenaunte in
the Indenture declared) all which is more then master Fitz harbert declares,
and it is much used at this day. And then ye must draw all together, and
set the rent thereof in the midst of the right margente, that it may be
ready to the eye.

How the Sry^e of a Personage or Rectorie, and Vicaredge may be bounded.
SCitus Rectorie de Sale scituatur et existit inter Regiam viam pred super
austr^ et ecclia^m perochial ex part Occidental et campum Boreal ex part
Boreal, et Tentm^ R.F. ex part oriental. Et Rector ecclesie pred habet vnum
Croftum iacent inter campum Boreal et Cemiteriu^ ecclesie pred ex part
Austral. Ac dict Crostum continet detem perticas ex part Boreal et duodecim
perticas ex part Austral, et Triginta perticas in longitudine ex Oriental
part, et viginti perticas et dimidiam ex part occidental. Et R.T. est modo
rector ibm^, et habuit rectoriam pred ex dono domini huius Manerij de Dale, cui
donatio eiusdem pertinet imperperm^, vt vero et iudubitato patrono eiusdem in
iure Maner^ sui predicti. Et predit. R. T. cli^cus tenet rectoriam pred, cum
omnibus Terris, Glebis, Pratis, Pascuis, pasturis, decim^, oblacoi^bus,
prouencoi^bus; abueucoi^bus and alijs proficuis quibuscunque in occupatione sua
propria, et valor annuus eiusdem in libris Dn^e Regine extendit ad x^iij. l.
ij. s^. sed valet per annum vltra repris^ xxij. l.

And note that the cause why I have neither in the Site and Demaynes of the
Manor before mentioned, nor in the entry of the said Site of the Personage
aforesaid, here butted, bounded or set out the names, contents of Acres of
the said Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Closes, etc. of the Demaines or Glebe
Lands, or of the Lands, Meadows, Pastures. etc. belonging to any tenement of
free holders, or copy holders, (the fourmes of thentries whereof now also
ensue) is, because the same must and should appear in the general vewes of
the fields, Meadows and closes of the hole Manor by them selves as
hereafter shall appear.

How the Tenementes or Mesuages of Freeholders should be butted, bounded and
entered.
VNum Mesuagium sieve tenementum, quod D. C. tenet libere per chartam cum
omnibus terris, prat, pastur^, etc. eidem tenemento sieve Mess. pertin^, de Dn^o
huius Manerij: quod quidem mesuagium sieve Tenementum iacet inter regiam viam
pred ex part Austral, et campum Borial pred ex part Borial, et rectoriam pred
ex part Occidental, et Ten^tu^ W. R. ex part Oriental, et continet xiii.
perticas ex part Austral eiusdem in latitudine et xxi. perticas et tres pedes
in longitudine, et xvi. perticas in latitudine apud caput Boreol. Et tenet
Mesuagium sieve Tenementum predict cu^ pertin^ de de^o domino per homagium,
fidelitatem et duos solidat reddit per annum, et vnam libram Piperis, ac sect
ad curiam dn^i de tribus septi^anis in tres septi^anas, et ad duas letas dn^i
ibm^ annuatim tenend.

And thus must ye enter the Mesuages, Lands and pastures of all free holders
being always sure to express the buttes and bounds of the same, and the
service and yearly Rent of every free Tenant as nere as ye can, in the entry
of the same.

How other Mesuages, Tenementes or Cotages, holden of the Lord at will, or by
Indenture, or by Copy of Court roll, should be butted, bounded, contained and
entered.
VNum Mesuagium sieve Tenementum dimissum. S.H. (if it be at will, say, ad
voluntatem dn^i (if it be by Indenture, say) per Indenturam gerent dat, etc.
(if it be by Copy of Court roll) say, per copiam Curie ad voluntatem dn^i,
secundum consuetudinem Manerij, cuius dat est, etc. Scituat inter regiam viam
predict ex part Austral, et campum Borealem predict ex part Boreal, et dictum
Tenement D.C. pred ex part Occidental, et co^em Campum ibm^ vocat Le Est
field ex part Oriental, et continet in latitudine quatuordecem pertic^, et
tres pedes assise, et xviii pertit^, et december pedes assis^ in longitudine,
he^nd etc. (as his estate is, followyng the form set out in the entry of the
Scyte of the Manor before expressed.) Reddend inde annuatim dict Ioanni Style
dn^o Maner^ predict xxiiii. s^. vi. d. ad duos a^ni terminos usual, vz. ad
festa Annuntiationis beat Marie virginis, et sei^ Michaelis Archangeli per
equales porcoe^s. (And then if it be by Indenture, touch also the couenauntes
therein in this or like form.) Et pred. S. H. et executor^ sui per Indentur^
pred tenentur omnibus reparationibus premissorum ad sumptus suos proprios
(grandi maremio solummodo ercept) Et in fine termini sui dabit domino optimu^
Animal quod he^t nomine Herriott. Et pred S. H. et execut sui habebunt (ex
conuentione dn^i predicti,) Sufficient hedgeboote, houseboote, fyreboote,
Ploughboote et Carteboote, super p^mis. crescen^, et ibm^ expendend. duran^
termino predicto. Et faciet Sectam ad curia^ domini quotie^s legaliter
summoi^tus fuerit. Et dabit annuatim dn^o predco, duas gallinas ad Fest natal
dn^i, etc. Et si reddu^s predict aretro fuerit in part vel in toto per spacium
vnius mensis post aliquod festum solucon^ pred et liti^me demandat, quod tunc
potest dn^s et heredes sui in p^miss. reintrar^, etc. (And even in like form
let him enter al other couenauntes contained in the Indenture.) And if it be by
Copy ye must recite the services and works which the Tenant should do if
he should or ought to do any, etc. and in this form make your entry of all
such like.

Now touching the entry of the Fields, Lands, Closes and meadows of every
Tenement (after Master Fitzharbartes form) they must be recited in the vewe
of the whole manor, as next hereafter ensuyng shall appear.

How to Butte and Bound the whole common fields belonging to a Manor.
CAmpus Austral ibm^ iacet ex australi part ville de Sale pred, et incipit
apud le Crucem ibm^ vocat Shawcrosse, apud quoddam furlongu^ vocat Well
Furlong. Quod quidem Furlongum continet sexaginta acras terre arabil et
abbuttant ex part boreal et occidental, super magnum Clausum dm^ de terris
dominicis voc^ wrangclose, et ex part oriental super communem viam ibm^ voc^
longlane, et ex part austral super Riuulum ibm^ vocatur Kernebroke, vnde Dn^s
habet tres acras et vnam rodam, rector ibm^ iii. acr^ et iiii. pertic^. R. F.
quatuor acr^. G.H. vnam acram et vnam rodam, S. R. septem acr^ et tres rod. et
sic de ceteris. Ye may do the like if ye will by the Lands as I have done by
the acres.

Also if there be any mo common Fields, enter them and bound them in like
manner, as I have done this South field aforemencioned.

How to but and bound the Meadows of a Man, nour, and specially when they are
common Meadows.
PRatu^ commune Maner^ de Sale predict vocat Brodemeade, iacet in Orientali
campo coi^s ca^pi ibm^ vocat Southfield, inter campum pred et Riuulum predict
vocat Kernebrooke, et ex part Occidental abbuttat super viam vocat longlane
pred, et ex partibus Austral et Oriental abu^t super claus. dedn^icis dn^i
vocat Wrangclose, et ex part Borcal abbut super Crofta I. H. et W. H. Et
Pratum predictum continet lxiii. acr^ et vnam rodam, et iacet in diuersis
partib. vocat Shootes. Et incipiens apud longlane pred in australi part
eiusdem, rector ibm^ habet tres Acras et vnam Rodam, dn^s Maner^ vt de dni^cis
suis sex Acras. R. S. v. acras et di^. I. B. quatuor acras et vnam rodam. F. H.
sex acras et di^. T.B. v. acras, Dn^a Regina ix. acras, Rector predict tres
acras et di^, etc. et sic de ceteris his Silibus.

And if there be any more or other Meadows, use the like form of entryng of
their Buttes Bounds and contents, notyng always their known names specially
if you can.

How a man should enter, butte and bound the several Pastures, Croftes and
Enclosures belongyng to a Manor.
VNam Clausur^ Pastur^ de Dn^icis dn^i continen^ quadraginta acr^ iacet inter
Pratum ibm^ vocat Brodemeade ex part oriental, et vnum clauss. pastur^ in
tenur^ R. F. vocat Welcroft, et Riuulum predic^ vocat Kernebroke ex partibus
Occidental et austral, ac co^em Campum ibm^ vocat Northfield, ex part Boriale,
et valet per annum vi. l.

Vnum aliud clauss. Pastur^ ibm^ quod R.F. tenet libe^ de dn^o pred vt libo^
ten^to suo pertinen^, voc^ Welcrofte co^t xiii. acr^ iacet inter wrangclose
predict. super Occidental et clm^. S. T. vocat old Acre, ex part Oriental and
riuulum predict^ vocat^ Kernebrooke, ex part Austral, et campum predict vocat
Northefelde, et val per annum. xxx. s^. iiii. d.

Vnum aliud claus. Pasture quod G. H. tenet de domino, vt Ten^to suo custumario
pertinen^, cont xxiiii. acr^, et iii. Rodas vocat Marlefelde, iacet iuxta
Wrangclose pred, abbut super Longlane pred versus Oriental et clm^ I. M. vocat
Short-acre, versus Occidental, et clm^ Rectoris ecclesie ibidem voc^ Parsones
Close ex part Austral, et dict clm^ ibidem vocat Well crofte ex part Boreal,
et valet per annum xxxii. s^.

Vnum Claus. pastur^ ibidem vocat Parsones close, continen^ xxii. acr^ di^, et
vnam Rodam iacet super clauss. pred vocat Shortacre versus Boreal, et claus.
vocat Welcrofte, versus Austral, et Longlane versus Occidental, et claus. R.F.
versus Oriental, pertinen^ Rectorie de Sale pred, val per annum. xxvi. s^.
viii. d.

And after this and like manner, ye may peruse, vewe, butte and bound, and
enter all manner of Closes, Pastures and Croftes in any Manor, or about any
Manor.

And you shall note, that this manner and form of vewyng, buttyng, boundyng,
and entryng of the said Messuages, or Tenementes, Fields, Meadows, and
Pastures, or Closes, is almost wholly according to the form, prescribed by
master Fitz Harbert, and is a very exact and most perfect way.

But there is now used of some, an other manner of Surueiyng, Buttyng, and
Boundyng, but specially of entryng of the same in these latter days, whereof I
would not have you also ignoraunte, and that is in this form: They enter
severally every man's Message, or Tenement, and Butte and bound first the
Site thereof accordingly, and then even in the same enter all in one (infra)
they do particularly butte and bound, and also enter every man's errable
land, also his Meadows, Closes, and Pastures, belongyng to every of the same
several Tenementes, all together, and then see out the rent in the right
margent thereof, and the fine and Herriot therefore, to be due in the left
margente thereof, as for your instruction, I will set out hereafter only one
example.

ARnoldus at Noke tenet per Indentur^ gerent dat xii. die Ianuarij, anno regni
Regis Henr^ viii. xxxiiii. dnum magn^ Ten^tum sieve capital Messuagium ibide^
vocat Halle green, scitual et existens apud plateam sieve vicu^ ibidem vocat
Strowde cross, inter vnam viam ibidem vocat Strowdelane ex part Oriental et
coi^am ibide^ vocat Strowdegrene ex Austral et qua^dam Croftam in tenur^
Ioannis ap Moore, ex part Boreal, and cuiusdam alii croft vocat Hall crofte,
in tenura eiusdam Arnoldi ex part Occidental, et continet in longitudine
triginta octo perticas, et xi. pedes assise, et in latitudine viginti nouem
pertit^, vnaqueque pertic^ existens xvi. pedes et di^. Super quam Scitum et
predict capitale Messuagium scituatur sufficienter edificat viz vna aula cum
vna camera, et vna parua camera vocat a Garret, super Aulam pred ex quadrat
lapid construct etc^. cum ceteris domibus et edificijs, et structuc^ eidem
annexat, acetiam vnum atrium quadrat eidem aule adiacen^, necnon vnum xiiii. l.
xiii. s^.
columbar^ dicto atrio contingen^ ac etiam vnum gardinu^ et vnum pomarium
adiacen^ circumpercat sieve palate, continen^ in toto tres rodas, and quatuor
pertic^, vnde vnum caput pomarij pred abbutt super Regiam viam vocat
Strowdelane pred versus Orien^, et abbutt super le Grene pred etc^. ac etiam
vnum pratum vocat Long Meade, continen^ xii. acres, quod quidem pratum iacet
in Occidental part campi voc^ Redfelde, et abbutt super Riuulum ibm^ voc^
Lowe-water super Orient etc^.) and so namyng every Close, Meadowe, or parcel
of land arable, appertainyng to the same Tenemente, and Butting the same on al
sides, as I have before partly show you, then saying) cum omnibus et singulis
suis pertinentijs quibuscunque, hend sibi executor^ and assignatis suis a feft
sancti Michaelis Archi^ vltimo preterito ante dat Indenture pred, ad terminu^
viginti et vnius annorum extunc proxime sequen^ et complend. Reddend inde
annuatim dn^o Mauer^ pred hered and assign^ suis xiiii. l. xiii. s^. legalis
monete Anglie, ad fest natal dn^i, et natiuitatis scti^ Ioannis Baptiste per
equal portiones, vt per Iudentur^ pred inter al before apparet. etc. And this
form aforesaid seems also very commodious, for it shows together plainly
to the eye, what, how, and where the parcells of lands be, that does belong to
every tenement or mesuage, whereas after the form before surueied, after ye
have found in your survey, a tenauntes mesuage or house, ye must be feign to
seek and pike out in the generaltie of the whole survey of Fields, Meadows
and Cloases of the same Manor, every tenauntes parcelles particulerly. Which
is a trouble and somewhat diffuse to him that is but a young surueiour. Mary,
to help that, it is used (after the survey of a Manor is generally taken in
form aforesaid: Then immediately therout to make your Terror wherein every
man's parcelles of Land are set out with his tenement, partly in form of the
last example aforesaid.

The fifte Rule. The description and enstruction for the making and engrossyng
of a Terror, of a Manor or such lands, tenements and hereditamentes.
THough some men make no difference between a Survey and a Terror, accompting
all to be one thing, yet truly as far as I could ever learn and understand,
there is much difference. One difference is that before last remembered, that
is to say, in the ingrosment thereof, to enter, and set out every tenau^tes
parcelles of Lands, Meadows, pastures and Closes (out of the generaltie of
the Survey) with their several names, Buttes and Bounds all together joined
with their tenement, all in one infra, as it were. Also in the terror, some
use first to begin with the declaration, of the circuit, then of whom the
Ma^nour lands etc. is holden, and by what service, as example here ensuyng
declares. Then the entry of the Scyte of the Manor place with the Demaynes.
Then the Parsonage or Vicaredge with the Glebe Lands, then the entries first
of free holders, then of Tenauntes at will, if there be any: then of Tenauntes
by Indenture for term of life or years: then the entryng of the tenauntes of
the Copiholde or Custumary Lands, and last of all, the entry of the common
Mores, Marshes, Woddes and Estouers belonging to the same Manor, with their
bounds and butmentes, as example of a brief terror shall hereafter declare
unto you. Which I hu^blie submit unto the correction of the learned. And some
use in entering of their Terrors, to set the names of every Tenaunte with the
fine and Herriotes (if they owe any) in the left margent, and the yearly rent
in the right margent.

Manerium de Dale in Comitatu praedicto.
Comitat Northu^b.
MAgnum Terrarium Iohi^s at Style militis, dn^i Manerij pred de eodem Manerio
diligenter renouat, fact, et examinat per Mandat dn^i predict, vltimo die
Augusti. Anno dn^i M.D.lxij. Annoque Regni Dn^e Nostre Elizabeth Dei gratia
Anglie Frauncie et Hibernie Regine fidei defensor^, etc. Quarto.

Videlicet.
CIrcuitur Manerij de Dale pred, incipit apud le cross Way vocat Shawe cross
apud Orient, ducent ad Burgu^^ de B. et exterdit a ^re^i^a via per sepem mag^i
co^ij, vocat le Hethe Down, vsque ad locum quendam Circuitus Maner^^d Dale,
cun metis et boundis eiusdem.
vocat le gravel pittes, in exteriore part co^ij predict, et abinde extend
per magnum fosse. vocat the dry diche, versus Austrum, vsque paruum riuulum
vocat Slades Brook, et abinde extendens semper a long per Riuulum pred versus
occidental, vsque ad molend pertinen^ Manerio de H. vocat Huttes mylle, et
abinde reextendit per co^em viam sine callem ibm^, versus boreal vsque ad
Stagnum quoddam come vocat Helliers ponde, et abinde circumextendens per
corneriu^ Parci Manerij pred, and per sepem vocat le great quicksett camporum
co^mun^, cuiusda^ Manerij voc^. G. adiacen^ vsque ad le cross way vocat Shawe
cross pred.

Qui quidem notabiles sieve special loci pred noi^at Shawcrosse, Gravel Pittes,
Slades Brook, Hittes mill, et Heliers ponde, sunt et semper de antiquo
fueri^t limits, seu le particular bounds, marks, et meares totius precint
sieve circuitus Manerij de Dale pred.

Tenura, sieve de quo tenet Manerium de Dale et per que redd et scruit.
Manerium de Dale pred cum omnibus et singulis terris, tenementis, pratis,
pascuis, pasturis, et ceteris suis iuribus, membr^, et pertinentijs tenetur de
H. Comite Northumbrie, vt de vni^o sieve manerio suo de C. per libm^ Soccagiu^
et reddit xxxiiij. s^ ij. d. ob q. annuati^ solut ad festum sc^ Michaelis
Archangeli tantum.

Vel al^^^ li tenetur de dn^a Regina in Capite per seruicium militare in hac
forma. Manerium de Dale pred cum omnibus et singulis Terris, Teneme^tis,
Pratis, Pascuis, pastur^, et ceteris suis iuribus, membris et pertinen^ si
dimitterentur xxiiii. li.

Rectoria de Dale pred cum terr^ Glebis.

Iacobus Branborne clicus Rector Rectorie de Dale xliiii. li.
TEnet Rectoriam de Dale pred, scitusque eiusdem existit inter Regiam viam ibm^
ex part Occidental, et cemiteriu^ ex part Oriental, et Scitum Manerij ex
part Austral, et communem campum ibide^ ex part Boreal, et continet xxxiiii.
pertic^ in latitudine, et lxxxii. pertic^ in longitudine, superque Scitum pred
edificat sunt vna Aula, vnu^ cenaculu^ vocat a Parlour, cum quatuor cameris, et
coquina, ac vnum stabul et vnum Horreu^, cont iii. Baies. Ac vnu^ claus. terr^
in Occide^tal part Pomarij, et Gardinum eidem Rectorie pertinen^, cont vndecem
acr^, ac xxii. acr^ terr^ arabil de terr^ glebis in co^muni campo ibm^ voc^
Milfelde, vnde vi. acr^ insimul iacent apud Hoggesende Ferrie ibm^, ac vnam
acr^ et di^ iacent apud Branbushe ibide^ ac vnu^ acr^ apud Wynlease etc. Ac
etiam omnes decimas, lane, garbar^, feni et ceter^ omnibus et singulis
proficuis, decimis, obuentionibus, et commoditatibus ac aduantagiis dict
Rector^ pertinen^ sieve spectan^, et habuit rectoriam predict ex donatione dicti
domini Manerii predit, qui est indubitatus patronus eiusdem in iure Manerii de
Dale pred et valet per annum.

Liberi Tenentes.
Willmus at Nooke. lxii. s^.
TEnet libe sibi et hered suis de domino huius Manerii ex donatione progenitor^
domini per Chartam, vnum Mesuagium sieve tenementum liberum: quod qui them
Messuagium sieve tenementum iacet inter Rectoriam de Dale, ex part Occidental
et Tenementum in tenur^ R. F. ex part Orie^tal et Regiam viam ibm^ ex part
Austral, et communem campum ibidem vocat Milnemarshe field ex part Boreal, and
continet xxxi perticas in longitudine, et xxii. pertic^ in latitudine. Ac etiam
vnam acr^ prati in comuni prato voc^ Blithe Meade, apud le Slade ibm^ et v.
acr^ prat in eodem prato apud Forough Bush ibm^ etc. Ac vnu^ claus. pastur^
voc^ Craddocks cont iiii. acr^, vnde vnum caput abbutt etc. quod quidem
Tenementum vocatur Holynshedes, quond Iohannis Makereth, et reddit domino
annuatim iiii. s^. viii. d. et tenet per fidelitat et sect ad cur^ Maner^ ad
duas letas annuatim tenend. Et Tenementum pred est heritabil. etc. --

Silis intratio fiat de terr^ et Tenementis ceterorum libor^ tenentium.

Tenentes ad voluntatem.
TEnet ad voluntatem Domini vnum tenementum in Ribstrete, iacen^ inter
tenementum, S. T. ex Oriental part et W. B. ex part occidental, et Regia^
via^ pred ex part Auscr^ et campu^ pred ex part Borial continens xxii. pertit
in longitudine et xxi. Iohe^s Do. xxxxiiii. s^. viii.d.
pertit in latitudine, cum vno Horto et Gardin^ adiacen^, ac vnu^ claus.
pastur^ vocat horse crofte, continens octo Acr^ et di^, abbutt super terr^
Iohi^s P. versus austral and terr^ I. H. versus boreal, etc. ac vnam acr^ et
di^ prati in co^i prato ibm^ apud Wrinehille, et quatuor acr^ di^ terr^ arabil
apud mylne Marshe field, iuxta locum vocat Hollie acre, etc. et redd per annum
xxiiij. s^. viii. d. ad duos anni terminos equal porcoi^bus. --

Silis Intratio fiat de terris et tenementis ceterorum tenen^ ad volunt.

Tenentes per Indentur^ pro teri^o vite sieve Annorum.

TEnet per Indentur^ gerent dat xxii. die Februarij. anno regni dn^i Regis
nuper Henrici octaui xxxiiii. vnum mesuagiu^ sieve Tenementum scituat inter
regiam viam pred ex part boreal et Tentum in tenur^ R. F. ex part austral, et
coe^m campu^ pred ex perte occidental, et Sowters lane ex part oriental, et
continet in latitudine xxii. pertic^, et xx. pertic^ in latitudine, et
mesuagium sieve Tenementum pred est sufficienter construct, ac etia^ tegulat,
cum vno Stabul et vno Horreo, ac le Oxehouse ibm^ cum Stramine coopert, cum vno
Gardino et vno Pomario insimul iacen^ cont duas acr^ et vnam Rodam terr^, ac
cum vno paruo Clauso Pastur^ in Oriental, vnde vnum Caput abutt, etc. Ac etiam
xxiiii. Acr^ ^err^ arabil, vnde. iiii. acr^ iacent in Mylnemarshe field, apud
windemill hille, etc. ac xi. Iohe^s at Noke. Cxiii. s^. iiii. d.
Acr^ prat, vnde iii. acr^ et vna Roda prati iacet in Broademeade, iuxta le
milne da^me ibm^, etc. ac quat claus. pastur^, cont in tot 32 acr^ pastur^,
vnde vnu^ claus. iacet apud Benbowe Cross cont xiiii. acr^ et di^ abbut super
le Be^bow lane, verse. occiden^ et terr^. Iohi^s M. versus oriental, et vnum
caput eiusdem abut super claus. de dn^icis dn^i ibm^ versus Austral et alterum
caput eiusdem abuttt super alium croft eiusdem I. M. versus Boreal (and sili^
modo de ceteris) quod quidem mesuagium sieve teneme^tum, ac cetera premiss. cum
pertin^ quondam voc^ Maliardes, modo Tournors nuper, i^ tenur^ Willi^ Turnour
defunct. He^d et tenend pred. mesuagium sieve tenementum, ac cetera p^miss. cum
pertine^t prefat Iohn^i at Noke executor^ et assign^ suis a festo sei^
Michaelis Archangeli vltimo preterito ante dat eiusdem Indentur^ ad terminum
viginti, et vnius annorum, extunc proximo sequen^ and complend. Reddend inde
annuatim dict I. S. dn^o Manerij pred hered et assign^ suis v. l. xiii. s^.
iiii. d. ad duos anni terminos usual equis porcionibus soluend, duran^ termino
pred. vz. ad Festa etc. Et pred Iohe^s at Noke, et executor^ sui habebunt, (ex
conuenco^e dn^i pred sufficient hedgeboote, ploughboote. etc. Et pred I. at
Noke, et excutor^ sui per Indentur^ pred tene^tur omnibus reparationibus
premissorum ad sumptos suos proprios (grandi Maremio solummodo excepto) et ita
sufficienter reperat in fine termi^ pred, in man^ dn^i sieve hered suorum quiet
relinque^t, et sursum reddent, ac etiam in fine termi^ sui predci^ dabit dn^o
pred, seu heredibus suis Quadraginta Solidos noi^e Heriott. Ac etiam tenetur
facere sectam ad curiam dn^i quotiens legaliter summo^it fuerit, ac etiam dabit
dn^o annuatim vnum Capone^ et vnam Gallinam ad fest natal dn^i, etc. Et si
reddu^s p^du^s areted fuerit insolut in part vel in tot per spaciu^ sex
septimanaru^ post aliquod festu^ solucon^ p^d, et litime demandat, quod tu^c
licebit dn^o pred, et heredibus suis in p^miss. et quamlibt inde parcel
reintrar^, etc.

Sili^s intratio fiat de terr^ and Tenementis ceterorum tenentium ad
voluntate^, et pro teri^o annorum, ac pro teri^o vite, ac per Copiam Cur^
secundum consuetudinem Mauerij.

Tenentes per Copiam Curie secundum consuetudinem Manerij.

TEnet per copia^ Cur^ gerent dat vndecimo die Maij. anno regni Regis nuper. H.
viii. xxxiiii. vnum tenementu^ custumariu^ abutt, etc. cuius ten^ti scitus
continet in longitudine ab orient vsque ad occident xiiii. pertic^, et in
latitudine ab austro vsque ad bor^ xi. perticas quod ten^tum cum vno Stabulo,
vno Horreo, ac le Oxestall sunt veter^ domus et ruinos. cumque Stramine
coopert. Ac etiam vnum Gardinum et vnu^ paruu^ Pomariu^ adjacent in Austral
part eiusdem ten^ti, cont tres Rodas, cum vno paruo Crofto eidem Pomario
adiacen^ cont tres acr^ and di^, abbut super Austr^, etc. Ac etia^ xxiiii. acr^
Pastur^ in septem clausis, vnde vnum clm cont ix acr^ iacen^ apud Ducwell
street abbut super terr^ W. H. versus Occiden^, etc. Ac etiam quatuor acr^
Prati in co^i Prato ibm^ voc^ Myulnemarshemeade, apud Sand Hille, etc. ac
xxxi. acr^ terr^ arabl in tribus coi^bus Ca^pis pertin^ Manerio pred, videlicet
xix. acr^ in Rubro Campo. vnde tres acr^ et ii. furlong^ iacent insimul apd
Shepardes Bush ibm^, etc. quoth quidem ten^tum custumar^ quod olim vocabat
Coliers, modo Hollandes, et erat quonda^ in tenur^ Willm^i Martyn he^nd et
tenend predicto Nicholao at Style, (si sit sibi et hered) dic, hered and
assign^ suis, si sit pro termino vite dic) et A vxore sue ac I. filij eorumdem
et vtriusque eorum diutius viuent (Si sit pro teri^o annorum dic) executor^ et
assign^ suis pro termino xxi. annorum extunc prox. sequend et plenarie
co^plendorum, ad voluntat domini secundum consue tudinem Manerii, per redd
lxii. s^. ad felt sancti Michaelis archangeli, et Annunciationis beat Marie
virgin^ annuat soluend equal portionibus, et per alia seruicia inde prius debit
et de iure consuet: et he^t coi^am in amnibus communiis domini Manerii pred pro
quibulcunque aueriis suis, et tenetur per co^suetudinem Manerii pred omnibus
reparationibus premissoru^ preter gra^de Marenniu^, et habent Firewoode; ex
consuetudine apud boscum domini voc^ Estouer, super tenementu^ suum pred
expendend et non alibi, et dabu^t annuatim ex consuetudine domino Maner^ pred
duas gallinas ad festum natal Domini. Ac etiam post mortem cuiuslibt tenentium
pred dabunt dn^o quilibt eorum optimum Animal nomine Herriotte, et dedit domino
de fine viii. li. pro tali statu habend, etc. et admiss. sunt etc. et fecer^
fidelitat etc. --

Silis intrato fiat de terr^ et Tenementis ceterorum tenentium per copiam
curie. Sed multi sole^t breuiori modo agere Intracoe^m eorum tene^tium custum^.

Communia, More et Bosci, ac Marisce dict Manerio de Dale pertin^, spectan^
sieve appenden^.

Communia vocat Wymond common
Magna communia ibidem vocat Wymondecommon, continens duo millia, et trecentas
acras terr^ pertinet co^muniter came dn^o and tenentibus Manerii de Dale pred,
quam dn^is et tenentibus Maneriorum de H. et C. dicto Manerio de Dale adiacen^
sieve contingen^.

Communia vocat Marshmore
Alia communia vocat Marshemore, continens quadringentas acras terr^ pertin^
proprie Dn^o et tene^tibus huius Manerii de Dale, et exte^dit se a le Rosses
wood in Orient, vsque Halliers Ponde in Occiden^, et abbutt ver le Auster^
super, etc.

Boscus co^munis voc^ le Estouer.
Boscus communis ibidem vocat le Estouer magna, pertinet proprie domino Manerii
de Dale predict, et tenentibus eiusdem tam pro reparatione ceuementorum suorum,
quam pro le Fuel eorundem ex consuetud, and extend ab Mores Lake, versus
Orient ad Blande marlepitte versus Occiden^, et a Graies down Lane, versus
Austr^ vsque Banierdes Shave, versus Boreal, etc.

Silis fiat intratio de horum silibus.

And thus much breefly for the engrossemente of a Survey and terror,
obseruyng as well the Rules, as forms of entries before specified, may well
suffice.

Note also, diverse men addicted to their own fantasies and minds, do use
diverse other forms, in making of Surueyes and terrors, whose doings like as
I will not repugne, so I trust they will not of their gentleness much carpe
at this, set out of good will for enstruction, only of such as be
ignoraunte in that faculty.

But yet before I leave treatyng hereof, I think good to put you in
remembrance, that one special point be observed, in the entryng of all
parcelles, that (by searchyng of the aunciente Evidences, Records, Books of
Surueye, and Terrors of any Manor, he do as nere as he can, in his new
entry in the Surueye book or Terror, at the engrossyng thereof, specify it,
and enter the old several names of every Tenemente, Close, or such: and also
the names of such old Tenauntes as held the same before, as well asof them
that hold it at this present day, and specially of the lands of
freeholders, and this principal observation will not only wonderfully
preserve memory, but also exclude doubts, and be occasion from time to time
to great quietness. A breef ensample whereof ensues.

Johannes Do.
Tenet lib^e de domino huius Manerii per Charta^, sibi et hered suis, (if it be
by Copy, say) per Copiam cut etc. vnum Mesuagium sieve Tenementum cum pertin^
etc. olim vocat Shanckes, postea Shangrelles, et modo Tremors, olim in tenur^
Willmi Shanck et postea Edmundi Tremour, et nuper Briani Tyson etc. --

A bye Rule. Regula Apportionation^ terrarum secundum reddit eiusdem.
SOme Surueiours use, some time to portionate the rent of every Tenauntes
holdyng, according to the number, quantity, and quality of the land that he
holds after the acre. That he may thereby the better perceive what every
Tenaunte commonly paieth for an acre, be it Land, Meadowe, Pasture, or wood,
after the stinte of his rent, and if it be better tha^ the rent, then there
by he understands how much more rent every Acre is yearly worth.

But this enstruction with other some before specified, should not be made to
common emongst those persons, who are ouergredie coueteous, that care not how
they rack their Tenauntes, to their own dampnation, least they abuse the
same, to the oppressyng of their Tenauntes. Yet ye shall have here a brief
example thereof.

SVppose a Tenant holds a Meese or Tenemente, with Garden and Orchard, and
twenty Acres of Pasture, thirty Acres of arable, and fowertine Acres of
Meadowe, (as for the wodlande, unless it be in those Mannours where it is
lawful for the Tenant to fell it, or after the same being stubbed, is made
into Pasture, etc. is seldom used to be rated or apportionated.) And he paieth
for all the same lx. s^. yearly. Now if it be known how much of the said
Rent is yearly pated for the Pasture, how much for the errable, and how
much for the Meadowe distinctly, either by several reservation in times past,
or how they were severally let heretofore, it were soon done. (As for the
House, Garden or Orcharde where there is above thirty or five and twenty Acres
of land belongyng to it, in this kind of apportionatyng, is seldom or never
rated or apportionated) but upon the Land, Meadow and Pasture only. Then is
the rate of the Land aforesaid, in this manner apportionated.

2 In Pasture -- xx. acr^. -- Rent xx. s^. The acre xij. d. -- Acr^. liiij. 1
In errable -- xxx. acres. Rent xv. s^. The acre vi. d. -- 3 In Meadowe xiiii.
acr^. Rent xxv. s^. The acre xxj. d. ob. Rent lx. s^. Carens i. d. in toto.

Some write their Rate or Apportionation in this form followyng.

Acre reddus quelibet acr^ 2 In Pastur^ xx. -- xx. s^. -- xii. d. Su^ma acrar^
-- liiii 1 In terr^ arabil xxx. -- xv. s^. -- vi. d. 3 In Prato. xiiii. -- xxv.
s^. xxj. d. ob Su^ma reddus -- lx. s^ Carens i. d. in toto.

Thus where the Rent is severally reserved for every nature or kind of land
a several certain rent, it may easily as ye see, be rated or aportionated.
And if this be the case ensuyng as it most commonly chances, that the
several rentes are uncertain.

As a Tenant holds a tenement and twenty four acres errable, twelve acres
Pasture, and eight acres meadowe, or such like, now to rate or apportionate the
same is somewhat difficulte. And before ye can make any substanciall
apportionation, Ye must partly know the goodness and fruitfulnes or fertillity
of every such land, Meadowe and Pasture. For in such a place the same may
lie that the errable is not worth iiii. d. an acre, but less, and in such
place it may lie, that an acre errable is worth xii. d. xvi. d. yea xx. d. an
acre and more. And in like manner the Pasture may lie in some place, that it is
worth iii. s^. iiii. d. or iiii. s^. or more, an acre, and in some place liyng
again it is worth scante xii. d. an acre or less. The Meadow likewise may
lie in some such place, that it is worth yearly vi.s^. viii. d. x.s^. yea
xiii. s^. iiii. d. or xx. s^. an acre, being enclosed and low ground. And
again in some place it may so lie, that it may be to dear of v.s^. an acre,
either for that it is baren, or lies high, or liyng low and fenny, it may be
full of Rushes, Flagges, or knotgrasse. And all these goodnesses of ground may
be sometime in one Manor. Yea sometime belongyng to one Tenement. Therefore
in this, and such like cases the rent must be apportionated after the goodness,
and badnesse, of the kinds of ground, according only to the prudente
discretion of the Surueiour, without a rule, or if ye will needs desire, a
certain form to apportionate such uncertainties (as most men do covet to
have a certainty prescribed in every thing) Then let this following be your
way, or mean, which I have known some men use, called a supposition pro
incerto, as they term it.

Apportionate the rent in the second case aforesaid, by allottyng first to
every acre of the arrable xii. d. an acre, let this be the root now, or
foundation. Then allotte upon every acre of Pasture always double as much and
half as much, as is allotted upon an acre errable, and then is here every
acre of pasture ii.s^. vi. d. And tha^ allot upon every acre of Meadowe four
times as much and half as much as is allotted also upon any acre errable,
which as the number of acres of meadowe do arise here, is four shillynges
six pence upon the acre, as thus.

In terr^ arabil xxiiii. acr^ reddit xxiiii.s^. quelib^t acr^ xii. d. sum^ acr^
xliiii su^m^ redd. 4. l x.s^. In Pastur^ -- xii.acr^ reddit xxx.s^. -- quelib^t
acr^ ii.s^. vi. d. sum^ acr^ xliiii su^m^ redd. 4. l x.s^. In Prat -- viii.
acr^. reddit xxxvi.s^. queli^bt acr^ iiii.s^. vi. d. sum^ acr^ xliiii su^m^
redd. 4. l. x.s^.
This manner of apportionatyng some do use when they would redily see a present
apportionacio^ (although, nere always being uncertain, because it is founded
upon a supposition uncertain. But the best and surest way is to make the
apportionatio^ always by the knowledge and discretion that is to say according
to the goodness and fertility of the land, and seldom otherwise.

The sixth Rule. The form how a Suite Roll should be engrossed and kept.
Libi. Tenentes qui debent annual a secta ad Leta et cur^ Baron^ Manerij de
Dale pred.

HEnricus at Noke, pro lib^o te^nt suo in Halstrete, cum pertim^ idem. Henricus
pro vn^ crofto vocat Peches wood.

Willms Boothe pro vno Horreo et xiiii. acr^ terr^ in Southfielde.

Edmundus Brainthorpe pro vno prato iuxta Hobbes mede.

Silis fiat intracio de his silibus, sed si sunt ad co^positionem cum dn^o
Manerij reddere annual fine^ certum, pro sectis ad Cur^ pred, tunc intitulatur
illa finis in margin super caput eiusdem in hac forma.

Finis pro annual sect 12. d
Richardus Moreton pro vno Tenemento cum pertin^ in le Scadesborne f^^te et sic
de ^eteris.

The seventh Rule. The form and instruction how to engrosse, and keep a
customarie Roll of a Manor.
Custionar^ sieve Rotul omnium et singulorum custumariorum in Manerio de Dale
pred, de tempore ex quo non extat memoria hominum ibm^, vsitat et approbat,
fact, renouat ac indentat inter du^m Manerii predex vna part ac tenentes
eiusdem Maner^ ex altera perte. x. Augusti anno etc.

Maneriu^ de Dale.
EST quedam antiqua consuetudo infra Manerium predict, quod nullus Tenentium
eiusdem Manerij potest dimittere Tenementum suum cum pertin^, vel aliquam inde
parcellam alicui extraneo qui habit extra limits huius Manerii, nisi solummodo
alicui tenenti infra Manerium pred, sine licentia domini, ac etiam non dimittet
tali tenenti neque, nisi pro termino vnius anni, et sic de anno in annum, ^^ne
licentia domini, sub pena forisfactur^ status sui in Tenemento pred, vel
parcel terr sic dimiss, etc.

Ac etiam quod null^s tenentium Manerii pred decidet, nec ^ender aliquos Boscos
super tenementum suum custum^, vel aliquam parcellam eidem Tenemento pertinen^,
crescen^, sine licentia domini, sub pena pred etc.

Acetiam quod vnumquodque tenementum pertinen^ huic manerio est herietabil et
dominus manerii pred Seisabit in manus suas proprias ad op^^ suum vnumquodque
optimum animal quod aliquis tene^^ habuit tempore mortis sue nomine heriott etc.

Item vnusquisque tenentium tenetur per consuetud teneme^ta sua in omnibus ad
sumptus suos proprios de tempore in tempus sufficienter reparare et manutenere
in omnibus reparationibus preter grande maremium sub penaforisfact pred etc.

Ac etiam vnusquisque tenentium tenetur, per consuetudinem eiusdem maner^
antiquam, dare domino annuatim in fest natalis domini duos Capones, et in festo
Pentecostes tres Anseres etc.

Et silis fiat intratio de ceteris custum^ alicui Manerio quocunque spectan^.

The eight Rule. The form and manner how to make a true and perfect ready
Rentall of a Manor, when the same shall be delivered to any Bailife, Reave,
or Collectour to gather by.
REntale Iohannis at Style militis, Maneriu^ de Dale.
dn^i Manerij pred ibidem renouat and examinat decimo die Decembr^, Anno regni
domine nostre Elizabeth, Dei gratia Anglie etc. Regine tertio, per A. G.
Superuisor^ terr^ domini pred, Soluend ad festa Annu^ciationis beat Marie
virginis, et Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, annuatim equaliter. vz.

Reddit assil. liberorum Tenentium.

De Anthonio Milles pro libo Reddu^ vnius tenti in Southelake cum cert parcel
terr^ eidem tenemento pertinen^. viii. s^. D' Augustino Northall pro libo Redd
vnius croft ibidem vocat Pastors, continen^ iiii. acr^ et di^. x. s^. D' Hered
Iohannis Hutton pro libo reddu^ vnius messuagij cum pertin^ et cert percellarum
terr^ in Harston, infra manerium pred per annum. xxiii. s^. i. d. ob. Sum^ Redd
liborum tenentium xli. s^. i. d. ob.
Reddit assis. scitus Manerij cum terr^ dominicalibus.
D'Ambrosio Stouer firmar^ scitus Manerij predict cum diuersis terr^, prac^, et
Pastur^ dominicalibus per annum. xxxviii. l. xix. s^ D'Richardo Morrisin
firmario vnius clausi Pastur^ dominical vocat Cowlease, cont xl acr^ per annum.
vii. li. ii. s^. Summa Reddit terr^ dn^icalium. xlvi. li. xii. d.
Reddit assis. Custum^ tenen^ ibidem.
D' Willmo Bortmocher pro redd tenti sui cum pertin^ per annum. iiii. li. xii.
s^. D' Iohanne Tirlynger pro redd teneme^ti sui custr^ eum pertin^ per annum.
iii. li. ii. s^. D' Henrico Marshe pro redd Tenementi sui custum^ cum pertin^
voc^ Tilers. iii. li. D' Briano Barret pro redd vnius Tenementi custum^ voc^
Martens. xl. s^. D' Oswaldo Barton, pro redd Tenementi sui custum^ cum
pertinen^. xxxiiii. s^. D' Rogero Marlebrough pro Tenemento suo custum^ voc^
Wrangles. xviii. s^. Sum^ redd custum^. xv. li. ii. s^. Summa total Rental
pred. lxiii. l. iiii. s^. i. d. ob.
Memorandu^ that in like form, as I have showed you by the example of this
Rentall, so may you do in all other.

The ninth Rule.
I Have under correction partlye set out, (although master Fitzharbert has
showed many good fourmes already) certain fourmes of such estates by copy
hold, and specially the leauiyng of a Fine and recovery in a custumarie Court
for Barryng of an Entaile of Custumarie Lands, not at any time heretofore else
published, which was of the diligent and exact penning of the late right
worshipful and well learned Master Justice Staunforde, late one of the
Justices of the common Bench at Westminster, according to the copy and true
report thereof.

AD cur^ Manerij ibm^ tent die Mercurij proxim^ post festum Apostolorum
Philippi et Iacobi, Sursum redd in plena curia.
Anno, etc. ven^. T. B. et Surs. redd in Man^ dn^i in plena cur^ vnum
tenementum scituat in wodlane abbutt super Tentm^ I.B. ex part Occidental,
etc. xxiiii. acr^ terr^ Prati et Pastur^ cum pertin^ ad opus et vsum I.L. et
Hered. suorum, qui presens hic in cur^ petit admitti ad premis. cui Dn^s per
Senescallum suu^ concessit inde Seia^m: habendum et tene^dum sibi, et Heredibus
suis de dn^o per virgam ad voluntatem domini, Finis.
secundum consuetudinem Manerij per reddit et seruit inde prius debit, et de
iure consuet, et dat dn^o de fine prout pz in margin, et fecit fidelitatem et
admissus est inde tenens.

Surs. reu^co^is.
Ad Cur^ ibm^ tent, etc. Homag^ present quod H.H. qui de Domino tenuit sibi et
heredibus suis reuersione^ vnius clausi, pastur^, etc. infra istud maneriu^,
quorum I.H. vidua est tee^ns ad terminum vite sue, diem clausit extremum, post
vltimam Curiam. Et quod R.H. eius Auunculus est illi here is, scilicet frater
Thome H. pris^ pred H.H. et est plene etatis, qui prn^s hic in Cur^ petit
admitti ad reuersionem terr^ pred I. H. matter dit. H.H. vt supradict est, cui
dominus per sen^ suum concessit inde Seia^m: habendum et tenendum sibi et
heredibus suis secundum consuetudine^ Manerij pred per redd et seruit inde
prius debit, Finis.
etc. et dat domino de fine prout pz, etc. et fecit fidelitatem et admissus est
inde tenens.

Vbi maritus tenet in iure vxoris et vbi eis relaxetur per alteru^
Ad Cur^ ibm^ tent, etc. compertum est per Homagium quod W.H. post vltim^ Cur^
Surs. redd in manus dn^^ vnum tenementum. etc. infra istud Manerium ad opus et
vsum. M. vxis^ eius et hered suorum. Et super hoc ven^ in plena Cur^. I.H. qui
iam dict Margaret in vxorem duxit cum predict M. et petunt admitti ad premis.
quibus dn^s per Senescallum suu^ concessit eis inde Seia^m. Habendum et
tene^dum eis, et Hered dicte Margarete de Dn^o per virgam ad voluntat Domini,
scdm^ consuetudinem Maner^ pred per redd et seruicia, etc. Et dat dn^o de fine.
etc. et fecit fidelitatem, etc. Et admis. sunt inde tenent. Et postea ven^ S.
T. Et Surs. redd, relaxauit et quiet clamauit dict I. H. et Margaret vxor^ eius
in plena et pacifica possessione existen^, de et in tenementis pred totum ius,
statum, titulum, clameu^, interesse conditiones et demand sua quecunque hu^it
he^t, seu hi^tur^ sit de et in ten^to, etc. Ita vt Finis.
nec prefat S.T. Hered seu assign^ sui post hac aliquod ius clameu^ seu demand
de et in premis. aut aliqua inde percella exigere, seu vendicare poterint, vel
poterit. Sed ab omni acco^ne iuris, tituli, et interesse inde petend penitus
sint exclusi imperpetuum per presents. hend etc. vt supra.

Ad Cur^ maner^, Vbi Here Is redempt erit terr^ impignorat per pre^m.
etc. compertum est per Homagium quod R. P. est filius et here is, H.P. qui
quide^ R.P. ingres. cert terr^, etc. Que dudum impignorat fuerunt. I P. et iam
redempt sunt per I.A. qui mr^em dicti R. in vxorem duxit. Et sic idem R.
ingressus est terr^ prediure hereditar^, at post decessum. H. pred vt filius et
here is dict. H. cui quidem Rico^ dn^s per Senescallum fuu^ concessit inde
sei^am^. Habendum et tenendum sibi et hered suis de dn^o per virgam ad
voluntatem dn^i, secundum consuetudinem Manerii per redd. etc. Et dat dn^o de
fine, etc. Et fecit, etc. et admis. etc.

Ad Cur^ tent. etc. venit. I. T. nuper relict. I.T. viri sui defunct, Relaxaco^
dotis vidue post morte^ viri sui.
et pretend her^e titl in vna domo. etc. vi^z. tertiam parte^ omnium terrarum
et tenementorum reddit, and seruit cum pertin^ noi^e Dotis sue ex Dotatione
dict I. T. viri sui, et pro quadam pecuniarum Sum^a sibi per Willm A. pre
manibus solut sursum redd, remisit, et relaxauit totum ius suum, statu^,
titulum clameu^ interesse et demand sua quecunque, que hu^it, he^t seu hi^tur^
sit in premis. Ita videll quod nec ipsa Iohanna nec hered sui, nec aliquis
alius noi^e suo vel eoru^, aliquod ius. flatum, titlm, clameum interesse seu
demand de et in premis. vel aliqua inde parcella exigere, vel vendicare
poterint. Sed ab omni acco^e Iuris, status, tituli, interesse, Licentia
dimittendi terr^ custum^
sed demand penitus sint exclusi imperperuu^ per presents.

Ad Cur^ ibm^ tent, etc. conceditur R.H. vidue, potestas, et licentia dimittend
vnum claus. pastur^ voc^. N. vz. cum pertin^ iacen^ et existen^ infra istud
Menerium. T.P. et assign^ suis a sesto, etc. vltim^ preterit, vsque ad finem
Termini xxi. annorum, Finis.
tunc proxime sequend and complend. Et dat Domino de fine pro licentia inde
he^nd vt pz in margin. Pro terio vite.


Ad hanc Cur^ ven^ I.H. et R. vxor eius, ipsa sola exai^ata coram senescallo,
et sursum redd in manus dm^ vnum tenement cum pertin^ iacen^ inter tenement F.
H. etc. ad opus et vsum G. H. and I vxor^ eius ad terminum vite eorum, et
alterius eorum diutius viuen^, Finis.
secundum consuetudinem Mauerij, et dant domino de fin^, etc. et f^cr^, etc. et
admis. sunt, etc.

Surs. redd. super conditione^.
Ad Cur^ ibm^ tent etc. venit I.H. et Surs. redd in manus domini vnum
tenementum, etc. abbutt, etc. ad opus et vsum R. F. etc. hend et tenend sibi et
heredibus suis, de domino ad voluntatem domini scdm, etc. sub conditionibus
sequentibus, videlt si pred R. F. soluat, aut solui faciat prefato, I.H. xx.
li. ad festa infrascripta vi^z, etc. et ad fest etc. proxim^ futur^ post datum
huius curie, quod tunc prius sursum redd, sit in suo robore et effectu. Et si
ipse defecerit in solutione solutionu^ pred. in part vel in toto, etc. quod
tunc been licebit I.H. pred et assign^ suis reincrare in premis. et ea rehe^re,
ista sursum redd in aliquo no^ obstan^. Et dat domino de fin^, etc. et fecit
fidelitat, etc. Et admissus est. etc.

Vbi dn^s co^ cedit proteri^o annorum cum claus. reparation^.
AD Cur^ ibidem tent etc. Dominus per A. B. Senescallum suum concessit R. F.
vnum messuagium cum domibus edificiis etc. ac ceteris suis pertm^ vocat. N.
hend et tenend sibi et assign^ suis a festo sancti Michaelis Archangeli, vltimo
preterito ante dat huius Curie, vsque ad finem et terminum xxi. annorum, extunc
proxime sequen^ et plenarie co^plend. Reddend inde annuatim dicto domino, et
hered suis x. s^. ad quatuor anni terminos viz, ad festa etc. per equales
portio^es. Prouiso semper, quod duran^ termino pred dominus inueniet gra^de
maremium, totiens quotiens necessarium fuerit dicto tenemento, ad emendend,
reparand, et sustinend, et dat domino de fine etc. Et fecit fidelitatem etc. Et
admiss. est etc.

The form of a Copy for term of three lives, as it is commonly used in the
cou^ties of Deuon^, Corn^, Summers. Dorss. etc. where the Tenauntes take their
holdynges of the lettyng of the Surueyour. etc.
AD Cur^ Maner^ ibm^ tent etc. venit I.G. et cepit de dn^o ex traditione R.F.
Armiger^, Maneriu^ de Sale.
perticular^ superuisor^ terrarum domini ibm^. per literas eiusdem domini
paten^ sufficient autorizat, dat etc. vnum teneme^tu^ cum pertin^, cont xxxvi.
acr^ terr^ et iiii. acr^ prat abuttat etc. habend, et tenend oi^a and singula
premiss. cu^ suis pertin^ prefat. I.G. and Elizabeth vxori eius, ac Agnet filie
eorumdm ad terminum vite eorum et alterius eorum diutius viuen^ successiue, ad
voluntatem dm^ secundum consuetudine^ Maner^, per redd et seruic^ inde prius
debit et de iure consuet. Et dat domino de fine xxiiii. Finis 24 l.
li. soluend, ad manus Balliui Manerii pred, ad iiii. proxim^ co^put equaliter
etc. Et fecit fidelitat etc. Et admissus^ est. etc.

An exact form of a Recovery of Copieholde land, for barryng of annuitie,
fact et dimiss. per W. Staung.
AD hanc Cur^ tent etc. Ven^ I.H. filius W.H. de S. in propr^ persona sua,
Querela quedam de recuperatione.
et quer^ versus I. A. filium et hered W. A. defunct in plito terr^ videlt de
vno tenemento, et xviii. acr^ terr^ custum^, and heriott cum pertin^ voc^
Wells, ac vn^ acr^ terr^ voc^ B. et T. pred infra iurisdictionem huius Curie,
et fecit protestationem prosequi querelam istam, in natura bris^ domini Regis
de ingr^id super dissei^amin le post ad co^em legem, et inuen^ plegios de
prosequend querelam suam, Iohannem Do, et Ricardu^ Roo, et petit process. inde
ei fieri versus pred Iohannem A. secundum consuetud Maner^ erga proximam Cur^
hic infra Maner^ pred tenend. Et ei conceditur: super quo preceptum est W. T.
Ballio Maner^ pred, at ministr^ huius cur^ quod Summone at per bonos Su^
monitor^ prefat I. quod. sic hic ad proximam Cur^ tenend: ad respondend prefat
I.H. de plito pred.

Forma recuperationis i^ curia.
AD hanc Curiam ven^ tam I.H. quam Johannes A. et Willmus T. Balliuus domini
Manerii pred, ac minister huius Cur^ et retorn^ quod preceptum suum ad vltimam
Cur^ sibi direct in omnibus seruit and execut super quo ven^ pred Johannes H.
in propria persona sua, et per licentiam domini petit versus pred Iohannem A.
vnum tenementum et xviii. acr^ terr^ custumar^ et herriott cum pertin^ in T.
pred infra iurisdictionem huius Curie, vt ius et hereditatem suam: et in quam
idem I. A. non habet ing^ru^ nisi per dissei^am quam Hugo Hunt, inde unjust et
sine iudicio fecit prefat I.H. infra quinquaginta annos, iam vltime elapsos. Et
vnde dicit quod ipse fuit seisitus de pred teneme^to, et xviii acr^ terr^
custum^ cum pertin^ in T. pred in dn^ico suo, vt de feod et iure, tempore pacis
te^pore dn^i Regis H. viii. nuper Regis Anglie pris^ domine Regine nunc,
capiend inde exples^ ad valentiam etc. et in que etc. Et inde produt^ sectam
etc. et pred I. A. in propria persona sua ven^ et defend ius suum quando etc.
Et vocat inde ad Warra^tizand W. R. qui presens est hic in Curia in propria
persona, et great tenement et xviii. acr^ terr^ pred ei warrantiz. Et super hoc
predictus Johannes, petit versus ipsum W. Read ten^ per Warrant suum tenementum
et xviii. acr^ terr^ cum pertin^ in forma pred etc. Et vnde dicit quod ipsemet
fuit seisitus de tenemento pred, et xviii. acr^ terr^ cum pertin^ in dominice
suo vt de feod, et iure, tempore pacis, tempore domini Regis H. viii. nuper
Regis Anglie pris^ domine Regine nunc, capiend inde exples ad valentiam etc. et
in que etc. inde produc^ sectam etc. Et predict W. Read ten^ per Warrentiam
suam defend ius suum quando etc. Et postea idem Johannes H. reuenit hic in
Curia ista in propria persona sua, and pred Wilmus Read licet solempnit exactus
non reuenit sed in contempt Curie recessit, et defaltum fecit, ideo concessum
est per curiam quod pred^n^s I. H. recuperet seiam^ de pred teneme^to, and
xviii. acr^ ter^ cum pertin^ versus prefat Iohannem A. Et quod idem Johannes A.
habeat de terr^ et tenementis pred Willmi Read, infra Manerium pred ad
valentiam etc. Et idem Willmus Read sit in mi^a. Et super hoc in ista eadem
Cur^ ven^ pred Johannes H. et humiliter petit quod ipsum Iohannem ad pred
tenement, et octodecim acr^ terr^ cultum^ cum pertin^ secundum formam
Recuperationis pred admittere dignaretur. Et super hoc du^s per senescallum
suum concessit prefat Iohanni et hered suis sei^am premissorum cum pertin^
tenend sibi et hered suis quiet de prefat Iohanne A. et hered suis imperpum^
secundum formam Recuperationis pred de dn^o per virgam ad volu^tatem domini
secundum consuetudinem Maner^ pred per reddit etc. et dat domino de fine etc.
Et postea in eadem Cur^ ven^ pred Johannes, et Dorothea vxor eius, ipsaque
Dorothea per senescallum sola examinata et confess. per sursumredd remiser^ et
relaxauer^ prefat Iohanni H. et hered suis totum ius suum stat, titulum,
clameum, interesse, and demand sua quecunque que habent hu^erunt, vel in futur^
he^re poterint in pred tent, et xviii. acr^ terr^ cum pertin^. Ita videlicet
quod nec ipsi Ioha^nes, et Dorothea, nec heredes sui, nec aliquis alius nomine
eorum, aliquod ius vel clameum in pred ten^, ec xviii. acr^ terr^ de cetero
exigere, vel vendicare poterit, vel poterint, sed ab omni action Iur^, vel
clamei sint exclus. et quilt eorum sit exclus. per presents. Et dat domino de
fine pro relaxatione pred. -- xiii. s^. iiii. d.

And now thus much may at this time suffice, touching the entry of the
estates of Copy hold Lands, if ye will see more, I refer you to master
Fitz Harberts work.

The tenth Rule.
BEcause it is partly appertaining to the Office of a Surueiour, to have some
understanding in measuryng and meating of Land and wood ground, and how to
reduce the same into true Contents and numbers of Acres, as often and when as
occasion shall require: Although they that desire the full and perfect knowledge
thereof, may read the same out of the aunciente Books of Architas and
Archimedes, or of worthy Euclides treatyng of the whole science of Geometry,
or else for this part Geometrical, only for measuryng of Lands, the Book of
Richard Benese, late Chanon of Marton, and the Tectonicon of master Leonarde
Digges our Countreiman, very well set out in our days: Although I might (I
say) leave men to those Books for their instruction in this matter, where as
they may learn twenty parts more then I can enfourme them: Yet because few
men are ripe therein, neither the same Books are always at hand at needful
times when occasion requires, I have therefore thought good, leauyng and
passing over an innumerable number of examples, (and also the Geometrical
Instrument or Staff untouched) only hereunto to annexe, and set out in brief
manner, for the Surueiours better enstruction: first, the parts whereinto an
Acre is divided: Secondly, a few plain examples amongeste many, for
measuryng of Land, and Wood, as well Hills as Valleys, which diligently
considered and perused by any willing or sensible parson, he may with
practice, sufficiently understand the true measuryng of all manner of parcelles
of Lands and Wodds whatsoever. And specially thou shall have also (Gentle
Reader) in the end thereof, a ready and fruitful Table for Contents of
Lands, much more amplified then Digges Table is. Only desiryng this of thee,
Gentle Reader, whatsoever thou be, that how soever my simple labor shall like
thee, yet, without any detractyng or dispraise, to accept in good part my
willing industry.

The Parts or Divisions of one Acre with the Denominations of the same,
according to the Statute here mentioned.
Three Barley corns fair and round, taken out of the myddest of the Ear,
makes an Inche. Twelve Inches make a Foot. Three foot make a Yard. Five
yards and a half makes a Perch, which in some countries men call a Pole or
Rod. a Pearche. Four Pearches make a day work. Ten day works or forty
Pearches makes a rode or quart of an Acre. Fourscore Pearches or two Roodes
makes half an Acre. A hundredth and lx. Perches or two Roodes, make an Acre.
And forty Perches in length, and four in breadth is.

A General Rule to be learned of the simple, to cast Pearches and dayworkes
into Acres.
AS a Mark of English money, contains two Nobles, which contain Clx. d.
that is every Noble four scour pence: and every half Noble xl. d: So an acre
contains Clx. perches, half an acre four scour Perches, and the quarter of
an acre or roode, xl. Perches.

And in every Mark is xl. grotes, and in every Grote. iiii. d. so is there in
every Acre xl. day works, and in every day work four Perches.

Thus by rate of money, perches and daieworkes are easily reduced into acres:
or in this manner also every x. s^. is three quarters of an Acre, and every
pound in money is one acre and a half.

Jnstruction for Introduction.
TO answer by Rod or by line, it is at your pleasure, but of them both the
line is the spedier and most commodious, and also of most antiquity.

Your line being four Perches of length, and at every pearche end a knot,
would be well seared with hoate Wax and Rosen, to avoid stretching thereof in
the wete, and shrinking in the drought.

Also you must note, there are diverse fashions of lands, and therefore
diversely to be measured. And some manner of land lies in such sondrie
fourmes, that it must needs be measured, not in the whole, but in diverse
parcelles, every part by it self. Also where a piece of Land is to be divided
into diverse parts, of which each one must be measured by him self, then ye
ought vigilauntly to consider, into how many parcells, and into how many and
what manner fashions they must be divided, that ye may measure every part,
according to his form or fashion.

diagram But before I enter into the declaration of any examples, I must first
inform you. That when any line (which cutteth any side of a Triangle or such
like even cross) makes the thing it deuideth, like unto a Carpenters squire,
I do always term, such a line to fall, light, or hit, squierwise. And I
name that line, the depe^ding line, and sometime I call it hereafter, the
whipped line, because I have fourmed it, in all the Figures like a littell
whipcorde, that by such difference ye may know it from the other lines, being
also the principal worker for the learning of all quantities. And that side or
part of every three cornered or triangled piece of Land, which the said
dependyng or whipped line cutteth, to be called the base line. And note also
every piece of Land is named a Triangle, when it has or is supposed to have
only three corners or angles, and three sides, whether the sides be equal or
not: and likewise they be called squares, that have four sides or four
corners, whether they differ in widenes or not.

Note also that howsoever your piece of land be fourmed or fashioned, be it
square or partly square, round or partly round, triangled or partly
triangled, or a hill mountyng, or a valley descending (of some of al which
figures ye shall hereafter see examples) Yet always must such pieces of Land
whatsoever it be, be reduced into one certain breadth and one certain
length, or else it can never be collected or summed into a perfect content or
number of Acres, and other odd quantities. The findyng out of which Lengthes
and Breadthes, my examples ensuyng shall thoroughly show you.

The first Rule, called the Rule of Squares.
Now because the even Squares be the easiest to be measured, and therefore
best first to be placed, for the instruction of learners, I thought
requisite to begin first with them.

Example of Squares.
SVppose your piece of Land to be square, that is to say, equal of breadth at
both ends and equal of length at both the sides, after this figure ensuing,
whereof the sides is, 40. perches a piece of length, and the breadth is 10.
perches a piece.

diagram

Then is there no more to do, but the same being so measured and found,
multiply the length with the breadth of the Perches which is here. 40. by 10.
And being so multiplied, it comes to 400 Perches, which if ye seek in the
Table hereafter followyng set out for contents (or else do cast it into
acres, or otherwise by rate of money, as in the general rule aforesaid is
showed you, you shall find that piece to contain 2. Acres. 2. Roodes.

But if a piece of land be on all diagram sides equal, after this figure
ensuyng, as if it be 10. perches on every side: then must you multiply the
length with the breadth: That is to say, 10 by 10 (or else seek the content
in the Table, and it amountyng to 100 perches, which makes half an Acre, or
2. roodes, and 5. day works.

And where some unskillful measurers, use to meat a piece of land round
about, of whatsoever fashion it be, addyng the number of perches of every side
together, and then use to part the whole number of Perches, into four equal
portions, of which, they will take one part of the breadth, and the other for
the length, they are not a little deceived.

The second Rule, called the rule of Triangles.

Moreover, a man may not only cast the squares aforesaied, and all other
square land if he please (though for such, the rule aforesaied is the spedier)
by the rule of Triangles hereafter ensuyng. But also there is almost no manner
of fashioned land, but it may by diligence be brought, or divided into
Triangles, and so by the Triangle Rule, the just content of Acres found and
measured.

Example of pieces of Land Triangled and first of the even Triangle.

To measure this piece of land, imagined to be of the similitude of an even
Triangle, and likewise all other Triangled land, of the diagram Figures here
after set out:

Admit this Figure ensuyng to be a parcel of Land, of which my desire is
to have the just and true measure.

There about is written as ye see B C D E. I find by measuryng cord, or
such like, that the dependyng, or whipped line B, C, is 24. perches and the
base line D. E, which the dependyng line cutteth in form of a squire, to be
24. also. Then multiply 24. Perches by half the dependyng line, which is 12
Perches, and it amounts to 288 Perches, which summed into Acres, make one
Acre, three Roodes, and two day works. But for your more speed of castyng,
if you please, when you have found the just length, and breadth of any figure,
repair to the Table hereafter described, and that will show you the just
number of Acres.

And in like manner must you do of this uneven Triangle, and of all these
seven Triangles followyng, and such like: as for an other example. Imagine
this present figure, totted over the corners with F. G. H. I. to be such a
like piece of Land, whereof ye couette to have the full and just measure: it
is found by meating, that the dependyng line F. H. is 22. Perches, and the
netherside line, or base line, which the said dependyng line, or whipped line
cutteth, or deuideth squirewise diagram which is G.I. to be 40. Now if ye look
in the Table followyng for the Numbers of 40 multiplied by 11, which is the
half of the dependyng line: ye shall find, it contains two Acres, three
Roodes. But if ye had rather try the truth by multipliyng the same yourself,
ye must multiply 40. being the length, with half the breadth, being 11. as is
aforesaied, and ye shall see, the sum will amounte to 440. Perches, which
east into Acres, is 2. Acres, 3. Roodes.

And this is the general rule of all manner of Triangles, as well presently
hereafter figured, as of all other whatsoever they be. Also it is the
principallest rule for measuryng of land.

diagram

But and if your Triangle be a piece of land, that is a double Triangle, in
the form of this figure followyng the^ may you divide it, either into diagram
Triangles, if you list, and so measure it, or else ye may do thus. Suppose
the dependyng line to be 66. Perches, and the middle line, which it deuideth
squirewise, being totted at the ends with I. K. to be 40 Perches, the half
whereof is 20. now have you the just length and breadth of this Figure,
wherewith ye may, if you please, repair to the Table hereafter expressed: or
else if ye will try it your self, then multiply the length, which is from H.
K. 66. with 20. which is in this foresaied Figure even half the breadth, and
then the sum Producte, amounts to 1320. Perches, which being reduced into
Acres, makes, 8. Acres and one roode.

The Rules for unequal parcelles of Land.
NOw when any piece of Land happens to be of such form, that it has
many points and Corners unequally fourmed: Then because it is yet neither
triangle nor square, it is without the compass of your Rules before specified,
until they be divided, as the proportion of the Figures followyng do show,
and such like. Then ye must by separation divide them into parts, That is to
sa^inc^ 2. 3. 4. or m^e parts, as cause shall require, either into triangles
or squares. And note that first. I show you Figures, of three imagines pieces
of Land, or ever they be (...) by the sep^ratyng line, as the examples
hereafter do declare and show. Ye must cast every parcel triangled or squared,
by the order of the Rules before specified.

diagram

Examples of the sail unequal figures aforesaid here as ye see now
separated.
NOW as concerning these Figures before also showed, ye see how now they be
by the line of separa^ion (which is the dashed line) separated or severed,
that is to say the first into one square and two triangles, without the dashed
line. The second figure into 2. triangles, and the third into three triangles
by the dashed line.

And for example, the first diagram figure. The Square in the midst is every
side 10. perches, and so one side being ten, multiplied by the other side being
also ten, makes. 100. Perches, which does amount to two Roodes and five day
works.

Now the descending wipped line of the 2. triangles at the ends of ye said
square suppose to be 6. Perches a piece, and the said side which they cut
squarewise 10. perches, then multiply either of the said 2. sides cut
squarewise, with half the depending lines being 3. a piece, and it makes
either of the said triangles 7. day works and 3. perches a piece. And so the
whole some of the first figure cast together, is 1. Acre and 2. perches.

Now ye see the second figure by the line dashed, called the line of
separation, to be divided into 2. parcelles of land triangled. The ha^gyng
line of the uppermost whereof, Imagine to be 8 Perches, and the dashed line
which it cutteth squarewise to be 12. Perches. And so ye half of the
depending line being 4. multiplied by 12. makes 1. Roode and 2. day works.
And likewise the dependyng line of the nether parcel of the said figure is 6.
and the base line which it deuideth squarewise. 12. Perches and so the half of
6. which is 3. multiplied by. 12. makes. 36. Perches, which is 9. dai^
works. And so the whole piece of land or figure contains. 3. Roodes and 1.
day work.

And ye see the third figure is now divided by the two dashed lines of
separation into three triangles, which contains as in the figure I have set
out, without any further rehearsal, for avoiding of tediousnes.

Also some pieces of Land as these two figures ensuyng, and such like,
albeit they may be divided into triangles, and so by the Rule of triangles
measured, yet have they a proper Rule for the more celeritie in measuryng of
them.

The Rule of triangled Squares.
ANd for example, the first of these figures being A.B.C.D. and also the other
figures being E.F.G.H, And all manner diagram of others such fourmed pieces of
lands, when thou would measure them, do no more but ioygne the ends both
in one sum, and then take the half of that number, and multiply him with
the whole number of the middle line or whipped line, and the content^^^
appear, as ye shall see the first figure, at the like (...) and C. is 4.
Perches: and between B. and D. is six Perches. Now 4. and 6. make 10. The
half whereof is. 5. which being multiplied by 10. which is the middle
depe^ding or whipped line, comes to 50. Perches, which makes one Roode, and
two day works and thr^e Perches. And so call the other figure also and such
li^e.

The most excellent Rule for measuryng of Wood Land, and other pieces of
Land, that are deformed or on all sides unequal.
AS touching the measuring of (...), and such like: And also for any manner of
evil ^auoured fashioned piece of Land, which requires to be brought into
many Squares or Triangles, To save labor, ye may do as follows: also it is
(...) (this ^^le following) where a man cannot vewe every way from side to
side, for standing of Wood, Fur^^^ or such like.

As, suppose your piece diagram of, Land or wood were fashioned after this
form, and were to be measured.

For ye measuring whereof it were good now yt ye did add unto the said piece
of land before figured, such and so many portions by enlargement, as ^^ll make
the same an even Square, as the said uneven Figure is now here followyng
squared. So I have added in A. 2. Perches, in B. 1. Perch, in D. one Perch,
(...) C. 2. Perches. All which ground added, summed together is. 4. Perches.
Now suppose every side of the Square (...) be 80. Perches (...) multiply
diagram (...) side with the other that is to ^ye. Memorandum, this figure
should have been made square for so it is supposed.
^0 by 80. And I find the (...) Thereout I (...) that which I added which
(...) four Perches and so re^^i^eth. (...) Roodes and 9. Days work, the
just content of the said first evil fashioned piece of Land.

And again briefly for your instruction, this is the said last Rule. First by
enlargemente measure it Square. Then multiply the one side with the other, and
cut of the total or producte, ^^ll away that ye added and the true measure is
contained in the remainder.

The Rule of Roundes or Circles.
AND now for measuryng of a Piece of Land all round, which is without any
Angle or Square: or ever ye can ^eate such a piece of Land, I must advertise
you of certain proper names, belongyng to a Circle, or Round piece of Land,
how every part is called properly.

A circle does contain these parts, which are also called by these proper
names ensuyng.

The Roundell is called the Circumference. The just middle point or prick
therein is called the Center. The line going through the prick or center, and
justly deuidyng the circle, is called the Diameter. The half of that is called
the semidiameter. The part divided above in the circle, from A to B is called
an Arc.
diagram

And then if ye would know, what this round piece of Land followyng
contains: Take this for a general rule, in every Diameter multiply half
the circumference, and it shows the content of any circle.

Now for example, imagine this presents figure to be a round piece of Land
whose circumference is 80. Perches* and the diameter, (...) ^^fe the Breadthe
thereof (...) be 40. multiply the diagram Semidiameter, yt is half the
number of the breadth, which is 20. in half the number of the perches of the
whole Circumference, or Compass, which is 40. it makes just 800. perches,
which is just five Acres: So is half that circled piece of Land 2. acres and
every quarter thereof one acre, and one roode.

diagram

An example of parts and portions of a Circle.
IMagine that P. Q. R. here ensuyng, were a part of a Circle, or piece of
Land, whose contence ye would have. And the whole compass of the Circle,
which this portion represents, as is said before, were 80. Perches, his
breadth or Diameter is 40. Perches: The compass whipped arc, unto the middle
line, which deuideth the Center, and is called the Diameter, is diagram 40.
Perches: now the semidiameter, or half breadth of the Circle 20. multiply
half the Compass of the Circumference whipped, and it makes two acres and a
half, and that is the content of the whipped compass to the sides of the
triangles whipped. Now to understand the other portion, or arc that is above
the whipped Triangles, severed by the line P. R. ye shall add the content of
the Triangles, which is one Acre and three roodes to be found by the rule of
Triangles: so have you in the whole four Acres and one roode. This sum
subtracted from the number contained in the whole Circle: the remain is the
sum of those Perches contained in the Arc, or small piece above the
Triangles, that is to say, three roodes, and that added to the rest, makes
the whole Circle five Acres again, as is aforesaid.

The rule of Reguler squared land.
BUT and if your compass be a piece of Reguler, or right squared land of
many sides, as are these two figures ensuing: Then measure and lay all the
sides together, taking the half number of perches there contained. Then draw
a right depe^dyng line from the mids of one of the sides to the Center, and
with that breadth multiply the other half number aforesaied, and the content
will appear.

Example.
Admit this Figure diagram A. D. B. C. to be a parcel of Land six squared,
and every of the sides to be 20. Perches a piece, the which summed together
make 120 Perches, the half whereof is 60. and the depe^dyng whipped line,
coming from the midst of the upper square to the Center to be 30. which
two sums multiplied one by the other, as before is showed, make five Acres,
two roodes, and five days work, and in like manner the other Figure is to be
cast, or else if ye list not to multiply the sommes your self, you may with
the length and breadth, enter my Table ensuyng.

And note this also principally, that triangles of all sides alike, and also
the quadrate figure, may be also measured by this Rule.

The Rule for measuryng of Mountains or Mountain Land, and also valeys or
valley ground.
NOw for the mountain or hille, ye must do this. Measure the Circuit of the
Base or foot of the Hill or Mountain, and that done, measure the upper part,
top, or Summitie thereof. Then join them or add them together. So must you
likewise do of the Assenses, that is to say, of the going up from the foot to
the top, always ioynyng the measures of the shorter and longer in one sum.
Then take the one half of the Ascences joined, and therewith multiply the
half of the circuites added, and the content will appear: as for example.

diagram

Suppose E. F. G. to be the Mountain or Hille, The compass of the foot or
base whereof, I find by measure to be 400. Perches. G. the Top to be. 20.
Perches, F. and G. being one of the Assenses to be 60. perches, and the other
Assents from E to G. to be. 38. Perches. Now when I have added together the
Circuit of the base or foot, and the Circuit of the Summitie or top, I
find, they make. 420. The half whereof is. 210. And the half of both the
Assenses to be. 49. Perches, which two Sums of the said halfes, multiplied
the one into ye other, or if ye enter for speed, the Table with those Sums,
ye shall find they make just. 64. Acres. 1. roode. 2. day works, 2 Perches.

AND moreover, now for the Valley or Dale, look as in the Mountain ye
measured the circuit of the foot or base: So now here the compass of the
height of the Valley must be measured, and also as ye sought to have the
measure there of the Sum^^ity or top: So must ye here also measure the
Circuit of the Bottom, or Deepth. And also as in the Mountain, ye measured
the Assense or going up to the top: So must here, the Descense or going
down of the hill be measured. And then for woorkyng the residue, do like as I
have in measuryng the Mountain enfourmed you.

An example of measuryng the Valley.
AND because I will show you but one example for all: I have here figured a
piece of Land of an unequal Valley, that it may be the Rule of measuryng of
all manner of Valleis, in what form soever they lie or be fashioned. Lay the
circuit of the heighte which I suppose here to be 30. in the compass about
of the top of the Valley. And the deepth of the Valley being 16. Perches,
and take these for the breadth. Then measure the Descences of both sides to the
bottom, the one side whereof here is. 18. and the other. 34. perches, which
added together make 52. And that is for the length. And then multiply half the
said number which is. 26. by 46. Perches, being half the other number
aforesaid, diagram and it comes to 1196. Perches, which make the content of
the Valley aforesaid. 7. Acres. 1. Roode and. 9. day works. Now if ye list
not your self to cast this sum, and all such like sums, ever when ye have
the length and breadth of any of all the figures aforesaied or any other like.
Enter the Table following for your expedition, and the contents will appear.

And thus much as is before for the Introduction of measuryng Land, with the
practice, shall suffice for the Surueiour, or his diligent Landemeater.

Finis.

