AN EPITHRENE: OR VOICE OF WEEPING: Bewailing The want of Weeping.

A Meditation.

Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Augustine
Fleuit Christus, fle^t and Homo. Chrysostom. (...). LONDON, Printed by A. M. for
Humphrey Robinson and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Chuch-yard at the
Sign of the three Pigeons. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, My honored Kinseman, JAMES CHAMBERS, Doctor in
Physic, Physician for his Majesty's Person in Ordinary, and for the Prince
his Highness.
SIR,
AS the Lord in Justice will adiudge those to be wicked and slothful
servants, Mat. 25.26
that improve not his Talents: So in Mercy be graciously accepts our
Free Will offerings, as well of Goats Hair and Rams Skins, Exo. 25.34
as of Gold and Silver, offered for building his Spiritual Tabernacle; Who is
well pleased, not so much with the Extention, as Intention of the Offering: And
among the Gentiles, (...), Suid in Voe (...)
It was thought suffici^nt, if poor men that were not able to sacrifice a
living Bull, did but offer a Bull of Me^le. Upon consideration of these, I
presume that your worthy and Christian disposition, will not disdain to accept
and protect the inarticulate Voice of this Abortive Infant, whose weak and
warbling Notes cannot be more disliked by most censorious Criticisme or
scornful Ignorance, than by his own Author. Which if distraction of my
thoughts in other business, and passages of my Function, had suffered me fully
to peruse, they might happily have given a more distinct and louder Echo. But
the neuer-enough deplored Iniquities of the Times and place where I live,
enforced them to Abortion; and made me cry out with the Prophet, My bowels,
Ier. 4.19.
my bowels, I am payned at my very heart, my heart makes a noise within me, I
cannot hold my peace: Ier. 20.9.
For the Word of the Lord was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my
bones, Psalm. 69.10.
and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. But because when I wept
and chastened my soul with Fasting, that was turned to my reproach; Aug.
Confess. 10.12.
Rideat me ista dicentem, qui ista non sentit, and ego dol^bo ridentem me; Let
him that feels not these things, scorn me that say these things, and I will
weep for him that scorneth me.

How ever the tongue of most men be like Hanuns Rasors, 2 Samuel 10.4
still cutting off, and disfiguring the most holy intents. My hope is, Theed
li. 4.26.
that as Aphraates having spent the greatest part of his life in solitary
Places, could excuse his unaccustomed walking once in the streets of Antiochia
(for which he was admired) by the example of a Maid that all her days had kept
her self within her Fathers house, until the violence of a sudden Fire
constrained her to bewray some Immodestie, to go abroad, and give notice of
the imminent danger: So now, my first stepping forth upon the Stage of the
World from my retired Privacie, where (...), Plutarch. Hier de Vitando susp.
Contub.
my daily Task is, Praeterita mea plangere vitia, and vitare prae. sentia) to
warn wanton Worldlings, delighting only in the Sardonian laughter, to abandon
their exorbitant enormities by holy weeping, may be taken in good part;
seeing, as says the Schooleman, Aquin 2.2 107. 1.2.
Voluntas est mensura actionum. And my endeavor proceeds from a will to do
good. Wherein if I seem to have stirred a course opposite to the liking of the
Multitude, or that my Matter be Cynicall, and Method Triuiall, almost
approving the Practical Philosophy (which I disclaim) of Heracli^us in his
sullen humor; or that others, Erasm. in Adag.
In antro Trophonii vaticinantes, should become irrisible: I have resolved, and
do esteem it a part of my Felicity upon Earth, to be accounted a Stoicke of
all the world, so I be a Peripateticke to Christ: For sensibly spoke he, and
fittingly (me thinks) to our Times, who Weeping said, that though we commit
no other sin, Hier in Apol. contr. Ruffin.
Certe verum tacuisse peccatum est, To conceal the Truth is Sin.

A sufficient Apology for my bold adventure of publishing this Essay of my
poor endeauours, may be the Raritie or rather Nullitie of Orthodoxe Tractats
in this Argument. Bellarm de Gemit. Colum. Bessas Heraclit. Christ.
Two only Popish Discourses, the one of Bellarmine, the other of Bessaeus, I
meet with; In which, because (without disparagement to their Learning) their
Labors are fraught full of frigid, frothy, superfluous, and superstitious
Speculations; I have published this Embryo, though (...), he may cost me the
publication of my Ignorance. As then no motive of this wretched World, but
zeal to promote Gods glory, and Christ's Gospel, moved me to expose these, to
the view of this censorious World: So in humble acknowledgement of your many
kindnesses toward me, They do make mention of your Name in the Frontispice.
Where be pleased (I beseech you) to accept my brief and ingenuous Confession,
that the Quotations, Quid cuius esset simpliciter confitentes, had these
causes: 1. To remove Imputations of Singularity, and Fantastical delight in
going alone: 2. To advantage (I hope) the Truth; as Testimonies of very
Heathens are inserted by Apostles: 3. Hieron. in Epitaph. Nep.
Hierome esteemed it a maine argument of Ingenuity in his Nepotian and worthy
of imitation: 4. To avoid that forging Trick of Jesuitical Legerdemaine: 5.
I know not better how to confirm what I allege, then by acknowledging whence
I had it. Therefore knowing mine own defects (Let others Narcissus like
content themselves with their own Conceptions) I do so reverence and admire
the rich Compositions of Ancient times, as that I cannot but accord to them,
that (in worthy examples) hold Imitation better then Invention. Vouchsafe then
(dear Sir) Acceptance of Patronage to this weak Watch* word, which fears
the sentence of Weakness, Galen. de Not facul. l. 2. c. 9.
(...)) though less then of Ingratitude: And therefore desires not so much to
expose my Observations to the World, as my Observance to you, for the fatherly
care you ever had in cherishing my Labors, and encouraging my Studies. For
which, I pray GOD, to prolong your Time with much comfort here, and crown it
with Eternity.

Addimus his precibus Lachryma^ quoque, verba preca^ri^ Perlegis, and lachryma^
finge videre meas. Your most bounden Kinsman and devoted in the Lord, JOHN
LESLY.

Synopsis and Series Methodi.
1. Preface. 1 Introductive,. 1. 2 Cohesive,. 2 3 Descriptive, 1 Object. 4 2
Subject. 6

2. Parts 1 Exegeticall, explicating the Nature of weeping, in the 1 Pattern
of Christ. 1. Showing the causes. 1 Efficient, his grief in which 1 Manner of
his grief, Voluntary, 11. 2 Matter of his grief: in which 1 Object grieving.
12 2 Subject grieved. 12

2 Final. 1 To convince the infidelity of the Jews. 13 2 To confirm the
truth of his Humanity. 13 3 To Excite Compassion in Christians. 13

2 Assigning four Reasons, why Christ wept in working this Miracle only. 15.
2 Practice of Christians. 1 Fained,. 18 2 Unfeigned, proceedine always from
some passion of the heart, as 1 Indignation and fear,. 19 2 Tribulation and
sorrow, which is 1 Corporal 1 Natural 20. 2 Diabolical 20.
2 Spiritual
3 Exultation and Joy, 21 4 Humiliation in Compunction and Compassion, where
are 1 Cause. 2 Nature. 1 Prescribed In the Gospel,. 12 2 Promised In the
Gospel,. 12 3 Practiced In the Gospel,. 12 4 Performed In the Gospel,. 12
3 Attributes 1 Not bi^^er 24. 2 Not difficult 24. 3 Not continued, because
agreeable to 1 Nature 24 2 Reason 24 3 Religion 24





2 Polemicall, illustrating the the necessity of Weeping, by 1 Scriptures. 1
Dogmatical, 28 2 Allegorical, 29 3 Exemplary, 30
2 Reasons 1 Apprehension, 32 2 Affliction. ^^3 3 Contrition, 34 4 Compassion 35

3 Pareneticall (...) some Use, (...) Weeping, for 1 Reformation 1 Correcting
the Contempt of Weeping, by the 1 Persons. 1. Rejecting Weeping,. 38. 2.
Practicing Weeping, 40.
2 Praise of Weeping,. 41.
2 Confuting the Sufficiency of Weeping, 1 (...), 43. and 44 2 (...), 45

2 Information, mooving to Weeping, for 1 Sins. 1 Perpetrated by our selves,
47 2 Participated with others, where are noted 1 Degrees 1 Antecedent 1
Counsel 49 2 Commandment. 49 3 Provocation 49
2 Consequent 1 Consent 50 2 Conuiuencie. 50 3 Defense. 50

2 Danger 50, etc.

2 Punishments 1 Temporal,. 57 2 Eternal, 58

3 Humiliation, in 1 Sinning, 1 Personally by our selves,. 60. and 61. 2
Universally by others, 62.
2 Suffering, 1 Judgments, 1 Public,. 63. 2 Private 64.
2 Persecutions 1 Foreign, 65 2 Domestical. 1 Verbal.. 66. 2 Real 67, etc.



4 Exhortation 1 Dissuading 1 Security,. 71. 2 Desperation. 72
2 Persuading 1 Observation of 1 ^^des of Weeping. 73. 2 Sign in the 1
Message, of Weeping 74. and 75. 2 Messengers of Weeping 74. and 75.
3 Times of Weeping 76.
Direction of means, by 1 Supplication, 77 2 Association, 77 3 Meditation, 77
4 Mortification, 77
3 Remotion of impediments 1 Internal, 78. 2 External, 79


5 Consolation, 1 In this life are 1 External Benefits, 83. 2 Internal
Comforts 84 3 Protection in Dangers. 85 4 Remission of Sins. 86.
2 In the life to come, 87. and 88.


3 Peroration 1 Apologeticall, 89. 2 Votive. 90. 3 Congratulatorie, by 1
Apprecation, 91. 2 Deprecation 92. 3 Supplication, 93.


Place this Analysis before Folio 1.

AN EPITHRENE, OR Voice of Weeping.
JOHN. 11.35. Jesus wept.
. 1
IF Nature only did promise unto a man a Weeping Life, exacting Tears at his
first entrance into the world, and suiting his whole life to that doleful
Beginning; Weeping (me thinks) should never displease Reasonable Souls. Or if
Weeping were only the Smart and Salve of sin, curing those sins which it
chastises with true Sorrow, and preventing the necessity of any other Care,
with hatred of sin; Weeping (me thinks) should never disquiet Religious
Souls. But seeing Weeping is the strongest voice to call upon God; and our
Tears, and sighs, and Groans, though they cannot end our Misery, may begin
our Glory; Weeping (me thinks) should never discourage the truly Regenerate.
For every true Christian should take Christ for his Pattern, and follow him
affectionately, when not only his Word, but his Action is our Warrant. And the
rather, because, De livore and zelo.
as Cyprian describes Christ's followers, Sequitur Christum qui, quod Christus
and fecit and docuit, imitatur, He follows Christ, that imitateth, what
Christ both did, and taught. In whose example, as we may find a perfectoure for
all our Imperfections, and a straight Rule to direct all our Aberrations: So
He who is, (...), the true way and the true Guide, has not only pointed out
the Path of Weeping, but trodden every step of it before us: He gave us
Instructions to Weep by many others, but none were ever sufficient to be an
Example of Weeping, save only himself. Neither needed he so often to Weep
upon Earth, but for our Example; which if it were good for him to give, it
cannot be evil for us to follow. Therefore Jesus Wept.

. 2
This Chapter contains two maine things. 1. A Miracle wrought by Christ in
raising Lazarus, who had lain dead four days in his grave. 2. The Jews
malicious Treachery against Christ, from the 47. verse unto the end. In the
Miracle three things are obseruable 1. The Antecedents. 2. The Concomitants. 3.
The Consequents. The Antecedents are Two, 1. Occasions, 2. Preparations; from
the beginning of the chapter unto the 43. verse: the Concomitants are Two, 1.
Christ's Authority, verse 43.2. The dead man's Obedience, verse 44. The
Consequents are Two, 1. Faith in many that believed, verse 45.2. Fraud in some
that went to the Pharisees, verse 46. But to return to the Antecedents of the
Miracle: The Antecedent Occasions are chiefly Two, 1. Christ's Inuitation, from
the first verse unto the 11.2. Disciples Infidelity, from the 11. verse unto
the 17. The Antecedent Preparations are twofold; 1. Circumstantiall, describing
first the Time, when, verse 17.2. the Place, where, verse 18.3. the Persons
before whom the Miracle was wrought, verse 19.2. Substantial, containing
Christ's Conferences with three sorts of Persons. 1. with Inuitators, Martha and
Mary, from verse 20. unto the 33.2. with Spectators, from verse 33. unto the
42.3. with the Animator, his eternal Father, verse 41.42. In our Saviors
Conference with the Spectators (whereof this Text is a part) we may note, that
as it is emphaticall, 1. by Interrogations, verses 34.37. and 40.2. by
Iniunction, verse 39. So is it Patheticall, and that two ways, expressing his
Grief, 1. Intellectually, by Groaning, verse. 33.2. Sensibly, by Weeping, in
this verse: Jesus Wept.

. 3
By which words, delivered, (...), briefly, but sententiously, we may perceive
the sacred fire of our Saviors sweet affection, so kindled within his bowels,
that smothered it cannot be, it must break forth, until it be quenched with
bitter Weeping. Yet here, before I proceed to reco^mend the matter to the
entertaiment of Christian Affections, I could stay the eye of the Reader, and
try the beginning of my strength, in showing the variable Opinions of Authors,
concerning the Birth, Education, Conversation, and other Passages in the State,
and Condition of Life, which Lazarus, and his Sisters are supposed to have
enjoyed and attained upon earth; And the rather, because these Persons seem to
be the proper Object, and Occasion (which Rules of Art enjoin us not to omit)
of this Text and Weeping. But I mean not to lead my Meditations aside; for
beside the Name of Lazarus, and Place of his aboade, we find nothing revealed
in Scriptures. Perhaps the Holy Ghost knowing, Aug. Conf. 10.3.
that Curiosum est genus humanum ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosum ad
corrigendam suam, Man is curious to dive into the life of others, but slow to
amend his own; thought it not much material, or pertinent for us to know,
whether they were Rich, or Poor, Old, or Young Noble, or Ignoble; seeing the
Lord conferreth his Spiritual Blessings promiscuously upon all, Act. 10.34.
that we might learn that God is no Respecter of Persons; But in every Age,
State, Nation, and Condition, they that fear him, and work righteousness are
accepted with him: In which unequal (yet just) dispensation of his benefits, I
trust there are none so blinded with Ignorance, as to imagine that the Lord is
partial; Seeing he respects none for any outward Circumstance or Quality
adherent to their Person, neither is he in any man's debt, nor will he have us
to value, or esteem his Graces by the dignity of any Person, but by his own
Bounty.

. 4
Yet Petrus de natalibus, Lib. 1. c. 72.
following (I know not what) Tradition, does confidently affirm, that they
were famous among the Jews for their Riches, and Nobility. Antoninus, Anton.
part 1. Hist. Sua.
writes that Mary and Martha were Ladies, the one in Magdalis, the other in
Bethany; And that Lazarus was Landlord, and Owner of many fair houses in
Jerusalem. But these Traditions or rather Fancies, Bar. Annal. To^. 1. p. 139.
Epiph cont. Manich. Hares. 66. pa. 281. Pelarg in Text.
their own Baronius has refuted. Epiphanius says, that he found likewise by
Tradition, that Lazarus was Thirty year old when he was raised from the dead,
and thereafter lived Thirty years more. Others write, that Lazarus was made
Bishop of Massilia, in the Fiftith year of Christ, when he with his two
Sisters, their maid Marcella, Maximinus, one of the Seaventy two Disciples,
Chelidonius a blind man, and other Conuerts persecuted by the Jews, were taken
and put into an old Ship, without food, or Ship-furniture, that they might
perish by Famine or Shipwreck; But all arriving safe at Massilia, he converted
those Barbarians unto the Faith of Christ; And at length after many tortures
was beheaded and made a Martyr. Of Mary likewise, some Ancients doubt, whether
she were the same mentioned Luke 7.38. Seleue.Orat. ^^.
Or some other: Basilius Seleuciensis says, she was not that woman mentioned,
Math. 26.7. nor that Mary mentioned Luke 10.39. his reason is, they were,
(...), notorious Sinners, but this Mary was ever a grave and sober woman.
Origin, Origin in Mat. Tract. 35. Chrysostom. in Joan Hom. 61. Niceph lib. 1. cap.
l. 3. Hierom. in Mat. 16. Cle. To. l. 3. Constable. Apost Aug. de. Cons Eua. l 2.
c. 78.79 Ambr. and Bed. ^^ Luc. 7.
Chrysostom, and Nicephorus say, there were three Maryes: Hierome, Clemens
Romanus, and others say, there were only two Maryes: but Augustine, Ambrose,
and Beda acknowledge but one Mary only. Yet (due reverence reserved unto their
Fatherhood) we may safely think, that the Evangelist in the second verse of
this Chapter, does distinguish Mary the Sister of Lazarus, from Mary the mother
of Christ, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the wife of Cleophas: Although we may not
be scrupulous, curious, nor peremptory in such matters, as make not much for
integrity, either of Faith or Manners; lest such subtilties do not only
quickly vanish in the judicious thoughts of others, but at length do bring
their own Authors to an Apoplexy.

. 5
But because, Hierom. contra Heluid.
Nugas terimus dum font veritatis omisso opinionum rivulos consectamur, we do
but prate, whilst leaving the pure fountain of Truth, we follow the muddy
Streams of Opinion: That we then may leave such Seraphicall spirits (as they
would seem unto themselves) to be censured by Augustine, for that from which
they would feign free themselves, even defect of Learning, De Agone Christ. ca.
4.
Omnis enim Anima indocta curiosa est; For it is the want of Learning that
makes men curious: * let us rather learn how to discharge the bond of this
needful duty, then to dive into the Subtilties of curious wits; And
frequently, and fervently ask of the Lord our heavenly Father, Josh. 15.19.
the like blessing which Achsah did ask of Caleb her earthly Father, even
Springs of waters, and Tears of Weeping, that we may weep, as Jesus Wept.

. 6
Weeping then is the sum and Subject of this Text, exprsesed by the Holy
Ghost without addition of any other words, or so much as of a Coniunctiue
Particle; which action of our Lord, related here so punctually by the blessed
Evangelist, Muscul. in Textum.
Musculus, esteems worthy of all observation: As if our Savior would thereby
argue, that as Weeping shows the desperate case of those, whom we lament,
whether of our selves or others; so it is the last means, by which we can
help Souls desperately wicked. For if Physicians, (...), administer desperate
Remedies to desperate diseases, and that suddenly, Christian Patience (I hope)
will admit the Remedy of Weeping, to cure (if it be possible) the desperate
desolations of Souls, and that resolutely and briefly. Yet lest brevity
should breed obscurity, the declaration of this Subject (if the Lord permit)
shall be first Exegeticall, Senec. Epist. 84.
2. Polemicall 3. Paraeneticall: And therefore, Cum melius seruentur distincta,
I confine my Meditations to prosecute. 1. the Explication of the Nature. 2. the
Illustration of the necessity. 3. the Application of some uses of Weeping.

I. Part Exegeticall: Explicating the Nature of Weeping.
. 7
E (...), Jesus wept, (...) (to Weep) Etymologists derive from (...), To be
wounded or bitten, (...), says the Greek Scholiast, because weeping
proceeds from a wounded spirit. Weeping being the Shedding of Tears, that
water of the highest price, that shower which comes from the heart pierced for
the most part with Grief, and that Sweat, yea Blood of the Soul laboring in
sorrow is then properly and commonly caused, when the Concavities of the
Brain, Basil Hom 4. de Great. Action.
filled with the smoakie perfume of Sorrow, do vent their Moisture or liquid
humor, through the eyes, as their proper channels, and distill it into Tears.
But leaving the exact definition of weeping to Physicians, Cypr. de discipl.
and habit. Virg.
Artists, Anatomists, (lest I should seem rather to confine it, then define
it) As Cyprian, described discipline, so we weeping; Custos spei, retinaculum
Fidei, dux Itineris salutaris, fomes bonae indolis, magistra virtutis, facit in
Christo manner semper, ac iugiter Deo viuere, and ad promissa coelestia, and
divina praemia peruenire: Weeping is the watch of Hope, Anchor of Faith, Guide
to Salvation, Mistress of virtue, the nourishment of good Nature, which makes
us to abide in Christ, to live unto God, and ministers an entrance into the
everlasting kingedome of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore, Et
sectari salubre est, and aversari lethale, To practice it, is profitable, and
to despise it is damnable.

. 8
Yet for more Elucidation, and Explication of the Text; Weeping is to be
considered. 1. In the Pattern of Christ: 2. In the Practice of Christians. In
the Pattern of Christ, Weeping was an action of Christ, in whom as all Graces
were transcendent, so the exercise of them was supereminent; Seeing then, Cypr.
de b^no patien.
Bonum quod amat, Dominus commendat, The Grace which our Lord loves, he
commends by his practice, we cannot err if we follow Christ as our
Pattern in this Action of Weeping. That all Christ's Actions are to be
imitated, no man does affirm, for such as were personal, or of divine
Operation, as his miraculous works; or of divine Prerogative, as his se^ding
for the Ass and Colt without leave of the Owner, or Mediatoriall, as the
works of his Prophetical, Regal, and Sacerdotall offices; none may attempt
to imitate: Neither always his Actions Circumstantiall, as his Gestures,
Vestures, and other Circumstances, which incidentally and indifferently Christ
used upon certain Occasions only, and cannot be pressed upon our
Consciences, as necessary to be imitated without Superstition, because not
contained within compass of divine Prescript, or Institution: But only his
Actions moral, as the works of Obedience, Meekness, Humility, Patience,
and Weeping, wherein (as Saint Peter says) He left us an example, 2 Pet. 2.21.
that we should follow his steps; and to those moral Actions only, Cypr. de
Lapsis.
Dominus in verbis doctor, consummator in factis; docens quid fieret, and
faciens quodcunque docuisset; our Lord, who is our Teacher by his words, and
Accomplisher by his deeds; teaching what should be done, and doing
whatsoever he taught, has tied us to imitate him by his own commandment
Math. 11.29. (...), Learn of me. In the Practice of Christians, Weeping must
be considered, seeing the Lord in the infiniteness of his love has
continually raised unto us many Guids, to direct us not only in words, filling
our ears with Holy Persuasions; but also by example, representing Grace most
lively to our eyes, and most frequently in this symptom of all Grace, Weeping.
In which, as Christ himself was a glorious Sun, so were his Saints in all
ages, as so many Stars, to light and to lead us (as well by example as by
exhortation) through the dark and dangerous passages of his life. That seeing
it is the greatest Glory whereto we can aspire, to draw as near unto Christ
in likeness of life, as he did unto us in likeness of nature, We might learn
to weep, seeing Jesus wept.

Of the pattern of Weeping in Christ.. 9
FIrst; As for the Pattern of Weeping in Christ, seeing here, Ad illius
exemplu^ mittimur, Hieron. ad Celan. Matr.
quem omnes fatemur imitandum, we are sent to imitate him, whom we all
acknowledge most worthy of imitation: That he wept, it needs no proof,
where the Scripture is so plain and plentiful; The only difficulty, is to
assign, 1. The Cause, 2. The Reason why he wept. And here to assign the
Cause of Christ's Weeping, we had need, for distinctnesse of Explication, to
distinguish the Efficient from the Final: And the rather, because Philosophy
teaches, That the one may be the Cause of the other mutually. To shun therefore
Confusion of speech, as the general Cause of every general effect, should be
showed; so the Particular Cause of this Particular Effect must be assigned.

. 10
The efficient Cause of Christ's Weeping, Arist. Phis 2. Ca. 3.
(...), from whence immediately proceeds this change, was his inward Grief;
therefore Bonaventura concludes, In l. 3. Sent Did. 15. Art. 2. qu. 2
Fletus est signum interioris moeroris, Weeping is a sign of inward Grief:
For as smoke a sign of fire, is immediately produced by fire, so is Weeping by
Grief: But for what our Savior grieved, and wept, I find it not determinately
defined by Interpreters. Bulling. in Text.
Bullinger, mentions three opinions, That he wept, grieving. 1. At the
Malice of Satan, by which death came into the world. 2. At the power of Sin,
by which infinite souls were destroyed. 3. At the invincible Incredulity of
the Jews: And annexeth his own for the fourth, as most probable, and
plausible, His great Love to Lazarus, and his Sisters; So that when he saw
them Weeping, and the Jews also weeping, then Jesus wept.

. 11.
Grief then being the Efficient Cause, which immediately caused this weeping,
it is requisite we observe here. 1. The Manner, 2. The Matter of his Grief.
The Manner was (which may seem, a Monster in Nature, and a Miracle to natural
men) Voluntary; Seeing as he assumed none of our Personal, but all our
Natural Infirmities, which proceeds not from Sin, nor tend unto Sin; So he
was affected with this natural Infirmity of Weeping, not by Necessity of
Generation, but by the free, and voluntary dispensation of his Mediator-ship.
It may be collected by that which Bonaventure teaches; Vbi supra Art. 2. qu. 2
That a man may be grieved three ways; 1. Besides the Dominion of reason, as
with the first motions of Grief, which suddenly do surprise us; 2. Against
the Dominion of Reason, when Reason is not only troubled, but disturbed, that
is, subdued by Sensuality for a while. 3. According to the Dominion of Reason,
when Reason commands us to be grieved; and thus in this last sense, our
Saviors Grief produced this Weeping willingly; when he considered his
Fathers Glory defaced, and man's Salvation endangered, he grieved willingly,
Although when he considered the Grief it self, it was against his Will,
because painful. Erroneous then is that Doctrine of Stoicall Apathy; Aug. de
Civit. l. 14. c. 9
That a wise man is not troubled with Grief and other Passions; All which
Christians must have (for Christ himself had them) lest they turn Stoics:
Aug in Ieae^. Tract. 60.
Qui quemadmodum Vanitatem existimant Veritatem, sic Stuporem deputant
Sanitatem, says Augustine upon the 21. verse of this Chapter; Who as they
account Vanity to be Verity; so they esteem Stupidity to be Soundness: Not
knowing that the Soul of man, as well as the Body of man, Aug. Ibid.
is then most desperately, and dangerously diseased, when most insensible of
Grief, says the Father. For a man not to be grieved when he ought to be
grieved, Est durities, non sapientitia, It is Hardness of Heart, and not
Wisdom.

. 12
Thus seeing our Savior grieved, not absolutely against his Will, but only in
some respect: That we may Secondly conceive the Matter of his Grief more
plainly, here consider. 1. The object, 2. The Subject of his Grief. The
Object, or Motive which moved him to Grieve; Aquinas says, Tertia part 15. a
b. in C. 1.2 36. 1. c.
was the Evil which Inwardly he apprehended. For as the Object of outward
Pain, is some hurt apprehended by the sense of Touching, so the Object and
Motive of Grief, is some evil apprehended inwardly, either Really or
Imaginarily. Thus the Soul of our Savior might inwardly apprehend some things
as hurtful, either in Relation to himself, as his Death and Passion; or in
Relation to others, as the Sins of his Disciples, Incredulity of the Jews,
or Misery of his friends. The Subject of his Grief in this perplexity, were
all the Faculties of his Soul; Understanding, Will, Aquin. 3.15 a. 5. ^n C.
Superior and Inferior Faculties. For seeing his body was passible and mortal,
and his Soul had all natural powers, as well as supernatural: when these
Faculties of his blessed Soul looked (Largely) not only to God and Man's
Salvation immediately, but also to the Means which lead to Eternity, they could
not but grieve; howsoever when (Strictly) they looked only to God and Man's
Salvation, they were affected with Grief. Briefly Bernard tells us, Bern.
Epist. 25.
He was, Turbatus, non Perturbatus, Moved, not Removed from his trust in God,
and resolution to work our good; which Divines do thus exemplify. A Physician
prescribing a Leper to drink some poison for his Health, the Leper in his
understanding conceives that Health is a good thing, and so taking the
understanding (Strictly) there is no Grief in it; In like manner he wills
his Health, taking the Will (Strictly) neither is there Grief in it: But when
he wills his Health by this Physic, and remembers he must drink that
Poison, then he is grieved and sorrowful. Hence it is evident that they do
mightily extenuate the meritorious and invaluable Sufferings of our Savior,
who affirm that he suffered not immediately in his Soul, but only by
Sympathy, that is, that only the Pains that arose from his Body tormented his
Soul. Whereas, the Soul of our Savior being the immediate Object of the wrath
of God, his Sufferings are called in the Original, Deaths, Es. 53.9. Because
he suffered the First Death, and the Equivalent of the Second Death.

. 13.
The Final Causes of Christ's weeping are many, which the Learned observe; in
which although, Hieron. i^ Apol. (...) Ruffin.
Hic sit Commentariorum mos, and explanantium regula, vt opiniones in
interpretatione varia^ persequantur, and quod vel sibi vel alijs videatur,
edisserant; It be the custom of Commentators, and rule of Interpreters in
their Expositions, to rehearse diverse opinions, both of their own and of
others; I will relate only three. Muscul. in Text.
1. To convince the Infidelity of the Jews; That the Infirmity of his Humanity
might be declared to be vhited in one, and the same work, unto the majesty of
his Divinity: That whomsoever the majesty of his Godhead, manifested in
raising Lazarus, should astonish; this weeping passion might relieve; and
con^rarily, whom the Infirmity of his Weeping did offend, his power in raising.
Lazarus might incite to believe in the Son of God: ^onauent. (...) Tent.
By his weeing therefore in this short Scripture he did first demonstrate his
Manhood, and thereafter by working the Miracle, his Godhead. 2. To confirm our
Faith in the Truth of his Humanity; for the Fathers deduced unanswerable
Arguments of his Manhood from this Text against Heretics; Apud Gel^ in lib.
c^^t^. Eutych. and Nest.
as Gregory Nyssen against Eunominus proved. That neither did Christ's Humanity
raise Lazarus, nor his Divinity weep for him, when he was dead, but as Tears
are proper to man, so to give Life, is proper to the Lord of Life: Athanasius
showed, De fide fua ad Theoph. lib. 9.
That Christ's Weeping for Lazarus, took away all suspicion of an imaginary and
fantastical body; because Tears are the humor of a true body: De great.
Action.
Basil also says, As our Lord was an hungered, and weary, not that his Divinity
was overcome with labor, but his Humanity, admitted the nature of the passion
that followed Nature; so he wept admitting the course of Nature into his
natural body. 3. To excite in us mutual compassion, teaching us by his own
example to weep with them that weep in a moderate manner; that neither,
Isidor. lib. 2. Epist. 137.
(...), says Pelusiota, After the manner of madmen we should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow; nor forget Christian Compassion and Humanity toward the
dead, and distressed, as Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, David, and others have done:
The Poet says, Quis nisi mentis inops Natorum in funere Matrem
Flere vetet? --


Nature does in a sort bid our Tears, though she bar our immoderation:
yea, God himself allowed his holy Priests to pollute themselves in Mourning
for their nearest dead friends, except the high Priests, which was forbidden
him in a Figure: And it was not without special reference to a Judgment, that
God tells Ezechiel, Ezec. 24.16.
He would take from him the desire of his eyes with a stroke, yet neither
should he mourn nor weep, neither should his Tears run down. And there
want not some Divines, which have thought Adam and Eve mourned an 100 years
for Abel; 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
And Paul reproves not all Sorrow, but Heathenish, without hope or measure.
He was not then affected with this passion of weeping, for his own
Necessity, but for our Utility says Brentius: Brent. in Text.
For in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, Heb. 2.17.
that he might be a merciful, and faithful high Priest for them, in things
pertaining to God; Heb. 4.15.
therefore he was touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, and in all
things tempted like as we are, yet without Sin. Thus pitying the Impenitency
and infidelity of the people, He that changes our vile body, that it may be
like unto his glorious body, changes also the affections of our Infirmity,
Aug. Tract. 60. in Io. in.
Compatiens nobis affectu animae suae, having compassion on us with the
affections of his Soul, says Augustine: For although Sorrow did wrest from
him many Tears in his passion, whereby he declared his Grief for the Pains
which he suffered in himself, yet many more Tears did he shed in Compassion
toward us.

. 14.
Wherefore if ever Bellarmine might have sued out a writ of dotage justly in
his latter days, surely he seems to doat, in that notwithstanding these
and many more Interpretatio^s of Fathers, and other learned, he says that some
Writers affirm, Bellar. de Gem Colu^bae, lib. 1. cap. 10.
That Christ when he wept did bewail Lazarus his mortal Life subject unto
the miseries of mortality, unto which miserable Life he was to return from
Limbo Patrum after his Resurrection. That the Soul of Lazarus was in the State
of Happiness before our Savior raised him, and that thereafter he was to
reenter into a miserable Life; we deny not: But because he names not one of
Ancient and Authentic Authority, to acquit his ridiculous Animaduersion
(concerning the being of Lazarus his Soul in Limbo Patrum) of an untruth;
August. Epist. 50.
See how fully that of Augustine is verified in him and his Associates, Qui
divina testimonia non sequuntur: pondus humani testimonij perdiderunt, Who
follow not divine Testimonies, have lost the weight of humane testimonies. See
likewise how Isidorus Pelusiota refuteth his Error, and confirms our
Position, Pelus lib. 2. Epist. 173.
his words are, (...) that is, Christ spoke in this manner, I bring Lazarus
unto the storms and tempests of this Life, who was entered into the Haven of
Rest, and had attained the Crown of Glory. But as Antipheron Orietes in
Aristotle, thought that every where he saw his own shape and picture going
before Him: So in every Text of Scripture where Jesuits walk, they do easily
persuade themselves that they see the Image of their own Inventions. And here
(if I had not resolved to study brevity) I could show the irreconcilable
Contradictions of learned Papists in this point; Diog. Laers lib. 1. cap 1.
who (like those (...) among the Philosophers, that out of every Sect. of
Philosophy selected what liked them) have confarcinated and gathered somewhat
out of all Religions, and blinded the Purity of Christian Religion, with their
impure mixtures: That such wavering minds as complain of Iarres in our
Reformed Religion, might satisfy themselves with the answer of Themistius the
Philosopher to Valens the Arrian Emperor, Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 27.
That as small and few were the differences amongst those ancient Christians,
if they had been compared with the diverse Opinions of Heathen Philosophers;
So, private and petty are our Divisions, if compared with the almost infinite
Controversies amongst Papists. But here I must six a Periode.

. 15
To assign the Reason why our Savior wept here, it is remarkable that He
never wept in working any Miracle, save only this. He did no miracle without
some great commotion of mind, Melan in Text. Luke 8.46.
says Melanchthon, for when he healed the woman of her bloody issue only with
the touch of his garment, He perceived that virtue was gone out of him: But
here he groaneth, he grieveth, he weepeth; And that for special Reasons; 1. To
show that such (says Augustine) as have long been dead in Sin, August. in
Joan. Tract. 42.
yea such as upon whom Satan has rolled the Stone of Custom, and stink in
the nostrils of the world through the putrified sores of Sin, as Lazarus in
his Grave, should not yet despair, but know that Weeping in Faith can cure
diseases past all other cures and hopes. 2. For Examples sake, that no pains
should be thought too much, no Sweating or Weeping spared, nor Life it self
esteemed too dear; but in imitation of our Lords Compassion, we should leave
no means untried, in all diligence showing much Pity and Compassion in
converting them. 3. To show that his Weeping being an Action of his Manhood,
which is but the Instrument of his Godhead, might lively declare the presence
of his Godhead, even then, when out of Pity he works by the Ministry of
weak and mean Instruments the miraculous work of man's Conversion. Melan in
Text.
4. Melanchthon, adds, that because Satan would have hindered him by diverse
cogitations, over whom as our Savior Triumphed in victory, so he wept for the
general Misery of man, more palpably expressed in the passages of this
Miracle, then any other.

. 16.
But as there is no proportion between his Sorrow and our Sorrow, either in
Quantity or Quality, in the Cause or Effect, So there is no Similitude: For
we in our State of Corruption are more grieved for that which we suffer our
selves, then we can be grieved for any other; But Christ was more grieved for
us, that we were separated from God, then he was for himself in his most
bitter passion; Therefore he charged the daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23.28.
not to weep for him, but for themselves. Yet his Compassion declared in the
Passion of this weeping, was no part (as I conceive) of that Obligatory
Satisfaction, wherein he was bound by Obligation to satisfy for us, but a
Charitable Affection, whereby he would voluntarily and of his accord, give
evidence of those forementioned Final Causes: And thus it seems Aquinas
would be understood, Aquin. in Tex^.
when he says, Hae lachrymae non erant ex necessitate, sed ex pietate, vt
docerent hominem propter peccatum sletihus indigere; He wept not of necessity,
but Piety; that man might know how much he needs to weep for Sin. Thus
Jesus wept.

Of the Practice of Weeping in Christians.. 17.
HAving dispatched the Pattern of Weeping in Christ, we come next to consider
the Practice of Weeping in Christians. Weeping, est triste Ministerin^, is a
sad Doctrine, and unsavory to flesh and blood, and therefore most men distaste
it, as the Israelites did the bitter waters of Marah; many account it a heavy
and troublesome matter, as if they got no good, no benefit by Mourning and
Mortification, but deprived themselves of worldly Pleasures. Yea it is esteemed
by most Protestants, as Purgatory is by Papists, who make it equal with Hell
it self, in Violence, though not in Perpetuity of Torments: For, Aug. Confess
7.16.
Palato non sano poena est panis, and oculis aegris odiosa lux, quae puris
amabilis; The same bread is distasteful to the sick, that is sweet to the
sound Palate, and the same Light is offensive to the soar, that is comfortable
to the clear eyes. Yet as there is no passage into Paradise but under a fiery
Sword, so if ever we look to enter into that heavenly Paradise, that place of
everlasting bliss, where all Tears shall be wiped from our eyes, we must
pass through the Purgatory of Weeping, under the sword that cutteth away the
branches of our corrupt Nature, Cant. 7.4.
and must have our Eyes like the Fish-Pooles in Heshbon, standing full of
water, and weep. Voluptatem vicisse, Cyprian. de Bone Pudie
maxima est voluptas: Nec vlla mayor est victoria, quam ea quae de
cupiditatibus refertur; Our greatest Pleasure is to abandon Pleasure; Neither
is there any greater victory, then that by which we triumph over our own
Lusts in Weeping. But Weeping, as all other Services of the Saints, is
perverted in a false Imitation. For as the grand Imposture of the world had
Sacrifices, Washings, Tithes, Priests, Altars, Oracles among the Heathen,
counterfeiting and imitating the like to these in the Church of God, thinking
by this means either to disgrace the Ordinances of God by Superstition, or to
beset the minds of men with Ignorance, that they should not distinguish
between Truth and Error: So by the same Satan's cunning, always skillful to
transform himself into an Angel of Light, Weeping has it counterfeit humor,
false, hypocritical, and external shows and showers of Tears, all strangers
to a wounded Spirit, and therefore, Hiero^. ad Celantiam. Matr.
Turpiora sunt vitia, quae virtutum specie celantur, the more abominable to
God, odious to the Godly, and dangerous to such as have not their senses
exercised, to put a difference between Good, and Evil.

. 18
Lest then any should either misconstrue my Meaning in this Di course, or
mistake a poysonfull Potion for wholesome Physic to their own destruction;
Let it be observed without further Curiosity, that because Weeping is a word
Homonymous or Ambiguous, and as the Philosopher says, Arist. Topie. 5.
(...), Every word that is ambiguous is obscure; we distinguish it into Fained
and Unfeigned Weeping. Fained Weeping are the outward and dissimulate Tears
shed for fashion only, with which the crafty and subtle of heart do dawbe
their Hypocrisy and Dissimulation in the sight of men: This the Heathen
perceived -- Lachrimae simulare docentur,
Hae quoque habent arts, quaeque iubentur eunt.
Thus Sampsons wife wept. Judge. 14.16 17.
This weeping is like the Crocodiles weeping, external only and to the show,
For as many do pray from the teeth outward, so many do weep from the eyes
outward, whose custom it is, according to the proverb, Erasm. Ada^. Chil.
Cont. 9. ^^ou. 10.
(...), To weep at the grave of their Step-dame; composing their foreheads to
sadness and gravitie, while they bid their hearts to be wanton and careless
within. Curt. lib. 5.
But if none or few (as reports the Historian) could deceive Antipater by
weeping, much more are all ^eares, Heb. 4.13.
naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Unfeigned Weeping
proceeds always from the Heart and the Passions thereof; Some times from
Indigna tion and Fear; Some times from Tribulation and Sorrow; Sometimes from
Exultation and Joy, Sometimes from Humiliation in Compunction for our selves,
and Compassion for others.

. 19
Weeping proceeding from Indignation, produces Tears of Anger, Flendo
diffundimus iram, By Weeping we express our Wrath, and Anger. And thus we
see many women and stomackefull Children, not knowing how to revenge their
supposed injuries, often fret and burst forth into Tears; and Children
beholding the rod of Correction, for Fear of Punishment do fall a weeping.

. 20.
Weeping proceeding from Tribulation is provoked by Sorrow and Grief of Heart;
for the loss of any thing may well be called worldly Weeping. And is according
to the diversity of Objects, Corporal or spiritual. First, sometimes for
Corporal, and worldly things; And is either, 1. Natural, as for losses and
crosses in Goods, Health, Honor, Friends, and the like; for which moderately
to weep, is not simply evil, but it is a wickedness to be, (...), without
natural affection: Thus Samuel wept for Saul, David for wicked Absalom, and
our Savior over Jerusalem; Add. page 16 Ber^. super C^^t, Sermon. 26.
Illi flerunt Compatiendo, and ego Patiendo non audeam? They wept in Compassion
of others, and may not I in Passion of my self: And here at the grave of
Lazarus, Christ neither reproved their Weeping, nor prohibited their Weeping,
but Wept with them that Wept; Where, as his Tears were Testimonies of his
Nature not of Diffidence, So our Weeping may not be a sign out of our
Infidelity, but present Condition. 2. Diabolical, when a friends departure
into Glory is more lamented, then the departure of Christ from the Soul; when
the fits of some short Sickness, are more lamented then the anguish of an
afflicted Conscience; when the loss of a little worldly wealth is more
lamented, then the loss of our heavenly Treasure in the Lords worship,
vilifying it in our attendance as if it were only some base Circumstance, or
outward Complement; when none of Gods Threatenings do cause us to bewail our
Misery, and yet every trifling Inconvenience or disappoyntment -- Gravius
moderamine iusto
Nec pro materia fertur doluisse --
Does so tyrannically torment our Souls, as though we were utterly undone:
This is worldly Weeping conceived for corporal and worldly things. Sometimes
this kind of Weeping is conceived for Spiritual things, yet in a carnal and
worldly manner; when the matter is Spiritual, but the respect is carnal: thus
Ahab humbled himself 1. King. 21.27. Esau wept, Genes. 27.38. and Judas, Math.
27.3. Here was weeping, yea the Causes thereof were Spiritual, Ahab for his
Oppression, Esau for his Blessing, and Judas for his Treachery; but the respect
was worldly and carnal, for the danger of their Punishment wrought in their
Consciences by the Law; which is the minister of death, and can never work the
sense of Mercy, or Hope of Pardon: Seeing when the Law is violated, it
requires the suffering of the Curse, not any true Sorrow, or sorrowful
Weeping for the avoiding of the Curse. Yea, it sets before our eyes the
rigor of Gods precisest Justice, and does in a manner forbid all Godly
Weeping; Telling us, it is in vain to seek by Tears and Lamentations any
Mercy at his hands, who is a consuming Fire, a God of pure eyes, and cannot
behold Iniquity. Thus the Law of it self leaves such Mourners in utter
desperation, then which there is not any thing more contrary to Godly
Lamentation: And is no otherwise a Schoolmaster unto Christ, then as the
Minister of the Gospel makes use of it, contrary to it own nature, to drive
us unto Christ, by teaching the Sinner condemned in the Law, not to weep so
much for the danger of his Punishment revealed to him by the Law, as for the
Evil of his Iniquities, for which mercy is offered unto him in the Gospel.
Thus many do weep, and yet never are saved.

. 21.
Weeping proceeding from Exultation has Joy of heart for it Cause; For it is
the expression of some men's kindness to entertayne others with Tears, and to
testify their Love and Affection with weeping, as David and his Servants, 2 Samuel 13.36.
when the Kings sons came, who were supposed to be slain at Absoloms
Sheepe-shearing: And Joseph entered into his chamber and wept, Gen 43 30.
when his bowels yerned upon Benjamin: Thus some men, as Cyprians, Martyrs,
express their Joy with Tears: and the mutual embraceing of Minutius,
Plutarch. in Fab Maximo.
and Fabius, Maximus occasioned the whole Army of Romans to weep for Joy.
Aquin. 22. qu 82. A. 4.3.
Thus (as Aquinas teaches) Tears proceed not alwaise and only from Grief,
but sometimes also from tenderness of Affection.

. 22.
But my purpose is to treat only of that weeping, which proceeds from
Humiliation, which in compassion lays to heart the miserable condition of
others no less then of our selves through sin: and may be termed a Godly and
Christian Weeping; Being for Sin as it is Sin, a breach of Gods Law, a
Dishonor and Offense done to his Majesty: whereby not only our eyes do melt
into Tears, but our hearts dissolve into sighs, and our Souls languish in
Dislikes: Yea all that we are and have, suffer some punishment, that when the
Lord is incensed with our Iniquities, he may be appeased with our Weeping; Not
because our Weeping in it self is acceptable unto God, but because it flows
from a due consideration of the Lords tender and merciful dealing with us, and
our ungrateful and ungracious Carriage toward him: The fear of Gods
Judgments, and Horror of Hell, may strike the heart with astonishment; but it
is Grief for displeasing our merciful God, and Sorrow for giving him cause to
hide his favor from us, though but for a time that properly causes this Godly
Weeping. Thus this Godly Weeping; Cypr. de Bono Pudicit.
Virtus est quae de dono Dei venit, licet se in oculo hominibus ostendat, It is
a Grace given by God, though it do manifest it self in the Eye unto men. And
that the Soul does Weep, the Scripture warranteth this kind of speech, for
Jeremy the 4.14. Jerusalem is exhorted to wash her heart from wickedness;
James 4.8. The double-minded must purify their hearts. And Ieremiahs Soul did
weep in secret, Ier. 13.17. Weeping then is not only an outward action but an
Inward Gift of the Spirit, ezpressed in outward Action: For the Lord says,
Zachar. 12.10. I will power upon the house of David the Spirit of Grace and
Supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn; Evidently arguing it to be a Grace of the Gospel, and a
Quality or Infused Gift, as Faith, Hope, Charity, are given only to the Heirs
of Salvation: For it is prescribed in the Gospel, Iam. 4.9. It is Practiced in
the Gospel, as shall appear; It is promised in the Gospel, Ezech. 39.26. It
is Performed in us by the Ministry of the Gospel, whilst it sets before our
eyes Christ crucified, and so causes us to Weep, as Zach. 12.10. And
therefore the voice of Weeping is the sweetest and most musical voice of all
other: It is the Trumpet of our true Iubilee sounding the Sentence of our
Redemption and Adoption; Leuit. 25 9.
for by Weeping the Holy Spirit, Laert. in Solon.
not Solon-like publishes, (...), A Law of Redemption, of Lands, Liberties,
Livelihoods irrecoverably engaged and indebted unto men; But the Eternal Edict
of Grace and Mercy concerning the Redemption of Souls and bodies sold through
Sin unto Satan. Neither must it discourage us, that few do Weep; seeing
true friends are few, Hier. contr. Iouin.
few are the Faithful, Just, and Righteous, Semperque virtus rara est, And
ever Grace is rare.

. 23.
All which truly apprehended and considered, do evidently prove that Godly
Weeping is not, 1. So Sour or bitter a thing as most think, but that
refreshing Oil, and sovereign Balm of Gilead, which cleanses the Soul, and
that with Joy draws water out of the Wels of Salvation: Isai. 12.1.
Aquin. 22. qu. 123 8. c.
For Weeping is the true Fortitude of the Soul, which delights the Soul
with the consideration of it owneparticular Acts and Ends, though in suffering
some present Sorrow, it somewhat displeases the Soul and, Vir fortis nonest
minus laudabilis in luctu, quam in bello, The valorous Christian is no less
praise worthy in Weeping, then Warrfare. 2. Nor so full of difficulty as most
think; For being the Gift of God, and Grace of the Gospel, it has Grace
annexed to it, whereby the same things that are required in the Gospel are
also promised, and the Yoke made sweet and easy: Note.
Yea weak performance of it is acceptable and accepted by reason that as the
Gospel accepts every little Mite, so a desire to Weep is Godly Weeping; and
to Weep, because we cannot Weep, goes current for Godly Weeping. 3. Nor so
continued a work, as may never be discontinued.

. 24.
For it is (once here, for all, to insert and inculcate the Confutatio^ of
Monkish hypocrisy) the Doctrine of Popish Superstition, all the day to bow
down the head like a Bulrush, to affect a sad carriage, a demure look, or a
dejected Countenance; Because sincere Christians should always Weep. Which
immoderate and affected Weeping is condemned by Nature and Reason, as well as
by Religion. In Nature all the Elements abhor excess of Weeping; The Earth
through immodera^e rain is overflooded, the Waters bemudded, the Air
darkened, the Fire oppressed with water gives neither Light nor Heat: And the
Eye it self (as Anatomists observe) has six dry skins, Vesael (...) 7. cap.
14. Tolet, (...) Arist^^ ^^nim.
to damme up like Sluices the excessive course of Tears, whereas it has but
three moist humors like Channels dissoluing into Tears. In reason, even blind
Reason, such as the Heathen had, it was a Pythagorean Theoreme, (...), Not to
eat the heart; or, as Solomon expounds it, As the moath fretteth the garment,
and the Worm eats Wood, so Heaviness does the heart: Whereupon Heraclitus
having soust himself all his life time in Weeping, is reported to have dyed of
a Dropsy, and (as a Selfe-Murtherer) drowned himself in his own Tears. In
Religion, we are taught, That it becomes the Righteous to rejoice; Psalm.
And we are commanded to Rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. But no where to
Weep evermore; At the most, Solomon allows but a Time to Weep, Eccles. 3.4.
as a Time to Laugh: Therefore the very Egyptians when they would describe
Weeping, painted those Pearls, which we call Margarites, or Unions, Suid.
whence Suidas says, (...), Margarites Hiereglyphically signify the shedding
of Tears; For as those Pearls are called Unions in Latin, because they are
found one after another, and never more at once; So Tears must be shed
successively one by one, and never powered out all at once. Hence it may in like
manner be conceived, Note.
that Tears are not always absolutely and necessarily required to manifest
true Humiliation; For sometimes the Constitution of body will yield no Tears,
neither in Sorrow, for Sin, nor worldly Crosses, which therefore may not be
imputed to Corruption of heart, or State of Vnregeneracie; Sometimes abundance
of Grief, does so oppress the heart, that it cannot ease it self by Tears.
When Amasis saw his son led to execution he could not Weep, but when he saw
his Friend begging he wept, Ar^st. Rheter, lib. 2. c. 8
(...); For the one was miserable, but the other cruel, says the Philosopher.
Thus many times Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent, Our lesser Griefs may
be expressed by Weeping, greater ones by astonishment.

. 25.
And here because I may hap pily seem, either palpably to bewray mine own
Oscitancie, or dastarly to betray the causes I have undertaken; as if this were
to make Weeping the easiest work in the World, yea a Pandar to Sin, and we
made no more of it, but Sin and Weep: As if our Weeping could get a Pardon
of the Old, and a License for the New. And likewise because the Lawyers rule
may in such a case go current with Divines, H^^^man. Quast. Illust. Quast. 23.
(...), That the false colluding Accuser, and the faint-hearted Maintainer of
the Truth are alike blameworthy. Lest therefore any (as Patients often do of
Physicians Bills) should complain of Danger in this case; This Divinity we
publish not to profane Ones, that turn every good thing to their own
destruction. But as Physicians administer their choycest Cordials only to
prepared bodies; So the comforts of these Attributes, can ease only those
Weeping Hearts, in whom also they expel Sinful delights and desires; Who when
they have appeased the Lord by their Weeping, adjure themselves and others not
to offend him again. As for the peevish Multitude (that frowar^ Generation) to
them it is not given to know the mystery of Weeping, neither have they any part
or portion in the forementioned Attributes of holy Weeping, the sole mundifying
water that washes off the Corruption, stays the Infection, cools the
Inflammation, and heals by degrees the most inueterate and dangerous
Impostumation of our Transgressions.

. 26.
What Cyprian then speaks of the work of Regeneration, Cyprian.
may be truly applied to Weeping in Regeneration, Sentitur priusquam dicitur,
It is felt before it can be spoken of. And because it consists rather in the
Fervor of affections, then moisture of eyes, it is better felt then
understood, and yet better understood then can be expressed. Lacbrymae sanguis
Anima, August.
Tears are the blood of the Soul; Where though there appears no external
skarre to be seen in the flesh, yet wounded the Soul is (like the Dove in
the Canticles) with the Darts of divine Love or Grief, and continually
bleedeth, but inwardly in Tears of Compassion and Compunction. Hence it is,
that the Regenerate in their Weeping resemble the strange Plant in Pliny, which
buds inwardly, Pli^ lib. 21 cap. 16.
and but seldom shoots forth any Flower, Blossom, or Leaf outwardly: So
that the greatest commendation of the Spiritual and Regenerate Mourner, is to
be like the Garamantite, Pli. l. 37. c. 7
a precious Stone that has no beauty in the outside, but within the body of it
Golden Drops do appear. And thus whosoever Weepeth in Humiliation, is and
must of necessity be Regenerate, for he unfeignedly loves Regeneration,
zealously studieth and practices Regeneration, hates and abhors all
Unregeneration, and endeauoreth every day to be more and more Regenerate.
Whence we collect, as naturally flowing from the Text, and without wresting,
That

The most Regenerate are most inclined to Weeping.

Which is, Basil.
(...), The full matter in a few words; the Sum and Center of all; The Sum
of all that has bin said, and the Center of all that shall be said in this
Tract. And so we come to illustrate the Necessity of Weeping, the second part
of this discourse, Polemicall.

2. Part Polemicall: Illustrating the Necessity of Weeping.
. 27
ANd truly Polemicall; 1. Cor. 15.32
For as Paul fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, so every
poor Planter in the Lords Vineyard must expect the encounter of unreasonable
and wicked men, 2 These. 3.2.
as the Apostle calls the Gaine-sayers of Grace and Opposites of Sincerity;
Job. 10.17.
And no less then Jobs entertaynement, That changes and wars are against
him. Wherefore that we may be able to stand in this Combat against the
assaults of Satan and Scoffs of his Scavingers, we will brandish, First the
Sword of the Scriptures, Secondly the Sling of Reason: Because Duplex est via
quam sequimur, Aug de Ordine l. 2. c. 5
cum rerum nos obscuritas movet, aut Rationem aut Authoritatem; In unfolding
Obscurities, we follow either Reason or Authority: And here we would confirm
this Truth by both; And first by Authority.

1. By Scriptures.
. 28
FIrst to demonstrate this Truth, and Necessity of Weeping in the Regenerate;
We have the Author and Finisher of our Regeneration, not only once, offering
unto us in this Text a Testimony of his Weeping, but in the days of his flesh
offering up Prayers and Supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7.
Whence although we conclude not with Chrysostom that we find our Savior
not only often Weeping, Chrysostom Hom. 6. in Math.
and never Laughing: But not so much as, (...), Lightly smyling, because the
Scripture does not mention it: Nor with Bernard, Bern. in Sentent.
That Thrice only in the Gospel he Wept. 1. At his Birth, for the general
Misery of Mankind. 2. In this Text, for La^arus. 3. Over Jerusalem,
immediately before his Passion: Yet we must consent unto Cyprian? Si ille flens
orabat, Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
qui sine peccato erat, q^antt magis Peccatores sic oportotlorar^; If he
prayed Weeping who was without Sin, how much more must Sinners pray Weeping?
Christ's life though it has a special Excellency to demonstrate this
Proposition, because the Light of Truth shined as perfectly in it, as in the
Scripture; Yet his Doctrine Math. 5.4. pronouncing those Blessed that mourn,
and promising comfort for their reward, does plainly confirm that as Comfort
is properly and only due unto the Regenerate, so they are inclined to Mourn
before they be thus rewarded; He foretold his Disciples, John. 16.20. That they
should Weep and lament; Having in the foregoing verses promised the assistance
of his Spirit, whose Nature is Love, and Name Comforter: Yet he will first see
the Weeping effect of our Grief, before we can feel the loving and
comfortable supply of his Grace; He will have us first power out the wine of
our Tears, before he power in the Oil of his mercy. And the Lord, Ierem.
31.9. Having established by promise the Covenant of Regeneration, adds this
Proviso, They shall come with Weeping; As if the Promises of Grace and Mercy,
were the Whetstones of our Grief; Signs, not Salues of our Calamity;
Memorials, not Medicines of our Misery. Be afflicted, mourn, and Weep; Let
your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and your Joy into Heaviness, Iam. 4.9.
Were the Apostles most strict and sacred Iniunction prescribing to Weep,
declares it to be an inevitable Decree in the Court of heaven, and more
inviolable, and inuiolated by those that are in the State of Regeneracy, then
the Laws of Medes and Persians.

. 29.
We do all profess to be the Servants of the living God, But as of old,
Levit. 21.20
none that was blind or had any blemish in his eye might serve at the Altar; So
now, none can sincerely serve the Lord that are blemished with the want of
Weeping; And among many Reasons this may be One, because for that impediment in
the eye, we cannot well show our inward Sorrowing by outward Weeping. Which
Necessity of Weeping, Hierome positively confirms, Hier. ad Eustoch.
Concluding, that, Longus risus perpeti compensandus est fletu, Much Laughter
must be recompensed with much Weeping: And else where, that not only the
Inhabitants of the Material Jerusalem, Hier. in 1. cap. Thren.
remembering in their afflictions and Miseries, all their pleasant things, that
they had in the days of old, mourned and Wept; But the Members also of the
Mystical Jerusalem repenting and groaning for anguish of Spirit, must
acknowledge they have erred from the way of Truth, and wearied themselves in
the way of wickedness and destruction. Levit. 1.14. Levit. 5 7.
The most frequent Sacrifices among the Jews were Doves and Pigeons, which of
all Fowls do most often lament, and therefore the Lord ordained them to be
often used in his Sacrifices, as the most significant Emblem of Weeping:
August in Joan. Tract. 6.
Whereunto Augustine elegantly alluding, says, that the first visible manner
in which the Holy Ghost descended from heaven, was like a Dove upon our Savior
in his Baptism; To teach us that as in the Arc of Noah there were a Raven and
a Dove, So in the Arc of the Church there are Ravens known by their Croking,
and Doves known by their Groaning, the infallible witness of the Spirit
abiding in them, which baptizeth and washes them with Tears. The Lords
breaking the Heads of Dragons in the waters, mentioned Psalm. 74.13. is
Allegorically expounded by Interpreters, to be the weakening and washing away
of our strongest and vilest Sins by Weeping. The Prophets for the most part
received their Commissions to prophecy by Rivers, as Ezechiel by the River
Chebar, Ezech. 1.3. Dan. 10.4.
Daniel by the River Hiddekel, Matthew. 3.6.
the Baptist by the River Iordane; And all of them preached and prophesied not
so much with words as Weeping: Which course of Weeping, Greg. de Allog. l. 3.
c. 34
Gregory requires as constantly in every constant professor, to be sought
for, by Prayer from the Lord; Joshua 15.19
as Achsah petitioned her father for Springs of waters, unto whom he had given
a South-land; Mat. 25.44.
For many do feed the hungry, lodge the stranger, cloth the naked, visit the
sick, and do other good works, wherein the Lord has only given them a dry
and South-land; With which (says the Father) they must not be contented, but
must further desire the Blessing of the Springs of water; The Upper Springs,
that through the love of heaven; And the nether Springs, that through the fear
of Hell, they may bewail the Sins they have committed.

. 30.
But as a Coach drawn with many horses, does easily run; So the Necessity
of this heavy (as it seems to some) weight of Weeping, may be tolerated
with more ease, if we consider that the Saints in Scripture have begun before
us to bear this inevitable burden in the heat of their day. We find Jobs
face, foul with Weeping, Job. 16.16. Paul protested, Act. 20.31. That for
three years he ceased not to warn every one with Tears, day and night,
knowing well, as Augustine observes, Plus gemitibus quam sermonibus, plus fletu
quam afflatu, There is more good to be done in Popular Sermons with ^ighing
then speaking, with Weeping then Words; And that, -- Si vis me flere, dolendum
est
Primum ipsi tibi --
In Weeping our Precepts must be exemplified by our Practice. Jacob wrestled
with God, and prevailed, Genes. 32.28. Which Wrestling the Prophet shows was
by Weeping, Hos. 12.4.
and his Prevailing by Praying. Daniel mourned three full weeks, Dan. 10.2.
David made his bed to swim, and watered his couch with Tears Psalm. 6.6.
Lachrymisque suis ieiunia pavit, And his Tears were his meat day and night,
Psalm. 42.3. And that Sinful Woman, Luke 7.38. which, -- Purgata recessit
Per gemitum: Proprijque lavans se in gurgite fletus,
Munda su^^ lackrimis redit, and detersa capill^.
Stood at our Saviors feet behind him Weeping, washed his feet with Tears,
and wiped them with the hairs of her head. And why should I add more. Cypr.
de. B^n. Poti.
Inspicimus tantum pauca de multis, vt de pauc is intellig antur and caetera:
For the time would fail me to tell of Annah, Samuel, Joseph, Jeremiah, Peter,
Mary, Timothy; It were too tedious to insist in the examples of these and other
Saints, subject to like Passions as we are; All whom we find, Quod voci
deerat, plangore replere, Where words were wanting have filled up their
complaints with weeping. Whose good example we ought the more carefully to
observe, for that the same light that shines forth in the Scripture, shines
also in the conversation of the Saints, and is reflected from them to our eyes,
as from a Glass; so that they are said, To hold forth the word of Life, Phil.
2.16. as the hand does a Torch or Candle, that we in the darkness of this
World, might follow them in this Valley of Tears.

2. By Reasons.
. 31.
NExt we add Reasons, not for Confirmation, but Manifestation of this Truth:
For seeing Grace does not abolish, Aquin. 1, 1, 8, 3. 2 Cor. 10.5.
but perfect Nature, Natural Reason must then do service and homage to Grace;
bringing into captivity, as every thought, to the Obedience of Christ, so this
also, That the most Regenerate are most inclined to Weeping.

. 32.
First because the most Regenerate have a renewed Apprehension, clearly to
discern between the best and the worst things: For being purified by Faith,
Aquin. 2, 2, 7 A. I. C.
Per fiaem fit in nobis Apprehensio timoris, Faith works in us the
Apprehension of Fear. Although the Lord enlightneth every one that comes into
this world with the Light of Reason (wherein the very Angels exceed us not,
Cont Aea. them. l. 2. c. 7.
as Augustine says considently, though Acumine sensuum, In quickness of
senses they do exceed us) yet has he appointed Precepts and Rules to guide
Reason, which if man follow, he does well; But if not, nothing well. The Rules
being Spiritual and Supernatural, the Natural man receives them not (being
the things of the Spirit of God) for they are foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2
14.
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; But the
Regenerate having received, not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which
is of God, do know that generally Mankind is in bondage to sensual Wisdom,
and commonly frame their lives thereby: Yea that the Sway of this knowledge, is
so mighty, that in many plain and evident causes, of good and evil, the poor
ruins of reason, which are the remnants of Gods Image in the soul, are put
out of countenance, in so much that many times, by Men of understanding, for
fear or flattery, Evil is embraced for Good, and Good for Evil. Now though
this seems not strange to the Regenerate, because they know, Cypr. a^ Demet.
Senuisse iam Mundum, and non illis viribus stare quibus prius steterat, That
the World is become weak through age, and is not so strong as it has bin; yet
what greater Reason to weep can reasonable men have then this general
mistaking of Good and Evil, throughout al most the Passages of this life; And
that in those very Instincts, which are left as the Principal Guides of
Reasonable man, by which his natural estate is continued, and without which,
mankind being yielded up to the guiding of his natural Corruption, must needs
have ruined and destroyed it self: Therefore the Regenerate knowing that, Aug.
contr. (...). l. 1. c. 5
Nihil est foedius risu irrisione digno, There is nothing more loathsome then
laughter, worthy to be laughed at, and that most men follow the worst things,
insomuch that as they come into this world blind, so they go out, neither
knowing, nor caring, nor asking, what they have to do here, nor what is
chiefly good for them while they be here; And that for the most part they do
what they see done, or what their own Lust will have done, spending their time
in Custom or Concupiscence; It would melt a heart of stone into Weeping to
think how the Demeanor or rather Misdemeanour of our present estate, does
declare that we are here met together to no other purpose, then to play the
Wretches and Fools; As if it were our appointed task to labor for Vanity, to
be imaginarily pleased, but really tormented and eternally.

. 33.
Secondly, the most Regenerate are most molested in this life with continual
conflicts; Wherein Preces and Lachrymae arma sunt Christianorum, Ambros.
Weeping and sighing, and Groaning are their only Armor of Defense and Offense,
the only Weapons of their spiritual Warrefare, by which they obtain both
safety and Victory. For the most fiery Anger has often been quenched with
Weeping, the most stony hearts of most cruel Tyrants have been mollifyed with
Weeping; And as many drops do soften hardest stones, so many Tears have
softened the rigor of severest Judges, and tied the Tongues of all Accusers:
Cypr. ^pist. ^7.
Therefore Cyprian exhorts, Incumbamus gemitibus assiduis, and de
precationibus crebris; haec enim nobis sunt arma caelestia, quae stare and
perseuerare nos fortiter faciunt; To bend our selves carefully and continually
to Weeping and Praying; for these are our heavenly Armor, which make us stand
and persevere unto the end. Weeping in all the suites of the Saints has proved
so strong an Advocate, that sell dome has it let any suite fall, against
whomsoever it pleads: Sure I am whenever with Weeping we sue unto God in
our Devotions, though our case seem most perilous and painful to men, it is
most pitiful and powerful with God; And when our selves seem most forsaken,
we are most victorious: When we perfume our Prayers with this Water of Life;
we purchase the favor of God, and repeal the sentence of his Indignation:
Whereas when Weeping ceased, it were easy to give instance, that the Heavens
became like brass, at the loss of so precious Waters, and the Earth like
Iron, at the absence of so fruitful showers; For as by the Tears of the Godly
are declared the first sparks of their Fearing the Lord; So their Tears are
Tokens of the Lords Love to them. Till Death therefore close up their Eyes,
they never leave Weeping; And then in Weeping are their Souls carried unto the
Haven of everlasting Rest; That as by Weeping they first passed from Sin to
Grace, so is their Weeping, Mundi melioris origo, Their Passage from Grace to
Glory. Thus although, Hier. ad (...).
Grandis sit labor, grandius tamen est praemium, esse quod Martyrs, esse quod
Apostoli, esse quod Christus est, Great be our pains, yet greater is our
reward, to be what the Martyrs are, to be what the Apostles are, to be what
Christ is, who all Wept in this Valley of Tears. But we should seem to
speak swelling words, if we continue in the clouds of Generalities; And if
we should descend to some solid particular Examples, it were infinite (though
easy) to demonstrate that Weeping conquereth most, when it complains most,
and commands most imperiously, when it entreats most humbly: Therefore our
Tears are, Cypr. Epist. 26.
Arma divina, and tela quae nesciunt vinci, The armor of God, and Weapons
which cannot fail us. For what the Apostle says of the fruits of Faith, may
likewise be said of the Tears of the Faithful, who through Weeping subdued
kingdoms, Hebr. 11.3^, 34.
wrought righteousness, obtained Promises, quenched the violence of the fire,
escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong; Nay in all
things we are more then Conquerours through him that enables us to Weep.

. 34
Thirdly, The most Regenerate, are most replenished with Grace, and therefore
most inclined to Weeping. They are filled with all the fullness of the Grace of
God, Ephesians. 3.19. Though not with the Essence or essential Virtue of Grace,
Aquin. 3.7.10. O.
(as Aquinas speaks) which is proper only to Christ, yet with a certain
Intention and Extention of Grace, according to their condition and capacity;
Therefore as the Faculties of the Soul do proceed from the essence of the
Soul; So Weeping does proceed from that Grace of God, Aquin. 12.110.4.1.
which is in the very Essence of their Souls as in it proper Subject, and not
in any particular Faculty of their Souls. As Vessels full of liquid
substances are aptest to distill the Liquor that is in them; So the Vessels of
Gods Mercy prepared unto Glory, are readiest to discover the good Treasure of
their hearts, by their propension to Weeping. Thus when the Lord powered upon
the house of David and Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace and
supplications, they powered out Tears for him whom they pierced: But it was the
deadly and indelible Iniquity of the Jews, That when the Lord called to
Weeping, and mourning, and baldness, and girding with Sacke-cloth; there was
nothing but Joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, killing Sheep, eating flesh; and
drinking wine, Isa. 22.12.13. Sanctified Weeping is a washing of Sin, and the
Regenerate know, Cypr. de Orat. Domin.
that, Opus est quotidiana sanctificatione, vt qui quotidie delinquimus,
delicta nostra sanctificatione assidua repurgemus; We have need daily to be
sanctified by Weeping. If unfeigned Passions in the Soul of natural men will
soon work effects in the body; Because the Soul and Body are so firmly and
familiarly united together, that whatsoever Joy or Grief happens to the one,
it is presently communicated to the other: Much more do the Souls of the
Elect made free from Sin, Romans 6.18.
impart to their Bodies this service of righteousness, whose Bodies are not
Mistrisses but Handmaids; Weeping when their Souls are affected, as may be
exemplyfied in all the fruits of the Spirit, mentioned, Gal. 5.22. For as Love
cansed Abraham to weep for Sarah, Genes. 23.2. As Joy caused Joseph to Weep,
when his bowels yerned upon his brother Benjamin, Genes. 43.30. As Peace moved
Jacob and Esau to Weep at their meeting, Genesis 33.4. So every Grace is
manifested by Weeping Eyes; Hierom ad Fursam.
for Speculum mentis est facies, and taciti oculi cordis fatentur arcana, The
face is the mirror of the mind. And the dumb eyes of the Regenerate show the
secrets of their hearts. And it is a part of the Spirits Intercession for us to
help our Infirmities with gronings, Romans 8.26.
which cannot be uttered, otherwise he dwells not in us: So that without
this Weeping, Man is, Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners, Nothing but mooving
Rubbish.

. 34.
Fourthly, The Regenerate have renewed affections, tenderly taking compassion on
the miseable condition of others. For every one knows that Tears proceed
most from the Fountain of Mercy, but chiefly in Love, for with the same eyes
that we love, with the same we Weep, Calpur. Flaceus Declam. 16. Aug. Conf.
4.4.
said one. As many times such is our own Condition, that, In solis gemitibus
and Lachrymis est nobis aliquantula requies, Our Weeping only does diminish
the anguish of our miseries, Aquin. 12. Q 38. A. 2. c.
because (says Aquinaes) It is a contentment to man to do an Act befitting
the estate wherein he finds himself, and nothing does agree better with the
condition of a miserable man then Weeping; Matar. Hom. 15.
(...), Our very Tears are a comfort to us. And because as by Weeping we cast
out that which afflicts us, and empty that humor which oppresses our
hearts, and thus find ease in our own afflictions: So our Weeping is sweet
and comfortable even to those whom we desire to comfort, by Sympathy, fellow
feeling, and Compassion; therefore says the Apostle, Romans 12.15. Weep with
them that Weep; Because even by nature those that groan under any burden of
Affliction feel his hand sweet, which labors to discharge them. So that in
Humanity as well as in Divinity it is true, August. Hom. 50.
that, Sicut comes Poenitentiae Dolor est, ita Lachrym^ testes Doloris, As
Grief is the companion of Remorse, So Tears are testimonies of Grief. And
not only every good eye will express his Grief, for those that be in
distress, because there is no Accident of humane calamity which is not
incident to our selves; but it is so natural for a man to feel Compassion,
when others like himself do suffer, that there is none so wicked, or worthy
of death, but men do pity him, when he is at the point to die. Hence it is,
that a Friend from whom Pity More (...) Lachryma Sol^ madentis ount,

Wresteth Tears as the Sun (melts the Snow) in the midst of the misery of a
comfortless Soul) does mitigate and mollify his Calamity, how great soever:
For, Arist. Eth. lib l. 9. c. 11.
(...), The sorrowful are comforted, when friends condole their Sorrows, says
the Philosopher: Whereof he yields two Reasons; One is, for that naturally
they who groan under any burden feel his hand sweet, which labors to
discharge them, or which help to support them; But friends that endeavor by
Weeping to ease them (as it were) of the burden, which presses them down, do
sweeten their pain, and make them endure their Affliction, with more Constancy
and Resolution: Secondly, for that they seeing their friends participate with
their Grief, know thereby that their Affections are sound, and that they love
them entirely, which is the sweetest thing that may happen in this life; For by
Nature we desire, if we cannot be relieved, yet to be pitied, to see some
who condole our Misery, who wish us well, who want not Will, but power to
relieve us. Wherefore these (I hope) or the like Grounds, derived from the
Principles of Nature, may persuade us, That the most Regenerate are most
inclined to Weeping.

3 Part. Pareneticall: Applying some Uses of Weeping.
. 36.
THus having Explicated the Nature of Weeping, and Illustrated the Necessity
of Weeping; We come in the last place to Apply some Uses of Weeping. In which,
because, Aug. de Ciu. De^. 10.23.
Nobis ad certam regulam loquendum est, ne verborum licentia impiam gignat
opinionem, We must speak after some Method, lest liberty of speech should
breed preiudicate opinion: We apply it for Reformation, Information,
Humiliation, Exhortation, and Consolation; Seeing it does naturally follow that
this short Scripture, may Reform some in the Scandal of Weeping, Inform
others of the Causes of Weeping, Humble many for the Want of Weeping, Exhort
all to the Practice of Weeping, and Comfort the best with the Fruits of
Weeping. But conscious to mine own Infirmities, Merciful Lord, favorably
receive the groans which my Grief sends unto thee. That as thou have
infused a Soul into my Body, so thou would infuse thy Spirit into my Soul,
to guide all the Actions and Motions thereof; that I may show my self a
Workman approved unto thee, rightly dividing thy Word of Weeping. Direct also
(Sweet Jesus) thy Spirit of Application unto the hearts of all, and every one
in particular, that He may incorporate into us (according to our several
Necessities) thy Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings of Weeping, That what is
spoken to all, may be in effect applied by every one; And all may receive some
Light and Life from thee, who art the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Amen.

1. Reformation.
. 37.
ANd first; What end or number is there of the Vanities, which our Eyes are
weary of beholding, and are worthy of Weeping. Has a Spirit of Slumber put out
our eyes, that we cannot see this Grace of Weeping (the Path to Piety and
Practice of all Virtue) disgraced without control? But like dumb Dogs men
hold their p^ace, or with Solomon's Sluggard fold their hands in their bosoms
and give themselves to ease and drowsinesse, whilst Satan causes Contempt and
Opinion of Sufficiency, the basest and most noisome weeds, to damme up the
flood gases of Weeping, that the choice Plants in the Eden of God may not be
watered with this dew of heaven. Ah Lord! Aug Conf lib. 1. c. 5.
Miserere vt loquar, Be merciful that I may speak. Thou that fillest all
things, why are not thy Servants filled with Power, Micah. 3.8.
and Judgment, and Might, by thy Spirit, to declare unto Jacob this
transgression, and to our Israel this Sin: Amos 6.1.
Why do they not cry, and spare not, Why do they not lift up their Voices
like Trumpets, and cry, and cry again, Woe to them that are at ease in Sion;
Luke 6.25.
Woe unto them that laugh now, for they shall mourn and Weep? That though
some deaf Adders will not be charmed and cured; Yea, though few or none of
the swinish herd of habitual Sinners, accustomed to wallow in the mire of
wantonness and Security, and deeply plunged into the dead Sea of worldly
pleasures; Though none of them will be washed with Weeping, but turn again
to their vomit, and trample the Pearls of all Admonition under feet; Yea
turn again and rend their Reprovers with Scoffs and Scorns, making Jests
and songs of them: Yet some, Quos piget imitari, Aug. Conf. lib. 8. c. 6.
nolint aduersari, That are not with us, may not be against us; And others may
be deterred, reclaimed, and awakened to prevent and suppress the spreading
Gangrene of Security and Lasciviousness; That thou, O Lord, may work thy
work in such as belong to thy Grace, for nothing is impossible to the work of
thy Grace.

. 38.
Listen not then (you that nourish your hearts in delights unto the day of
slaughter) Listen not unto the allurements of your flesh, that corrupt case of
flesh and blood, wherein your souls are pent, as Prisoners in a loathsome
Dungeon: Which as it shamefully abuses and abaseth your souls; So your Souls
will one day find it not only a Deceiver and a Traitor, but a Forger of false
Assurances. Listen not unto the Enchauntments of the world, or of your own
corrupt hearts, promising unto your selves Mirth, Pleasures, and Iollitie, lest
Exigua ingentis vestr^ solatia lu^tu^.

For one drop of mad Mirth, you be sure of Gallons and Tons of Woe, Gall,
Wormwood here or thereafter. Listen not unto that bewitching Imagination
invenoming our Souls with a fond and false conceit, that Weeping is an
Effeminatenesse of mind, or Imbecility of Nature, because in the esteem of
Worldlings, Women only and Children through weakness of judgment be most
addicted to Weeping. By nature indeed the Woman is the weaker Vessel,
Theophyl. i^ loan. cap. 20. p. 571.
(...), Soon moved to Weeping, and subject to many either passionate
Affections, or affectionate Passions. But the Adamantine hearts of such as
seldom or never are dissolved by the blood of the Immaculate Lamb into the
true Tears of Contrition, or Compassion, Hos non Nobilitas, generesaue nomina
tangunt,

May justly cause them to be branded with Baseness of mind, and charged with
hardness of heart: Seeing of whatsoever degree or condition they be, those
are (...), the only raven Sots of our time, whose whole employment is to
emasculate in themselves the Hereicall vigor of this heavenly Virtue: And
(as much as in them lies) enfeeble the hearts of the Lords people, as the faint
hearted Spies of Israel, that they enter not into the promised land by the Sole
way of the Weeping Cross, which the Lord has appointed and painted out. And
therefore some dreadful death and unexpected, does commonly surprise them,
condemning their cruelty, Aelian lib. 14 c. 22.
as once the cruelty of the Tyrant Trysus, who when he thought to stop all
occasion of Conspiracy against his own Person, first he commanded his
Subjects not to speak one with another, cither privately or publicly, so that
they were enforced to express their Meaning and Mind by the Motions of their
hands and eyes; From which, when likewise he restrained them they mourned
grievously with great weeping and lamentation: At length when the Tyrant
hastened to inhibite their mourning, they killed him and his Minions with the
weapons of his own Guard. These are, (...), Hom. Iliad. 9.
(as the Greek Captain called his companions) the Women not the Men of Greece,
the Carpet-knights of our nation, that begin Christianity in the Delicateness
of Agag, continue it in the Voluptuousness of Herod, and being brought unto a
wicked (if not wretched) Death like Nahal, worthy of their miserable life, are
buried as Iehojakim with the Burial of an Ass, Ierem. 22.18.
ignobly, ingloriously, without Weeping or Lamentation. But here I must stop,
lest like Hipparchion, I be stricken blind, for saying there are Moates in the
Sun. Yet it would grieve an heart of stone to see how furiously, Aug. Cons.
l. 6. c. 4.
Insani sunt adversus antidotum, quo sani esse possunt, Men are enraged against
the Physic, whereby they might be cured. For as those Grounds that lie low
are commonly moorish, so this base part of the World wherein we live, is the
Vale of Tears, that true Bochim, our mourning place; In which it is the Voice
of every Man.

(...), In Anth^ll^. Graec l. 1. c. 13 Epig. 10.

(...).
To acknowledge that he begins, continues, and ends his life with
Tears. We begin with Tears; If a child be heard cry, it is in Law a lawful
proof of his life; Else if he Weep not, we say he is dead borne, because
stillborne: At our end and parting, God will have Tears, which he does not
wipe off, unless we Weep; Or at least, unless we be in that case that David
and his people were in, and Jeremiah, 1 Samuel 3^, 4 Lam. 2.11.
and the Jews that Wept until they had no more power to Weep. It is our
destiny as we are Men, to Weep; But more as we are Christians. To sow in
Tears: And God loves these Wet seed times, and they are so seasonable for
us, that here one says, My belly, my belly, with the Prophet; Another, mine
head, mine head, with the Shunamites child; Another, My son, my son, with
David; Another, My father, my father, with Elisha; One cries out of his Sins,
as David; Another of his hunger, as Esau: Another of an ill Wife, as Job;
Another of treacherous friends, as the Psalmist; One of a Sore in body, as
Hezekiah; Another of a troubled Soul, as our Savior in the Garden; Every one
has some Cross, some Complaint or other, to make his cheeks wet, and his
heart heavy.

. 39.
Why are we not then content to weep here for a while, on condition that we
may weep no more? Why are we not ambitious of this blessed ease? Certainly
we do not smart enough with our evils, that are not desirous of this rest
We can do no other thing (says the Moralist) not learn, Plin. Praf. lib. 7.
not speak, not go, not eat by natural inclination, but Weep: And yet,
Your perverse disposition, unto every natural action, save only to this (most
necessary) of Weeping: Hence it is that our miseries are like waves, which
break one upon another, and toss us the more with perpetual vexations,
because we are vain and foolish, and wish not with Weeping to be in our
Haven; Because we are sick, and grieve not to think of our remedy; Because
we are still dying, and are loath to think of life, therefore before our Tears
be dry, they are ready to be overtaken with other Tears, in other particular
Afflictions. Oh! our miserable Infidelity, that though we see a glorious Heaven
above us, yet we are unwilling to go to it; We see a wearisome world about
us, and are loath to Weep that we may think of leaving it. Oh! that the Lord
would teach these Men how much they are mistaken, that think to go to Heaven
with dry Eyes, and hope to leap immediately out of the pleasures of Earth,
into the Paradise of God, insulting over the drooping estate of Gods distressed
Ones. Hierom. and. Beda in Math. 26.75.
But as Peter could not Weep while he was in the High Priests Hall, so these
Men cannot Weep where they have offended. Yet let the know, they must have a
time of Tears, And if they do not begin with tears, they shalend with the^.
Alas how are weak and wretched Sinners deceived by their sottish sense: they
sweetly swallow without distaste the poisonous pleasures of Sin which bane the
Soul; but they cannot relish Weeping, the principal expeller of this poyso^,
they can no ways enforce it down. Whereas a Soul once infected with Sin
cannot possibly be recovered to the State of Grace, but it must first be
bruised with Weeping, as Corn is grinded with the Milstones: And this bruising
makes a broken and contrite heart, that Sacrifice which the Lord does never
despise. But this Virtue (as other Virtues) is not loved enough, because she
is not seen; And her contrary Vices loose much detestation because their
vglines is secret. If in ancient Sacrifices of Pagans, they carefully observed
the Generositie of the Beasts that were to be sacrificed; So as their Priest
coming to brandish a naked sword before their Eyes, if they were affrighted,
were chased from the Altar; Whereas if they stood still without amasement, were
esteemed worthy to be sacrificed: Then dejected Spirits, which are affrighted,
and do shun the bright Sword of the Spirit when seasonably it would extort
Weeping, and cause us to shed Tears, Degeneres animos timor arguit, Their
Fear argues their dastardly Profession of Grace and goodness, and are
always worthily contemned of good People, for their Baseness and Hardness of
heart. And that Weeping is the effect of a contrite and mollified heart,
witnesses that Encomium of the Heathen Poet -- Molis^^ma Corda Iuvenal. sat.
15.

Humano generi dare se Natura fatetur,
Quae Lachrymas dedit; hac nostri pars optima sensus.


. 40.
For Weeping may not be esteemed base (without manifest Impiety and Blasphemy)
which is so highly esteemed of the Lord, lest we condemn the Generation of
the Just, and frequent practice of our Savior. How much our Savior regards
Weeping, he evidently declares, in that it was his pleasure not only to Weep
so often for our example, but that the often Weeping of his Servants should be
every where registered in his Word; And that the Weeping of those Women that
followed him to his Passion and in his Passion, should be recorded in his
Gospel; Luke 23.27
and the shedding of their Tears mentioned with the shedding of his own
Blood. Certainly when he would not (as observes a Divine Lawyer) so much as
speak to Herod, nor answer Pilate, although he were urged, yet without
request he spoke to those that Went after him. Seeing then he did more at the
silent tears of poor women, then either at the entreaty or command of
powerful men; And, if it were only for that we are bound in all things we
say or do, to have respect to his Example, We must not once think ought that
may disparage so holy a Virtue. Wherefore as Leonidas said, it was better to
go into the field with an Army of Hearts, a Lion being their Captain, then
having but one Heart for the Captain, the whole Army consisting of Lions; So it
should be our hearts desire and prayer to God, that the Masters of our
Assemblies, Magistrates and Ministers (in whom to stir up this Grace of God,
I principally intended this Weeping Treatise) might be furnished and endued
with this Lion-like Virtue. And justly may it be called a Lyon-like Virtue, for
as it is the Nature of the Lion, Parcere subiectis, and debellare superb^^.

To spare the prostrate, and to devour the obstinate; So it is the nature of
Weeping to obdurate the proud that Weep not, and to proncure Grace unto the
Humble that Weep: Without which likewise even Faith in Gods Promises may
prove Presumption. But for so much as Rulers and Governors of others have
plentiful matter above others to exercise their Weeping: Seeing (as the
Historian has well observed) Men are more bitter and troublesome unto their
Governors, Xenophon in Praefat. Hist.
then any flocks of Sheep or Herds of Cattle unto their Keepers or Leaders: I
thought with the Prophet, Ierem. 5.5.
I would get me unto the Great Men, and would speak unto them, for they have
known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God, They know that
Weeping is the most infallible Sign of a broken and contrite heart; They know
that, Ezech. 24.16.
not without special reference to a Judgment, did the Lord say to Ezechiel,
that when he took away his Wi^^ he should neither Mourn nor Weep, They know
that, Cypr. Epist. 6.
Recedente hac disciplina dominica recedit and Gratia: When the sacred
chastening of our selves departs, Grace departs: And would to God those
Great Ones did not presage that the constitution of too many of their Souls is
exceeding defective, dangerous, and desperate in this respect. And therefore
seeing, Nulla major flendi est causa, Seueca lib. 4 Controu. 1. P.
quam flere non posse, There can be no greater cause of Weeping, then when we
cannot Weep; Not unto us, or the best Tears of the best of us, may we
sacrifice as to our own nets; Blessed only be that Divine Providence
evermore, which has made our Dread Sovereign to cry down this universal
Wantonness by his own Example, Whose Weeping in public and Private
Devotions, like Hezekiah or Josiah, as it may be said to procure our present
Peace and Plenty, so will it be chronicled in ever Blessed memory till the
days of our mourning be ended. But because a King is praised, Sentiendo
copiosius quam loquendo; By silence more then by Speech, I leave it to the
Hearts of all, to comment upon my Silence, and do only pray, O vtinam
n^citura tibi, mitissime Regum,
In medio nixu viscera rupta forent.


That the Lord of Heaven and Earth would consume his Enemies, like a Snaile
that melts, and that the Heart of every one may speedily wither in the midst
of his bowels, Socrat. lib. 7 c. 22. and 41
who heartily and unfeignedly prays not for the peace of so meek, so mild, so
merciful a Theodosius, and prefers not his prosperity before his own.

. 41.
Know we not that Weeping is the surest form of Supplication to obtain any
thing of the Lord? With whom. -- Lachryma pondera vocis habent.

Tears are words, and more then words; For the multitude of words is not so
perswasiue, as a few Tears are prevalent, because words may proceed from the
Tongue only. But Tears commonly from a broken Heart possessed either with
Fear or Love; Weeping may seem a Serpent to devour us, but if we step boldly
unto it, we may take it by the tail (as Moses his Rod) and it will forthwith
turn into a Rod of Comfort. Psalm 23 4.
Why then should we be so afraid of Weeping, which is so highly commended, so
straightly commanded, and so indifferently communicated to all that love the
Lord Jesus; Who loves accepts, preserves, honors, blesses, and never
forsakes them that Weep? Eusebius de Vita Constable. l. 1. c. 22.
If the Inscription of Constantines Cross could assuredly persuade him of
Victory, much more may we through Instruction of the Weeping Cross, fully
believe, (...), To prevail with all and in all. If Weeping argues both the
Magnanimity of the Saints, for, Vir fortis non est minus laudabilis in luctu,
quam in bello, Our Courage is no less praiseworthy in Weeeping then Warring,
says, devout Bernard; Bern Sermon. 10, de m^do viven.
And excellency of the Saints, as the very Heathen by nature did maintain, for
(...), Zenob. Cent. 1. Prou. 14.
They affirmed that the most excellent were most inclined to Weeping. If
Weeping (I say) argues the only true excellency and generous Magnanimity of
the Saints, Servants, and Soldiers of the Lord upon earth, unjustly and
vndeservedly do Wanton Worldlings condemn it, because they affect it not.
Alas, they do not know, neither consider that Weeping overcommeth the
invincible God, appeaseth the intractable Man, and tormenteth the Devil more
then Hellfire. For, Aug. Hem 50.
Nec Vehementius Satan prosternitur, nec acriores dolores insligimus, quam quum
plagas peccatorum plorand^ sanamus; Satan is never more shamefully vanquished,
or cruelly tortured, then when we cure the wounds of sin with Weeping. Alas!
They know not that Weeping only is the water that quenches the heat of Gods
anger, that qualifieth the force of his justice, that recovereth the loss of
his mercy, and exciteth in our hearts, the spring of all his comforts.
Chrysostom called it, Chrysostom ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 5.
(...), A Medicine which is able to cure the eyes; But we add further, that
this Sovereign Medicine has virtue in it to excerebrate all Cares, to
expectorate all Fears, to euacuate all Griefs, to exhaust all Passions, and
to exhilarate the whole Man. If we should part with all we have, all our
delights, all our desires, we part with no more then nothing, for the enjoying
of this Grace, which does more sweetly refresh us, more abundantly satisfy
us, and more fully assure us of the favor of God, then all that we are able to
part from; For so much as Weeping does infallibly prove our Union with God,
Chr^s. Hom. 6. in Matthew.
(...), Nothing combineth and so fast unites unto God, as tears, says
Chrysostom. Weeping then is a sign that two Extremes, the Mourner and the
thing mourned for are combined into one. For as they that Weep for Earthly
things are earthy; So they that Weep for Heavenly things are Heavenly and
united unto God, Though not Naturally, yet Spiritually; Not transformed in
Nature, but changed in Affections and whole manner of life: That as Iron cast
into the Fire, shows that it has taken the Qualities of the Fire, and yet
cease not to remain Iron; So he that Weepeth is partaker of the Purity and
Sanctity of God, though still he abide Man. Weep then, O Christian, and
vilify the false Imputation of Pusillanimitie; Cypr. ad Demet.
Esteeming it more modest and Religious, Errantium imperitiam silentio
spernere, quam loquendo dementium Insaniam provocare, Tovilifie their Ignorance
by silence, then to provoke their phrantick madness by replying; for Weeping
is the Language of Heaven, and the strongest voice to call upon God. Howsoever,
Lord grant, I may not only be permitted, but enabled to Weep.

. 42.
And the rather, because none of the most Regenerate in their greatest
abundance of Tears and pronenesse to Weeping, do we ever read to have bin
satiated or satisfied with Weeping, but (as a thirsty land) to have desired
more of this Heavenly Moisture. For, so far are we from Superfluity, that
with much labor and watchfulness attain we to Sufficiency of any Grace in
this State of Mortality. It is a ruled Case in Divinity, That Faith or any
other Grace, cannot be consummated in this Life; In which we see through a
Glass only, and darkely; Until it do terminate in Glory, and that which is
imperfect be done away. Not that Weeping can be continued, where our maine
Comfort is, that all Tears are wiped away: But that, as Faith then shall be
turned into fruition; So Weeping into the accomplishment of Joy eternal. Great
then is the Forgetfulness, that I may not say the Impudency of Bellarmine,
Bellar de Com. Colum. in Epist. ad Jesuit.
who in the Epistle to his Fraternity boasts of such superabundant Weeping in
his Ignatius and Xauerius, that they were constrained, A Domino temperamentum
petere. To pray God to restrain their weeping. Which Excess of Weeping, never
happened (for ought I find) unto Jeremiah, David, or other true Saints, though
(...), Infallibly inspired of the Lord; But rather wished for fountains, and
gloryed in Rivers of Tears. By which Incredible and False Assertion, as we may
conjecture, what wide Difference there is, between the (not Superstitious
only, and Supererogating, but) Blasphemous Saints of Rome, and the truly
Sanctified Saints of God, Canonized in the book of Life; So -- Insidas and
crimine ab vne
Disce omnes. --


We may perceive how far we may trust his Judgment, and what credit he
deserves in Matters of Faith, when as he so intollerably luxuriateth in the
Morality of Weeping, flatly contradicting the Tenor of Scriptures, and common
Current of purer and Primitive Fathers, which to avoyde Tediousness I spare to
insert.

. 43.
That his Assertion is Incredible, the Person of whom it is affirmed, confirmed
it. For in Ignatius by Profession and Education abloody Soldier (which were
enough for Confutation) our Weeping and his Warring habituated in wickedness,
can no more subsist, then Light and Darkness together. Mistake me not, for a
Transgressour of any common Place. The Lord (I acknowledge) may have his Saints
among Soldiers. But Ignatius his Conversation is not so sup^rannuate as the
Story of Pope Ione which has gained by the Age of it, now scarcely to be
believed; being (as it were) but a Matter of yesterday: And from whom the issue
of blood has run ever since, and can never, neither will be ever stopped, so
long as his Jesuitical Locusts are alive, the only fiery Pyracmeus, and
Masters of all Villainies in the world; neither can all their Indices
Expurgatorij be able to blot out the memory of their cruel and bloody Facts,
or free them from these attributes Attributes. But this Assertion is one of
those many things, which Aut nequiter dissimulat, aut turpiter ignorant, The
Cardinal either foolishly dissembles, or was grossly ignorant of.

. 44.
The Falsehood of his Assertion may easily be perceived, if We consider that
the Fountain, Form, and Fruit of Weeping are not Moral, but Theological
Virtues, in which there is no Excess. 1. The Fountain of Weeping is Faith,
Love, Repentance, in which, Cyr. Epist. 76.
Spiritus Sanctus non de mensura datur, sed super Credentem totus infunditur;
The Holy Ghost is not given by measure unto the Regenerate, Aquin. 37.10 c.
even when we enjoy these according to our condition, state, and end prefixed
unto us by the Lord, and therefore no Weeping; For as Streams do resemble the
Nature of those Fountains whence they spring; So Tears do express the
Property of those Graces whence they proceed. 2. The Form of Weeping (which
gives it Being) is Sorrow, which the Apostle approoved. 2 Cor. 7.11. When it
increased not exceeded, therefore so consequently the Formed, Aquin. 1 80. 1 6.
Weeping: For, Quamlibet Formam sequitur aliqua inclinatio, quae est appetitus
rei habentis illam formam, Every form has some Inclinarion which is the
appetite of the thing Formed; Therefore as to Increase, is the Inclination of
Godly Sorrow (as reache^h the Apostle) so it is the Property of Godly Weeping.
3. The Fruit of Weeping is Joy, Psalm 126.5.
They that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Even Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; In which as there is no Mediocritie,
so neither in Weeping: For here (me thinks) if any where, so far as nice
Restrictions will permit, that Philosophical Ax^ome has place, Propter q^od
vnumquodque est tale, id ipsum est magis tale. Qualities in the Cause, are
proportionable in the Effect. Worldly Weeping (I confess) may exceed and
become vicious; For being a Moral Virtue; it should consist in a Mean or
Mediocritie, limited by Prudence: But Godly Weeping is a Supernatural Grace,
inseparably attending and accompanying all other Graces (Gratum facientes) as
has been prooved; Look how the Rational Soul implies the Animal, so does
Godly Weeping lustifying Graces, being Individual.

. 45.
But Bellarmine might have learned, not only in Scriptures, but in Schoolmen,
Bonau. in 4. Sent-Dist 16. P 1. A 4. Q. 1. and 2. Aquin. in Suppl. Q 3. A. 2.
That Contrition must be augmented and increased; And, That Contrite Weeping
can never so displease rectified Reason, as to exceed for Sin: Unless as
one of St. Iudes Sensual Separatists, or teachers of Sensuality, he would
delude the Simple with Sensual Wisdom, That Whorish Tears of every
Hypocrite and Reprobate, are Tears of true Contrition; which has been showed
to be no other then worldly Weeping for Sp^^^^ll things, commonly in the
outward senses, or in a sensual respect, and no Godly Weeping in inward
Humiliation, which is the very Essence of Co^trice Weeping, Bonau. in 4 Sent
Did. 16. P. t. A. 1. Q.
whereby the Will disliketh and dissenteth from Sin, And is not to be taken
for the bare outward Effect of true Contrition. As it is true, Eras in adag.
Ch^^. 4 Cent. 9.
(...), There is nothing sooner dry then a Tear, so there is nothing sooner
out of season then Worldly Weeping; Which if it be fresh, finds some to
commiserate it; If stale, is rather entertained with scorn then commiseration:
But Tears of Repentance come never out of time: They can never be shed either
too soon, or too late, or too much. But the Demeanor of their Pope Nicholas
the Third seems more Religious and Devout then that of Igmatius or Xaverius,
Plat in Vit. Nich. 3.
Qui semper d^m solennia ageret, Lachrymas funderet; Who always Wept, when he
worshipped, says the Antiquary. Finally we read of a Stone in Arcadia called
Asbeston, Aug. de Civi^ Dei. l. 21. c. 5.
which being once made hot can never be cooled. And why may not every blessed
Mourner be like the Salt in Sicilie, which in the fire swimmeth like Water? Or
like the stone Asbeston, which once being hot cannot be cooled? Aug de vera and
fall. Penit. c. 13.
But Augustine is punctual in this point, Non est saetis quod doleamius, sed
non semper doluisse do eamus, It is not sufficient to Weep, but we must Weep^
that we have not always Wept. Pel^s l 2. Ep. 76.
And Isrdore observes, that the Lord in indgement does afflict them with
diverse diseases that quench this Motion of his Spirit. But lest any should
think the Matter not Tanti; For me, Firmiter valeret, Cypr. Epist. 30.
si ab Eva. gelica Lege non dissonaret, This doctrine should ^a^e gone for
current if it had not gone awrye from the Gospel. And were not openly
professed by the Mooke Grace Civility of many Moral Protestants. Lactant.
Instit. l. 3.6.4.
For as Arcesilas having considered the Co^^radictions and Oppositions of
Philosophers among themselves, in the end contemned them all, Et constituit
novam non Ph^losophandi Philosophiam, And inv^nted a new Philosophy not to
study Philosophy: So Worldlings and Atheists expending the differences in
Weeping, have resolved not to Weep. But I have done: Yet all may conceive by
this little, That no Jesuit, qua Jesuit, ever Wept with Jesus, August. Conf
l. 12. c. 32.
Gracious God, Verbo tuo pasce nos, ne error illudat, Feed us with thy Word,
that Error deceive us not in Weeping with Jesus.

2. Information.
. 46.
AS Internal and Spiritual Joy, arising from Peace of Conscience, Assurance
of Remission of Sin, and Testimonies of the Favor of God, are the
Inheritance of the Regenerate; So Weeping is and must be their Portion in this
Vale of Tears. Aug. Conf. l. 10. c. 21.
For in them, Contendunt laetitiae flendae cum letandis moeroribus, Mournful
Mirth striveth against joyful Sorrow. Their Life is tempered with Sweet and
Sour, and therefore they must look for a mixture of both; -- Vsque ad^o nulla
est sincera volup^as

Never is Assurance of true Joy sealed to Man without Weeping. The wicked
indeed hunt after nothing but Mirth, never caring how lawless it be, so it be
pleasant; For where the World is the God, there Pleasure is ever the best
Devotion: But mortified Souls have learned to scorn Sinful Joys, and affect
either solid delights or none; And had rather Weep for want of Mirth, then be
transported with Wanton Pleasure. As in Eliah his Sacrifice there was both Fire
and Water, 1. Kings 1^.38.
where the Fire consumed the Water on the Altar; So in the Sacrifice of a
Contrite Heart, there must be both the Fire of Believing, and Water of Weeping;
And in the end* the Fire of Faith will dry up the Stream of Tears. The whole
course of Nature in the innumerable and several changes thereof, instructs
us daily, that Rejoicing and weeping have such intercourse in this Life, that
our inward thoughts do often breed an outward shower, and that shower a
Sunshine; So that although to day we Weep not, yet to Morrow perhaps we cannot
but Weep; To day, we may read Salomons Song of Songs, to morrow perhaps we
must point out the Lamentations of Jeremy. This variable Condition in the
Regenerate, evinceth not always misery threatened against them, neither gives
it any being of Misery unto them, or in them; But rather works both Sense and
Cure of all their miseries. Now if we would know, Moveat tantos quae causa
dolores, What may be the Causes of their so much Weeping; Bern de Mode Viven.
Sermon. 10.
Bernard shows us four causes. 1. Our own Iniquities. 2. Worldly miseries.
3. Compassion of others. 4. The Love of eternal Glory: For the First, Psalm.
6.6.
David made his bed to swim, and watered his Couch with Tears; For the
Second, Psalm. 120.5.
Davia likewise bemoaned his woeful Sojourning in Mesech, and dwelling in the
Tents of Kedar; For the Third, our Savior Wept over Jerusalem; For the
Fourth, Luke 19 41
Psalm. 137.1.
The Church by the Rivers of Babylon sat down and Wept: All which more
compendiously w^ reduce to this Dichotomie, Sin and Punishment, Hinc illae
Lachrymae, Hence proceed all our Tears. For Sin (being the cause of the
Lords hatred and hostility against us, the Seed out of which all misery
grows, and the Debt, for which we should be cast into perpetual Prison, were
it not pardoned) does no less make us miserable, then the Punishments of
Sin. Seeing then, so long as, -- Manent Sceleris vestigia nostri.

Sin is the first Cause why the Regenerate do Weep, their Weeping would be
easily excused, if it could be perceived how their Thoughts are justly
distemper^d, First at the Corruption of Sin in themselves, Next at the
Dominion of Sin in others: Were it but for these two only, I know not why
any, whose understanding is enlightened with Grace, should have Pleasure or
Liberty (almost) to do any thing, but only to Weep.

. 46.
And first, who but a stranger to a wounded Spirit, can with dry eyes humble
himself before the Lord in Affliction of Conscience for his own Sins, when
as, if but in the end of one day he should examine his Thoughts, Words, and
Works, from his waking in the Morning to that hour, when he beholds the spots
of his Soul, his Decays of Grace, his Neglect of Duties, his Coldness in
Religion, his Fall from his first Love, and the many breaches of his
Conscience; Surely, such a one is (though a Monarch in this World) more to be
pitied then a Galley-slaue, that in such Misery pitieth not himself with
Weeping. Quid miserius misero non miserante seipsum? There is none in (
Augustines judgment) so miserable as that Man that commiserateth not himself.
Aug. Conf. lib. 1. c. 13.
But if he find himself lapsed with Peter^ into Perjury, with Manasseh into
Idolatry, with David into Adultery, with Paul into Blasphemy, or the like
grievous and scandalous Sins, then do they know that, Cypr.
Magnum peccatum magna deleri vult Misericordia, Great Sins must be wiped
away with great Mercy, and great Mercy must be sued for with great Weeping:
Therefore nothing but Chattering like Cranes, Mourning like Doves, or making
beds to swim with Tears can be sufficient to expiate the heinousness of
these iniquities. Aug. de Nupt. and Concup. l. 2. c. 2.
Our daily conflict with Sin, Etiamsi non sit damnabilis, quia non perficit
iniquitatem, est tamen miserabilis, quia non habet pacem, Howsoever it be not
damnable, because it accomplisheth not sin, yet it is miserable because not
peaceable. Thus also enclosed in the horrible pit (as the Prophet speaks) of
terror in Conscience for our Sins, besides outward Vexations from the
Dragons and Ostriches of the World, the immediate Malice of Satan, and in a
manner the Floods of Gods Indignation, going over our Heads and Hearts, there
must be in us a great Mourning, as the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley
of Megiddon, before we can be truly reconciled to God: And in this case, Hoc
ipso sunt Majores tumores, quo minores dolores: The lesser our Weeping, the
greater is our Wickedness. For so much as we could neither see our sins nor
sorrow for them, did not the Lord both enlighten our understandings and soften
our Hearts in Weeping; the Regenerate can and do forget all things, and among
all things themselves also, to find the Favor of the Lord, and to seek it by
Weeping. As the highest Heaven draws all the inferior Orbs with the
Circumference thereof, although they have naturally a contrary course or
motion, so our Reason enabled by Grace, draws all our Appetites, to this
service and Sacrifice, although they have properly an Inclination clean
contrary to Weeping. Where then were our judgments? Where were our right Wits?
Nay, Where were our Inordinate Self-love, which is always careful to avoid
both loss and harm; If when the Lord enlightneth our understandings, we
should drown our Sins in Wantonness and not in Weeping? In all things we
are bound after Repentance, to seek nothing but the Honor of God, and the
Contempt and Abnegation of our Selves; Which we do most, when we Weep most:
therefore the more Tears we shed for our Sins, the more we do both loath
and lament the service we have done them, the sooner seek we to withdraw our
desires from their subjection, and the surer are we to find the Favor of God:
What then should Penitent sinners do? But live in Lamenting the Errors of
their life, and consume all their days which are to come, in bewailing every
part thereof, which is past, and watching against the depraved Passages to
come; Rejoicing chiefly, when they can be sorrowful for their sins, even
when all Dishonours and Punishments do run upon them for the same.
Repentance being absolutely necessary to Salvation (for except we Repent, Luke
13.3.
We must perish) and there can be no true Repentance without Mourning and
Sorrowing, 2 Cor. 7.10
in respect that it is a Godly Sorrow that works Repentance to Salvation.
Since it is then either Weep on Earth, or Weep in Hell, Woe unto us if we
defer our Weeping, woe unto us if we Weep not for our deferring it, Woe
unto us if we Weep not as soon as we can, And Weep not for this, that we
wept no sooner.

. 48.
As for the Dominion of Sin in others, what Heart, unless it be in danger of
Final Hardening, may not be provoked to Weeping in Indignation: When especially
it beholds Wanton Worldlings to rejoice in that condition of life, for which
they can never sufficiently lament. For they Rejoice in their Sins, which will
eternally ruin their Bodies and Souls. Exitus auspicio gravior; Their end is
much more horrible then their Beginning; They begin in Pleasure, but they end
in Pain. When Dolphins leap and play in the Sea, it is a sure sign of some
Tempest approaching; And when the Wicked sport and Solace themselves in their
Sins, it is an infallible Argument of their ruin at hand. Of which ruin all
they likewise are Partakers, that Weep not for the Sins of others, because
their not Weeping shows, 1 Timothy 5.22
they are guilty, and do presumptuously Partake of those very sins which
others commit. For of sins some be Fautors, some be Authors, Of both, the
Heathen wittily, Seneca.
Nihil interest faveasne Sceleri, an illud facias, It is in a manner all one,
to commit and to commend a Villainy. But Divines say more, Non caret scrupulo
occultae Societatis, Gregor.
qui manifesto discrimini non occurrit; He is suspected to be an Abettour of
evil, who endeavors not to abandon evil. For so much then as, Seneca.
Vitia serpunt ad vicinos, and Contactu nocent, Sins of others are like
Plague-sores, which breath out an Infectious savor to all that approach them:
For the fuller Explication of this Truth, it will not (I hope) seem tedious,
if I insist a little, and consider two things in our Participation of other
men's sins; 1. The Degrees, 2. The Danger of our Participation; The more to
inform and enforce our Weeping.

. 49.
For the First: As Lawyers make two Degrees of Accessuries, or Participatours,
One Antecedent before the Offense committed, Another Consequent after it is
committed; So in Divinity we may be Partakers of other Men's sins, both before
they be committed and after: For Sin is like the Serpent Amphisbaena which
has one Sting in the Head, and another in the Tail, and powers out Poison at
both ends, and that, Ore trisulco, With a Threefold sting. For first, before
the Working of any Wickedness, others may be Partakers of it, 1. By Counsel,
2. By Commandment, 3. By Provocation, 1. Other Men's sins may be made ours by
Giving evil Counsel, 2 Samuel 16.21.
and so sinned Achitophel in advising Absalom to unnatural Lust: 2. By
Commanding, and that, either Directly, Commanding by direct Precept of Word, as
the Murder of the Lords Priests is imputed to Saul, 1 Samuel 12.21.
because he commanded Doeg to fall upon them; Or of Writ as the killing of
Vriah is imputed to David, 2 Samuel 12 9
for that he wrote unto Ioab to set him in the Forefront of the battle: Or
else Indirectly, by indirect authorizing of others to work Wickedness, Prou.
26.8.
And thus as he that binds a Stone in a Sling, to be discharged at all
adventure; So is he that gives honor to a Fool, setting him in place of
Authority; For he that puts a Sword into a mad-Mans hand, is guilty of the
mischief committed by him. 3. By provocation, as it were even by daring of
others to any Sin, 1 Kin. 217.
2 Kin 9.36
as Iezebel urged Ahab to oppress Naboth for which offense, as the Dogs
licked Naboths blood, so they devoured her flesh; In like sort the common
Provocations to needless Oaths, Prou 1.14.
frivolous Contentions, excessive Drinking, and the like, Prou. 7 18.
fall within the compass of this Fault; Or by alluring intisements to Profit
or Pleasure.

. 50.
After a Sin is committed, others may be guilty of it, 1. By Consent, 2. By
Connivency, 3. By Defense. And first Consent makes us guilty of other Men's
Sins, whether it be Expressed in Deed, Psalm. 50.18.
as when thou saw a Thief then thou consentedst with him, and have been
Partaker with the Adulterers; Or in Word, as he that bids an Heretic
God-speed, ^ John 11.
is partaker of his evil deeds, Or else if it be by Suppressed Consent, for
there is, Consensus Silentij, A Consent of Silence, When Sin is not rebuked by
those, that are warranted thereunto by special calling, according to that
Commandment, Leviticus 19.17. Thou shall in any ways rebuke thy Neighbor,
and not suffer Sin upon him: The reason hereof is, for that as, Malum
Consilium inducit in Peccatum; Sic Malum Silentium relinquit in peccato, evil
Counsel leads unto sin, so evil silence leaves in sin; And it is a
great want of charity to deny that favor to a Man, which must be afforded to
a Beast, yea to an enemies Ass: Exodus 23.24
But if a Man want warrant to reprove, Ezech. 9 8.
then he must mourn for the offense, and Pray for the offender, so happily he
may escape the general scourge when it comes. 2. Connivency, when we wink
at sins committed by others, and this especially is the common Sin of
Superiors, to whom the Sword of Authority is committed, Rem. 13.4.
for cutting off Malefactors; Therefore, Qui tolerat aliena peccata, cum
tollere possit, sua facit. He that tollerateth the sins of others, when he
may take them away, makes them his own: This was it, which the Apostle so
sharply censured in the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.1.
who neglected the rod of Discipline against the incestuous Person; 1 Samuel 2.17
And this was it, that pulled down an endless judgment on Eli his house. 3.
By Defense, when we defend the sins of other men by Lessening, Excusing,
Justifying, or Countenancing of them; When men are blinded or besotted with
violent Passion, to extenuate or justify their own sinful actions, Iona.
4.9.
as Jonah did his anger, is usual; but to become a Proctor or a Patron of
other Men's Sins (seeing every one is naturally prone to mislike that evil in
others which they allow in themselves) this bewrays an Affection strangely
depraved and poisoned with Wickedness: Solomon casts these two into an
equal balance of Abomination before God, Prou. 17.15
To justify the Wicked, and to condemn the just; And therefore this kind of
iniquity is branded with a double curse, one of God, Isa. 5.10.
Woe unto them that call evil good; Another of Man, Prou. 24.24
He that says to the Wicked thou art righteous, him shall the people curse,
Nations shall abhor him.

. 51.
Next the Danger and Damage that comes by this Contagion is exceeding great:
Yet the slight regard and slender conceit that most Men have of their own
misdeeds, wherein they be sole and principal Agents, does evidently show that
they make small or no Conscience of being Accessaries to Sins wrought by
others. But it is the voice of Heaven, That those that be Partakers in Sins,
Revel. 18.4.
shall be Partakers in Plagues: Yea it is a Rule of Equity, approved both by
Natural and Civil Reason, that, Accessorium sequi congruit Naturam
Principalis, It is meet that the Accessory be esteemed of the same nature with
the Principal: And according to the Practice of all Nations in the best
governed States, Agentes and consentientes pari poena plectuntur, Actours of
Sin and Consenters to Sin are punished alike. Now as the Execution of this
Justice in temporal Causes restrains Multitudes from much Mischief: So
ought it to curb us much more in Cases of Conscience, and that for these two
Considerations.

. 52.
First, because as in humane Laws, there be no Accessories in some offenses,
but all Principalls, as in Treasons or Attempts against the life of the Prince,
and wilful Murders; So it is to be judged of all sins whatsoever; For in
true Construction of Divinity, every Sin is a wilful Murder of the Soul;
And it is attempted against the life of the King of Kings, because the
Redemption thereof, cost the Son of God his life. And this Consideration,
though it concerns all Men most nearly, yet especially the Masters of
Assemblies, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, because the Neglect thereof, is
such a kind of Idolatry, as transformeth them into Idols themselves, making
them to have Eyes that see not, Ears that hear not, Hands that handle not the
works of Righteousness: But above all it boreth out the Eyes, and makes them
as blind as ever was Sampson or Zedekiah. And every inferior Man's
participation of other Men's Sins, is most usually laid to the charge of the
Superior: Insomuch, that as in the body Natural, when we see one go or do
amiss, though his feet or hands be the next Actours of his Error, we say
not, Are you lame? But, Have you no eyes? or Can you not see? So what ever
Swervings be in the Body either Politic or Ecclesiastical, the blame lights
not commonly upon the Immediate Delinquents, but upon the Principal Opticke
Pieces in Church and Commonwealth; Whence Men say, Have you no Magistrate?
Have you no Minister? Because these being as Guides and Guardians of the rest,
should either prevent or reform their Aberrations: And it is an old Saying,
and a true one, Qui non corripit, corrumpit, He that reprooveth not, reformeth
not.

53.
Secondly, the equal Punishment and danger of all delinquents, as well of
Consenters to Sin, as Actours of sin, should make us every way most watchful
in this Participation of other men's sins; Because as Voluntary Escapes among
Men are punished Lege Talionis, By the Law of Requital, as the Jailer wilfully
suffering any Prisoner to escape committed to his Custody, suffers as in case
of the Party escaped, be it for Debt, Felony, or Treason; so likewise in Gods
Justice, when Magistrates suffer Malefactors to pass unpunished or
uncontrolled, that come within their compass. As it was threatened to Ahab for
letting Benhadad go, 1 King. 20.42. 1 King. 22.34. 1 Samuel 3.13
whom the Lord had delivered into his hand to be put to death: And as it was
threatened to Eli, for not restraining his Sons, when they made themselves
vile: The like Sentence may all Men justly fear, who neglect the abandoning
and punishment of offenses in their several places; For, Aug. Epist. 182.
Illicita non prohibere Consensus Erroris est, Not to restrain Sin is to
maintain sin: Especially being tied thereunto by solemn oath, which
wrappeth men into a double danger; One, of the Sin, which they suffer
uncensured, Another, of Taking Gods Name in vain, which can never escape a
fearful Affliction. And therefore Augustine searching out the special
reasons, De Civit. l 1. c. 9.
why in common Calamities of War, Famin^, and Pestilence, Good Men often
perish with the Bad, says, Iure vitam istam cum ijs amaram sentiunt quibus
peccantibus amari esse noluerunt, They justly taste the bitterness of Gods
wrath, who would not be bitter in rebuking the transgressions of his Will.

. 53.
And thus, if we consider the degrees and danger in Participation of other Men's
sins, Lord! With what bitterness of Spirit may the Godly groan; How should
they charge their Eyes with Tears, their Breasts with Sighs, Their Tongues with
Complaints, and their whole Bodies with Disquiet? How ought they not to double
the force of their Weeping? When they see Sin so audacious, when Esauisme,
Hypocrisy, Irreligion, Iniquity, and the love of the World so abound? When
delayed and perverted Justice is turned into Hemlocke, and turns some men out
of their wits, makes others ready to destroy either themselves, or their
adversaries, yea sometime their Judges? What man unless he be a Cain, or of
the brood of Cain, can deny himself to be his brothers keeper seeing he cannot
otherwise keep his own Soul from the pollutions and punishments of other
men's sins in a froward and crooked generation?

. 54.
But here if (inverting our Saviors speech) I should somewhat strain at
Camels, Mat 33.24. Exodus 9.16.
and swallow Gnats; Complaining with the Prophet; The Leaders of this People
cause them to err, and they that are led of them, are destroyed, both City and
Country would (I fear) quickly report, that my Complaint were causeless.
For mine own part I profess and protest that no Child of the Prophets should
be less troubled with Ionahs Passion, would the Lords Mercy make me in this
matte an Ignorant, and the great Ones Innocence my words all impertinent. Yet
who can but Weep, when he sees that such as are, In seculo primi, in Christi
Familia vltimi, Hiereny ad (...).
Placed nearest on Earth unto the Lord, either most Opposite to the ways of
Grace and works of Godliness in themselves, or wanting all courage in defense
of the Lord; servants, and Oposi^ion of his Enemies; or when he sees their
cruel Pity toward the Wicked like water powered upon Lime in stead of
quenching to kindle the rage of their iniquity. Eccle. 8.11.
When we see Men armed every way with Gods own Authority, Isay 26.10.
and knowing the Judgment of God (that they which commit such things, Romans
1.32.
are worthy of death) yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them; When we see such as with David should fight the battles of the
Lord, Oba. 11.12.
yet with Edomites in the Prophet, either standing on the other side, in the
day that Strangers and Forrainers cast lots upon Jerusalem, and are as one of
them, or looking on in the day of oppression, if not speaking proudly in the
day of our distress; o at the best, more charitable and merciful, th^n the
God of Mercy has allowed or commanded them; When we see (I say) these and the
like Abominations committed by Great Ones in Authority (Patrons of Profannesse
and Persecutors of Godliness) what can we do but Weep and Wail, beholding
such Men (for some private interest or base engagement) Which in all likelihood
entered into their Places and Offices, Plutar.
like Stratocles and Dromiclidas, as into an harvest of Gold) corrupting or
interrupting public Justice, whereby their superiors are abused, Inferiors
oppressed, Religion discountenanced, and the Righteous discouraged, by their
murdering Example, or forbearance of the Wicked.

. 55.
I know how well mercy becomes the mouth of Gods Minister, and that we should
not be Whetstones for Rigor and Severity: But withal, I resolve with
Augustine, Aug. de Fide and operib.
Saevire nolumus, dormire nolumus, As I would not persuade to Cruelty, so I
would rouse up from Security. Though We have not so learned Christ in his
Word; Yet the indeleble Notions of Nature have (I am sure) imprinted this in
our hearts, that most People are like Sheep, easilier following example, then
led and driven by laws and Statutes, and therefore -- Immedicabile membrum
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.


The incurable Member must be cut off, if it were only for fear of further
infection; for a little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump of a Church or
Commonwealth; and Sin the more it is spared, the more it spreads. When then
We are daily vexed with the sense and sight of Sin, Nos flendo ducimus horas,
We do Weep, and must Weep, and in Weeping may fear to presage concerning
the Abettors (and such as should be suppressours of Iniquity) what may become
of them and theirs; Judge. 5 23.
The Angel of the Lord cursed Meroz, and the inhabitants thereof with a bitter
curse, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. Esth. 4.14.
Only thus much the righteous be persuaded with Mordecai: That help and
comfort shall appear unto them out of another place, when Weeping they open
their grievances unto an higher Judge, whose sentence is no dead Letter, 2 Kin.
8.12.
but Direful Revenge Could Elisha Weep, when he foresaw what evil Hazael
would do unto the children of Israel, And should not the Regenerate Weep
foreseeing the inevitable evil, which by the toleration and conversation of
the Wicked cannot but ensue? The Regenerate therefore are no less grieved at
the sins of others, then at their own; seeing, the Lord is alike dishonored
and offended by both: Not as fearing to feel some evil procured by our own
sins, but out of true Love to God in seeing and hearing the unlawful deeds of
others, We must Weep and vex our righteous Souls from day to day. Thus as
Samuel mourned for Saul, 1 Samuel 15.35. Iere. 13.17. Luke 19.41.
Jeremiah for the pride of his times, Our Savior for the security of
Jerusalem, and as Rivers of waters ran down David's eyes, Psalm. 119.130.
because Men kept not the Law: So none can be assured that his heart is
sincere before God, if in the like cases he be not disposed to Weeping. Vae
tacentibus de te, quoniam, Domine, loquaces muti sunt; Woe to the Tongue-tyed
in thy Cause, O God, for the most Talkatiue are too silent. He bears no
dutiful respect to the Lord, that can behold Transgressors, and is not
grieved. It grieveth a friend to hear or see the disgrace of a Friend, but the
Regenerate (who are called Christ's Friends, John 15.15.) should show but poor
friendship, if they should not be affected at wrongs done to his Majesty. He
cannot be truly Religious that in comparison bemoaneth not, when he
considers the fiery jelousie of the Lord will break forth suddenly and
inevitably with Storms and streams of Indignation upon such swarms and
Millions of People, as in his sight and to his knowledge, for some Wretched
Vanities of this momentany life, heap up wrath against the day of Wrath, even
all the horrors and tortures of which any created nature can be capable
everlastingly.

. 56.
Secondly, Punishments of Sin cause the Elect to Weep more excessiuely both
in Number and Measure then others; Although they fear them not, but daily
expect them, because they daily deserve them. Knowing that they daily offend,
they know also that Divine Justice will not suffer sin to be unpunished: And
often, Hier. ad Eustoc.
Secura eorum scit Conscientia, quod non propter peccata patiantur, Their
secure Consciences know well, that they suffer not for their Sins. Yet, it is
an infallible mark of Hypocrites, to discern the face of the Sky, and not to
discern the Signs and times, in time of their visitation, and not to know the
things which belong unto their Peace, but then to have them hid from their
eyes. It argues desperate hardness of heart, particularly in Ahaz, 2 Chio.
28.22.
that he was not humbled by Afflictions, but in the time of his distress he
trespassed yet more against the Lord; And generally in every Reprobate, that,
though they be smitten, Iere. 5.3.
yet they will not sorrow, though they be consumed, yet they refuse to receive
Correction. When the Regenerate Weep; Bern. super ^ant. Sermon. 26.
Non quia percussi plorant, arguunt ferientem, sed provocant Pictatem,
Severitatem flectere sataguni. Being smitten they Weep, not because they
accuse the Smiter, but they implore his Mercy, because they would appease his
Justice. It is then the Symptom of a Sanctified and Mollified heart to Weep
as David, 2 Samuel 24.^7.
when he saw multitudes swept away with the Pestilence; Iere. 9.1.
and as Jeremiah wished his head were waters, and his eyes a fountain of
Tears, that he might Weep Day and Night for the slain of his people. Though
we have no cause of dejection for our own particular Grievances, we have more
then cause to Weep, for the Miseries of others, for whom the Lord reserveth
heavy hammers of wrath, to break their Obstinacy, to bridle their boldness,
and to beat down their Rebellion against him, that so, if it be possible, he
may draw them to an higher, or drive them to a deeper Consideration of
themselves.

. 58.
Lastly, Where the Spirit of God works a through Meditation of misery, he
makes the very Horrors of Hell to be a mean of Mourning; And to speak unto
us, Indg. 16.20
as Dalilah to Sampson; Up and arise, for the Philistines be upon thee Hell,
even Hell it self, in the worst sense, not the Grave of the body, but of the
Soul, is at the door, nay behind the door. For, Aug. de Genesis cont. Manich.
l. 2. c. 28.
Nihil sic revocat no^ a Peccato, quemadmodum inhiantis Gehennae Cogitatie,
Nothing so powerfully draws us from Sin, as the Meditation of the Horrors
of Hell; In which as Popish writers presumptuously make Maps of Hell, as if
they had surveyed the Regions of it; So Protestants on the other side, are (me
thinks) too brief in their writings and meditations of it, though it be as
impossible to apprehend the horrors of it by Contemplation, as to bepaint the
Situation of it by Description. Yet the Regenerate, not confounded (as ordinary
Professors) with a short fit or flashes of Hell in their Consciences, Omnia
soliciti plena timoris habent.

Do always fear, and take no rest, before in their perplexed Agonies they
get pardon in Christ, even by Weeping; Giving all diligence to make their
Salvation sure, and to escape so great Condemnation. They suppose not that God
created Hellfire only, to punish the Devils and Damned Souls, but rather to
keep sinners from Damnation, to incite them to Mortification, and to raise
them to Glorification: For, so much as a Man fears the punishment that he
has deserved, so much more carefully will he both Weep and avoid those faults
which he has committed. Senecae.
Non cito perit ruina, qui ruinam timet, He that fears destruction is neither
easily nor often destroyed in it. Thus they awaken and arouse themselves to
foresee Hell in it own shape, and to fore appoint themselves, not against the
first Death, which they cannot avoid, but against the Second, which they may,
if they get their part in the first Resurrection by Weeping. Whence it comes
to pass that here also they bewail not their own estate only, but as
Christ (knowing that, Cypr. de Discipl and Hab. Virgin
Qui cupiunt esse Christiani, debent quod secit Christus imitari, Who desire to
be Christians should imitate the deeds of Christ) They weep for others, and
lament the stupiditie of infinite sorts of People, that see one another, like
silly fish, taken out of the Pond of this World by Death, but think not of the
Fire into which they come; They see Atheists and Epicures boldly and beastly
sitting down (as Israelits in the wilderness) to eat and to drink and
rising up to play) never caring to consider, nor having any mind or power to
think of that horrible Monster, never enough feared, that dreadful Page and
follower of death.

Sicque tenent Lachrymat, quia nil lachrymabile cermunt. Thus they weep not
now, because they see not with whom they have to begin when they have done
with Death, which is but the beginning of their Weeping: In which, Tanto
quisque tolerabiliorem habebit damnationem, quanto hic minorem habuit
Iniquitatem, Aug in Enchir. cap 39.
Their Damnation (as Augustine proves pithily) will be more tolerable, by
how much their iniquity has been the lesser in this life. Whereas nature, even
mere Nature, and not only the Platonists and other wise and learned Heathen
amongst Grecians and Romans, but the Unlettered Savages and Scythians also,
have and do out of Natures Instinct, and Divine Impression, know and admit of
a Place of everlasting well and ill being after death, for the souls of men.
But these Monsters of men, though they wilfully shut their own eyes, and blot
out the Principles of Nature, do make the regenerate to shed many Tears,
because they fear not the wrath to come, Cypr. de unit. Eccl.
Quod metuerent, si crederent, quia non credunt omnino, nec metuunt; Si autem
crederent et cauerent, si cauerent euaderent; which they would fear, if they
believed; But because they believe not, they fear not, For if they believed,
they would regard it; And if they regarded, they would avoid it. They consider
not how fearfully they will find themselves deluded, when their seared
Consciences awake, worse then Jonas in the Tempest, even in a Gulf, (Horresco
referens) of Fire and Brimstone; Where no rock, nor mountain, nor arm of
flesh, nor army of Angels, can protect them from the irresistible Indignation
of the Almighty. But Plura dolor prohibet, No more of this. It is then for
these Considerations that the Regenerate are inclined to Weeping, and tha their
hearts are so often as Limbecks; Sometimes distilling their Weeping out of the
Weeds of their own Offenses, by the fire of true Contrition; Sometimes out of
the bitter Herbs of others Iniquities, by the heat of tender Compassion;
Sometimes out of the Gall and Wormwood of Temporal and Eternal Judgments,
by the Flames of Spiritual Contemplation.

3. Humiliation.
. 59.
AND now, what Doleful Complaint may we not justly pant forth, for that we
neither See the just Causes of our Weeping, nor Sorrow for them? As if the Lord
had neither enlightened our Understandings, nor softened our hearts for this
Work; But concealed in this our day, the things which belong unto our Peace,
and hide them from our Eyes. Aug. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 9.
But alas, oh Lord! Vnde hoc Monstrum, and quare istud? How long will it be
before our secure Souls be awakened to Weep, that the Causes of our Weeping
may be weakened? Thou that have hitherto in Patience expected our Weeping, we
beseech thee now in Pity call us effectually to Weeping. Oh! Amos 5.1.
That we would hear, as the Prophet charge, The Word which is taken up
against us, even a Lamentation, before the Lord turn our Feasts into Mourning,
and all our Songs into Lamentations, Amos 8.10
and before he bring up Sackcloath upon all loins, and baldness upon every
head; And before he make it as the Mourning of an only Son, and the end
thereof as a bitter day. How ought we to humble our selves in this our want
and Defect of Weeping! We may as justly plead as ever Cyprian, Cypr. Epist. 2
Scelus non tantum geritur, sed docetur, Sin is not only wrought, but taught;
And every where we may see with this same Father, Quod and dolori sit and
pudori, What may make us both Weep and blush: For the forementioned Causes of
Weeping (and all other Causes) may as palpably be found among us, as ever;
Only we want Grace to lay them to heart. Is it nothing to you, all ye that
pass by? Behold and see, where is that Place, over which we may not Weep, as
once our Savior Wept over Jerusalem; That the impenitent Multitude, which
vilify all other means of Grace, might be moved (if it were possible) by
Weeping to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance? And who sees not,
Indignation is come forth from the Lord, who has so often set his Trumpet to
the mouth of his Prophets, Crying, An Eagle comes against the house of the
Lord, because the People have transgressed his Covenant, and trespassed against
his Law? May not every one see Ieremiahs Almond rod and seething Pot, in the
heavy Messages and Judgments of the Lord, uttered against us touching all our
wickedness? What then remains, but that we take heed, Ne sit minor
Medicina, quam vulnus, Cypr. Epist. 31.
That our Cure be no less then our wound; That our Weeping be no less, then
our wickedness; Ezekiel 22.6.
That we Weep, if not as Ezekiel, to the breaking of the loins, and melting
of the heart; Amos 5.16.
Yet as Amos, VVailing in all our streets, and saying in all our high ways,
Alas, Alas, Calling the Husbandman to Mourning, and such (...) And yet we
always want either Remembrance or Disposition to Weep. For sometimes Satan
does stupifie and benumme our Souls, and then we have little or no feeling of
our Sins; Sometimes we are so sensible of our Sins, so apprehensiue both of
the Number and Deformity of them, that we become thereby either ashamed or
affrayed to bewail them; That the Shame and Fear which Satan took away when
we committed Sin, he restored again when we should Lament them. And not
only does Commission make us sinful, but we are guilty of every Sin we
hate not; For though we cannot avoid all and every Sin, Yet we should hate
all and every Sin.

. 61.
And thus having totally polluted our Lives in Thought, Word, and Work, with
the Incestuous brood of Actual transgressions; We pass over a great part of
our Lives in doing nothing, a greater in doing things to little purpose, but
the greatest part in doing evil. We do either through Ignorance, not knowing
God; or Negligence, not following God; Or through Malice, resisting God, live
as without GOD in this world. We are so void of love, that we are hard and
severe to our neighbor, as if we had no sense of his sorrow, or Sorrow for
his sufferings: We are so perverse in our Conuersations, that we abuse our
Superiors by Flattery; Our Inferiors by Contempt; our Equals, by extreme
Disdain. Oh how little do we either desire or discern that which is Good;
How little do we see or shun that which is Evil! We may find our selves
in the passages of all our Actions, not only foolish, but senseless; Whence
it is, that as a beastly and savage Life seems Civil to them, who have been
continually brought up in the same, because Custom changes into Nature; So
we esteem not our condition miserable, because we never knew what it was to
be happy: Thus through continual Use we confirm our Impudency, and our
Impudency takes from us all Opinion of Sinning. In a word; That it fares
thus with us, we have (if we search our souls) our own Judgments for
Judges, our own Thoughts for VVitnesses, our own Consciences for Executioners,
our own Memories for Registers of our Iniquities. Now how little we do Weep
for all our Personal Sins (Although no man can be privy to the private
VVailings of other, yet) our little Reformation does testify; For Godly
Weeping ever proceeds from Displeasure against Sin; and Displeasure
against Sin is accompanied with Hatred of Sin; and Hatred of Sin brings
forth Reformation: So that the Argument is unanswerable from the First to the
Last, That where is no Reformation, there can be no holy Lamentation, although
the Head were Waters, and the Eyes a daily fountain of Tears. VVhereupon we
conclude with Anselme, Quid ergo restat, De. Mister. hom. l. 1.
O Peccator, D^ Miser. bominu l. 1.
nisi vt in tota vita tua deplores totam vitam tuam, What then should a Sinner
do throughout his whole life, but Weep for the Sins of his whole life.

. 62.
Next, if we consider the Sins of others, we may see that as our Age is the
last of all Ages,, so it is the Sink of all their Sins, and the Puddle of
all Profaneness. Cypr. Epi. 2.
Admonetur aetas omnis auditu, fieri posse, quod factum est; Nunquam aeui senio
delicta moriuntur, nunquam temporibus Crimen obruitur, nunquam Scelus obliuione
sepelitur; Exempla fiant, quae esse iam facinora destiterunt. Succeeding Ages
are taught, that that may be done which has b^ene done; Sin never dies,
but becomes exemplary unto us; And what was Execrable unto others, is our
example. Corruptions are bred in our Civil Bodies, as Diseases in our Natural
Bodies: At first they be not discerned easily, but they proceed insensibly,
till that come to pass, which Livy observed in the Roman Senate, Decad. 1.
lib. 10.
Nec vitia nostra, nec remedia far possumus, We can neither endure the
Malady, nor the Medicine. But few can, or (at least) will be persuaded that
our Sins which threaten our desolation, are so incomparable or transcendent,
that they have not been parallelled in former Ages: Yet if they consider, John
3.19,
First that as this is the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come into
the World, and Men love darkness rather then light; So there was never more
Light of Knowledge then now, and never more darkness of Impiety then now;
For there could not be such darkness of Sin, if there were not such Light
of Grace: But in that we openly reject all Goodness, we give height to our
Sins; And therefore are worse then predecessors in ancient times, because we
might be better. Next, if they consider, Isa. 5.2.
that as no Man ever planteth a Vineyard, but he will look for fruit from it;
So by how much our Means of Grace are greater, by so much are our Defects
greater: But search we all Records, and compare such helps, such Care, such
Cost, such Expectation, with our unfruitful Works and Wickedness, and see
whether any ancient times did ever parallel our times in Iniquity. Lastly, the
Ancient of times, to whom all times are present, has told us that these last
times shall be worst; And our Experience does justify him with all, but the
wilful, that the Filthiness of the People has filled our Land from corner to
corner: that now Atheism, Blasphemy, Ignorance, Infidelity, Impenitency,
Hypocrisy, Intemperancy, Pride, Lust, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Sacrilege,
Slaundering, Simonie, Lukewarmenesse and Neutralitie in Religion, Lingering
after Super stition and Idolatry, Falsehood in Dealings and Friendship till all
burst again, Van^ty in following the Fashion without shame or medestie; Unto
all, and above all these; we add Covetousness, and Wantonness, especially in
Sabbath-breaking, the very scumme of all Impiety, the Dregs and Lees of our
National Impurity, that now, Flagrant vitio Gentisque suoq:, above all Nations
upon the earth our People burn and boil in these iniquities, more then ever
Sodom in Lust, or Samaria in any Lewdness, that now the rest of the works of
Darkness, which like hateful Night-Birds, were wont to seek Corners, to avoid
the wonderment of the World, do declare themselves as the sins of Sodom,
and Men never blush to commit them openly. Which if they be not speedily
affronted and confronted, what can be expected, but that these iniquities be
not purged from us till we dye? But, Lord, Des meliora pijs, erroresque
hostibus illos.

So let all thine Enemies perish, Judge. 5.31.
but let them that love thee, be as the Sun when he goes forth in his
might. How little we do Weep for these Abominations in others, is too too
manifest, (Nisi nos manifesta negemus) by our little care that we take for the
Reformation of others. When the Heathen Solon was demanded, what City or
Country was best governed; That (said he) where the not wronged, as well as
the wronged do punish Vice and persecute. Wickedness. But now, Videntur
peccata aliorum, Hier. ad Gauden.
sed non planguntur, quia non vindicantur, We see apparently the Sins of
others, but bewail them not, because we reform them not. As if for this
Duty, namely to reform others, the Magistrate did not bear the Sword, the
Minister should not sacrifice his dearest blood, and all Men were not bound to
pull others out of the fire by discreet Admonition, or fervent Prayer, that
the Lord would be pleased to show them their Misery and his Mercy; That so by
this good Endeavor of all sorts of Men, Cypr. de bono pudicit.
Vitia castigentur, vt odiantur, Sin may be reprooved, that it may be hated.
But alas! as the chief Rulers confessed not Christ, lest they should be cast
out of the Synagogue, Ioh 12.42.
For they loved the praise of Men, more then the praise of God; So the Fear or
Love of Men, whose breath is in his Nostriles, have taken away courage from our
hearts, and our hearts (I fear) from the Lord. And yet lest any should be
discouraged with Singleness in this kind of Sincerity, as though, (...), One
were none to do any good; A Father teaches us, that (...), Chrys^^t.
One Man truly Zealous suffices to reform a whole multitude. Now if we
neglect in our Several Stations and Vocations, to reform Sin in others, it
cannot be perceived that we pity them, or truly Weep for their Sins. But
our careless Consideration of the fearful condition, and wretched end of
Impenitent Sinners where we live, working in us so little or no care to
reform them, gives but small testimony that our stony Hearts or Leaden Eyes
can yield any Tears; When as all things do Weep for them, because these
Wretches forsake the common Lord, use all means to betray and crucify him
again, regard Man and the deceitful alurements of the Devil, more then either
the Benefits or Threats of the Almighty; And fasten their thoughts upon the
cretures, contemning the power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the Creator.
Therefore the Heaven Weep for them, the Angels Weep for them, the Saints
Weep for them, all Creatures Weep for them, and Christ Weepeth more for them,
then ever he did for the desolation of Jerusalem, because their Sins defile
others, deforme the Creatures, and depresse themselves into the deepest Gulf
of Woe.

. 63.
But because for mine own part, Aug Conf. l. 3. c. 2.
M^^gis misercor gaudentem in flagitio, quam dura perpessum detrimento
perniciosae voluptatis, aut amissione mise^ ae faelicitatis, I pity more a
great deal impenitent Sinners rejovcing in sin, then others howsoever
grievously afflicted with Crosses or Calamities: If we consider, First, the
public punishments of Sin, which are always infallible evidences of the Lords
displeasure against sinners; We may perceive that though the Lord has smitten
us more then the Men of Bethshemesh, yea then the Assyrians, 1 Samuel 16.19. 2 Samuel 19.35.
at one time; Yet we rejoice rather in our Sins, then lament them. Verily we
have seen with our Eyes, even those Judgments which may be abundant matter of
Weeping, and are very near forerunners of the great and terrible day of the
Lord. We have seen prodigious Apparitions in the Air, incredible Inundations
in the Sea, we have had incomparable Earthquakes, fearful Fires in our
Houses, Extraordinary Plagues in the most Populous parts of this Kingdom,
grievous and pining Famines, unseasonable Seasons, and many more Visitations,
all which we have felt in such extremity and vehemence, of which these parts of
the World are not naturally capable: So certain it is that the Finger of God
has been in them. Ezekiel. 21.9.
And even now, the Sword is sharpened, and also fourbished; It is sharpened to
make a sore slaughter; It is fourbished, that it may glitter; Should we then
make Mirth? Or should we not rather Mourn and Weep? May we not com plain.
Cypr. ad Demet.
Ecce irrogantur divinitus plagae, and nullus Dei metus est; Ecce verbera
desuper and flagella non desunt, sed trepidatio nulla, nulla formido est. Si
non intercederet rebus humanis vel ista censura; Quanto ad hue Major in
hominibus esset audacia facinorum, impunitate secura? Behold, Behold, We feel
the Judgments of the Lord, yet we fear not the Lord; What if Man were not
thus punished, how much more secure would his boldness be, through the
impunity of his Sins? Death and Bloodshed, Strife and Sword, Calamities,
Famine, Tribulation, and the Scourge, these things the Lord has created for
the Wicked to punish them. For there is no Evil (of Punishment) but the Lord
has done it: Amos 36.
And every such evil is inflicted for Sin; Lam 3.37.
So evident it is that whatsoever common Punishments do befall us, they are
from the Lord, and likewise for sin. Esth. 4.3.
If Mordecai then and the Jews had cause to Weep, at the bloody Decree of an
Earthly King; Isa. 22.4.5.
how much more cause have we to Weep at the Revelation of the Righteous
judgments of God? And with the Prophet, to Weep bitterly, and not be
comforted, because of the spoiling of the daughter of our People. For now is a
day of trouble, and of treading down, and of Perplexity by the Lord God of
Hosts. What shall we then think or say of these punishments, Numb. 16.46.
but as Moses and Aaron of one sudden Pestilence, There is Wrath gone forth
from the Lord, and the Plague is begun. Hos 4.1.
For the Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of our Land, because
there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land; By Swearing,
and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out,
and Blood touches Blood; Therefore shall the land Mourn. And therefore does
our Land Mourn, and yet we do not Mourn, for all these Signs of our
displeased God.

. 69.
Yet the Terror (if there were any tenderness left in our hearts) the Terror
that has taken hold of some amongst us, should undoubtedly have made us,
Mittere legate pro doloribus nostris Lachrymas, Cypr. Epist. 31^
To send our Tears as Messengers of our Sorrows: Yea the Tragical ends and
events of others, should have sounded in our Ears, -- Lachrymosa poemata Puppi.

And have affrighted us, astonished us, and so moved us to Weeping. For some
of us hedged about with increase of all outward blessings, yet having abused
them, though they bred security for a while, we have seen their fear at
length seize upon them most violently and suddenly: Some of us enjoying
strength of body, yet having abused it to Intemperance, the Lord practiced
Martiall-law, and did present Execution upon them, turning the height and Pride
of their Strength into Lamenesse, Blindness, Deafness, Diseases innumerable,
Though he deferreth most of them until that solemn day of Judgment to come:
Others amongst us having knowledge, but thereby elevated and puffed up in their
Souls, we have seen them like Angels of Light fall from on high into the
Darkene, of Ignorance, Error, Curiosity, Inconstancy, Coffeehouse,
Passions. We have heard of Theft, Perjury, Robbery, Murder, Parricide,
Fratricide, Homicide of all sorts, as perpetrated, so plaged (and what can be
more horrible?) in the very act of Sinning. And yet we are far from
Weeping, that we continue fearelesse and careless of the like untimely
shameful Ends: Never blessing the Lord that in Mercy and Patience suffers
us, and gives us all good things. Thus when the Connivence of our Heavenly
Father, like the Indulgence of Eli toward his Sons, has made so many of us
wanton and disobedient, we never fear though he work extraordinary and rare
judgments on others in our Israel, whereat our Ears should tingle, and our
Eyes Weep, lest when he begins with them, he likewise make an end with
our Selves: Job 18.19.
Consuming all Wamons with a total Destruction, without any dispensation, not
leaving the least remembrance of them upon Earth: And Rooting out Houses as
well as Inhabitants, Zachar 5.4
Making the Stones at every Joint to Weep, the Beams and every Pin to
Weep. And both Stone out of the Wall, and Beam and every Piece of Timber may
Weep; yet We, more insensible then the senseless Creatures, never Weep with
them, never join with them in their mourne-full Anthems.

65.
Great is our Privilege, through the great Mercy and Patience of the Lord at
this hour toward us, in that we hear neither noise of War, nor news of an
Enemy: Deus nobis haec otia fecit, The Lord has turned our Swords into
Mattocks, and every man sits under his own Vine. Yet behold, Cypr de Lapsis.
Lachrymis magis quam verbis opus est, ad exprimendum dolorem; We have more
need of Tears then Words, to express our graceless and grievous Lack of
Weeping, void of natural Compassionatenesse, and pangs of common humanity,
whereby we are bound to commiserate the Miseries of afflicted Joseph in
foreign Nations, though this Christian Duty be often enjoined us by Authority.
When Alexander saw the dead corpse of Darius; and Julius Caesar, the head of
Pompey; and Marcus Marcellus, Syracusa burning; and Scipi^, Numantia sporled;
and Titus, Jerusalem made even with the ground, they could not abstain from
Weeping; although they were Heathen and Mortal Enemies. And if we were not
hewn out of the hardest rocks, if the Image of GOD but in a mean measure
were repaired in our Souls, Tum mea cum multis iuncta querela foret.

Then we, and others, and all men professing the same Faith which is in Jesus
Christ, could not but groan and grieve to hear the insolent Depopulations,
Oppressions, and Persecutions, which cruel Might and Malice have wrought in
other Countries (beyond hope of recovery) which heretofore were Seminaries of
Piety and true Religion, and Sanctuaries for the distressed members of Christ.
And yet for all this, we do not shed one Tear, let fly one Sigh, or
troubled groan, nor abate any of our Pomp or Prodigality; But rather like
corrupted flesh, we swell higher for these strokes; And as senseless limbs,
we feel not the cutting and cauterizing of our own members. Oh! that we had
Grace as well as Space, to Weep (at least) in Humility and Sincerity, and to
learn by the stripes of others, not to dream of stability in our present
Peace and Security, when as our Iniquities are thus at the highest pitch! To
Weep (I say) and Learn by others more righteous then we, before the Lord do
bring the Doctrine of Desolation upon our selves, and make us Weep with many
bitter Tears, when our Cities and Countries are made Habitations for Dragons,
and Courts for Ostridges, and our selves deprived of Lands, Liberties, Hier, ad
Geront. V^duam
and perhaps Lives too. Sed nostri temporis mala periculosa sunt tam
loquentibus quam audientibus, vt ne gemitus quidem liber sit; Nolentibus; i^^
nec audentibus nobis flere quae patimur; But the Sins of our Times are
dangerous, both to the hearers and speakers of them; So that as some will not,
so others dare not Weep for our Sufferings. Yet as the Lord in Jeremiah says,
Ierem 7.12.
Go to Shiloh; So let us go to our neighbor Nations, and behold and see,
what the Lord has done to them, for the Wickedness of his People there; Whose
Wickedness, our Wickedness may as truly be said to justify, as ever
Samaria did Sodom; And the Lords Justice then, is his Justice now.

. 66.
Furthermore, is it not high time for every true hearted Christian, to rend
their clothes with Joshua, to fall down, and Water the Earth as well as their
cheeks with Tears? Whereas, if they consider the present condition of the
sincerest Servants of GOD at home, they may see that, Cypr. ad Demet.
Excogitat nouas poenas ingeniosa Crudelitas, They in our own Israel are
intollerably persecuted both by the unrighteous words, and works of the
Wicked. In Primitive Times, as Augustine often observes, Satan like a roaring
Lion persecuted with insatiable Cruelty, drinking up the blood of the Saints;
But now like a crafty Serpent, he vexes them in as high a degree, with all
indignities and disgraces; for the Sword of the Tongue wounds a generous
Heart, as deep as the Sword in the hand does the Body. It is strange to see in
such a reformed Church as ours, how they that, Hier. in Apolog adu. Ruff.
Coniuncti de perfidia, ad maledicta confugiant, Are convinced of sin, Fly
to slanders; How they that sit in the seat of the scornful, should so
boldly, impudently, and (which confirms their Impudency) with Impunity, fill
their hearts and mouths with disdainefull, malicious, and enraged preiudices
against the Simplicity of the Servants of God. Cypr. Epist. 42.
Iactare gestiunt, quae probare non possunt, No scoffs, no Taunts, no
Slanders, no Reproaches, no uncharitable Censures, can Malice invent, or Tongue
utter, which has been dipped in the Fire of Hell, that is not now a days
discharged with Gnashing of teeth against their pract^ses and Profession, as
against their proper Object. Vbicunque viderint Christianum, Hieron ad Furian.
statim illud de triuio, (...), Wheresoever they see an Israelite indeed, in
their bas st proverbiall Scommes, they condemn downright both the manner and
matter of his Conversation. Which work of Satan, though the same holy Cyprian
advises us the rather to vilify, Cypr. Epist. 52.
because it is their lot, Qui Conscientiae suae luce clarescunt, vt alienis
rumoribus sordiaentur, whose consciences are clear and cleansed, to be defiled
with the Scourge of tongues: Yet for so much as by our Office, Men have their
Christendom, Hieron, ad Holiod.
their Communion with Christ, their Absolution from Sin, their Marriages
consecrated, yea the Salvation of their Souls, and whatsoever Grace
accompanies Salvation; And were without it, no better then Bastards, Pagans,
and Vessels of wrath; Let it be our Wisdom and Christian Resolution, to
think as basely of men (though the greatest in our several Charges) thus
abasing us, 2 Cor. 11.22. Phil. 3.4, 5, 6.
who upon the search may be found, nothing inferior to themselves, either in
birth or breeding: Considering withal that we are entrusted of the Lord with
the most precious Treasures of the Gospel of his Son, and Souls of his
People. Oh the honor that has been formerly done by Heathens, to them that
had but the false face of Prophets! I shame and grieve to compare the Times and
Men. Only, oh God, Be thou merciful to the Contempt of thy servants. This (I
confess) has been the Complaint of the Godly, Hier. ad Julian.
almost in all Ages; Because, Difficile est pressam malis innocentiam non
dolere, It is hard for Innocence oppressed with Misery not to grieve: Yet as
sin never so much abounded, so Sinners were never so much transported with
imbittered and implacable Opposition to Sincerity, as now; When as, Aug.
Epist. 64.
Hostis nostri vires sentit nemo, nisi qui ei bellum indixerit, none feel the
Power, of Satan's Virulency, and Malice of his members, but they that War
against him. To evidence or exemplify this Truth, were too long, neither is
it needful: so that now, for this Sin, the Reader Quascunque aspiciet
Lachryma fecere lituras.

What B^otts or Errors soever he finds here, may impute them justly to my
Tears: Resolving hereafter to content my self either to cast down my heart
in Pitying, or to lift it up in Praying: Bernard. de Considerat. l. 3. c. 2.
Seeing our Complaints for this Sin are laughed out of Courts authorized to
punish it, with a Plus facetiae -- quam Iustitiae; Or no more regarded then the
humming of Bees. Sometimes then we may deplore the extravagant Hypocrisy of
the Times, gaul'd and grieved at the Conscionable Conversation of the little
Flock of Christ, because it condemns their outward Formality, and
Temporizing, and makes it plainly appear, that their present Case without
Conversion is wretched. Sometimes we may implore the help of Heaven, either
to ^estraine the Hellish Virulencie of railing Shimeis, Mich. 7.9.
and malicious Doegs: Or to give us Grace and Patience, To bear this
Indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against him; Until he plead
our Cause, and execute Judgment for us: Knowing that, Hier. contr. Iovinianum.
l. 2.
Amara est veritas, and qui eam prae dicant replentur amaritudine, The Truth is
bitter, and they that Preach and Profess it are filled with Bitterness. For,
that of Hezekiah his Song, according to the Vulgar Translation, may fitly be
appropriated to our Age, and is verified in our Nation, Ecce in pace amaritud^
mea amarissima; Which according to the Hebrew, our Translation reads, Behold
for Peace I had great bi^ternesse; But the Vulgar, Isa. 38.17.
Behold in Peace my bitterness is most bitter: Bern. super Cant Sermon. 35.
Whereupon Bernard plays no less Elegantly then Morally; Amara prius in nece
Martyrum, amarior post in conflictu Haereticorum, amarissima nunc in moribus
Domesticorum; Bitter first in the death of Martyrs, more bitter thereafter in
Conflicts with Heretics, most bitter now through malice of Professors. Thus
it was foretold of old, but now fulfilled. Howsoever, Quae venit indigne, poena
d^lenda venit.

We cannot choose but Weep, in all our Indignities and wrongs Yet our Comfort
is, that a Day will come, in which the high and everlasting Judge, with the
brightness of his Coming, will then at furthest, before Men and Angels, bring
forth our Righteousness as the Light, and our Judgment as the Noone day. In
which -- (Scelesta tanta est iniuriae Lingu^) --

Those Doggish Tongues and barking Dogs that now domineere over the Lambs of
Christ, will be everlastingly cashired from the presence of the Lord, and
joys of his Eternity: For the Reviler, no more then the Drunkard, Adulterer,
1 Cor. 6.10.
and the rest of that impure and impenitent Crew, shall never inherit the
Kingdom of God. Cypr. de Unit. Ecclesia.
Quid facit in pectore Christian Luporum feritas, and Canum rabies? What does
Woolfish cruelty, and Dogged Fury in the mouth or heart of a Christian?
Wherefore, as the meek Spirit of God, never abides with their untamed
Affections; So shun thou, Oh my Soul, their cursed Anger, for it is fierce:
And hate thou their Wrath, for it is cruel.

. 67.
Lastly, if we would consider our Real and Actual Grievances, we could not
but Weep in a general Humiliation, before the Lord come upon us, with his
Wrath never more to be appeased. Cypr. Epist. 34.
If there were any, Thomae similis, qui minus auribus credat; nec ocuiorum
fides deest, vt quis quod audit, and videat, Like Thomas the Apostle, who
believes not our report; What our report cannot, his own sight and senses may
persuade him. I am sure, the Ministers and Men of God (of inferior degree) the
more Experience they have in their holy work, the less Reward and Respect
they find in the World. Which misery, though Christ and Paul foreseeing, Luke
10.7.
enacted as the Law of Heaven in more then Mede and Persian irrevocability, 1 Timothy 5.18
That the Labourer is worthy of his hire. Yet that brief Statute (so ample and
strong in it self, that the very Metaphorical Phrase, not only determines
the Quantity and Quality, but yields an imperious Reason of the strict
performance thereof) is of no force, and counted a strange thing in our Peoples
estimation. If the meanest Drudges (bv precepts both Leviticall and
Evangelicall) may not be unrewarded, Deuteronomy. 24.14
Iam. 5.4.
unless Men will incur inevitable Condemnation in their Consciences here,
and in the last Judgment hereafter: Then much more barbarous is their
Injustice, and Iniquity heinous, (Est aliqua ingratin meritum expr^brare
voluptas)

That feed the Ministers of the Lord with the Bread of Affliction, and the
water of Afflction, that is, That withold earthly Food, from that mouth that
feeds them with Heavenly Food; That depriveth him of his due Apparel, that
adorneth them with the righteousness of Christ. How fitly Cyprian his Complaint,
comparing Primitive Times, with Succeeding Times, may be accommodated to our
Times, Cypr. de Vnitate Ecclesia.
let all Men Judge. Domos tunc and fundos venundabant, and Thesauros sibi in
coelo reponentes, distribuenda in vsus indigentiuas pretia Apostolis
offerebant; At nunc de Patrimonio, nec decimus damus; They sold their Houses
and Lands, and laying up Treasure in heaven, they brought the Price thereof to
the Apostles to be distributed to the Poor; But now out of our large
Patrimonies, we pay not so much as the due Tenth. Whereas then, now a days
Men, by detayning sacrilegiously Gods portion from Gods Servants, against all
Equity both Divine and Humane, do certainly pull down upon their Souls,
Bodies, Goods, and Posterity, (which if I would run into Particulars, could
plainly prove, by special and almost insinite Instances in this Kingdom)
that heavy and horrible Curse. Malachi 3.8.9. In robbing the Lord of Tithes
and Offerings. Where the Lord himself fights not with shadows, Cypr. Epist.
75.
nor is so zealous for a Ceremony. But whereas, Aliquandiu erratum est, non
ideo semper errandum est. We have for some long time thus sinned
Sacrilegiously, we must not therefore continue in that Sin. It is high Time
therefore to beseech our Improper Lay-Impropriatours, for Gods sake who
commands our Maintenance, for their souls sake, which reap the fruit of our
Maintenance, for the Words sake by which we are warranted to demand our
Maintenance, and for Christ's sake in whom we deserve our Maintenance, that
they would have his Ministers in due account, that the Worship of the Lord,
which they magnify in word, but repute indeed to be little worth, may not be
so meanly and sordidly maintained. That they would consider our Maintenance
does claim and include all necessaries: Lege, Quos nos hosts 234. de ver^.
Signif.
For, Alimentis legatis, cibaria and vestitus and habitatio debentur, By the
Civil Laws, He that bequeathes a man Maintenance and Nourishment, intends
he should have Bed and Board, Apparel and dwelling. And therefore that it is
not some poor part of our maintenance in most Parishes, 1 King. 12.31.
(with which our bare reading Predecessors, like Ieroboams Priests, made of
the lowest of the People, and most of them taken from their Shops and Trulls
were contented) which heretofore has been paid by Custom more then Equity
unto others before us. Is the Reward of our Work due unto us, which we would
willingly bestow amongst Stationers every year That we may find that our
Preaching has, as delivered them from Sin, Sorrow, and Servitude, so
likewise seasoned them with the Power of Godliness. Lest not only the
Superstition of Papists, but Idolatry of Heathen Muffians rise in judgment,
and condemn them, because they Repented not; But whilst we informed their
Understandings, Satan perverted their Affections with Irreverence and
Irreligion.

. 68.
And here, because, Iusto desunt sua verba dolori, I want words sufficiently to
bewail this grievous Sin; I know not how it comes to pass, that Ministers
are ever worst Orators in their own Cause; either too Modest to Plead for
themselves, Or too Timorous, contenting our selves at every Balaks beck, Number.
23.25
neither to Curse nor Bless, where the Lord has cursed; And threatened to make
them (though Princes) like Orch and like Zeeb; Psalm. 83.11.12.
yea, all their Princes like Zeba and Zalmunna, which have said, Let us take
for our possession the habitations of God. And all men may know, that all the
miracles of the Apostles were saving Miracles, save only in Ananias and
Saphira; Act 5.5.
their Sacrilegious Alienating Church-Goods. And the Son of God did never
work any Miracle by force and violence, Mat. 21 12.
save only when he met with this Sin of Merchandise in the house of GOD,
then, and only then in all his life did the Lamb of God play the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah. Therefore although now, Noscanimus surdis, We have small hope
that our Maintenance may be augmented; Yet this barbarous and Sacrilegious
Outrage, not only causes Lamentation, Weeping, Math. 2.18.
and great Mourning, like unto the Voice heard in Ramah, penetrating the
clouds, and Horrenda grauiter c^^lum pulsante querela

Knocking at the Gate of Heaven, enters into the Ears of the Lord of
Sabbath; But likewise the most Imperious and Impious Church-Robbers that ever
have been, or ever shall be, will never be able to stop the mouths, or stay
the pens of them that having wearied their bodies, wasted their Spirits,
spent their Patrimonies, and worn out their Hopes in that Sacred Function;
Which declare their Grievances of all sorts unto the World, as Athanasius wrote
his, Socrat l. 2. c. 1.
(...), Books in which he complained of his Abuses and Afflictions; which may
tell these inexcusable and self condemned ( Legom enim Dei scriptam in
Cordibus hominum, Aug Confess. l. 2. c. 4.
ne ipsa quidem delet Iniquitas) Blood Suckers, that our Maintenance, the
Churches Patrimony, like the unseen coal of Fire in the Apologue, burns up
the Sacrilegious Eagles Nest, and consumes all their own Patrimonies: So that
by their unjust Purchases of Parsonages, they Purchase Aceldama to them and
theirs.

. 69.
And whilst we thus Complain of intolerable Inhumanity, wherewith the
Inferior sort of the Clergy is daily broyled, and beggered, and abused: Does
the Laytie think to be exempted? Certainly true ever, as well as wise and
grave, has that saying of the Ecclesiastical Historiographer been found,
(...), Socrat, l. 5. in Proamto.
There is always an inseparable Conjunction and Communion in Church and
Commonwealth; For if the one do Mourn, the other either does or shall
shortly groan. And what shall I say? I should be censured either as insensible
of Digression, or transported with Passion, if I would stand to fill up an
Induction, with our Jewish and Injurious Bargains, our fraudulent Conveyances,
our Disapoyntments of Trusts, our wrongful Detrusions of Money, Goods, and
Lands, our more then Turkish Couzenages, and Oppressions, Aug. Confess lib. 3.
c. 3.
for which, Hoe laudabilior, quo fraudulentior, A man is more praised, the more
he is Perfidious. And which may cause us to yield the Juice of our Tears, as
well as exhibit Bills of Complaints, whilst we are content quietly to be
racked, crushed, and spoiled: But these I purposely omit, for Haec animus
meminisse horret, luctuque refugit.

My Soul sigheth at the Sight and Sense of these Sins, and shunneth them in
sighing.

. 70.
Yet all this battery does not serve to make a breach into our Souls, and to
cause us the more to abhor our Sins; Or at lest to conceive some fear in
committing them, which being fully apprehended, might in time draw us all
together to forsake them. Assuredly we are possessed with the Spirit of Fury,
we are filled with the Poison of Serpents, we are like the deaf Adder (as
David said of Wilful Sinners) in stopping our Ears against the Voice of the
Charmer; Psalm 58.4. Mic 6.9.
for we hear not the rod, nor him who has appointed it. Thus we declare,
Mat. 17.17.20.
that we are as Christ called the Jews, Not only a Perverse, but a
faithless Generation. For if we had Faith as a Grain of Mustard seed, we
would Weep; For Mustard feed has it name, (...), Because it makes the eyes
to weep. So that, he that has Faith as a Grain of Mustard seed, has so
much Grace as to make his Eyes to Weep. But, Credere se in Christum quomodo
dicit, Cypr. de vnitate Eccles.
qui non facit quod-Christus facere praecepit, How can that man say he
believes in Christ, who does not what Christ commands him to do; And no
Duty more frequently does he command then to Weep; Therefore where is no
Weeping, there can be no great evidence of Faith.

4. Exhortation.
. 70.
Go to now, Iam. 5.5.
ye that live in pleasure on Earth and are Wanton; ye that nourish your
hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Weep and howl, before Misery and Mischief
come upon you. Take the advantage of this acceptable Time, and make much of
this day of Salvation, and blessed opportunity. For this, Gird thy self with
Sackcloth, Oh Sinner, Lament, Iam. 4.8.
and howl before the Lord, Qui iuvet, and molius, quam tu tibi, consulat, opto,

Whom I beseech to be more merciful unto thee, then thou art mindful of thy
self; That the fierce anger of thy God, Ierem. 7.29
may be turned back from thee. Let us cut off our hair, and cast it away, and
take up a Lamentation on high places before the Lord reject us, and forsake us,
as the Generation of his Wrath. Oh let us not be so dull and flow to believe
all that is written in the Law and the Prophets; Cypr. Epist. 31.
For there is fire, as well as water; There is Death as well as life; And there
is hell, as well as Heaven? Shall all go to heaven? Or is hell only prepared
for Turks, Jews and Infidels, whose Hearts being hardened in Sin, know not
how to Weep for their present Misery and future Indignation? And not much
rather for Christians not touched with Sorrow; When insensate with Sin, they
call not to mind, that the Lord will afflict them in the day of his fierce
Anger. Quia qui non fleuit, Bern. Sermon. de Miser. Human.
quando erat tempus flendi, aeterno luctu lugebit, sed sine fructu, For he that
Weepeth not, when the Time is to Weep, shall Weep Eternally, but
irrecoverably. Feign would I free mine own Soul from the Blood of Souls,
with some Weeping; And I should think my Weeping some part of my Happiness,
If, -- Alijsque d^lens sim causa del^ris,

It might work in any, a Godly Weeping to Repentance. But as how much the
longer any filthy liquor stands in a Vessel, so much the more is the Vessel
fowled and stained, and so much the hardlyer can the foul stains be washed
away; So the longer time that Sin remains in our hearts, with an
uncontrolled Custom, the more are our unhappy Souls soyled with the stains
thereof, which are the more hard to be washed away by Weeping. And seeing
after our Baptism, Titus 3.5.
(...), Which is the Laver or Washing of Regeneration, Our Life is nothing
else but a Fowling of that which was washed; We must wash and Baptize our
Souls with Tears, Lachrimae enim paeni^entium pro Baptismate reputantur apud
Deum, Bern. Sermon. 10. de Modo been Vin.
For the Tears of the penitent are accounted as Baptism with the Lord. As
death depriveth a Man of natural Life, So Mourning destroys the Body of
sin, which is the Sensual Life: Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 141.
Oh therefore, Moriamur, ne moriamur, Lachrymemur ne Damnemur, Let us Dye for a
time in this Life, lest we dve for ever in the next Life; And let us Mourn
for a season, lest we be damned for ever.

. 71.
And although it be vain to Weep for worldly desires and crosses, yet true
Tears for sin, and the smart of Sin, are never forcelesse nor frui^lesse.
For if Alexander, Quint. Curt.
when he had read a large Letter written to him by Antipater, wherein were
diverse accusations against his Mother Olympas; Answered, that Antipater knew
not that one Tear of a Mother would blot away many Accusations: Much more may
we be assured that the Tears of Repentance will blot away the memory of many
sins, though they be written like the Sins of Judah, With a Pen of Iron, and
graven with the point of a Diamond. Oh say not then, Thou can not Weep, For
if not, it is because thou love not Christ, Bern in Cae^a Dom. Sermon. 9.
Lachrimae enim testes amoris sunt, For our Tears are tokens of our truest
Love to Christ. And if thou Weep not for the Love of Christ, yet Weep for the
fear of Hell; And if neither for this, thou can Weep, Nec times Mortem nec
amas Vitam, Verily thy state is dangerous, for thou neither fear Death nor
love Life. Who therefore has Ears to hear, Matt. 13.9.
let him hear; Let all learn of our Savior to require and yield, in this
most serious Matter, their best Affection and heedfull Attention. For what
shall Men do with their Ears and hearts, if they Hearken not to these things,
and affect them not? Aug. de Verbis Dom Sermon. 25.
Seeing we Ministers, Quod admonemur, admonere debemus, What we are Taught, are
bound to Teach others. Oh! Let us See, Hear, and Understand, lest we be such
as have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, Hearts and understand not the
Importance of this Fire, which our Savior has sent down for ever into his
Church to be taught, Heard, and believed. From which, Quia aversi sumus, Aug.
Conf. lib. 4. c. p. 16
perversi sumus; Revertamur, ne Evertamur. Because we are averse, we are
therefore Perverse: Let us return lest we be destroyed: Lest our Weeping be
without relief, because without Repentance. Many indeed, we know, Chr^s. Hem.
6. in Alath.
Weep when they bury their Friends or Children, yet Weeping does not raise
them from the dead; others Weep when they loose their wealth, yet Weeping does
not recover it; others weep when they are wronged, yet Weeping does not right
them; Some Weep like Haman, when their proud Purposes be Crossed; Some like
Ahab, when their covetous Designements are not effected, Heu, quantum insano
iuvat indulgere doleri!

Oh the great delight we take in our wretched Weeping! But what Man, Woman, or
Child does not deserve to be cast both Soul and Body into that Sulphurous
Tophet, where is nothing but everlasting Weeping and Gnashing of teeth? And who
almost Weepeth for it? This (I know) is an ordinary Notion, and this we know
all, and understand it, Sed Doctrinaliter, non Disciplinaliter, (as says the
Schoole-man) But by way of Doctrine to disprove an Erour, not by way of
Discipline to ditect our Lines.

. 73.
Oh that we were not so stifnecked and obstinate in the customs of our
licentious Lives! Thus to be carried with the Sway of App^tits, rage of
Sensuality, tempests of Affections, without any discours^, Rule, or Restraint
of Reason. Then should we know, that the End for which the Lord exercises us
with Weeping, is to renew his defaced Image, that is to beget a right
understanding in us. We are all bound to declare that Difference, whereby
Nature has distinguished us from brute Beasts; Which consists not in
outward appearance and behavior, but chiefly in disposition of Mind and
Understanding: Which is so near a resemblance of the Lord, that it is his
Image in us, and that nothing in all his Creatures can so clearly express
him. Aquin. 1. Q. 39. A. 2. c.
For, as God understands and loves himself, so Man by his Intellectual
Faculty, is apt, and inclinable to understand him and love him: And the more
perfectly, Man understands and loves God, the more lively does he express
his Image. But where is the Image of God? Where is our Understanding? If we
understand not our estate, if we understand not our dangers: Which did we
understand, we would express some care and diligence how to avoid them. For
assuredly they want understanding that believe not their Dangers, and with all
care and diligence, endeavor not to avoid them. In Scriptures, the dangers of
our sin full estate are frequently exprested by Fires and Flames, by Scorching
and Burning, and the like: which if we duly did consider, we would often ask
our own hearts, Isa 33.14.
who among us can dwell in the devouring Fire? Who among us can dwell in
everlasting Burnings? What therefore Augustine said of the Damned in Hell, the
same let us say of the obdurate in heart, Aug* de (...) Des. lib. 21 c. 2.
Mirabile est ardere in ignibus, and tamen vi^ere; Sed mirabilius vinere
inig^ibus, nec dolere; Si autem hoc creditur, cur non and illud? It is
wonderful to burn in fire, and yet to live; But more wonderful to live in
fire, and not to Wee^e. If we believe the one, why not the other? Let us then
fix the eyes of our Souls, upon the invaluable pretionsnesse of our
Conformity to the Image of God, that the false represen^a ions of this
flattering World, may not frustrate the Lord of his End, and draw us from
Weeping: Which emplanteth in the Sanctified Soul by the Spirit of all Comfort,
such unconquerable Comforts, as are able to keep us in resolution against all
Malice and Cruelties whatsoever; And truly persuades us, that after the
approaching Period of a few and evil days, having beheld the face of God in
Righteousness, Psalm. 17.15.
we shall be satisfied, when we awake, with his likeness.

. 74.
Let it not seem grievous to Weep, for never in any (especially Halcyon)
days of the Gospel, was more barbarous Inhumanity, perfidious Treachery, and
exorbitant Impiety, studied, exercised, practiced among Christians, then now, a
fearful Presage of the fiery Trial. I say not this, (...), to emendicate
Attention: For it has been formerly showed, that our Sins are so tra^scendent,
that they have not been parallelled in former ages; And I wish unfeignedly,
Adherbal apud Salust.
Vt haec vana potius forent, quam mise ria nostra meis verbis fidem faceret,
That these things were false, far rather then our misery should find them
true: But Experience as well as Observation teaches me to Complain, Hieron,
ad Ch^omatun
In Patria nostra rusticitatis vernacula Deus Venture est, and Sanctior est ille
qui ditior est, In our Nation the Slave of Inhumanity, their Belly is their
GOD, and the Richest are accounted most Religious. Wherefore let it not seem
tedious to the Adulterers and Adulteresses of the World, that hunt after the
Love and friendship of the World, to cause their beds to swim with Tears.
For as David when he had defiled his bed with Adulterous Embracements, Psalm
6.6.
therefore chiefly Wept upon his bed: So let every one plentifully power forth
his Tears, for as much as every one (commonly) makes in these days of Peace
and Rest, his Bed the Place where his particular and Personal Iniquities are
first hatched and enacted; Mica. 2.2.
For it is upon their beds that Men devise Iniquities and work evil, that
when the morning is light they may practice it, because it is in the power of
their hand. To hinder the course of Divine Justice by mortal means, will be
more impossible, then for a man to beat the Lightening back again into the
Clouds with his breath. Luke 12.
There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid that shall
not be known: Sooner or later the mad^esse of Sinners shall be m^de eviden^,
^f not in the Sin as Zambri and Gozbi their fury; Number. 25.8.
Yet as David's, in the punishment, he did it secretly, says Gody, 2 Samuel
12.12.
but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun: Thus will
the Lord of Hosts be famous in every Sinners Infamy. I say therefore in the
word of the Lord, Joel. 1.5.
as the Prophet, Awake ye Drunkards, Weep and howl: I say it not only to
the Drunken with wine and strong drink, but with Sin and Affliction; And
without Presumption (I hope) I may confidently say with Cyprian, Cypr. de
lapsis.
Sacerdotem Dei nec occulta vestra crimina fallunt, That the true Minister and
Servant of God cannot be ignorant of your secret Sins: He that disclosed unto
Elisha, the Counsel of the King of Syria, does often reveal the Secrets of
the People, unto his Servants the Prophets, Amos 3.7.
howsoever it seems mervailous and incredible in our eyes. Yet it is
wonderful to see, how the Wisdom of the children of this World, bears
with, and performs all things in obedience to their Masters, save only to
their Ministers, which in the Spirit of Truth, teaches obedience only to the
Faith which is in Christ Jesus. The Merchant sends his Factours to Sea, and
no danger does stay them; The Husband man sends his Hindes into the Field,
and no weather must hinder them; The Captain leads his Soldiers into the
Battle, and no Death must terrify them; Rich men displace, disgrace, nay
devour and destroy, and they are suffered patiently. Thus we see that in this
latter age of the World, we are so rebellious to all that is of. God, that
nothing seems more bitter and grievous then spiritual Obedience. We can be
contented to abide any Truth, but not heavenly Truth; Any Wisdom, but not
Godly Wisdom; Any Laws, but not Holy Laws; Any Cross, but not the Weeping
Cross, through which we must enter (if ever) into the Kingdom of Heaven. Oh
let us not still be infatuated with a Reprobate Mind, to yield all Obedience
unto any Direction, and so much to be scandalized at the Word of Exhorcation,
as if every word were a blow levelled to undo us! For, Aug. Epist. 166.
Nulla est peior Mors animae, quam libertas erroris, No death of the Soul is
more dangerous, then Liberty to Sin. And yet none seem to Worldlings greater
Sinners, then such as are clothed with Weeping Garments: Their fair wedding
garments do not only cover many a foul sin in themselves, and enwall them
from all Dangers, Disgraces, Distresses, and Disasters in this life, to all
which they are exposed and hastened, which want them; But much more embolden
them to execute all Extremity and severity both in Word and Work, against
those that are rude and rough in the out side, bruised with Labors, wasted
with Miseries, which could never wear soft raiment, because of their heavy
burdens. Yet, those I could humbly beseech to remember, that (though
Apocryphal) which most renowned Fathers, both Greek and Latin, have
frequently inculcated in their Writings, Wisd 6, 6.
Mighty Men shall be mightily tormented.

. 75.
And therefore, seeing the signs of the Fig Tree do bud amongst us, and the
Messengers of the Lord (as once Cato showed a green Fig from Carthage in the
Senate, signifying that Carthage was too near Rome, for the Romans to be
secure) do put us in mind how near we are to the Gulf, where is nothing but
Weeping and Wailing, when we are least inclined to Weeping; Let us pray the
Lord, that these things be not the beginning of evil. And as our sins have
often occasioned some Men, as Miraculously (I dare say) to open their mouths,
as those Christians in Lybia, Euagr. lib. 4 cap. 14.
whose tongues Onorichus King of Vandals cut out for the Gospels sake, and yet
spoke plainly and distinctly in Constantinople: So, -- Nosperne mea praesagia
lingua.

Think it not strange, that not only the Voice of the Preacher turns
Exhortation into Lamentation, but that the Pen of the Scribe does expostulate
our want of Weeping: Seeing it can and will be but poor Comfort for any
Watchman or Messenger of the Lord on his death bed, Hieron. ad. Nepot.
that remembers Hieromes charge to Nepotian, if as Pericles the Heathen
rejoiced on his death bed, for that none of his Citizens in Athens had ever
worn a Mourning Gown through his occasion; So he be persuaded that none ever
mourned in Spirit through his Preaching whom Theodorus the Tragedian will
condemn, who said, That, Plutarch. desus land
(...), Not to make others laugh but to make them Weep and Mourn is only
wonderful; for we may not think that Vengeance, no more then Wickedness can
have an end. That the Lord takes in hand to root out or destroy us, no Man
can affirm; but to say that which we see and hear, the Sword is Drawn,
Sharpened, Ezekiel. 22.2.
and Fourbished, and why not against us, as soon as against others, our Sins
being as (if not more) exorbitant except we repent, and as the Ninivites, Luke
13.3. Iona. 2.8.
we turn from our evil ways in Mourning and Weeping, that the Almighty may
turn from the Plagues he has devised against us. As it is curious and above
our reach to search whether the Almighty intends to wast us or any other
Nation, so it is Ridiculous in the multitude of so many apparent Signs of our
displeased God, not to be afflicted, mourn, and Weep; Unto which we are so
frequently exhorted, where our Warchmen are not asleep, or our Seers blind.
Oh! Let us well consider, how dangerous our case is, how inexcusable our folly,
and how damnable our Security: That the Messengers of the Lord may not seem,
Tormenta quaedam adhibere; To torment Men before their time, because they tell
them of the wrath to come; Observing, Searching, Urging, Pressing, Applying,
Preaching in season and out of season, compare Scriptures with Scriptures,
Sins with Sins, and People with people, whence they may most firmly
conclude, Qui junguntur in culpa, Cypr. Epist. ^8.
nec in poena separantur, That Companions in Sin must be Companions in
suffering. If Leonidas when he saw his Soldiers dining after too sumptuous
and superfluous a manner, desired them so to Dine as they that were to Sup in
their Graves; It is not amiss to exhort a Luscious and Lascivious Gentry, a
Covetous and carnally minded Commonalty, to Rejoice as though they rejoiced
not, and to awake the compassion of the Almighty by. Weeping, before dread and
amazement do dull our senses, distract our thoughts, and leau^ us no liberty
but only to Weep.

. 76.
Think we then of these, that we may redeem the Time we have misspent, if
not in Hours, yet in Tears, That the Lord our God beholding our Contrition,
may accept our Tears in lieu of our Times. The Lord keeps an account of all
our idle hours, how idly we have consumed our Days, in the Works of vanity:
Aug. de Catechiz ruidb. c. 14.
Oh then, Flectamur, ne frangamur, Let us bow, lest we be broken! Oh that we
would Redeem the Time with Weeping! For which some hope of Comfort yet is left
in us; In as much as the Lord has a Book of Accounts, wherein our Sins are
set down, So, we know he has a Bottle wherein our Tears are put, if we be
wise for our own good, and learn of the Unjust Steward, Luke 16.1.
to make the best of our Opportunities. Yea, but when must we Weep, that the
chil dren of this World may not always be wiser in their Generation, then the
Children of light? Say not in thy Heart, What are the appointed Times of
Weeping? Which we conceive to be either General, the whole Time of our Life,
therefore called the Valley of Tears; In which as there is no Time, in which
we either Sin not, or suffer not for sin in our selves or others; So there
is no time of our Life, which (if it were possible) should be free from
Weeping. Or Particular, as 1. After special Sins, whether Palpable or
Secret, as Peter after his Denial went forth and Wept bitterly: Mat. 26.75
2. In special Afflictions, when the Lord by Crosses corrects our dullness
and sharpeneth us, 2 King. 20.
as Hezekiah in his sickness: 3. Before our special Services to the Lord,
Luk 7.39.
as that Sinful Woman which Wept, before she washed our Saviors feet: 4.
In Prayers for special blessings, as Hanna for her son Samuel. 1 Samuel 1.10
Oh the glorious Crowns of those blessed Mourners! That daily purchased a
Pardon of course for their ordinary infirmities, that washed and scowred their
Souls every Morning and Evening with Weeping, more duly then our ordinary
Professors their Face and Hands with water; And every day, as they run into
arrerages, had the black debt of their sins crossed with the red lines of the
blood of Christ by Weeping. Therefore, (as Bernard beseeches us) let us
remember our sins with Tears, Bern de moao vivend^ Ser. 10.
Quia qui non habet cordis contritionem in Lachrymis, non habet mundam
Orationem, For he that has not Contrition of heart in Tears makes no pure
or accepta le Prayer. Let us pretermit no day upon the forementioned Occasions
without Weeping, whereby we may make our Peace presently with our Lord and
Consciences, and so enjoy his wonted favors; I, a Favor (I dare say)
including all other favors. But oh the woeful and dangerous condition of
those Souls which weep not! but shutting their eyes against so clear a
Light, either willingly sit down in palpable Darkness, or fall back from
the sincerity of their Weeping: Never fearing, lest the Lord stripp them
naked, and set them as in the day they were borne, I, make them as a
Wilderness, set them as a dry land, and slay them with Thirst. Hos. 2.3. Aug.
de Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 2. c. 6.
For, Quis dubitaverit hoe esse sceleratius peccatum, quod est gravius
vindicatum, Who will doubt that to be the more grievous sin, which is more
severely punished? But because it is not for me to judge them; That I leave to
the high and impartial Judge. For us, as we would save our Souls, let us
Weep, that we may carefully preserve our Souls from the universal Contagion
of Wantonness and Profaneness. In other duties the Philosophers (...),
Hieron. ad ^emet^^^dem. ^ccle^, 7.16
and Solomon's ^vermuch, may have place; But let us never fear that our
diseretion can hate Lasciviousness too much; Let us awaken our Zeal to a
ferquent Opposition and daily Reclamation of such Wickedness: No man may sit
still, and think to avoyde the judgment of God, if he be but a bare
spectatour of sin, as has been prooved. For the most private or Common
Christian is an Actour and not a Witness only of Public, Common, and crying
Sins, unless at least he Weep for them. Must all ^srael be smitten for one
Achans secret Theft; And will the Lord spare us in the multiplied multitude of
our public Iniquities? Verily in this alone they are enemies to Christ, that
are not enemies to Sin, and love to do nothing. But briefly, if we find
any otherwise minded, let us hate their Opinions, strive against their
Practice, pity their misguiding, neglect their censures, labor their recovery,
pray for their Salvation, and Weep because they Weep not.

. 77.
Let not the Salvation of our Souls be so little esteemed or regarded, as not
to Weep for our present Misery, Especially when our present Misery, does
threaten us with present Mortality. I do of set purpose pass over the just,
though miserable occasions of our Weeping; Which are as monstrous as miserable,
yea Miraculous; seeing, Aug. de Ciut. Dei l. 10. c. 12.
Homo maximum est miraculum, Man himself is the greatest Miracle that Weepeth
not: For who is there that sees them not, or has not his part in them?
Wherefore then should the evil that is suffered be reported? Or wherefore
should the Evil that is foretold be neglected, more then the Evil that is
suffered? Whence we may infallibly conclude, the Day of our Visitation is come
already, seeing (...) ^orning of our Evils has appeared: The Morning even of
the Evils of our Sufferings, as well as of our Sins. It is not a Comete or an
Eclipse that we stand upon: We see a Morning, or rather a Day of Evils, in
which whosoever are most secure, Isa 30.13.
are as a breach ready to fall swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking
comes suddenly at an instant: Or, stand but like the Walls of a ruinous house
yet untouched, which in all likelihood must be pulled down, as well as the
rest: The Lord grant the Ruin thereof be not so fearful, as it is like to
be certain. Which that we may prevent, let us be exhorted and persuaded. 1.
To beg of the Lord with all importunity and continuance in prayer this
mercy, that he would melt and soften our hea^^ in Weeping; Resolving ^^^er to
appear before the Lord, but still to remember the Petition of the Prophet,
Ierem. 9.18.
That our Eyes may run down with Tears, and our Eyelids gush out with
weeping. 2. Eccles. 7.2.
To go more often into the house of Mourning then we do, that is, Not only
to converse with the humble and tender hearted Christians, which in Sorrow for
the hand of God upon them, and Affliction of Spirit do Weep; But to resort to
the house of God, where the Law as a Sword may shed, and the Gospel as a Sun
may thaw thy heart into reares, by the continual Preaching of the Word. 3. To
look much and often upon him whom we have pierced; Remembering the Passion of
our Savior, The Poverty, Banishment, Ignom^nie, Temptations, Apprehension,
Araignement, and Death, which he suffered for us; Considering him on the
Cross, how he was dug, his side with a Spear, his hands and feet with
Nails, Socrat. l. 1. c. 13.
and those so big, that Constantine made thereof an Helmet and a Bridle for
his own use in War: This Meditation and Application of his bloodshed will
dissolve more easily the hardest heart into Weeping, then the hottest blood of
Goats can the Adamant. 4. To set some time a part by Fasting for the
afflicting and humbling of our Souls, when we perceive the Lord displeased
with us: For in all our Afflictions the Lord intends our Weeping, not that,
as Esau, we should Weep only, and still keep Revenge, or other
bosome-Sinnes within; But put away the froward heart, hate and abhor the
Sin, that does so easily beset us; Unto which Action, Fasting is a special
Means to help it forward. As a Rider breaks his horse, that he may travel
him, both the way and the Pace which he shall think fit; So a Mourner must
beat down his own Inclinations, and tame his flesh by Fasting.

. 78.
But I may not, nay I would not seem to prescribe, only give me leave to
Exhort; For, Non est tenuitatis meae dictare vobis, etc. as said Bernard; It
suteth not with my mean Knowledge to direct you the Means, but with my
Conscience to rub your Memories. We exhort and beseech you therefore, Cypr. de
lapsis.
Cum lachrymis nostris vestras lachrymas jungite; Add your Tears unto our
Tears, that all of us, Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus, May
Weep as bitterly, as we have sinned grievously. Oh therefore! before the Lord
shake off the dust of his feet against us, and turn to some other Nation more
worthy, let us open the doors of our hearts, that he may come in and sup and
stay with us: Let us labor, our Souls may Weep in Secret, as Jeremiah, for
that is the right Method in the Practice of Weeping. The Heart is. Originally
evil, the Treasury and Storehouse of Wickedness; therefore as it was first
Deformed with Wickedness; so let it first be reformed with Weeping. For many
we see whose Weeping is not from the heart: Si de cord procederent illa
lachrymae, Bern. in Sent.
non tam facile soluerentur in risum, If their Tears proceeded from the heart,
they could not so easily be turned into laughter. But away with that
Sycophanticall Hypocrisy, that advises men to begin with outward Abstinence
from Sin as the more easier, and so by degrees to come to inward
Mortification. The heart, as our Savior teaches, is surcharged with the
superfluities of all wickednesses, and thence flows Corruption, which has
continual Eruption, into corrupted Action. So that it is impossible, our
outward Actions should be Reformed, while as the heart remains unpurged with
Weeping. Ierem. 4.14.
Listen we then to the Prophets Counsel, O Jerusalem, wash thine heart: Iam.
4.8.
And to the Apostles, Cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your mind you
double minded: which both Washing and Purifying must be by Weeping. Let none
think they do Lament enough, when they have brought their outward man to some
Weeping; Their hearts yet inwardly swelling with abundance of Abominations.
For, the heart, as it is the Fountain of natural Life, and of a Sinful Life;
so must it be the Fountain of Spiritual Life by Weeping: For so much as
Weeping always brings with it a wonderful change and palpable alteration of
Heart and Life. Chrysostom. de Job. Serus. ^.
(...), etc, For always and everywhere Weeping changes the form and fashion
of our Life, faith Chrysostom. All other Weeping, is but the Visour of
Weeping, not the face; Or if the face, not the Heart. It may be a Weeping for
the Judgment, not for the Sin; As the very Devils do Weep and Howl to be
tormented. Every Weeping is not a Sign of Grace; Happy only is that Weeping,
for which the heart is the holier.

. 79.
But as my Purpose is not to flatter any one (though it be a maine Sin in
our days, Hier. ad Celan. Masron.
Vt qui adulari nescit, aut inuidus aut superbus putetur; To esteem every one
either Proud or Invious, that cannot flatter) so my earnest desire is, that
none should flatter or deceive themselves, to think that by the external Act
of Mourning and Weeping, they may either turn the Wrath of God from them, or
be reconciled to his Mercy and Favor: Unless where is a Fire of Evil as of
Malice and Envy, we seek to quench it; Where is a Sink of Evil, as of
Uncharitableness and Coverousnesse, we seek to cleanse it; Where is a Root
of Evil, as of Pride and Hypocrisy, we seek to extirpate it; Where is a
Storm of Evil, as of Oppression and Cruelty, we seek to assuage it. Against
these and the like Sins the Lords Messengers have cried both late and early
in all Ages, but more importunately in our Age, then ever: -- Sed quid decuisse
iuvabas?

Yet their labor has been for the most part as Water poured upon the Earth;
As a Fire kindled, where no man warmeth, himself; As meat dressed, when the
Guests refuse to come; Or as when a deaf man is taught, or a dead man is
cured, so our Message is rejected and despised. Cypr. Epist. 30.
Thus, Animus aegrorum Medentium respuere solet industriam, Our Sick think
they have no need of the Physician; In so much that nothing may seem now to
remain for us to do, but only to Weep. For in this case it is, that the good
Samaritan said unto the Host, Take care of him; Luke 10.35.
In which words (as Bernard excellently) Petitur ^ te cura, Ber. de Consider.
lib. 4.
non curatio, He enjoyneth not the Minister to Cure, but to take Care for the
Wounde^ man: If the Wounded man, as Babylon, will not be Cured, Ierem. 51.9.
Ezekiel. 33.9.
he shall die for his Iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul. Seeing
then, Dolendum a Medico, quod non delendum a Medicina, The Physician may
bewail; where his Physic cannot prevail; In these our desperately obstinate
Times, we have done our part when we Weep, and we shall assuredly recvive
our reward. If we cannot turn the Stream, yet if we endeavor to Swim
against it, it shall be out glory: For even without Conquest, it is glorious to
have resisted. Therefore as Paul told the Philippians, Phil. 3.1^.
So let all Faithful Pa^tors tell the Enemies of Christ, even Weeping, that
howsoever neither their words, nor Works, nor writings prevail with them; Yet
they must Exhort to Weeping, that all may be inexcusable, that even Idiots,
Women, and Children, may not justly say in their deepest Desolations, Nonne
haec praescisse oportuit nos antea, Should not these things have been told us
before? Wherefore though Israel play the Harlot, Hosh 4.15. Isa. 61.6.
yet let not Judah offend; Seeing the Lord has set Watchmen upon her Walls,
which shall never hold their peace day nor night; But like the Valiant Ones of
the Lord shall cry without, Isa. 33.2.
and as it becomes Ambassadors of peace, shall Weep bitterly. Certainly, if
we could be persuaded of these things, we should not much need to be
exhorted to Weeping, but as the Israelites, when the Angel had rebuked them,
for disobeying the Voice of the Lord, Judge 2.5.
lifted up their Voice and Wept, and called that place Bochim: So our Weeping
would turn our Churches into Bochims; And make our Sermons and Supplications
in all Places, Ezech. 2.10
as Ezechiel his Roll of Prophecy, wherein was written Lamentation, and
Mourning, and Woe.

5. Consolation.
. 80.
AND now, Oh Sacred Weeping! What shall I say of thee? Shall I say thou art an
honorable Virtue? Or shall I term thee some heavenly Deity? Verily it
seems thou art a Deity, and that God has imparted some part of his Dominion
unto thee: That he has made thee his Vicegerent upon earth, and invested thee
with his own Authority to Bless and Comfort. As the Lord does comfort in
heaven, so does Mourning upon Earth; And as only the Lord makes the Righteous
blessed in heaven, so Mourning (by his Blessing) makes the Unrighteous blessed
upon earth: For, Math. 5.4.
Blessed are they, not, Blessed shall they be that Mourn; Because after Sin
none are blessed, but Mourning Sinners. Whom then may we esteem Blessed in
this Life? The Rich? The Witty? The Wise? The Mighty? The Honorable? Alas!
Miserable Comforters are they unto others, and Miserable Comforters are they to
themselves, who esteem themselves or others blessed, by being any, or all of
these, in which is neither trust nor taste of true Felicity: Blessed are they
that Mourn. It cannot be denied, but Mourners are almost always corrected,
yet we may see them always comforted; In that their Correction proceeds
from the Love and Favor of GOD, either as a Bridle restraining them from the
Licentiousness of Sin, or as a File and Hammer consuming the Dross or Rust of
Sin. Neither does the Lord abridge Mourners of these earthly comforts, which
dare weigh with our discontentments in this life. His greater Light of
Spiritual Comforts, does not extinguish the lesser of earthly Comforts:
Health, Wealth, Friends, Reputation, Competencie, as they may occasion, but not
limit our Rejoicing; So they cannot be Comforts if they delight us not.

. 81.
Behold then, this Corrasiue Divinity may be a sole Sovereign Cordial of
Comfort, to those that in the Time of their troubles go out of themselves, and
with Weeping eyes look upward to the God of all Consolation, Psalm. 30.5.
Whose anger endures but for a moment, and in whose favor is life: For their
Weeping may endure for a Night, but joy comes in the Morning^ Behold, Isa.
30.19.
the Lord does wait that he may be gracious unto them, at the voice of their
cry; For when he shall hear it, he will answer them. Oh happy hand which is
so heavy upon mournful Sinners, that it suffers them not to lie senseless
in their Sins, heaping to themselves wrath against the day of wrath. It may
be a Comfort above all comforts, that this heavy hand raises them by Weeping
out of the ordour of their sins: For he that has so loved them, will not
leave them; He that has begun his work in them, will accomplish it, even as
every Natural cause leaves not the work unfinished, which it begins; As
the Virtue of the Seed cease not in the blade, not in the Ear, not in the
Leaf, not in the Flower, until it bring forth fruit to perfect ripeness; As
the Bird never forsakes her young, until she see them able both to fly, and
to provide for themselves: So the Supernatural Cause of all Causes is moved
by his infinite goodness and Love, to finish the work which he has begun.
Fear not then, Oh Weeping Soul, The works of the Lord are perfect works;
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
He who has begun to love thee, will never change, but will persist to
perfect all his Gifts and Blessings upon thee, that thou may rejoice after
thy Weeping. For wherefore did he turn thy heart from Sin? Wherefore did he
provoke thee to Weeping? But because thou should Wash and be clean, and
Rejoice in thy cleanness. The Eagle feeling his VVings heavy, Aug. in Psalm.
103.
is said to plunge them in a Fountain, and so renews his strength; And every
Christian that feels the heavy burden of Sin, bathing himself in a
Fountain of tears, becomes lively and lusty like the Eagle: And as the
Rainbow in the Cloud, Genesis 9.15.
denounces a present Shower, yet withal assures, that Waters shall no more
become a Flood to destroy the earth: So the Rain bow of Sorrow in the heart of
a Sinner, may extort Tears from the eyes, yet never showreth down the
overflowing waters of Confusion unto Death, but the everflowing streams of the
everlasting Covenant of Grace, Mercy, 2 Cor. 7.10
and Repentance unto Salvation not to be repented of. The cause then of our
Dullness and Discontentments in the days of our distresses, Isa. 36.6.
is our dependence upon the Reed of Egypt, or worldly means, whilst we
neglect the Principal means of Weeping. Our corrupted Nature and Carnal
Friends, will direct us in Crosses and Calamities to Company, Music,
Discourse, Gaming, and the like, which are but as the drinking of hot VVines to
qualify a burning Fever, a little pleasing to the taste, but much increasing
both the Pain and Danger of the Disease; And like the Fire, which Queque magis
tegitur, tanto magis astuat Ignis.

The more it is covered, the more it burns. Whereas all blessed Mourners may
well assure themselves, that as after their Mourning they find some
preparation and beginning of all and every Grace they want or Weep for: So
what ever Grace by Weeping is prepared and begun in them, it will be
perfected and perpetuated. The Lord in Wisdom -- Curis aeuit m^rtalia corda.

Suffers Corrasives, Cauterizes, Cuttings, and Launcings to be our Portion in
this life; that we Weeping may be both comforted and defended by his mercy,
that we Weeping may be prepared and guided to his Glory, that we Weeping
may be delivered from the Plagues which the Wicked shall endure.

. 82.
Now that we may have Life and Comfort in Weeping, that we may neither be
beguiled through Infidelity and Uncertainty of our Hopes, nor benumbed through
Deadness and dullness of out Hearts; Let us first ground our Faith in Christ
through his Word and Spirit; And then set often before our eyes our
everlastingly joyful Estate and Condition. And for the first, Consider,

. 83.
1. The Weeping Soul draws the Lords special Love and Favor to it, in most
special manner; for though the Lord beholds all things, yet his more
special Eye is to the Mourning Spirit. God has a general care of all things,
Isa. 66.1, 2.
but the grieved Soul is his particular Treasure. Hier. ad Ocean.
O faelix fletus, qui Dei oculos ad se trahit, Oh happy Weeping which draws
the Eyes of God unto it! Great then should be our Comfort when we are enabled
to Weep, for so much as it draws the Lords special Favor to us. And here
(because it is no shame to learn Wit of Heathens, neither is it material, in
whose School we take out a good Lesson) the Graceless Gentiles observed that
Weeping ever portended prosperity, and foresignified Felicity. Arrian de
Expeditione Alexandri.
When Alexander began his Persian Wars, the Marble Statue of Orpheus i^
Pieria, is said to Weep: Which so wonderfully astonished all the Kings
Sorcerers and Soothsayers, that only Aristander the Telmissean Soothsayer could
interpret it to prognosticate all prosperous event, and good success unto the
King. And that we might the more fully be assured of the Lords Favor, he
promises unto all sincere Mourners the assured Comforts of outward Blessings,
1 King. 21.29.
which Ahabs Hypocritical Weeping wanted not. Isa. 1.19.
For if we be willing and obedient, that is, willing to obey the former
Commandment (mentioned Verse 16.) of Washing and making our selves clean with
Weeping, we shall care the good of the Land, that is, we shall not only have
the blessings of Heaven, but the blessings of the Earth also. Thus when we
feast the Lord with the Water of our Weeping, he will fill us with the Wine of
his Blessings, and power down a Blessing without measure, when in any good
measure we Weep for our Sins.

. 84.
2. That for all Blessed Mourners are already prepared and now revealed so pure
and constant delights, so Noble, so Generous, yea so Angelical that Heaven it
self has no better, but only in degree and manner of fruition; For so
transcendent are the Objects of their thoughts above all other Men, that the
Excellency of their Justification, the Sweetness of their Recanciliation, the
Glory of their Adoption, the Assurance of their Salvation, and their Freedom
from the Fear of Death and Hell, do breed in their Hearts, Pleasure and
Joys, so far exceeding the Mirth of any Worldling or professed Epicure in
Quantity or Quality, that a sweeter or more ravishing mirth never entered into
the Heart of Man, as testifies the Apostle: 1 Cor. 2.9.
Which cannot be understood of the Joys in Heaven, for the most Regenerate
here cannot tell what they shall be, Math. 5.4.
but of those Joys, with which all Spiritual Mourners are comforted in this
Life. In which respect the Gospel is truly said to be the tidings of great
Joy, and indeed of so great Joy, as the Heart of Mortal Man cannot receive:
Yet true right, title, and sweetness thereof belong only to those that
Mou^^e; For the Spirit of God applies and Preaches those g^^d Tidings, To the
Poor, Luke 4.18.
the broken hearted, and those that Mourn, etc. Therefore as the inward
Faculties of the Soul are capable of greater Pleasure then the outward senses,
partly because they are more Noble and Divine, and partly because their Object
is more excellent which is God himself and all Goodness: So the more perfect
those Faculties are, the more perfect Pleasure they apprehend in their proper
Objects. But Mourners have the inward Faculties of their Souls, more perfect
and clear then other Men; Because nothing either defiles or defaceth the
inward Faculties of the Soul, but only Sin, which they constantly wash away
with Weeping. Hence it must needs follow, that Mourners only enjoy pure
Pleasure in this Life, as proceeding from the purifyed and sanctified Faculties
of their Souls, washed by Weeping from Corruptions of Sin. In our Mourning
then, Cypr de Immort.
Deus non sanguinem nostrum sed fidem quaerit, The Lord seeks not our Blood,
but our Belief, Not our Death, but our Faith: For by Faith only are the
Comforts of the Gospel then plentifully dispensed, when we are most
uncomfortable, and do Mourn most for Sin: And if we truly Mourn for any
Grace of the Spirit, the Gospel assures us of it, in some competent measure.
It is then (after a sort) ingenerate and natural unto the Regenerate to Weep:
Which Action of Weeping because some would violently and by force restrain,
Pelus. lib. 2. Epis. 176. and l. 3. Epist. ^.
a Father tells us, they fall into diverse and dangerous diseases in stead of
Joy and Comfort. Mourners therefore are filled with the good things of the
Gospel, Luke 1.53.
and have the Spirit of Consolation. Woe therefore and thrice woe is unto that
Soul, whom the desire of this Blessing draws not to Weeping.

. 85.
3. That the Lord makes special Provision in all Dangers and Distresses, for
the safety of those that Weep: So that Weeping may be truly called, Na^. in
laud Hieron.
(...), The greatest and safest Guard of Man's Life. For Mourners are never
forsaken, but in the midst of their Miseries, Mercy does compass them about;
They are never cast off, but are always by the Mercies of God safely guarded;
The Mercies of God do defend them for the present, and will deliver them in
the time to come. For the present, it does enable them, not only willingly,
but joyfully, and desirously to suffer the Momentany Afflictions of this life:
For the future time, it prepares for them an eternal Crown of Glory, to
which all the wailings and VVeepings of this Life, are an Ordinary and almost
necessary passage: As therefore when the six Angel, Ezech. 9 2.
like Men were come down against Jerusalem, with every one his VVeapon in his
hand to destroy it, first there was a course taken to set a mark on the
foreheads of them, that sigh and Weep for all the Abominations that were done
in the midst thereof. The reason may be, By Weeping we are united unto God (as
is formerly showed) and so we possess God, and have God. Cyprian de Orat.
Dominica.
And therefore, Cum Dei sunt omnia, habenti Deum nihil deerit, si Deo ipse non
desit, Seeing all things are Gods nothing can be wanting to him that has God,
if Man himself be not wanting to God, In the want of Weeping. And the Sword
of Vengeance is never drawn, till particular order be taken for the safety of
Spiritual Mourners: And if it come to pass that they be swept away in any
common Calamity, yet their death is so precious in the sight of the Lord, Isa.
57.1.
that it is their happiness to be taken away from the Evil^ to come. But to
strengthen us under all burdens, we have one joy (that were all our Sorrows
doubled) could make us lightly bear them: And this is, the Truth of Gods
Promises. Of which we have an experimental Knowledge, Theodoret. l. 5. c. 24.
like that of Theodosius the Elder, who, when he Wept, had the weapons of his
enemies turned into their own bowels: Socrat. l. 7. cap. 18.
And like that of Theodosius the Younger, who, while he Wept, and Prayed, had
an hundred thousand Saracens drowned by Angels in Euphrates. Therefore the
only way. 1. Either to keep back those Punishments our Sins have deserved,
is to Weep; For Gods Anger in Scripture is often compared to Fire which no
Water, but the Water of Weeping can prevent or extinguish. 2. Or to take away
Punishments when they are inflicted; As Manasseth, -- Scelere ante ali^^
immanier omnes 2 Chronicles. 33.13.


Who did more evil then the Nations did before him; His Weeping having broken
the fetters of his Sins, broke likewise the setters which detained him in
Prison. 3. Or to sanctify our Afflictions, and mitigate the Pain and Poison
of them, when they cannot be removed; Thus Crosses often are as no Crosses, 1
Cor. 7.36
and they that Weep as though they Wept not: When we through fear do Weep
in Confession, Deprecation, or Supplication for Mercy, -- Nostra est timer iste
Volupta^s

Our crosses cannot affright or grieve us so much as our Tears do cheer us
in Weeping.

. 86.
7. That Mourners are in a most happy State, for they have assurance of the
Remission of their Sins. Our Sins are written in a Book, in the Book of
the Lords Remembrance; Unto which our Tears are like unto a Water-Spunge. If
we Weep, then our Sins are blotted out of that Book of Remembrance; Chrysostom.
hom. 2 in Psa. 51
(...). For our tears are the great Sponge of our Sins. Hier^ ^. ad Julian.
So that Peccatores pristinum recipient gradum, si sordes fletibus lavarint.
Sinners are sure to have their Sins pardoned, if they have washed them with
Weeping. The Mourning Sinner only Ille verus vitium purgas in am^e no^^.

Washes away his old Sins with the new Water of Tears. If we can then but
unfeignedly Weep for our Sins, we are safe. When the Stream of our Sins,
and the Stream of Gods wrath for our Sins, come against our Souls, if we
can get the Stream of our Tears, to meet with the stream of Christ's blood,
the Streams of our Si^^ and of Gods wrath are either dried up, or turned
another way: Because our Weeping makes our Sins both seen and not seen;
Seen unto our selves, and so amended; Not seen unto the Lord, and so
remitted. As the Tears of Vine-branches do cure the Corporal Leprosy; Plin.
lib. 23 in Proaemio.
So the Tears of those Vine-branches graffed into the true vine Jesus Christ,
do cure our Souls of Sin that Spiritual Leprosy. And we have the Lords
infallible Promise, Zachary 13.1, That, Then, that is, whenever we do
Mourn for our Sins, as for our Firstborn, We shall have a Fountain
opened for Sin and for Uncleanness. The Reason is, Non Vindicabit Dominus bi^
in id ipsum, Hieron. ad Castratium
The Lord will never punish one Sin twice: For what we punish in our selves
with Tears, the Lord will never punish with Torments, according to that of the
Prophet, Nahum. 1.9
Affliction shall not rise up the second time. Thus if our heads be Fountains of
Tears to bewail our Sins, Christ's heart will be a Fountain of blood to wash
away our Sins. Not that Weeping meriteth Remission, nor that it apprehends
it, for so only Faith brings Remission of Sins, but as it is a necessary and
inseparable Attendant of Faith in apprehending Remission. For when we hold out
the hand of Faith to receive Gods Mercy, we do it with Weeping eyes,
lamenting our Misery. And therefore though it be Faith that apprehends Mercy
and Pardon, yet because this Faith is (in a manner) a Weeping Faith, yea even
then most of all Weeping, when it most of all apprehends Mercy: Math. 5.4.
Therefore is the Promise of Comfort and Remission of sins so often in
Scripture made unto Weeping.

. 87.
Secondly, As for the eternally joyful estate of blessed Mourners, as it is
incomprehensible, so inexpressible. For all Comforts and Graces our souls can
have here, in this time of Regeneration, are in Comparison not only mixed and
dilute, but short and sudden flashes of comfort, to our never ending Joys in
Glorification. Here our Knowledge is darkened with Ignorance, there God himself
is Fullness of Light to the Understanding; Here our Memories are clouded with
forgetfulness, there is continuation of Eternity without intermission; Here
our Wills are vexed with Distractions, there they shall be without disturbance;
Here our Affections are tossed with Passions, there the superior part of the
soul pleases it self in the Vision of God, and the inferior is satiated
with the fruition of his pleasures. And thus though the comforts of Mourners in
this Life be greater then they ca^ either ask or think, yet are they still
soyled and stained with Thoughts, Fantasies, Forgetfulness, Infirmities,
Affections, which can never be removed, till after this Life we be perfected in
our Virtues, and freed from our Frailties, never Mourning, but ever Praising
our Creator without Defatigation or satietie. These and the like
incomprehensible and inexpressible Comforts, although they be delayed for a
while, (...) si nondum res, Au^ust de doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 22
tamen spes nos he tempore consolatur, If not their Help, yet their hope does
comfort us in this Life. They are sure, though secret Comforts, and such as by
Reason of the hiddennesse of them, make many to think it is the most perplexed
life in the world, to turn our careless Living into holy Mourning. Yet when
the day of our Refreshing shall come, all these and many more Comforts shall
we suck, Isa. 6^.11.
and be satisfied with the breasts of our Consolations. Now our Tears are as
Vailes upon our faces, overshadowing our Happiness, that it cannot be seen:
But when they shall be wiped away, then at last shall be a Day of full and
final Refreshing; In which, as they whom their Mothers comfort, the Lord will
comfort us, and we shall be comforted. Our Sun shall no more go down, neither
shall our Moon withdraw it self; For the Lord shall be our everlasting Light
and Life, when the days of our Mourning shall be ended.

88.
But for so much as we are so far from Understanding the full Felicities which
Mourners shall enjoy, as we are from enjoying them; For no man does understand
them, but they who do enjoy them. And because it is the Confession of blind
Phylosophie, that our Understanding of heavenly things, is, (...), As the eyes
of Owls that cannot behold the Sun; I conclude unto Mourners, 1 Reg. 10.16.
as the Queen of Sheba unto Solomon. It was a true report that I heard in mine
own Land, of thine Acts and thy Wisdom; Howbeit, I believed not the words,
until I came and mine eyes have seen it, and behold the half was not told
me. Thus, we are further from heaven, then the Queen of Sheba was from
Solomon; And we hear of our joys there as she of Solomon; And our report of
them is true, as their report of Solomon; But our report is not believed, no
more then the report of the wisdom of Solomon, But when they shall enjoy those
Comforts, they will confess, that not half the Good and Glo ry was reported
on earth, which they find in heaven. Where likewise, Cypr. d^ M^rt.
Dominus est daturus eis Gloria sua ampliora praemia, qu^ru circa se fuerint
desideria maejora, The Lord will reward with greater Glory, those that with
greater desire, longed after his presence in Weeping, Isa. 61.7.
When everlasting joy shall be unto all Spiritual Mourners. *

Conclusion.
89.
BUT oh Lord, Who believes our Report? Or to whom is the Comfort, Benefit, and
Excellency of this Grace of thine revealed? Oh Lord, To whom shall we speak,
and apply what has been spoken? For the Sons of men have lost their
hearing. Charm we never so wisely, exhort we never so earnestly, men despise
us Ministers and our Admonitions, as if we spoke only out of Ch^ler and
Passion, out of Fashion and Formality. Yea, as among the Jews, there was not
one Hangman, but every one wa^ Executioner, so now among us every one almost is
a Carping Censurer. Therefore it was my endeavor to submit to the Philosophers
grave and strict precept, Arist Top^ ^ Cap 14 sect 4.
(...), That the Authorites, Examples, Testimonies, and other Evidences
alleged, should convince such Critics, that, Scalig in R^sp^^erar.
Nos Novatores non sumus, licet illi sint Veteratores, That we teach no new
Doctrine, though they corrupt, contemn, or abuse true Doctrine. And because
the general Complaint of the world is, that there is No end of making many
Books, Aug. Epist. 101.
for, Laborant homines in discendo, and brevia non valent intelligere, pro lixa
non amant legere, There is little or no fruit in those that read them; As
slenderly slighting them, as ever Julian the Apostata did the Books of
Primitive Christians. To whom though St. Basils Rejoinder to the same
disdainful Apostata, (...), Sozom. l 5. c 17.
To read and not to understand, is to condemn or contemn, may fitly be
retorted; Yet, Oh that I could stir up some Weeping Intentions and Affections
in some Readers, whose eyes may happily be cast upon this Advise! Then would
they also endeavor to work the like in others, and so a small number by
multiplication might prove a great. Yet that I may not be censured as one, Who,
Dum alienos errores emendare nititur, Hier ad Lucin.
ostendit suos, Whilst he would amend faults in others, publishes his own.
Only Duty herein excuses me from Presumption; Seeing, (...), In doing our
Duties, our faults are excusable. For the present I know and acknowledge
ingenuously, that I have violated many Rules of Art, and omitted not only many
Circumstances, but much more Substance, whilst it has been my desire to
prosecute the Defect of Weeping, without exact Method or Rhetoric: And the
rather, seeing in Complaints, it is the best Method to observe no Method, and
the best Rhetoric is sincere Profession and Confession of the Truth. In
which, my heart-broke Elegies have given an harsh and broken Harmony, a sullen
Style as well as sacred* And being tuned heavily to sighs and lamentations, it
could not b^^ abhor the strong Lines of Descant and Division. Yet in all
these, where Intellecta parum, confusaque verba fuerunt, I have failed, God (I
hope) and good People will pardon me, because of my unfeigned Desire to incite
all to this Duty of Weeping; And yet both Freely and Sparingly: Freely in
regard of true Weepers, lest unto them I should seem Cynicall, in saying too
little; Sparingly, in regard of our Wantons, lest unto these I should seem
Satyricall, in saying too much.

. 90.
Endeavoring therefore my self, Accipiat lachrymas vtraque turba meas, To be
made all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9 22.
that I might by all means gain some to Christ, I humbly and heartily beseech
the great Lord of our harvest, to touch the heart of some learned Zenas, some
skillful Apelles, some Practical Divine, with a Coal from his Altar, who may
teach us the Art of Weeping. The Art of Weeping, which is more necessary to be
taught and learned in our days, then any of all the Liberal Sciences. Oh that
this Art were seriously studied, taught, and practiced! then would the Beauty
of Weeping more orieutly blaze in the eyes of all, the Name of it more
pleasantly sound in the Ears of all, and the Contraries of it be more odiously
censured of all. We have (I confess) the use of Weeping, although it be not
taught us, as men had the use of Logic before the Art was penned: Yet none can
deny, but that Rules and Directions orderly collected, to acquaint us with the
Name, Nature, Subject, Object, Kinds, Properties, Causes, Effects, Ends,
Means, Marks, Canons, and Motives of it, would much conduce to a more lively
and certain Practice, then wild and unguided Affections: And such helps Gods
Spirit in Ordinary despi^eth not. All that I, upon this sudden, and (as I
conceive) extraordinary and necessary Occasion of Weeping, undertook
(intending only Sanctisication, and no Matter of Controversy) was to be at
least like the Whetstone in the Poet, Horat de Ar^e Poet
Which can sharpen the Knife, though it self cannot cut. And the rather,
because it better beseems my years to warn, then to teach; To enkindle
Affections, then to inform Judgment (Though, Aug cont. Cres^on. Gramm. lib.
4. c. 65.
Arrogantia non sit, vel quaerere vel asserere Veritatem, It be no Presumption
in any man, either to search or Teach the Truth.) And out of this short Text of
Weeping, to bring some Light to the Grace of Weeping.

. 91.
Let me (in the mean while) Congratulate thee, Oh Christian, whosoever thou
art; That running after thy only Pattern Jesus Christ thy Redeemer, do
follow this Affection of his Weeping, that all Gracious Effects may follow
thee: That art become (as it becomes thee) an humble Suppliant in the lowest
degree of Sorrow and Shame: That powredst out thy Soul at his feet with
Tears, and, Aug. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 8.
Tam vultu quam mente turbatus, Make thy abject Countenance and dejected
Gesture, unfeigned Messengers of thy distressed Thoughts: For thy Mournful
Elegies shall be turned into joyful Halelujahs, when the Laughing Humor of
every Democritus, will prove but a doleful Dorion. Well knows thy mild
Ph^sitian, that, Mors ista Criminum, Cypr. Epist. 2.
est vita virtutum, This sharp Corrasiue of Weeping, angreth thy tender and
wounded heart with great bitterness. Yet -- Dabit Deus his quoque finem.

Thy God will assuredly apply a sweet Lenitive to assuage thy pain; By which
also thou may acknowledge thy Calamity to be rather a fatherly
Chastisement, then a severe Punishment. Plin. l 12. c. 15.
For doubtless as that Myrrh is more precious which drops from the Tree of it
own accord, then that which issues enforced by Incision, o^ other ways: So
those tears are more acceptable to the Lord, which earnest desire of Grace in
Love and Humility causes to distill. And, as when the Eagle broods, the Chicke
that comes of the Egg lying nearest her heart is best beloved of her;
Plutarch.
So the Tears of thy humble and contrite Heart are no less acceptable unto
the Lord, then the blood of Martyrs: Yea every true Mourner is a true Martyr,
for, Basil.
(...), The whole life of the Just Man is a Martyrdom. And therefore, He that
is both Commander and Spectatour of thy Combat says in a word behind thee,
Luctare, Adiuuabo: Isai. 30.21.
Aug. in Ps. 4.^.
Vincito, Coronabo: Be of good courage, thy God is both Judge and Rewarder of
thy Conflict: Who admits thee so often into his Presence, and affords thee
space to embrace the sacred Ordinance of his Word and Sacraments, the Conduits
of his Grace, and Seals of thy Redemption, by which he renews the evidences
of his unchangeable Love, and accepts all thy Sacrifices. Thus thy Gracious
Lord, who is ever a Merciful Father to forsaken VVretches, an easy Judge to
repenting Sinners, and a God of comfort to sincere Mourners, will not only
stint thy Weeping, but perfect thy Joy, and make the end of thy Weeping and
Sorrows, the beginning of thy never-ending pleasures.

. 92.
Let it not then be tedious or troublesome unto thee to weep, seeing unto none
does thy Lord impart his Love, but unto whom he imparteth his Labor: And with
none does he communicate his Grief, but therewith also he communicates his
Grace. We are caught with Sin, as Fishes are taken with a bait: Therefore
as the Fish Scolopendra, Plin. lib. 9. Cap. 43.
having sucked in the Fishers hook, instantly does rid her from it by vomiting
up all her guts: So let it not be tedious to power out thy Soul before God by
casting up, and casting out in Weeping all the sinful baits of Satan within
thee. Be not then (as most be) of so effeminate and soft disposition, that
they are ready to swound at the very name and first Alarm of Weeping: Seeing
in the troublesome Sea of this World, Aug. Trac. 1. in to (...)
Non portum sed planctum iuuenimus, We find no Haven but howling, that we
should employ our selves in seeking to redress by weeping and sorrow, what we
cannot avoy de in sin. Stand not gazing on others in thy greatest dangers,
expecting aid from God, but not remembering, that thou must, (...), Add ^hy
own Industry to the In vocation of Divine assistance: For Mercy and Grace are
not gotten by wishing, it is by weeping and Watching that they gain a good
and Godly success. Origin Ho^ in Ierem.
A tristibus semper sednecessarijs inchoat Deus, deinde progreditur ad
hilariora, God ever begins at necessary discontentments, and so proceeds
unto things more pleasing; First he wounds, then he makes whole; First he
plucketh up, then he planteth; First he mortifyeth, then he vivifyeth. Cant.
2.2.
As thy Beloved is called a Lilly among Thorns, so he cannot be attained with
idle ease: Thou must endure not only labor but pain likewise, If thou will
enjoy him. If thou would have his Head to comfort thee, it is crowned with
Thorns; If his Heart to pity thee, it is pierced with a Spear: If his Hands
or Feet to help thee, they are stroke through with Nails; And if his Eyes to
watch ^uer thee, behold! they are Lymbecks of Tears. Wherefore, Recusas esse
in Corpore, Aug. Tract 87. (...) Joan.
si non vis pati cum Capite, Thou refusest to be a Member of the Mystical body
of Christ, if thou will not suffer with thy Head and Savior. Know then, Oh
Sin full Soul, that Sinners may be forgiven if their Sins be lamented
For the Poison of Sin is not like the Poison of Tarantula, It must be cured
with Mourning, and not with Music. Therefore as that Holy Bishop spoke
concerning Augustine before his Conversion, Aug. Conf. 12. l. 3. c. 3.
Fieri non potest vt Filius istarum Lachrymarum pereat, So may it be spoken
concerning thee before thy Consolation, Fieri non potest vt in Fluvio istarum
Lachrymarum pereas, It is impossible, that in the Flood of thy Tears thou
should perish. For every Grace and good Gift, which no other Mortal Force,
Favor, or Policy can procure, the continued Tears of Godly Weeping are able
to obtain. And as it is undoubtedly true, that he never leaves those that
love him, and ever loves those that Weep with him; So thou shall undoubtedly
find him Liberal above Measure, and Comfortable beyond Expectation, not for
any Merit of thy Weeping, but for his own Mercies sake.

. 92.
Wherefore, Oh Blessed Savior, thou alone that know how little account I
make of this unworthy Service I have done unto thee, and yet am Confident that
thou acceptest this poor Mite, because it came of thee, that I should have the
least Will or Skill to do it; Be pleased, I beseech thee by all thy Mercies
and Merits, to give me Grace to Weep with thee. And in taken of thy Grace,
Give me a Flood of Tears, that I may pour them forth before thee, with
Reverence, bewailing my Miseries, and begging thy Suppertance and Supply. And
to this effect, Mollify my Stony Heart, Illuminate my Mystie Mind, Subdue my
Sensual Affections. Subdue, O Lord, my Body to my Soul, my Soul unto Reason,
my Reason unto Faith, that I may Joy only in Weeping with thee, who have
promised to all such Mourners, in thy presence Fullness of Joy, and at thy
right hand Pleasures for evermore. AMEN.

GRATIAS TIBI DOMINE IESV.
FJNJS.
Errata.
In Epist. Page 4 l 18, r. T^n u^s p^s l. vlt. (...) the first ha fe of a
Parentnesis before, (Wh^^e and p 11. l. 5. before (O^ ^8 p 8. l. 8 r. m^^e.

In Lib. Page 1 l. 9. r unto man p 2 l 8 r C^re p. 37. l. 18, blende l p 47 l.
7, r (...) p ^8 l. ^, r No^^ov. p 64. l. 8, r cause p 7 ^. l 18, r. Where p 84.
l 10, r. all almost p. 107 l. 1, r. poieted p 11 ^. l. 14, r Oh our. p. 130. l.
1, r. confinneth. p 140. l 16, r pant out p 207. l 4, r ^o far p 224 l 8, r
indigentium: ibid. l 10, r. decimas p ^38. l. 20. r. lachrimemur. p 257. l 5,
r. Comparing. p 261. l. 16, blot out (l) p 26^. l 5, r and make. p. 296. l 17,
r. 4. p. 297 l. 8, r lauer^^t. p 301. l 19, r. Praising.

In Sect.. 34. iterated p 90. and 94 46 iterated p. 138. and 143. 53. iterated
p 161 and 163.. 69, r 64. p 205. 70. iterated p. 2, 3 and 235.

I Will not accuse the Readers discretion, to tell him of false Points, or
smaller Errors: I entreat only to amend these, and pardon all.


