THE SANCTVARIE OF SALVATION, HELMET OF HEALTH, AND MIRROVR OF MODESTY AND
GOOD MANNERS.

Wherein is contained an exhortation unto the institution of a Christian,
virtuous, honest, and laudable life, very behoouefull, wholesome and fruitful
both to highest and lowest degrees of men, which desire either health of body,
or salvation of soul:

Written in Latin very learnedly and elegantlie by Leuinus Lemnius of Zirizaa
Physician, and englished by H.K. for the common commodity and comfort of them
which understand not the Latin tongue, and to be as it were a glass, wherein
men may behold their life and conversation.

MAT. 11. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.
Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and
ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden light.

printer's device of Hugh Singleton GOD IS MY HELPER


Printed at London by Hugh Singleton.

The printer to the Reader.
THe gentleman (friendly reader) to whom this book in the english tongue was
dedicated, and who for the excellency thereof reserved it for his own private
Reading without suffering it to be published, is now deceased: The work
thereupon coming to the hands of a gentleman his kinsman, he is desirous by
my press to make thee partaker of it, as of a work unworthy to be obscured;
Take then to thy profit (gentle reader) this book which being written by a
famous author, summarilie contains precepte in what soever necessary to
humane knowledge either concerning body o^ soul: The preface of no less
importaunc^ for instruction, then the book it self: I prai^ the also look
into, and be thankful to o^ learned countryman the traslator for hi^
travail herein. And so fare thou well in the lord, who prosper thee in thy
good and virtuous studies.

To the right worshipful Master Stephen Thimelby Esquier, Recorder of the
City of Lincoln, Henry Kinder wishes in this life all good hope worship, and
prosperity, and in the life to come salvation and everlasting glory and
felicity in Jesus Christ.
AFter that I had atchiued the enterprise of the translation of this little
book (right worshipful) to the end I might communicate, illustrate, and
explanate the same to them which understand not the latin tongue, as well for
the commodity of the studious reader, as the commendation of Leuinus Lemnius
the learned author: I called to mind a certain brief and grave poem of Rhianus
the Greek poet concerning the imprudencie and inco^stancie of some men, which
cannot moderate their troublous affections and perturbations of mind with
equanimitie, which is a singular virtue and soueraign remedy of al griefs
incident unto humane life: which moderation of mind whosoever wants is either
puffed up with prosperity, or discouraged with adversity. We, says that poet,
do err and judge amiss concerning the manifold gifts of God, and receive
them foolishly and unadvisedly. For he that is poor and destitute of living,
does with sorrow, grief, and heaviness of heart, lay great blame on the
determination and appointment of God: but he neglects the virtue, industry,
and apt inclination of his own mind: neither dare he for fear say or do any
thing where rich men be in presence, but bashfulnes and pensiuenes do consume
his heart. Contrariwise he which lives in prosperity, to who^ God has given
riches, preeminence, and authority, often times forgets his condition,
beginning, educatio^, and mortality: and eleuating himself with arrogancy
and depraved hautines of heart, thu^dereth like Jupiter: and though sometime he
be of little stature, he stretches up his head on high, and with amiable arms
wooeth fair Minerua, and seeks to attain to the top of Olympus. When I had
well pondered this pithie poesy, I was animated and encouraged thereby to
dedicate these my little labors and lucubrations to your worship, as a
testification of my prompt will, ready mind, and grateful heart: So that I was
dismayed neither with the consideration of my poor low estate, neither with
the fear of some such highminded me^, as the poet here does reprehend: who
being advanced and adorned with worldly wealth, wisdom, dignity, and
prosperity, and every day expecting and desiring most exquisit and pleasant
novelties, will peradventure contemn this rude, and unpolished piece of work.
Therefore submitting the same to your favor and protection, I attempered my
pen, not to be plausible to the learned, whereunto I am not able to attain,
but to please and profit the mean and unlearned multitude, which is my only
desire. And although I know there be an infinite nmber of learned students,
whose diligence herein might have been far more commendable in polishing this
translation with perfect and excellent Rhetorical skill, and so could have
come nearer to the elegant style of the learned author: Yet I thought it
better, thus boldly and rudely, as I could, to attempt the same, then that it
shouldly hidden from the unlearned, for whose instruction, admonition, and
exhortation it was meet and requisite to dinulgate the same. For to what end
is a man borne and brought forth into the light of this life, but by his
industry to glorify his Creator, and to benefit his neighbor? He has lived
long enough whosoever has lived unto nature well and sufficiently, unto
himself and his own salvation blessedly and happily, unto the comfort of
others profitablie, unto the glory of God acceptablie and thankefully. He
has not lived, which has left no issue proceeded of him, which graffeth not
trees for another age to come, and so profit his posterity, which shows not
some good and profitable doctrine unto the people that shall be born after him.
For as we at this day are the better stablished and more surely confirmed and
grounded in the true faith, because we have learned and received the same into
our hearts of Christ, of his Apostles, of the fathers, of the primitive Church,
and likewise of this last Church, which was a disciple and scholar of
sincerity and verity Even so our posterity shall learn and acquire
understanding and knowledge of this our age, and of their ancestors and
fore-elders, and will be glade to hear of our consent and agreement in true
religion, and our mutual confirmation and establishing of our assured and
lively faith in Christ Jesus, and will be delighted with the proper erudition
of humanity, and profitable precepts of moral doctrine, which we deliver and
leave unto them. Therefore trusting your worship will accept this fruit of my
studies, be it never so unripe, so unseasonable and unpleasant, and will regard
rather the beneuolent affection of the giver, then the gift it self: I am
thereupon emboldened to present the same unto you, as a token of this good and
happy new year and many more, and also as a declaration of my willing and
dutiful mind toward you, if able power were correspondent to the same. Truly
I have good and just cause to assure my self of your favor, prompt readiness,
and alacrity toward me in co^desce^ding to this my humble request, and have as
it were the hope thereof in my hands, when I consider your courtesy,
affability, and bounty toward all men but specially toward them, in whom
some signification and token of Godly zeal, virtue, and industry, not
colored with hypocrisy, does appear: So that if your christian modesty would
suffer your praises to be emblazed to your face your bountifulnes in the
propagatio^ of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the preferment of good learning
(you being a benign patron of them both) deserves to be more highly
co^decorated, the^ this my barbarous epistle can possibile reach unto. Wherefore
your worshipp vouchsafing to grant this my humble suit in the cheerful
acceptau^ce of this my travail, I shall think my self most bound to your
benignity, and shall have great cause, during life, to pray to God the father
for his son Christ Jesus sake, to increase in you great plenty of his good and
gracious gifts, and to lift up his merciful and loving countenance upon you,
all the days of your long life led in holiness and righteousness acceptable
unto him, and to accumulate and bless you with worship, renown, prosperity,
and felicity: And when our bodies shall be restored to a far better state of
life, and joined together to their souls, to give you the most happy fruition
and possession of eternity, immortality, and most blessed life, that shall
never in everlasting continuance of time be changed. Amen.

Your worships most humble Henry kinder.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe whole sum and effect of all divine and humane philosophy, wherein all
kind of excellent and exquisite knowledge consists, tends chiefly unto
this scope, and may be comprehended briefly in these two cardinal and
principal precepts, namely: To know God, and, To know a man's self. For these
two exceeding great and large branches of wisdom, reaching by faith (but not
by curiosity) even to the throne of the Majesty of God above al heavens,
Ephesians. 4.
and spreading and stretching forth themselves over all the works of God in
nature, are not only very necessary unto virtuous life, and godly
conversation, but also very expedient and behouefull unto everlasting life and
salvation. These be the two ready steps, by which we must ascend up unto the
only perfect and true door of eternal life, even Jesus Christ, the Author,
Captain, and finisher of our faith: by whom whosoever enters, he shall be
saved, and shall go in and our, and find pasture, that is, John 10.
shall enjoy the gift of grace, the treasure of truth, the food of
immortality. The knowledge of God is acquired by two manner of studies or
meditatio^s. First by the contemplation and consideration of his glorious,
excellent, and wonderful works: for the invisible things of him, that is to
say, his eternal power and Godhead, Romans 1.
are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works.
Secondly, God is known by his word, and he will be found of them which seek
him therein diligently and desirously. Prou. 8.
For so says the wisdom of God by Solomon, I love them that love me: and
they that seek me early, shall find me. Unto the^ therefore which studiously
meditate in the holy Scriptures, and attentively hear the Gospel preached, God
does reveal and make known the richer of his glorious mysteries, which riches
is Christ m^ the hope of glory. For by the sincere preaching of him every man
is admonished, Coloss. 1.
and every man is taught in all wisdom, that every man may be presented
perfect in Christ Jesus. The knowledge of a man's self is attained likewise by
two intentive cogitations, and diligent considerations, which do both proceed
from the most pure fountain of the infallible word of God. The one is, if a
man ponder and consider well the excellency of his creation. Genesis 1. Coloss.
3. 1 Cor. 11. Iam. 1.
The other is, if a man behold himself in the word of God, and look i^ the
perfect law of liberty, and continue therein. For Gods word is a glass,
wherein we must behold our selves, and become like unto him. And therein he
shall see, Eccles. 17.
that as the wise man says, God has created man of the earth, and turned him
unto it again. He has given him the number of days and certain times, and
power of the things that are upon ^arth. He clothed the^ with strength as they
had need, and made them according to his image. He filled them with knowledge
of understanding, and showed them good and evil He set his eye upon their
hearts, declaring unto them his noble works. And gave them occasion to rejoice
perpetually in his miracles, the they should prudently declare his works, and
tha^ the elect should praise his holy name together. The Philosophers having
some taste and feeling of this knowledge, even by the law and instinct of
nature (although they were destitute of the law of the holy spirit and of
grace, that comes by the faith of Jesus Christ) called this studious
meditation a contemplative life, or speculatiue science: wherein whosoever does
employ his travail and diligence industriously and give his heart to search
and find out wisdom by all things that are done under the heaven, Eccl. 1.
that is to say, of all the works of God in the wonderful workmanship and
creation of the world, so far forth and so much as the lord God the giver of
wisdom and of all good gifts, does distribute and divide to every man, in
such manner as it pleases him, and such measure as he knows every man has
need of: he shall surely find, and undoubtedly prove, yea even by experience,
that in this life there is no felicity, Genes. 47. Hebr. 11. 1. Ioh. 5. Job.
14. Galat. 5. Eccles. 2.
that this world is nothing else but a perilous pilgrimage, a maze of misery,
a surging sea of sorrows and troubles, a continual conflict, a wretched
warfare, a gulf of greefes, a huge heap of iniquities, and a wast wilderness
full of vanities and vexation of the spirit, and that there is no profit
under the sun. For thus has it pleased the lord the Creator and conseruatour
of all things by his excellent wisdom, Eccles. 1.
to humble the heart of man in this sore travail, that he has given to the
sons of men, and in the consideration of man's frail state and miserable
condition: and to eleuate, extol, and lift up his mind in looking and aspiring
unto heavenly things, to the end that he should, Cic. 4. Acad quest. and in
Somn. Scip.
as Cicero says, with an high, noble, and invincible heart, contemn these
human, visible, corruptible, earthly, mortal, caducal, traunsitory and
momentanythings: and as ye Apostle says, Philipp. 3.
follow hard toward the mark for the prise of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus: sighing and desiring to be clothed with our house which is from
heaven: 2. Cor. 5.
And seek those things which are above, and set our affections on heavenly
things, Coloss. 3.
and not one things which are on the earth: and direct and erect al our cares,
studies, cogitations, desires and delights unto Christ Jesus, which sits at
the right hand of God: that our conversation may be in heaven with him. And for
him that true, incorruptible and unspeakable treasure to judge all these things
to be but dung: Philipp. 3.
And for the winning of him to think and count al these things but loss, yt
we may be found in him that is, not having our own righteousness which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness
which is of God through faith: 2. Cor. 4.
And that we should not look on the things which are seen, but on the
things which are not seen: Mat. 6.
And that like the fowls of the heaven, and the lilies of the field, which
live and grow without care and toil of this life, we should not weary our
selves in laboring for the meat which perishes, but labor for the meat
which endures unto everlasting life, Ioh. 6.
which the son of man shall give unto us. For as the Israelites walked,
iourneyed, and wandered in the great wilderness forty years, Psalm. 66, and
107.
and passed through many probations and tribulations, before they did go in
and possess that good land that flowed with milk and honey, which the lord
had promised, and sworn unto their fathers to give them Even so the same our
good God, which so conducted his peculier people, and proved them with many
miseries and afflictions, before he brought them to that plentiful land, does
in like manner by his fatherly providence and favorable protection, lead us
his adopted children, Galat. 4. Ephesians. 1.
whom he has received by grace, through the great wide wilderness of this
wicked and wretched world: In which our journey toward that happy and
heavenly country, that continuing city to come, Heb. 11. and 12.
he tries us with many kind of troubles and calamities, Psalm. 66. and 78.
Ioh. 14.
and causes us, as the Psalmist says, to go through fire and water, before
he bring us forth to yt welthie place, yt pleasant land, that celestial
habitation, those eternal mansions, that supernall Jerusalem the mother of us
all, Galat. 4. Coloss. 1. Act. 14.
the everlasting kingdom of his dear son Jesus Christ, unto which we must
enter through many tribulations. This is that precept which our Savior does
inculcate into the ears and hearts of all them which will follow him, and
become his true disciples, Luc. 9.
namely to forsake and deny themselves, and take their cross patiently, that
is to say, to suffer constantly all tribulations that the lord lays upon
them: Hebr. 12. 1. Cor. 9.
And to cast away every thing that presses down, as riches, cares, and
voluptuousnes: And so abstain, that they may get the maisterie: and finally so
run, that in Christ Jesus they may obtain victoriously, and be crowned with
him triumphantly. Unto this continual bickering and warfare, wherein the
church of Christ militant here on earth is continually exercised, he himself
being our most mighty and puissant Captain, does animate and encourage us
most comfortably with these words, Ioh. 16.
Be of good comfort (says he) I have overcome the world. For he has
conquered the Devil, ye world sin, damnation, death, and hell for us, and has
loosed all our sorrows. Therefore this holy, heavenly, and divine contemplation
raises and lifts up our hearts, our cogitations, our studies, our senses,
desires, and love from vain pleasures unto the true and everlasting treasures,
according to that effectual and pithy prayer of David: O turn away mine eyes,
least they behold vanity. For indeed all things are vain, Psalm. 119. Wis. 13.
except the knowledge of God, and most miserable are they that are destitute
thereof. Now as concerning the Knowledge of a man's self, wherewith every
Christian ought to be instructed and endued: there is almost no natural,
mortal and earthly man no not commonly among the heathen, much less among
true Christians, but that by the use of reason and quicknes of wit infused by
nature, he understands and perceives himself to be created and ordained of
God to a far better, happier, and more excellent end and purpose, then all
other creatures void of reason, wit, and judgment, over which creatures God
the creator has made and constituted man lord, ruler and governor: Psalm. 8.
And in the creation of him, which, as David says, is wonderful and
fearful, he has made the fashion, Psalm. 139.
form, and shape of his body straight upright toward heaven: whereby he is
admonished to lift up his heart unto heaven, and set his love on heavenly
things: and not to fix and cast down his cogitations upon earthly things only:
but to have mind continually on that divine, Genes. 1.
spiritual, and immortal substance, whereof his soul is a likeness and
image: And to consider, that in this his marvelous creation, he excels all
other living creatures, whose bodily shape is in form prone and groueling
down toward the earth, being created and ordained unto corruption, Romans 8.
and subject unto vanity, and destinated to perish with the earth: whereas
contrariwise, man is appointed and assigned through faith in Christ Jesus unto
immortality and eternal felicity in heaven. This certain persuasion and
true opinion the poet undoubtedly seemed to have fixed and stablished in his
mind, declaring the same in these elegant verses. Ovid. in. 1. lib. Metamorph.
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
which may be englished thus, God gave to man a face on high,
And heaven to behold,
And visage straight lift up toth' stars
Commanded him he should.
But whosoever will know him self rightly, and perfectly, must consider, that
man consists of two parts, namely the body and kthe soul: whereof the one
is subject to corruption, the other is incoruptible, the one perceived
sensible, the other invisible, the one subject to death, the other immortal, the
one a divine, spiritual and heavenly substance, the other a gross and frail
lump of earth, which turns into earth again. In every faithful, virtuous,
and godly Christian the soul (which is the highest or chiefe^ part of the mind
or spirit or power intellectiue) being led by the Spirit of God, ought to
rule the body and the lusts, appetites and desires thereof: And the body as a
servant or minister unto his lord and master, ought always to be obedient to
the good and godly motions of the Spirit, as the Apostle teaches, saying If
ye mortify the deeds of the body by ye Spirit ye shall live. And a little
after he says, Romans 8.
The same Spirit bears witness with our spirit, yt we are the children of
God. So that we have two witnesses, that is to say, Gods spirit, and ours,
which is certified by the Spirit of God: which must have domination over the
affections, lusts, perturbations, will, desires, and concupiscence. For if at
any time the body being not thus kept in subjection, do happen to rebel and
make insurection against the Spirit, and like an untamed colte which casts
of his rider, do throw away the yoke of obedience, and make war against ye
honest, good, godly, and virtuous desires of the mind, surely then the whole
man both body and soul must needs run, even as though he were carried
hedlong, into all kind of vices, wickedness, and sin, and so consequently be
thrown down into the guife or pit of eternal damnation and destruction. Of
this most perilous and pernicious fall the Apostle gives us a very good and
profitable admonition, saying, Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that
ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. For the body, Romans 6.
that is subject to sin, presses down the soul that museth of many things,
and cloggeth, darkneth, and dulleth the understanding, so that it cannot lift
up it self in godly meditations and heavenly contemplations. Unto this place
that precept of Cicero seems not altogether unfit to be referred, when he
says, Rationi appetitus pareat. Let the appetite be ruled by reason. Cic. 1
lib. Offic. Cic. ibide^.
And again he says, Naturam optimam viuendi ducem sequamur. Let us follow
nature the best guide of life. In these two brief documents the whole sum
and scope of all moral philosophy, in my judgment, may well be comprehended.
For when the gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, Romans 2.
they having not the law, are a law unto themselves, which show the effect
of the law written in their hearts. I fear lest this may justly be spoken
to our great shame in these days, which being professed Christians, and
peyfectly instructed in the law of God, and many of us very skillful not only
in humane, but also in heavenly, sacred, and divine philosophy, are so led
with self-love, and so carried away from God with worldly vanities and
momentanie delights: Mat. 10.
and seek so much to save our lives, as our Savior says, that we lose our
lives* for we prefer our lives before the glory of Christ: And knowing our
masters will, and not preparing our selves, Luc. 12.
neither doing according to his will we shall be beaten with many stripes: I
fear, I say, lest the heathen or gentiles, which in the time of nature
without law, lived virtuously, shall condemn us, which in the time of grace,
having the law of God do live vitiously.

To the end therefore to awake us from our sleepy senceles, and sinful
security, where with many of us are heavily oppressed and deeply drowned: I
have thought good by bringing this little book abroad unto the commune
commodity, I trust of all then that read the same, to stir up the minds of
such as are drowned in voluptuousnes, and cast down into the deepthe of the
earth with cares of this life, and to raise them up unto the consideration of
their sta^e and vocation, wherein God has placed us, like unto soldiers,
which must every one look surely and attend diligently to his order, araie,
standing place, and watching in this our continual conflict, bick^ing, and
warfare: wherein because we have many tyranious enemies, many pernicious perils
are i^inent and incident unto every one of us, 1 Pet. 5.
unless we warily, watchfully, and circumspectly, withstand and resist the
assaults, invasions, and irruptions of our malicious and pestiferous
adversaries, which continually by all means possible, do seek, devise, and
work our overthrow and utter destruction. The author of this book being a
very learned man, as it appears by his writing, was no doubt greatly inflamed
with the godly zeal of Christianity and honesty, of true religion and
integrity of life: because herein he has left unto us such a worthy work?
Wherein is contained the way and means, how we may and must acquire and
obtain the assurance of our souls health and salvation, which is a thing
most necessary for all men to know. And this doctrine has the author
comprehend ed in a few chapiters so briefly and compendiously, that the reader
may gather and receive as sufficient instruction and utility by meditating in
the same, as in perusing the whole Bible, and all the expositions and
paraphrasticall explications of the holy Scriptures, written by the ancient
and learned fathers. Mat. 5.6
For like as our Savior reduced the whole sum of all the law and the
prophets into a sweet short sermon, Mat. 22.
yea into two short commandments of perfect love toward God and toward our
neighbor, Romans 13.
and therein has knit up the knot of all righteousness, and tied the bond of
perfection: Even so this author has observed the same order, and used the like
method in this compendious form of exhortation. Moreover he being a very
expert and skillful physician, has also prescribed unto the studious reader an
excellent brief dietarie for the conservation of the health of the body:
which whosoever will deligentlie keep and follow, he shall, I dare be bold to
say, have as many good precepts necessary and profitable enough for the
preserving of bodily health, as in reading all the great volumes of
Hippocrates, Galen, Auicenna, Rhazis, and whatsoever others, that have
learnedly and largely written of Physic.

And lastly of moral philosophy, or doctrine of manners, and politic
regiment of life, he has written so pithilie and witrily, that these few
leaves do afford as much good and wise instruction concerning virtuous and
honest conversation, modesty, temperaunce, sobriety, and prudent governance
of all men's public and private actions, as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and all
other Philosophers and humane writers (the reading of whose works were a
tedious and infinite labor) do contain. In this book therefore the reader
shall reap a triple or threefold commodity: namely, the health of body, the
salvation of soul, and the integrity of life, as an inseparable companion of
them both. This book is an Epitome, that is to say, a short summarie or
compendious collection of divine, humane, natural, and moral Philosophy: So
that in the little labor of reading the same studiously, and meditating and
ruminating the precepts thereof diligently, the reader shall be delighted and
profited exceedingly. And because according to the corruption of our depraved
nature we are more prone, more inclined, more diligent and careful to seek
the health of our bodies, then the salfetie and salvation of our souls, and
take more thought, and make greater provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts of it, Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
then to desire and acquire the sincere milk of the word of God, which being
received with meekness, is able to save our soule^ Therefore of these two
things, namely, health of body, and salvation of soul, which are both indeed
worthy to be desired (but yet the one much more then the other) that which is
a great deal more worthy to be sought and labored for, is in this books
very orderly and aptly first set down, according to that divine and
principal precept of our Savior, Mat. 6.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness. Whereby we are
admonished, that as the soul, being as I said before, a divine, spiritual,
and immortal substance, does far excel the body, which is nothing else but
dust, earth and ashes: Genes. 18.
Even so the sacred, and eternal food and assured salvation of the soul
ought to be acquired with far greater care and more earnest study, zeal,
love, desire and affection, then the health and welfare of the body. But alas,
how lamentable a thing is it in these days, wherein the light of the Gospel
shines so clearly, to see the preposterous peruersitie of many of us, whose
minds like unto brute beasts, are fixed upon present and caducall things, and
are plucked and cast down from heaven and heavenly desires unto earth and
earthly vanities, and do care and travail incessantly for the pampering and
cherishing of the body, but are so slouthful, careless and negligent in seeking
the salvation of our souls. 1. Cor. 2.
And albeit I confess with the Apostle, that no man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man which is in him: Neither does any man know and
understand the hearts of men, but God only: Psalm. 33. Mat. 12.
yet because a good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth
good things* and an evil man out of an evil treasure brings forth evil
things: for of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: Therefore by the
outward man, may the inward man be perceived of them which intentiuely look
thereupon, and examine the conversation of men by the law of God, and try the
spirits, whether they be of God, 1. John. 4.
by the touchstone of truth. And again, although we ought not to judge any
thing of our brethren before the time until the Lord come, 1. Cor. 4.
who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the
hearts manifest: lest we our selves by judging be judged, and in condemning be
condemned: Luke. 6.
Yet if we look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of other men: Philipp. 2.
and behold some men's sins that are open before hand, and go before unto
judgment: 1 Timothy 5.
and take heed both unto our selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy
Ghost has made us overseers, Act. 20.
to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood: (I
speak to them that are called thereunto) we may easily and evidently see, 1.
John. 5.
if we will not wink one at another faults, that the whole world lies in
wickedness, that is, all men generally, as of themselves, lie as it were buried
in evil, and that many wicked people forget God, Psalm. 9.
and therefore, as the prophet says, shall be turned into hell. For of two
detestable iniquities and most grievous enormities, namely maliciousnes, and
forgetfulness of God, we have in these our days two manifest arguments,
apparent signs, and plain tokens, to wit, men's negligence, coldness and
slackenesse in the invocation of God by prayer, and their ingratitude in not
ascribing praise and giving thanks to the Lord of life for his benefits
bestowed upon us. These two kinds of impiety do spring from two most horrible
and filthy fountains of all iniquity, namely ignorance, and security:
Ignorance, when a man knows neither God, nor him self rightly, nor his due
obedience to God: Securitie^ when a man knows, and yet regards not, but
contemns the judgments and law of God. Therefore as all the faithful
ministers of the word of God in fulfilling their functions diligently and
faithfully, (...) rebuking the people for their disobedience and iniquities
meekely and modestly, 1. Tim. 5. 2 Timothy 2.
must needs see a^ note these four pernicious and pestilent maladie^
wherewith the flock of Jesus Christ is most mi^rably assailed, daungerously
depraved, and dea^ annoyed by that ancient, malicious and subtle serpent, and
do like good Physicions apply wholesome medicines of the word of God unto
these cruel wounds of the envious enemy, and after the example of that
merciful Samaritaine, cure and comfort the wounded and afflicted consciences,
Luke. 10.
giving two pence unto the host for the relief and succor of him that is thus
robbed and spoiled of the grace of God that comes by Jesus Christ: which two
pence are ye two testaments, which our Savior has delivered unto the host,
that is to say, to the faithful preacher and sincere disposer of the secrets
of God, commanding him to take care and cure of his members, which are
desttiute of the knowledge of God, and to minister unto them the most
comfortable meditine of his mercy in the merits of Jesus Christ: So I being
one of the lest of the ministers of Jesus Christ (which ^m not worthy to be
called his minister, because I ^m not any way at all able to fulfill the due
office perfectly, nor do ye duty thoroughly of that high, holy, worthy,
excellent and reverend vocation) seeing and ^amenting the ignorance and
negligence of the people of God, the flock of Jesus Christ, my brethren ^y
adoption and grace in Christ, was moved and in^lamed with zeal of the Lords
house to bring somewhat unto the buylding thereof by writing, since that cannot
by preaching, being not called to ye divine, ^acred and reverend function. Mat.
25. Luke. 19.
For as our Savior ^ayeth, he that receives but one talent, ought not to ^igg
and hide the same in the earth, or lay it up in secret. Cic. pro Arch. poe.
And as Cicero says in his oration Pro Archia Poeta Caeteros pudeat, siqui ita
se literis abdierunt, vt nihil ^ssint ex his neque ad commimen^ afferre
fructum, neque (...) aspectum lucemque proferre. That is, Let others be shamed,
or, other men may be ashamed, if any such ^ere be, that have so studied in
secret, that out of ^eir studies they can neither affoorde any thing unto the
commodity of the common wealth, (...) bring any thing abroad into the sight
and light of the world. Let such be admonished of their charge, and excited and
stirred up unto diligence and vigilancie with this sage sentence of Cicero Cic.
Cornific. Famili 12.
Nulla lassi^ impedire officium and fidem debet. That is. No wearyne^ ought to
hinder men in doing their duty duty fully and faithfully. Therefore let us not
be wearye (...) well doing, but labor to reap the fruit. I write (...) this,
to dispraise or reprehende the negligence of any man, or to commend mine own
industry, which were a point of errogancie, but to animate and encorage them,
whom duty byndeth, and the gift of knowledge enableth, having received many
tale^ of the Lord, to labor in the Lords vineyarde diligently and faithfully,
which is a part of charity. For the Lord God, who searches the hearts and
rei^ and looks into men's thoughts, Eccles. 23.
whose eyes are (...) thousand times brighter then the Sun, beholding all the
ways and works of men, he, I say, knowet^ all the mind, will, intent, desire
and affection of (...) faithful servants? Psalm. 38.
and their gronings are not hidd^ from him Surely all the faithful disposers
and toward of the holy mysteries and secrets of God, (...) of the manifold
graces of Jesus Christ, have gr^ cause to lament these evil and woeful days,
Revel. 12.
wherein the devil is come down to the inhabitants of the earth, that is, to
those that are given to the wo^ and fleshly lusts: and to bewail the
blindness (...) hardness of man's heart, whose imaginations are (...) even from
his youth: Genesis 8.
and the great wickedness (...) man on the earth, so that the earth is corrupt
before God, Genesis 6.
and filled with cruelty, because all flesh (...) corrupt his way upon earth.
For even as it was in (...) days before the deluge or flood, when those
ob^rate and obstinate Giants contemned the preachi^ and despised the warnings
of Noe, the friend of God the eight person a preacher of righteousness, 2.
Pet. 2. 1 Pet. 3.
yea rather were disobedient unto our Savior, who in spirit preached unto them
by the mouth of Noe: So now it is to be feared, Ierem. 9.
yea rather with heads full of water, and with eyes that have a fountain of
tears, the pastors of Christ's flock have cause to weep day and night,
because so many wanton worldlings lie weltring in wickedness, and turn the
grace of God into voluptuousness, Jude.
being fulled asleep in carelessness, and carried headlong to perdition with
contempt of the word of God. Ephesians. 2. 2. Tim. 2.
Now undoubtedly is the time come, wherein the prince of darkness bears such
sway in the children of disobedience, and holds so many disobedient wretches
captive at his will. Now does that malicious adversary that roaring lion walk
and let about, 1. Pet. 5.
seeking and gaping for his pray most perniciously, deuoureth so many silly
miserable and succourles souls cruelly. Now because the hirelings (of whom we
have to too many) care not for the sheep, John. 10.
but leave them without succor and defense, and fly from them: the woolfe
comes upon them with insaciable rapacitie and greediness, and catches and
scatters the sheep and makes lamentable havoc of the poor afflicted
flock of Jesus Christ. Now verelie, yea even now at this present, Revel. 12.
the great Dragon that old Serpent, called the devil and Satan, shows his
rage, and has great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time.
Mat. 4.
For he is the Prince of this world: which title he usurps and chalengeth
to himself, and he rides upon wanton wicked worldlings, as it were upon a
horse. And this is the cause, that there be so many workers of iniquity, Mat.
7. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
so little faith on earth, so few faithful followers of Christ. We are they
upon whom the end of the world is come: for whereas the Apostle says, Hebr.
9.
that Christ in the end of the world has appeared once to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself. To which wor^ the Apostle Saint Peter agrees, 1.
Pet. 4.
and says, Now the end of all things is at hand: how much more now may this
our time and age be called the end, si^ that we are come so much nearer unto
the day of the Lord? For now all those evils, calamities and sorrows which our
Savior foretold should come upon the earth, are come in deed, and those true
prophecies of the infallible truth it self are now most certainly fulfilled,
Mat. 24.
and most manifestly verified. For, iniquity is increased, yea it abounds,
and has the upper hand upon the face of the whole earth. Charity is cold, yea
it is extreemly frozen. The Disciples of Christ are afflicted, yea they are
hated and persecuted every where among all nations. And although indeed here
in England the light of the loving and merciful countenance of our good,
gracious, and long suffering God, does now at this present shine among us most
co^fortablie, (blessed be his holy name therefore:) yet it is to be feared, yea
surely it is rather to be expected, yt our sinful security, noughtie
negligence, and horrible ingratitude, will very shortly, and sooner then many
think, turn away his favorable face from us, and set his face with heavy
displeasure and indignation against us, and take away these his great blessings
of peace, tranquillity, truth and prosperity from us. For when they shall
say peace and safety, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
then shall sudden destruction come upon them. Ought not we then to look
daily and continually for these imminent perilles and punishments? Seeing
therefore that all these calamities and afflictions present are justly come
upon this wicked world, and many m^ grievous sorrows are to be looked for:
2. Pet. 3.
what manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness, looking
for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God? How great cause have we
to watch, that we may be ready for the coming of the Lord? Happy are those
wise virgins, who having oil in their lamps, Mat. 25.
are ready to meet the blessed bridegroom Jesus Christ, and do enter with
him unto the glorious marriage of him that most loving husband with his Church,
that is, the congregation of all faithful souls dispersed upon the face of ye
whole earth, and knit together in one by faith, and by the confession of his
holy name, through the operation of his holy Spirit: Ephesians. 5.
Which Church he has sanctified and appointed to be his spouse or bride,
holy, chaste, and without reprehension. Mat. 22.
Happy are those ghests that come in thither, clothed and adorned with the
most precious wedding garment of his righteousness, of a pure affection, and
upright conscience, wherewith all they are invested that assuredly and
constantly believe in him, and in whom by his righteousness grace reigns
unto everlasting life. Happy are those servants, whom their lord when he
comes, shall find well doing. Mat. 24. Luke. 12. and. 19.
For such good faithful servants will the Lord himself commend in the presence
and hearing of their brethren, and make them partakers, possessours of his
unspeakable joys. Happy are they that so continue to the end, for they shall
be saved. These are they that be clothed with white garments, eue^ with the
innocence, sincerity and perfect righteousness of that immaculate lamb,
Revel. 7.
who^ he has purged, washed, cleansed and purified with his most precious
blood. These are they whom he that rides on the red horse persecuteth, Revel
6.
even Satan with his blooddie tyranny. But the Lord will for their sakes
shorten these evil, woeful, miserable, Mat. 24.
and sorrowful days: for so he provides for his children in the midst of
their troubles. Yet a very little while, Hebr. 10.
and he that shall come, will come, and will not carry: as he himself
promises, saying, Revel. 22.
Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according
as his work shall be. Therefore he will come shortly; to comfort us which have
the (...) fruits of his Spirit, Romans 8.
which mourn in our selves, and look and wait for the adoption. even the
deliverance of our body. Philipp. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
And he will come, to change o^ vile bodies, and make them like unto his
glorious body, and to receive us up in glory, that we may ever be with him.
Bur we must beware, that we esteem not the length nor shortness of the Lords
coming by our own imaginations, but with all patience ^ be constant and
rejoice in all our tribulations: 2. Pet. 3.
for the Lord is not slack concerning his promise. O how joyful shall his
coming be to all them that look for the same patiently and faithfully! O how
terrible and dreadful shall the fight of him be to them the pierced him,
Zach. 12. Phis. 3. 2. Tim. 3. Heb. 6. Luke. 16. and. 17. Mark. 16. Luke. 16.
and. 20. Ioh. 12. Romans 9. Romans 2. Mat. 25. 2. Cor. 5.
to the enemies of his cross, to them that resist the truth, to them that
crucify him afre^, to the hypocrites and unbelievers, to them that ^stifie
themselves, and have not attained the righteousness of faith! Upon them shall
that elect and precious stone fall, and all to grind them to powder. Upon them
shall come indignation and wrath tribulation and anguish upon the soul of
every man that does evil. When the son of man comes in his glory, and all
the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory; and
before hi^ shall be gathered all nations. Therefore remembering and considering
that we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man
may receive the things that are done in his body, according to that he has
don, whether it be good as evil: It behooves us, as the Psalmist says, to
number our days, Psalm. 90.
that we may apply our hearts v^ wisdom. The days of our pilgrimage (as
Jacob says) are few and evil, Genesis 47.
which when they are past, we can not call again, as the Poet hereunto
alludeth: V^ irreuocabile tempus. Let us therefore follow the admonition of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.
and redeem the time, because the days are evil: and recompense the race of
lewd life that we have run, with godly conversation all the residue of our
age. And forasmuch as we commonly consume and lose the most and best part of
our age and life time, especially youth in vanities and frivolous delights: we
must beware, Luke. 21.
least our hearts be oppressed and overcome with cares, with sensuality, with
intemperance, with concupiscence, and voluptuousnes, and so death come hastily
upon us, and prevent us, Eccles. 12
before we remember our creator now in the days of our youth, wealth and
prosperity: 1 Thessalonians. 5.
and least the day of the Lord coming as uncertainly and suddenly as a thief
in the night, take us unawares, and find us unprepared and provided. But let us
watch diligently and continually for the defense and safeguard of our houses,
that is to say, of these our earthly and transitory tabernacles, Mat. 24.
our frail bodies, and let us not suffer them to be broken up and dug
through, and the treasures of our souls dearly bought, Hebr. 9.
and our consciences purged with the blood of Jesus Christ, to be spoiled and
carried away unto perdition by the unclean spirit, which never rests until
he return unto the place from whence he came out, Mat. 12.
if he can find ingresse and regresse possibly, and makes the end of his
captive far worse, and more miserable then the beginning. And let us through
assured faith in Christ Jesus, Mat. 6.
lay up for our souls incorruptible and immovable treasures in heaven: and
whilst we are in these tabernacles, let us keep surely and safely the same
treasures of the grace of Christ Jesus in these our earthen vessels. 2. Cor. 4.
Happy are they that have their loins girded about, and wait for their
master, with their lights or lamps burning in their hands: Luke 12.
the light whereof shines to the glory and praise of God, and to the good
example of men, and edification of the Church of Christ, whose godly, virtuous,
and honest conversation even the Gentile, superstitious, and idolatrous people
beholding, 1. Pet. 2.
are moved and induced thereby to extol and magnify the name of god, in the
day when God does mollify, open, and illuminate their blind and hard hearts,
by the light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. If we would consider how short,
momentanie and miserable our life is, we should never be drawn with any
earthly pleasures, and worldly delights (which indeed are nothing else but
miseries) from the most comfortable contemplation, cogitation, and desire of
that life to come, which so far excedeth this, as no heart is able to
conceive, nor tongue express. For, as the Apostle says, The things which
eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, 1. Cor. 2.
neither came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for them that love
him. Esai. 64.
So that no mortal man can think Gods providence toward his. The eternity
of which incomprehensible and inexplicable felicity may be perceived by these
words, Eccles. 18.
like as drops of rain are unto the sea, and as a gravel stone is unto the
sand, even so is a thousand years unto the days everlasting. But as for our
life what is it else but a vapor, Iam. 4.
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away? David very aptly
likeneth and resembles the life of man sometime to a spanne, Psalm. 39. Psalm. 90.
sometime to a shadow, sometime to sleep, sometime to a wind that passes over,
and comes not again, sometime to a dream, sometime to a tale that is told,
Psalm. 49 62 102 and 103 73. and 78.
the remembrance whereof is soon and suddenly gone, sometime to vanity,
sometime to a flower, to hay, to grass, to beasts that perish. And therefore
he oftentimes complains of the shortness of his age and life time. Full well
in deed may our life be likened to a dream, the delights and pleasures thereof
do so soon vanish away, even as commonly it comes to pass in a dream when
one awaketh. For a man dreameth, that he has great ple^tie of delicious meats
and banketting cheer, and when he awaketh, he feels nothing but hunger.
Again, in sleep a man weeneth, that he has abundance of riches, gold and
silver, and worldly wealth, and being awaked, finds nothing but poverty.
Even so all the glory, beauty, bravery, pomp, pride and pleasure of this
world, passes and vanishes away like a dream or a trance, like a fantasy
or most vain vision. Therefore the earth is as it were a stage, whereon every
man living in his state, condition, order and degree, does play his part: Some
represents and bears one person, some another. Emperors, kings, princes,
presidents, lieutenants, bishops, Judges, magistrates, philosophers, learned
men, and all they which being placed in any degree of dignity, do rule and
govern ye common wealth, Psalm. 39.
are not in deed those persons, which in the eye of the world, and light of the
common wealth they show themselves to be, neither are they in very deed endued
with such good things as they seem to have. No surely, they are but plaiers
upon the scaffold for a short time: yea according to this common saying, Homo
bulla, they walk in a vain shadow. And therefore their felicity, Psalm. 39.
be it never so glorious in the eyes of men, Eccle. 1.
is nothing else but vanity. For the riches of this world is even beggerie:
and the wisdom of men what is it else but foolishness? 1. Cor. 1.
They that take pain and have pleasure and delectation in reading, not only
the sacred monuments and holy histories contained in the Bible, but also the
strange mutations, alterations, subuersions and ruins of the greatest
Monarchies, famous Kingdoms, royal realms, and flourishing common wealths,
and of the sudden decay and passing away of the pomp and pride of this
world, which profane writers have chronicled, and left unto their posterity,
may well consider and easily see, how frail, fickle, and transitory the
glory of all famous antiquities, and renowned monuments has been, whereof n^
in these days scarcely any token or memorial is le^ in the world to be
seen: which fading away of all these goodly flowers, a very learned writer in
these our days has pithily and pretily comprehended in this elegant
Distichon, or couple of verses: Laurentius Humfredus in lib. de vita and morte
Joan. Iuelli.
En fuit, en non est Babylon, nec Persicae pompae,
Nec Graecum imperium nec Latialis honos.
Lo Babylon was, but now is not,
nor pomp of Persian land,
Nor Empire of the Greeks, nor wealth
of royal Rome does stand.


Eccles. 10.
The Lord has cast down the thrones of proud princes, and set up the meek in
their stead. Seeing then that God has thus cut down and overthrown all the
proud nations, ever since the beginning of the world: will he not likewise
destroy that man of sin, even the son of perdition, which exalts himself
so high, 2. These. 2.
that he sits as God in the templ^ of God, and shows and boasts himself
that he is God? Yes no doubt, the Lord will consume him with the spirit of his
mouth, that is, with his word, yes and that shortly: Revel. 22.
for he promises so, and says: Surely, I come quickly. Amen Even so come Lord
Jesus, Et cito conteras, oraemus illum fumosum saeculi Typh^. And beat and
break down quickly that smokie pride of the world, Lord we pray thee. And
then God the father will exalt and set up for ever and ever throughout all
worlds, and all endless eternity the kingdom of the meek and lowly
Prince, Act. 10.
even his dear son Jesus Christ: with whom is no respect of persons, but among
all men he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.
And when he has put down and subdued all his enemies, and joined his chosen
unto himself, spiritually and corporally, then will he deliver up to God his
father that peaceable kingdom, 1. Cor. 15.
that is to say, those whom he has redeemed with his own blood, Mat. 13.
and they shall shine as the Sun in his heavenly kingdom. There they shall
see the eternal fountain, and ((...), Mat. 5. Job. 9. Psalm. 24. Esai. 60. 1.
Pet. 1. Philpp. 3 1. Ioh. 3. Revel. 7. and 21. Psalm. 91.96.121. Esai.
35.49.60.65. Psalm. 16. 1. Cor. 15. Revel. 22.
that is) form of the highest excellency, of the most principal beautitude of
the chiefest goodness communicating himself with them all: unto whom things
that be past, do not pass, nor things to come do succeed, almighty,
incomprehensible, whom the Angels desire to behold. None lame, or blind, none
deformed or maimed, shall be there. Life shall be without end, love shall not
languish, joy shall not decrease, nor youth wax old. No grief, no pain, no
sorrow shall be felt, no mourning shall be heard, no grievous thing seen, no
danger of sin, no rebellion of the flesh, no night, no sleep the image of
death, no meat or drink the helps of human infirmity, no trafique or
merchandise, no arts or sciences, no money the cause of discord, and the root
of all evil: but all goodness, immortal peace, and perfect tranquillity,
unspeakable felicity, the most blessed presence of the divine majesty shall
be all in all, to whom be all praise, power, glory, honor, might, and
majesty for ever and ever, throughout infinite eternity.

Amen.
The Sanctuary of Salvation, Helmet of Health, and Myrror of Modesty and good
manners.
We must chiefly fasten our eyes upon God through Christ, and lift up our
mind unto him.

CHAP. 1.
From whence salvation is to be sought.
Whosoever is very desirous of his Salvation, and ardently seeks his own
safety and good state, and in this his appointed standing place of life,
wishes with great watchfulnes and vigilancie, and without fear and faynting
to abide and stand fast against imminent chances, harms, damages and
inconveniences, which in every moment do assail us, and soon and suddenly
fall upon us: Let him fix his eyes upon our most gracious and most mighty God
and heavenly father by Christ, and have his mind, which has flowed from this
most plentiful fountain, God the fountain of all good things.
continually lifted up unto him, and me look unto any other, nor seek
assurance of Salvation of any other, but trust and leave to him only, serve,
worship, and reverence him, and ask of him all things necessary to salvation
through the trust and confidence of our Mediator. The magnificence of God
toward man.
And further let him diligently consider, and attentively ponder with himself,
how great bounteousnesse God uses toward mankind, with what ornaments and
gifts of nature he furnishes him, with what worthiness and excellency he
adorneth him, unto what renown and honor he aduaunceth this his workmanship
compact of the earth?

How great benefits God the Creator of all things has bestowed upon man.

CHAP. 2.
AS the form and outward fashion and shape of man's body, being high and
straight upright toward Heaven, The double shape of man.
to the end he may learn to have his eyes directed unto his first beginning,
is goodly to behold and cunningly and comely expressed above other creatures:
so also his inward shape does meruailously adorn and beautify him, Genes. 1.
because it is conformed according to the image and likeness of God, that is,
represents and shows the substance of his Creator, Man is the image of God.
and comes nearest unto his nature. Which virtue, efficacy and power, being
excellent and infused into him from God, consists wholly in the soul and
mind, being drawn forth from the principal pattern and sacred closet of the
Godhead. By which divine gift man attayneth to be endued with reason, judgment
and understanding, and made capeable of heavenly doctrine, and by conceiving
the knowledge of God, 2. Cor. 3.
and by the light of faith, is united unto him, and wholly transformed into
him. But besides other notable prerogatives, man has specially gotten this,
that whereas God has made other creatures reasonlesse, that is to say, dumb
and destitute of the use of speech and voice, he has granted to man the gift
of speaking, Wherein man differs from beasts.
whereby he may communicate and impart to others the meaning of his mind, and
declare the conceit of his counsel and purpose, and which is the chiefest of
al and most acceptable to God, Speech is a singular gift of God.
that with his voice he extol and most highly praise his Creator, the
knowledge of whom he has conceived in mind by faith. For by this means not
only his Majesty, and his great power, God requires thankfulness.
and high honor is magnified, but also according to the small portion and
measure of man's wit, some thanks (even so great thanks as we are able to
give) for the benefits that we receive, is acquitted, and a testification of our
thankful, ready, and well willing mind toward our bountiful father, Psalm.
16.
is uttered and declared: and because God needs not our goods, he requires
nothing else of us, but love and thankfulness.

Nothing more dear in the sight of God the^ man, and that all things are
created for the use and commodity of man.

CHAP. 3.
God bears a merueilous love to man.
FOrasmuch as God bears a singular love toward man, he has garnished his
heart and mind, wherein his divine power appears, with many and great
ornaments, and has also furnished him abundantly with outward gifts, and with
the most ample possession of things, which nature Gods minister does
plentifully pour forth, and has given unto him the governance, All things are
created for the use and benefit of man.
rule and principality of all the same wholly and universally, yea even to
every base cobbler and meanest man, which enjoys the bounty of his Creator,
and the goodly and passing delectable pleasantness of the whole world, as well
as any King of them all that abounds in wealth and riches, so that he
dwells in the great wide and large stage of this world, not as a forayner and
stranger borne, which dwells in another man's house, to whom the possession of
worldly things apperteyneth not, but as a citizen, Man is a ruler of the world.
burgess, and free man of the world, and Lord of all things which the earth
contains. For unto his use and commodity, and the service and obedience of
him, all things are created, whatsoever are contained in the compass and
circuit of Heaven and earth, and sea? which thing David being an entier and
singular prayser of the works of God, declares in these verses. Psalm. 1.8.
O Lord our Lord, how wonderful is thy name in all the world? For thy
magnificence is exalted above the Heavens. What is man, that thou art mindful
of him, or the son of man, that thou have regard of him? Thou have made him a
little less then God or the Angels. thou have crowned him with glory and
honor, and have made him ruler over the works of they hands. Thou have put all
things in subjection under his feet etc. By which words he shows, how
greatly God esteems man next after Christ, and how great the estimation of
man is in his sight, to whom all the whole work of nature universally serves
and is obedient, so that not only all things are created for his commodity
and ready for his use, Romans 8.
but also Christ for his sake has submitted himself to death, for whose
favor and merits the father gives us all things abundantly.

How great the thankfulness of man toward God ought to be.

CHAP. 4.
This thing ought chiefly to stir up man ^ love God entirely and worship
him sincerely, that when as man was abandoned from God, and cast down into
everlasting death, for breaking his commandment, our heavenly father for the
singular favor and merits of Christ, The reconciliation of man.
received him into favor again: for Christ having co^passio^ on the calamity
of (...) reconciled man to his father, being purged by his blood, and
conquering death, and shaking off the tyrrannie of our most cruel enemy, ^
whom man was bound and as it were in debted, delivered and brought man safe
again into the liberty which he had lost, and restored him unto the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, so that as Saint Paul witnesses, we are
no more foreiners and strangers with God, Ephesians. 2.
but citizens and heirs, finally his friends and of his household, being
builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being
the head corner stone, by whom we have access and entrance in one spirit unto
the father. Tit. 3.
Wherefore since that every one of us by the help of wholesome and sound
doctrine, is graft into Christ by faith and by the fountain of regeneration,
and as Saint Paul says, 2. Tim. 1.
Has obtained grace and inheritance by the renewing of his holy spirit, which
he has poured forth upon us richly: It is meet, and the restoration of our
saving health does require, that all our hope and trust being reposed in so
bountiful a father, and his son Jesus Christ, who has abolished death and
sin, we submit our selves to him, and direct our life, conversation, desires,
delights and studies unto his good will and pleasure, and with pureness of
heart, holy and unblameable manner of living, Our life must be approved unto
God.
and continual and fervent prayer knit our selves and cleave fast unto him,
and endeavor all that ever we can, to seek and get his favor and grace, by
and through Jesus Christ our only advocate with the father, the only
propitiation for our sins.

What good man has by Baptism, and what we are taught thereby.

CHAP. 5.
BEcause Baptism or the holy washing is the first entrance, What effect
Baptism has.
and the very door and porch into the Church, congregation and company of the
faithful, it brings us into the hope and trust of our salvation. For our
bodies being mortified, and our minds renewed by faith and repentance, that
is, by detesting and abhorring our former life we are graft^ to Christ, who by
the use of this outward symbol, Sacrament and token, does wash ou^, wipe
away, and abolish the spotts and corruption of our mind by sheading his holy
Spirit into our hearts, by whom we concei^ing the assurance of our salvation,
do boldly (...) Abba Father. Which calling on the Father with twice and double
repetition of the same word, is of such efficacy and so speedy a^medie, that
it obtains al things at the hand of our bounteous father, so that a man
direct his desires and prayers, his petitions and so has full sighs unto him
by Christ. For he being our Captain, 1. Ioh. 5. Iam. 1. and 5
our guide, our leader, and only Mediator, who by his own blood has deli^ued
and obtained grace for us, verily there is nothing that is expedient for our
health, safety and salvation, but we have the same granted unto us, Prayer by
Christ is effectual.
neither shall our prayers at any time be void or vnauayleable: Neither are
the ears of so good and gracious a Father shut up, but are open unto their
prayers, for whose redemption he has given and bestowed his only begotten
son.

We must love God first and chiefly, and then our neighbor.

CHAP. 6.
Love toward God.
AS our charity, that is, our entier, Deuteronomy. 6. Iosu. 22. and 23.
pure and sincere love, must most specially be showed, uttered and declared
toward God, to whom we owe whatsoever we have, and on whom all man's power
and strength which consistes in the mind, heart, soul, and spirit, Marc. 12.
Luc. 10.
ought to be employed, fixed and bestowed: so consequently also toward our
neighbor, that is, toward him that is of the sal^er nature and condition,
commune and inciden^ alike to every one of us, our love must be bent and
directed as largely, amply and fervently, as every one of us love themself, so
that all men willingly and gladly be diligent to help their neighbors, and
succor them in their necessity and poverty, Love toward our Neighbor.
with their counsel and riches, if at any time the cause so require and
occasion offer it self, which occasion a man also of himself ought to seek
and take, to do a benefit to his neighbor, even of his own accord, without
any craving. For this is the chief fruit of faith, and a sincere and
unfeigned testification of the true profession of Christianity.

How great the loving kindness and (...) affection of Children ought to be
toward their Parents.

CHAP. 7.
But as we owe all things to God, much ^ our country and friends, so also we
do owe not a little deal to our parents. And albeit it is not needful exactly
to prescribe what observance and reverence ought to be done unto them, for as
much as it is natural in man to have love and bear good will toward them that
be his own, yea even in the heathen people, Matthew. 5.
as Christ our Savior says, so that this affection (although the duty
thereof be performed) deserves no praise, but escheweth offense and
transgression: Affection of Children toward their Parents.
Prouer. 23.
yet nevertheless every one, even from his childhood, must earnestly and
thoroughly be taught this lesson, to love his parents very entirely and heartily,
by whose travail and means he had his first beginning of life and
participation of this light, so that he obey and follow their will in all
things which reason induces, and equity requires, as we read how Christ was
obedient to Joseph and Marie his mother. Luc. 2. Exodus 20. Deu. 5. Mat. 15.
Ephesians. 6.
For that natural and loving affection, obedience, and reverence, which is
exhibited to parents, is acceptable and well pleasing to God: which thing also
is earnestly prescribed both in the old and new Testament. A pretty learned
saying is that of Pittacus the Philosopher, Such rewards and stipends as thou
bestowest on thy parents, such do thou look to receive of thy sons. To
which effect belongs that sacred sentence of Christ, having a further and
more ample signification, Matthew 7.
With what measure ye mete, with the same shall other men measure to you. Marc.
4.
For by transgressing and neglecting of this precept, it commonly comes to
pass, that parents find their children stiffnecked, stubborn and disobedient,
so that when they are of more age, they refuse, disdeigne and despise the
admonitions of their fore-elders, yea and that worthily oftentimes by the just
vengeance of like punishment, because they showed themselves intractable
toward their elders, and were despiteful against them.

How every one should behave himself toward his master that instructs him.

CHAP. 8.
Honor to be given to Schoolmasters.
Exhibit and give unto thy masters which enfourme and teach thee, and adorn
thy mind with the studies of learning, no less honor then unto thy parents.
For so the Poet Inuenal praises those elders, and prays that their souls
flitted and departed from their bodies, may have good luck and prosperity,
because they did bear singular favor and good will toward their masters as
well as toward their parents, thus he says: Sat. 7.
God give the ghosts of those old men
a light thin easy ground,
And saffron sweet to smell therein,
and spring in pitcher found
Perpetually, because that they
would have their master be
In parents steed, whom to obey
they compted equity.


Lib. 2. cap. 10.
So Fabius admonishes scholars to love their masters, no less then their
studies, and to account them as parents, not of their bodies indeed, but of
their minds. For, to be borne, and to be instructed, are two things of like
sort and condition, and almost of like nature: because the one does procreate
the body, the other does inform, frame and fashion the mind. If therefore
fathers which be adorned with the studies of humanity, Instruction adorneth
the mind.
do bestow and employ their diligence and labor in instructing and enforming
their own children, or if they being destitute of such aid and ready
furtherance, do use the help of a learned teacher for their children to
attain to wisdom and good discipline, surely there is nothing can be more
largely and franckly bestowed on the children for the purchasing of renown and
the commendation and ornament of virtue. For by such education, nurture and
good bringing up, the mind is not only decked and beautified with most
excellent virtues, to wit, integrity and uprightness of life, honest and good
behavior, continency, chastity, lowliness, gentleness, meekness,
modesty, humanity, righteousness, temperancie, courtesy: but also great
wealth, honor and preferment, whereunto learning is the way of advancement, is
appointed, assigned and attributed to them without their seeking, yea and in a
manner ofttimes against their will and desire.

Unto what persons in humane society honor and reverence must chiefly be
given.

CHAP. 9.
Honor ought indeed to be given to every man according to his dignity and
order, Romans 13.
as S. Paul commands, but specially to the old age full of years and
hoarie hairs, to which we all come soon and shortly, this duty must be
fulfilled. Old men must be honored.
So by the ordinance of God does Moses teach, saying, Leuit. 19.
Rise up before the hoarie head, and honor the person of the old man. Lycurgus
the Lacedaemonians lawmaker appointed this also to be observed. He would not
have the rich and mighty men to have the greatest honor, but the old men
according to the degree of their age. And surely age^ not more honored in any
place of the wo^ Amongst this sort and order we must recla^ and repute the
Magistrate, To whom honor must be given.
Romans 13.
Magistrates must be honored.
the dignity of the Consul or chief Justice, Praetor or Mayor, whose wise
government, policy and authority, is a steadfast stay to the safety of the
Common wealth, by means whereof all the realm has peace and tranquillity,
without any section, tumult or rebellion. To these must we add and account men
that be of approved honesty, and well known and well grown in years, or
Gentlemen and Barons that come of gentle and noble house and auncestrie, or
them also that be excellently furnished with the studies of good learning, and
thereby become worthy ornaments of their country. But the higher dignity and
more chief estimation in this respect, Ministers of the Church must be honored.
and in observing of this duty, do I asscribe and assign unto them which
labor fervently in the Ministry and holy functions of the Church or
congregation, and bestow their study, labor and travail in enforming the
minds, and reforming the depraved manners of men. So does S. Paul pronounce
the Elders, 1. Tim. 5.
that is to say, they which give light and ensample to their flock by sober and
discreet behavior, by sage fatherly wisdom, and integrity of life, and do
feed the hungry multitude with wholesome doctrine, and with the pure and
sincere food of the word of the Gospel, these, I say, Romans 12.13 Philip. 2.
he affirms to be worthy of double honor, and all things requisite must be
bestowed on them plenteously and copiously, not only reverence according to
their age, but also such necessary aids and allowances, as they may therewith
moderatly be sustained, and be furnished and stored with necessary household
substance.

What commodity instruction brings to a man, and how it must be used, and of
what manner and sort it ought to be.

CHAP. 10.
GReat respect, The good that man has by instruction.
care and regard ought to be had in what manner of learning any one is to be
trained up. Wherefore so soon as ever age is capable of discipline, and apt
and meet for the study of good letters, let it be seasoned and sauoured
speedily with liberal and gentle Arts. For by them chiefly the nature of man
is fashioned and well framed unto good behavior, and trimly polished with the
ornament of humanity. But the most convenient, commodious and prosperous
beginning of trayning up of youth, is first to bring their manners into good
fashion. For which cause let a young man addicted to study, first re^ his
manners to good order, and then let (...) learn eloquence, and the cunning
skill of ^tering his cogitations learnedly, In Epist.
which ((...) Pliny says) cannot well be achieved w^ our good demeanor.
For better is the tr^ and manner of living honestly, then of sp^king finally
and eloque^tly: and the integri^ of life is more to be desired, then the skill
(...) eloquence: although indeed these two ought to be lincked together and not
separate, and finally the one to be a help to the other. In like manner may
we reason and persuade concerning the choice, Knowledge of things and words
must be acquired.
discerning and judgment of words and matters: for although the knowledge of
things is more to be wished and sought, then the knowledge and elegancie of
words, yet nevertheless, matters must be declared with such words as are
plain, manifest, and meet for the same. And this is the cause that the
precepts and documents of life, which do garnish and adorn the mind, and
inform and frame the heart unto godly conversation, although of themselves
they be honest and wholesome, Lib. 1. ca. 1. Lib. 1. ca. 3.
yet notwithstanding (as Lactantius and Fabius do affirm) they have more
importance and efficacy unto persuasion, whenever a plausible style and
laudable composition of words does illuminate and set forth to the
understanding of the hearers, the excellency of the matter. For those things
flow into men's minds the more effectually, which are compact and framed with
such pith and force of words as is convenient, and be artificially amplified
with rhetorical skill. And albeit we must be so studious of words, and have so
great delight therein (as some that have small skill use to do being destitute
of the knowledge of things) yet for all that it is better to join prudencie
and good experience with eloquence and elegancie of words and utterance
thereof: least by little and little we fall to the use and custom of such
words, Barbarousnesse to be esch^wed.
as are grown out of use; as are barbarous, unfit, fond, and strange, whereby
the discourse and treatise, although it be pit^ie and sententious, is rather
obscured then adorned. If therefore fine, trim and elegant words have no
wisdom nor gravity, weight nor pithinesse of sentences in them, experience
and skill without eloquence is more to be commended, then babbling and foolish
loquacitie. Wisdom, says Cicero, as it is the foundation of other things, so
is it also of eloquence. Wise, witty, Lib. 2. de Orat.
and learned is that saying of Horace, which every man must follow in every
profession, In art. Poet.
The Poets red do profit men,
or do delight them well,
And lessons good they now and then
among such pleasures tell.
The praise of perfect skill is his,
which mingleth goodwith sweet,
His reader he does greatly please,
and gives him counsel meet.


But the sacred Scripture given and uttered by the inspiration of the holy
Spirit needs no such help of man. For it delights, draws, wins and
transformeth the hearts of men, not with eloquence, not with gloriousness of
words, but with a certain secret, hidden and divine efficacy. Which thing
when S. Paul the Apostle would testify and make known to the Corinthians, he
says thus, 1. Cor. 2.
When I came unto you, and opened unto you the testimonies of God, I used no
glorious finesse of words, nor great show of wisdom: neither was my word and
preaching in the entycing and persuading words of man's wisdom, but in showing
of the spirit and power, that your faith should not consist in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God. Paul's meaning is declared.
By which words he does not reject the pithie importance of words and
sentences, wherewith he was ple^tifully stored furnished, neither does he take
from himself the power and efficacy of persuasion, The holy Scripture is not
without force and efficacy.
wherewith, using firm reasons and strong arguments and words meet for the
matter, he drew men's minds unto the knowledge of the truth: but his will and
meaning is to show, that the professors of the Gospel do not trust the force
of eloquence, nor win men's hearts unto them with the sweet and pleasant
allurement of words, but with the Spirit and power of God. Therefore Paul
speaks wisdom among them that be perfect, wisdom indeed not of this world,
nor of the Princes of this world, that is, of the Orators which are abolished,
and the smokie glory of their orations is vanished, but he speaks the
wisdom of God, that is secret and lies hidden in a mystery, which moves
men's minds, and makes them to regard it effectually, and pricketh and
pierces their hearts more vehemently and sharply, then any humane learning and
doctrine decked and polished with most exquisit words. The word of God is of
fiery force.
For the word of god is quick lively, and mighty in operation, as the Apostle
says, Heb. 4.
and more piercing then any two edged sword, passing through even to the
division of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and marrom, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and the intents of the heart. So says God by the
Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 23.
Is not my word like a fire, and like a hammer that breaks the rocks? David
acknowledged the same, who in his heart felt the force and flames of the word
of God, saying, Psalm. 119.
Thy word is tried to the uttermost. And Solomon, Prouer. 30.
All the words of God are pure and clean, and a shield to all them that put
their trust in him. Wherefore the doctrine of Christ and Christianity ought
not to be deemed of the ignorant as idle, unprofitable, or unsavory, seeing
that it endeweth the minds of men with such heavenly, wholesome, and healthful
power and virtue. And this is a manifest proof and token that the holy
Prophets were not void of learning, but exactly and perfectly replenished with
the knowledge of things and of words, because that every where in the Bible
there be so many notable parables, The Prophets endued with knowledge of things.
tropes, metaphors, comparisons, figurative speeches, similitudes derived and
taken of living and growing creatures, and of the whole nature of things, which
is most large and ample, whereby the preachings and sermons of the Prophets are
so trimly decked and garnished, The Prophets eloquent
that no such thing is to be found in humane discipline and learning, neither
does there come to our hand in any place such and so great majesty of words
and sentences, which may affect, smite, and inuit men's minds, and provoke
them to embrace such docume^ts and perfect precepts, most expedient and
necessary unto salvation.

Out of what books we must learn integrity of manners, honest behavior, and
good precepts of life.

CHAP. 11.
Instruction must begin at Christ.
HOw we should lead an holy, honest, and unblameable life, we can be taught no
way more assuredly, the^ by the ordinances, decrees, and commandments of
Christ, to whom we being first admitted and instituted, made the first
entrance of our profession, and gave our name, whose doctrine does more
effectually induce, affect, move, persuade, and transform the mind of man,
because that the same being uttered by the inspiration and instinct of the
Spirit of God, has no worldly dreggs or corruption mingled therewith, nor
sauoreth of old wives superstition, which is a certain shadow and an
hypocritical and feined kind of religion, and because most behoueably for our
salvation the same doctrine is most clearly separated from idolatry, that is
to say, from such adulterous, counterfeit, and pernicious worshipping, as is
attributed to other, more or rather then unto God. And therefore to whatsoever
kind of life and trade of living thou addictest and betakest thy self,
whatsoever kind of study, practice and faculty thou take in hand, wherein
thou intendest to lead and spend thy whole life: exercise thy self in the
word, will and testimonies of God, Tender age must be accustomed unto the best
discipline.
and from thy very childehoode embrace his wholesome doctrine. For the heart of
man even from his infancy having the sweet taste and savor of the word of
God, and being environed with the safe defense thereof as with a strong
munition and fortress, stands, stoutely, abides constantly, and defends
it self valiantly against al manner of evil lusts, inordinate affections, and
monstrous vices. For this cause Jeremy gives wholesome admonition. O how good
is it, says he, Lament. 3.
for a man to take the yoke of the Lord from his youth up? For look what way a
young man, says Solomon, Prouer. 22.
is taught to go, the fame he will not leave when he is old. A sentence.
Cyprian.
Whereunto that of Cyprian is very like. Neither suddenly nor hastily can that
be shaken off, which by long use and practice is grown to an old custom. For
those things which every man has been wonted and accustomed unto from his
first infancy, he will not easily be drawn from them when he comes to more
years. And hereupon it comes to pass that by an old grown custom there
be almost in every place so many old men that be dronkards, lecherous, and
given to unlawful lust, A sentence of Job expounded.
so that according to the sentence of Job, Job. 20.
Their bones are filled with the vices and vicious pleasures of their youth,
that is, they be wanton and serve their leawd lusts, having no regard either
of comely behavior or of their age, so that they cannot leave off such ill
custom, nor be rid out of the snares and encumbrances of such old long
wonted vices wherewith they are entangled. There be some indeed, which as soon
as the heat of youth is past, and the flames of flourishing age are quenched,
do retire and withdraw themselves from those vices unto which that age is wont
to be subject, and reforming their manners, do apply and addict themselves to a
more moderate manner of life. So Cicero in his oration pro Coelio says. Cicero
pro Coelio.
There have been many worthy and famous men, both in our time and in our
forcelders days, which when as the lusts of youth were cooled and
restinguished, became excellent virtuous men in the full strength of their age.
But although we know that it has happened so to some, which either by grief
and irksomeness of the life past, or else by the motion of Gods Spirit, or
finally by the exhortation and admonition of their friends, have been revoked
and brought to a better and a more temperate mind: yet notwithstanding many
being taken away sooner then they looked for, have been utterly disappoynted
of the purpose of amendment of life, so that such procrastination and putting
off from day to day, has been very hurtful unto them, and the good and
convenient occasion of repentance slipped away from them, before that they by
detesting of vice, could embrace such purpose and manner of life as were most
expedient for their salvation. Vice must be forsaken quickly and speedily.
Wherefore it is better, putting away all delay, to be very careful and
diligent to adome the life with virtue, and to accustom those things that be
good even from the tender age, rather then long to differ the occasion of
better life. The Apostle S. Paul oftentimes and in many places beats the same
into our minds, Ephesians 5. Coloss. 4.
and counsaileth us to walk wisely and circumspectly in the course and race of
this life, Not as unwise, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days
are evil. By which words he gives this admonition to every man, A place of
Paul expounded.
that in the race of this life they suffer not the opportunity of obteining
salvation to slip away, but every moment to take sure hold of the same when it
is offered, Galat. 6.
and redeem it with the loss of all other things, lest when we think least,
we happen to be found and taken unawares drowned in drousie security. Matthew.
13. Luc 12.
Christ also in every place raises and stirs up sleepie sluggards to
watching and waking vigilantly, Christ exciteth us to watchfulness.
and exhorts the^ with many examples to be careful of their salvation like
valiant, well trained and well exercised soldiers, which being placed in a
garriso^, where every man must keep his standing, do always stand in readiness
and prepared furniture, and never cease or slack their diligence of ward and
industry of watching, lest any man break into the camp, they being not aware
thereof, A place of Abacuc declared.
Abacuc uses this Metaphor: Abacuc. ^.
I will stand upon my ward or watch, and set my step upon my bulwark, and
look and see what he says to me. A similitude of the watch in the camp.
He takes on him the person of a watchman, who privily marketh the invasion,
irruption and deceitefull ambushes of the enemies, and has his whole mind and
cogitation fixed on God, and through the trust reposed in him, withstandeth the
enemy, and suffers him not to enter. Luc. 12 Matthew. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Pet.
3.
But our Savior brings and uses many very apt and fit similitudes, whereby
he warns and puts every one of us in mind of our duty, as namely, of
the watching and scoultes of the camp, of the thief, robber and hous-breaker
in the night, of the sudden sorrow of a woman travailing with child, Luc. 12.
of the bridegroom which goes forth to make ready the manage, of the unknown
coming of the master and goodman of the house not looked for, of calamities,
Matthew. 25.
troubles, sorrows, and wars that shall come upon the earth, of famine and
desolation that is even at hand, Marc. 11.
of the figgtree that buddeth and blossometh and brings forth his green
tendrilles, of the day of death and of judgment, and many such other: whereby
he plucketh us by the ears, and makes us attentive to take heed unto our
salvation. They that be young have a very good example given to them of Christ,
Luc. 2. The childhoode of Christ commended.
how they should trade and lead their life, even in their very childhoode. For
he being a child prospered in age and wisdom before God and men, in whose
sight his modesty, mildness, and innocence of life made him gracious,
amiable, and worthy of love and favor: him it is meet for children and all
ages to follow above all other, and after his example to approve and make
commendable their study, zeal, affection and diligence unto all men among
whom they dwell. And whereas our Lord Jesus at the age of twelve years showed a
worthy trial and token of his towardness amongst the wise and learned men,
and spoke many things very fit for the time and meet for the matter, and when
he was asked he answered mildely, gently, and modestly, without any token of
arrogancy or pride, which vices are wont to be in young men, that be of a ripe
and bold wit: Christ is the scope, mark, pattern and example of life.
I expound this same thing to have a great meaning in it, and this
consideration to be had thereof, namely, that they which be of such young age,
following the example of our Savior, should even in the spring time of their
age declare some manifest proof of their towardness, and show either to their
parents or to their acquaintance some hope of virtue already begun.

But considering that thou have need of some leader and guide, which may
plainelv as it were poynting with his finger, tell thee what way thou should
go, and how to follow and attain to the best exampls of life, I will show
thee now as occasion offers me, what arts and sciences are best for thee to
embrace, and to what authors thou should addict and give thy self, that
thereby thou may get sure, sound, and perfect learning, and may be advanced
^o the highest dignity, or such degree as is next thereunto.

What authors are most profitable for the attaining of eloquence, and to adorn
the mind, and what arts must chiefly be embraced.

CHAP. 12.
SEe that thou have such choice of authors, that thou determine to read and
imitate those that be best commanded and most approved. For he is an unwise
man, The best authors must be imitated every of them.
which endeavoring to imitate, and desiring and striving to emulate and to do
as well as other men, does not seek and earnestly follow those things that
be good and most profitable. In the nature of things we may plainly learn
this by the very sowing of corn: for we use to sow and put into the ground
the best wheat we can choose and get: and the cunning feate of graffing
teaches us the same evidently* for we use to graffe the kindliest impes and
most fruitful young sets into the stock of a^ other tree. A similitude of
graffing of Trees.
Which thing also is usually observed in the lively making of a picture, in
setting of a song, in Poetry, and Rhetoric, and in c^posing of Poemes and
Orations, wherein the curious and industrious follower, that contendeth to
counteruaile his president, endeavors and strives to imitate those things
that be most cunningly done and most perfectly made. We must endeavor unto the
best things after the example of S. Paul.
The Apostle Saint Paul 1. Cor. 12.
wills men to observe the same in those things that appertain to godly
zeal, and the gifts of the holy Ghost; that they should labor, aspire and
covet after the best and chiefest of the same. For whosoever shall in such wise
either bend his study, or tend and direct the course of his life, he shall
never repent him of his diligence so bestowed, or of his travail so well
employed, as we see commonly unwise men to do, which have entangled themselves
with a superstitious kind of life, or have wasted much time in an unpleasant
style and form of speaking not used of the learned, and have much a do to
leave it: In this respect, me think, A praise of Italy and Greece.
Italy the nurse of studies, and Greece the fountain of learning, is worthy
to be commended for trading and trayning up the tender age in all the best
Sciences: which manner of instruction France and Germany cease not to
follow. For by this means it comes to pass, that young men instructed with
pureness of words, and elegancie of speech, do soon and speedily attain to
the knowledge of things.

Judgment, censure, or opinion concerning heathen or profane writers.

CHAP. 13.
ALthough there be some, Those things which polish and adorn the style and
tongue, must be embraced.
which because they cannot rightly nor indifferently esteem and judge of
things, do conte^ptuously abandon and utterly reject profane authors (as
improperly and unfitly they term them) and will have no examples fetched from
them, either of polishing the speech, or of ordering the life, yet in my
judgment they are not to be despised. For Poets, Orators, Comedi-makers,
Tragedy writers, Historiographers, are a good help for studious youngmen unto
the knowledge of things and of words, unto liberal and natural Sciences,
unto sound, sure and well grounded learning, The commodity of the finer and
more polished literature and study of humanity.
yea and they do set open an easy and ready entrance to the same. Good
cause truly and great reason there is, that these studies are commendably
entitled and worthily co^me^ded with the name of humanity and fine kind of
learning, because indeed they endew and inuest the tender and budding age with
gentleness, meekness, and courteous conditions. Men also that be more grown
in years and of ripe age, do by this study of humanity delight and recreate
themselves honestly, and shake off such tediousness, as is commonly incident
to them that have many great businesses and weighty affairs. Which thing was
the cause, that besides other writers that were of the true faith and of right
judgment and opinion, In Epist. ad Nepot.
S. Basile called by surname the Great, invited and counseled his nephew to
read Orators and Poets diligently.

The office and duty of a Poet, and what profit studious youth and men also
of good years may reap by reading of Poets.

CHAP. 14.
The intent and purpose and practist of a Poet.
HOw perfectly and exactly a Poet, being very like to an Orator, teaches,
orders, and enformeth children in such speech and behavior as is most decent
and convenient (for which cause he is accounted to be the master of liberal
arts and comely conversation) Horace does properly show in elegant verse,
Lib. 2. Epis. ad Augustum.
A Poet is a perfect informer of manners.
The tender maffling mouth of child
the Poet forms well,
From talk wherewith mind is de^ilde
his cares he does repel,
And straight his heart he brings in frame
with lovely lessons so,
From wrath and rancour to refrain,
and envy to let go,
Of deeds well don he makes report,
each time how men should know
Examples gives, and great comfort
to poor and sick does show.


The Poet also does inculcate into the mind of young and tender age certain
other profitable precepts, not severely, not threatningly, not imperiously,
least they should be discouraged, and leave of so good a purpose: but handles
and entreats them gently, mildly sweetly, pleasantly, and with such
moderation and cunning skill, as hostlers and horsebreakers do with gentle
stroaking and clapping, and noise made with their mouth, accustom noble and
stout stomacked horses to praunce and leap up, and with cunning nimblenesse of
their feet Virgil. Georg. 3.
To bounce so bravely on the ground with swift, stout, lofty pase. Moreover
these pleasant delights and recreations of studies do not only stir up,
animate, and quicken the huelinesse of the spirit and power of the mind in
young men and striplings, but they are also commodious, and profitable to me^
of greater age, whenever they may have convenient leisure from troublesome
businesses, and encumbrances of the common wealth, and weighty and earnest
affairs of civil policy. Poetry is the most ancient of arts.
Theoph^stus and likewise Cicero and Fabius do affir^ that the generation of
Poets is of great antiquity and very ancient, and much commended of the old
world. Lib. 10. c. 1.
For it is certain and well known, that by them the barbarous, straying, and
savage people wandering here and there like wild beasts, were drawn together,
and brought to civil society of life, as Horace has expressed in pretty
pleasant verse, In art. Poet.
The excellent praise of a Poet.
The sacred Poet Orpheus the Gods interpreter
The savage people did restrain from barbarique murder
And filthy feeding, for which cause the Tigres he to ta^
And Lions rage to mitigate, is said with lasting fame.
Amphion fou^der of the Towers of thebes with sound of (...)
Reported is to move the rocks, with sweet entreating su^e
To lead the^ as he list. This was in old time wisdom plain
The public things from private goods, the sacred from profane
Discerning right to separate: give God and men their own,
The bed defiled to forbid, let nuptial laws be known.
Towns and Cities great to build, and grave good laws (...) wood.
Such fame and name have Poets divine, their works are thought so good.


Of the use and commodity of Histories.

CHAP. 15.
FOrasmuch as an history, that is to say, a true and trusty narration
reciting and telling of exploites and things done, has in it no less profit
then pleasure, and besides the pleasantness of reading, brings very much
fruit of wisdom: it is me^ to that every man exercise himself in the same
studiously. But by the way let Titus Lini^s tell us the use, fruit and
commodity of histories. Amongst all things which thou know, this is a thing
specially auailable for thy health and profit (says he), The use and
commodity of histories.
The commendation of an history out of Liuie.
That thou may behold the documents of every example, even as though they
were placed and set in a famous and renowned monument, Out of them thou may
take that which is good for thee and the common wealth to follow, byt^ in thou
may beware of those actions and enterprises, whose beginning with
dishonestie, have their end, shame and reproach, and such to eschew. So in like
manner when as one demanded of Zeno, by what means a man might be made happy:
If (says he) a man earnestly behold the age that is past, that is, if he mark
and consider the acts and deeds of his fore-elders, and view well the
monuments and renowned memorial of men of old time. The judgment of Cicero
concerning an history.
For a history, as Cicero witnesses, De Oratore
is the light of truth, the keeper of times, the lively and steadfast stay of
memory, the maistresse of life, the messenger of old age and antiquity,
wherein all things be described elegantly and copiously, and very faithfully
as it behaueth, and with a true narration of things as they were done. But the
sacred The Bible exhibiteth wholesome histories and profitable unto the doctrine
of salvation.
Bible chiefly opens unto us a ^ple field and discourse of histories, and
^streth and brings to our hands very (...) narrations of most memorable
acts, where we may find very profitable documents, and take examples fit for
the framing and leading of our life, whereof many, y^ the most pa^ do set
before our eyes and mind the wonderful and dreadful judgments of God, and
(...) teach and admonish every one of us, how detestable Idolatry is in the
sight of God, (...) contempt of his holy word, and to be affected with no
reverence toward him, and to so^e protection and assurance of salvation by any
other means, then by trust and confide^ in God only, and so in heart to
depart from the Lord. Ierem. 17.


Of Comedies.

CHAP. 16.
The use of a Comedy.
A Comedy is like to an history, because it is the mirror and glass of ma^s
life, wherein every man, under the person of another, behold (...) and
perceives his own manners and affections* and an express Image of his daily
life, and marketh his own vices or virtues after a many sort, as Cicero says,
in a pretty, fine, witty, and pleasant manner. In which kind of exercise all
nations for the most part, every one in their own proper tongue and peculiar
language, The license of the players of Comedies or Enterludes
do use oftentimes great license and liberty of words, so that according to the
saying of Horace, such liberty falls into reprehension, and is blame worthy,
because commonly the plaiers are over sharp and bitter in noting and rebuking
vices: for they do not only check men of mean estate and of the lowest
sort, but they quip and taunt, and with very sharp rithmes reprehend the
nobility, and men of high degree, even in the most freque^ted stage and
scaffold of the City. Moderation of Comedies or plays must be used.
Which men if they would attempt such a thing qithout any spite or spot of
infamy, and with verses that be not so seditious, and would sharpen their
toungs against them only which have deserved it, the^ it may seem tolerable,
to the end that the diseased and sick persons, when they are rubbed on the
sore, may repent, and remember to have better regard of their duty. We
commonly call the Rhythmicall verse and tunable modulations, where with
Comedies are made, Stage plays or Enterludes. Certain things which must be
learned in youthly age.
But in very truth it is decent for young striplings and children to learn
these recreations and pleasant delights of wits, and not for men of greater
age: For these studies agree best with flourishing age, wherewith nevertheless
the riper age, having had some taste of the same in the years that are passed,
may be recreated and refreshed. Howbeit let not men of the elder so^* nor old
men that how and sloupe for age, No age too late to learn.
(...) ashamed to learn those things that are good for their souls health,
and profitable unto the increase of virtue and honesty: For to acqui^e these
things, as also to retire and depart from sin, there is no time either too
late or out of season.

Of eloquence and skillful utterance, which is profitable and necessary for
every man, of what language soever he be.

CHAP. 17.
RHetorique or the art of Orators, the property whereof is to declare, plead
and pronounce a matter aptly, distinctly, and elegantly, To what things
eloquence is profitable.
and with best chosen words, and grave pithy sentences, to allure and inflame
the hearts of the hearers, is profitable and necessary for those men chiefly,
which fulfill the function of preaching, which administer and govern the
common wealth, and execute the office of a Magistrate, or are placed in the
dignity of Consul or chief Justice, or the order of Praetor or Mayor,
Seditions are quieted, appeased and repressed by eloquence.
or which are busied and encumbred with the discord of soldiers, and hurley
burley and outrage of the camp, and the tumult and uproar of the people and
civil sedition, whose duty binds, and authority requires to rule with
reason and counsel, and mitigate with Majesty of words the minds of the
disordered multitude kindled with fury and rage. For subjects must not always
be kept in obedience with threatenings, terror, violence, fierceness, cruelty,
sword and punishments, (unless some heinous offense and bloody matter require
such remedy to assuage and pacify sedition and tumultuous dissension) but they
must be revoked from wicked enterprises, and redu^d unto the doing of their
duty, with mild words, with sweet soueraign speech, and with grave and
constant countenance. And even such like prudencie and dexterity must the
householder use toward his family, and schoolemaisters toward their
scholars, which be inclined to tumult and refuse due obedience.

To what sciences and worthy learning the studies of humanity open us the way.

CAP. 18.
The studies of humanity or liberal learning and discipline is commodious and
auailable, The fine polished learning of humanity adorneth the studies.
not only to the polishing and adorning of the speech with pleasant
allurement of words and intisements of talk, but also unto such arts and
sciences as are good and necessary for man's life, as namely Physic, skill of
healing, knowledge of the Law, and Philo^phie, wherein man's mind chiefly
delighte^ and takes comfort, not humane, The Philosophy of Christ.
do I mea^ but heavenly Philosophy, whereby Christ being our captain, leader
and guide, we conceive the knowledge and love of God and sure trust and
confidence in him, For all a^ wherein man's industry exercises it self, ought
to be referred and applied to this end, and directed to this mark, scope, and
purpose. The professors of worldly wisdom attained not to this most excellent
Philosophy, who erring and wandering wide from the truth, do inueigle men's
minds with falsehood in steed of truth, with vanity and trifles in steed of
the true treasure, with colored simulation in place of sound syncerity* with
things doubtful for things certain and sure, and hurtful for wholesome:
because they were destitute of the spirit of God, and wanted the revelation and
knowledge of his divine wisdom and will.

Three kinds of learning that be most profitable.
But seeing that amongst other, there be three sorts of learning chiefly, which
do not only advance and profit the professors of them (although that thing
ought not so greatly to be regarded) but also are commodious for men of mean
estate, and a help to the competent and convenient sustenaunce of the life: it
behooves to deliberate without delay, which of them thou int^dest to induce^,
and unto which by nature thou art aptly and fitly framed. Theology or study of
divinity, that is, The commodity and fruit of the study of divinity.
the knowledge of divine matters, being showed, given, and uttered by the
inspiration of the holy spirit, does inform and frame the mind to piety and
godliness, and shows how God ought to be worshipped, and by what means every
man may obtain salvation, which (if it be purely and sincerely delivered unto
us) does leave all other arts far behind it, even as far as things divine
do surmount humane, and things firm, sure and sound, do pass those that be
frail, caducall and transitory. What part of divinity is profitable for all
men.
That part of this knowledge is most necessary and needful for all men to the
obtaining of salvation, which instilleth and infuseth faith into the heart,
faith, I say, garnished and beautified with the works of charity and sincere
love, as in an other place I have declared. For by this faith through Christ
our conductor, We have access and entrance in one spirit unto the Father. The
commodity of Physic.
Physic or the knowledge of medicine by prescribing unto us frugality and
temperance of sustenance, and by the use of wholesome things, respects and
mayntaineth the health, and remedieth diseases. Of preserving the health.
This science, as Plutarch affirms, is so of the number of the seven
liberal arts, that in the excellency of good regiment, in delectable
pleasantness and fine civility, it is in^ to none of them. It also brings a
(...) plenteous reward to them that be st^ous thereof, that is to say, beside
the in^ of wealth, it also ministers health, which (...) more worth then all
manner of riches and p^sessions. The pleasant contemplation of herbs.
As for the delight and commodi^ which comes of the contemplatio^ of herb^ and
the knowledge of their operation and virtue of the anatomy and dissection of
the members of man's body, and the obseruati^ of all the parts thereof, no man
can^ easily be persuaded therein or acknowledg^ the same, unless he have
experience of it by use and exercise. The knowledge of the civil law has been
always had in gre^ honor, The commodity of the skill and knowledge of the law.
whereof the office and function is to govern Cities with counsel, to
stablish them with laws, to reform them with judgment, For common wealth to
counsel well,
disorders to amend,
To beat down them that do rebel,
true subjects to defend.


Cic. pro Coelio.
Which order whosoever contemns and renounceth, he as Cicero says, not
only breaks the bonds of judgments, The knowledge of the law commended of
Cicero.
but also of common commodity and life. We see daily that the sure stay of
the common wealth stands hereupon, and that amongst our inhabitants and
country men tranquillity and peace has possessed every place, which comes
to pass by the authority of most sure and inviolable laws, whereby the prince
and magistrate exercises justice, and receiving his power from God, as Paul
affirms, Romans 13.
punishes the evil doers and the wicked, defends the well doers and the
godly. The civil law approved of Christ and Paul.
For which cause God will have singular honor and obedience given unto Kings,
and to them which administer and govern the common wealth, so that they
command those things that be agreeable to equity, and not disagreeable with
the word of God.

We must wholly addict our selves and cleave surely unto one certain and
determined kind of learning.

CHAP. 19.
We must cleave to one certain and determinate kind of learning.
FOrasmuch as there be some, which the more pleasant those studies are that
they like of, the more time and travail they spend therein, and do not apply
themselves unto sure and sound literature: I do think it a part of wisdom,
that he which wishes to reap the commodity of eruditio^, and not to lose both
cost and labor, do give himself to that kind of learning, Do nothing against
nature.
unto which by nature he is most fit, lest he seem to attempt some thing in
despite of Minerua, that is to say, quite against nature, his in^tion being
utterly unapt thereunto: And ^ther, that he diligently apply the study of t^
art, whereunto he has addicted himse^ and with great and earnest endeavor
(...) with all speed possible to come to the (...) and prefixed end of his
travail, that wh^ the space of his study and race of the time the^of is run
out, he may attain to full and perfect learning (if by any means it may be
^tayned.) Continue at study without weariness.
But as for other delights and recre^tions of studies, let him take a smack or
ta^ thereof now and then by fittes, at certai^ hours of best leisure spared
from other nec^sarie business, to cut off tediousness, and to rest him a little
from his laborious industry, so that nevertheless he apply himself unto his
accustomed business and daily tas^ and return seriously unto his studyes that
were intermitted and left of for a time.

What studies and occupations be paynfull and not profitable, and what studies
be hurt (...) and pernicious.

CHAP. 20.
WE must beware of that which some (...) use to do in some kinds of learning,
the is, lest we bestow great study and much labo^ in things obscure and
difficult, which be (...) necessary, Unprofitable studies must be rejected.
but to employ our diligence and ^rauaile in things commendable and worthy of
knowledge, for that deserves praise. For some be occupied and much encumbred
with ^inolous studies, and bestow all their industry ^n those things which have
much tediousnes, ^nxietie, and perplexity, but have very small fruit of the
labor bestowed. Such are the exceeding curious observations and judgments of
the planets and stars, How far forth Astrology is to be exercised.
and of their constellations and influe^ces, which be brought and sought out of
the vanity of the Caldees, whereupon the indiscreet professors thereof rashly
presuming, do boldly foreshew and tell, what shall chance to every man, how his
nativity shall be, what fortune and hap shall come unto him, what success
every man shall have, and do never seek counsel at the providence of God,
when as it is manifest and most certain, that all the whole world is governed
according to his good will and pleasure. The Prophet Esaias reprooueth the
rashness of these men, Esa. 47. and 44.
and reprehendeth their foretellings of fortune and chances, and derideth them
which seek counsel at these, and inquire Oracles and answers of such
deceivers. For thus he inueieth against them and sharply rebukes them: Let the
heaven gazers stand up and save thee, which beheld the stars, and counted the
months, that thereby they might tell thee things to come. Jeremy likewise, Ier.
10.
Do not ye learn after the ways and manner of the Gentiles, and (...) afraid
of the tokens of heaven. For the laws of (...) people are vain, that is to
say, their (...) proofs or demo^strations are deceitful ^bulous. Astrology
not utterly to be condemned.
By which word the holy Proph^ not utterly condemn or reject Astrolog^ which
has use, commodity and profit p^liar unto it, but they speak against such
skil^ men of this art, as with deceitful diuinat^ and telling of false things
for true, The vanity of Astrology reproved of the prophets.
do del^ the people, and do blind and bleare the credul^ and easily believing
multitude with vain e^ctation of things. Of like sort are the vaniti^
Palmestrie, Arts that be hurtful.
which by beholding the linea^ or lines and marks of the hands, do trifle
wonderfully. Likewise the dazzling deceit and c^loured craft of Alcumistrie,
where with fri^lous triflers do persuade men, that they (...) turn the
propriety and kind of things, and cha^g^ silver and brass into gold. Amongst
these (...) we reckon those arts that be worse, nam^ Necromancie, whereby the
bodies of the d^ are wont to be called out of their graves, and a^swers
required of the^, as we read that the Sorceresse or enchanting woman did, who
to gratify Saul, 1. Reg. 28.
brought up Samuel in a fained, false and counterfeit shape. Not unlike to this
be Hydromancie, and Pyromancie, which be done (...) water and fire: and many
other illusions and iugling casts of devils, and inchantme^ts of Magick^ as
Ariolation, that is prophecy of things to come, Sooth saying by view of
sacrifices, noise and flying of birds, that is to say, diuinations and
conjectures by beholding of bowels, Witchcraft and inchaunting hurtful
and by the singing, chirping and chattring of birds amongst these do I reckon
mischievous deeds done by sorcery and witchcraft, wherewith in Germany diverse
witches that hurt infants, and sorceresses by their inchantme^ts, do hurt and
harm their neigbours herds of cattle and sheep, and by the ministry of
devils, do rob them of their milk and butter, and wast, spoil and break their
harvest and vineyards. More over they take from men their bodily and manly
strength, and make them feeble and unable (...) natural copulatio^, even as
though they were gelded: whereof diverse me^ strong and firmly co^pact have made
complaint to me, who lamented that they were degenerated into eunuchs and
emasculate persons, to their great shame, and the detriment of their wives, to
who^ I endeavored to minister remedy and preservatives against witchcraft, with
laying to of herbs, which by the gift of God are effectual, medicinable, and a
sovereign succor against such delusio^s of Inchantme^ts. And therefore to
weary the wit with such witchcraft, is a thing not only unnecessary and
unprofitable, but also very pernicious and dangerous: Deuter. 18.
for by the laws of God and men they are worthily punished and put to death,
which do practice any such mischievous arts, which are ye works of evil
spirits. But for what cause enchantments ought (...) utterly reproved and
abandoned, I will (...) more at large in the end of this book, w^ will
entreat of the Majesty of the name of ^sus, left here the order and course of
my ^ter and treatise be interrupted.

We ought to have as great care and regard the soul and mind, as of the
body, year^ much more.

CHAP. 21.
The care and culture that is to be employed on the mind and the body
COnsidering that man consists and (...) compact of body and soul, we must
(...) very diligent respect and foresig^ to the ^tie and soundness of both
these parts. (...) soul is the chiefest part of man: the bo^ the mansion place
of the soul. We have (...) soul for a ruler and governor, but we use (...)
body rather as a servant and minister. A^ therefore we must not be negligent
in the culture and due ordering of either of them. A similitude taken of
household affairs
For we be careful, that our houses be not da^ and moist, and that the roofes
and tops (...) them be not gaping open with chinckes and crannies to receive
rain and wind, and ^nally, lest our garments and couerings being filthy and
not ayred should be full of moc^es and worms: how much more ought we (...)
look well to the body? the vices whereof (...) annoy the mind, and pa^ to and
fro from the one to the other by the consent and means of society and mutual
participation.

For, Horat. lib. 2 Sermon. Satyr. 2.
The body clogd with outward vice
does press the mind down too,
And suffers not from earth to rise
the soul, as it should do.


Whereunto that saying of the wise man agrees, Wisd. 1.
The body that is corrupted, is a heavy burden to the soul, and keeps
down the understanding that museth of many things. Therefore some respect must
be given to the body, by the firmness and corrobation whereof (as Pliny
says) the mind is sustained. This did S. Paul observe, 1. Timot. 5.
who forbidding Timothy to use water, prescribed unto him the moderate use of
wine, that thereby he might strengthen his stomach, and be the more
chearefully animated and encouraged in the spreading abroad and publishing of
the Gospel. For the body being kept sound and preserved safe from sickness,
does service to the mind the better, and is no hinderance or encumbrance to
the clear understanding in the contemplation and studious beholding of things
that be highest, most excellent, and most worthy to be known. But it is
required at our hands to have special care of the soul, and to adorn and
garnish it by all means possible. And there is no way better to bring this to
pass, then by sure and ste^dfast trust in God, which rayseth up man unto the
certain and undoubted hope of immortality, and delivers ^he mind from fear
and dread of death. And (...) meat is the nourishment of the body: so is the
word of God the food and sustenance of the soul, The food of the soul
by which only peace and tranquillity is conceived in the conscience, then the
which there is nothing more to be wished of man (...) more worthy to be desired
or fought for in the course and race of this life. But with how great grief,
The ungodly are unquiet.
trouble, and unquietness of conscience the ungodly are vexed, how cruel
tormen^ of mind the wicked feel, even the outward h^ bite, quality and
condition of the body does declare. For wickedness is a revenger and punisher of
it self, so that whatsoever conscience it has once caught and possessed, it
never suffers the same to be quiet, but continually vexes tosteth, and
disquieteth it with perturbatio^s. Which the Prophet Esaias evidently end pressed
by a pretty similitude taken of the raging and surges of the Sea, for thus he
says: Esaias. 57.
The hea^ of the wicked rages like the Sea, and the ways thereof boil out
mire and dyrt: that is to say the conscience of the^ which are contaminated
with wickedness and polluted with impiety, is tumultuous, Vicious affections
do annoy and hurt the mind.
troublous and unquiet. And in very deed what man can have a sweet and
pleasant life, or a calm and quiet mind, which carries about with him a body
defiled with most filthy diseases, and a mind utterly overwhelmed and deformed
with foul and abominable vices? Wherefore seeing that the most part of
enormities proceed from the corrupt and vicious affections of the mind, we
must resist the same by all means possible, lest the body have any hurt or
ind^mmagement thereby. With like care and endeavor must the body be preserved
from diseases and sickness, lest some spot or contagion happen to redound from
the body to the mind. Ill humors do dull and darken the understanding.
For when naughty and corrupt humors bring foul fumes to the brain, they
drive and provoke the mind unto many evils and inconveniences.

What help must be used for the body, that it may continue in perfect health.

CHAP. 22.
Frugality or moderation of repast is good for the health.
COntentation with a little, and temperance of food preserves health, and
drives away sickness, using therewithal a moderation of those things, which
are necessary for the stablishing of the health, and confirming of the
strength. These are called of Galen the causes of conservation, Artis Medi. 85.
because they be requisite and meet for the preservation of the state of the
body, so that we use them conveniently, commodiously, and in due time. Men of
later (...) call them things not natural, not because (...) be contrary to
nature, but for that they are co^^tute without the body, and be not, as the
humors, are naturally graffed in us, and by vse^ effect do some what hurt
nature and the p^wers thereof, if they be not rightly and con^niently used. Of
this sort is the air that compasses us about, meat and drink, sleep and
waking, repletion, emptines, affections and motions of the mind, every one of
the which constrayneth, drives, and reduces the both unto the conservation
and safeguard of it self. But because the chiefest part of sound health
consists in wholesome diet, we must diligen^ly observe and consider, what in
the same is either good or hurtful for the body. And for that ingurgitation
or gluttony is no less filthy and odious, then noisome and pernicious to the
health, so much meat and drink must be taken, as necessity of nature
requires, and that the strength of the body be refreshed, and not oppressed.
Moderation of sustenance good for students
For the moderation of sustenance is very convenient and necessary in all
earnest applying of studies, and businesses of great and weighty affairs, in
enduring the labors of painful watching work, and in fulfilling public
offices and common duties. This is it that surely stablisheth good health,
this makes both the animal and the vital spirits, which are ascribed to the
brain and heart, so cheerful, so glad, prompt and courageous, that every man
easily, and speedily, and without any grief, accomplisheth and brings to
pass those things which he has conceived and purposed in mind. But on the
other side daily examples do show, that by excess, riot, and intemperaunce of
life diseases are caused, studies, are hindered, all honest cogitations languish
and wax feeble, good enterprises and laborious lucubrations go not forward,
the promptness and readiness of the understanding decays, the strength,
power, and lively quickness of the mind is extinguished; men are made
sluggish, unapt, slothful, sleepy, lazy, and endeavor not to do any
excellent act or laudable exployt. Wherefore let him that has addicted
himself to the study of learning, and is very desirous of erudition, so
moderate and rule his state of life, that nothing be done after the pleasure of
his lust, but that his appetite obey reason, a^nd that he refer all things unto
the commodity of life and necessity of nature. Christ commands us to be
moderate in meat.
Christ requires this of them that profess him, and reduces them unto
temperaunce with these words: Luc. 21.
Take heed, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you suddenly.
For as a snare shall it come upon all them that dwell upon the face of the
whole earth. By which sermon he se^ sobriety in men's minds, and banisheth
^he love of worldly things, and will have their continue in that conflict even
until the last day of life, lest some worse thing happen unto them. Satietie
or fullness is to be eschewed.
A proper and pretty saying is that of Cornelius Celsus, Cornel. Cells. lib. 1.
When ye come to meat, too much satietie is never good, too much abstinence
oftentimes is ill, neither is hunger convenient after fullness, nor fullness
and immoderate ingurgitation after hunger. Wherefore foolishly do they, which
after banqueting, feasting and good cheer the day before, do so macerate,
make lean, and pine themselves with want of meat out of measure the next day
after, that sometime their heart faints, and they fall in sown, and have
need to be recovered with things odiferous and of sweet smelling savor.
Other again after fasting and hunger of the day before do load and over
charge themselves with meat and drink more then is meet, in such abundance,
that unless they be loosed, they seem to be bursten. Howbeit sometime for a
man to have the more liberal repast, More liberal refectio^ sometime may be
used
and to refresh himself with his friends and companions in convenient feasts,
is not culpable, nor deserves in any respect to be reproved, so that all
things be done moderately, and keep within the compass of mediocritie and
the limits of temperance. For by such recreations sorrow and sadness is
driven away, which by over ardent and earnest contemplation, dulleth and
darkneth the quickness and sharpness of the mind and understanding, and by
extenuating and exhausting the spirits, makes students melancholicke,
unpleasant, sad, sour, silent, and wayward, and causes them to abhor all
good fellowship, and to be estranged from all civil familiarity, which
perturbations ought to be very far from lovers of studies, politic men, and
them that have attained the best degrees of learning.

Meats must be received of the liberality and bounteousnesse of GOD, with
great thankfulness and thanksgiving.

CHAP. 23.
FOrasmuch as by the munificence and free gift of God we enjoy his creatures
plenteously and abundantly, At our meat let us acknowledge the bountifulnes of
God.
and that all things are created from the beginning of the world for the use
and commodity of men: For this cause so soon as we sit down at the table
before we put our hands to the dish or food, our mind must be lift up unto the
Creator of al universally, to obtain of him with hearty, lively, faithful,
and earnest prayer, that he will vouchsafe to make those things which we
receive wholesome for us by faith, and give them effi^cie to feed, foster and
nourish out bodies. (...) the nourishment, vigor, and lively strength
consists not in much meat, neither in many fine and sundry sorts of meats,
but in (...) word of God which endueth them with (...) effectual power. 1.
Tim. 4. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 10.
Wherefore all things must be rendered, yielded, and ascribed to God. For so
does S. Paul teach, and so likewise does Prudentius show us, who it is of
whom we ought to crave and trust surely to obtain s^stenance and succor of
our life, forsooth even of God the father, of whom by Christ we obtain all
things. For he directs his prayers to that effect and with that confidence
thus, Cathimer. An hymn of Prudentius at sitting down to meat, or before
dinner of supper.
O Christ next to thy father is thy might,
Behold I pray thee with countenance bright,
Bow down thy face which is our saving health,
Thy fair and mild beams cast forth for our wealth,
That to the honor of thy name we may
Take our refection now and always.
Without thee O Lord nothing can be sweet,
Nor mouth does avail to taste any meat,
Unless our food thy favor bless O Christ,
By faith in thee all things thou sanctifiest,
God grant our meats may of him have their taste,
And Christ be among us at this our repast,
Our earnest, our sport, words, and merry talk,
And what we be, and do, and where we walk,
The high and holy Trinity guide his steck.


As Soon as our strength is recreated with meat, he exhorts us unto
thanksgiving by the example of Christ. For our Savior when supper was ended,
Matthew. 26. Marc. 14.
went not from the table before a hymn or song of praise were said, to the
end that we should acknowledge that all things do proceed from the
plenteous, rich, and bounteous hand of God, and by his gift are wholesome and
healthful for us. Thus therefore he goes forward with grace and thanksgiving,
Prudentius his grace or thanksgiving.
With meat received our bodies fed,
our weakness to sustain,
God let our tongue, as we are bid,
the father praise again.
So we with these thy gifts refresh't,
God which give all good thing,
Do render thanks to thee the highest,
and hymmes with heart we sing.


There be very many such forms and sorts of prayer extant in most approved and
well commended authors, and in the Bible also we find every where pithie,
hearty, earnest, and piercing petitions: But there is none more effectual to
obtain withal, then that which is prescribed to us of Christ. Matt. 6. Luke
11.
For whatsoever is either asked or conceived in the mind, ought to be referred
to this prayer, and springs and flows from this fountain. That prayer
indeed consists but of very few words, and is divided into six or seven
parts, but it i^ and replenished with mysteries, that it contains in it all
things which appertain (...) to the glory of GOD, or our necessity, (...) and
profit, or the commodity also of (...) neighbor.

How w^ must have regard of hospitality.

CHAP. 24.
Strangers and guestes must be well entertained and entreated liberally and
courteously
AS concerning the respect that is to be (...) of the entertainment of guests
and strangers, or of them which seek and hunt for feasts and banquets of
another man's cost, it becomes every man to be well advised, wary and
circumspect. First verily it is meet for every man to have care of
hospitality, which the Apostles and other writers doc commend, Romans 12. 1.
Tim. 3 Tit. 1.
and S. Paul requires in a Bishop, and the doors of the house and entrance of
the parlours must be open unto modest Citizens and courteous neighbors. For as
Cicero says, it is very decent and convenient that the houses of noble and
honorable men be open and reach to receive noble and worthy guests. 1. Pet.
4. Heb. 13.
In which duty of humanity to avoid ambition and ostentation,
sumptuousness, and respect of persons, We must have respect and regard of the
poor.
Christ would have the poor and needy to be invited and bidden, and in so
doing that we should not look for like gifts again, Luc. 14.
nor for recompense of benefits bestowed at our neighbors hands, but only
at our heavenly fathers hand, who gives us all things again, pouring his
blessings upon us with abundant and exceeding overplus. But because there be
some men impudent and of a brazen face, A choice and discresion is to be had of
guests.
which being past shame and modesty, do at their own pleasure intrude
themselves into feasts, and sometime when they are well fed, steal away
privily out of the company, and give not thanks to the master of the feast:
Therefore I think it convenient to make such a difference and choice of
guests, that they which be modest, thriftie and temperate be entertained: But
unthrifts, licorous persons, gluttons, insatiable eaters, and flattering
parasites, which shoue and push in themselves impudently, contrary to the will
of the master of the house, must be shut out at the doors, or sent away
with some civility and courteous excuse, or if that will not serve, nor can
be obtained, some notable good sentences or wise sayings written and set up in
the parlour, must be objected unto them, which may admonish them of their
duty, unto which effect this pretty precept, as well as any other, may be
set upon the posts in the parlour, for them to look upon, that they being
much ashamed ashamed may remember what is seemly comely to be observed, An
elegant verse for guests at feasts.
Will thou sit at my board my guest?
these paradoxes keep:
With biting jests, or spiteful speech
reproach on no man heap,
Take in good part such meats as be
before thee set to eat.
Disprayse nor falsely him accuse,
whose praise thou can not treat.
Of equal quaffing to and fro
I monish thee beware.
Thy lowering looks put quit away.
Thy pleasant speech declare,
Be merry jesting honestly,
Pay thanks to God thy debt.
Requite thine host like amity,
that which he did not get
In fallow land his resting field.
Do thus, if thou desire
Twice welcome to thy friend to be,
and favor to acquire.


A proverb used at feasts
There is a pretty Proverb also, which shows us that we must not neglect the
company and familiarity of guests, but to keep the laws of humanity and
observe the rites of amity, which is this: Do not pass the salt and the
table. For when as men in old time used to make feasts amongst themselves one
to an other, and from one place to another, with such like sage sentences and
good prudent counsel they nourished and fostred friendship being once
begone, and stablished it in their merry meetings and joyful cheer. For which
cause it was an ancient custom to appeach those men of treachery and
disloyalty, which had gone beyond the Salt and the Table, that is to say, had
broken the token and covenant of amity, and violated the league and most
hearty friendship, and faithful conjunction of life, where with they were
linked and knit together amongst themselves by salt and bread, and by the
participation and society of one table. Unto this symbol, this token of
amity, this good precept, that complaint of David has relation, wherein he
representing the person of Christ, appealeth his friend and familiar of
treason, falsehood and unfaithfulness, which was hidden under the show and
color of honesty, and feigned and counterfeit pretense of godliness. Psalm.
41. John. 13.
For thus he complayneth of him, Even that man of my peace, in whom I hoped,
whom I trusted, and which did eat bread with me, that is to say, was my mate at
meat and table fellow, has attempted to overthrow me. It were a thing
tolerable and I could more mildely bear it, A place of David expounded.
if mine enemy denouncing war by Heralds of arms, had assailed me in open
battle: But him to circumuent me, to go about to deceive me, to lay great
wait for me, stiffly to stand against me and to supplant (...) with whom I had
intercourse of most nea^e and dear familiarity, and whom I made partake of my
counsels and secrets, it is a thing intolerable and which cannot be borne
withal* In like manner Christ being moved and grieved with such a villainous
and malicious fast says thus: John 13.
He which did eat bread with me, has lift up his heel against me, that is
to say, my household enemy, who is more pernicious then any other enemy,
purposes precisely with deceitful devises and privy practices how he may
oppress and entrappe me. He takes his Metaphore of friends which in outward
show and first view are fair speakers, but inwardly they are full of fraud,
and the poison of aspes lies under their lips, hidden in the heart: for they
smite a man privily and hit him with the heel on the back part, that it cannot
be perceived who did the hurt. A proverb against treacherous persons.
By a prouerbiall figure, such claw-backs of Colax crew may well be said to
strike with turning away the point, that is to say, not before on the face, but
behind on the back and on the hinder part of the body. David makes another
expostulation or complaint like unto this, wherein he complayneth himself to
be greatly endammaged of that man, whose familiarity he specially used, and
was so knitte and united unto him in the league of amity, that he was
partaker of all his purposes, and as his most trusty and special friend that
knew his secrets. Which cruel dealing and heinous fact he very vehemently
rebukes and reprooueth with these words: Psalm. 55.
For if an open enemy had done me this dishonor, then I could have borne
it. And if mine adversaries had lift up themselves against me, I would
peradventure have hidden my self from them. But it was even thou a man of one
mind with me, and one that knew my mind only, my guide, and mine own
familiar friend, which did receive sweet meat in my company, and we
were conuersaunt in the house of GOD with consent etc. A place of David
declared.
These are patheticall verses, that is to say, full of passions and
perturbations of mind, whereby he declared himself to take much grief and
to have great indignation, because he finds him, that hitherto bare a show
of a trusty friend, to be his most mortal and envious enemy, and covertly
and closely to seek and work his destruction. But to painte out lively and to
set forth in his colors such a crafty turne-coate, chaungling, and subtle
surmiser, which under a certain show and pretense of feigned friendship and
counterfeit virtue does in countenance, eyes, and wo^ flatter his friend, when
as inwardly he nourishes rank poison and vipers venime for his destruction,
he adds this also to the crime of disloyalty: A similitude of oil and butter.
The words of his mouth are softer then butter, whereas war is prepared in his
heart* His speeches are smoother then oil, when as i^ very deed they be
swords and darts. By which similitude he describes and notes feigned and
malicious friends, which have one thing close in their heart, and another ready
in their tongue, and which do show bread in the one hand and bear a stone in
the other. Of which falsehood and treachery Judas Iscariot prefixed a pattern,
and after him many other, which learned that lewd lesson of him, and have taken
fraudulent examples.

Of the care of household wealth and hous-keeping, and the governance thereof.

CHAP. 25.
The care and good regard of household and hous-keeping.
AS touching Oeconomicall prudencie, that is, the administration of household
businesses and affairs, which as Cicero testifies, is the minister and
servant of the body; it is decent for every man to be diligent and discreet
in stablishing and garnishing the same so, that the enlarging and augmentation
thereof be referred unto the necessary use of life, unto commodity, unto
neatness, cleanliness and trimnesse, not unto excess and delicate pleasures,
not unto sumptuous fare and immoderate provision and furnishing of dishes,
which disperse, diminish, waste and consume riches, yea even great substance
and large possessions. Therefore in adorning feasts and furnishing the table,
frugalitie, thriftie sparing, and moderation of meats must chiefly be
observed, and all prouocations of gluttony and lewd lust must be eschewed:
and finally all fine delicate iunckets and banqueting dishes, Costly provision
of meats is to be eschewed.
Ephesians. 5.
which are used commonly to be brought in at the second course to them that are
already well satiate with meat, to provoke them to desire to eat a fresh
again, must be avoided. This prodigality, superfluity, and ryotous life
does not only make wealth decay, and causes sickness, but also when
banquetters are hot with drinking wine, it ministers heat and nourishment unto
luxury, and stirs up the loins, and affects the priuities and uncomely
parts with stiffnesse, whereby they begin to itch, and that I may use the
Apostles word, 1. Cor. 7.
to be burned, that is to say, to be the more mightily provoked and inflamed
unto inordinate desire of uncleanness: Romans 13.
For which cause S. Paul would have nothing done according to the will and
pleasure of our lusts, but would have all things tend unto the necessity, use
and commodity of nature, not unto superfl^ and voluptuousness, which is very
hu^ both to body and soul. There is no man ^deede so insensible or unnatural,
that he ^ abide to hate his body, Ephesians. 5.
but as S. Paul says, nourishes and cherishes it, as Christ does ^he
congregation. By which example the Apostle inuiteth and wills husbands to
love the wives, and endeavor to have such care of them, as every man has of
his own body, and perform that unto them which Christ has performed to his
Church and congregation his only and entirely beloved spouse. But in the
administration and ordering of household business and in establishing and
maintaining household substance, and saving it from detriment and loss, all
things must be so measurably and temperately used, that thou incur not the
name either of a spend-good or an unthrift, ^ of a very niggard, a pinch-penie,
a nip-crust^ holdfast. Use measure, for that is a virtue and treasure.
Goods are saved and kept by sparing^ augmented and increased thereby: But yet
thy substance ought not to be so pinched and streictly stored up, that thou
defraud thine own belly of natural refection, and pin^ both thy self and
thine, which some vile misers use to do: And again on the other side that
thou do not as ryotous reuellers are wont, spend out of measure thy gotten
goods, and waste thine inheritance, and consume thy substance in licorousnesse
and dainty dishes, amongst a crew of such dissolute and unthrifty companions,
which do instigate, entice, and encourage thee to make such hauock of all. For
as indeed according to the saying of Terence, A man that seeks to have
gain, must needs bestow cost: so according to the sentence of Plautus, A
proverb commending frugality or temperate sparing.
A man cannot be sure to have gain, if the cost be greater then it. Whereby he
gives advertisement and admonition so to moderate and measure cost and
charges, lest by unmeasurable spending and wasting, the mayntenance of
housekeeping happen to be impaired: but let the reckoning of receites and
expenses be alike, eeuen and equal. Wherefore it is the duty of a diligent
householder, when time requires, to bring forth such things as are requisite
out of his storehouse, and when need is and occasion serves, to lay up in
store agaye. For it is too late to spare when all is spent, as the common
saying is. Late sparing loses much profit.
That law which Amasis king of the Egyptians caused to be published, and was
also put in practice of Solon the lawgiver to the Atheniens, is agreeable to
this purpose, Lib 3. Euterpe.
and convenient for the commodity of the common wealth, and conservation of
household substance, by which law it was provided, The law of Amasis against
idle persons.
as Herodotus affirms, That as well the people of the country as strangers
inhabiting there, should every year declare before the Presidents of
Provinces, how and whereupon they lived, and by what means and trade they got
their living. And they which could not give such notice, nor bring testimony
that they lived lawfully; should be punished by death. By the severity and
rigor of which edict, commandment, and decree, his intent was to restrain
idle persons from robbery, rapine, pilling, and spoiling, that they should have
no provocation thereunto, to which state those unthrifts use commonly to come,
which have spent away the inheritance and lands left unto them by their
fathers, and have utterly wasted and consumed their patrimony at the dice,
among whores, and in ryotous revel and drunken feasting. Upon these respects
and considerations I think the law of expenses grew up among the Corinthians
against unthrifts, and such as make hauock of their goods unadvisedly, or make
more sumptuous feasts and with greater prodigality, then their substance and
yearly reuenews will bear. Which law, Lib. 6.
forasmuch as Diphilus pronounces it in that public place in Rome where all
sciences were read, and Erasmus, a man famous in all kind of learning, has
expressed it in Latin verses, shall here be annexed, that thereby Magistrates
may take such order and use such means to bring the same to pass, that Cities
and Fermes without the town walls and graunges be not molested of violent
thieves and robbers, which both on the day time and on the night do rob and
spoil men's riches and quiet possessions, and cruelly cruciate and torment
their bodies, except they forthwith reueile and bring forth unto them their
treasure. The sentence of this law is expressed in these verses, The law of the
Corinthians concerning expenses and charges.
This by the law provided was
Corinthians here among,
If any man we see always
fine fare to have so long,
We ask him, how he lives so,
what work he does always:
If he have lands, thus for to do,
and rents that charges pays,
We let him use his goods at will.
but if the cost exceed
His substance, we forbid him still
such thriftlesse life to lead.
If he will not this now obey,
his penalty is great.
Of living he that has no stay,
and costly cheer will eat,
Tormentors must have him to pain.
oh God, is not this fit?
For such cannot it is most certain
offenses but commit,
But must needs drive a pray by night,
or break a house to steal,
Or be a mate to them, of theft
whom wicked deeds appeal:
Or carry tales and lies t'accuse,
or witness false to bear.
Such men as filth we do refuse,
and purge this City clear.


S. Paul pricketh sluggards forward to labor and industry.
With like severity does S. Paul the Apostle require duties to be done: 2.
These. 3.
For he commands slothful and idle persons to shake off drowsy
sluggishnesse, and to employ their labor and diligence in handy works and
manual occupations, wherewith they may sustain themselves and their
housholdes: which precept he would have to be so severely observed, that those
men which would not apply their labor, and be diligent and careful to
maintain their household estate, but like Drones or dorre bees which seek to
consume the labors and honey making of the hyue bees, do live of other men's
liberality and gifts, and be idle, occupied in no work, but only in being
busi-bodies in other men's matters, that those, I say, should have no meat
granted nor given to them. The admonition of S. Paul to thieves.
Unto this discipline and severity of reforming manners S. Paul Ephesians 4.
also reuoketh and reduces thieves which rob, pill and spoil other men's
goods, whom he does not only admonish to abstain and refrain their hands from
other men's goods, but also to bestow on the relieuing of the poor and nedy
those goods which are acquired and gotten with honest labor, so that their
former lewd and dissolute life, stained and polluted with robbery, rapines and
unjustly gotten goods, may now be reformed, renewed, and garnished with good
works and liberality toward them that are pressed with poverty. Luke 19.
Whereof we have an example in Zachaeus, who distributed unto the poor those
goods that he had gotten by usury. For by this means it comes to pass, that
the faults and vices of the life heretofore wickedly led, may be changed into
virtue and godliness, to wit, the affections being quite altered, and the
natural naughtiness being put off, and corrupt customs abolished.

The moderation and measurable use of sleeping and waking.

CHAP. 26.
Moderation of sleeping and waking.
STudious and politic men amongst other things must have regard of sleep and
waking. For if these things be used moderately, conveniently and in due season,
they bring very much commodity in stablishing and strengthening the health. For
they do not only make the body prompte, cheerful, lively, strong, and
lusty, but also specially cause the mind to be the more quick, apt, prone and
ready to fulfill such office, charge and duty as is appointed and committed.
But immoderate and unmeasurable sleep makes men dull, foolish, sluggish,
forgetful, and such as hardly can atchieue any good and laudable enterprises,
or attain unto the knowledge of any excellent Arts and Sciences. Wherefore
men of such sort and condition must be animated unto good exercises, and to
take pains, to the end they may shake off heavy idleness and sleepie sloth,
and apply the powers of the mind unto some such actions as are seemly for a
man of good wit, calling and estimation.

Noon sleep when and how it is hurtful.
Now as concerning sleep at noone and on the day time, I do advise young men
not to accustom themselves thereunto, unless weariness proceeding of great
heat and labor, do afflict the strength, or that they have passed the night
before either in watching or banqueting out of due time: for then noone rest
may be taken without hurt. But otherwise it causes the memory to fail, and
darkneth the understanding, and besides the heaviness of the head, it brings
dimnesse of the eyes, especially when men lie down upon a full stomach. And
therewithal they have this inconvenience, that immediately after their heavy,
dead, and drousie sleep is past, they are disposed and desirous to vomit, and
do gape and yawn, and raskle with their arms abroad, that is to say, stretch
forth their members every way, having a concourse of vapors diffused throughout
the whole body, by reason of a sickly grief and a stiffnesse of a fever or
ague, A disposition, to vomit proceeding of surfeit.
which the old Latins do call Helucus: which signifies sick of yesterdayes
drinking. Which word betokens such as either after surfeit or noone sleep
be ready to vomit, and are faint, feeble and accrased, and incontinently
inclined to yawning and yexing. But old men and they that are in their
perfect, ripe and best age, may safely sleep at noone, that is to say, Sleep
at noone is convenient for old men
when dinner is done (so that there be some little space of time between) may
give themselves to slumber a little, especially in summer time and hot
weather: for then the intemperatenesse of the air makes men sleepy, at which
time this ease may be commodiously taken either sitting in a chair or lying
on a bed, the head being laid the higher and a little the more upright on the
pillow, for by such recreation with sleep the spirits both natural and
vital, from which the animal power that abides in the brain, receives
nourishment, be refreshed and revived. But waking out of due season is both
hurtful to every age, Much waking dries the body.
and especially very harmfull to old age, as also hunger, for both these bring
dryness to the bray^ and besides frenzy and doting folly proceeding thereof,
these two inconveniences make the body dry, evil favored, and very lean. If
therefore strength be impaired, or the spirits and powers wasted, and the
vital juice being consumed, the body wax lean, either with immoderate
waking, or hunger, or working in the night out of due time, or by too much
labor, or by intemperate carnal copulation, then must the strength be
recovered and refreshed with moist meats and drinks, or potions that cause
sleep, as lettuce, spinach, orage in operation like unto mallows, buglosse,
borage, the seeds of new or fresh poppie, the flowers of water lilie, Things
that cause sleep which moysten the brain.
whereunto are added flowers of violets, pine apple kernels, sweet^ almonds,
the kind of nuttes which the Apothecaries commonly call fistici, the juice of
barley steeped or pressed, great raysins and small raysins called Corins, which
have no stones or kernels in them, Dates, Orenges or the rindes of lymons or
citrons confected with sugar or honey. For with these the natural and vital
humor is refreshed, and the brain, which is the habitacle of the mind and
understanding, is as it were perfumed and imbrue^ with a dew like moistning
vapor, and watered with a sweet breathing upward or sent, whereof comes quiet
sleep without any trouble or tumultuous disquietnesse. How sleepy drowsines
may and must be shaken off.
But if any man be by nature more inclined to sleep, and not ardently bent
unto any laudable practices and enterprises, let him continually clean unto
exercise and labor, let him eschew al meats that be of cold and moist
faculty, and use those which having efficacy to heat, do dry up superfluous
humors, wherein the cause of sleep does consist: Of which quality are these,
hyssope, rosemary, sage, organum, marioram, sauerie, red coleworts, ginger,
pepper, nutmeg, cloves, and many other things which do ease and comfort the
brayn being stuffed with vapors and fumie humor, and do stir up and quicken
the mind darkened with gross and thick vapors, and make it lively, prompt and
ready to conceive honest cogitations.

What good or hurt comes of repletion and abstinence, and consequently of the
belly too much laxatiue or of the contrary.

CHAP. 27.
THe same moderation also must be used in other things which be either good or
hurtful for the health: as fulness and emptines, whereby the body is refreshed
with meat and drink, or being filled full of humors is euacuated. Moderation in
meat must be used.
But as the diet of studious and politic persons ought to be moderate and
te^perate: so the same must not be over small and sparing, lest the spirits be
extenuated: and they must also diligently observe, that they be not more
costi^* or more laxatiue then is requisite. For both these as well the one as
the other (if they ^ceede measure) be hurtful to the health alike. For if the
belly have too great a flux, or beauer loose, it makes the body dry and very
lean, and to have very little sleep, and ^o brings dryness into the
brain, and thereby impayreth the memory. But if the belly be over dry and too
much stinted and stopped it obscureth the memory, dazeleth the eyes, causes
unquiet and troublesome dreams, by means of gross and thick humors which
ascend to the brain. The things which do gently soften and laxe the belly,
be these, to wit, Herbs that loose the belly.
Violets, Lettuce, Spinach, Orage which in their kind and effect are like to
Mallows, which herb the Poet Martial testifies to be commended and committed
unto men of old time for that purpose, The Bayliffe of the Ferme his wife
brought Mallows unto me
To laxe, and diverse herbs for life
which garden riches be.


Put to these buglosse, borage, cheruil^d beat, blete, damask prunes, raysins
and cori^* mulberies, figs. The things which minister sovereign medicine
for this effect, be these, namely, mercury, fumitorie, fern growing on trees
called Polipodie, seen, rubarbe, wild or bastard saffro^ or as we call it
English saffron; epithyme which is a weed that grows winding about thyme, and
has a flower like thyme: It is used as a gentle purger of melancholy: cassia,
manna, which is a manner of dew congelated on trees and plants, and so is
gathered in certain countries and reserved as a gentle purger of choler: It is
also called Melaerium. As for scamonie, the root of the herb tripolium
commonly called Turbit, Mezereon, and such like strong purgative medicines, do
debilitate and overthrow the strength: and therefore are not to be ministered
but unto them that be of strong nature and constitution, when as a shrewd
knotte requires a shrewd wedge. Things that bind the belly.
But if the belly be more loose then is convenient for the health, it may be
stinted and stayed, with often using of red mynt, and with the confection or
syrop thereof tempered with honey, which is every where to be had in the
Apothecaries shoppes. Quinces likewise that have tender mosinesse, and any
confection of them, do bind and corroborate the belly, likewise red roses: To
these may you add medlers, before they come to their kindly moystnes, softnes,
and tenderness: in like manner heppes whose kernel within is full of stones, but
they are of a sweet and pleasant taste, and therewithal tarte and binding Rhus
Ponticum, which our country (...) Ribes or Respes, which stirs up the
app^tite marueilously, and drives away the ab^ring and loathing, which a weak
stomach (...) when it is ready to vomit, and strengthens ^ with virtue
retentiue, especially in sum^ time, when as choleric humor washes (...)
intrayles much, and provoke flux, to which use and effect the juice thereof
being tempered with sugar, What it is that Auicenna calls Rob.
which Auicenna calls Rob, in singular medicine and ready remedy: for it
stays the panch that is annoyed with too great a flux, it raises up the
weakness of the appetite, and stirs up a good desire to eat, as do also
pomegranates, having within them red kernels full of corners, which be i^
taste sometime sweet, sometime tarte.

Studious and politic persons must often times purge the pores, by which the
excrements are euacuated.

CHAP. 28.
The pores are ordained to purge the excrements.
GOD the Creator of man's body has not without great cause and good
consideration, made so many passages and ways for the purging out of humors
and the clensing forth of excrements, lest in very deed man should happen to
be overthrown with the great abundance of them, and be suffocated and
^trangled with the vapors which proceed from them. So the head purges and
exone^ateth it self by the nostrels, ears, and roufe of the mouth with
spitting and sneesing: The breast and lungs bring out fleume by the artery of
the voice or windepipe with coughing: The stomach or ventricle draws out the
pumpe or sink by vomit and belchings: The bowels cleanse themselves by the
belly or panche, and shutting forth ven^ositie at the back door, do wash
the gutter clean from fylth and dregs: The reins and bladder derive and
carry the urine by the passages and conduits thereof: And the superficial or
outward part of the body dryueth out the soote-like vapors and sweat-breeding
exhalations by the skin that is full of pores, and has a passage through it by
many little holes. Wherefore seeing that the body cannot continue in sound and
perfect health, unless all the parts thereof be well ordered and in good
state, and fulfill every one their function and office without any annoyaunce
or hurt: care and diligence must be employed herein specially, that no
disorder or distemperance grow up in the body, whereby the action or working
of the instruments thereof might either be marred or made worse. For the mind
uses the ministry of these, and thereby brings to pass excellent
enterprises. If some disease molest, if the head be troubled with heaviness,
if fleume be grievous, if the (...) or strangurie or dropping of the urine do^
vex, if dimnesse or blearenesse corrupt the eyes, if the hands or feet be
afflicted with the gowte, Horat. in Art.
If any man with noisome scabbe
or iaundise troubled be,
man's mind can not speedily fulfill or execute any office, affairs or
business appointed. For which cause those men may be reputed wise, which
seek to have regard of health, and to purge and cleanse the body and the parts
thereof from all excrements. For so the mind or intellectiue power is more
clear, and made the more apt, able and convenient for every action. A great
sort of men neglecting all comely and due order, and having no respect of
health, do gape for riches, and are only and wholly bent unto the desire of
getting and scraping of worldly goods together, when as yet notwithstanding
sound health is better then gold, Health is better the^ gold.
and nothing more worthy to be wished for then the tranquillity and quietness
of the mind. Horace confirms the same in these verses, Horat. lib. 1
epistol. 12. Ad Iccium.
If belly and sides be well in health,
and feet do feel no pain:
What greater good in royal wealth
can to a King remain?
No house, no ferme, no heap of coin
the owners body saues
From fevers, nor from cares the mind
which toss like raging waves.


And to the end he might bring every man to a temperate and moderate use of
things, he adds further, Horat. lib. 1 Epistol. 2. Ad Lollium
The owner must be sound in health,
if he mind well to use
His substance and acquired wealth,
and counsel not refuse.


To which words the wise Hebrew plainly and wholly agrees thus, Eccles. 30.
Better it is to be poor, being whole and strong, then to be rich and not to
have health. Health and good liking is above all gold, and a sound body is
better tha^ great riches. There is no riches better then health of body, nor
any delight greater, the^ the gladness of the mind, and joy of the heart.
Wisd 4. Eccles. 30.
Therefore felicity must not be measured by the abundant plenty of riches or
prosperous success of things, but by perfect health and unreprovable
soundness of body and mind. For in very deed that man both lives and has
the fruition of health and welfare, which enjoys the pleasure and commodity
of these things without any annoyance or inconvenience.

Wholesome precepts necessary and requisite as well for the mind as for the body.

CAP. 29.
THere be three things accounted very wholesome in the opinion and judgment
of all men, and therefore it is meet for every man to observe them, namely, To
feed without fullness, Not to refuse labor, To conserve the seed of nature.
To the which I have opposed iump so many very unwholesome things, which do not
only bring sickness and diseases, but also do accelerate old age before the
time, and destroy men with hasty death. vz. To be stuffed and stretched with
surfeit, To be idle and slothful, To be weakened with immoderate carnal
concupiscence. Measure must be used in things convenient for nature.
For not only frugality, by expelling gluttony, co^stituteth a healthful body,
Exercise, by shaking off idleness and sluggishnesse, makes it nimble, quick
and lively: but also if we may receive documentes of the kind and natural
property of horses, Virgil. lib. 3 Georg.
No diligence them stronger makes
and stomach stout to have,
Then from blind love to pull them back
and lust which they do crave.


Because indeed an intemperate and libidinous youth delivers unto old age a
feeble and fruitless body. Therefore not only in youthful years, but most
chiefly in old age, inordinate lusts must be restrained, and the entry into
luxury stopped, which as it is shameful for youth: so, as Cicero says, Love
and lust not decent for old age.
it is most filthy and unseemly for old age. For as in war and in the camp
soldiers have need of strength, have need of nimblenesse, have need of
valiantness to suffer and endure labor and travail: even so in love and in
accomplishing the pleasures thereof, strength is requisite to sustain the
labors of the night, to overcome and abolish the tediousness of matrimony,
to bear and abide the conditions of a malapert wife, of an imperious and
stately dame. Wherefore neither war nor love is meet for old men, because
either of them caryeth with it many troubles, griefs, and inconveniences, for
the which old age is over weak, and an unequal match and unmeet to endure
them. The Poet Ovid has expressed the same in elegant verse, Ovid lib. 1. Amo.
Eleg. 9.
All lovers play the soldiers part,
and Cupid has his compe:
O Atticus believe me well,
all lovers play this part.
A man that able is for war,
his age is meet for lust:
Old men forwarres both unfit are,
and love forsake they must.
Love is a kind of warfare, then
ye which are weak depart:
Defend this standard must those men
which have no fearful heart.
The night, the cold, and iourneys long,
and labors full of pain,
All grief endure those soldiers strong,
in sweet camp to remain.


Moreover, who does not see how indecent a thing it is for an old man grown
our of favor and fashion and riuelled, to basse and kiss, and strive to
embrace like a young man? When as he is unable to accomplish the solace of
marriage. So said Sophocles well and truly, who being aged was asked, whether
he used the pleasures of the body: The Gods forbid, (quoth he) I have fled far
from thence verily and run away gladly from that, even as from a churlish and
furious master.

A man must have respect of his estimation and good name.

CHAP. 30.
Regard is to be had of a man's fame, name and report.
Endeavor by all means possible to bring this to pass, that thy neighbors
and all they which know thee, may conceive a very good opinion of thee, and
give laudable testimony to thy estimation and name: and finally, think very
well of thee, and speak of thee to thy praise and good credit. And be not
ashamed to mark well, with what persuasion the country men are induced, and
how they are affectioned in their minds toward thee. For if a man neglect and
care not what every man thinks or speaks of him, it is not only, as Cicero
says, Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
a token of an arrogant man, but also of one that is dissolute. So we read,
that Christ asked of his Apostles, what opinion the confused multitude
conceived of him, what report went of him, Mat. 16.
and finally what they persuaded themselves concerning the Messiah, not led
weth ambition, nor that he sought glory, praise or renown, Christ sought not
the praise of the people.
but that he might prove and try them, whether by hearing of so many
healthful sermons, and beholding of so many miracles, they did think of him
more highly, reverently and magnificently, then the common people: therefore he
enquired and demanded this of them, to the end he might get out of them, and
cause them to utter a sound profession of the faith, and might try how much
they had profited in heavenly doctrine, which has no falsehood, no vanity, no
deceit, no simulation, no guile, as the Pharisees maliciously surmised and
falsely detracted: but is very expedient unto salvation, pure and sincere, being
spoken and pronounced of the truth it self, even of the son of God our
Savior so long time looked for. Which when Peter, by the inspiration of the
higest father, had in the name of all the Apostles singularly, plainly and
openly professed, Profession of faith.
and constantly pronounced Jesus the author of all salvation, and that
mankind by trust and confidence in him obtayneth redemption, Christ commended
the profession of Peter given unto him by the inspiratio^ of the holy spirit,
and confirms it being grounded and stablished upon an immovable foundation,
that it should be invincible and inexpugnable. In every action and in all thy
words and deeds have a care of comlynes, Regard is to be had of comlines and
decency.
and remember what is most decent and seemly, for this does the regard of
honesty require: Whereupon arises that preatie prudent proverb, The chiefest
part of any art is to do that which is dece^t, to wit, that which is fit for
nature, convenient for the wit and natural inclination, How and by what means
glory is to be sought and attained.
and meet for the manners and conditions. The ready, easy, speedy, and short
way to the atteyning of perfect and permanent renown, is to be such an one,
and behave thee self so, as thou would be accounted, whereof by the way
Horace gives advertisement, Horat. lib. 1. Epistol. 7.
Thou shall live well, if thou have care
To be that same which thou do hear.
that is to say, such an one as thou art said to be, and as thy neighbors, and
countrymen testyfie of thee: Which if they think and account thee to be an
honest, innocent and true meaning man, then indeed thou do well, so that
thou do not play the hypocrite and false dissembler, nor deceive them with a
color, show add pretense of honesty, as some players do in their counterfayt
apparel, visours and visages, which at the first view appear to be of
approved honesty, when as indeed they are turne-coats, variable and
inconstant and naughtypacks, Pers. Sat. 5.
For being trimmed outwardly
on face, they hide in heart
An old and naughty crafty mind
a wily foxes part.


The sure reward of silence.
Remember that there be two singular virtues, by which young men are wont
chiefly to be commended, namely faithfulness and taciturnitie: to the which if
shamfastnes be adjoined, being an amiable color of young striplings age,
adorned with mixture of read and white, being as it were therewith co^mendably
decked: there is nothing surely can be added to the ornament and commendation
of natural comelynes and modesty, more favorable, or more gracious and
acceptable. But whosoever is destitute of this towardnes and lacks these
ornaments of youth, or has lost them, we commonly account him past help, past
hope and grace, notable in ungraciousness, and exceeding impudent. Therefore is
this saying true, I count him quite lost verily,
Who is past all shame utterly.


Shamefastnes commends young men.
For shamefastnes and bashfulnes does commend and adorn young men more then can
be expressed, so that those young striplings undoubtedly become honest, or show
concerning themselves some hope of virtue or token of honesty, in whom there
appears some sign and signification of shamefastness, which apparently
shows it self. A token of a good nature and disposition.
So Diogenes when he beheld a certain young man, and perceived that he was
ashamed and did blush, says to him, My son, be bold, for such is the color
of virtue, honesty, and modesty. Likewise we read in Terence, when Mitio
conceived a very good hope of his son; He blushed, says he, therefore all is
safe and well. Moreover, shame and confession is a token and testification of
Innocence, if at any time it be found and perceived in them which have not
committed offenses of purposed and wilful malice. But contrariwise
unshamefastness and impudent obstinacy, is an evident sign and argument of
ungraciousness. Boldness is naught.
For some young men that be very bold, are not afraid at all to look
steadfastly and fasten their eyes even upon grave men and to deny their fact,
yea althoug it be manifestly proved and can not be denied. But to the end
thou may without envy purchase praise, and procure friendship, Thou shall
accustom thy self, as the Comicall Poet says, to suffer, endure, and bear
with all sorts of men patiently. Teren. Andr. Act. 1. Scen. 1.
With whom thou keep company
A match thy self to yield thee,
Their studies honest if they be,
To practice do not disagree,
Against no man see thou be,
Nor coumpt thy self better then he.


For it is a token of a noble and gentle heart and dest mind, to do much, but
to speak little of himself, after the example of Iugurtha, whom in this
respect Salust commends, not as proud Thrasolike boasters and bragging
soldiers, which insolently advance themselves, and tell every man of their
own famous facts and excellent exployts, with brave boasting and great
ostentation. Wherefore seeing that frivolous bragging and vain boasting is
odious to every man, Boasting is odious.
let no man flatter himself in the praise of his wit, learning, or wealth,
nor ambitiously show and set forth his own gifts, but so moderate his doings,
that he think and speak of himself humbly and modestly, lest, as S. Paul
says, Romans 12.
he seem to despise, disdain, and contemn other men. We have admonition
hereof by many men in their writings, and namely by Horace in these verses,
Horat. lib. 1 Epistol. 18. Ad Lollium
Of no man search at any time
the secrets for to know,
But keep them close when either wine
or wrath wrest thee to show,
Thy studies thou shall not commend,
Nor other men's shall reprehend.


Rejoice no^ scoff at other men's misery.
Let it never be in thy mind to rejoice at another man's calamity, nor laugh at
his misery, no not of thy foe or enemy, but rather be sorry for it, even as
though thou were partaker of his grief, and count his hap and condition worthy
of compassion. For such is the course, change and mutability of man's state,
that many from high felicity, and very large and ample possession of great
wealth are thrown down unto poverty, and brought into a miserable case, and
sometime their hard hap is to have a woeful, sorrowful, and lamentable end. Other
again from the very lowest degree and base parentage, and wretched bondage, are
advanced unto riches, unto honor, unto dignity, rule and dominion.

Eccle. 10.
Do not that to another man, which thou would not have done to thy self. For
Christ would have all our actions, studies and meditations to be squared by
this squire, and perfectly tried according to this rule, when as he says,
Matt. 7.
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so also do
ye to them: that is, give to every man honor, reverence, succor and other
duties of humanity, which every man would have exhibited to himself. Too much
hastines of speech runs into reprehension.
Be not hasty, rash; or unadvised in uttering thy words: Finally so govern thy
self, that thy tongue run not before thy mind, neither let words pass
unwisely through thy throat, which afterward had need return back again the
same way to be better tempered. For many with whom we dwell and deal are
slippery in fidelity, and void of taciturnitie, which do not only carry all
abroad those words which escape any man's mouth imprudently, but also with
backbiting and crafty accusations and chalenges, do empayre, hurt, stayne
and violate the good name and fame of their neighbor. For this cause Horace
instructs every man with wholesome admonition and counsel thus, Horat.
epist. 18. Ad Lollium lib. 1. Epist.
That I may counsel thee forthwith,
if counsailer thou need,
What of each man thou say, and it
to whom thou say, take heed.
Fly busy man demanding much,
for that is a babbler sure,
No secrets broad wide ears of such
can keep, but them out pour.
And words once past do fly
Past calling back to thee.


Babbling is hurtful.
In which verses he gives admonition to every man, to speak of other men
advisedly, and moderately, not to blab out any thing rashly, which may at any
time be his harm or hinderance, and do him some damage or detriment. Lastly,
he advises us to observe and beware of privy harkeners and secret serchers
and spies what men say or do, which intrude themselves into all companies, and
subtly smell out something, whereof they may bring complaint and accusation
before the chief Constables, Justices and Judges, so that no man may safely
mutter, whisper, or murmr concerning any matter, neither may any man in such
infelicitie and so great misery of our days, openly and playnlie profess
those things that lie in his mind, and which reason induces, although it be
agreeable to the truth and sincere religion, even for fear of promoters,
tale-bearers, and accusers, to whom also rewards, fees, and preferment is
appointed, that they may show themselves the more circumspect and attentive to
see, Beware of word-spiers and privy harkeners.
hear, pry and epsy in this their very ignominious and detestable business
of spying, marking and searching, insomuch that men in authority, which use
the ministry of these men, do hate and abhor them even for their office
sake. For some men are delighted to have men's faults bewrayed, noted, and
appeached: but yet they hate the craftsmen and doers thereof, although for the
time the office which they so fulfill, Tale-bearers are odious to all men.
pleases them well. For they suspect them as untrusty, treacherous, and
disloyal fellows. Augustus Caesar declared the same plainly, in whose
presence when as Rhymirales King of the Thracians boasted too insolently of his
own merits: The saying of Augustus concerning treason.
I love, says he, the treason, but I detest the Traitor. So, as Julius
Capitolinus records; tale-cariers were repressed and extinct of the Emperor
Antonius Pius, to wit, that kind of men which by accusation was wont to get the
fourth part of men's goods, which sort of men are the more hated and abhorred
both of the highest, and likewise of the lowest degrees of men, because in
their sayings and doings they do exasperate and aggrauate all things, and make
them more heinous then the truth of the matter is. Marcus Emperor Capitolinus
Wherefore Marcus the Philosopher being Emperor took good order, and used
politic means for the crafty and malicious accusations of such tale-bearers,
adiudging the note of infamy to false accusers and secret complayners. Saturio
the Parasite as we read in Plautus, In Persa.
accompteth it an infamous and detestable thing to practice privy accusing and
carrying of tales, and had rather that a man should feed his belly by playing
the Parasite after the trade and manner of his ancestors, A Parasite is not so
ill as a talebearer.
then to play the accusation carier, and by such means to become rich, and to
gape for the goods and life of other men. Although indeed such kind of
offices deserves no great praise among wise men, which suffer not parasites
and flatter^s to sow pretty fine ears to their heads, that is to say, to make
them fools, nor their mind and understanding to be taken away, and so to be
deluded by their fair sweet plausible words and pleasant entisements.

The appeasing and pacifying of discord and dissentions is praise worthy.

CHAP. 31.
Contentions must be appeased
IF any hidden hatred, grudge and contention happen among any Citizens,
neighbors or companions, it is the duty of an honest man as much as he can to
assuage and quiet the same, to put away and remove the offenses, hurt and
displeasures done, to bring the dissentions to agreement, lest they wax more
bitter and grievous, to break off debate and controversies, to mitigate
discord, to renew concord, to procure peace between the contentious and
disagreeing persons, and to offer and show himself a faithful and diligent
pacifier of men's alterations. Which duty of humanitic our Savior places not
in the lest part of blessedness, Mat. 5.
who adorneth and honors them that be desirous and studious lovers hereof, A
peace maker deserves praise.
with the glorious title of the sons of God. From this and from many other
virtues, wherewith charity, that is, a desire to do good to all men, is
garnished, some troublous, seditious and tumultuous fellows are utterly
revolted, who because they hate and abhor al manner of peacemaking and
reconciliation, do of a malicious, wicked, and peevish purpose, sow sedition
every where, and do not remedy nor redress grievous rancor and cankered
contention, but do rather make the same more rough and rigorous, and as the
proverb is, Do put oil to the flame, and when a thing is naught, make it
worse, A kings mind may be provoked to wrath.
yea even when Kings and Princes happen to be moved and provoked, whose mind by
nature being noble, stout and fierce, is more and more kindled and inflamed
with the corrupt and malicious counsel of these men. Surely there is nothing
more detestable, or more to be abhorred then these kind of men, specially
when there is any business in hand concerning Religion, from which all
corrupt and perverse affections ought to be utterly secluded, lest by any
severity, rygor, austeritie, and cruelty men's minds happen rather to be
alienated and withdrawn from the zeal of godliness, then by lenity,
mildness, and clemency to be invited, moved and provoked thereunto. For if
it seem good either to stablish the old custom, or by taking away errors
which by little and little are crepte in, to renew and redintegrate some
thing, and reduce religion unto the first fountain, all such things ought to
be done with judgment, discretion and good aduisement, using such regard,
order and means, that no uproar arise, as of late years it chanced in
France: In which country men's minds being drawn into diverse parts, some one
way, some another, Religion was begone to be broached, spread abroad and set
forth with force and arms, the end of which matter was woeful and lamentable.
A venomous back-biter is as hurtful also as a privy accuser, Backbiting must be
eschewed.
who with reproaches, ignominy, slanders, diffamations, and reproves, works
the overthrow of him that deserves it not, and with his poisoned tongue
defaceth and destroys him utterly: which kind of men Horace in these verses
both reprooueth and teaches us to avoid them, Horat lib. Ser 1. Saty. 4
His absent friend he which does gnaw,
and not defend when other blame,
Men's laughter he that makes to flow,
and eke their talk to note the same,
He that cannot dissemble well,
nor cloak those things which he does see,
He which cannot but secrets tell,
he ugly is abhorrd to be:
O Roman have thou care,
Of such for to beware.


Like to this is that same admonition of Solomon: Prouer. 4.
Put away from thee a froward mouth, and let backbiting lips be far from
thee, And a little after likewise he says: Prouer. 24.
Keep no company with back-biters, for their destruction shall come suddenly.
The holy writers do testify and plainly show in every place, Eccles. 10.
Exodus 22. Psalm. 70.71.101. Ezech. 22. Iam. 4. Romans 1.
how much this rage of detracting and madness of ill speaking has been
always abhorred, hated and detested of al honest, wise, and godly men, and
namely of S. Augustine himself, insomuch that he caused these verses to be set
up in his parlour, to object them against backbiters, and to stop their mouths
withal, Verses used of S. Augustine.
Whosoever delights to diffame
those men which are not here,
Or bitter tongue which will not tame,
whose babbling who can bear?
Or pleasant mates with quaffing much
and full cups weary make:
This board receives here none such,
let him this warning take.


For by this means he alienated and segregated from his table and company,
them that be delighted with gluttony, or that love to speak ill of men, or
use also at meat dishonest, shameful, and filthy communication.

Let no man be proud in prosperity, nor discomforted in adversity, but rest
and stay himself upon the providence of God.

CHAP. 32.
BEcause in man's life nothing is sure nor continues long, neither do all
things run always in one state, continuing ever in one order, but by a
certain enterchaunge and turning of their course, sometime prosperity and
felicity flattereth, sometime the case being altered, adversity pincheth and
wringeth. Therefore the mind must be confirmed with such constancy,
Stedfastnes and consta^cie is commendable.
and stablished with such equabilitie, indifferency and equal condition, that
thou be not insolent in prosperity, nor cast down or over come with
adversity, but which way soever man's state inclines it self (as sometime it
is wont in a light moment) thou always strengthen, assure, and support thy
self upon the word of God and his providence, The mind must be strengthened
and comforted with the providence of God
according to whose good pleasure we know certainly that this world is ordered
and and governed that al things are done and fulfilled after his will, to the
which al events, chances, and successes, whether they be prosperous or
contrary, ought to be referred, not unto the inconsta^cie and temerity of
fortune. For, that be far from us, that men which are endewed with the
understanding and knowledge of GOD, This word (fortune) is to be abandoned and
rejected of Christians.
should persuade themselves, that any thing is done by chance, hap, or
fortune, when as indeed the chief cause of all things must be ascribed unto
God.

Curiosity must be eschewed.

CHAP. 33.
Marking of other men's matters is reprehe^ded.
BE not a curious marker of other men's matters: but rather endeavor diligently
to amend thine own life, then to look narrowly into an other man's, or to
reprehend his conversation. S. Paul the Apostle also does diligently and
earnestly give every man this precept, 1. Cor. 5.
not to have circumspect eyes abroad, and look on other men's businesses, but
to be careful, wary, and vigilant in his own household affairs, and to
take good heed, that nothing be done amiss, which may worthylie be
reproved of foreyners. But as for the things, matters and businesses of other
men, which appertain not to us, he would not have any man to have great
regard thereof, or carefully to look to the same, no not if any fault be
committed. For there be some so far wide from the true profession of Christ,
A si^tude of ^sitions.
that they despise wholesome counsel, and hate them which labor to bring
them to a better mind: even like to some which being diseased and full of
byles and sores in the fundament, do contemn and neglect the healthful and
faithful Physician, and had lever continue still in filthy corrupt humors,
then to receive a singular and sovereign remedy. Because therefore it is not
always a wise man's part to be busy or to meddle in all businesses, Meddle
not in other men's businesses.
nor expedient to be curious in other men's matters, this prouerbiall sentence
may well be objected against such busi-bodies, as will have an oar in every
boat, thus, He procures himself much quietness, which medleth not in other
men's business. Hereupon S. Paul calls back and reduces the Thessalonians
to their own occupations and businesses, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
and suffers them not to be curious in other men's matters. But it is
wonderful to consider, how quick-witted many be in the businesses of
foreiners, Quick eied abroad, blind at home.
how quick-sighted in examming, fearching, sifting, spying, and marking other
men's doings, when as in the mean time they neglect their own, and let their
whole mind and cogitation go a pilgrimage and run all abroad, but at home
they are as dim of sight as Fayrees, hobgoblins, or night-sprites, and
blinder then Mooles? Pers. Sat. 4.
No man attempteth to descend
into himself, no man:
But on his back, which go'th before,
the wallet spy we can.


Which sort of men as Persius, so likewise also Horace does check and sharply
reprehend in these verses, Horat. Sermon. 1. Satyr. 3.
When thou with bleard and noynted eyes
thine own faults do foresee:
To spy thy friends offense and vice,
so sharp why is thine eye,
An Aegle-like most quick of sight,
or dragon Epidaure?
No more adoo, thine own self sift
and try, if heretofore
Thy nature or ill custom has
ingraft some vice in thee:
For in such fields as are neglect
growth Fern that burnt must be.


The blind love of a man's self is to be detested.
Seeing therefore that this vice of self-love does dim and blinden man's
understanding, and darken his mind so much, that many men favor and flatter
their own vices: Christ our Savior does sharply inueigh against those men
which fasten their eyes upon the life and manners of other men, Mat 7. Luc. 6.
rather than upon their own, and which curiously mark a mote or a straw, that
is to say, the smallest faults and of no value or importance, and do aggrauate
them exceedingly, when in the mean while, they do not mark, perceive, nor
consider the beam, that is to say, their own great and grievous offenses.

Moderation in apparel.

CHAP. 34.
The moderate use of things is to be respected
AS in the furnishing of feasts, frugalitie and temperaunce of fare must be
regarded: so also in the apparel and attire of the body, the same moderation
must be had in such wise, that nothing be referred unto prodigality and
vain ostentation, but that all things tend unto the necessity of nature,
and the use, profit and commodity of life: whereunto if comely trimnesse, and
neat comeliness, not too gay and exquisite galantnesse, be added, I see no
cause but that it is tolerable. Women are desirous of fine attire.
But because woman-kinde does chiefly desire and greatly delight to be gayly
and galantly attired and decently trimmed, thereby to acquire beauty and the
grace of beautiful fayrenesse, 1 Pet. 3.
S. Peter the Apostle admonishes matrons, not to bestow too much cost on fine
raiment, nor to make themselves gay and brave to the eyes of the beholders,
with frisled and broydered hair, or gold, or pearls, or cheynes, or bracelets,
but to please and delight their husbands, and to win their favor and
benevolence with modest manner of apparel, and sober attire and arraying,
without gorgiousnes or curiosity, as in old time those holy and honorable
dames Rachel, Genesis 16.
Sara, Rebecca and Susanna used to do. Prodigality and riot to be eschewed
For truly I know many both in our time and in our foreelders days, which with
wearing sumptuous and costly garments, yea and the same eftsoons renewed after
sundry outlandish fashions, and consequently by fine and curious furniture of
dayntie dishes, have been brought to utter beggary and extreme poverty, and
have been also derided of those men which provoked and helped them to waste
their patrimony, and which also by deceit, craftiness, slight, guile and
fraudulent subtilty had scraped, catched and gotten something from them,
insomuch that they would not bestow one farthing to relieve and succor those
men in their calamity and misery, whom they had brought even to the hospital
or almeshouse, and extreme penury. But forasmuch as we see every where so many
unthrifts, ryotous persons, spenders and wasters of their own substance, and
greedy of other men's goods: no man ought to think it strange or marvelous,
that we find in every place so many me^ in so great debt, How men come in debt.
not only of the vulgar and mean sort and common people, but gentlemen also,
yea Courtiers, Barons and noble me^ of the realm, that ride roially with
notable pomp like princes, which sometime defrauding wards and widows, from
whom they scrape all the money that can be gotten, yet they pay no man any
part of their debt, no not whilst they be alive, much less do they leave
order to pay it after their decease, when in truth they have more then their
life so gaged and so far indaunger to their creditors, that immediately after
they have changed life, all their goods are put under the voice of the Bedle
or Crier, and the creditors strive who should be first served.

Let no man despise that estate, lot or condition, that is allotted and
appointed unto him.

CHAP. 35.
Let every man be content with his own state.
BE content with that state and condition which has happened unto thee, in this
course and standing place of life, and stage of this world, and bear the same
for the time moderately and patiently, yea what person or part soever thou
bear, in what place, or in what order and state soever thou stand. Let every
man abide in his calling.
S. Paul requires the same of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 7.
bringing in his exhortation the example of a freema^ and of a servant, of the
circumcised and uncircumcised, of married and unmarried, and exhorts every one
willingly and gladly to abide in his calling, and not for any state of life to
swerve or shrink from the true religion of Christ, after they have once
begone to embrace and profess the same. For godliness, as he teaches
Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.
is plenteous and great gain to a man that with his whole heart is content
with that which is allotted unto him. But some there be, Inconsta^cie is
reproved.
who because they are grieved with their condition, and weary of the state
wherein they live, do wish to have it changed, and to be translated into
another which may be more commodious and convenient for them: Which thing if it
cannot be obtained according to their mind and will, and as they desire, or
that it be not altogether so expedient for them, there is no cause nor reason
why they should macerate, afflict, vex, disquiet or consume themselves with
sorrow, but take all things mildely and quietly, and not resist, strive,
grudge, God is the governor of all things
or murmr against God the governor of all things, who by his singular
providence rules and orders this world, and provides very well for the
maintenance and welfare of men, not only as Cicero says, for all universally
but also for every one particularly. Which thing also David in many places does
inculcate and oftentimes repeat, and specially when he says, Psalm. 33.
He fashioneth the hearts of men every one, he understands all their works.
Wherefore every man ought to be persuaded and assured of this, that God is the
governor of all things, and that every thing is done according to his good
pleasure, at his beck, and after his will, and finally that he sees, marketh
and considere^ of what condition, inclination and disposition every man is,
what he does, what offense he commits, with what mind purpose and intent,
with what affection, love and zeal he does favor and reverence religion,
what is expedient, necessary, convenient, behoouefull and healthful for every
man.

And therefore if at any time al things be not answerable to our desires, and
that we be disappoynted of those things that we wish for, yet let every man
abide in his vocation which God has appointed unto him, until the favor and
loving kindness of our highest father do determine otherwise concerning his
estate. 4. King. 20. Esai. 38 Iusu. 10.
For he changes the course, he turns and alters the order of humane
things according to the rule, power and dominion of his will. He rayseth up the
abject and despised from the base and lowest estate of beggars, Psalm. 113.
and does illustrate and make them famous and noble with dignity, honor, and
power. He brings down the arrogant and hautie, and such as be puffed with
pride, Psalm. 113.
and throws them out of the throne of their felicity. He makes the barren
and fruitless women to be fruitful, and to be joyful mothers of many children.
Wherefore let every man quietly and gently bear and endure his calling in hope
and trust to obtain and have a better, and let him lean wholly to God and
rest only in him, for upon him chiefly and principally lies the care of ma^s
estate. To which effect that saying of Esai has relation. Esai. 30.
Thus says the Lord God, even the holy one of Israel, In silence and hope
shall be your strength and safety. A place of Esai expounded.
By which words he drives mistrust out of troublesome and unquiet minds, and
exhorts them quietly and assuredly to look for the help, aid, and succor
of God. For it shall come to pass that in his good time, when he thinks and
knows best, they shall obtain their desire, so that they do not distrust his
promises: although sometime he defer his help, yet them that long and labor to
come to him, he never disappointeth of their affectuous hope and patient
expectation. The Poet Horace, who curiously espied and marked men's doings, when
he perceived that men are as it were tossed too and fro with such inconstancy
in that manner, purpose, and trade of life which they have once embraced, and
that there is no stedfastnes nor constancy in their minds, insomuch that every
man contemns and disdayneth his own estate, and desires to change with
another man's, the merchant, the soldier, the husband man, the lawyer: He
demands thus, Horat. lib. 1 Sermon. Sat. 1
Mecoenas, how com'th it to pass,
that no man liu'th content
With such state, as his purpose was,
or fortune to him sent,
But rather do those men commend,
Who diverse arts to prove intend?
Which afterward he prosecuteth with an elegant proverb by a Metaphore taken of
heard^ of cattle, Horat. lib. 1 Epist. 14.
The slow ox would the saddle bear,
the horse does wish the plough.
Whereby he notes the natural property of man's inclination to be yrke of his
own estate and condition, We are yrke of our selves.
and desires that it might be changed with another man's, and counts things
unproven better then things proved. In another place also he gives a reason
of this inconstancy and lightness, whereby the mind wauereth, by an
altercatio^ that arose betwixt two, concerning the delight to dwell in the
country and in the City. For the one praised the civility, vrbanitie,
courtesy, and affairs of the City; the assembly, resort, hant, and noise of
the people: the other esteemed solitariness and husbandry, and the
pleasauntnes of the woods to be better. For thus they dispute between
themselves, Horat. epist. 14 Lib. 1. Epist. Ad Villicum suum.
Country life count I the best,
the City thou do praise:
His own^ state he does sure detest,
whom other men's does please.
These fools do both of place complain
not justly: For the mind
Is to be blamed, which does remain
and shunnes not corrupt kind.


The mind is the cause of inco^stancie.
Truly the Poet in my judgment does with good reason blame the mind and lay all the fault on the rashness and unsteadfastness thereof. For since that man's mind
is led with affections, and not with reason, and is tossed too and fro, A
similitude of the raging Sea.
even as a ship with the rage and surges of the Sea: he is plucked and drawn
every moment into diverse purposes, and conceiueth many kinds of variable
cogitations and intents, whereby it comes to pass, that whatsoever kind of
life or purpose or trade of living he imbraceth, he does not steadfastly
persevere and continue in the same, but does eftsoons cast in his mind,
devise and purpose some other thing, which he hops shall be more
commodious: When as in very deed the change of his state and condition cannot
shake off nor remove such perturbatio^s and affections, nor take away cares
because it is evident, that these are not incident unto the things, but dwell
in the minds of men. For if either every man's solitariness be changed into
frequented company, or his poverty be translated and altered into wealthy
plenty and abundance of all things, yet for all that his mind shall be never a
whit the more quiet, because he does not lay away the troublesome motions of the
mind, that are not obedient to reason. Such men in some respect (as Plutarch
Plut. de tra^q. animi.
and Basil Basil de vita solitaria.
testify) have like hap as they have which commit themselves to sail upon
the Ocean and huge sea, desiring to be conveyed and carried into some haven,
whereunto they direct their course. A similitude of the^ that are tossed in the
sea.
For they are afflicted as well in a great ship as in a small bark with
loathsomnes of stomach, with giddines of the head, with vomiting, so, that
their disposiued and desire to vomit is not released or mitigated more in the
one then in the other, because choler and fleume abounding in the body, does
accompany and go with them in both places. So likewise in changing the
purpose, trade and manner of life, no man obtayneth tranquillity of mind,
unless he utterly abandon his affections, and rule all his dooinges with
reason. To which end and effect that saying of Seneca agrees very well. Sen.
ad Lucil. Epist. 1.
Me think it is a special token of a quiet and moderate mind, when a man can
be constant and continue with himself. Wherefore, o Lucilius, I am glad,
says he, that thou do not run here and there or wander abroad. For he
that is every where, is no where. Therefore it avails not to go beyond sea,
or to change the Cities, or to seek one while for this abiding place, an
other while for that. If thou will shun these things that so urge and molest
thee, thou must not be in another place, but must be another man, that is,
order, stay, and quiet thy mind, cast off corrupt and naughty affections,
moderate all thy doings, delights and desires with reason, aduisement,
counsel, and wisdom. For as he truly says, The air they change but not
their mind
which run beyond the seas.
But against such tumultuous and troublous affections, which do so draw the
mind into diverse desires, and pluck it into so many variable purposes, that in
a light moment it retireth from an enterprise determined and begone, we must
constantly fight, and continually withstand them with the word of God, and the
wholesome and healthful doctrine thereof. What stablisheth the mind.
For this sword of the spirit causes the mind, which strayeth here and
there, and wandereth all abroad, to be stable, firm and steadfast, and to be
content with his own lot, state and condition, so that he neither forsake,
contemn nor disdain the same, nor ambitiously and greedily covet and gape for
another man's calling.

The society, company, and familiarity of dishonest and wicked persons must be
eschewed.

CHAP. 36.
Fly from the fellowship and sodalitie of lewd and naughty persons, even as
from the pestilence. Sen. lib. 3. de ira.
For manners and conditions, as Seneca says plainly, are taken by the
conversation and company. Keep company with them that be honest.
And even as infectious (...) contagious sicknesses are brought into the body,
so vices by words enter into the hea^ and contaminate the mind. So that the
cleared holesom air is not so profitable for health, (...) it is for weak,
feeble and wavering minds to be conversant and keep company with vertuo^,
good, and honest men. The cruel, savage, fierce, and wild beasts are a
docume^t and example unto us, for they by men's freque^ted and hanted company do
wax meek and gentle, and become tame. And as it is the condition of honesty
and good behavior to indue the lovers and followers thereof with virtue, and
to adorn them with honest and vncorrupt manners: so is it also the property of
ungraciousness, unthriftiness, and naughtiness, to deprave, pollute and
coinquinate with vices them that be delighted therewith. 1. Cor. 15.
Therefore the Apostle S. Paul, lest any man should happen to be withdrawn
from the truth, from the hope of salvation, from the trust to obtain
immortality, from integrity and honesty of conversation, he studiously and
diligently admonishes the lovers of godliness, not to conceive such an
opinion in their mind, to persuade themselves that no part of man remains
after death, but that this whole workmanship perishes utterly, and comes to
naught even as brute and dumb beasts. Which error the ungodly and such as be
far from God, do earnestly inculcate into the ears of unwise and
uncircumspect men, and with that pernicious heresy, sect and opinion, do
turn away their wavering and inconstant minds from wholesome doctrine, from a
thing certain and sure, whereof there should or can be no doubt. For this cause
the Apostle by all means possible withdraws Christians from the conversation
of those me^, Wicked and lewd persons to be avoided.
which by their fradulent and deceiptfull doctrine seek to intrappe and
entangle in an error imprudent and heedlesse men. For with Menander his little
six foot verse thus he does illustrate his exhortation: Evil communication
corrupts good conversation.

The tongue must be restrained not only from filthy talk, but also from idle
words.

CHAP. 37.
When as we hear that our Savior Christ Jesus reprehendeth and reprooueth
idle words, Mat. 12.
that is to say, unfruitful, unprofitable, superfluous, frivolous, vainly
pratled and foolishly babled words, and such as are uttered without any profit
either of the hearer or of the speaker, so that he shall give and render
account of them in the day of judgment: how much more, as S. Paul says, ought
we to detest filthy and scoffing talk, Ephesians. 5.
uncomely jesting, dishonest mirth, indecent and vns^ly vrbanitie or
pleasantness of speech, which do greatly hurt the integrity of behauiour^
finally biting taunts, Scoffing talk is to be eschewed
nipping quippes, bi^er floutes and mockes, which because they leave in the
mind a grievous remenbraunce thereof, and fix a sharp impression therein,
like waspes which flying away fasten their stings, and minister nourishment and
occasion of hatred both open and covert, insomuch that at length by heaping up
words redounding from one to another, and interlacing their debate with
figurative and crooked taunts, cast like darts one at another too and fro, the
matter comes to a bloody fight, and by the instigation of some persons
stirs up bitter hatred and rancor, and unappeasable wrath and indignation,
which being conceived deeply in the mind and impressed obstinately in the
heart, are rubbed up and exasperate again even then most of all, when as they
seemed to have been blotted and rased out, extinct, and utterly forgotten.
Backbiting taunts and quips to be eschewed.
Moreover, discord, dissension, and the furious rage of cursed speaking and
brauling do displease the Apostle S. Paul exceedingly, and therefore he gives
warning to the Galathians Gal 5.
to abstain from those soul, cancred and horrible affections, and not to
suffer any bitter, spiteful, and venomous biting contumelies, nor any
reproachful words or delight in backbiting to grow to malice and rancor
amongst the^: lest when one biteth, quippeth, taunteth, reprocheth, angreth and
vexes another, one do consume and rent another in pieces like wild beasts.
Grudges and privy hatred to be eschewed.
The very same admonition gives he also to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.
whom he lovingly inuiteth and induces unto mutual concord by the name of our
God and Lord Jesus Christ, and exhorts them not to disagree among themselves
with hatred and malice, but to have concord and to agree together, and to be of
one mind and one meaning. S. Paul takes this example of Christ, John. 15.
who so often and so many ways does inculcate into the minds of his disciples
mutual love and charity, which only is the bond of perfection, and the only
law and sum of many laws. For there is no need of the spurs and
stimulations of laws, Colos. 3. Ephesians. 4.
when benevolence is readily, willingly and gladly showed, and entire and
ardent charity toward his neigbour, eue^ such as spares neither himself nor
his substance to do his neighbor good. But because lamentable tragedies and
grievous tumults do commonly rise of the incontinencie and unruliness of the
tongue, specially when one does as it were spit and spew out the poison of his
bitter gall: therefore S. Paul with holsom admonition instructs the
Colossians, and by the way shows the^, what moderation must be used in words,
Colos. 4.
Let your speech with all grace be well sauored, and decently powdered with salt,
that ye may mark^ and know how ye ought to answer every man, that is to say,
The tongue must be bridled.
Let not your talk run too much at large, or out of measure in mirth or
jesting, lest it turn to wantonness; neither let it be severe, sharp, eagre,
or full of bitterness, lest it offend, drive away or alienate the hearers. An
holsom exhortation of S. Paul.
1. Tim. 3.
Let all your communication taste of the grace, comeliness and delectablenes of
humanity, and be seasoned with the salt of wisdom. For this cause also he
requires meekness, mildness, gentleness, and lenity in Bishops and
ministers of the Church, Tit. 1.
neither does he permit that subjects be rebuked rigorously or handled too
sharply. S. Paul would have us to observe comelines in all things.
Now therefore because S. Paul in every action of life, in words and deeds
exacteth, confirms and measures every thing according to the perfect rule of
comelines and honesty, and for that the intemperancy of the tongue, besides
backbiting, cursed and evil speaking, besides privy, crafty and false
accusation, and open reproachful and rebukefull railing, which are the
enormities thereof, does also infect and stain sincere and pure minds with
dishonesty of talk and filthynes of words: therefore, I say, he labors to
extirpate and pluck these vices also out of men's hearts. So when he frames and
fashioneth the tongue, and informs the mind of the Ephesians, he says,
Ephesians. 4.
Let no filthy or vicious communication proceed out of your mouth, but such as
is good unto edification, as often as need is, that it may give grace unto the
hearers, that is to say, that it may instruct the hearers, that it may bring
and minister some fruit and profit unto them. One vice springs and grows
of another.
And forasmuch as all vices are tied and linked together, and one springs up
and grows of another, to the end that no manner evil should rest or remain in
men's hearts, he says, Beneuole^ce of one toward another is to be maintained
Let all bitterness, swelling, wrath, hatred, roaring, cursed speaking, be put
away from you withal maliciousnes. Be ye courteous one to another, merciful,
forgiving one another, even as GOD for Christ his sake has forgiven you. The
same admonition also does he inculcate to the Romans at large, teaching them
these precepts, namely: Romans 12.
That love must be unfeigned, That they must hate that which is evil, That by
brotherly charity they must be ready and prone to love one another, That in
giving honor they go one before another, that is, one to excel an other in
ministering help and succor: 2. Cor. 8. Heb. 12.
and accomplishing the duty of loving kindness, To apply themselves to the
time, To support and exhilarate themselves with hope, To speak well of those
which persecute them, not to curse or banne them, To be like affectioned and of
like mind one toward another, Not to think arrogantly of themselves, Not to
requite evil for evil, To give place unto wrath, Not to revenge themselves,
With benefits lovingly, heartily and franckly bestowed, to ouerwhelme and lade
the enemy, and inflame him thereby to show like love again. Deuteronomy. 32.
For indeed this is to burn the adversary, and to heap coals of fire upon his
head. Wherefore amongst other documents, Prouer. 25.
which he recites at large, he reckons and compteth it to be meet and
decent, that every man exercise all the duties of humanity toward all men,
and be ready to benefit every one. For, Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
as Cicero says, affability and courtesy of speech wins one man to
another, and courteous gentleness, In the duties of humanity let Christians
labor to excel one anther.
and the endeavor to deserve well of men gets sure, permanent and long
continuing friendship. And if mutual love be thus nourished and by this means
stablished among the heathen, how much more ought the same to be entire,
unfeigned, steadfast, and ardent in them which are united and knit together in
the league, alia^ce, and covenant of Christ?

In words and every action of life, falsehood and fayning, covered deceit and
dissembling is detestable.

CHAP. 38.
Learn to utter and speak the truth always. For to lie, to speak doubtfully,
intricately, confusedly, stammeringly, faynedly, and to turn back and shrink
from the truth, is a servile guise and not decent nor comely for a freeman or
one well brought up in honest and good discipline. Therefore the Apostle S.
Paul gravely and severely gives this excellent exhortation, Philip. 4. An
holsom exhortation of S. Paul.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are comely and honest, whatsoever
things are just and agreeable unto equity, whatsoever things are pure and
sincere, whatsoever things are convenient to maintain concord, whatsoever
things are of good and honest report, that is, do win commendable fame and
estimation, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, that is to say,
if there be any thing joined with virtue and praise worthy: have those same
things in your mind, that is, let those things be your only delight, imprint
and keep surely those things continually in your hearts, let those things
be always fixed before your eyes, let those things be deeply fastened and
grounded in your minds, and endeavor with all your power to attain those
things and to express them in your life and conversation: And the God of peace
shall be with you. For truly as the same Apostle says, Romans 8.
Al things are an help for good unto the^ that love God, that is to say, have
happy and prosperous succes.

The fond and blind love of a man's self, and vain persuasion of learning, must
be abandoned.

CHAP. 39.
The persuasion of being learned is to be abolished out of the mind
COnsidering that the opinion of learning conceived sooner the^ it ought to be,
does not a little harm to studies, and hinders the progres thereof: this thing
oughtst thou to beware of principally, that neither in the studies of learning
nor in any other art which thou intendest perfectly to learn, thou suffer
such persuasion to enter into thy mind, to think that thou have attained to
those things, from which thou art far off, and whereof thou have neither
knowledge, proof, nor experience, inasmuch as thou have not thoroughly searched
nor sought out the same. For there be many lovers of themselves, which stand
highly in their own conceit, which rejoice and glory, and flatter themselves
concerning their own learning, and think they lack no part of the perfection
either of learning or of godliness, and that they are com to the mark, when as
indeed they are scarsely in the half or midway: And this is the cause, that so
many excellent wits ordained and appointed unto famous and most worthy
exploytes, do never come to the top of perfection. Which when Fabius did well
perceive, Fab lib. 1. cap. 2.
he required this principally of the professors of sciences that either they be
learned indeed, or else acknowledge themselves not to be so. For there is
nothing worse then for men to presume upon a false persuasion of learning, when
they have proceeded but a little further then the first principles thereof. For
such do not only disdain to give place to them that are able to teach and
skilful to instruct, but also with great pride and presumptuousnes, do boldly
impart their ignorance Unskillful Schoolmasters.
and inculcate their unskillfulness unto others, chale^ging unto themselves such
ability, with which this kind of men is puffed up in arrogancy. Unlearned
preachers.
There be some also in these days which do impudently presume to the office of
preaching, when as in deed they be not exercised nor trained in this holy
colluctation or wrestling, nor furnished with efficacy of vtteraunce, nor
endued with knowledge of things, nor adorned with the understanding of the
sacred scriptures. Whereby it comes to pass that the desirous and hungry
hearers are not refreshed with any food of wholesome doctrine, nor conceive any
comfort of the word of God, nor any nourishment of the soul, but receive into
their minds only mere trifles and old wives superstitions. Unskillful
Physicians.
Amongst these men of this order I may rightly reckon those, which being neither
stablished with good aduisement and consideration, nor confirmed with
experience, do take upon them the difficult and laborious enterprise of curing,
healing, and doing the part of a Physician, and do practice the art of
Physic, to the great damage and detriment of people, and the ieopardy and
loss of their health. The opinion of learning and knowledge to be abolished.
Seeing therefore such vain persuasion of learning with the glorious and proud
boasting thereof, does so much indammage and hinder fruitful wits: studious men
which do affectate and greatly desire sound, sure, and perfect learning, must
endeavor by all means possible using al means, helps, and furthera^ces of their
studies, to attain soon and speedily unto principal perfection, abolishing
and rejecting al opinion of learning already acquired, so that if they have
profited and proceeded to some purpose, yet not to leave off or recoyle from so
good an enterprise, but still to go forward, until they have attained to the
mark, and have run out their prefixed race, and win the garla^d, prise and
praise, or obtain the next place thereunto. Let never that foolish opinion so
pernicious unto noble wits be conceived in thy mind or rest in thy heart, to
think that thou have fulfilled and fully accomplished the industry and labor of
learning, when as yet thou art but at the threshold, and staiest in the first
entry and porch of learning, nor to imagine that thou have attained to those
things, whereunto thou have not reached by far, but ar^ a great way from the^.
For such persuasion works this in men's minds, that they loiter long before
they come to the mark, and become slack and negligent in all their doings, and go
not forward, eue^ like to slothful and sluggish fellows which when they run in
a race, do not lustily and speedily make have to win the prise and reward of
victory, but eftsoons stay and stand still^ while looking back, and suffer
the garland to be intercepted from them, to their great shame and reproach:
Herein we ought to follow the example of S. Paul, who in the function of his
Apostleship, and percelebrating and publishing of the doctrine of the Gospel,
wherein the salvation of all men does consist, Phil. 3. A place of S. Paul
explanated.
he confesses indeed freely, that he has not gotten that which he labored to
attain unto, but without any delay or stay, he manfully performs and
finisheth his course, and with all his endeavor, labor and power he preaseth
according to the mark appointed, to the reward of the high calling, that is, to
the beatitude and felicity which is ordained of God for every man by Christ,
so that he forgets all those things which were cast behind him, and which
he seems already to have fulfilled and finished, neither does he call them
into remembrance at all: but courageously, chearefully, gladly, and with his
whole force and might, applies and employeth himself unto those things which
are before, and remain yet to be accomplished, rejecting and not regarding all
those things, which might hinder him hastening to the prefixed mark and reward
of immortality. Hereunto belongs that sermon of Christ, Luke 9. The wholesome
and healthful sermon of Christ.
No man that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is apt for the
kingdom of God. By which similitude derived of the industry of plowing and
tilling the ground, he admonishes his faithful followers, that in the
business and work of salvation look what every man has attempted and once
taken in hand, he must persist and go forward in the same, until he have
achieved to perfection and consummation thereof, and not turn aside his mind
unto transitory and momentanie things, or retyne from his enterprise, or be
drawn some other way from his purpose: but to accomplish and finish that thing
which he has well begone. For slacknesse, procrastination, or delay in an
wholesome and earnest matter, and unlusty and slow going forward in a good
business begone, 1. Cor. 9.
is not a little hurtful. Saint Paul also wills that a man, which is
prepared and made ready for such a journey, should not have his course
hindered, or his way stopped by any means, taking an example of them which in
a public and common game of wrestling, combat, A similitude of champions.
or conflict, or bickering in the sight of the people, do fervently covet and
strive to get the reward, wherein every one of them is ready to do and suffer
all that he can, Virg. lib. 5. Aeneid.
and to adventure his life for the acquiring of commendation, so that he may
win the prise and praise, and the exaltation and rejoicing of the people.
Horace being indeed an heathen Poet, but yet a very good nurturer and informer
of manners, when he considered how great damage and detriment men sustain by
slacking, loytering, Horat. lib. 1 Epistol. 2. Ad Lollium
and lingering their businesses, he takes an example of an ignominious and
shameful act, and applies the same to exhort men to healthful, fruitful and
profitable things, An example of night robbers.
To kill men thieves arise by night,
and do thou not awake
To keep thy self in health? But yet
if warning thou forsake
While thou art sound, yet have thou care
when dropsy makes thee swell.
Why things to eyes which noyfull are
do thou so soon repel,
If thou a year defer good time
of curing well thy mind?
Thing well begone I count half done,
this proverb true I find.


Ovid expresses the same sentence and meaning thereof. Ovid. lib. 2. de Rem.
amoris.
Thou suffrest fire and surgeons tool,
thy health to get again,
Thy thirsty mouth thou will not cool,
of dryth thou bear the pain.
Will thou not then those things endure,
that sound thy mind may save?
But this part is more worth, and sure
more cost it ought to have.


Christ our Savior uses the same argument, Mat. 24.
and therewith whetteth and quickneth our industry, and pricketh forward and
provoke every man to watch, Luc. 12.
by producing a parable of the evil, unjust, and unfaithful stewards,
bayliffes, overseers and rulers of the household, of thieves and housebreakers
in the night. For as they are very diligent in the acquiring of their
commodities, and seek any occasion to scrape something together, to steal
something away privily, and rob other men of their goods: so is it meet,
behoueable and expedient that every man be careful of his salvation, and let
no commodity pass, nor opportunity slip, whereby and wherein he may in due
time and convenient season, provide and get those things which are necessary
for his salvation, and shall be profitable and good for his soul and mind.

A man must have choice and difference of familiars and friends.

CHAP. 40.
DO not unadvisedly admit and receive every man into familiarity without any
choice and difference, but those only whose virtue is well known, and honesty
of life well approved. A good precept hereof is that proverb, viz. Have a
certain choice of friends. A proverb taken of daunces.
Lay not thine hand upon every man, deriuing a similitude of daunces and the
fashion and manner of dauncings. For young men when they go to dance, do not
reach forth their hands to every mate, but they use a certain discretion and
kind of chosing either of the vulgar, common and meaner sort, or of Senators
daughters which be of honorable estate and noble degree: which thing also must
principally be observed in the society of life, getting of amity, and
contracting of friendship. For there be some, which because they want
experience in humane estate, cannot discern pure or vncorrupt friends from
such as be feigned, colored, and counterfeit: but without any difference, do
admit into their faithful and trusty familiarity those whom they have
neither well known nor tried, even such as afterward they find to be
sycophants, talecariers, and crafty deceivers. Wherefore as it becomes thee
to show thy self faithful and trusty toward all men: Every man is not to be
trusted.
so to trust no man imprudently and rashly, unless, as the common saying is, thou
have eaten a bushel of salt with him, that is, unless thou have had long
acquaintance and conversation with him, and have well known and thoroughly
tried his behavior and disposition. Whereunto belongs that saying of the
wise Hebrew. Eccles. 8.
Commit not thy counsel to a stranger, for thou know not what may come
thereof: that is, what monster, what wonderful and merueilous thing he keeps
in his bosom. Open not thy mind to every man, lest peradventure he be
unthankful unto thee, and so deceive thee, and afterward bring reproach upon
thee. For the lightness, disloyalty, and inconstancy of men is the cause,
that the leagues of amity do not last nor continue long, Friendship ought to
be immortal.
and for this cause many are minded so to use their friends, as if in time to
come they should become their foes: And again, so to practice malice and
hatred against their enemies and foes, as though in convenient time their
enmity should be abolished and put away, and they received again into favor
and faithful society of life. So the Poet Martial makes men afraid to tie
themselves very strictly in the bond of familiarity, Mar. lib. 12
If thou desire some bitter griefs to shun,
And heavy bytings of the heart avoid:
With none too far in friendship see thou run:
Less shall thou joy, with sorrow less annoyd.


Let enmity be mortal.
Notwithstanding the sentence and opinion of those men is not dissonant from
reason, nor repugnant to humane nature, which think that malice, hatred and
enmity ought to be mortal, but friendship and amity, which consists of a
certain faithful society and trusty participation of men's minds, and the
consent and agreement of their wills and purposes, ought to be perpetual and
everlasting. For they which rashly let the bonds of amity and friendship be
dissolved, cannot escape the crime of lightness and inconstancy. Therefore
Cicero thinks it best, Cic. lib. offic. 2.
that such friendship as a man likes not, be ripped a sunder by little and
little leisurely, and not cut off violently.

Do not rashly offer thy self to be surety for any man.

CHAP. 41.
In suretieship is danger and damage.
BEware that thou do not hastily and unadvisedly offer thy self to be surety
for every man. Because immediately after suretyship follows harm and loss
even at hand. For he that undertakes, promises, and gageth his credit for
another man, puts himself in danger: Because if the other man fail, the
surety abides the punishment and smarte thereof, and must pay and perform
that which he has promised for another. For this cause Solomon having great
experience of humane affairs, does put his son in fear of readiness and
alacrity unto suretiship, Solomon puts me^ in fear of suretiship.
Prouer. 6.
My son, says he, if thou be surety for thy neighbor, and have fastened thy
hand with a stranger, thou art snared, bound and entangled with the words of
thy lips, and taken with thine own speech: Wherefore make speed possible to be
discharged and delivered out of the hand of thy neighbor. But yet this precept
ought not to be observed with too much hardness of heart, because oftentimes in
very urgent causes we ought to pleasure our friends, and to gratify them to
whom we are bound by the laws of nature, and to lay down our credit and
wealth, yea and sometime our life also for them, yet for all that so, that none
of them in his cause decline or swerve from right and equity, nor commit any
thing that is contrary to honesty, as the proverb teaches us, How far
friendship is to be showed.
which is, Thou must do as thy friends desire thee, but even to the altars,
that is to say, thou must not pass nor transgress the laws of religion: for
it is not lawful for a man to do his friend a good turn, or follow his
fantasy, with the hurt of conscience or loss of piety.

Flatterers must be eschewed.

CHAP. 42.
A flatterer is pernicious.
FOrasmuch as flattery and the cunning, or rather craftiness of adulation does
easily deceive a simple and plain meaning man with a certain pleasant
allurement of words, composed very subtly and artificially: I would advertise
thee not to give ear to a flatterer, nor suffer thy self to be besmeared and
pleasantly delighted with his fair speeches and delectable entisements. The
difference of a friend and a flatterer.
And by these marks thou may discern a sincere and faithful friend from a
naughty and feigned flatterer. For the one freely and gravely admonishes him
of his duty, whose good and godly estate he desires to continue, which
Solomon accompteth to be the chiefest part of friendship: The other flattereth
and fauneth craftily and subtly, commends every thing, reioyseth at the
errors and faults of the hearer, and altogether delights his hearing, and
frames and applies the flattering and fair pleasantness of his words, Esa.
30.
not only agreeable to his will, but also even according to his beck and
countenance. Gnatho who first instituted parasiticall discipline, as we read
in Terence, does express and describe this sort of men so plainly, as if it
were in a lively picture, and shows in these verses how he is wont to bind
and win men's hearts unto him: Terent. in Eunuch. Act. 2. See. 2.
The condition of a flatterer.
There is a kind of men, which would
be counted chief of all,
And are not so: their humor I
and fantasy do feed,
Yet not that they may laugh at me
too far in folly fall:
But of my self I do them please,
with praise I do them lead,
Their wits I do extol so hye,
commending all they say,
Which if again they do deny,
that also I commend:
If he say no then I say no,
if yea, then say I yea:
Thus have I framed my self to do,
this is my scope and end,
In every thing to follow men,
and to their mind agree,
To flatter them: for now a days
this gain is great I see.


Wherefore seeing that fair flattering speech is detestable and odious to all
men: although thy substance be slender and thy goods small, yet never show thy
self a parasite, a smelfeast, a disciple or follower of Gnatho: never go
about to flatter any man by upholding or soothing his tale. The unsure
friendship that flatterers get.
Such tickling of men's cares gets favor indeed of some men, but that
favor vanishes away soon and continues not long. Great gain and advantage
sometime is gotten thereby, but it is infamous and ignominious, and coupled
with shame and reproach; and in the end hurtful to the craftsman and author
thereof, when the deceit and colored craft thereof is detected: so that no
honest gentleman, and liberally brought up, can abide to have this note of
infamy and reproach imputed unto him. There be also certain old crafty
knaves and chaungeable fellows in their words and deeds, An old, crafty and
naughty craft.
next cousins to flatterers, which by wily subtlety and craftiness are
marvelous cunning in deceitful arguments and fraudulent fallacies to
circumuent and deceive simple and plain meaning men, and they gape for their
goods and wives, even like unto Hyaenae, Subtle and deceitful civility.
which is a kind of wild beast that counterfaiteth the voice of men, and so
entiseth them out of their houses, and destroys them, and like unto
Crocodiles, being fair speakers to the outward appearance and at the first
sight, but they are such as afterward do endammage a man, and craftily attempt
and work his utter destruction. Some there be of this sort who indeed are
subtle and crafty, but they are marvelous officious, serviceable and
diligent, and ready at every beck unto all obedience and obeisance, which for
that purpose and intent do insinuate themselves and creep into the
familiarity, friendship and society of some men, to the end they may scrape,
catch, steal and pilfer some thing from them. For these fellows seeking and
getting opportunity by all means possible, have eyes and hands ready bent,
and diligent to gather by stealth, pack and conueigh away something slightly.
And therefore thou may not unadvisedly trust every man, unless thou have
some special trial and proof of his loyalty and honesty.

Certain precepts convenient and profitable to the leading of a man's life
well, happily, and prosperously.

CHAP. 43.
In what things happiness of life consists.
AMongst many documents delivered unto us of learned and eloquent men, exhorting
us to live well and in happiness, the Poet Martial specially has briefly
comprehended certain precepts agreeable unto honesty, whereby as it were
poynting with the finger he plainly shows, how a man may lead his life
commodiously and conveniently, and have good regard not only to the health of
the body, but also to the tranquillity of the mind: which he prosecuteth
thus: Martial. lib. 10.
The things which make the happy life,
most pleasant Martial,
Be, Goods not gotten painfully,
but left to live withal,
The fruitful field, the lasting fire,
at no time any strife,
The raiment course no fine attire,
the quiet mind is chief,
The natural strength, the body sound,
prudent simplicity,
Equal friends, fare easily found,
no costly cookerie,
The night that shunneth surfeiting,
and from all cares is free,
The bed that has no sorrowing,
but kept in chastity,
And be such as thou would be thought,
nothing desire thou more:
Thy last day fear not to be brought,
nor wish the same before.


If thou can not obtain these commodities of life altogether as thou wishest
and according to thy desire: yet have thou no cause, neither is it meet for
thee to macerate or annoy thee with grief, or consume and destroy thy self
with sorrow, but refer all things to the will of God and his providence, Gods
providence governs things.
which is the only ruler and governor of humane estate: which thing David
also used always to do in those things which were wont to happen unto him,
The godly do not acknowledge fortune.
whether they were prosperous or otherwise, he commits and submits all
the same to his power, without any respect of chance or fortune. And so when
he attributes all the course and race of his life unto him, he says, Psalm. 31.
My time is in thy hand that is to say, All things run and pass their
course, even as it pleases thee, and as it seems good in thy sight.

Of exercise, whereby the wearied strength both of the mind and body is
refreshed, recreated, and restored.

CHAP. 44.
BEcause humane nature cannot abide still and continue, unless it eftsoons or
incontinently after take breath again and pause a while, and be renewed with
some refreshing: therefore some relaxation, or recreation, or loosing again
from labor must be granted and given thereunto, to cherish it withal, lest
the strength of the body wax feeble, and the lively quickness of the mind be
debilitated and weakened, and overthrown with too much business and
immoderate labor. Rest from labor is good.
And as quiet and convenient sleep does recreate and refresh the members that
be wearied and attenuated with labor and travail: so also the relaxation and
intermissiion of vigilant studies and industrious contemplation does comfort
and redintegrate the mind being wearied with intentive meditation, or the
laborious ioyle of nightworks, and restores the spirits that be exhausted and
lulled on sleep with drousnesse. Men of old time, whenever they might rest
themselves, The delect^ble recreation of husbandry.
or had leisure from the functions of the Commonwealth and foreign affairs,
recreated and delighted themselves with the pleasantnes of husbandry, and
reaped no less profit then pleasure of the exercise of tillage. For besides
woods and harbors very delectable to behold, besides places planted, set and
compassed with trees, and trimly decked with hedgerowes full of fine twigs and
rods, besides the commodities and pleasant secret situation of Farms and
Manours separated from concourse of people, they got gayn and advantage both
very just and very plentious of their fruitful and well tilled soil, by their
goodly harvest, and yearly increase and reuenew. For profit joined with
honesty and righteousness cannot be reprehended of any man. And indeed among
all things, as Cicero says, Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
whereof some good is gotten, there is none better, none more plentious, none
more seemly for a free man, then husbandry. Insomuch that Hesiodus judged and
deemed nothing to be so royal and magnificke, as to till the ground, and to be
exercised and occupied in the faculty of country man's life. For which cause
the Romans in old time forsaking the city being weary of it, like men
delivered out of imprisonment, used to go and solace themselves in the
country. For in this kind of life many things come in hand, wherewith a man
may be delighted and recreated, because they happen every one in his ordinary
time, turn, and course. For one while time and occasion serves to prune,
cleanse and cut trees: another while the fair, mild sweet spring time
entiseth and allureth men, to The husbandma^ is never idle.
graft impes or young settes and slips in another tree: sometime the season
requires to dress vineyards, and to join the high poplar trees with the well
grown stock and broadspred branches of the vine, Horat. in Od.
Virgil. 1. Georg.
Sometime to catch wild beasts with snare,
sometime with lime begil'd,
Sometime with hounds to hunt the hare
and dear through forest wild,
The birds with pretty craft to take,
the brimbles eke to burn.


Many kinds of exercises.
For hawking and hunting is a healthful exercise, and convenient for a young
man's body that is of full age, and not utterly to be dispraised, so that a man
be not too much given thereunto, and employ all his labor and travail in
chasing renting, and tearing of wild beasts, and in the mean time neglect his
earnest businesses and governance of his household. But to delight and recreate
a man's self with tables of Geographie or description of the earth, and within
the limits of his study to go through the whole circuit of the world
stretching far and wide, and to measure with his eyes and a pair of
compasses, regions that be far distant one from another, rather then in body
with great danger and loss of his goods to travail abroad, and journey
through many strange countries, not without great ieopardy, this
contemplation, I say, does marvelously refresh the mind. A picture delight^
and recreateth the eyes
Amongst the Chartes or descriptions Cosmographicall I make account of those
pictures which be made with great cunning and art, and lively expressed, which
be either adorned with colors, or which have their portraiture of one color,
that is to say, naked and bare, and not portrayed with any variety of painting
or coloring, which delight the eyes with no vain spectacle, specially if it be
done or beholde^ without superstition, and they minister some docume^ts unto
virtue and piety, as those be which contain the sacred and holy histories. For
that cause a Poesy or a Poets work is of the^ in old time properly called a
dumb picture. But indeed a Poem is a speaking and a lively and not a dumb
picture. Music refreshes the mind.
Moreover, the recreatio^ and delight of music is honest and principally
pleasant, wherewith the mind, when it languisheth or faynteth, is very much
comforted, quickened, and revived. For Music with her harmony, good
concordance, and instruments which sound tunably, does not only delight the
ears with sweetness of the sou^ds, but also by the same melodious noise
piercing and passing throughout all the arteries and pipes of the body,
stirs up and quickneth the spirits both vital and animal, and dispersing
the dark dimnesse and mistie dullness of the mind, makes the understanding
lively, cheereful and active. This was the cause that Pythagoras used, Fab.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
as soon as he was awaked, to move and stir up his mind with a harp, to the
end it might be the more prone and ready to fulfill such functions, and
accomplish such public duties, as the day required: And when he went to
sleep, he was wont to mittigate his mind again with a lute, to the end he
might make his affections more quiet. Cii. 1. Tuscul.
So we read that Epaminondas prince of Greece sung and played on instruments
properly and trimly, and all Greece, as Cicero testifies, reputed great
learning to consist in sweet modulation of voices and musical strings, and he
that was unskillful of that art, was accounted the less learned. So in the
old world they were wont at their royal tables to have the famous facts and
excellent acts of noble and renowned personages, Lovers of music in old time.
and such as were honored like Gods, sweetly sung upon the harp. For thus
Virgil writes, Virgil. lib. 1 Aeneid.
Hayrie Iopas with great sound
of gilde a harp does sing,
Those things which famous Atlas taught
he plays on pleasant string.
He tells of the wandering moon,
and travails of the Sun:
From whence mankind, and beasts, and rain,
and fire their course begun:
The star that stands behind the tail
of greater bear the sign,
The rainy seven stars, and the seven
which in the north combine:
Why in the winter days the Sun
it self in Ocean sea,
Makes have to dip, or what those nights
does cause so long to stay.


The Hebrews refused not the pleasant recreation and delight of music.
And besides other monuments the history of David shows plainly, that the
Hebrews also had the use and benefit of this delitesome recreation, and that
the same of famous and worthy men was trimly adorned and highly esteemed. For
that princely prophet was accustomed to sing holy hymns and Psalms to the
harp, 1. King. 16.
David honors God with instruments of music.
and with his sweet melodiously sounding harp to mitigate and assuage the
furious mind of Saul, when he was vexed of the ill spirit, and troubled with
melancholy, and so to bring the king to a better reformed and more quiet mind.
Also the prophet Helisaeus being angered and molested with the importunate
calling of kings, 4. King. 3.
Helisaeus is delighted with music.
desired that a minstrell should be brought unto him, by whose harmony and
musical melody he appeased his mind, and so when all perturbations and
disquietnesse was driven away, and the troublous motions and passions brought
to rest, he being inspired with the Spirit of God, begins to prophecy, and
to foreshewe to the three kings those things which should come to pass. The
holy Bible shows plainly every where, that music was wont to be used also
at feasts. For the wise man taking a similitude of pearls garnished with
gold, says thus, Eccle. 32. Similitudes of music and pearls.
Like as the Carbuncle stone shines that is set in gold: so does music and
melody with moderate drinking of wine adorn the feast. He says moreover,
Like as the Smaragde, the greenenesse whereof is very bright and insatiable,
commonly called Amarant, commends the gold so is the sweet symphonie of
fingers in a merry feast. But lest any man consume too much time, or be
occupied in such entising delights and allurements more then is convenient: he
shows among his good precepts, what ought to be more esteemed and regarded,
then this delectable recreation, with these words, Eccle. 40. Esai reproves
great wine drinkers.
Wine and minstrilsie rejoice the mind and heart, but the love of wisdom more
then they both. Esai indeed reprooueth wine bibbers, and such as are
continually given to banqueting, and delight themselves sweetly and pleasantly
with musical instruments, but it is because they have so great mind of their
own pleasures, that they have no respect of the Creator, nor be thankful to
God, from whose bountifulness all things do flow, for any of those things
which they in their welfare do plenteously and abundantly enjoy. For thus he
threatens them. Esai. 5.
Woe to you that rise early to follow drunkenness, and to quaffe so until the
evening, that ye are set on fire with wine. The harp, lute, timbrell, and pipe
is at your feast: and ye regard not the work of the Lord, neither do ye
consider the works of his hands, that is to say, ye have not your eyes and
your mind erected and lifted up unto him, from whose goodness, benignity, and
liberality these things do proceed. The Prophet Amos in effect has the like
words, who with these kind of threatenings does as it were pluck by the ears,
and sharply rebuke them that live lasciuiously, wantonly, and ryotously. Amos
rebukes drunkards and wine bibbers.
Amos. 6.
Woe to you which are wealthy in Sion, which go pompously, which lie in yuory
beds, and play the wanto^s on your couches, which sing to the sound of the
psalterie, and drink wine in goblets, and are anointed with the best oyntme^t,
but none of you is moved to have compassion on the calamity of your poor
brethren, or is sorry for the misery of the afflicted, ye have no regard nor
respect of the needy, nor exhibit thankfulness to God for so great
benefits. Therefore the pleasant delight of music, and therewithal the
moderate use of wine and good cheer, by which the drowsy, dull, and faint
spirits are quickened, comforted and revived, by which mela^cholike fumes are
dispersed, is blameless, and deserves not to be reprehended of any sour, sad
and unpleasant Stoic, unless by the abuse and unmeasurable continuance of
these things men wax forgetful of the due service and worship of God, and of
their own salvation. Exercise less laborious.
Amongst exercises that be mild, soft and gentle, and less troublous or
laborious, cariages are reckoned which be done either on horse back or in a
wagon, or in a ship also, and walkings abroad in the open air, which a man
may have in garden alleys, and in vineyards that be spread and stretched in
great length, The pleasa^tnes of gardens refreshes the mind.
running on frames and joined together throughout, so that under such a fair
green vault and chamberlike roufe of flourishing vine leaves, is as wholesome
walking as in the open pleasant field. And when a man walks, if he happen to
wax weary, well dressed and trimmed gardens are not without pretty seats made
in finely wrought arbours, and vmbrages or shadowing places, To take the cool
shade in summer.
under which a man may take the cool shade, and shield himself from heat.
But when a man is disposed to walk in the Sunshine, and to take the free
and open air, To walk in the Sunshine in winter is very pleasant.
he may conveniently do it in the wide open field or in some eminent and high
place. But amongst moderate and wholesome exercises, as clear and loud reading
and the use of declaiming is convenient and beseeming for studious and
politic men: Exercise meat for students.
so for them which be mighty and strong, wrestling, the use of crosse-bowes
and the little ball commended of Galen in a book thereof set forth, the
conflict or game of sword players and of running with horses, whereby natural
heat increases, and the body gets strength, the blood passing and having
recourse throughout all the members: which causes them that be so exercised
to have a flourishing color, and their skin all over spread with a
delectable redness. But they which exercise themselves in such manner striving
for the best game, must remember that all things be done moderately, lest
violent mouings with forcible wresting and turning of the body, loose the
members out of joint, or lest any part of the body start out of his steadfast
room, or be removed from his place by winding and bowing himself round in
compass with too much vehemence. Moreover as the mind must not be wearied with
studies immediately after refection, but that the stomach may the more easily
concoct and digest the meat received without any hindera^ce, and that natural
heat happen not to be dispersed, and dissolved: even so they which have dined
liberally, and stuffed themselves with meat, must not sustain over much labor
or laborious exercises. For violent and inte^perate mouings do hurt and hinder
digestion, Vehement and violent moving hinders digestion.
and al immoderate and vehement agitatio^s and stirrings of the body do draw
into the veins crude, raw and imperfectly digested meat, which by opilatio^ or
stopping and putrifactio^ proceeding thereof is the cause, and ingendring of
diseases and sickness. The old play that is like unto the game at tables or
casting of the dice, Play at huckle bones or with coytes
which was made with small sheep bones finely smoothed, wherewith our country
maids, being young and not yet mariageable, Many kind of childish games and
exercises.
are wont to play, and immediately after they be married do despise the same. But
young striplings have a game amongst themselves with a certain kind of bones
called huckle-bones or coytes, taken out of neats feet, wherewith they exercise
themselves at a certain time of the year, as also with nuttes and timbrels.
These childish exercises are rejected and counted despiseable of them which be
somewhat more in years, so that after they come to man's state, they think it
not beseeming nor gentlemanlike to be occupied with such trifles. For after the
fashion of children as Horace says, Horat. lib. Sermon. 2. Sat. 3.
To build little cottages, to tie myse to a little cart,
To play at eeuen and od, to ride on a long rod
If any man delight that has a beard,
He is not well in his wit, it is to be feared.


The dice play undoes many men.
But if there be dice also of another sort, for those, which I spoke of before,
consist of four sides, but these have six sides being eeuen four square
whereof there is so often and so much abuse in all Europe, that many oftentimes
by using them do vnmeasurably spend, disperse, and consume their inheritance,
lands and possessions, and after they have so wasted their wealth and
substance, are brought to extreme poverty: when as the use of playing at
huckle-bones, which girls of our country do accustom, does not empaire or
diminish their goods. For with them they make sport to drive away tediousness
of the time, or when they may keep holy day, they play for something of no
great value, as namely, chestnuts, filbirds, pinnes, buttons, clasps, laces,
and such like things, as they use to give to their friends at the end of a
feast. Furthermore, Driving of tops.
young striplings do exercise themselves lively and lustily with driving of the
top, and with the swift running round of the whirle-gig, so fast, that one can
scarcely see or perceive it, and this do they in winter time to get themselves
heat withal. Which kind of exercise was used also of men in old time, as
Persius testifies, being himself greatly delighted with it and with many
other, as he says, Pers. Sat. 3.
For by good right I did desire
to know that cunning feate,
What winning luckie sise point brings:
what loss and eke how great
That leesing cast by hazard has:
the fraud how to eschew
Practiced with neck of narrow box,
whereout the dice they threw:
Or with a scourge to drive the top
wrought finely of box tree,
That none herein should more excel
or should more sleightie be.


Virgil also makes mention of this childish instrument, and in very elegant
verses compares the mind of Lauinia raging mad with the love of Turnus, to a
whirle-gigge, and says that it is turned and tossed, like a top that is
driven to and fro with whips and scourges, which matter he prosecuteth thus,
Virg. lib. 7. Aeneid.
Virgil makes an elegant description.
Then this unhappy woman runs
that huge great City through,
Incensed with mad and monstrous rage,
not decently enough:
As sometimes does the whirling-gigge
with vehement stroke of whip,
Which boys, intentive to their play,
make round about to skip
Void halles throughout in compass great,
with lashes to and fro,
And crookedly at randon drive:
fools are amassed so,
The flock of children marvel how
the top can turn so fast:
The stripes encourage them: so she
with furious course in have
Through midst of city headlong runs,
through people fierce does pass.


Children commonly use to be delighted and occupied with these kind of plays;
But the age that is more grown to perfection, and begins to come to full
ripeness, requires more decent games. But in every kind of exercise that is
commodious and profitable for the body and the mind, we must always have
regard of comeliness and honesty. So Salust commends the towardness and
good disposition of Iugurtha, The good towardnes of Iugurtha.
when as yet the same was not depraved with ambition, nor corrupted with the
covetous desire of dominion. For he as soon as he was well and fully grown,
being endued with puissant strength and comely countenance, but most chiefly
excelling in wit, did not give himself to excess riot, or idleness to be
corrupted therewith: but as the custom of that country is, to ryding, The
exercise of youth.
to casting of the da^, to run with his like companions for wag^rs; and when
he excelled them all in glory and renown, yet was he well loved of all men:
he used to do very much, but to speak very little of himself. As for the
plays of Dice, and Cards, Infamous games.
and all other vain delights of idle persons, see that thou eschew them, as a
thing most hurtful, shameful, and ignominious. For in such games no cunning
skill prevails, but craft, deceit, guile, slight, and subtlety: neither
does consideration, aduisement or wisdom take place, but chance, fortune,
temeritie and rashness. The dice comprehends every kind of play that is
subject to the mutabilitie of fortune, as draughts, What dice is.
casting of dice out of a box or out of the hand, chests-play, and all kind of
dice casting or table-play: so that in very small things and childrens pastime
it deserves reprehension, if it be done either too often, or deceitfully, or
contentiously. So says Martial featly and properly, Martial. lib. 14.
Small dice do seem a trifeling game,
And hurt to have none in the same:
Yet boys they make often times to lose
Even all the points that tie their hose.


Wherefore seeing that in this kind of game all things for the most part use to
be done couetously, lewdly, naughtily and deceitfully, such moderation must be
had, that we seek for delight some recreation, Winning without wily deceit
rather then to be greedy of gain gotten by winning. For we see commonly,
that they which do not take heed nor be circumspect, are clean wiped and
beguiled of their money, and craftily tromped by fraudulent and wily fellows.
And albeit some hope of winning in such exercises tickleth a man's mind, and the
reward of victory comfort the winner, yet notwithstanding no man ought to
do any thing upon greedy hope or covetous gaping for advantage. For exercise
is ordained, and license to play is permitted, not for the winning or the
getting of gain thereby, but in respect of health and pleasant recreation, to
the end that the wearied mind may have some rest, and so conceive new strength
to tolerate and sustain labors again. But it is the nature and condition of
dice-players, that as soon as once that itch and scabbe has gotten hold on
their minds, The condition of dice-players.
it can hardly be extinguished. For men of that habit, quality, and sort on
every side soliciting and procuring them thereunto, they run again to those
hurtful and noisome pleasures every moment. Which vice also is even graffed
and rooted in whoremongers. Therefore Ovid gives wholesome counsel, Let
winning go: mad avarice
does vex the mind of men,
And fearful hands often times the dice
allure to play again.


Indeed the industry of getting goods, and the increasing and enlarging of
household wealth, in my judgment, ought not to be dispraised nor reproved: but
it is meet and decent to seek to get such gain as is profitable and honest,
and such as may be acquired without the injury, displeasure and damage of any
man. A proper witty proverb is that of Plautus, It is right and reason that
every man for his own gain be more diligent then fraudulent. For goods
wrongfully and wickedly gotten do not only bring infamy and reproach, but
also having no certainty nor sure continuance, Deceitfully gotten quickly
spent.
are very soon spent, and quickly consumed and gone: such is the end of riches
lewdly gotten with deceit, craft, false reporting and accusing, slight,
fraud, subtlety, and finally with usury, with table play, with dicing and
carding. Wherefore see that thou cease not by all means possible to withdraw
them which be thy companions in studies and exercises, from such lewdness and
unthriftiness, and to solicit and exhort them unto honesty, unto commendable
comeliness, unto virtue. For this duty and merit of humanity does not only
deserve praise amongst wise men, but also it is well pleasing and acceptable to
God: which the Lord affirms plainly by the Prophet Jeremy in these words,
Jeremy. 15.
He that separateth the thing that is precious from the vile, shallbe even as
mine own mouth. A place of Jeremy declared.
Whereby he gives us to understand, that the man which withdraws either
himself or his neighbor (for GOD loves or esteems nothing better then man)
from things that be most vile, from a filthy, polluted, and defiled life,
from erring and going astray, and be his principal leader and chief onsetter
unto integrity of life and unblameable conversation, such a man that so does
is worthy of excellent praise, and draws nearest unto God, and deserves
divine honor. And hereunto belongs and accords that saying of Saint James
the Apostle, James. 5.
Brethren, if any man amongst you err from the truth, and some man convert
him, let him, that so does, know, that he has revived a sinner from death,
and saved his soul.

In all enterprises, acts and exployts, good consideration and advised
deliberation must be our counsailour.

CHAP. 45.
IN every action, and in all manner businesses and affairs of this life, all
things must be so moderated with reason, circumspect aduisement, and
premeditation, that thou do nothing the day before, which may cause thee to
repent the next day after. It is naught to say, I had not thought
For it is a shame to commit any such fact, that when the deed is done and past,
thou be constrained to say, I had not thought. Nothing must be done hastily.
Upon the which rock thou shall neither fall nor be hurt, if thou do nothing
rashly, unadvisedly, and hastily, but let all things be done circumspectly,
soberly, diligently, discreetly, in such wise, that thou frame and conform
every thing according to the rule of reason. So Salust does advertise by a good
precept, Before thou en^prise or begin a thing, it is needful to hand good
aduisement wisely, and when thou have well deliberated, then to accomplish the
same speedily. And Cicero likewise, Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
In all things that thou attemptest, or take in hand, a diligent preparation
must be had. Whereunto belongs that proverb or old saying commonly used,
Make speed soft and fair: Soft fire makes sweet malt: and Soon enough, if
it be well enough.

Do not those things whereof thou stand in doubt.

CHAP. 46.
Do nothing that may put thy mind in a scruple, and cause ambiguitie, so,
that thou doubt, whether it be right or wrong that thou intendest to attempt or
enterprise. For equity, as Cicero says, Cic. 1. Offic.
is clear and evident of it self, and is joined and united both with virtue
and honesty. But doubtfulnesse is alied and confederated with unrighteousness
and other vices. Hereunto agrees that saying of S. Paul, Romans 14.
Happy is he which judges not himself in that thing which he allows: that
is to say, which in attempting any business does not feel his conscience
secretly reclaiming and denying the same. A place of S. Paul expounded.
Which sentence, although the Apostle wrote it concerning the choice of meats,
and eschewing offense and hurt of conscience, as is declared before: yet it may
be also conveniently applied to other things. Doubting brings a scruple and
trouble to the conscience.
For in every action which we do not perform with firm steadfastness and
sure constancy of purpose, but with a wavering, scrupulous and doubtful
mind, surely we are condemned, even our own consci-being judge. For
whatsoever proceeds not of faith, whereby we approve our minds and become
acceptable before God, and whatsoever is done against the consent of
conscience, it is an offense and in danger of sin. And the reason is this,
because that when a man doubts whether a thing be evil or no, and yet
commits the same thing being of it self not evil, he declares plainly
that he would commit some wicked and flagitious fact, if occasion do happen
or opportunity be offered. But true godliness and well stablished wisdom
environed and fenced with faith, and strengthened with the holy spirit,
discerns and discusseth all things prudently and wisely, and cannot abide to
attempt any thing, which has any appearance of evil, or which may temerate
the mind, or contaminate the conscience with any grief.

The rewards of virtue and vice.

CHAP. 47.
THat good and wise admonition which Cate the elder was wont to inculcate and
often repeat to his companions in war, that same ought to be fixed and
fastened in every man's mind and memory: Virtue is eternal.
If with labor thou do some excellent act and honest exployt, the pains
taken departs, thy honest deed remains: Pleasure or voluptuousnes is
momentanie.
If with voluptuousness any evil fact be committed: the pleasure, as a thing
transitory, flies and vanishes away soon and quickly, but the lewdness and
wickedness, as a stayne of infamy and note of reproach that cannot be blotted
out, abides and sticks still continually. A Proverb against the^ that go
and grow out of kind
Hereunto we may well refer this proverb, He that has once been a malapart
iester or saucie scoffer, will never be good householder. For he that has once
in an ignominious matter lost his good name and cracked his credit, shall not
easily get the commendable report of an honest man, no although he wax rich or
become very wealthy. An exhortation of Plato unto virtue.
In like manner Plato does instigate and exhort young men to the winning and
obtaining of felicity, by setting before the^ the image of famous virtue and
vicious pleasure. For soon and sudden repentance, anguish of heart,
unquietness of mind, and continual grief and sorrow does accompany the
mome^tany sweetness and sweet entisements of voluptuousnes, according to the
common saying, Sweet meat must have sour sauce. But contrariwise quietness of
mind, tranquillity of heart, safety of conscience, and finally sure, perfect, and
perpetual joy does immediately follow the labors and miserable toil and
travail of virtue. Sentence of S. Gregory.
The whole effect hereof may be briefly comprehended in this sentence, That
which delights, is caducall, that which afflicts, is perpetual.

The beginning of all our actions must we take of God.

CAP. 48.
The beginnings of our actions must we ask and have of God.
Whatsoever thou art minded to attempt and perform, ask counsel of our most
gracious and most mighty God. And if thou purpose to dilate and entreat of any
matter, if thou go about to administer or fulfill any offices or duties
either private or public, humbly and lamentably beseech his divine power, will
and majesty to inspire into thine heart by his holy Spirit those things that
be good, necessary, profitable and expedient unto salvation. For I am not able
to express how much it helps and avails unto the happy and prosperous
success of our works, to refer all the beginnings of our actions and commit
all our ways, purposes and desires unto God For those things which are not
begone, attempted, or taken in hand with such beginning, we see commonly for
the most part, that they proceed unfortunately and vnluckely. For this cause
the Lord threatens by the Prophet Esai, saying, Esai. 30.
Woe to you ye shrinking children, which take counsel, but not by me, which
we are a web, and not by my spirit. By which words he denounces unto them
unhappy and unlucky success, because they seek the defense, protection, and
assurance of their salvation from some other place, and by some other means,
rather then at God his hand, neither do they ask counsel of him, nor pray
and desire to receive answer of him, God governs our doings.
to whom all things are subject, and in whose hand and power the domination,
rule and governance of the whole world does consist. For by him, as Salom^
says, Prouer. 8.
Kings reign, and lawmakers decree just ordinances: By him princes bear
rule, and all judges of the earth execute right judgment. For counsel and
equity is his, wisdom is his, in his hand is all strength, honor, and
power, whereby they that have government and are set in authority do stablish
their dominions, and keep their subjects in due obedience. God is the first
and principal cause of things.
Wherefore since that all things are done, achieved, accomplished and brought to
pass according to the just judgment, good will, and pleasure of God, and that
he is the first, chief, and principal cause of things: We must with most
effectual prayers desire of him prosperous succes of our works, we must crave
and beg of him all things that be profitable and expedient unto our
salvation, and necessary to the leading of our lives well and happily. Which
precept and document Christ does inculcate and often beat into our minds, when
he says, Mat. 6. Luke 12.
First seek ye the kingdom of God and his righteousness: and other things
shall come franckly and freely unto you, and shall be added and given in
surplusage or overplus.

And therefore that beginning of the day is most fortunate, luckie and
prosperous, which is commenced with contemplation of heavenly things, with the
doctrine of the Gospel, with worshipping and honoring the majesty of God.

The dawning of the day, and betimes in the morning is the most meet and
convenient time to order, dispose, and prepare the mind, and to lift up the
heart unto God.

CHAP. 49.
The early morning is meet for prayer.
THere is no part of the day more conuenable to eleuate and direct the mind unto
God, then a little before daylight. For then when the darkness of the night
is dispearsed, the mind is the more cheerful, prompt, and apt to conceive
good cogitations that be conducible for health and profitable unto salvation.
The books of the Bible do in every place testify, that the holy Prophets
used so to do. David being wrapped in perplexity and distress, calls on God
for help thus, Psalm. 5.
O God thou art my God, Psalm. 63.
early do I wake unto thee. Betimes will I stand by thee and will look up. Early
in the morning shall my prayer come before thee. So Esai, Esa. 50.
The Lord lifts up mine ear, yea he lifts up mine ear betimes, that I
may hear him at a master, that is to say, as an admonisher who does stir up,
quicken, and as it were pluck by the care them that be rechlesse and
negligent. And again, Esai. 26.
My soul has longed for thee in the night season, yea and in my spirit and
with my whole heart will I wake unto thee betimes in the morning. A place of
Esai expounded.
By which words the Prophet shows, that his whole mind, and all the strength
and powers of his soul, his spirits both vital and animal and whatsoever
force and efficacy of nature he has, is so fixed and fastened on God
continually, that no part or parcel of time passes without remembrance of
him, but all his words and deeds, yea and whatsoever thought enters into his
mind, is directed and transferred unto God.

In the end of the day the mind must give account of such deeds as were done
that day.

CHAP. 50.
Of all our doings we must ask account of our mind and conscience
REquire a reckoning of thy mind every day at eeuen of all thy daily affairs,
businesses and actions, whatsoever has been said or done that day. And so
when the day is ended, before thou commit thy self to rest, take an accounts
of thy self, how the day has been passed and bestowed, and ask thine own
mind: What fault have thou amended or redressed this day? What vice have thou
resisted? Wherein or in what part and respect art thou become better? How much
is thy godliness increased? How much have thou proceeded and gone forward in
virtue?

Virgil. in viro bono.
Wherein have I transgressed?
what has been done in time? what not?
Why was this deed so decent? or
what reason was in that?
What have I left undone?
why held I this opinion?
Which better was for me to change?
why did compassion
On needy man make some remorse
discouraged mind to feel?
Every day must we conceive purpose of amendment of life.
It can scarcely be told or expressed, how caulme and peaceable the mind will
be, how quiet and restfull the sleep shall be, when as by conceiving sure
purpose of amendment, thou do with such manner of thought, intent and
meditation drive away the heaviness of the heart. Bestow the day in honest
businesses.
Forasmuch then as daily actions and things which we see on the day time, do
sometime trouble and hinder the sleep, men must diligently endeavor to pass and
bestow the day in honest businesses, so that nothing come to mind to the
grief thereof, which may disquiet or trouble the night rest.

Let no man flatter his own faults, or diminish his evil deeds.

CHAP. 51.
Vices must not be extenuated.
IF any thing be done unwisely, if any offense wilfully contrary to right and
reason be committed, which is repugnant to honesty and comely behavior: let
never thy mind be moved or induced to gloss thine own error, or extenuate thine
offense with excuse. For excuse brings boldness to sin, and ministers
occasion to do the like fault again. When David considered how great
wickedness springs of this lewd, naughty, and erroneous opinion of pleasing
a man's self in his own vices, he prays thus, O decline not my heart unto
the words of wickedness to consent unto the excusing of sins and ungodly
works. A place of David expounded.
In which words he prays, that an evil mind, a naughty will, and delight of
the heart may be far from him, wherewith wicked and ungracious persons being
depraved, do heap mischiefs upon mischiefs, and do clearly cleanse,
purge, extenuate, and diminish their mischievous deeds, and suffer not any
fault to be imputed, or blame to be laid on themselves. By which blindness
and dark dimnesse of the mind it comes to pass, that when as the mind is
once enured and hardened in sin, and being accustomed thereunto, has gotten
an habit therein, and has lincked it self with lewd lust, it does slip
forward every day more and more into that which is worse, and so falls and
comes utterly to naught without any hope of recovery or amendment. Whereunto
belongs that saying of Solomon, Prouer. 18.
The ungodly when he is tumbled down into the bottom of sin, contemns and
despises, that is to say, thinks surely and fully persuades himself, that
he has committed none offense, neither is he greatly moved or grieved with
the enormitie of that mischievous deed or wicked fact which he has
perpetrated: But as the same wise man says, Shame and reproach follows him
that is such an one. Whereby he signifies plainly, that he sustayneth so great
loss of his good name, and gets such a spot of infamy, that it i^ hard for
him ever after to win and purchase the name and commendation of an hones^
man. The mind of the ungodly is obdurated and hardened in wickedness.
In the like mischief are those men wrapped, which when they have offended, and
are fallen into some sin, do not acknowledge their iniquity, neither can
they abide to confess it, although the torment of their conscience does force
and compel them to make confession thereof, but they hide the same in silence
and in holding their peace, and think to cover and bury al things in obliuio^.
A similitude of the nature of children.
For these men do even like unto children, which do not abstain from things
forbidden them, specially when they hope, that it shall be kept secret, and
that their father or mother shall not know of it. Whereof we have examples in
Adam and Cain, and in their posterity, upon whom the spot of transgression is
spread and transfused, even as if it were come by inheritance. Therefore
whosoever desires to have the happy fruition of tranquillity of mind, and to
suffer no tormenting vexation thereof, let him not wilfully nor obstinately
deny, or hide in silence those faults which he has committed, but openly show
them before GOD. The acknowledging of sin puts away the sin
For the acknowledging of sin, and confession of the offense obtayneth
forgiveness, and by faith in the blood of Jesus Christ washes out, wipeth
away, and abolisheth all the filthiness, spots, and uncleanness of the mind.
Concealing of a fault in silence aggrauateth it
But keeping of silence and shrinking back from such confession, does
exasperate the evil, and aggrauate the crime, and makes the cause of the
guilty person to be worse. Whereof David having proof and experience in
himself, says: Psalm. 32.
Because I held my peace, my bones are waxen old, when I cried all the day.
Pain and grief which he could not endure, compelled him to cry and wayle, but
it constrained him not to make confession of his sin: Gods facilitic and
readiness in forgiving.
yet notwithstanding by and by after, he purposes and intends to disclose and
open unto God his offense that he has committed, whom he undoubtedly knows
to be inclined, prone, and ready to forgive sin, when any man repents from
the bottom of his heart, and detesteth his evil life. Therefore taking
boldness and confidence he says, I said, I will confess my unrighteousness
unto the Lord against my self, and so thou forgauest the wickedness of my
sin. For such is the love and loving inclination of God toward men, such is
his mildness, meekness, long suffering and lenity, that as soon as men
think and purpose to repent, forthwith he forgiueth them their sin. Which
he shows playnelie by the Prophet Esaie in these words, Esai. 65.
And it shall be, that or ever they call, I will answer them, and whilst
they are yet but thinking how to speak, I shall hear them. Whereby he
declares his prompt goodness, his prone loving kindness and ready favor,
that if a man do but conceive in his mind the purpose of a better amended
life, straight way the Lord remitteth unto him the offense that he has
committed. So in Ezechiel, Ezech. 18.
At what time soever a sinner shall bewail his sin, I will no more remember
his iniquityes.

Whatsoever good thing happens unto us we must ascribe the same unto God:

CHAP. 52.
Whatsoever good thing happens to man must be transferred and ascribed unto
God.
IF any honorable, famous, royal, or magnifique thing happen unto thee in this
frail and caducall body, and in this momentany and transitory life, if thou
have great possessions, hereditaments, and goodly manours nigh unto to the
City, if thy wealth and riches do abound, and if honor, reputation,
greatness of power or majesty, nobleness, dignity, and renown do adorn
the same: if thy mind be endewed with the knowledge, skill, and understanding
of many things, and do not want wisdom joined with prudencie and
discretion: finally, if thy body be healthful, lusty and strong, or if thou
have any thing more then all these, acknowledge that thou have received all
these things of our most bountiful father, from whom every good thing,
whatsoever it be, proceeds, comes, springs, and flows. To this document
S. Paul reduces him that swells with pride, and is puffed up with vain
persuasion, and takes away from him the trust which he has of himself with
these words, 1. Cor. 4.
What is it which thou have not received? which if thou have received, why
do thou boast as though thou had not received it? The Lord also by the
Prophet Jeremy does even print, thrust, and beat the same into every man's
heart, saying, Ierem. 9.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, nor the rich man glory in his riches: but whosoever glories, let him
glory in this, that he understands and knows me. He that glories, says
S. Paul, 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor 10.
let him glory in the Lord, of whom we have obtained all good things,
whatsoever they be, plentifully and abundantly by Jesus Christ, who is made
unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, salvation, redemption.
And further to the end that no man should rejoice in himself, or favor and
flatter himself, and extol himself too insolently and proudly concerning
outward and inward gifts, S. Paul puts us in mind and tells us, that we
bear this treasure in earthen vessels, that is to say, in a frail and dying
body, to the end that every man may know, that this ought to be ascribed to
the power, highness, and excellency of God, and not to the strength of man.
All good things that we have come from God.
And as all good things that be in man, whatsoever light and understanding,
whatsoever wisdom and knowledge, whatsoever virtue or righteousness is in him,
ought to be yielded, reckoned and rendered unto God, and to the father of
light from whom all good giuings and gifts do descend, as S. James Iam. 1.
the Apostle testifies: All naughtines and wickedness proceeds from our
corrupted mind.
so whatsoever vice, ungraciousness, malitiousnesse, wickedness, whatsoever
darkness, ignorance, and blindness, whatsoever lewdness, naughtiness, and
corruption is in man's mind, all that same ought to be ascribed and imputed
unto our own malicious will, and not the very least fault to be laid on God.
Wisd. 2.
For sin and the transgression of God his commandment, has brought upon us al
kind of miseries, calamities, diseases, sicknesses and griefs both of body and
mind, and lastly death, and has graffed in man's heart al manner of procliuitie
and inclination unto wickedness.

Discretion, aduisement, and consideration must be had in choosing the kind of
life:

CHAP. 53.
Deliberatio^ in choosing any kind of life.
IN choosing that kind and manner of life which thou determinest to embrace, and
wherein thou purposest to rest and abide unto the end, and quietly to pass thy
days until old age come stealing upon thee, this thing ought chiefly to be
regarded, namely, to attempt things prude^tly and advisedly, and not rashly to
addict thy self to any purpose and fashion of life, from which afterward, if
thou repent or be yrke thereof, thou may not retire or be released. For they
which being of unripe age, and having apt inclination of nature, which is not
yet well tried nor perfectly proved and known, neither well considering
whereunto by nature they be most fitly bent, do take in hand some kind of
life, and bind themselves thereunto perpetually, they lead an unpleasant life
and full of tediousnes and grief, if at any time (as oftentimes it comes to
pass) they begin to be yrke or weary of their manner and trade of life, or
perceive themselves unable to bear the burden and charge thereof. Wherefore
lest any man snare or entangle himself unadvisedly, before that he embrace any
trade or manner of life, let him take himself a time to deliberate, what course
of life he will chiefly follow, and whereunto he is minded to addict himself. In
which deliberation, according to the advertisement of Cicero, all counsel and
aduisement must have respect and regard to the nature of every man, Cic. lib.
1. Offic.
to the end that framing himself to some fashion of living very carefully he
may persist in his enterprise steadfastly. For many seeking and laboring to
attain to the best, are deceived, not so much with their will, as with the
error of their course, Some go awry and decline from the right way, not
willingly but erroniously.
who go^ wrong way to work, and wandering with from the mark which Christ
has prefixed (...) set before us, do decline unto superstition, that is to
say, do fall into a show and appearance of religion colored with simulation
and cou^terfayted with hypocrisy. But the aid, fortification, and protection
of our salvation must chiefly and principally be sought for at Christ's hand,
who being our only captain, we pass through the raging waves of the surging
Sea of this world, and arrive in the happy haven long looked for. John. 10.
He is the door which opens unto us the entrance and way to come to the
Father: Of Christ must we seek salvation.
He is the way, the truth, and the life, from whom Satan seeks and laboreth
to draw us away, who transforming himself into an Angel of light, by his
wicked teachers inueigleth men's minds with falsehood in stead of truth, with
doubtful things for things certain, with fainednesse and hypocrisy in place
of pure religion and sincerity, with hurtful things in stead of wholesome
things. Genesis 2.
Adam was deceived with a show and color of truth.
This was the first deceit of our enemy wherewith he assailed Adam, and
darkened, daziled, and blinded his mind, and deceived him being vncircu^spect
and too light a believer, with a show and color of truth, so that he cease
not craftily to devise and work the same against all his posterity, and
abolishing the sincere worshipping of God and true religion requisite unto
salvation, The devil withdraws men's minds from sound doctrine.
to bring in superstition, idolatry, false doctrine, and doubtful and
dangerous traditions of life, and finally to plant all manner engines, and use
all crafty inventions possible, and endeavor therewith by extinguishing the
clear light of the truth, and obscuring the shining brightness of faith, to
lead and draw mankind from the knowledge of God, and to bring blindness and
dim gross darkness into his mind.

Of the lawful society of matrimony.

CHAP. 54.
A definition of matrimony.
Matrimony is a lawful and inseparable joining together of man and woman,
instituted of God, partly to subdue inordinate lusts, and to avoid unlawful,
uncertain, and confused keeping of company together, and partly for the
procreation of children. And as S. Paul has written of it, Lib. 12. cap.
so also Columella out of the book of oeconomie or household governance, made
by Xenophon, has left unto us in writing, that marriage was invented by nature,
that men might enter into that society of life which is not only most
pleasant, but also most profitable: And to the end the same might be
maintained, and that in continuance of time mankind should not decay and
perish, nature has ordained man (...) be lawfully joined unto woman, by the
blessing of God powered upon the^, that by this indissoluble coupling together
mortal man should not lack aid and help, Genesis 2.
wherewith not only love of procreatio^, but also mutual participatio^ of life,
condition and estate should knit the^ together. Wherefore seeing that wedlock
is a most safe haven, The commodity of marriage.
and a sure stay and trusty standing place for mankind, in whom by nature there
is ingraffed a fervent desire and inclination to increase his lineage and
offspring: surely that man does well provide for his tranquillity, who does
betake himself thereunto, specially when his age is grown to full ripeness,
and is come to the perfect strength of a man. Marriage must not be rashly taken
in hand.
But they which attempt the same too soon, and before their convenient time be
come, and have not well tried their strength, nor perfectly proved their
firmness of nature, surely such men are unwise in so doing, and have small
consideration of their age. For there be some young striplings having almost no
tokens of a man, Untimely wedlock weakneth many.
which do enter into this yoke either by a certain unadvised rashness, or by
the instigation of baudes, or else by the compulsion of their parents, which
gape for a great dowry: Of this sort I have known some, which before the
year were ended, have been very weak and feeble in their loins and shancks,
and all their vital juice was so exhausted and consumed, that I was
constrained to comfort, recreate, and restore their decayed and impaired
strength with nourishing medicines. Wherefore let not boys, or those that be
little elder then boys, apply themselves to the procreation of Children: but
let every one measure and try well his own strength; whether his loins be
strong enough to bear the same or no. But he that purposes to addict himself
to matrimonial society, In choosing a wife have regard of her honest stock
and kindred.
must observe this thing specially, to choose for his wife one that is of
honest stock and kindred, not so much respecting her great dowry (although that
ought not to be refused) as her gentle, comely, honest, chaste and shamfast
manners, and good behavior. For a woman (as the Comicall Poet says) Amphi.
act. 2.
if she be commendably manered, she is sufficiently dowred. A proper witty and
sage saying is that of Alcumena, as Plautus has written, which every young
maid and matron ought to keep sure in remembrance, I do not account (says
she) that to be a dowry which commonly is called so: But I judge this to be
the right and best dowry, namely, honesty, chastity, shamefastness, and
continency, fear of GOD, love of parents, and concord of Kinsfolks,
obedience to my husband, and to be chief over them that be honest, that I may
be bounteous to the good. Therefore parents must very carefully beware,
Parents must have good regard to the frailty of their daughters.
lest this frail feminine sex being brickle vessels, and prone to ruin,
should be stained with any spot of infamy, or sustain any loss of honesty,
especially when they begin to be mariagable, and come to their full
ripeness, but they must inform and instruct their daughters unto decent
behavior and virtue, Eccles. 7.
and exhort and provoke them unto honesty of life and blameless nourture. No
occasion of offense or falling must be given to young maidens.
There be some lewd progenitors and wicked parents which utterly neglect, ye
rather do deprave and corrupt the integrity of their daughters and virgins.
For they mar them with domestical and familiar examples, and do open them
the window unto drunkenness, malapartnes, and unshamefastness. Whereby it
comes to pass, that by little and little they use to shake off all
shamefastness, and set their honesty to safe, so that they suffer the same
very easily to be assaulted, won, and spoiled, or do not greatly resist the
crafty deceiuer of virginity, whose touching, feeling, handling, groaping,
kisses, and ticklings, they neither fear nor abhor, but willingly without
resistance receive the flattering allurements of such wantons.

Faults and errors committed in entering into marriage.
Amongst many enormities and faults usually committed in entering into the state
of matrimony, there be three specially, in my judgment, to be reprehended,
whereof many damages and inconveniences do proceed. The first is, because the
most part of me^ do hastily and unadvisedly, and without any ripe or convenient
deliberation, attempt this kind of life, yea and that at such age as is unmeet
for the same. Secondly because some do addict themselves to matrimony too late
and out of due season, and take upon the^ to bear this burden, when as their
flourishing age fades, Feeble and weak persons unfit for wedlock
and they begin to wax old. Lastly, because they suffer themselves to be
coupled in an unequal yoke of wedlock, the healthful and sound with the sick
and diseased, the young man, because he gapeth for a great dowry, with the
old woman: Which is a thing dissonant and discordant from natural society;
the old man with the young girl, which is a match not utterly to be
reprehended, nor in mine opinion, altogether contrary to the order of nature,
considering that many crude old men, and such as be of green old age, are
not unable for procreation, which cannot be in aged and fruitless women. But
as too much hastiness and speed in setting their minds on marriage too soon,
is to be dispraysed in young men: so is the slacknesse, slownesse, In entering
into matrimony, all things must be done in due season conuenie^tly
and long delay thereof in them that be of full years. For they which suffer
themselves to be tied with this bond too soon, and bound with this knot too
hastily, their bodies being not yet firm and able enough, nor their strength
sufficiently increased, such young inexpert Soldiers cannot long abide the
bru^ in this wrestling conflict, but after one assault or two, their courage
fails them, and their lively vigor withers like plants plucked up by the
roots. But they which delaying from day to day do suffer the lawful time of
marriage to pass away from them, Let the^ that be of full age and strength,
many.
and do long time defer the purpose of contracting matrimony, do live a
sad, sour and unpleasant life, or sometimes pollute themselves with in
ordinate and unlawful uncleanness: Which inconvenience is every where
evidently to be seen in so many men that be diseased in the fundament, that
be annoyed with many maladies, wryed, bleare eyed, crooked, gowtie, and having
legs puffed and swollen: which men, if afterward when they are weary and yrke
of that kind of life, do happen to be associated and linked in lawful wedlock,
they throw themselves into a great heap of griefs and troubles and much
tediousnes. For insomuch as they are exhausted, wasted, spent, worn out, and
their strength impaired by the intemperance of Venerie, wherein they lewdly
lived before, they are both grievous to themselves, and the hope and desire of
the new married woman is frustrate.

Whatsoever society consists not within the limits of marriage, is
reproueable, and disagreeable from lawful matrimony.

CHAP. 55.
FOrasmuch as Christ our Savior and his Apostles do detest incontinencie,
Mat. 5. and 11
uncleanness, inordinate lust, and unlawful love, and do pronounce them to
be excluded from the Kingdom of God, Hebr. 13.
which do contaminate themselves with adultery or with the filthy lust of
whoredom and fornication, I cannot see with what face or colors those persons
are able to defend themselves, which abhorring matrimony, do purpose to live
at their own liberty, viciously, delitiously, and dissolutely. For there be
some, which without the bounds and compass of wedlock, do addict themselves
for a time to one lover, concubine, or paramour, neither with comeliness,
Unlawful love, lust, and carnal copulation.
nor honesty, nor quiet mind, nor safe conscience. They indeed seek for
commodity and ease of their life as they persuade themselves, neither can they
abide to assign themselves to any woman, from whom they may not leap back
nor recoyle. But sometime they find a great deal more bitter grief and
anguish, What happens to the^ which dissolutely delight themselves with
lechery.
and are constrained t^ suffer and abide more contumelious despite at the
hands of their imperious, stout, and malapart leman or lover, then of her which
is a man's wife lawfully assigned and admitted. And they have this inconuenie^ce
also besides; because that long familiarity makes this set bold and
presumptuous, so that if a man be weary of her, and would gladly be rid of
her, and send her packing, he cannot do it without tumult and troublous stir.
For they make an outrageous uproar and confused hurly burly, when any mention
of divorce or separation happens, or when they fear, because of some storm
which is risen, that they shall be shut out of doors.

Those familiar and domestical companions which foolish Priests do receive
into society of life, do minister many, yea and abundant examples, of which
Priests single life is exacted and required, a thing truly very hard and
exceeding difficult for the^, which be strong, lusty and of good constitution
and complexion, to observe and keep inuiolated; and so the lawful use of
matrimony is forbidden. Wherefore those men err greatly being far wide from
the truth, and in the choice of humane society are utterly deceived in an ill
opinion, and blinded in a detestable error, which think that those men live at
ease and in quiet, who being free from a wife, do keep some woman at home, or
hunt and seek for one abroad, with whom they may recreate and delight
themselves, and whose company they may enjoy and take pleasure of, when they
lust. When as indeed oftentimes, Carnal company without matrimony burdeneth
the conscience.
yea and commonly for the most part, besides the disquietnesse of mind and
tormenting grief of conscience, more tediousness, trouble and vexation, more
ielously and suspicion rises by means of such a lover or concubine, that may
be taken or let to hire, and tarieth but for a time, then of a lawful and
faithful wife, solemnly admitted and taken unto perpetual society of life.
And albeit in this estate, as in many other, the sweet is mingled among the
bitter, the sower with the pleasant, the merry with the sorry, foul weather
with fair; neither is this ordinance of life free from covert hatred,
contentions, alterations, obiurgations, No state of life without grief.
chidings, and the affection of jealousy (as there is noth^ng in any kind of
life that is happy and blessed in every respect:) yet for all that, no fault
or blame must be laid or imputed to the order of matrimony. For although very
many detriments, damages, and inconveniences be incident unto this kind of
life, and married folks be molested with great grief, care, thought,
heaviness, and travail in the nourishing, education and bringing up of their
children, 1. Cor. 7.
and, as S. Paul testifies, in establishing their household substance and
domestical estate: yet nevertheless mutual love and procreation of children,
by the ordinance of God, does mitigate all these dolours, and sweetneth all
this bitterness. Children are the delight of matrimony.
Children also are a delectable pleasure and singular delight of matrimony,
whereby matrimonial love is increased and maintained, and great solace and
comfort mutually on either party is conceived. The lack of children must be
taken patiently
But if contrary to their will and desire, they happen to have no increase by
issue, and the hope of their posterity for the space of some years to be
differred: yet nevertheless the faithful loyalty of matrimony must be kept
inuiolably, and the mutual fellowship of life maintained so, that the one be a
good stay to the other, even like to fruitful trees planted and set nigh
together in a border, which do shore and proppe up a vine, whereon it is
sustained, and being as it were married, joined, and nailed thereunto, grows
up exceedingly, and spreads it self very largely. For as a vine destitute of
proppes and shores, Matrimony compared to a vine.
falls down and lies flat on the ground: so does matrimony also fall and
household wealth decay, unless it be vpholden with mutual help and diligence of
man and woman. But if there be any enormitie in this society, if any
inconvenience, suspicions, tumults, disquietnesse or discord do invade the
married couple: it must be rather imputed and ascribed to the affections,
perturbations, Men's affections are to be blamed and not nature.
and waywardness of both sexes, then to this institution and ordinance. For
these enormities are not proper to wedlock, but be the offenses and vices of
our depraved and corrupt nature and of a troublous mind, which we have gotten
by the spot of original sin, upon which all the blame ought to be laid.

How and by what means it may be brought to pass, that death be not terrible
to a man of lewd and naughty nature.

CHAP. 56.
COnsidering that in humane estate there is nothing permanent, nothing sure and
steadfast, but all things, yea even the best commended and most approved, are
momentanie, frail, We must have no trust in caducall things.
transitory, and do soon fail and fall: there is no cause why a man should
greatly love, like, extol, and esteem the same, and be delighted withal more
then is meet: but rather erect and lift up his mind and heart unto the
heavenly habitations, and regard, consider, meditate, and muse upon things
perfect, sure, and eternal. For whosoever fixes in his heart undoubted trust
in GOD the father by Christ Jesus, and thereupon groundeth the sure hope and
expectation of immortality, Assured trust in Christ puts away the fear of
death.
he need not fear any imminent chances and endammagements, he has (...)
cause to dread sickness, calamities, dangers, no nor finally death, whereof
those men specially be sore afraid, who are destitute of the Spirit of God, and
not endued with any knowledge of the deity. For they which put the^ confidence
in GOD, being strengthened and supported with his holy spirit, do boldly and
manly, without any fear or discouraging, stand and abide against all
adversities. For as S. Paul says, Romans 8. 2. Tim. 1. Gal. 4.
We have not received the spirit of bondage, or of fear, but the spirit of
adoption, of power, and of love, by whom we boldly cry Abba, father. Herein,
says S. John, 1. Ioh. 4.
is the love perfect with us, that we should have trust in the day of
judgment. There is no fear in love but perfect love casts out all fear,
for fear brings painfulnesse or trembling dread. Therefore to the end we may
shake off all fear, and drive out of our minds all dread of death, and
whatsoever it be that causes trembling horror, let us cast all our care on our
bountiful father; and refer and erect all our thoughts, our hope, Coloss. 2.
our prayers, and our whole trust and confidence unto him, and unto Jesus
Christ, who has purged, cleansed, and cleared us with his blood, Christ has
overcome death.
and has delivered us and set us at liberty from sin, and from the tyranny
of death, and has blotted out, rased, and quite cancelled the obligation or
handwriting which was against us, A similitude of the^ that be in great debt.
wherewith we were bound, and as it were indebted to the devil. Moreover,
Christ our Savior, to the end he might comfort and fortify men's fearful
minds, and declare that all our hope and trust consists and rests in him,
says thus, Ioh. 16.
Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. Now is the Prince of this world
judged, that is to say, he which brought in death, is repulsed by my death, and
condemned in judgment, and deposed from his power to do hurt, whereof he is
deprived. Ioh. 14.
The Prince of this world comes, and has not any thing in me. By the
comfort of which words he shows manifestly, that Satan, Christ is a terror to
Satan.
and those which in this world by sin are his confederates, has no power
against Christ or his members which cleave unto him, Comfortable sentences.
and be graffed in him by faith. These wholesome and lively sermons work this
effect in the minds of those men which lean and trust unto his defense, that
casting away the fear of death, they lustily, cheerfully, and courageously
enuirone and fortify themselves against any assaults, or invasions of
troubles, or calamities whatsoever, and declare their invincible magnanimity,
and with great confidence break forth into these words: Psalm. 25.
Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net. Psalm. 27.
The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is
the defender of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid* If an host of men
were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid: Psalm. 3.
I will not fear thousands of people that compass me about. If there rise up
war against me, yet my hope is in him. Psalm. 23.
Though I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me. Job. 13.
Though he kill me, I will put my trust in him: that is to say, If he cast
upon me the horror of death, and if I must b^ spoiled of my life, yet for all
that I will trust in him, who by his providence will make a way and use means
to save me. Psalm. 118. Hebr. 13.
The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what flesh shall do unto me. And that
saying of Jeremy. Jeremy. 17.
Behold, say they, where is the word of the Lord? Let (...) come. And I was not
troubled, following this the sheepeheard, and thou know, I have not desired
the day of man: that is, A place of Jeremy expounded.
I look not for help of any other, but of thee, so that I regard not a whit,
neither do I fear them which threaten my death. Be not thou a terror unto
me, O my hope, in the day of my affliction. Let them be afeard, but let not me
fear.

Saint Paul being inflamed with the same fervent and ardent zeal of faith,
and trusting unto the aid and protection of GOD, pronounces assuredly, and
boldly, that there is nothing in the world so dreadful or horrible, that can
put godly men's minds in fear, of pluck them away from the love of GOD and
sure trust reposed in him. For I surely persuade my self, says he, Romans 8.
that neither death, neither life, neither angels or invisible spirits,
neither principalities or powers, neither things now at hand, nor things to
come, neither any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
GOD which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The confidence of Paul quickneth al me^.
So S. Paul does constantly show, that he which is graft in GOD the father by
Christ, does valiantly, fearing nothing, stand and abide against all manner
terrors, how or whence soever they happen, against the invasions, furious
rage, and raging noise of enemies, against the horror of death, Psalm. 46.
which either enemies or foes do threaten, or which sickness accelerateth, or
the law of nature brings. What takes away fear of death.
Seeing therefore that there is nothing more effectual to deliver men's minds
from the fear and great dread of death, then sure and steadfast trust in GOD
through Christ our leader, guide and Captain, whereby we conceive most sure
and undoubted hope of resurrection, and most assured expectation of everlasting
life: unto this most sure refuge let all men make all speed possible* and bend
all their endeavor, let every one of us embrace, accept, love, and imprint in
his heart this wholesome and heavenly doctrine* herewith let all men comfort,
stay, and strengthen themselves in all dangers, distress, and imminent
extremities: herewith let them appease and quiet their conscience, and with the
meditation hereof let them put away all sorrow of heart, and shake off
heaviness and mourning, which they conceive, when they are deprived either of
parents or of children Hereunto belongs that lively consolation of the
Apostle, wherewith he comfort the Thessalonians with constant expectation of
the resurrection and sure hope of eternal life, and wills them to refrain
from weeping, and not to mourn and make lamentation for their friends departed
and taken away from amongst the living, as the Ethnickes or heathen use to do.
I would not brethren, says he, 2 Thessalonians. 4.
that ye should be ignorant concerning them which are fallen a sleep, (being
brought to rest as it were with, sleep, and not with death) The dead must not
be mourned for after the manner of the heathen.
that ye sorrow not nor take grief, as other do which have no hope of
returning to life again. Death is a sleep.
For if we believe that Jesus dyed and lived again, even so them also which
are fallen a sleep by Jesus, God will b^ing with him. And again, when he
withdraws the Philippians from worldly things, and reduces them to things
sure, incorruptible and perfect, he says, Philip. 3.
Our conversation is in heaven, out of the which we look for the Lord Jesus
Christ, who will transfigure our base body, and make it in fashion like unto
his glorious body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself. By what things and means the fear of death is
to be put away.
In which words Saint Paul admonishes them, to comfort, strengthen and
fortify themselves in all their afflictions, with the love and longing desire
of eternity, and in the conflict of this life to be afraid of nothing that
may withdraw or call us away from that far better life, to the which Christ
has opened us the way by the power of his resurrection. Comfort in Christ.
Wherefore when we come to the last day of our life, and when death is even hard
at hand, which every man fears, unless he consolate and corroborate himself
in Christ, or when any meditation hereof comes into the minds of them that be
sound and well in health, or if poverty, or sickness, or misery, or any
other dangers and perils of this life do oppress and afflict us: let us
then, and at all times, Our eyes must be fastened and fixed on Christ.
refer all our petitions, hope, and desires unto Christ Jesus, who by his
death has paid the penalty, and suffered the punishment that was due to us,
Coloss. 3.
who has forgiven us all our sins who is the propitiation for our offenses,
who is our advocate, as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 2.
our intercessor and spokesman unto GOD the father, who is the reconciler of
GOD and man, and who, as Saint Paul says, 1. Tim. 2. Esai. 50.
has given and offered up himself a redemption, ransom, offering, and
sacrifice for all men. In him only consists our salvation, life, and
resurrection. Ephesians 2..
By him we have access and entrance in one spirit unto the father. Coloss.
1. Ioh. 1.
By his blood shed we have obtained redemption and remission of si^. Because
it well pleased the father that in him should all fullness dwell, and by him to
reconcile unto himself all things being pacified by his blood. Seeing
therefore that we have such a great, such a worthy, and such an excellent
high Priest, as says the author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 4.
who has pierced the heavens, even Jesus the son of God, who being tempted
by all me (...) without sin, feels and has compassion on our infirmities:
Christ is the peacemaker between God and man.
Let us come with trusty boldness unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy to help in time of our need. For we being succored with the
defense and protection, and strongly environed and fenced with the guard of
such a renowned Captain, do valiantly withstand and constantly abide against
all monstrous mischiefs of devils, How the mind and conscience is to be
strengthened when death approaches.
which forthwith vanish away as soon as the light of the truth arises;
against sin, death, and hell: and so we are brought out of the dangerous
watch and watchful warfare of this life unto that desired and happy haven,
and most blessed habitation in heaven. Wherefore if any damage, detriment, in
conuenience, misfortune, or misery shall come to a man in the swift running
course of this life, In Christ is the comfort of all calamities.
if any man happen to be cast or brought into any danger of his life, to be
pinched with poverty, to be afflicted with sickness, to be vexed of
enemies, if desolation and calamity fall upon him, if his wickednesses and
iniquities abound, if the innocent and giltlesse be oppressed and killed, if
sound and wholesome doctrine be contemned, if heresies and pernicious sects
and opinions grow up, if perverse errors be sown abroad on every side: in
all this so great confusion and troublous tumult of worldly affairs, Christ
is the sacred and sure anchor in all tempests of this troublous world
let every man betake and commit himself unto Christ, and seek the
assurance of salvation at and of him only, rest and trust wholly in him and
upon him, stay and strengthen himself on him as on the sacred anchor, and
finally eftsoons meditate and ruminate in his mind that constant profession
of David Psalm. 16.
I will set the Lord always in my sight, for he is on my right hand, so that
I shall not be moved nor troubled. In which words he shows that he has
his eyes still continually fixed on GOD, and that he trusts in his defense,
and that by his help he abides steadfast in dangerous and doubtful matters,
and wauereth not, nor is carried about with any wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.
but is stable and constant, and is not moved away from that trust which he
has reposed in GOD, even for this cause only, because he finds God
favorable and inclined to mercy, Hebr. 13.
and to assist him in all things; so that boldly he breaks forth into
these words: Psalm. 28.
Behold the Lord is my helper, and my heart has trusted in him, and I am
helped, and my flesh has flourished much in him, and willingly and gladly will
I confess unto him.

Of the greatness, highness, majesty, and power of the name of Jesus Christ
by which only Magical enchauntments must be resisted, and illusions of
Devils vanquished, and whatsoever damages, hurts, or inconveniences happen to
be done either to the mind or to the body, must be avoided.

CHAP. 57.
FOrasmuch as I have showed a little before, that enchauntments, sorcerie, and
Arts of Magic ought to be utterly rooted out, and that such wicked and
mischievous practices ought not to be exercised of any man: It remains now,
that I show by the way as occasion serves, with what virtue, power and
efficacy, with what words and prayers men's minds that are besieged,
afflicted, and snared with the delusions and deceitful iugling casts of
devils, may be eased and helped: Devils are envious and malicious adversaries
unto men.
moreover by what means we may drive away and destroy witching sorcerie, which
the ministers of devils do bring upon their miserable captives, vexing and
tormenting both their minds and bodies. Devils mingle themselves with humors
as infectio^s in men's bodies.
These wicked ministers do privily leap into the bodies of men and women,
and do violence to humane nature, and deprive the same of her proper power and
natural strength, or at least way alter and change the same. These evil
angels or spirits do mingle and conioyne themselves with the food,
nourishments, and humors of men's bodies, with their spirits or souls, and
with the wind and air which we receive within our bodies, and wherewith we
breathe, and do corrupt many other things which we use necessarily, and
wherewith health is preserved. Therefore I have thought it good, and do judge
this thing worth the labor, to show plainly, by what means miserable
wretched men may well and conveniently be eased, rid, and delivered from such
bonds of thraldom and mischief, wherewith they feel themselves wrapped and
encombred. The hurts which devils do, can not be referred unto natural causes.
For the harms and hurts wherewith they are annoyed, can not be referred unto
any natural causes, nor be expelled with those remedies, wherewith common
diseases are cured. If any disease or sickness come of surfeiting, of
venereous act, of weariness, of cold, heat, fullness, hunger: every one of
these is driven out by peculiar remedies. But such mischievous hurts as are
done by evil spirits, do not require any natural remedies at all, but
divine, heavenly, and supernatural medicines.

Why God suffers us to be vexed of devils.
Some men marvel that so great power is given to the devil and his ministers,
so to vex, torment, and afflict men. God does partly wink at, and will not
behold those harms which the soldiers of Satan and devilish sorcerers do
unto wretched men, but suffers them to be vexed, payned, God uses the malice
of devils to punish the wicked therewith.
and macerated, and herein consists the good consideration of his merciful
purpose and providence: and partly he does instigate the devil and his
ministers, to use such fierceness and cruelty against many that have
deserved such affliction, and so uses the malice of them for the punishment
and chastisement of the ungodly. So is the lying spirit sent into the mouths
of all the Prophets, 3. King. 22.
Achab deceived.
to the end that Achab being deceived and seduced, may go up to battle,
wherein present destruction was prepared for him. Sometime God does suffer some
men to have such harm, damage, and detriment done unto them, thereby to try
their constancy. So he permitted Job not only to be deprived of his goods,
Job. 2.
and robbed and spoiled of all his riches, but also to have his body rent and
tormented with most grievous pain. And this same he suffered to be done, Why
Job was vexed of the devil.
partly to prove and try the constancy of the man, and to encourage other
men to the patient enduring of tribulations, lest they being discouraged with
miseries, should fall from GOD: and partly to declare his power, by which he
comfort and strengthens them that put their trust in him, and when as the
are brought even to naught, he lifts and sets them up, and restores them
to their old former dignity. But we must consider the diversity of the common
sort of lunaticke persons possessed with ill spirits, which are besieged and
assaulted of the devil, or be vexed of him in any part of their body. For
very many of them are dull and senseless, an^ far from the knowledge of GOD,
upon whom the devil (as an apt and ready instrument) exercises his tyranny.
So Satan assayleth sluggards, Idolaters, and superstitious persons, in whose
minds rather he finds a resting place, then in theirs, who are instructed
with the knowledge of the majesty and power of God, The devil assaileth dull
and senseless men.
and do stablish and stay themselves with assured trust in him, for he is
rather afraid of such godly persons, and dare not plant his engines, nor work
his subtle inventions against the^, because he knows surely, that his
attempts and enterprises shall be vain and frustrate, and not prevail against
them which do watch diligently, and are strengthened with the aid and
protection of God. A similitude of a city neither well walled nor fortified.
For like as Castles, Towers, and Cities that be not environed with any walls,
that be not fortified with any ditches, trenches, ra^pars, or fortresses, that
be not furnished with any garrisons of soldiers, are wont easily to (...)
won: even so men's slothful and slug^ishe minds, which be not strengthened
with wholesome and heavenly doctrine, nor ^ablished with confidence in God, are
the more in danger, being subject and ready to ^e snared and caught with the
wily deceipts ^f Devils, and so fall the sooner. The devil provoke men to
every wicked and hurtful thing.
And be^use above all other things, Satan desi^eth this chiefly, to abolish
the glory of God, ^o draw man from salvation, and to solicit and move him to
fall away from God, he cea^eth not to assail him within and without, and
enuiously and maliciously does what he ^an, to work destruction sometime to
the ^ody, sometime to the soul, and sometime ^o both body and soul. Genes 4.
1. King. 31. Mat. 27.
As Cain and King Saul do minister examples unto us, so does ^lso Judas
Ischariot, whose mind when the Di^el had driven to desperation and mistrust,
^hen with tediousnes and wearines of his life he ^ompelled him to hang
himself, and so de^med his body with the public reproach (...) ignominy of
such an horrible, mischievous, and most wicked fact. Mat. 8.
But although Satan ^eing a most envious and malignant enemy of mankind, has
and uses a thousand wiles and sleights to deceive and hurt us: yet
nevertheless, he is put to flight and to the foil with this one thing only,
which is very effectual and a sovereign help, The devil is driven away by
trust in God.
and present remedy, namely with sound and sure faith, and constant and
steadfast trust in GOD the Father by Christ. With which fortification the
Apostle Saint Peter admonishes us, to fight against the crafty laying in
wait, fallacies, fraudulent attemptes, deceiptes, slilinesse, subtilties,
rage, and fierceness of that pestiferous tyranne, that is to wit, with
sobriety and watchfulness, fortified and fenced with Faith. For he does as
it were pluck by the ear, awake, stir up and quicken secure, negligent, and
rechlesse persons with these words. 1. Pet. 5.
Saint Peter armeth us against the Devil.
Be ye sober and watch: ^or your adversary the Devil goes about as a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, whom resist ye being steadfast in
Faith. For as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 5.
This is the victory which has overcome the world, even our Faith. For the
trust which we have surely reposed in Christ, and wherewith we commit our
selves wholly unto such a valiant defender, Devils must be driven away by
trust in Christ.
against the Devils and Princes of this world, does win and get us the
victory so triumphantly, that we bring home rich and goodly spoils taken from
the enemy thus conquered and ouerthrown. Therefore whenever we determine and
go about to work some thing against the adversary, and to withstand his
enchauntments and resist his bewitching sorceries, or drive evil spirits out
of men's minds: all the same must be wrought and brought to pass by assured
trust and confidence in Christ Jesus, rejecting and abandoning all old wives
superstition, and vanity of the Ethnickes or Heathen, and other execrable
blasphemies and detestable cursinges done by Magic. For GOD by his Son, who
is the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.
and the express Image of his substance, works all things in all men, and
rules every thing with the word of his power. All attributed to Christ.
And this prerogative deserved he to have for his singular obedience,
humility, and modesty toward his Father. Philipp 2.
For when he was in the form of GOD, that is to say, like match and equal
unto him, Christ equal to God.
he thought it no robbery to be equal unto GOD, but he abased himself,
taking on him the shape of a servant, and humbled himself, and became
obedient even to the ignominious and detestable death of the Cross. The
greatness and highness of the name of Jesus.
Wherefore God has exalted him unto the chiefest and most excellent highness,
and has honored and illustrated him with a name which excels every name,
that in the name of JESUS every knee should bow both of things in Heaven and
things in earth, and things under the earth, and that all tongues should
confess and acknowledge, that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto the glory of God
the Father, Unto whom all the glory of the son redoundeth, and is referred,
and contrariwise al glory of the Father unto the Son. Great and hard things
are done by the name of Christ.
Therefore if any man purpose to attempt any such thing, if he go about to
ease and help afflicted minds, if he labor to drive Devils out of men's
bodies, let him take in hand to perform the same by calling on God the Father,
with undoubted trust and confidence of and in the name of Jesus Christ: for so
shall he obtain all those things, and shall not be frustrate of his desire.
For by the efficacy, virtue and power of this marvelous, wonderful, high,
honorable, and excellent name (so that a man do not doubt nor mistrust the
promises of God) sickness is assuaged, maladies be mittigated, affections,
passions and perturbations of the mind be quieted, tempests, storms, and
tempestuous seas become calm, Devils fly away, as Christ immediately before
his ascension into heaven, promised, poisoned potions lose their strength, Mar.
16.
All kind of evils are overcome and expelled by confidence in Christ.
serpents cannot sting nor hurt, the darkness of the mind is dispersed, the
terror, fear and horror of death is driven away, hurtful and noisome
thoughts are expelled and vanishe away, the mind conceiueth tranquillity, and
a quiet and peaceable conscience, so that whatsoever comes or falls upon
us, and wheresoever it chance, nothing in the world can make us afraid,
because God the Father comfort, strengthens, and stablisheth us with his
spirit by Jesus Christ. Therefore thy mind must be lifted up unto the living
God by his son being our guide and leader: and remember that al things which
thou purposest to take in hand must be accomplished by the power of the
wonderful name of Jesus. Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Act. 2.
For all power in heaven and earth is given to him. Neither is there any other
name under the sun wherein consists salvation: Which name is terrible to the
ungodly, dreadful to Devils, so that it makes them to tremble: but to them
which believe and trust in him, it is power, wisdom, salvation, life, and
resurrection. For he is ordained of God to be judge of the quick and the dead,
I mean Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, Act. 4. 1. Cor. 1. Apoc. 1.
the Prince of the Kings of the earth, which loved us, and washed us from our
sins by his own blood. In Christ is forgiveness of sins.
To him as Saint Peter says in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 10.
all the Prophets give witness, that whosoever believes in him, shall by his
name receive forgiveness of sins. This is everlasting life (which testimony
Christ exhibiteth to the Father) Ioh. 17.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, unto
whom the whole efficacy and virtue of the Godhead, and whatsoever power and
wisdom may be ascribed unto GOD, is referred, attributed, and derived.
Seeing therefore that this name is so glorious, so noble, so renowned, so
honorable, so holy, so inviolable, and of so great Majesty and power: we must
diligently take heed and studiously beware, that it be not used vainly and
irreverently, Act. 19.
as those derided coniurers did, who when they attempted and took upon them,
with certain rites and words purposely conceived for their gain and for an
ostentation, to drive away the hurtful spirit, abusing the name of Jesus, by
the power of which name Paul did work miracles, they brought themselves into
great danger, and their coniuring or rather mocking delusion was endammageable
to them. For he that was possessed of the Devil prevailed against them, The
coniurers rent and torn.
and ran upon them, and rent and wounded them so cruelly, that they were
constrained to save themselves by flying away out of the house. Coniurers now a
days folish bablers and led with vain doctrine.
There have been also even in our time certain seely foolish priests, who
when as they, being neither armed with any Faith of the name of Christ, nor
indewed with integrity, attempted the like enterprise, were derided of the
Devil, and put to such shame, that they were compelled to leave the thing
undone, and depart away with great fear and trembling. But if any man will go
about any such attempt, and endeavor to drive out evil spirits out of men's
bodies: Let him follow the example of Peter and John, who using no ambitious
words, lifted up the lame in this manner: Act. 3.
The miracle of Peter and John.
IN THE NAME OF JESUS CHRIST OF NAZARETH arise and walk: and he forthwith
receiving strength in his legs and anckles, and starting up, stood and
walked, and entered with them into the Temple, leaping and walking, and praising
God. All glory is given to Christ.
Coloss. 2.
Heb. 1.
Seeing therefore that Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, coeternall
and coequall with the father, in whom all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are hidden, does rule and govern all things with the word of his
power: it is meet that we, conceiving and reposing our whole trust and
confidence in God through Jesus Christ, do by his power, mighty operation,
aid and protection, resist and withstand Satan, sin, hell, and whatsoever
other things are malicious adversaries and hurtful unto man. For, as Saint
Paul says, Ephesians. 1.
Excellent is that greatness, strength, power, and puissance, which God showed
according to his mighty working in Christ, when he raised him from the dead,
and made him sit at his right hand in heavenly things above al power, and
principality, and dominion, and abole every thing that is named (...) in this
world only, but also in that that is to come. Christ is the head of the
Church or Congregation.
And he has put all things under his feet, and gave him the head above all
things to the Church or Congregation which is his body, the fullness of him,
which fills all in all: that is to say, Christ fulfilleth all things in all
men.
Christ is he by whom God fulfilleth, perfourmeth and accomplisheth all things
in all men, especially in them which believe and trust in him, and as the
Apostle says a little before, are sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
who is the pledge and earnest of our inheritance unto the redemption of the
purchased and acquired possession, unto the praise of his glory. Christ
comforts and strengthens us in afflictions.
Wherefore Saint Paul, who was accustomed to be exercised and tried in
innumerable conflictes, and was constrained patiently to suffer and constantly
to endure many assaults, admonishes al men, that whenever dangers are
immine^t, death is threatened, Satan lays siege and assault to the mind,
they resist, withstand, and wrestle against them with a valiant heart that
cannot be discouraged. For thus he encourages and fortifieth the Ephesians:
Ephesians. 6.
Finally my brethren, be strong through the Lord, and through the power of his
might, put on all the armor of God, that ye may stand against the assaults of
the Devil. For we wrestle not against blood and flesh, that is to say,
against frail and dying men, although even they also sometime are malicious
adversaries, but against Lords and Rulers of the world, Governors of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual craftiness in heavenly things. By
which plenteousnesse of words and copiousnesse of sentences, as also by an
elegant Metaphor derived and taken of the conflict and invasion of enemies, he
shows that deuilish spirits, A similitude of industry in warfare.
and their soldiers, guard, and ministers, do with marvelous craft and
wonderful subtle policies, lay snares and go about to deceive them, which
be addicted unto Christ, and have given their name unto him. Wherefore, seeing
that our enemies are so terrible, and so full of spiritual craftines, he
proceeds in his exhortation plainly to inform us, with what munition and
weapons we must withstand them: The armor of christian soldiers.
Take unto you, says he, Ephesians. 6.
the whole armor of God (taking example of them which being well harnessed,
fenced, and appointed, do go forth into the embattayled army, and stand ready
in their array) that ye may be able to resist the adversary, and to stand
until all things be perfectly accomplished, and your business fully
dispatched, as they which be not put to flight, nor constrained to turn their
backs. Stand therefore with your loins girded about with the girdle of truth,
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and shodde with shoes, that
ye may be prepared and ready for the Gospel of peace. Above all take unto you
the shield of Faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit which is
the word of God. Prayer is a good armor against the Devil.
Whereunto he adds prayers and supplications, as it were succor, aides, and
defenses in the reregard or arriere band, which work such effect, that we
obtain the victory, and as Saint Peter says, who treats of the same
matter, 1. Pet. 5.
that God in so doubtful a conflict and in event of battle sometime so
uncertain, does renew, refreshe, settle, stablish, strengthen, and sustain
them that be a little while afflicted, An argument of the authority of Christ.
and even as it were ready to fall. And since that the authority of Pythagoras
was in times past had in so high reputation amongst them that were addicted
unto him, and his doctrine so greatly esteemed, that it was accounted in stead
of an Oracle, and as it were spoken from the threefooted stool or tables in
the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, so that when any man doubted, by and by
without any stay they objected unto him these words for persuasion, (...).
Ipse dixit, he said it, as though then it were neither right nor lawful to
repugne or reclaim the same: verily it is meet, right, and very requisite
unto our salvation, to ascribe the same honor, and attribute the same
reverence, yea rather far greater, unto Jesus Christ, and in affirming and
defending his doctrine, and stablishing the profession of Faith, to make these
words openly and clearly to sound in men's deaf and dull ears, Ipse dixit,
must be attributed to Christ.
PISTEYSON, AYTOS EPHA SOTP. CREED, IPSE DIXIT SERVATOR. Believe thou, for our
Savior said it.For his doctrine is not man's doctrine, his doctrine is not
disproueable, not cold, The doctrine of Christ excels all wisdom.
not without authority and power, but liuelye, wholesome, effectual, divine,
and godly, and brings beatitude and felicity unto man, which only must be
acquired and obtained of Christ, who is the fountain of all wisdom and
goodness, Colos. 2.
And in whom dwells all the fullness of GOD bodily, by whom we are
complete. By him, as Saint Paul says, Colos. 1.
God the Father has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the kingdom of his beloved son, by whom we have redemption in his
blood, even the forgiveness of sins. God has poured all things on Christ most
abundantly.
Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first begotten of all creatures,
because that by him all things are created, which are in heaven and earth,
visible and invisible, thrones, dominations, principalities, powers. Al things
are created by him and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all
things have their being. And he is the head of the body of the Church, the
beginning and first begotten of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence, and obtain the principality. For it pleased the Father that the
fullness of all things should dwell in him, and by him to reconcile toward
himself all things, being pacified and appeased by the blood of his Cross.
Seeing therefore that God the Father has given and bestowed, has shed and
poured on Christ all things so liberally, plentifully and abundantly, let us
labor and strive to come, with all speed possible, unto this most plenteous,
neuer-wasting and euer-lasting fountain, and let us be bold, with must
assured trust and effectual confidence, to ask, hope, and expect every thing
of him, let us enterprise and take in hand to bring any thing to pass by him.
The force of faith.
If thou intend to drive away Devils, to heal diseases, to deliver and rid thy
self out of dangers, to destroy venomous beasts, to expel the pernicious
power of poison, and abolish the hurt thereof, to move mountains out of their
place, remember that all these things must be achieved and accomplished by
the strength and power of Jesus Christ, and by undoubted affiance in him. For
Christ promises that all things shall be plain, manifest, open, and easy unto
him that believes and trusts in him: Which most comfortable promise it
pleased him to confirm unto his Apostles in his last Sermon before he was
taken up into heaven. When he says: Mar. 16.
Go ye into all the whole world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.
He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved, but he that will not
believe, shall be condemned. And these signs shall follow them which believe,
In my name they shall cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they
shall drive away and destroy Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them, they shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall
be well, that is to say, at the touching of them they shall wax healthful and
be hole and sound. Al these things shall be always pressed and ready, when the
fruit and profit of the Gospel shall require a miracle. But indeed these
things are always wrought and performed in the hearts of men by the ministers
of the profession of the Gospel, Miracles wrought in men's hearts and minds.
when as they drive and pluck filthy vices and abominable sin out of men's
minds, when as they heal the sicknesses and diseases of the mind, with the
effectual power of the spirit and with wholesome doctrine, when as they do
deliver and set the heart at liberty from coueteousnesse, hatred, wrath, evil
concupiscence, crafty, false, and malicious surmises and accusations,
backebiting and slaundering, and other renemous affections, and do adorn the
mind with divine, holy, and godly gifts.

Whether herbs and precious stones be of any power or available efficacy in
driving away Devils, and expelling other hurtful things.

CHAP. 58.
ALthough herbs have such peculiar use and commodity, and such special force
and strength naturally by the wonderful work of the Creator of nature, that
they be meet and conveniently used and necessarily applied for the sustenaunce
and medecin of men's bodies: Herbs effectual unto many things.
yet notwithstanding some herbs are nobly commended of old and ancient
writers, because they be good helps against mischievous hurtes, and do drive
away and expel all kind of enchauntments, witchcraft, and sorcery. These are
called remedies against all ill and mischiefs, or preservatives against poison
and sorcerie, because they put away and expulse whatsoever things are
hurtful, Pearls endued with secret efficacy.
noyous, and grievous to man. And this virtue is attributed not only to
herbs, but also to pearls and precious stones, which efficacy they have not
of their first form and qualities, that is to say, of the temperature of
heat, of coldness, of dryness, and moystnesse, but by a peculiar power
specially pertaining to their kind, and by a secret effect and hidden
property, the cause whereof can not be declared. Lodestone. Amber or Aumber.
Ieate. Sapphire.
So the Lodestone by rubbing of it, draws iron to it. The Ieate stone and
Aumbre, that Beads were made of, draws chafe and little strawes. The
Sapphire which is of the color of the sky, light, watchet, or bluncket,
preserves chastity. Iacint. Chrysolit.
The Iacint and Chrysolite being worn in a ring on the finger, resists the
pestilence, Emeraude.
The Emeraud and Prasine stone, which are green stones, do make the heart
merry. Turquoyse.
The Turquoyse saves and preserves from slipping, falling, and rushing against
any thing, or if any such thing do happen, it keeps the body safe from hurt.
Coral.
Coral put on the neck, drives away troublous and terrible dreams, and
mittigateth the fear that children have in the night. Carbuncle. Sardine.
The Carbuncle and Sardine stone, commonly called Corneol, so named of the red
berye of the Cornelier Tree, the fruit whereof is like to heppes, provoke
mirth and gladness, and makes a man cherefull, and causes him to have a
goodly fair fresh flourishing color, by reason that the blood has ready
passage and course throughout the body. So other precious stones have power and
do excel in other virtues, some in one, some in another, and do chase and drive
away hobgoblins or night spirits, fairees or elses that do bewitch infantes,
the night mares or hegges, and evil spirits of the air, if we may give
credence to the monuments and works of ancient writers. So amongst herbs
there be some which prevail against those diseases and horrible maladies,
which are much like unto the malicious vexations, grievous afflictions and
horrible torments of Devils. Of which sort be these, Horr^ble diseases are are
driven out by the help of herbs.
melancholy, frenzy, madness, falling sickness or foul evil, and most
grievous and cruel diseases, which come to maids and widows, of the passions
of the womb, or late fluxion of their natural euacuations, or when they defer
the time of marriage too long, and then be matched in matrimony. For the mind
is so troubled and affected by means of noyous fumes, black and gross
vapors like unto soote of a chimney, that they think themselves to be vexed
of some hurtful spirit, and persuade themselves that the Devil assayleth
their mind, and drives them unto many absurd, inconvenient, foolish, and
odious imaginations. Unto which noyful malady, attempting first incision or
cutting open of the vain for Phlebotomy or bloudletting about the ancles,
wholesome herbs are applied in medicine, which may deliver them from such
accidents: as namely these, Mugworth, Sauory, Penny royal or Pulioll royal,
Organum or Organie, Clary. Moreover among herbs which do ease and help
afflicted minds, and keep them harmless from the devil, or from conceiving
imagination of him, or from poisoned fumes which do annoy and corrupt the
brain, these be reckoned, Rue, Squilla or sea onyon.
namely Rue, Squilla or sea onion, of the juice whereof both the syrup, oxymel
and vinegar is confected; Osteritium, commonly called Magistrantia: Angelica or
Imperial: a kind of fenell giant, or of the herb that grows in Syria, the
juice whereof is called of the Apothecaries Asadulcis, Belzoe or Belzoin,
commonly called Benjamin, or rather Benzwin; Alisson, Madder.
the herb called the lesser Madder, wherewith they use to color skins, which
herb remedieth the madness of a dog, and heals them also that be bitten of
a mad dog, which affection, hurt and grief is not unlike to those which are
vexed of Satan, and incensed with furious raging: Rosemary.
Rosemary purges the house, and a stalk of this herb, or a stem or branch
of the body of this tree, hanged on the threshold, drives away devils, and
the infection of pestilence. Palmae Christi.
And so does also that herb which in every place is commonly known by the name
of Palma, or Palmus Christi, because the leaves of it are in fashion like unto
a hand stretched out. Things good against falling sickness
So likewise Corrall, Pyonie, Mistelden, do expel the falling sickness, if
they be either hanged on the neck, or given to drink in wine. Of which
remedies if any man think that some may be exhibited and ministered for the
driving out of devils: then, away with all vanity and heathnish superstition,
away with all babbling prayers, and such kind of outlandish or strange country
words, wherewith the professors of Magical Arts, do commonly bring to pass
their enchauntments and sorceries. Herbs have their effect of God.
If herbs have any effectual operation or power, as experience does plainly
show that they have, remember that they have it of the Lord. For all medicines
and medicinable stemmes and herbs, which are applied unto men's bodies, are not
effectual, nor have the effect of restoring health, in respect of themselves,
or by their own virtue, but by the gift and goodness of God. Therefore if thou
intend to do some good cure, by the help of herbs, do not put thy trust in
the herbs, but in God. For so shall thy enterprise have such good hap and
prosperous success in driving away diseases, as thou would wish to have.
Otherwise this endeavor goes wrong way to work, and the event thereof
deceives the skillful professor of the Art, when as he does neither wey in
his mind the power of the Creator, nor trusts in him of whom all things have
and receive their effect. Why king Asa obtained not his health.
2. Paral. 16.
2. Paral. 16.
For this cause Asa king of Judah, when he was afflicted and stricken with very
vehement grief and pain in his feet, and sought not God, nor asked remedy of
him, but trusted only to Physicians, he felt no ease nor help by their
fomentations, but dyed of the gowte, as the history does testify. For God
does not forbid men to use the help of Physicians, but to trust in them too
much, and to have no regard of him which makes hole and gives health, Psalm.
62.
and by whose gift all things are effectual. Moreover, those men do fondly
and superstitiously, and do attempt a thing not altogether differing from
idolatry, who in their enchauntments, use herbs consecrated with certain
counterfeit prayers, or do also labor to expel diseases with them by their
sorcerie. So they apply and use Fern or Brake gathered in the night season,
when the Sun entering into Cancer is at the highest, and the day at the
longest, Rue, Herbs must not be applied to Magical enchauntments.
three leaued grass, or Trifoyle, and Veruaine, mixed in their Magical
delusions, wherewith they deceive and blind the rude and ignorant people, to
the end they may scrape and get something from them, and beguile them of their
money. And yet for all that, those vain craftsmen do never become rich men.
This advertisement have I thought convenient and necessary to be annexed to
this treatise, O studious reader, to admonish every man to abstain from
Magical enchauntments, and to mark well and consider, of whom the aid,
succor, and safegarde of health and soundness must be asked and sought, and
in what manner (rejecting heathnish vanity and superstition) we ought to use
those pressed and ready remedies, which GOD of his great goodness and
bountiful liberality, has plentifully and abundantly granted unto us.

Of the majesty and power of the most highest, and how many diverse titles and
names are attributed and ascribed unto that one only substance of GOD,
distinct and divided into three equal persons. By the contemplation whereof,
man's mind conceiueth tranquillity and comfort, and most effectual faith and
trust toward God.

CHAP. 59.
The nature of God is unsearchable.
BEcause GOD that most excellent, most mighty and puissant nature, and the very
eternal mind or spirit free and clear from all mortal mixture and
congelation, extends himself so exceedingly, as cannot be measured, and
dilateth, stretches, and sheddeth forth himself so far on every side, as
cannot be comprehended, who rules and governs every thing, Ioh. 1.
and endueth them with his power: for that cause that same one deity, for this
virtue, power, excellent and mighty operation, is highly entitled with diverse
names, and nobly renowned, celebrated, and adorned with many glorious
testifications of praise and honor, both of the Hebrews, and also among other
nations that have had any knowledge of the Godhead. So in the sacred and holy
history the Lord is called El, Eloim, Adonai, Emanuel: God has sundry names.
Of the which names every one signifies peculiar strength, and might, and
attributes great power unto GOD, the which he exercises and executes on
things here beneath. For which cause when he set forth, published, and
ordained the commandments of his law to be carefully kept and observed of
the Jews, to the end that greater authority and higher worship might the
more honorably and reverently be given and ascribed unto him, he says,
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt and house
of bondage. Thou shall have no strange Gods before me. Iehoua, that is, Lord,
is a singular name of God.
By this holy and wonderful name, he ascribes unto himself the rule and
dominion of all things that have their being. For since that he is the
fountain, spring, and beginning of all universally, and since that he alone
has his permanent being and perpetual abiding by himself, he only gives
power and strength to all things to have their being and abiding. Wherefore it
is meet and decent, This name is assigned to God of his effect.
that all mortal men obey his commandments and ordinances, and be subject
unto his laws, and not seek protection, health, help, and salvation of any
other, but of him, nor turn themselves unto any other, but unto him, who only
is from everlasting. This name which the Hebrews call Iehoua, the Greeks
(...), the Latins call the same Existentem, that is, being. Therefore the
nomination of the divine substance, is derived of many things. Namely, of his
first and perpetual power and might to be, of his eternity, of his
magnificence, Majesty, rule and dominion, to the which all things are subject
and under obedience, and by which he rules all creatures, and guides and
governs them by his most effectual and principal providence. GOD has also
a name assigned unto him of his placabilitie or mildness, Ose. 3. Joel. 2.
Naum 1.
in that his displeasure is so soon appeased and so easily mitigated, of his
meekness, mercy, and compassion, which he uses toward men, which do
humbly beseech and lamentably desire his aid, his help and succor in their
necessity, distress and misery. For the hebrewe word, El, expresses the
clemency or mercy of God joined with his righteousness, Naum. 2. Ose. 11.
wherewith he comfort, strengthens, and preserves the godly, and
chastises, punishes, and corrects the wicked, and by putting his fear in
their hearts, calls them back from their wickedness. He is also named of
the light, wherewith he drives away the darkness, the blindness, ignorance,
and errors of the mind and understanding, and does illuminate and lighten
men's hearts which are full of darkness, with the light of his truth and
knowledge of him. For so says our Savior, Ioh. 8.
I am the light of the world, he that follows me; walks not in
darkness. Of the fire also, wherewith he enflameth and brenneth the godly
with the love of his divine Majesty, and endueth their minds with wholesome
and lively doctrine. But he consumes and utterly destroys his adversaries,
which neither reverence, worship, nor fear him, and brings them to naught,
even as the fire licketh up dry straw, or stubble, or such like light
nourishments thereof. Deuteronomy. 4.
Therefore Moses and Saint Paul do admonish us, to worship GOD reverently
and religiously, that is, with pure heart and good conscience, that we may
be accepted before him. For our GOD, says he, Hebr. 12.
is a consuming fire. Wherefore let every man behave himself lowly and
humbly before him. Mich. 6. Ose. 2.
GOD has also a name attributed unto him of his goodness, He is called God of
his goodness.
liberality, and bounteousnesse, which he uses toward his faithful
servants: whom he suffers not to be oppressed with any extreme necessity,
or to perish for want of things necessary: but in all things that they have
need of, he provides for them plentifully, and gives unto them abundantly
all things needful and profitable, both outward goods, and also tranquillity
of heart, quietness of mind, and peace of conscience. And he is called
Father, of his piety, loving kindness, and fatherly affection, wherewith he
embraces his children, and by his bountiful providence cares and provides
for their health, safety, and commodity. So the Lord says by the Prophet
Jeremy, Jeremy. 31. Malach. 1.
Thou shall call me father, and shall not cease to go after me. Again,
Jeremy. 1. Esa. 63.
I am become a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first borne, and I will
lea^e them forth by the brook of waters in the right way, and they shall not
fall: That is to say, they shall follow my steps, they shall go with me,
and they shall agree unto my will, and continue therein, and I will keep them
safe in all their ways, neither shall any harm happen unto them, no injury,
no wrong or despite shall be done unto them, no destruction, no calamity, no
misery shall be brought upon them. Moreover the Prophet Esaias does commemorate and
recoumpt those goodly, fair, glorious and triumphant titles, which God the
Father attributes unto Christ, that every man may know what Christ has done
for us by his nativity, death, and resurrection, and by his ascension into
Heaven. For thus the Prophet expresses the greatness of his might and power,
his magnificence, his excellency, his brightness, his glory, his honor, his
power, his highness, his majesty: Of the which every one redoundeth unto our
profit and commodity: whereupon he is called Emanuel, that is to say, What
Emanuel does signify.
Esai 9.
God with us. A child is borne unto us, and a Son is given unto us, and the
principality is upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful, The
giver of counsel, The mighty God, The Father of the world to come, The Prince
of peace. Ierem. 5.
Innumerable and infinite are the testifications of praise, honor, and glory,
which may be applied and ascribed unto his exceeding, infinite,
incomprehensible and surpassing majesty, yea even which he attributes unto
himself. Ose. 7. Esa. 61. Mat. 9.
So he calls himself the Physician, because he gives and assures the
health of soul and body, and cures, amendeth, and heals both the inward and
outward vices and corruption of men. He calls himself the Shepherd, Esai.
40. Ioh. 10. Psalm. 77. and 78. 1. Pet. 2.
because he very carefully, diligently, and watchfully looks unto his flock,
and gathers together the dispersed and scattere^ sheep, and feeds and
refreshes them with the wholesome pasture and food of his holy word. Ioh. 15.
A similitude of a vine.
So Christ calls himself the fruitful vine, and his Father the husbandman,
and us the branches growing and abiding in the vine, whom he purges and
pruneth, and cleanses from the vine the unprofitable stalks or stemmes, that
is to say, cutteth clean away superfluous lusts and covetous desires, to the
end they may bring forth more fruit. But those whom he finds unfruitful
and void of yearly profit and increase (by which Metaphor he means them
which bring forth no fruit of Faith) he adiudgeth and appoints them to the
fire, as unprofitable and dry withered shragges that have no juice, but are
utterly fruitelesse. A similitude of building.
1. Cor. ^.
Saint Paul also uses a like Metaphor derived of diligence in husbandry and
industry of building. For, privy hatred, variaunce, and strife being repressed
and abolished, wherewith the Corinthians were at discord among themselves, and
were puffed up and swelled one against another, in the behalf of their Doctors
and Teachers, (as we see men do oftentimes even now in these our days) he
admonishes and warns every one of them, that if they have gotten any holesom
learning, they do not attibute it to the Ministers, but ascribe it unto GOD
the author of all good things. The Apostles are Gods ministers.
We, says he, are helpers, and as it were hired workmen. We do Gods
business, to him do we approve our industry, for him do we take all this
pains. Ye are Gods husbandry, and as it were his ground, soil or land, which
we til, and make more apt for fruit, with sowing the seed of wholesome doctrine.
Ye are Gods building and workmanship, which arises and is erected up unto
his glory. But as concerning the great highness, honor, and Majesty of God,
nothing can be invented or devised, nothing can be thought, mused, or conceived
in the mind, so high, so magnificke, so renowned, so excellent, so glorious,
God is the perfect pattern and absolute ensample of virtue.
so surpassing fair and goodly, finally so perfect in every respect, and in all
kind of virtues, but the same ought worthyly to be referred and attributed
unto the essency or substance of God, or applied and ascribed unto him. The
wisdom of God.
Psalm. 66.104.107.147.
His wisdom being the ruler and governor of all things, wherewith he
preserves, supporteth, and sustayneth the whole universal world by his
counsel and providence, is incomprehensible, inexplicable; unspeakable, and
infinite, so that the order and orderly continuance of all things from time to
time so wonderfully, does draw all men into admiration and love of the Creator,
inflaming and provoking them to extol and magnify him for his excellent and
marvelous works. The strength and might of God. The power of God.
Psalm. 18 27. 62.
He might, strength, and power, wherewith he casts down and overthrows his
enemies, and wherewith he helps and maintayneth the godly, is inexpugnable
and invincible, and cannot be resisted. For there is nothing which does not
give place unto his strength. Esai. 25. Proverb. 8. Luc. 2.
No castles, no towers, no fortifications, no defenses, no fortresses or
bulwarks, how strong soever they be, can withstand his puissance. The
righteousness of God.
His Judgment and Justice, wherewith he distributeth to every man that which is
due, convenient, and requisite for him, and adiudgeth and renders rewards to
every man according to his worthiness and deserts, Psalm. 18.48.85.
is right, lawful, holy, sincere, pure, Psalm. 22.145.
laudable, and of excellent equity, so that no man (unless he be of depraved
judgment) has any cause to complain of the same. The mercy of God is a sure
refuge to sinners.
His mercy, compassion, pity, clemency, and mildness, which every one of the
Prophets do greatly commend and highly extol, is exceeding, and excels and
surpasses all his virtuous. For all men which fear his Justice flee unto his
Mercy as unto a sure sanctuary, and do humbly desire his help and succor.
This takes away despair and distrust out of men's fearful hearts and
consciences. With this the holy Spirit the Comforter does comfort, strengthen,
Psalm. 32.57. Colos. 2.
and raise up them that suddenly fall, and grafting and fixing in their hearts
assured hope and trust to obtain salvation, makes the^ come boldly unto the
throne of grace, to obtain mercy and receive remission of sins, Hebr. 4.
so that there is nothing which may be imputed unto them, there is none that
can accuse, appeach, or condemn them to be guilty of death. Saint Paul having
good proof and experience of this mercy of God, and being of a persecuter
chosen and admitted to be an Apostle, does support, stay, comfort, and
strengthen the doubtful and wavering minds of men, and provoke and allureth
them unto the mercy of God, even by his own notable and excellent example,
with these words: Whereas before, says he, 1. Tim. 1.
I was a persecuter, a blaspemer, a violent tyranne: I obtained mercy, because
I did it ignorauntly through unbelief. That is to say, void of faith, and not
knowing the counsel, purpose, and determination of God. For he supposed, when
he persecuted the Christians, that he did God good service. And further, to
the end that all men may have good consideration and careful regard of their
salvation, and that every man may assuredly know that his sins are purged and
cleansed away by the blood of Christ, 1. Ioh. 1.6.
Saint Paul with assured protestation and affirmance pronounces these words
to them that trust in him. Saint Paul praises and extolleth the mercy of God.
This is a sure saying and by all means worthy to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, of when I am chief. Saint Paul
provoke all men to commit themselves to the mercy of God.
But for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me he might first show all
clemency, to declare an ensample unto them, which should believe on him unto
everlasting life, that is to say, with hope and constant expectation of the
kingdom of heaven. And because this benefit ought wholly to be ascribed unto
our heavenly Father, and that he ought not to be robbed of his due praise, not
defrauded of the testification and percelebration of his infinite goodness,
he immediately annexeth these words: Unto the immortal King of World, unto
the invisible, and only wise God be honor, praise, and glory for ever, Amen.
Saint Peter also for the mystery of our redemption, attributes the like praise
1. Pet. 1.
Saint Peter extolleth the mercy of God exceedingly.
Unto God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his
abundant mercy regenerated us unto a lively hope, by this that Jesus Christ
rose again from the dead, to an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that
cannot fade nor perish, laid up in heaven toward us: that is to say, for the
love of us and for our sakes. Tit. 3.
For after that the kindness, and love and humanity of God our Savior
toward man appeared, not for any of our deserts, nor for the works of
righteousness which we wrought, but according to his mercy he saved us by the
fountain of regeneration and renewing of the holy Spirit, which he has shed
forth richly by Jesus Christ our Savior, that we being justified by his
grace, might be made heirs according to the hope of everlasting life: which
saying is certain true and undoubted, and to be infixed and surely kept by
all means in every man's mind. Seeing therefore that the love and ready
kindness of God is so great, his favor, charity, his fatherly dear and tender
affection toward mankind is such, that he has not only given us the use
and commodity of all things, but also (which far exceeds these benefits)
has bestowed even his only beloved Son for the redemption of man, that by
the death and resurrection of Christ, man might obtain reconciliation and
grace: it is meet and decent, and both equity, and thankfulness for such a
benefit bestowed on us, does require, that every one of us do put al our whole
hope, trust and confidence in him, Our life must be approved unto God.
and magnify him with most high and excellent praises, and endeavor to approve
our conversation, and lead our lives acceptable before him, and please him with
Faith, not an idle and vain Faith, Faith is adorned with fruits.
but that which is sustained, declared, environed, and accompanied with the
works of charity: and denying and forsaking ungodliness, and rejecting carnal
lusts and worldly desires, consecrat our selves wholly unto him, and live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.
Looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the great God and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
iniquity, and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself zealous and fervent
follower of good works: For by framing our lives and ordering our conversation
after this manner, and by the operation and consolation of the holy Spirit the
Comforter given unto us and dwelling in us, Romans 5.
peace, tranquillity, and sure safety shall be nourished and stablished in our
hearts and consciences, and dread and fear of death being shaken off and
driven away, Christ being our leader and guide, our captain and forerunner, we
shall enter into immortality, and the blessed and everlasting mansions. And
indeed death is not the destruction of the body, Death is the renewing of life.
but the renewing of it. It is not the extinguishment or perishing of nature,
but it is the porche and door of the other far better life to come, and the
very gate and first entry unto the heavenly City, and the entrance and way
unto everlasting life. Of the certainty whereof no man has cause to doubt, or
mistrust the promises of God, when as the truth it self, which is infallible
and never falls or deceives, does faithfully perform that which it has
promised. God is true in his promises.
For God is true, and every man is a liar, that is, God saileth no man,
deceives no man, nor disappointeth any man of his hope and expectation. Psalm.
62.116.
He is no vain promiser nor unfaithful promis-keeper, as men use to be, which
dissolve leagues and alliance, break covenants, and with a kind of old crafty
subtilty, wind themselves out of the bonds of their promises, and slip from
their word, but he is constant, steadfast, sure, and very faithfully performs
and accomplisheth that which he has promised, and which he has undertaken to
bring to pass. But every man is a liar, that is to say, deceitful, slippery,
light, inconstant, mutable, doubtful, wavering, variable, The exposition of
these words (man is a liar.)
fraudulent, vain, crafty, sly, unfaithful, and which speaks one thing
standing, and another sitting, so that no man may safely trust him. Which vices
are very far from the Majesty of God, yea so far as cannot be expressed,
because that no humane affections can be inci^ent unto him. Therefore we must
with most assured confidence trust, lean, and clean unto him, specially and
principally, and direct and refer all our prayers requests, hope, In danger
and distres we must flee to God.
and desires unto him only, whenever either dangers or calamities are
imminent, or when death and our extreme conflict is even at hand. For by his
favor, presence, and present help, al things are mittigated, and made mild,
easy and tolerable, and al things are of sour, grievous and bitter, made
sweet, delectable, and pleasant. By sure trust in him the fear of death is
driven away, and al terror and trembling is abolished out of our hearts. For the
love of him we contemn and despise the fawning delights and flattering
pleasures of this life. By the power and help of him we endure and patiently
suffer miseries, damages, and inconveniences, which compass, besiege, and
assail us every moment. With firmly stablished hope in him and constant
expectation of immortality we^ being supported and comforted, do willingly,
gladly, and chearefully flit and depart from the prison of this life and short
time of our abiding here, and by Christ our guide and leader we are conducted
and brought unto those eternal and blessed dwelling places. And with less
grief and greater joy, are we separa^ from the society of the body, and from
the course and standing place of this life: And our last conflict and wrestling
with death, (in which for the most part mistrust and despair assaileth the
conscience) makes us to have the less carfulness, heaviness, and
perplexity, because we are sure, 1. Tim. 2.
that redemption and grace i^ obtained for us by the merit of Christ. The death
of Christ washes away our sins.
For the Mediator between God and man Jesus Christ has reconciled us unto his
father, and with his blood has washed away our sins, and by the power of his
resurrection has given (...) righteousness: 1. Ioh 2.
For Christ was delivered for our sins, as Saint Paul says. Romans 4.
And was raised for the justification of us. The resurrection of Christ
justifies us.
So that we being confirmed and assured by the resurrection of Christ, as by a
sure pledge, do trust that we shall be saved and raised up by his power. For
he, as the Apostle testifies, Philip. 3.
Will transform our vile body, and make it of like fashion unto his glorious
body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things
to himself. For although, according to the doctrine of Saint Paul, 2. Cor 4.
and 5.
This our earthly mansion of this tabernacle must be destroyed, even as a
ruinous house, which is dissolved, when the ioints and ^enons are loosed, and
the framing together of the ^afters is plucked asunder: yet that building which
we have of God, is not made with hands, but eternal in heaven. For God which
has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by him, and shall make
us partakers of the common resurrection; Which most certain hope brings this
to pass, that we being less deprived, naked, or destitute do suffer our
selves to be withdrawn and removed from hence.

FINIS.
A Table of all the Chapters contained in this exhortation.
1 WE must chiefly fasten our eyes upon God through Christ, and lift up our
mind unto him. page 1 2 How great benefits God the Creator of ^ll things
has bestowed upon man. p. 2 3 Nothing more dear in the sight of God then man,
and that all things are created for the use of man. p. 4 4 How great the
thankefulnes of man toward God ought to be. p. ^ 5 What baptism avails unto
man, and wh^ we are taught thereby. p. 7 6 We must love God first and chiefly,
and then our neighbor. p. 9 7 How great the loving kindness and natural
affection of children ought to be toward the^ parents. p. 10 8 How every one
should behave himself toward his master that instructs him. p. 11 9 Unto
what persons in human society honor and reverence must chiefly be given. p.
13 10 What commodity instruction brings to a man, and of what manner and sort
it ought to be. p. 15 11 Out of what books we must learn integrity of
manners, honest behavior, and good precepts of life. p. 21 12 What authors are
most profitable for the attayning of eloquence, and to adorn the mind, and
what arts must chiefly be embraced p. 27 13 Judgment or opinions concerning
heathen and profane writers. p. 29 14 The office and d^ty of a Poet, and what
praefite studious youth, and men also of good years, may reap by reading of
Poets p. 30 15 Of the use and commodity of historians. p. 32 16 Of Comedies. p.
34 17 Of eloquence and skillfull utterance, which in profitable and necessary
for every man, of what language soever he be. p. 36 18 To what sciences and
worthy knowledge the studies of humanity open us the way. p. 37 19 We must
addict our selves and cleave surely unto one certain and determined kind of
learning. p. 4^ 20. What studies and ocupations be painful and not
profitable, and what studies be hurtful and pernicious. p. 42 21 We ought to
have us great (...) and regard of the soul and mind, as of the body, yea
rather much more. p. 46 22 What help must be used for the body that it may
continue in perfect health. p. 49 23 Meats must be received of the liberality
and bounteousnesse of God with great thankfulness and thanksgiving. p. 53 24
How we must have regard of Hospitality. p. 56 25 Of the care of household
wealth (...) houskeeping, and the gouernauce thereof. p. 62 26 The moderation
and measurable use of steeping and waking. p. 69 27 What good or hurt comes
of repl^tion and abstinence, and finally of the (...) ^ much laxatiue or of the
contrary. p. 73 28. Studious and politic persons must oftentimes purge the
pores by which the excrements are ^cuted. p. 76 29 Wholesome precepts necessary
and requisite as well for the mind as for the body. p. 80 30 A man must have
respect of his estimation and good name. p. 82 31 The appeasing and pacifying
of discord and dissension is praise worthy. p. 92 32 Let no man be proud in
prosperity, nor discomforted in adversity, but rest and stay himself upon the
providence of God. p. 96 33 Curiosity must be eschewed. p. 97 34 Moderation in
apparel. p. 100 35 Let no man despise that state, lotte or condition that is
appointed unto him. p. 102 36 The society company and familiarity of dishonest
and wicked persons to be eschewed. p. 109 37 The tongue must be restrained only
from filthy talk but also from idle words. p. 111 38 In words and in every
action of life, falsehood and feining is detestable. p. 116 39 The fond and
blind love of a man's self and vain persuasion of learning must be abandoned.
p. 117 40 A man must have choice and difference of familiars and friends. p.
124 41 Do not rashly offer thy self to be suerty for any man. p. 127 42
Flatterers must be eschewed. p. 128 43 Certain precepts convenient and
profitable to the leading of a man's life well, happily and prosperously. p. 132
44 Of exercise whereby the wearied strength both of mind and body is recreated.
p. 134 45 In all exploits good aduisement must be our counsailour. p. 151 46
Do not those things, whereof thou art in doubt. p. 152 47 The rewards of
virtue and vice. p. 154 48 The beginning of all our actions must we take of
God. p. 155 49 The dawning of the day and betimes in the morning is the most
meetest and convenient time to order, dispose, and prepare the mind and lift up
the heart unto God. p. 157 50 In the end of the day the mind must give account
of such dread as were done that day. p. 159 51 Let no man flatter his own
faults, or extenuate his offenses. p. 160 52 Whatsoever good thing happens
unto us, we must ascribe the same to God. p. 164 53 Discretion, aduisement and
consideration must be had in choosing the kind of life. p. 166 54 Of the
lawful society of matrimony. p. 169 55 Whatsoever society consists not
within the limits of wedlock, is reproueable and disagreeable from lawful
matrimony. p. 175 56 How and by what means it may be obtained and brought to
pass, that death be not dreadful and terrible to a man of lewd and naughty
nature. p. 179 57 Of the greatness, highness, majesty and power of the name
of Jesus Christ, by which only magical enchauntmentes must be resisted, and
illusions of devils overcome, driven away, and vanquished, and whatsoever other
damages, hurts or inconveniences happen to be done either to the mind or to
the body, must be expelled and avoided. p. 189 58 Whether herbs and precious
stones be of any power or auaileabe efficacy in driving away devils, and
expelling other hurtful things. p. 206 59 Of the majesty and power of the
most highest, and how many diverse titles and names are ascribed and attributed
to that one only substance of God, distinct and divided into three equal
persons. By the contemplation whereof, man's mind conceiueth traquillity, and
comfort and most effectual faith and trust toward God. p. 212
The end of the Table.

