AN ITALIAN GRAMMAR; WRITTEN IN LATIN BY SCIPIO LENTVLO A NEAPOLITANE:

And turned in English: By H. G.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackefrieres.

1575.

(...) therein all the rules that may serve for the better understanding of that
tongue, are so well set forth, and in so good order disposed, with so apt
examples, and with that brevity and facility, as none other written before of
that matter in any tongue that I have seen, as I have seen diverse, is (in my
judgment) comparable unto it. Now such as it is, rudely attired with this
english habit, I betake unto your favorable acceptance as a token of the
dutiful good will I bear you. And as a pledge of the service and duty I owe
to your parents. And so humble I take my leave. the 4, of December 1574.

Yours wholy at commandment HENRY GRANTHAN.

Of the Letters.
The letters which the Italians use, are twenty. A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I,
L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, Z.

These are divided in to vouelles, A, E, I, O, V: and into consonantes, which
are the rest.

Howbeit, H is no letter: but a sign of aspiration, or dravving of the
breathe.

But V, is somtymes a consonant: as in these words. Venere, Venus: Verita,
Truth: Virtu, Virtue: Vita, Life.

The like is I, for although the letter G, be added to words, that with the
latins do begin with Iu or Ia, Io or Ie: as in Giouanni, Iohne: Giusto, Just:
Giesu, Jesus: Giasone, Jason: yet in pronouncing of the latter vouel the sound
is only hard And the first co^sonant by that means is in reason conceived

Of the use of the Letters.
First of letters are framed syllables, and of syllables are made words, and
that of diverse diversely.

Vouelles may be put in the beginning, midst, and end of a word: as does
appear by this word, Amore, Love.

But co^sonantes are set, either in the beginning, or in the midst of a
word, and in the end very seldom, as hereafter is shevved.

Further, many consonantes are put in syllables, before other consonantes: as
B, before R, in breue in brief: Tenebre, Darkness: Libro, a Book. And before
L, as in Oblio, Forgeatfulnesse: Obliquo, Crooked: Obligo, Bond or duty.

C before R, as in Crudele, Cruel: Credo, I believe: And before L, as in
Clamore, Clamor or crying out: Inclito, Renoumed: Inclinato and Inchinato,
Inclined: Concludo and Conchiudo, I conclude: so Conclusione and not
Conchiusione, is rightly said.

D before R, as in Dritto, Right: Padre, a Father: Madre, a Mother: Ladro, a
Thief.

F before R, as in Frutto, Fruit: Fratello, a Brother: Fraud, Fraud or
disceite.

G before N, as in Benigno, benign: ordigno, an instrument: Ingegno, vvyt:
Lamagna, Almaigne: Compagno, a compaignion. And before R, as in Gratia, grace
or favor: Grato, thankful: Grave, grave. And before L, as in Gloria, glory:
Consiglio, Counsel.

P before R, as in Pregio, the price: Sempre, always: Prudente, prudent:
Lepre, a hare. And before L, as in Contemplo, I do contemplate, or behold
diligently: Multiplico, I do multiply.

S before B, as in Sbassame^to, an imbasing: Shandito, a banished man. And
before C, as in Scacciato, put away: Nasco I spring or am borne: Pasco, I
feed. And before D, as in Sdegno, anger or disdain: Sdrucito, rypte. And
before F, as in Sfacendato, unoccupied: Sfodrato, drawn or unsheathed (as a
svvorde). And before G, as in Sgomento, I fear: Sganno, I do deliver from
disceite. And before L, as in Sleale, unfaithful: Slegato, unbound. And
before M, as Smembrato, disme^bred: Smorto, pale or vvanne. And before N, as in
Sneruo, to debilitate or make feoble: Snello, nymble: Snodo, I do vnknitt. And
before P, as in Spirito, a spirit: Speranza, hope. And before Q, as in
Squalido, sluttishe: Squame, the skale of a fish. And before R, as in
Sregolato, unruled. And before T, as in Studio, study.

T before R, as in Tremo, I tremble: Tronco, the stumpe or stem of a tree:
Tranquillita, tranquillitye or rest.

But the letter Z, neither goes before, neither yet follovveth an other
consonant in one self syllable.

Further, tovvching that which belongethe to the letters, it is very
necessary to know, by what reason the letters consonantes are doubled in a
word: the which I will shevve by order of the letters as briefly as I can,
that thereby the same may the more easily be committed to memory.

B, therefore is doubled in these words, Dubbio, a doubt: Debbo, I ought, also
Deggio: Sabbia, gravel: Scabbia, the skabbe: Abbete, a fyr tree: Habbia, he
has, and also Haggia: Robba, gooddes. and it is said, Rubare, to steal: But
Labbro, a lip: Fabbro, a carpenter: Libbro, a book: Ebbro, dronke: may
either be written thus, or with a single B. It is also doubled in the third
persons singular and plural of the preter imperfectense of the subiunctiue
mode: as Amerebbe and Amerebbono, Valerebbe and Valerebbono, Leggerebbe, and
Leggerebbono, Vdirebbe and Vdirebbono: that is, he should love, they should love,
he should be vvorth, they should be vvorth: he should read, thy should read: he
should hear, they should hear. Again it is doubled in this word Obbietto,
which is also said Oggetto, that is, the object. Also in many verbes, which
are compound with the prepositio^ Ad, changing the letter D, into B, vvher
with the simple words do begin, as Abbarbaglio, that is, I do dasell:
Abbraccio, I do embrace: There is excluded Abondo, that is, I do abbounde: and
Abandono, I do forsake.

C is doubled in these words, which are taken from the latin, having the
letter X, in the first syllable: and of excellens, is made Eccellente, of
excepto, Eccetto, and of exceptio, Eccettione. And in these words Occhio an
eye, Ginocchio, a knee: which have in the plural Occhi, and Ginocchi: so
Finocchio, Fennel, and Finocchi. But here I will note by the way, that the
syllable Chi, is to be pronounced more mildely in those words, then in
Stocchi, arming swords: Fiocchi, locks of hear or vvoll, the which has
otherwise in the singular number Stocco and Fiocco. But this manner of
pronunciation, who can teach by vvriting? Further this letter is doubled in
Sacco a sack, Giaccio I lie, Ghiaccio, a froste. Lykevvyse in verbes compound
with the preposition AD, the letter D being changed in to C, as we said of
late of the letter B, as Accolgo, I do vvelcome: Accenno, I do nop. Accoppio, I
do cople. Lastly in verbes beginning with RA, as Racconciare, to repair:
Racommandare, to recommende.

Further, D is doubled in Cadde, which is the preterperfectense of the
indicative mode, and third person singular, of the verb Cado or Caggio, I
fall: and in Caddero, vhich is of the plural number. It is doubled also in
verbes compounde with the preposition AD, as are Adduco, I bring forth:
Addormo, I fall on sleep: Addolcisco, I do svveeten: So likevvyse in the verb
Raddolcire. There are that do double it also in the verb Traduco, but that is
not allowed of with some.

Also, F is doubled in these words Offesa, Vfficio, Beffe, Affanno, and very
manny such like. Likewise in verbes compounde with the preposition A D, as
Affermo, I affirm: Affretto, I do make haste. The same is to be understood of
verbes compound with the preposition D I, as Differisco, Diffido, Diffinisco.
And so likewise of many verbes, taking their original from latin verbes that
have in the first syllable the preposition O B, B being changed into F, in
this wise, Offero, Offendo, Offusco.

Besides, G is wont to be doubled, so often as I and O, or I and A, do meet
together in a dipthonge, so that they make one syllable: as is seen in these
words, Saggio, Saggia, sage or wise, which have in the plural Saggi and
Sagge. Here is to be noted that the letter I of this last word Sagge, and
such like, is of very many wrongfully placed between G and E, to the end they
may say Saggie, Piaggie, Greggie: where they are to say Sagge, wise,
Piagge, Brymmes or Brinkes, Gregge, flocks. But contrary wise when I and O,
do make two syllables, the G that goes before them shall be single, as
Priuilegio, Regio, Litigio, Vestigio: we do say also Dionigio and Dionigi,
Dennys, Ambrogio and Ambrosio. Neither is double G, vvritte^ in those words,
that do end two vvayes in I, as are Parisi and Parigi Parrys, Tunisi and
Tunigi, Luisi and Luigi, Malagisi and Malagigi. But it is doubled in those that
come from the latin ending in X, as Grex, from whence Gregge or Greggia,
poetical: from Lex, Leg: But from Fex, is made Feccia, because the latin
has in the genitive singular Fecis. And from Rex, is made Re, asvvell in the
singular as in the plural number, although Poets may say somtymes in the
plural Regi. It is doubled also in certain verbes ending in Go, as Leggo,
Correggo, Veggo and also Veggio. In fine, it is doubled in verbes compounde
with the preposition A D, such as are Agghiaccio, Aggiungo, Agguaglio, and
Aggiornarsi.

There follovveth L, which is found double in these words, Bello, Castello,
Fratello, Fallo, Cauallo, Metallo, and many such like. Further, it is found
doubled in the third persons singular of the preterperfectense of the
indicative mode, in those verbes that are of the first and fourth conjugation,
when in the end there is added an article, as Amollo, Vdillo. It is doubled
also in verbes compounde with the preposition A D, as Allargo, Alleuio,
Alloggio, Alletto, Allento, The self same is done in verbes whereunto there
is set before Ra, as is Rallento, Rallegro, Rallumo. Also I will not omit how
in prose the most part do use to write, Dello, Allo, Dallo, Delli, Alli,
Dalli, Della, Alla, Dalla, Delle, All, and Dalle: for De lo, A lo, Da lo, De
li, etc. as Poets do write. But Allui, Dallui, and such like, I would not
use, although very many do allow of them.

As concerning the letter M, it is doubled in these words. Damma, Epigramma,
Fiamma, Gemma, Gierusalemme, Boemme. Also it is doubled when Mi is put to a
verb in the end: as Emmi, it is to me: Dammi, give me: Fammi, do me. Again in
the first persons of the plural number, of the preterperfectense of the
indicative mode: As Amammo, we have loved: Valemmo, we have been worth:
Leggemmo, we have read: Vdimmo, we have hard: Fummo, we have been. Also
in verbes compounde with the preposition A D, as Ammaestro, I do teach:
Ammonisco, I do Admonish: Ammiro, I marvel. We say Rammentare, to call to
remembrance.

Further, N is doubled in these noumes: Donna, Madonna, Sonna, Anno, Affanno,
Iuganno, Senno, Innocente. It is doubled also in these words which are
derived from the latin noumes, vvherin M goes before N, as of Somnus Sonno,
Columna Colonna, Damnum Danno, Scamnum Scanno, Autamnus Autonno, and such
other like. It happens likewise so in the third persons plural, of the
presentense, of the indicative mode, of verbes that in the first person are of
one syllable: wherefore Ho, I have, has Hanno, they have: Sto, I stand, has
Stanno, they stand: Fo, I do or make, has Fanno, They do or make: Do, I
give, has Danno, they give. There is excepted So I am, which has Sono (They
are) with a single N. The third persons plural of the future tense, in the
indicative mode, have also a double N, as Ameranno, they shall love, Valeranno,
they shall be vvorth: Leggeranno, and Vdiranno. Lykevvyse these
preterperfectenses in the singular number shall be vvritte^ with double N,
Venni, I have come: Venne he has come: Tenni, I have hilde: Ten, he has
hilde: in the plural, Vennero, they have come: Tennero, they have hilde.
Again in verbes compounde with the preposition AD, as Annottarsi, To wax
night: Annidarsi, To be neasted: Annuntio, I do tell tydinges: Annullare, to
Adnull. Lastly it is doubled in verbes compounde with the preposition In, as
Innouare, and Innamorarsi.

Now follovveth P, which is doubled in these words: Zoppo, lame: Appetito,
an appetite: Doppio, double: Coppia, as Vna coppia d'huomini da been, A couple
of honest men: Doppo After, howbeit Poets do write Dopo. It is doubled also
in these preterperfectenses: Ruppi, I have broken: Ruppe, he has broken:
Ruppero, they have broken. Seppi, I have known: Seppe, he has known:
Seppero, they have known. So Sappia I may know: Sappiamo, we may know:
Sappiate, you may know, Sappiano, they may know. Again it is doubled in
certain noumes proper: as Filippo, Aristippo, Egesippo, Ippolito, Ippodamia,
Gioseppe. Also in verbes compounde with the preposition AD, as Approuo,
Appare. And in these that are compounde with RA, as Rapporto, I report:
Rappello, I repeal or call back. And to conclude, in the verb Oppongo, Ilaye
against.

Neither vvil I ouerpasse the letter Q, for although it be not doubled in any
word, nevertheless in these words Acqua, water, Acque waters: Giacqui, I
have layne: Giacque, he has layne: Giacquero, they have layne: and in like
sort of others that have C before Q, it seems in the pronouncing to have a
sound as though the Q were double. The same does happen of these verbes
Nocqui, I have hurt: Nocque, he has hurt: Nocquero, they have hurt: Nacqui, I
have been borne: Nacque, he has been borne: Nacquero, they have been borne:
Piacqui, I have pleased: Piacque, he has pleased: Piacquero, they have
pleased. Again, in the verbes Acquisto, I get: Acqueto, as mi acqueto, I do
quiet me.

R is found diversely doubled in words: as first in verbes whose third
persons singular of the present tense in the indicative mode do end in Re,
such as are Soccorre, he does succor: Abborre, he does abhor: Corre, he
runs. There is excepted More, he dies. It is furthermore doubled in verbes,
out of whose midst, for elegancy of speech, there is taken away the
syllable Ne, and Glie, which did go before the letter R, and an other R added
in their place: whereupon, of Tenero is made Terro, I shall hold: of Venero
is made Verro, I shall come: of Cogliero Corro, I shall gather: Cogliere,
Corre, to gather: Venerei, Verrei, I should come: It is also doubled in these
words, Carro, a carte: Torre, a tovver: Terra, Arra, Orrendo, which are
noumes: and in verbes, as Narro, I shevve: Atterro, I cast to the ground:
Serro, I shut: Afferro, I grype or hold fast: Sotterro, I put in to the
ground. Lastly in verbes compounde with the preposition AD, as Arrestarsi, to
be arrested: Arrischio, I do hasarde: Arriuo, I do arrive: Arricchire, to
enryche: Arrostisco, I do roste.

S is also doubled, for we say Cassa, a chest: Osso, a bone: Fosso, a dyche.
There are also verbes, as Posso, I can: Arrossisco, I blushe. Furthermore it is
doubled in these noumes which are taken from the latin words, having the
letter X: and by that means of Saxum, is made Sasso, a stone: of Luxuria,
Lussuria lust: of Fixus, Fisso, and Fitto fixed: of Alexander, Alessandro: of
Dixit, Disse, he has said: of Vixi, Vissi, I have lyved: of Rexi, Ressi, I
have ruled: of Texo, Tesso, I do vveave. Again it is doubled in noumes that
come from the latins having P, and S: as for Ipse, we may say Esso, he: for
Gypsum, Gesso, plaster: for scripsit, Scrisse, he has vvritte^. But P, is
retained in these noumes proper, Ipsifile, Ipsicratea, and Capsa the proper
name of a cittye. And I shall note by the way, how P is taken away, when
it goes before the letter S, as Salmo for Psalmus. Further, it is doubled in
words that come from the latin, having B before S, as Assoluto from Absolutus
absolute: Asserto from absorptus, supped up. Assente from Absens, absent.
Astemio from abstemius, that absteineth from drink. Assentio from absyntium,
vvormevvood. It is doubled also in the last syllable of the preter
imperfectense of the optatiue mode, singular number: as Amassi, I did love, or
thou did love: Amasse, he did love: and in like sort in the other
coniugations. And also when it is of the plural number, in a middle syllable:
as Amassimo, we did love, Amassero, they did love. Lykevvise in the
preterperfectense of the indicative mode, of verbes of the third coniugatio^:
as Percossi, I have stryken: Percosse, he has stryken: Percossero, they have
stryken. Again in verbes compounde with the preposition AD, as Assaggio, I do
assaye: Assalto, I do assault: Assicuro, I do assuer: Assegno, I do assygne:
Assordo, I make deaf: Assomiglio, I do resemble. We say Rassumo, I take
again: and Rassetto, I do set or agree.

Touching the letter T, it is found also doubled in these words which come
from the latin, having B C, or P, before T: hereupon it is, that for Obtusus
we say Ottuso, dull or blunt: for obtineo Ottengo, I do obtain: for octo
Otto eight: for doctus Dotto learned: for factus Fatto done or made: for
baptismus Battesimo baptysme: for septe^ Set seven: for ruptus Rotto broken:
and for corruptus Corrotto corrupt. Howbeit Petrarke has written Rapto of
raptus, a snatching or taking a way: VVherby he would make a difference
between the noume Rapto, and the aduerbe Ratto, svvyftly. It is doubled again
in these diminutiues, Poueretto, a little pour vvretche: Libretto, a little
book: Fanciulletto, a little child: Boschetto, a little vvood. And to
conclude, in verbes compounde with the preposition AD, as Attristo, I make
sorrovvfull: Atterro, I cast to the ground, etc.

V is doubled in these verbes Auue^tarsi, to be cast. Auuertire, to aduertyse
or admonish. Auuicinarsi, to Approach. Auuedersi, to be advvares. Auuotirsi,
to make a vow. Auualersi, to use any thing of an others or an others travel.
Notvvithstanding, Auenire and not Auuenire, is to be written as many will
have it: For because Auuenire, is not derived from the verb Aduenio, but from
the verb Euenit, to happen or come to pass: the which signification does
aptly agree to Auenire.

Further, tovvching the letters X, Y, and K: we ought not to be ignorant,
how they are in no use with the Italia^s, for that they are not no^bred
emo^gest the other letters. For in stead of Y, they use I: for K, C: and for
X, they use S: as we have shevved before, either doubled in the midst of a
word, or sometimes single in the midst of a word, and alvvayes single in
the beginning. And therefore in what belongs to the beginning, we say
Senocrate, for Xenocrates: Senofonte for Xenophon: and Serse for Xerses.

Lastly the letter Z, which is the last of all the letters, that the Italians
do use, is doubled when it is placed between two vouelles: as in Bellezza,
Dolcezza, Gentilezza. But when any consonant goes before it, then is it put
single: as in Speranza, Partenza, Licenza, Sapienza. But here is to be noted,
that Z is not rightly doubled in this word Mezo, although it be between two
vouelles: Notvvithstanding Petrarke has done otherways, being brought
thereunto for necessities sake in thendes of his verses, for the keeping of his
rysme. For when we pronounce Mezo, it appears plainly (who that observes
the Italian pronunciation) not to be pronounced like unto Pezzo, a piece:
Auezzo, accustomed, and such like. And because sometimes, not only like
consonantes are doubled in a word, but also diverse: and not only doubled,
but are found also tripled: therefore I do judge it necessary to declare the
reason thereof. This therefore is first to be considred, how that the Italian
speech does not suffer two like consonantes to be put before words. For if
any should thus write, Ssoperbo, Vuenere, he should not do Italian like. And
yet, there is no lack, but that two diverse consonantes may be set before in
very many words, as may be seen in Spero, Studio, Scarico, Credo, Prezzo.
Yea, and somtymes three also are found before in Italian words: as in
Strada, Strale, Stratagema, Strano, Stringo, Stretto, Sprezzo, Splendore,
Splendido, Scriuo. Further, there cannot be put three diverse consonantes in
the midst of a word, and therefore we say not, Constante, Transformo,
Transmuto, Obstacolo, Substegno, Postposto: But Costante, Trasformo, Trasmuto,
Ostacolo, Sostegno, Posposto: There are excepted, Mostro, Sempre, Sepolero,
Tempro, Abbreuio, Accresco, Attrauerso.

Moreover, H thorough use of a known aspiration, ought not to remain
unknown: and how that of the most Italian vvriters it is put almost in to
all those words, that we receive from the latins, and in the which the
latins them selves do use an aspiration: as in Huomo, from homo: Humano, from
humanus: Ho, from Habeo, etc. But since in our age the cause is taken away,
why the use of a known aspiration is sought for, suerly me thinks
theffecte ought to cesse: that is, that H be no more put in to Italian words
(as we do pronounce very fevve of them) for a sign of a more gross spirit.
And notvvithstanding that the use of this aspiration seems to me, to be
coupled to fevve words, yet suerly it is chiefly to be retained in this
word Huomo, to hide the foulness, that this dipthonge VO, (being placed as
it were in the head) seems to bring unto this noume. Further, it is not to
be removed from this verb Ho, I have: and that for a difference to be had,
between that Ho and O, an aduerbe of calling, and O, a voice of separation.
Again, between Ha, (he has) and A, the preposition serving to the Dative
case. Lastly, to the end it may be preserved in these syllables, Che, Chi, Ghe,
Ghi, in the which assuredly there is a sign of a more gross spirit, vvherby
these syllables do differ from them which have Ce, Ci, Ge, Gi. For what the
difference is, whether way thou shall pronovvnce: they rightlye know, that
have the Italian manner of pronouncing.

Touching that which does belong to the vouelles, it is to be known how
they do cleave together in dipthonges: which are AV: as Aura, Laura, Mauro.

EV, as Euro, thest vvinde: Sceuro, divided or separated:

IE, as Viene, he comes: Brieue, Brief: Tiene, he holds: Ieri, yesterdaye:
Pieno full: Fieno heye.

IA, as Cianciare, to babble: Ciance, bablinges or trifles: Bianco, white:
Caccia, hunting.

IO, as Fiore, a flovver: Sciocco, folyshe: Sciolgo, I loose: Scioperato,
unoccupied.

IV, as Ciurma, a company: Schiuma, frothe or skume: Piu, more: Giu, down.

IVO, as Figliuolo, a son: Giuoco, play or sport.

VO, as Huomo, a man: Vopo, need: Vouo, an egg: Buono, good: Cuoco, a cook.

VI, as Guida, a guide: Piacqui, I have pleased: Acquisto, I geat: Quinto, five.

VE, as Piacque, It has pleased: Acque waters: Adunque, Then or therefore,
Lingue, tongues.

VA, as Acqua, water: Lingua, a tongue: Guadagno, gain.

AI, as Fai, thou make: Stai, thou stand: Amai, I have loved: Lai,
lamentacions: Farai, thou shall make.

VAI, as Guai, vvoose, or sorrovves.

IEI, as Miei, mine.

EI, as Lei, she: Costei, this vvoma^: Sei, be thou.

VOI, as Tuoi, thine: Suoi, there is: Buoi, oxen: Vuoi, vvylt thou.

Here is to be remembered, that although Tuo, Suo, Io, Lei, Lui, Noi, Voi,
Tuoi, Suoi, Miei, Vuoi, Buoi, for the most part be of one syllable, asvvell in
prose as in verse, yet tovvching verse, they are alvvayes in the end two
syllables.

Neither will I omyt how far the pronounciation of vouelles, is to be
observed: O and E are pronounced somtymes more darkely, and somtymes more
clearly. And most darkely in these words Amore, Color, Ardore, and such
like. But E is pronounced more clearly in this word Erba: and O, in this
word Ottima. Nevertheless the manner of pronouncing, cannot be shevved by
vvriting: wherefore it is to be learned of him, that has the Italian tongue.

The Italian speech has certain articles, which are set before noumes
improper: vvherof some be masculine, and some feminine: and that, as well in the
singular: as in the plural number, as herafter appears.

Articles. Masculine Singular number. Il, lo: the, him, it.
Plural number. i, li, gli: the, them.

Feminine Sing. nom. La: the, her, it.
Plur. nom. Le: the, them.



It lacks cases: vvherin as it is like unto the Hebrew tongue, so is it
unlike, either to the Greek, or Latin tongues. VVerfore in varying of the
articles, by sundry cases, it takes these prepositions: De for the genitive: A
for the dative, and Da for the ablative. In the vocative, it uses for a sign
of that case O, an aduerbe of calling. In the nominative and accusative,
Articles are also used: as hereafter it may appear.

Articles. Masculine. Singular number. Nominative: Il, lo: the, it. Genitive:
Del, dello: of the, him, it. Dative: Al, allo: to the, him, it. Accusative: il,
lo: him, it Vocative: o, o. Ablative, Dal, dallo: from the, him, it.
Plur. nomb. Nomi. i, li, gli: the. Geni. de i, de'delli, degli: of the, the.
Dati. a i, a', alli, a gli: to the, the. Accu. i, li. gli: the, them. Voca. o,
o. Abla. da i, da', dalli, dagli: from the, them.

Feminine. Sing. nomb. Nomin. la: the, it. Geni. della, or de la: of the, her,
it. Dati. alla, or a la: to the, her, it. Accu. la: the, her, it. Voca. o: o.
Ab. dalla, or da la: from the, her, it.
Plur. nomb. Nomi. le: the. Genesis delle, or de le: of the, them. Dati. all, or
a le: to the, them. Accu. le: the, them. Voc. o: o. Ab. dalle, or da le: from
the, them.

Articles joined to other prepositions. Ne, in Nello, Nel: in the, it. Nelli,
Ne gli, Ne i. Ne': in the. Nella: in the, it. Nelle: in the.
Per, for, by, or thorough Per lo, Pel, Pello: for by, or thorough the, it. Per
li, Per gli, Pelli, Per i, Pe i, Pe', for, by, or thorough the. Per la for, by,
or thorough the, it
Per le Con: with Con lo, Col, Collo: with the, with it. Con li, Con gli,
Colli, Co i, Co': with the. Con la, Colla with the.
Con le, Colle




Of the use of the Articles.
All articles almost, are usually placed before noumes common. I say almost,
because somtymes th'article la, is placed before noumes proper: as in his place
shall be shevved.

LO.
Th'article lo, is to go before words beginning with a vouel: but the letter
O is cut of, and an Apostropha set in the place, after this sort: l'Amore,
l'Onore: And therefore they are pronounced as though they were written Lamore,
Lonore.

But here is to be noted, that the Thuscan Italians are accustomed to take
away I, from these words which are compound with this preposition In, and
to add an Apostropha to the vouell of the article: thus, Lo'mperatore in the
singular number: and Gli'mperatori in the plural: and so of others like.
Howbeit, I would not have the^ (though Boccace be their author) to be
imytated in this: since it is an affected kind of speech. Further, since an
Apostropha is a sign of a vouell missing, to what end is it set to the
article, to whom there is nothing missing? Besides, the sign of such a lack
does rather appertain to the letters consonantes deprived of their vouelles,
then to the self vouelles. To conclude, those words Imperatore and
Imperatori may seem (as me thinks unjustly beheaded, in taking from them the
letter I, from whence they do begin.

And now to our matter: Lo is also to go before words that do begin with
two sundry consonantes, vvherof the first shall be S: in this wise: Lo Spirito,
lo Stomaco, lo Scacciato a cast of: lo Stato, lo Strale a shafte or arrovve.

In like sort it is to be used, being joined with a preposition: as Dello
Spirito, of the spirit: Allo Spirito, to the spirit: Dallo Spirito, from the
spirit: Per lo spirito, for, by, or thorough the spirit: Con lo Spirito, with
the spirit: Nello Spirito, in the spirit.

In fine, this article Lo is set before this noume Il Quale, and that in the
beginning of a verse: wherefore we say, lo Quale.

IL.
THE article Il is to be placed before words that do begin with a consonant:
as Il Re, il Prencipe, il Cielo, etc.

And both Lo and Il, do go before verbes of the infinitive mode, observing the
affore said order in the beginning of the letters: as l'Amare, il dire, lo
Scriuere.

The which order is to be observed with these masculin articles in the plural
number: for I, is set before words beginning with a consonant: as i
Principi, i Re, i Cieli.

But Li and Gli, do go before words beginning with a vouell: as li or gli
Amori, li or gli Onori, li or gli Eserciti.

Howbeit when the vouel shall be I, vvher with the word follovving the
article does begin, then shall the article Gli, be placed before it: and
notvvithstanding forgo his vouell, in this sort: Gl' Iniqui, Gl' Impij, Gl'
Ingiusti, etc.

Li and Gli, are also placed before words, that do begin with two diverse
consonantes: vvherof the first shall be S: as Gli Spiriti, Gli Strali, Gli Stenti
the torments: Gli Scommodi, the disco^modities, etc.

The same is to be done when they are joined to prepositions: for we say
De i Re, and not De gli Re, and so by the other cases.

But here is to be noted, that the article I, for the most part is taken
away, and an Apostropha set in place thereof, in this sort, De' fatti tuoi for
De i fattituei: So is A also used for A i, Da' for Da i, Co' for Co i, Ne' for
Ne i, and Pe' for Pe i. And it behooves that this be done with judgment, the
which, (who that so can) is rather attained by reading of approved aucthors,
then by any art.

Besides we say Delli Spiriti, and not De i Spiriti, A gli or Alli Spiriti.
But not A i Spiriti, etc.

Further, the preposition Per, will alvvaies requier the articles Lo, Li, or
Gli, without observing any rule of the letters, vvher with the words
follovving do begin: as Per lo petto, Per gli fianchi, And many times they say,
Pe' monti, Pe' piani: in stedde of those forms of speech that have Per li
monti, Per li piani: that is, by the mountains, by the plains.

These forsaide articles being joined with prepositions are none otherways
used, then if they were without them: wherefore we say, Dell' Amore, De gli
Amori, All' ingiusto, A gl' ingiusti: and after the same manner, thoroughout
all the other cases, asvvell of the singular, as of the plural number.

LA.
Tovvching the feminine article, La, it is for the most part given to noumes
common: as when we say La tauola, La barca, La scuola: and somtymes to
noumes proper: as Roccace did in sayng, La Belcolore, La Fiammetta, etc.

Where it behooves to note, how this article is set whole and perfect,
before words that begin with a consonant: as next before it appears: and as
aften as it is set before words beginning with a vouell, it is deprived of
the letter A, and an Apostropha added in this wise, l' Anima, l' Onesta, l'
Amicitia.

In like sort is Le to be used, being the plural number to the article La:
Saving it is not given to noumes proper. So that we say, Le stelle, Le done,
likewise: L'anime, L'amicittie, L'iniquita, L'imprese.

The Same order is to be observed, when this article is coupled to
prepositions: For we say in the singular number: Della stella, Alla stella,
Dalla stella, Per la stella, Con la stella, Nella stella: Dell'anima, All'
anima, etc. But in the plural number. Delle stelle, All stelle, etc. Dell'
anime, All' anime: etc.

Of a Noume.
Every Italian noume does end in some vouell, as Dio, Angelo, Cielo, Huomo, and
others almost innumerable.

But yet somtymes they do forgo it, chieflye in words, where those letters
that the latins do call liquides, videlicet L, N, and R, do preceede the last
vouell: as Debil, Fell, Mel, Fedel, Van, Pensier, for Debile, Feel, Mele,
Fedele, Vano, Pensiero.

And this is usually done, when the word follovving shall begin with a
consonant: as Van desio, Pensier canuto: that is, a vain desire, a grave
thought: Also Fedel compagno, Mel dolce: where no Apostropha is added, because
they do not forgo their vouelles for others follovving: and therefore we say,
Gran cosa, Buon Ghristiano, San Paolo: for Grande Cosa, Buono Cristiano, Santo
Paolo: which last manner of speeches are much more improper, then the former.

But from this rule are excepted these noumes, Collo a neck, Apollo, Volo a
flight, Affanno grief, Inganno deceit, Oscuro, Duro, and Chiaro. For hardly
we say Col, Apol, Vol, Affan, Ingan, Oscur, Dur, Chiar: although Petrarke
(and that very seldom) has used these two last.

Neither do these words Animo, Abisso, Pegno, Sostegno, and such like: suffer
any abridging.

Further the Italian noumes, do use to let slip the last vouell, when the
word that follovveth does begin with a vouell, and for the vouell omitted,
to write an Apostropha, thus: Vostr' occhi, Molt anni, etc. Whereupon, it does
appear to be chiefly in use in noumes adjectives.

Lastly, the Italian poets do deprive many noumes, not of their vouelles
only, but of their last syllables: or at least do take from those syllables
L: for to observe number in verse: whereupon it is, that they say somtymes,
Anima' and Amai for Animali: Lacciuo' for Lacciuoli: Caua' and Cauai for
Caualli: Be' and Bei for Belli: Que' and Quei for Quelli: Ta' and Tai for Tali:
Qua and Quai for Quali.

How beit this is nothing at all used, vhen the word that follovveth does
begin with a vouell: as the writings of approved aucthors in sundry places
bear witness.

Of the ending of Noumes.
Proper names of men and the singular number do end in. A, Auea, Pitagora,
Luca, Andrea, Porsena. E, Cesare, Aristotile, Scipione, Platone. I, Giouanni,
Luigi, Dionigi. O. Alessandro, Pietro, Paolo. V. Giesu, Artu.

Proper names of Cities, the mascul gender do end in. E, Lione. I, Parigi,
Brindisi, Ragusi. O, Milano, Como, Pesaro. V, Corfu, Cefalu, Peru.

Proper names of families ending in. A, Colonna, Carrafa, Gonzaga, Cossa
Austria, Aragona. E, Dentice, Ponte, Este. I, Medici, Gritti, Piccolomini,
Venti, Tornaquinci, Doni, etc. I, or O, Quirini and Quirino, Soderini and
Soderino, etc. I, or E, Caualcanti or Coualcante, O, Auolo, Toledo.

Further, these surnames are not used after one self manner and therefore it
shall not be amysse to show you how they are used in speech: for we say
Pompeo Colonna, Pompey Colu^na, Maria Colonna, Mary Columna. I Colonnesi: those
of Columna.

We say further Carlo d'Austria: Quei della casa d'Austria Ferrante,
d'Aragona: Quei d'Aragona: for Aragonesi does signify those that are affected
to that family.

Tovvching the second sort: we say Camillo, Dentice, Diana, Dentice, Il
Dentice, I Dentici, le Dentici. Again Andrea Ponte, or da Ponte: Caterina
Ponte, Il Ponte, or da casa Ponte, Quel, or Quei da casa ponte. Also Ercole da
Este, Caterina da Este, Quei da Este.

The surnames of the third sort are thus used: for we say: Cosmo Medici, or
Cosmo de'Medici: Lucretia Medici or de'Medici: Il Medici, I Medici:

So Francesco Doni, Giouanna Doni, Il Doni: likewise Alessandro Piccolomini,
Il Piccolomini, Portia Piccolomini, la Piccolomini.

We say further Pietro Quirini, or Quirino: Camilla de' Quirini, or Quirina,
but not Camilla Quirini: which is not in use. Again it is rightly said il
Quirino, but not il Quirini. But if any shall obiecte, why is it rightly
said? il Medici, il Doni: I answer, that the surnames of Medici and Doni have
none other termination that is in use. But the surname Quirini has both
Quirino for the men, and Quirina for the women. By this means we say Antonia
Quirina, and not Quirini, but de' Quirini: where, notvvithstanding we may
say Caterina Medici, and not Medica.

Likewise the examples of the fifte sort shall be, Guido Caualcante or
Caualcanti: Il Caualcante, I Caualcanti: Giulia Caualcante.

And tovvching those of the last sort, we say Alfonso d'Aualo, Pietro di
Toledo.

Noumes appellatiues of the masc. ge^der and singular number do end in. A,
Sofista, Poeta, Profeta, Podesta, Pianeta. E, Onore, Amore, Color, and Fante,
which is of the fe. ge^der, also Signore. O, and E, Caualiero (with the
Poets, or Caualiere (with those that write in prose) of the which sort
there are many other like noumes.

This noume Pari does belong to both genders: wherefore we say I Pari tuoi,
I Pari vostri, Le paritue, Le parivostre: that is, thine, or your like, and
this only in the plural number. For in the singular we say Tuo pari, and
Tua pari, that is thy like.

We say further, un Paio di Calze: duc paia, tree paia, quattro paia, etc. Di
polli: by the which form of speeches, it is apparent what difference there
is betvvne Pari, Paio, and Paia: for Pari declares similitude, Paio and Paia,
fellowship.

But the reader is here to be admonished, that these words Paio, Pari, and
Paia, do belong also unto the verb Parere, to seem. In this sort

Indicative.
Io Paio I seem Tu Pari Thou seem.
Subiunctiue.
Io Paia He seem. Tu Paia Thou seem Colui Paia I seems.
Noumes adiect. of the singular number and mas. ge^der do end in. O, Diuino,
Bello, Vmano, Fiero, Altiero, Orrendo, Ornato, etc. E, Celeste, Fedele, Dolce,
Vmile, etc. which are also of the femin. ge^der.

Tovvching these noumes, when they are of the plural number, they do end all
in I, as do Huomini, Cieli, Angeli, etc. And that asvvell when they end in O,
in the singular number: as when they end in E.

Notvvithstanding such are excepted as in the plural number have double
terminations: that is, in I, and are of the masculine gender: and in A,
changing the masculine ge^der in to the feminine as here follovving does
appear.

Noumes in the plural number ending in. A, Dita, Labbra, and Labbia,
Ginocchia, Braccia, Legna, Vestigia, Risa, etc. I, Diti, Labbri, Ginocchi,
Bracci, Legni, Vestigij, Risi.

But those that end in A, are most in use with such as write in prose.

And suerly, noumes of the femi. gender do not end after that manner: as it
may here after appear.

Proper names of women the singular number do end in. A, Cornelia, Laura,
Tullia, Lucretia, Maria, etc. E, Beatrice, Rachele, Berenice, Penelope, etc. O,
Glicerio, Calisto, Dido, Safo, Calippo, Ino, etc.
Proper names of Cities of the feminine gender ending in. A, Roma, Venetia,
Padoua, Verona, Fiorenza, etc. E, Auignone, Cartagine, Atene. I, Napoli,
Costantinopoli. O, Corinto, Sesto, Abido, Effeso, Argo.
A, Anima, Amicitia, Donna, Signora. E, Opinione, Lettione, Affettione. O,
Mano.

Nomes appellatiues of the feminine gender and singular number ending in. A and
E A, Onesta, Arma, Loda, Froda, Fronda, ala. E, Onestate, Arm, Lode, Frode,
Fronde, ale.
V and E E, Virtute, Seruitute, Grue: V. Virtu, Seruitu, Gru.
A and O A, Orecchia, Foglia, Cerchia, Chiostra, G'elsa: O, Orecchio, Foglio,
Cerchio, Chiostro, Gelso.


But when they end in O, they are of the masculine gender Orecchia, and
Foglia are often in use, as are Cerchio, Chiostro, and Gelso: but the rest not
so.

Noumes adjectives of the feminine gender and singular number ending in. A,
Bianca, Bella, Diuina, Ornata, Fiera, Rea, etc. E, Fedele, Crudele, Forte: the
which are also of the masculine gender.

Further, such noumes shall have I, in the plural number, as in the last place
have E in the singular: But if in the singular they have A, they shall have E
in the plural. Where upon it is, that those that have double terminatio^s in
the singular number, have them also double in the plural: as here follovving
it may appear.

Sing. nom. A, Fontana Plu. nomb. E, Fontane I, Fonti

E, Font
Sing. nom. A, Arma Plu. nomb. E, arm I, armi

E, Arm
Sing. nom. V, Virtu Plu. nomb. V, Virtu I, Virtuti

E, Virtute
Sing. nom. A, Bonta Plu. nomb. A, Bonta I, Bontati

E, Bontate
Sing. nom. A, Orecchia Plu. nomb. E, Orecchie I, Orecchi

O, Orecchio

But Mano, thorough a certain use of speech, though it be of the feminine
gender, does end (in the singular number) in O, as Mano: whereupon it
follovveth, that in the plural it does end in I, as Mani.

Of the declining of Noumes.
Although the Italian tongue (as we have before declared in the declining of
the articles) has neither cases, nor declension of noumes as are in the Latin,
and Greek tongues: yet does it receive all manner of variation: which is such,
as does depend upon prepositions, either by them selves alone, orioyned with
the articles.

The 1. Example with the articles joined to prepositions.
Nomin. singul. L' Amico The friend Genit. Dell' Amico Of the friend Dat. All'
Amico To the friend Accus. L' Amico The friend Vocat. O Amico O friend Ablat.
Dall' Amico From the friend. Nom. plur. Gli Amici The friends Genit. De gli
Amici Of the friends Dat. A gli Amici To the friends Accus. Gli Amici The
friends Vocat. O Amici O friends Ablat. Da gli Amici From the fre^des.

The use of the 1. Example thorough all the Cases and Numbers.
Nom. sing. L' Amico venne: A friend has come. Genesis Mi ricordo dell' amico: I
do remember me of a friend. Dat. Compiaccio all' amico: I please (or content) a
friend. Accus. Amo l' amico: I love a friend. Vocat. O amico vieni: Oh friend
come. Ablat. Mi parto dall' amico: I depart from a friend. Nom. plu. Gli amici
vennero: the fre^des have come. Genesis Mi ricordo de gli amici: I do remember me
of the friends. Dat. Compiaccio a gli amici: I please (or content) the friends.
Accus. Amo gli amici: I love the friends. Vocat. O amici venite: Oh friends
come. Ablat. Mi parto da gli amici: I depart from the friends.
The 2. example with prepositions only.
Nom. sing. Amico Friend Genit. di amico of a friend Dati. ad amico to a friend
Accus. amico friend Vocat. amico friend Ablat. da amico from a friend. Nom.
plur. Amici Friends. Genit. di amici of friends Dat. ad amici to friends Accus.
amici friends Vocat. amici friends Ablat. da amici from friends.

The use of the 2. example thorough all the Cases.
Nom. sing. Fu amico vero. He was a true friend. Genit. Non e vfficio di amico.
It is not the office (or duty) of a friend. Dat. Io ne parlai ad amico fidato.
I have spoken thereof to a trusty friend. Acc. May non visit ai amico a me piu
caro di te: I did never visit a friend more dear to me the^ thou. Vocat. Amico
vieni. Friend come. Ablat. Da amico, come sei tu, riceuo ogni cosa in buona
part: From a friend as thou art, I receive every thing in good part. Nom.
plu. Furono amici very: They were true fre^des. Cenit. Non e vfficio di amici:
It is not the office (or duty) of friends. Dat. Io ne parlai ad amici fidati:
I have spoken thereof to trusty friends. Accu. May non visitai amici a me piu
cari di voi: I did never visit friends more dear to me the^ you. Vocat. Amici
venite: Friends come. Ablat. Da amici come sete voi, riceuo ogni cosa in buona
part: From friends as you are, I receive every thing in good part.
The 3. example with the article IL.
Nom. singul. Il maestro the master Genit. del maestro of the master Dat. al
maestro to the master Accus. il maestro the master Vocat. o maestro o master
Ablat. dal maestro from the master. Nom. plur. I maestri the masters Genit.
De i maestri of the masters Dat. a i maestri to the masters Accus. i maestri
the masters Vocat. o maestri o masters Ablat. da i maestri from the masters.

The 4. example: is of a Noume of the feminine gender, which takes the
article L A, deprived of the vouell.
Nom. sing. L'anima the sole Genit. dell' anima of the sole Dat. all' anima to
the sole Accus. l'anima the sole Vocat. o anima o sole Ablat. dall' anima from
the sole. Nom. plur. L'anime the soles Genit. dell' anime of the soles Dat.
all' anime to the soles Accus. l' anime the soles Vocat. o anime o soles Ablat.
dall' anime from the soles.

The 5. examples is of a Noume of the same gender with the article L A,
vvholye.
Nom. sing. La mente the mind Genit. della mente of the mind Dat. alla mente
to the mind Accus. la mente the mind Vocat. o mente o mind Ablat. dalla
mente from the mind. Nom. plur. Le menti the minds Genit. delle menti of the
minds Dat. all menti to the minds Accus. le menti the minds Vocat. o menti
o minds Ablat. dalle menti from the minds.

I will add here, in what sort most of the noumes that we do use, are
derived unto us from all the declensions of the latin noumes. But I will be more
brief herein, then peradventure the matter shall seem able to some: both
because I desire breuity: as to the end the reader instructed in the latin,
when by these, that I shall now tovvche he shall as it were in searching take
hold, he may by him self call more to remembrance.

Of the 1. noumes masc* and femi. ending in. A, Poeta, Profeta, Pitagora,
Euangelista, Femina, Erba, Tauola, Carta, Fenestra. E, Anchise, Penelope.
Of the 2. noumes of both genders ending in. O, Antonio, Virgilio, Milano,
Cauallo, Libro, Lauro, etc. I, Dionigi, Parigi, Luigi.
Of the 3. ending in. A, Poema, Stratagema, Dogma, etc. E, Cesare, Lettione,
Pallade, Rachele, Nieue, Scure, etc. I, Filli, Meri, Cariddi, Tifi, etc.
Of the 4. which end in. O, Mano, Corno, Effetto, Affetto, Difetto, Rispetto,
Senso, Gusto, Intelletto, Vdito. A, Vista or Veduta, Vdita.
Of the 5. which end in. E, Specie, Effigy, Temperie, Congerie. I, Di, Mezodi.

Of Noumes comparatiues and Superlatiues.
The Italian speech does lack noumes comparatiues: But in stedde thereof they
use the positive, with the aduerbe Piu, more: thus, Piu dotto, Piu belle, Piu
forte. Whose signification is increased by adding of the aduerbes, Molto, and
Assai: as Assai piu or Molto piu, or Assai molto piu, or Molto Assai piu Dotto:
every one of these vvayes is rightly said.

But tovvching their use, they do requier a genitive case, in this sort: Io so
no piu dotto di te, I am better learned then thou. Also, Cicerone fu piu
eloquente di Ortensio, Cicero was more cloquent then Hortensius. We have
also these manner of speeches in the comparatiue degrees: Tu non sei il piu
dotto del mondo: Tu sei il piu ricco della compagnia: Io sono amico de i piu
dotti: Tu sei de i piu dotti: Tu sei stimato tra i piu dotti: Tu ti puoi
paragonare a i piu dotti.

The superlatiue is not so used, as it can declare comparison, but vvorthynes:
For we say not, Cicerone fu eloquentissimo de' Romani, since such a phrase of
speech is all together latin: But we say Cicerone fu eloquentissimo:
without addition of any other person, in comparison of whom Cicero may be.

Of Noumes Numerall.
Vno, is of the singular number, Vni of the plural, and both of the masculine
gender. Vna, is of the singular number, Vne of the plural, and both of the
feminine gender. And we do use Vno, and Vna, when we number: But Vni and
Vne, in this sort: as L'une e l'altre: Gli uni e gli altri, both the one and
the other none otherways then the latins do use Vtrique and vtraeque.

Due, and in verse (who that will) Duo: never Dua, or Duoi, though many do
use them. Further they do belong to either gender: the which is likewise to
be understood of all the other numbers that follow. We say also Ambidue:
which is understood of two males, or at least the one of the two being a
male: and Ambedue of two females. But Ambodue, Amendue, Amendune, and
Ame^duni: although approved auctors do use them: yet would not I willingly use
them.

We say further Ambo: in the same fignification that the latins do.

Tree: three, Quattro: four, Cinque: five, Sei: six. Set: seven, Otto:
eight, Noue: nine, Diece: ten, Vndici: eleven, Dodici: twelve, Tredici:
thertene, Quartordici: sovvertene, Quindici: fiuetene, Sedeci: sixtene,
Dicessette: seuentene, Diciotto: eitghtene, Dicennoue: nynetene, Venti:
twenty, Vent'uno or vna: twenty one, Venti due: tvventytvvo, Ventitre:
tvventythree, Venti quattro: tvventyfovver, Venti cinque: tvventyfiue, and so
forvvardes, Trenta: therty, Quaranta: forty. Cinquanta: fiuety, Sessanta:
sixty, or three skore, Set anta: seventy, or three skore and ten, Ottanta:
eighty, or four skore, Nouanta: nynety, or four skore and ten, Cento: An
hundred, Cento and vno, or vna: an hundred and one, Cento and due: an hundred
and two, Cento and tree: an hundred and three, Cento and quattro: an hundred
and four. And so forvvardes. Dugento: two hundred, Trecento: three hundred,
Quattrocento: four hundred, Cinquecento: five hundred, Seicento: six hundred,
Settecento: seven hundred, Ottocento: eight hundred, Nouecento: nine hundred.
Mill: A thousand, Due mila: two thousand,
Tree mila: three thousand, Quattro mila: four thousand. Cinque mila: five
thousand, Sei mila: six thousand, Set mila: seven thousand, Otto mila: eight
thousand, Noue mila: nine thousand, Diece mila: ten thousand. Vndici mila:
eleven thousand, Dodici mila: twelve thousand, Tredici mila: thertene
thousand, and so forvvardes. Cento mila: an hundred thousand,
Dugento mila: two hundred thousand. Trecento mila: three hundred thousand,
and so unto. Un milioni: a million, or ten thousand thousand.
Due milioni: two millions, Tree milioni: three millions, And so in like sort
infinitely.
Further, we say Un paio, due paia, a couple, two couple: Un centinaio, due
centinaia, one hundred: two hundredes: Un migliaio, due migliaia: one
thousand, two thousands, etc.

Also: Vna decina, due decine: one tenthe two tenthes, etc. Vna dozina, due
dozine: one dosen, two dosen, etc. Vna ventina, due ventine, one skore two
skore, etc. Vna trentina, due trentine: one therty, two thertyes, etc.

Of Noumes signifying order.
Primo and Primiero: the first. Secondo: the second, Terzo: the therde, Quarto:
the fourth, Quinto: the fifte, Sesto: the sixte, Settimo: the seuenthe,
Ottauo: the eight, Nono: the nynthe, Decimo: the tenthe, Vndecimo: the
eleuenthe. Duodecimo: the tvvelf, Decimo terzo and Terzodecimo, Decimo quarto
and Quarto decimo, Decimo quinto and Quarto decimo, Decimo sesto and Sesto
decimo, Decimo settimo and Dicisettesimo, Decimo ottauo and Deciottesimo,
Decimo nono, and vigesimo, and ventesimo, Vigesimo primo: Vigesimo secundo. And
so unto.
Trigesimo, and Trentesimo: the thertithe, Quatragesimo, and Quarantesimo: the
fortythe, Quinquagesimo, and Cinquantesimo: the fiuetithe, Sessagesimo, and
Sessantesimo: the sixtithe, Ottuagesimo, and Ottantesimo: the eightithe,
Nonagesimo, and Nouantesimo: the ninetithe, Ce^tesimo the hundredth,
Duge^tesimo: the two hundredth. Trecentesimo, Quattrocentesimo,
Cinquecentesimo, Seicentesimo, Settecentesimo, Ottocentesimo, Nouecentesimo,
Millesimo: the thousanthe, etc.
Noumes Relatiues.
Il Quale and la Quale, are noumes that are most often placed in speech, and
alvvayes are referred to something that went before: and therefore of the
Grammarians are called relatiues. They are alvvayes joined with an article:
for Quale without an article, is rather a noume of quality, then a relative.
Further it may be declined, in such sort, as is set out by the example
follovving.

The declension of a Noume relative.
Nom. sing. Il Quale, la Quale, the which. Genit. Del Quale, della Quale, of
the which. Dat. Al Quale, alla Quale, to the which. Accus. Il Quale, la
Quale, the which. Ablat. Dal Quale, dalla Quale, from the which. Nom. plu. I
Quali, le Quali, the which. Genit. Dei Quali, delle Quali, of the which. Dat.
Ai Quali, all Quali, to the which. Accus. I Quali, le Quali, the which.
Ablat. Dai Quali, dalle Quali, from the which.
But in the oblique cases there is also Cui: that does belong to both
genders, and nombers. And may be declined in this wise.

Genit. Di Cui, of whom, whose. Dat. A Cui, to whom. Accus. Cui, whom.
Ablat. Da Cui, from whom.

The use of this Noume Cui is such, as we may speak it thorough out all
the oblique cases and numbers.
Genit. Mi parlo tuo padre, di cui e il cauallo: thy father has spoken to me,
whose horse it is. Dat. Io vidi il tuo fratello, a cui diedi il libro: I have
seen thy brother, to whom I have given the book. Accus. Io haueua
familiarita col tuo amico cui morde il cane arrabbiato: I had familiarity with
thy friend, whom a mad dog did bite. Ablat. Andai a trouare Antonio, da cui
riceuei le tue lettere: I have gone to find out anthony, from whom, I have
received thy letters.
And although this noume does lack his nominative case, and is declined only
in the oblique cases by adding of prepositions, as we have before shevved:
yet you shall here and there find amongst good aucthors these forms of
speech: Il cui valor: la cui bonta: I cui amori: le cui ricchezze: And thus
it is needeful to declare them: as, Il valor di cui, the vvorthynesse of
whom, La bonta di cui, the goodness of whom, Gli amori di cui, the loves
of whom: Le ricchezze di cui, the riches of whom.

It may also be rightly said by the oblique cases: as, Del' cui valor, for Del
valor di cui, whose worthiness, Della cui bonta, for Della bonta di cui,
whose goodness, Dei cui amori, for De gli amori di cui, whose loves: Delle
cui ricchezze, for Delle ricchezze di cui, whose riches, etc.

For by whom that will, it may be run thorough all the cases in like
sort, which I do omit for breuities sake: but hereby it may easly be seen
that the articles Il, La, I, and Le, do not in those phrases of speech
properly belong to the noumes Cui, but to the noumes Valor, Bonta, Amori, and
Ricchezze.

Further, it is used in the dative case without a preposition, in this sort:
Cui non basta for a cui non basta, to whom it suffisethe not: cui diede il Re
potesta, etc. for a cui diede, etc, to whom the king gave power.

But touching the use of the noume Il Quale, there is no cause why I should
curiously endeavor my self to allege many things: since it is al one with
the latin relative. Therefore I will here note how that, Che, for the most
part is put in place thereof: And that in the nominative and accusative cases
of both the numbers, in this sort: L'huomo, che pensa esser sauio, molte
volte e sciocco, the man that thinkethe him self wise, many times is a fool.
Again L'huomo, ch'io amo, e dotto, the man that I love, is learned. The like
examples may be brought of the plural number.

But sithence we have made mention of Che, it is to be noted, that the same
may somtymes be joined with prepositions in this wise: di Che, a Che, da Che,
in Che, con Che, per Che. It is also joined with articles, thus: Ilche,
Delche, Alche, Nelche: But we do not say Colche, so neither Per il che,
because the first is not in use; and the later is used but thus, Il perch. And
no body, but such as lack judgment of the ear, will confess that Per il
Che, is more rightly said, then Il perch: howbeit Boccace does use this often
times, in his manner of speech, but the other never.

Somtymes Che is doubled in this sort Che che, and signifies Qualunque cosa,
as Che che sia, what soever it be, Che che habbia detto, what soever he has
said.

Again, thereof is made Chiunque, who soever: and is of three syllables. But
between Chiunque and Qualunque, this is the difference, that the one is not
joined to a substa^tiue, but the other is: and yet, that also somtymes is
separated from it. For Petrarke speaks thus, Chiunque alberga, whosoever
hosteth: where Chiunque is of it self without adding of any noume
substantive. Again, he saiethe afterward, Qualunque animale, what soever
living creature: where Animale, a noume substa^tiue is joined to the noume
Qualunque. Yet he said somtymes, and that but once: Gioir di qualunque, the
gladding of what soever.

From this Che taking E, and adding I, is made chi: the which is put often
times for Colui, Quello, Colei, Quella, Coloro, Quelli, and Quelle pronoumes:
in this wise: Chi ha smarrita la strada, torni indietro: for Colui, or Quello,
il quale ha smarrua, etc. who that has myssed his way, let him return back.

Further Chi does many times signify, who? an interrogation, and that
thoroughout all the cases: as.

By the Nom. Chifu? who was it? chiilfece? who has done it? Geni. Di
chiseitu figliuolo? whose son art thou? Dat. A chi l'hai dato? to whom
have thou given it. Accus. Chi battesti? whom have thou beaten? Ablat. Da chi
l'hai vdito? from whom have thou hard it?

Besides we say: Chi qua e Chi la, some here, and some there: Chispogliaua
questo, e chi quello: some did spoil this man, and some that man.

Lastly we say Chi chesia, who soever it be.

Of Noumes which are called Partitiues, Infinitiues, Distributiues and
Negatiues.
First the noume Altri, that with this voice is only content, and does belong
to every number, and gender, is thus used: Ma quando altri volesse opporsi, But
when an other would be contrary. Also, Altridice, an other says.

But in the oblique cases, it has, Altrui: wherefore we say: Io porto la
pena dell' altrui colpa, It may also be said, della colpa altrui: that is, I
suffer the punyshement of an others fault. All' altrui valor, or al valor
altrui, to an others vvorthynesse. Dall' altrui forza, or Dalla forza altrui:
By an others strength.

But the noume Altro, has in the plural Altri, and is of the masculine
gender: as Altra, which is of the feminine has in the plural number Altre.
the which noume does differ from the noume Altri: in this that it is never
coupled to a substantive: But Altro is often, and alvvayes referred to the
before named persons. For we say: Laltro tuo amico, gli altri tuoi amici,
l'altra tua amica, l'altre tue amiche: And in like sort thorough out all the
cases, the vocative except. It is used also in the neuter gender, and we say:
Altro domando, I requier an other thing. Auzi altro, rather some other thing.
But then it does forsake the article, as by example, apperethe.

Alcuno, some body, has in the plural Alcuni, some: as Alcuna, some body,
has Alcune, in the plural, some. And that thorough out all the cases: and
they are of the feminine gender.

But the noume Ogniuno, Ciascuno: that is, every one, each one: Also Niuno,
Veruno, Nessuno, Nullo: that is, none, no one, no body: do want the plural
number: which does also fail them, when they be of the feminine gender, as
Ogniuna, Ciascuna, Niuna, Veruna, Nessuna, Nulla.

And although this noume Nulla, be many times used in the neuter gender, and
signifies, nothing: as Nulla posse leuar, (says the Poet); I can take
nothing away: yet does it signify also some thing: as Vuoitu nulla? vvil you
any thing?

Lastly it is to be known, how that all these noumes do refuse the articles:
for we do not say, l' Alcuno, l'Ogniuno, il Ciascuno, il Nessuno, etc.

Of Pronoumes.
A Pronoume we call that word, that is used in the stedde of a noume: such
as is also a pronoume both with the Greckes and latins. VVherfor some are
primatiues, and some deriuatiues: they have also nombers, genders, and
persons, as have the Grecke and Latin pronoumes. But what they have that is
either like, or unlike unto them, the diligent reader may easly perceive,
asvvell by the handling now of them, as by the types here follovving.

Certain Pronoumes. Primitiues. Mas. genesis Sing. nom. Io, I: Tu, thou: Se, him:
Egli, Ei, E', Quello, colui, he: Esso, he there: Questo, Costui, this man: Cio,
that: Cotesto, that man.
Plu. nom. Noi, we: Voi, you: Eglino, Quelli, Loro, Coloro, they: Essi, these
there: Questi, costoro, these men: Cotesti, those men.

Femi. genesis Sing. nom. Ella, Lei, Quella, Colei, she: Essa, she there: Questa,
Costei, this woman: Cotesta, that vvhoman.
Plu. nom. Elleno, Elle, Quelle, they: Esse, those there: Queste, these women:
Coteste, those women.


Deriuatiues. Mas. genesis Sing. nom. Mio, mine: Tuo, thine: Suo, his: Nostro,
ours: Vostro, yours.
Plu. nom. Miei, mine: Tuoi, thine: Suoi, there is: Nostri, ours: Vostri, yours.

Femi. genesis Sing. nom. Mia, mine: Tua, thine: Sua, hers: Nostra, ours: Vostra,
yours.
Plu. ^om. Mie, mine: Tue, thine: Sue, hers: Nostre, ours: Vostre, yours.




Pronoumes belonging to both genders. Io, Tu, Coloro, Costoro, Loro, Se.

Of the declining of a Pronoume.
The 1. example.
Nom. sing. Io, I, Genit. di me, of me, Dat. a me, to me, Accus. me, me, Ablat.
da me, from me, Nom. plu. Noi, We, Genit. di noi, of us, Dat. a noi, to us,
Accus. noi, us, Ablat. da noi, from us.

The 2. example.
Nom. sing. Tu, Thou, Genit. di te, of thee, Dat. a te, to thee, Accus. te,
thee, Vocat. tu, thou, Ablat. da te, from thee. Nom. plu. Voi, You, Genit. di
voi, of you, or yours, Dat. a voi, to you, Accus. voi, you, Vocat. voi, you,
Ablat. da voi, from you.

The 3. example.
Genit. Sing. and Plu. di Se, Of him, or his; of them, or theirs. Dat. a Se, To
him, to them. Accus. Se, Him, them. Ablat. da Se, From him, from them.

The 4. example.
Nom. sing. Egli, Ei, E', Quello Colui, He. Genit. Di lui, colui, quello, of
him, or his. Dat. a lui, colui, quello, to him. Accus. lui, colui, quello, him.
Ablat. da lui, colui, quello, from him. Nom. plu. Eglino, Quelli, coloro, They.
Genit. di Loro, colero, Quelli, of them, or there is. Dat. a Loro, coloro, Quelli,
to them. Accus. Loro, coloro, Quelli, them. Ablat, da Loro, coloro, Quelli.
from them.

The 5. example.
Nom. sing. Ella, Colei, Quella, She. Genit. di Lei, colei, quella, hers, or
of her. Dat. a Lei, colei, quella, to her. Accus. Lei, colei, quella, her.
Ablat. da Lei, colei, quella, from her. Nom. plu. Elleno, Coloro, Quelle, They,
Genit. di Loro, coloro, quelle, of them, or there is. Dat. a Loro, coloro, quelle,
to them. Accus. Loro, coloro, quelle, them. Ablat. da Loro, coloro, quelle,
from them.

The 6. example.
Nom. sin. Questo, Costui, this man. Genit. di Questo, costui, of this man, or
this man's. Dat. a Questo, costui, to this man. Accus. Questo, costui, this man.
Ablat. da Questo, costui, from this man. Nom. plu. Questi, Costoro, these men.
Genit. di questi, costoro, of these men, or these men's. Dat. a questi, costoro,
to these men. Accus. Questi, costoro, these men. Ablat. da questi, costoro,
from these men.
The 7. example.
Nom. sing. Questa, Costei, this woman. Geni. di questa, costei, of this
woman, or this vvoma^s. Dat. a questa, costei, to this woman. Accus. Questa,
costei, this woman. Ablat. da questa, costei, from this woman. Nom. plu.
Queste, Costoro, these women. Genit. di queste, costoro, of these women, or
these vvomens. Dat. a queste, costoro, to these women. Accus. Queste, costoro,
these women. Ablat. da queste, costoro, from these women.
Touching the other pronoumes, that is, the deriuatiues, they follow
altogether the declensio^ of those noumes, that do end in O, if they be of
the masculine gender, or in A, if they be of the feminine gender.

But the pronoume Cio, is alvvayes of the singular number, and neuter gender.

Of the use of Pronoumes.
These Pronoumes Egli, Ei, E', and Ella do alvvayes sarue to the nominative
case: as Egli disse, he has said: Ella volse, she has turned.

The like is of these pronoumes Eglino, and Elleno, (which Orators and such as
write in prose do use) for they also sarue to the nominative case: and we say
Eglino dissero, they have said: Elleno volsero, they have turned.

Again: these pronoumes Egli, and E, somtymes are filling words, and are
rather used for a grace in speech, then of any necessity: as Egli non ha guari
di tempo, for Non ha guari di tempo, it is no long time: Again, Eparra
me^zogna, for Parra menzogna, it shall seem a lie.

Pronoumes. Lui Lei Do sarue to the
Loro
Genit. Ci siamo ricordati di Lui, Lei, Loro, We have remembered us, of him,
her, them. Dat. Dissi a Lui, Lei, Loro, I have told him, her, them. Accus.
Vidi Lui, Lei, Loro, I have seen him, her, them. Ablat. Horiccuuto cio da lui,
Lei. Loro: I have received that from him, her, them. Nom. Costui, Costei;
Colui, Colei disse, this man, this woman; he, she has said. Costoro, Coloro,
dissero, these, they have said.

Pronoumes. Costui Colui Costei do sarue to the
Col^i Costoro Coloro
Genesis Mi ricordo di Costui, costei, colui, colei, costoro, coloro: I do
remember me of this man, this woman, him, her, these, them. Dat. Io dissi a
costui, costei, colui, colei, costoro, coloro: I have told to this man, this
woman, him, her, these, them. Accus. Io amo costui, costei, colui, colei,
costoro, coloro: I love this man, this vvvoman, him, her, these, them. Abl. Io
l'ho vdito da costui, costei, colui, colei, costoro, coloro, I have hard it
from this man, this woman, him, her, these, them.

Further the articles, Li, gli, and Le, are often times used for these
pronoumes, Lui and Lei: And that only in the dative case, in this wise: Le
di, or dille, for di a Lei, tell her: Da gli or Dalli, for Da a Lui, guie him:
and remember that these articles Gli, and Le, which are of the plural number,
are used for Lui and Lei: pronoumes of the singular number.

Again the articles Lo, La, Gli, and Le are used for these pronoumes Lui, Lei,
and Loro: and that in the accusative case only, thus: Lo batte, and Battello,
for Batte lui or Quello, he has beaten him: La Bacio, and Baciolla, for Bacio
Lei or Quella: he has kissed her: Gli percosse, and Percossegli, for Percosse
Loro, or Quelli, he has stricken them: Le bacio, and Baciolle, for Bacio loro
or Quelle: he has kissed them.

Pronoume. Se serves to the

Genit. Nessuno si dismentica di se: no body is forgeatfull of him self. Dat.
Catone diede a se la merte: Cato has given to him self the death. Accus.
Ciascuno ama piu se, che gli altri: Each one louethe him self, more then
others. Ablat. Questo lo disse da se, he has told him this of him self.

But this Pronoume Se, is often joined with Stesso, in the singular number,
and masculine gender: and Stessi, in the plural number, the same gen der. Also
Stessa in the feminine gender, and sing. nom. and stesse, in the plural
number, and the same gender: the which is done thorough out all the oblique
cases, except the vocative, in this wise.

Di Se stesso, of him self: Di se stesta, of her self: Di se stessi, of them
selves: Di se stesse, of them selves. Also Ase stesso, to him self: A se
stessa, to her self: A se stessi and A se stesse, to them selves. Again, Se
stesso, him self: Se stessa, her self: Se stessi and Se stesse, them selves.
To conclude, Da se stesso, by him selue: Da se stessa, by her self: Da se
stessi, and Da se stesse, by them selves. The same is to be understood of
Medesimo, Medesima, Medesimi, Medesime:

These are also joined to all other pronoumes: for we say: Io stesso or
medesimo, I my self: Di me stesso, or medesimo, of my self: And so in like
sort thorough out all the cases, the vocative except. In the plural number
we say, Noi stessi or medesimi, we our selves: Di noi stessi, or medesimi, of
us our selves: etc. Also Tu stesso, Tu stessa, thou thy self: Io stessa, I my
self. Noi stesse, we our selves: Di noi stesse, of us our selves: Di voi
stesse, of you your selves.

Egli stesso, he him self: Di lui stesso, of him self: Ella stessa, she her
self: Di lei stessa, of her self: etc. Eglino stessi, they them selves: Di
loro stessi, of them selves, etc. Elleno stesse, they them selves: Di loro
stesse, of them selves, etc.

But to what end do I stay upon somany examples: since these words do not
only accompanye all the Pronoumes, but Noumes also? For many times we speak
in this wise, il Re stesso, or medesimo, the king him self: La Regina stessa,
or medesima, the Queen her self: i Cieli stessi or medesimi, the self
heavens: Le stelle stesse, or medessime, the self stars.

Neither is it to be omitted how that Stesso does receive in the beginning the
letter I, when an article goes before it, that does end in a vouell, the
which article does forsake his vouell, and takes an Apostropha.

Pronoumes. Esso Essa do sarue to the
Essi Esse
Nomi. Esso or Essa fu, disse, fece: he or she has been, has said, has
done: Also, Essi or Esse furono: they have been. Genesis Miricordero di Esso or
Essa, Essi, Esse: I shall be myndefull of him, or her, them. Dat. Il diede ad
esso, etc: he has given it to him, etc. Ablat. L'ho vdito da Esso, etc: I
have hard it from him, etc.

Howbeit all these, except the Nominative case were better explained by the
Pronoumes Lui, Lei, and Loro: so that one should speak more rightly in this
sort: Lo mi ricordo di lui, Lei, Loro: L'ho dato a lui, Lei, Loro: Ho veduto
Lui, Lei, Loro: L'ho riceuuto da lui, lei, loro.

Further those Pronoumes, are joined to certain Noumes thoroughout all the
cases, the vocative except: as appears by this tipe follovving.

the Pronoume Esso, is joined to certain noumes in the Nom. Esso Re disse, the
King has said. Genit. Vago di Esse giouani, desirous of the young women.
Dat. Diedi il libro ad esso giudice, I gave the book to the judge. Accus.
Percosse Essi nemici, he did strike the enemies. Ablat. Il riccuci da Essi
amici, I have received it from friends.

Lastly, thus the Italians do say, Con esso Lui, Lei, Lero: for con Lui, Lei,
Loro, with him, her, them. Also, Con esso teco, for Con teco or Teco, with
thee: Con esso meco, for Con meco or meco, with me: Con esso seco, for Con
seco or Seco, with him. Again, Con esso noi, with us: Con esso voi, with
you.

They say also Con esso le mani, with the hands. Con esso un colpo, with one
blow. And not a fevv of these kind of speeches, do the Italians use, they
chiefly that inhabit Tuscane: Howbeit, I would not have them to be generally
used.

These Pronoumes Questi, Quei or Quegli, are accustomed for the most part to
be put in stedde of the Pronoumes, Questo, Quello; or Costui, and Colui: and
that many times in the Nominative case, and by it self, without the adding of
any substantive: Howbeit they are alvvayes referred to some man, that a little
before has been mentioned: as by a fevv examples shall plainly appear. For
we say, Cicerone fu non solo Orator s^mmo, ma anchora ottino cittadino: Questi
giouo molta alla sua patria: Cicero was not only an excellent Orator, but a
very good Citizen: this man has greatly profited his contry. Also, Quegli
parlo, he has spoken. And such like almost inumerable, thou shall find,
in the Tuscane vvriters. But (to speak freely what think) I can skarse be
brought to allow of it: For to me it seemethe a kind of speech to greatly
affected.

Therefore Questo and Quello, when they are of the masculine gender, do requier
a noume substa^tiue: as Questo Re, this King, Quello prencipe, that prince. But
when they are of the neuter gender, they put away the noume substantive, and
therefore we say Questo che io dico, e cosi this which I do tell, is thus.
Again Quello non e cosi, that is not so.

Touching the which Pronoumes, this is not to be forgotten, that when they
are expressed by the genitive plural, they are wont to be deprived of their
helps: that is (with the Tuscanes) of the preposition Di, in this sort: A
casa questi vsurai, for a casa di questi vsurai: to the house of these usurers.

The Pronoume Cio, the which we have said before to be the neuter ge^der: is
used in these sorts of speech: as Cioe, that is: Sopra cio, thereupon: Oltre a
cio, besides that: Cioche, whatsoever: Accioche, to the end that: Percioche,
because that: Percio, therefore.

But in what belongethe to the Pronoume Cotesto, it is given to things and
persons, that are out of the pronouncer, vverfore we say to him, with
whom we speak: Cotesto libro, il quale tu hai nelle mani, e bello, that
book, which thou have in thy hands, is a fair book. We use this
Pronoume also in the neuter gender, in this wise, Cotesto, che tu dici, e
vero, that that thou say, is true.

To conclude, it seems behouefull to speak not a little of Ci and Ne, which
are used for Noi, Mi for Me, Vi for Voi, and Ti for Te. But because they are
for the most part fixed to verbes, as it often happens in the Hebrew tongue:
thersore we do refer them to that place where we shall entreat of those
verbes.

Of the Verb.
There are four co^iugations of Verbes, which are chiefly known bytheire
infinitive modes.

The first co^iugation is of Verbes that in th'infinitiue mode have A, long
before RE: as Amare, to love: Cantare, to sing: Volare, to fly: Mangiare, to
eat, etc.

The second is of Verbes that have E, long before RE: as Valere, to be
worth: Hauere, to have, Teuere, to hold, etc.

The third is of Verbes that have E, short before RE: as Leggere, to read:
Scriuere, to write: Viuere, to live: Ridere, to laugh, etc.

The fourth is of Verbes that have I, long before RE: as Vdire, to hear:
Morire, to dye: Finire, to end. etc.

The first Conjugation.
Th'indicatiue mode: Present tense.
Sing. Io Amo, I love. Tu Ami, thou love. Colui Ama, he loves.
Plu. Noi Amiamo, we love. Voi Amate, you love. Coloro Amano, they love.

Preter imperfectense.
Sing. Io Amaua, Tu Amaui, Colui Amaua, I thou he Loved, or did love.
we you they

Plu. Noi Amauamo, Voi Amauate, Coloro Amauano,

Preterperfectense.
Sin. Io Amai, and ho amato, Tu Amasti, and hai amato, Colui Amo: and ha amato,
I thou he Have loved
we you they

Plu. Noi ama^mo, and habbiamo amato Voi Amaste, and hauete amato, Coloro
Amarono, Amaron, Amaro, Amar, and hanno amato.

It is to be remembered that Amaron and Amar, in the third person plural of this
preterpersectense, are to be used when the word that follovveth does begin
with a consonant. And this you shall find observed in sundry places by good
aucthors.

Preterpluperfectense.
Sing. Io haueua amato, Tu haueui amato, Colui haueua amato, I thou he Had
loved.
we you they

Plu. Noi haueuamo amato, Voi haueuate amato, Coloro haueuano amato,

Future tense.
Sing. Io Amero, Tu Amerai, Colui Amera, I thou he shall, or will love.
we you they

Plur. Noi Ameremo, Voi Amerete, Coloro Ameranno,

Note that in stedde of Amero, and the like future tense generally of all other
Verbes, The Italian uses the infinitive mode with this Verb Voglio before it:
as,

Sing. Io Voglio amare, Tu Vuoi amare, Colui Vuole amare, I thou he will love.
we you they

Plur. Noi Vogliamo amare, Voi Volete amare, Coloro Vogliono amare,

Likewise Io Voglio tenere, I will hold. Io Voglio leggere, I will read.
Io Voglio vdire, I will hear.

Th'imparatiue mode: Present tense.
Singul. Ama tu, love thou. Ami colui, let him love.
Plur. Amiamo noi, Let us love. Amate voi, love you. Amino coloro, let them
love.

Non amare: Love not thou: for in forbidding they use ever more th'infinitiue
mode with Non: in stedde of the singular number.

Th'optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio Voglia, or Dio Voglia, or O che, or O
Dio che.
Sing. Io Ami, Tu Ami, Colui Ami, god grant that I thou he love.
we you they


Plur. Noi Amiamo, Voi Amiate, Coloro Amino,

Preterimperfectense. O Dio volesse, or Dio volesse, or O Dio che, or O che.
Sing. Io Amassi, Tu Amassi, Colui Amasse, would to god that I thou he loved
or did love.
we you they


Plur. Noi Amassimo, Voi Amaste, Coloro Amassero,

Preterperfectense. O Dio voglia, Dio voglia, O Dio'che, O che.
Sin. Io habbia amato, Tu habbi amato, Colui habbia amato, god grant that I
thou he have loved
we you they


Plu. Noi habbiamo amato, Voi habbiate amato, Coloro habbiano amato

Preterpluperfectense. O Dio volesse, Dio volesse, o Dio che, o che.
Sin. Io hauessi amato, Tu hauessi amato, Colui hauesse amato, I would to God
that I thou he had loved
we you they


Plu. Noi hauessimo amato, Voi haueste amato, coloro hauessero amato

Future tense. Dio voglia che.
Sing. Io Ami da qua innanzi, Tu Ami da qua innanzi, Colui Ami da qua innanzi,
God grant that I thou he we love herafter.
you they


Plur. Noi Amiamo da qua innanzi, Voi Amiate da qua innanzi, Coloro Amino da
qua innanzi,

The subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Sing. Io Ami, Tu Ami, Colui Ami, for as much as I thou he love.
we you they


Plur. Noi Amiamo, Voi Amiate, Coloro Amino,

Preterimperfectense. Auegnache.
Io Amassi: Although I loved or did love. Tu Amassi: Although thou louedest or
did love, etc. as in the optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Se.
Sing. Io Amerei, and Ameria, Tu Amaresti, Colui Amarebbe, and Ameria, if I
thou he should love.
we you they


Plur. Noi Amaremmo, Voi Amareste, Coloro Amarebbono, and Ameriano.

Preterperfectense. Quando.
Io habbia amato, when I have loved. Tu habbi amato, when thou have loved,
etc. as in the optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Che.
Sing. Io hauerei and Haueria amato, Tu haueresti amato, Colui hauerebbe and
Haueria amato: that I thou he should have loved.
we you they


Plu. Noi haueremmo amato, Voi hauereste amato, Coloro hauerebbono and
Haueriano amato.

Preterpluperfectense. Poi che.
Io hauessi amato, Since I had loved. Tu hauessi amato, Since thou had
loved, etc. as in the optatiue mode.
Future tense. Quando.
Sin. Io hauero amato, Tu hauerai amato, Colui hauera amato, vhe^ I thou he
shall have loved.
we you they


Plu. Noi haueremo amato, Voi hauerete amato, Coloro hauera^no amato,

Th'infinitiue mode: Present tense.
Amare, to love.
Preter perfectense.
Hauere amato, to have loved.
Future tense.
Douere amare Essere per amare To be to love, or to love herafter.
Hauere ad amare
Participles Amante, loving: Amato loved. Amanti loving: Amati loved.

Geru^des Present tense.
Amando Io, Tu, Colui, Noi, Voi, Coloro: I, thou, he, we, you, they loving.
Preterperfectense.
Hauendo amato Io, Tu, Colui, Noi, Voi, Coloro: I, thou, he, we, you, they
having loved.
Future tense.
Douendo amare Essendo per amare Io, tu, colui, noi, voi, coloro: I, thou, he,
we, you, they being, or having to love.
Hauendo amare

The second Conjugation.
The Indicative mode: Present tense.
Sing. Io Tengo: I hold. Tu tieni: thou hold. Colui tiene: he holds.
Plur. Noi Teniamo: we hold. Voi tenete: you hold. Coloro tengono: they
hold.

Preter imperfectense.
Sing. Io Teneua, and Tenea, Tu teneui, Colui teneua and tenea, I thou he hilde
or did hold.
we you they

Plur. Noi teneuamo: Voi teneuate, Coloro teneuano and teneano

Preterperfectense.
Sin. Io Tenni, and ho tenuto: Tu tenesti, and hai tenuto, Colui ten, and ha
tenuto, I thou he have hilde.
we you they

Plu. Noi tenemmo, and habbiamo tenuto, Voi teneste, and hauete tenuto, Coloro
tennero, and hanno tenuto,

Preterpluperfectense.
Sing. Io Haueua tenuto, Tu haueui tenuto, Colui haueua tenuto, I thou he had
hilde
we you they

Plur. Noi haueuamo tenuto, Voi haueuate tenuto, Coloro haueuano tenuto,

Future tense.
Sin. Io Tenero and Terro, Tu tenerai, and terrai, Colui tenera, and terra, I
thou he shall, or will hold.
we you they

Plu. Noi teneremo, and terremo, Voi tenerete, and terrete, Coloro teneranno,
and terra^no

Io voglio tenere, I will hold, Tu voi tenere, thou will hold, etc. as in
the indicative mode.
Th'imparatiue mode: Present tense.
Sing. Tieni tu: hold thou. Tenga colui, let him hold. Non Tenere, hold not
thou.
Plur. Teniamo noi, let us hold. Teniate voi, hold you. Tengano coloro, let
them hold,

The optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Tenga, Tu tenga, Colui tenga, god grant that I thou he hold.
we you they


Plur. Noi teniamo, Voi teniate, Coloro tengano,

Preterimperfectense. O Dio Volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Tenessi, Tu tenessi, Colui tenesse, I would to god that I thou he
hilde or did hold
we you they


Plu. Noi tenessimo. Voi teneste, Coloro tenessero,

Preterperfectense. O Dio voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Habbia tenuto, Tu habbi tenuto, Colui habbia tenuto, god grant that I
thou he have hilde.
we you they


Plu. Noi habbiamo tenuto, Voi habbiate tenuto, Coloro habbiano tenuto,

Preterpluperfectense. O Dio Volesso che, etc.
Sin. Io Hauessi tenuto, Tu hauessi tenuto, Colui hauesse tenuto, I would to
god that I thou he had hilde
we you they


Plu. Noi Hauessimo tenuto, Voi haueste tenuto, Coloro hauessero tenuto

Future tense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Tenga da qua innanzi, Tu Tenga da qua innanzi, Colui tenga da qua
innanzi, God grant that I thou he hold herafter.
we you they


Plur. Noi Teniamo da qua innanzi, Voi teniate da qua innanzi, Coloro tengano
da qua innanzi.

The subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Sing. Io Tenga, Tu tenga, Colui tenga, for as much as I thou he hold.
we you they


Plur. Noi Teniamo, Voi teniate, Coloro tengano,

Preterimperfectense. Auegna che.
Io Tenessi, Although I hilde or did hold. Tu tenessi, Although thou hildest
or did hold, etc. As in the optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Se.
Sin. Io Tenerei, Terrei, Teneria, and Terria. Tu teneresti and terresti, Colui
tenerebbe, terrebbe, teneria, and terria, if I thou he should hold.
we you they


Pl. Noi Teneremmo and terremmo, Voi tenereste and terreste, coloro
tenerebbono, terrebbono, teneriano, and terriano.

Preterperfectense. Quando.
Io Habbia tenuto: when I have hilde. Tu habbi tenuto, when thou have hilde,
etc. As in the optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Che.
Sin. Io Hauerei, and Haueria tenuto, Tu haueresti tenuto, Colui hauerebbe and
haueria tenuto, that I thou he hold have hilde.
we you they


Plu. Noi haueremmo tenuto, Voi hauereste tenuto, Coloro hauerebbono, and
haueriano tenuto,

Preterpluperfectense. Poiche.
Io Hauessi tenuto, Since I had hilde. Tu Hauessi tenuto, Since thou had
hilde, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Future tense. Quando.
Sin. Io Hauero tenuto, Tu hauerai tenuto, Colui hauera tenuto, when I thou he
shall have hilde.
we you they


Plu. Noi haueremo tenuto, Voi hauerete tenuto, Coloro hauera^no tenuto

Th'infinitiue mode: Present tense.
Tenere, To hold.
Preterperfectense.
Hauer tenuto, To have hilde.
Future tense.
Dover tenere Esser per tenere To be to hold, or to hold herafter.
Hauere a tenere
Participles Tenente, holding. Tenuto, hilde. Tenenti, holding. Tenuti, hilde.

Geru^des Present tense.
Tenendo, Holding.
Preterperfectense.
Hauendo tenuto, having hilde.
Future tense.
Douendo tenere Hauendo a tenere Being, or having to hold.
Essendo per tenere

The third Conjugation.
Th'Indicatiue mode: Present tense.
Singul. Io Leggo, I read. Tu Leggi, thou read. Colui Leg, he reads.
Plur. Noi Leggiamo, we read. Voi Leggete, you read. Coloro Leggono, they
read.

Preterimperfectense.
Sin. Io Leggeua, and Leggea, Tu Leggeui. Colui Leggeua and Leggea, I thou he
did read.
we you they

Plu. Noi Leggeuamo, Voi Leggeuate, coloro Leggeuano and leggeano

Preterperfectense.
Sing. Io Lessi, and Ho letto, Tu leggesti, and hai letto, Colui less, and ha
letto, I thou he we have read.
you they

Plur. Noi Leggemmo, and habbiamo letto, Voi leggeste, and hauete letto, Coloro
lessero, and ha^no letto,

Preterpluperfectense.
Sing. Io Haueua letto, Tu haueui letto, Colui haueua letto, I thou he had
read.
we you they

Plur. Noi Haueuamo letto, Voi haueuate letto, Coloro haueuano letto,

Future tense.
Sing. Io Leggero, Tu leggerai, Colui leggera, I thou he shall or will read.
we you they

Plur. Noi Leggeremo, Voi leggerete, Coloro leggeranno,

Io Voglio leggere, I will read. Tu Voi leggere, thou will read, etc. as in
the Indicative mode.
Th'imparatiue mode: Present tense.
Singul. Leggi tu, Read thou. Legga colui, let him read.
Plur. Leggiamo noi, let us read. Leggete voi, read you. Leggano coloro, let
them read. Non Leggere, read not thou.

The Optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Legga, Tu Legga, Colui Legga, God grant that I thou he read.
we you they


Plur. Noi Leggiamo, Voi Leggiate, Coloro Leggano,

Preterimperfectense. O Dio Volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Leggessi, Tu Leggessi, Colui Leggesse, I would to God that I thou he
read, or did read.
we you they


Plu. Noi Leggessimo, Voi Leggeste, Coloro leggessero,

Preterperfectense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Habbia letto, Tu habbi letto, Colui habbia letto, god grant that I
thou he have read.
we you they


Plu. Noi habbiamo letto, Voi habbiate letto, Coloro habbiano letto,

Preterpluperfectense. O Dio volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Hauessi letto, Tu hauessi letto, Colui hauesse letto, I would to god
that I thou he had read.
we you they


Plu. Noi Hauessimo letto, Voi haueste letto, Coloro hauessero letto

Future tense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Legga da qua innanzi. Tu Legga da qua innanzi, Colui Legga da qua
innanzi, god grant that I thou he read herafter.
we you they


Plur. Noi Leggiamo da qua innanzi, Voi Leggiate da qua innanzi. Coloro leggano
da qua innanzi.

The subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Sing. Io Legga, Tu Legga, Colui Legga, for as much as I thou he read.
we you they


Plur. Noi Leggiamo, Voi Leggiate, Coloro Leggano,

Preterimperfectense. Auegna che.
Io Leggessi, Although I read or did read. Tu leggessi, although thou read
or did read, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Se.
Sin. Io Leggerei, and Leggeria, Tu Leggeresti, Colui Leggerebbe, and Leggeria,
I thou he should read.
we you they

Plu. Noi Leggeremmo, Voi Leggereste, Coloro Leggerebbono, and Leggeriano,

Preterperfectense. Quando.
Io Habbia letto, when I have read. Tu Habbi letto, when thou have read,
etc. as in the optatiue mode.
Otherways, Che.
Sin. Io Hauerei, and Haueria letto, Tu haueresti letto, Colui hauerebbe, and
haueria letto, that I thou he should have read.
we you they


Plu. Noi haueremmo letto, Voi hauereste letto, Coloro hauerebbono and
haueriano letto,

Preterpluperfectense. Poi che.
Io Hauessi letto, Since I had read. Tu Hauessi letto, Since thou had
read, etc. as in the optatiue mode.
Future tense. Quando.
Sin. Io Hauero letto, Tu hauerai letto, Colui hauera letto, when I thou he
shall have read.
we you they


Plu. Noi haueremo letto, Voi hauerete letto, Coloro hauera^no letto,

The Infinitive mode: Present tense.
Leggere, to read.
Preterperfectense.
Hauer letto, to have read.
Future tense.
Dover Leggere Hauer a Leggere To be to read, or to read herafter.
Esser per Leggere
Participles Leggente, reading. Letto, read. Legenti, reading, Letti, read.

Geru^des Present tense.
Leggendo, reading.
Preterperfectense.
Hauendo letto, having read.
Future tense.
Douendo leggere Hauendo da leggere Being, or having to read.
Essendo per leggere

The forth Conjugation.
The Indicative mode: Present tense.
Singul. Io Odo, I hear. Tu Odi, thou hear. Colui Ode, he hears.
Plur. Noi Vdiamo, we hear. Voi Vdite, you hear. Coloro Odono, they hear.

Preterimperfectense.
Sin. Io Vdiua, Tu vdiui, Colui vdiua, I thou he heard or did hear
we you they

Plu. Noi vdiuamo, Voi vdiuate, Coloro vdiuano and vdiano,

Preterperfectense.
Sing. Io Vdi, vdij, and ho vdito, Tu vdisti, and hai vdito, Colui vdi, and ha
vdito, I thou he have heard.
we you they

Plur. Noi Vdimmo, and Habbiamo vdito, Voi vdiste and hauete vdito, Coloro
vdirono, vdiron, vdiro, vdir, and hanno vdito.

Preterpluperfectense.
Sing. Io Haueua Vdito, Tu haueui vdito, Colui haueua vdito, I thou he had heard
we you they

Plur. Noi haueuamo vdito, Voi haueuate vdito, Coloro haueuano vdito,

Future tense.
Sing. Io Vdiro, Tu vdirai, I thou shall or will hear.
he we you shall or vvil hear.
they


Colui vdira, Plur. Noi Vdiremo, Voi vdirete, Coloro vdiranno,

Io Voglio vdire, I will hear. Tu Voi vdire, thou will hear, etc.
Th'imperatiue mode: Present tense.
Sing. Odi tu: hear thou. Oda colui, let him hear. Non Vdire, hear not thou.
Plur. Vdiamo noi, let us hear. Vdite voi, hear you. Odano coloro, let them
hear,

The optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Oda, Tu Oda, Colui Oda, God grant that I thou he hear.
we you they


Plur. Noi Odiamo, Voi Odiate, Coloro Odano,

Preterimperfectense. O Dio Volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Vdissi, Tu vdissi, Colui vdisse, I would to god that I thou he heard
or did hear
we you they


Plu. Noi vdissimo. Voi vdiste, Coloro vdissero,

Preterperfectense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Habbia vdito, Tu habbia vdito, Coli i habbia vdito, God grant that I
thou he have heard.
we you they


Plu. Noi habbiamo vdito, Voi habbiate vdito, Coloro habbiano vdito,

Preterpluperfectense. O Dio Volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Hauessi vdito, Tu hauessi vdito, Colui hauesse vdito, I would to God
that I thou he had heard
we you they


Plu. Noi Hauessimo vdito, Voi haueste vdito, Coloro hauessero vdito,

Future tense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Oda da qua inna^zi, Tu Oda da qua inna^zi Colui Oda da qua innanzi,
God grant that I thou he we hear herafter.
you they


Plu. Noi Vdiamo da qua innanzi, Voi Vdiate da qua innanzi, Coloro Odano da qua
innanzi,

The subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che, etc.
Sing. Io Oda, Tu Oda, Colui Oda, for as much as I thou he hear.
we you they


Plur. Noi Vdiamo, Voi Vdiate, Coloro Odano,

Preterimperfectense. Auegna che, etc.
Sin. Io Vdissi, Tu vdissi, Colui vdisse, Although I thou he hard or did hear
we you they


Plu. Noi Vdissimo, Voi vdiste, Coloro vdissero

Otherwise, Se.
Sing. Io Vdirei, and vdiria, Tu vdiresti, Colui vdirebbe, and vdiria, if I
thou he should hear.
we you they


Plur. Noi vdiremmo, Voi vdireste, Coloro vdirebbono, and vdiriano.

Preterperfectense. Quando.
Sin. Io Habbia vdito, Tu habbia vdito, Colui habbia vdito, when I thou he
have heard.
we you they


Plu. Noi habbiamo vdito, Voi habbiate vdito, Coloro habbiano vdito,

Otherwise, Che.
Sing. Io Hauerei and Haueria vdito, Tu haueresti vdito, Colui hauerebbe and
baueria vdito, that I thou he should have heard
we you they


Plur. Noi Hauere^mo vdito, Voi hauereste vdito, Coloro hauerebbono and
haueriano vdito,

Preterpluperfectense. Poi che.
Sin. Io Hauessi vdito, Tu hauessi vdito, Colui hauesse vdito, Since that I
thou he had heard.
we you they


Plu. Noi Hauessimo vdito, Voi haueste vdito, Coloro hauessero vdito.

Future tense. Quando.
Sin. Io hauero Vdito, Tu hauerai vdito, Colui hauera vdito, when I thou he
shall have heard.
we you they


Plu Noi haueremo vdito, Voi hauerete vdito, Coloro haueranno vdito,

The Infinitive mode: Present tense.
Vdire, to hear.
Preterperfectense.
Hauere vdito, to have heard.
Future tense.
Douere vdire Hauere ad vdire To be to hear, or to hear herafter.
Essere per vdire
Participles Vdiente, hearing: vdito heard. Vdienti hearing: vditi heard.

Gerundes Present tense.
Odendo, Hearing.
Preterperfectense.
Hauendo vdito, Having heard.
Future tense.
Douendo Vdire Essendo per vdire Being or having to hear
Hauendo ad vdire

And because the Italian tongue does lack a Verb passive: and cannot express
the passive voice, without the help of this verb Sono: therefore we must
first declyne this verb before we can proceed to the other.

The Indicative mode: Present tense.
Sing. Io Sono: I am. Tu Sei: thou art. Colui E: he is.
Plur. Noi Siamo: we are or be. Vei Sete: you are or be. Coloro Sono: they
are or be.

Preter imperfectense.
Sing. Io Era, Ivvas, Tu Eri, thou vvast. Colui Era, he was.
Plur. Noi Erauamo and Eramo, we were, Voi Erauate, you were. Coloro Erano,
they we.

Preterperfectense.
Sing. Io Fui, and Sono stato, Tu Fosti, and Sei stato, Colui Fu, and E stato,
I thou he have been.
we you they

Plur. Noi Fummo, and Siamo stati, Voi Foste, and Sete stati, Coloro Furono,
Furo, Furo, and Sono stati.

Preterpluperfectense.
Sing. Io Era stato, Tu Eri stato, Colui Era stato, I thou he had been.
we you they

Plur. Noi Erauamo stati, Voi Erauate stati, Coloro Erano stati,

Future tense.
Sing. Io Saro, and Fia, Tu Sarai, Colui Sara, Fia, and Fie, I thou he shall be.
we you they

Plur. Noi Saremo, Voi Sarete, Coloro Saranno, and Fiano,

The imperative mode: Present tense.
Singul. Sij, Sia, and Sie tu, Be thou. Sia, and Sie colui, Let him be.
Plur. Siamo noi, Let us be. Siate voi, Be you. Siano coloro, Let them be.

The Optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio voglia, Dio voglia, o Dio che, o che.
Sin. Io Sia, Tu Sij, Sia, and sie, God grant that I thou he be.
we you they


Plu. Noi Siamo, Voi Siate, Coloro Siano, and Sieno,

Preterimperfectense. O Dio Volesse, Dio volesse, o Dio che, o che,
Sin. Io Fossi, and Fussi, Tu Fossi, and Fussi, Colui fosse, and fusse Would
to God that I thou he we were.
you they


Plu. Noi Fossimo, and fussimo, Voi foste, and fuste, Coloro fossero, and
fussero.

Preterperfectense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Sia stato, Tu Sij stato, Colui Sia stato, God grant that I thou he
have been.
we you they


Plu. Noi Siamo stati, Voi Siate stati, Coloro Siano stati,

Preterpluperfectense. O Dio volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Fossi stato, Tu Fossi stato, Colui Fosse stato, I would to God that I
thou he had been.
we you they


Plu. Noi Fossimo stati, Voi Foste stati, coloro Fossero stati,

Future tense. O Dio voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Sia da qua innanzi, Tu Sij da qua innanzi, Colui Sia da qua inna^zi
Plu. Noi Siamo da qua innanzi, God grant that I thou he we be herafter.
you they

Voi Siate da qua inna^zi, Coloro Siano da qua innanzi,

The subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Sing. Io Sia, Tu Sij, Colui Sia, for as much as I am. thou art. he is. we
are. you are. they are.


Plur. Noi Siamo, Voi Siate, Coloro Siano,

Preterimperfectense. Auegna che.
Sing. Io Fussi, Tu Fussi, Colui Fusse, Although I thou he were.
we you they


Plur. Noi Fussimo, Voi Fuste, Coloro fussero

Otherwise, Se.
Singu. Io Sarei and Saria, Tu Saresti, Colui Sarebbe, and Saria, if I thou he
should be.
we you they


Plur. Noi Saremmo, Voi Sareste, Coloro Sarebbono, and sariano,

Preterperfectense. Quando.
Sing. Io Sia stato, Tu Sij stato, Colui Sia stato, when I thou he have be^.
we you they


Plur. Noi Siamo stati, Voi Siate stati, Coloro Siano stati,

Other wise, Che.
Sin. Io Sarei, and Saria stato Tu Saresti stato, Colui Sarebbe and Saria
stato, that I thou he should have been.
we you they


Plu. Noi Saremmo stati, Voi Sareste stati, Coloro sarebbono and sariano stati,

Preterpluperfectense. Poi che.
Sin. Io Fussi stato, Tu Fussi stato, Colui Fusse stato, Since that I thou he
had been.
we you they


Plu. Noi Fussimo stati, Voi Fuste stati, Coloro fussero stati,

Future tense. Quando.
Sin. Io Saro stato, Tu sarai stato, Colui sara stato, when I thou shall have been.
he we you they


Plu. Noi Saremo stati, Voi sarete stati, Coloro saranno stati,

Th'infinitiue mode: Present tense.
Essere, to be.
Preter perfectense.
Essere stato, to have been.
Future tense.
Douer' Essere, Hauere ad Essere, To be to be, or to have to be.

Participles Stato, stata: and suto, suta, ben. Stati, state: and suti, suit,
ben.

Gerundes Present tense.
Essendo, Being.
Preterperfectense.
Essendo stato, stata, stati, state: Having ben.
Future tense.
Douendo essere Hauendo ad essere Being, or having to be.
Essendo per essere

The declining of a Verb passive of the first Conjugation.
The Indicative mode: Present tense.
Sing. Io Sono amato, I am loved. Tu Sei amato, thou art loved. Colui E amato:
si ama, amasi, he is loved.
Plur. Noi Siamo amati, we are loved. Voi Sete amati, you are loved. Coloro
Sono amati: si amano, amonosi, and amansi, they are loved.

Preterimperfectense.
Sing. Io Era amato, Tu Eria amato, I thou was loved.
he
Colui Era amato, si amaua, amauasi.
Plur. Noi Erauamo amati, Voi Erauate amati, we you were loved.
they
Coloro Erano amati, si amauano, amauanosi, and amauansi.

Preterperfectense.
Sin. Io Sono stato, and Fui amato, Tu Sei stato, and Fosti amato, Colui
Estato, and Fu amato: si amo, amossi. I thou he have been loved.
we you they

Plu. Noi Siamo stati, and Fummo amati, Voi sete stati, and Foste amati Coloro
Sono stati and Furono amati: si amarono, Amaron, amaro, amar, and amaronosi,
amaronsi, amarosi, amarsi,

Preterpluperfectense.
Sin. Io Era stato amato, Tu Eristato amato, Colui Erastato amato, I thou he
had been loved.
we you they

Plu. Noi erauamo stati amati, Voierauate stati amati, Coloro erano stati amati,

Future tense.
Singu. Io Saro amato, Tu Sarai amato, Colui Sara amato: si amera, amerassi. I
thou he shall be loved.
we you they

Plur. Noi Saremo amati, Voi sarete amati, Coloro saranno amati: si Ameranno,
amerannosi, and ameransi.

Th'Imparatiue mode: Present tense.
Sing. Sij amato tu, Be thou loved. Sia amato colui, si ami, amisi, Let him be
loved.
Plur. Siamo amati noi, Let us be loved. Siate amati voi, be you loved. Siano
amati coloro, si amino, aminosi, and aminsi, let them be loved.

The Optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Sia amato, Tu sij amato, Coluisia amato, si ami, amisi, God grant
that I thou he be loved.
we you they


Plur. Noi Siamo amati, Voi siate amati, Coloro siano amati, si amino, aminosi,
and aminsi,

Preterimperfectense. O Dio volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Fossi amato, Tu fossi amato, Colui fosse amato, si amasse, amassesi, I
would to god that I thou he were loved.
we you they


Plu. Noi Fossimo amati, Voi foste amati, Coloro fossero amati, si amassero,
amasserosi, and amassersi.

Preterperfectense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Sia stato amato, Tu Sij stato amato, Colui Sia stato amato, God grant
that I thou he have been loved.
we you they


Plu. Noi Siamo stati amati, Voi Siate stati amati, Coloro siano stati amati

Preterpluperfectense. O Dio volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Fossi stato amato, Tu fossi stato amato Colui fosse stato amato, I
would to God that I thou he had been loved.
we you they


Plu. Noi fossimo stati amati, Voi foste stati amati, Coloro fossero stati
amati.

Future tense. O Dio voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Sia amato da qua innanzi, Tu sy amato da qua innanzi, colui sia amato
da qua innanzi, God grant that I thou he be loved herafter.
we you they


Plur. Noi Siamo amati da qua innanzi, Voi siate amati da qua innanzi, Coloro
siano amati da qua innanzi.

The Subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Io Sia amato, For as much as I am loved. Tu sy amato, For as much as thou art
loved, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Preterimperfectense. Auegna che.
Io Fossi amato, Although I were loved. Tu Fossi amato, Although thou were
loved, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Se.
Sing. Io Sarei and saria amato Tu saresti amato, If I thou should be loved.
he

Colui sarebbe and saria amato: si amerebbe, amerebbesi, si ameria, ameriasi.
Plur. Noi Seremmo amati, Voi sareste amati, If we you should be loved.
they

Coloro Sarebbono and sariano amati: si amerebbono, amerebbonosi, amerebbonsi,
si ameriano, amerianosi, and ameriansi.

Preterperfectense. Concio sia cosa che.
Io Sia stato amato: For as much as I have been loved. Tu Sy stato amato: For
as much as thou have ben loved, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Se.
Sin. Io Sarei, and saria stato amato, Tu saresti stato amato, Colui sarebbe,
and saria stato amato, If I thou he should have be^ loved.
we you they


Plu. Noi Sare^mo stati amati, Voi sareste stati amati, Coloro sarebbono, and
sariano stati amati,

Preterpluperfectense. Poi che.
Io Fossi stato amato, Since I had been loved, Tu fossi stato amato, Since thou
had ben loved, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Future tense. Quando.
Si^. Io Saro stato amato, Tu Sarai stato amato, Colui Sara stato amato, when I
thou he shall have been loved.
we you they


Pl. Noi Saremo stati amati, Voi Sarete stati amati, Coloro Sara^no stati amati

The Infinitive mode: Present tense.
Essere amato, or Amarsi, to be loved.
Preterperfectense.
Essere stato amato, or Essersi amato, to have been loved.
Future tense.
Douere essere amato, Douersi amare, Douere amarsi, Hauere ad essere amato,
Hauere ad amarsi, hauersi ad amare, Essere per amarsi, Essersi per amare, to
be, to be loved: to have to be loved.
Participles Amato, loved. Amati, loved. Amata, loved. Amate, loved.

Gerundes Present tense.
Esse^do amato: and Ama^dosi: Being loved.
Preterperfectense.
Esse^do stato amato: Having ben loved.
Future tense.
Essendo per essere amato: Essendo si per amare: and Essendo per amarsi,
Douendo essere amato, Douendosi amare, and Douendo amarsi, Hauendo ad essere
amato, Hauendosi ad amare, and Hauendo ad amarsi: Being to be loved.

And because this Verb Ho (I have) comes often in use: as may be seen in the
declining of the former Verbes: Therefore I have thought good not t'omit the
declining of it.

The Indicative mode: Present tense.
Sing. Io Ho, and Haggio poetical: I have. Tu Hai: thou haste. Colui Ha, and
Have poetical: he has.
Plur. Noi Habbiamo: we have. Voi hauete: you have. Coloro hanno: they have.

Preterimperfectense.
Sin. Io Haueua, and Hauea, Tu haueui, Colui haueua and hauea, I thou he had.
we you they

Plu. Noi Haueuamo, Voi haueuate, Coloro haueuano, and haueano,

Preterperfectense.
Singu. Io Hebbi; and Ho hauuto, Tu hauesti, and hai hauuto, Colui hebbe, and
ha hauuto I thou he have had.
we you they

Plur. Noi Hauemmo, and habbiamo hauuto, Voi haueste, and hauete hauuto Coloro
hebbero, and hanno hauuto,

Preterpluperfectense.
Sing. Io Haueua hauuto, Tu haueui hauuto, Colui haueua hauuto, I thou he had
had.
we you they

Plur. Noi Haueuamo hauuto, Voi haueuate hauuto, Coloro haueuano hauuto,

Future tense.
Sing. Io Hauero, hauro, and Harro, Tu hauerai, haurai, and harrai Colui
hauera, haura, and harra, I thou he shall
have. we you they

Plur. Noi Haueremo, hauremo, and harremo, Voi hauerete, haurete, and harrete,
Coloro haueranno, haurano, and harranno,

Th'Imperatiue mode: Present tense.
Sing. Habbia tu, have thou, Habbia colui, let him have.
Plur. Habbiamo noi, let us have. Habbiate voi, have you. Habbiano coloro, let
them have.

The Optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Habbia, Tu habbia, Colui habbia, God grant that I thou he have.
we you they


Plur. Noi Habbiamo, Voi habbiate, Coloro habbiano,

Preterimperfectense. O Dio volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Hauessi, Tu hauessi, Colui hauesse, I would to God that I thou he had.
we you they


Plu. Noi Hauessimo, Voi haueste, Coloro hauessero,

Preterperfectense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Habbia hauuto Tu habbia hauuto, Colui habbia hauuto, God grant that I
thou he have had.
we you they


Plu. Noi Habbiamo hauuto, Voi habbiate hauuto, Coloro habbiano hauuto

Preterpluperfectense. O Dio volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Hauessi hauuto, Tu hauessi hauuto, Colui hauesse hauuto, I would to
God that I thou he had had
we you they


Plu. Noi Hauessimo hauuto, Voi hauesie hauuto, Coloro hauessero hauuto

Future tense. O Dio voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Habbia da qua inna^zi Tu habbia da qua inna^zi Colui habbia da qua
innanzi, God grant that I thou he have herafter.
we you they


Plu. Noi Habbiamo da qua innanzi, Voi habbiate da qua innanzi, Coloro habbiano
da qua innanzi,

The Subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Io Habbia, For as much as I have. Tu habbia, For as much as thou have, etc. as
in the Optatiue mode.
Preter imperfectense. Auegna che.
Io Hauessi, Although I had. Tu hauessi, Although thou had, etc. as in
th'Optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Se.
Sin. Io Hauerei, haurei, and harrei: Haueria, hauria, and harria, Tu
haueresti, hauresti, and harresti, Colui hauerebbe haurebbe, and harrebbe:
Haueria, hauria, and harria, If I thou he should have.
we you they


Plu. Noi Haueremmo, hauremmo, and harremmo, Voi hauereste, haureste, and
harreste, Coloro hauerebbono, haurebbono, and harrebbono: Haueriano, hauriano,
and harriano.

Preter perfectense. Concio sia cosa che.
Io Habbia hauuto: For as much as I have had. Tu habbia huuto: For as much as
thou have had, etc, as in the Optatiue mode.
Otherwise, O Che.
Si. Io Hauerei, and Haueria hauuto. Tu haueresti hauuto, Colui hauerebbe and
haueria hauuto, o that I thou he should have had.
we you they


Pl. Noi Haueremmo hauuto, Voi hauereste hauuto, Coloro hauerebbono, and
haueriano hauuto,

Preterpluperfectense. Poi che.
Io Hauessi hauuto: Since I had had. Tu hauessi hauuto, Since thou had had,
etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Future tense. Quando.
Sin. Io Hauero hauuto, Tu hauer ai hauuto, Colui hauera hauuto, when I thou
he shall have had.
we you they


Plu. Noi Haueremo hauuto, Voi hauereste hauuto, Coloro houera^no hauuto

Th'Infinitiue mode: Present tense.
Hauere, to have.
Preterperfectense.
Hauere hauuto, to have had.
Future tense.
Douere hauere, To be to have.
Essere per hauere,
Participles Hauente, having. Hauuto, ta, had. Hauenti, having. Hauuti, te,
had.

Geru^des Present tense.
Hauendo, having.
Preterperfectense.
Hauendo hauuto, having had.
Future tense.
Douendo hauere Hauendo ad hauere Having, or being to have.
Essendo per hauere

The declining of the Verb
Andare: To go.
The Indicative mode: Present tense.
Sing. Io Vo, and Vado, I go. Tu vai: thou go. Colui va, he goes.
Plur. Noi Andiamo, we go. Voi andate, you go. Coloro vanno, they go.

Preterimperfectense.
Sing. Io Andaua, Tu andaui, Colui andaua, I thou he went or did go.
we you they

Plur. Noi Andauamo, Voi andauate, Coloro andauanno,

Preterperfectense.
Sin. Io Andai, and Sono andato, Tu andasti, and Sei andato, Colui ando, and E
andato, I thou he have gone.
we you they

Plu. Noi Andammo, and Siamo andati, Voi andaste, and Sete andati, Coloro
andarono, and Sono andati,

Preterpluperfectense.
Sing. Io Era andato, Tu Eri andato, Colui Era andato, I thou he had gone, or
was gone.
we you they

Plur. Noi Erauamo andati, Voi erauate andati, Coloro erano andati,

Future tense.
Sin. Io Andero, and Andro, Tu anderai, and andrai, Colui andera, and andra, I
thou he shall go.
we you they

Plu. Noi Anderemo, and andremo, Voi anderete, and andrete, Coloro andera^no,
and andra^no

Th'imperatiue mode: Present tense.
Sing. Vatu, go thou. Vada, and vadi colui, let him go.
Plur. Andiamo noi, let us go. Andate voi, go you. Vadano, and vadino coloro,
let them go.

The Optatiue mode: Present tense. O Dio voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Vada, and vadi, Tu vada, and vadi, Colui vada, and vadi, God grant
that I thou he go.
we you they


Plu. Noi Andiamo, Voi andiate, Coloro vadano, and vadino

Preterimperfectense. O Dio volesse che, etc.
Sing. Io Andassi, Tu andassi, Colui andasse, I would to god that I thou he
went, or did go.
we you they


Plur. Noi Andassimo, Voi andaste, Coloro andassero,

Preterperfectense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sing. Io Sia andato, Tu Sij andato, Colui Sia andato, God grant that I thou
he have gone.
we you they


Plur. Noi Siamo andati, Voi Siate andati, Coloro Siano andati,

Preterpluperfectense. O. Dio Volesse che, etc.
Sin. Io Fossi andato, Tu fossi andato, Colui fosse' andato, I would to God
that I thou he had gone.
we you they


Plu. Noi Fossimo andati, Voi foste andati, Coloro fossero andati,

Future tense. O Dio Voglia che, etc.
Sin. Io Vada da qua innanzi, Tu vada da qua inna^zi, Colui vada da qua
innanzi, God grant that I thou he go herafter.
we you they


Plu. Noi Andiamo da qua innanzi, Voi Andiate da qua innanzi, Coloro vadano da
qua innanzi,

The Subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Sin. Io Vada and Vadi, Tu vada and vadi, Colui vada and vadi for as much as I
thou he go.
we you they


Plu. Noi Andiamo, Voi Andiate, Coloro vadano,

Preterimperfectense. Auegna che.
Io Andassi, Although I went or did go. Tu andassi, Although thou vventest, or
did go, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Se.
Sin. Io Anderei, Andrei, Anderia, and Andria, Tu anderesti, and Andresti,
Colui anderebbe, andrebbe, Anderia, and andria. If I thou he should go.
we you they


Plu. Noi Anderemmo, and Andremmo, Voi andereste, and andreste, Coloro
anderebbono, andrebbono, anderiano, and andriano.

Preterperfectense. Concio sia cosa che.
Io Sia andato, For as much sa I have gone. Tu Sij andato, For as much as thou
have gone, etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Otherwise, Che.
Sin. Io Sarei, and Saria andato Tu Saresti andato, Colui Sarebbe, and Saria
andato, that I thou he should have gone.
we you they


Plu. Noi Saremmo andati, Voi Sareste andati, Coloro Sarebbono, and Sariano
andati,

Preterpluperfectense. Poi che.
Io Fossi andato, Since I had gone. Tu fossi andato, Since thou had gone,
etc. as in the Optatiue mode.
Future tense. Quando.
Sin. Io Saro andato, Tu Sarai andato, Colui Sara andato, when I thou he
shall be gone.
we you they


Plu. Noi Saremo andati, Voi Sarete andati, Coloro Sara^no andati,

Th'Infinitiue mode: Present tense.
Andare, To go.
Preterperfectense.
Essere andato, To be gonne.
Future tense.
Essere per andare, Douere andare, To be, or to have to go.
Hauere ad andare,
Participles Anda^te, going. Andato, ta: I to ta, gone. Anda^ti, going. Andati,
te: I ti, I te, gone.

Gerundes Present tense.
Andando, Going.
Preterperfectense.
Essendo andato, Being gone.
Future tense.
Douendo andare, Essendo per andare, Being, or having to go.
Hauendo andare,

I do think good not to omit certain words used by Poets in the declining
in this Verb: As in

The Indicative mode: Present tense.
Plu. Noi Gimo, we go. Voi Gite, you go.
Preterimperfectense.
ng. Io Giua, Tu Giui, Colui Giua, I thou he went, or did go.
we you they

lur. Noi Giuamo, Voi Giuate, Coloro Giuano,

Preterperfectense.
Sing. Io Gij, Tu Gisti, Colui Gio, I thou he have gonne.
we you they

Plur. Noi Gimmo, Voi Gisti, Coloro Girono,

Future tense.
Sing. Io Giro, Tu Girai, or Irai, Colui Gira, I thou he shall go.
we you they

Plur. Noi Giremo, Voi Girete, or Irete, Coloro Giranno,

Th'Imperatiue mode: Present tense.
Plur. Gite or Ite voi, Go you.

The Optatiue mode: Preterimperfectense. O che.
Sing. Io Gissi, Tu Gissi, Colui Gisse, o that I thou he went, or did go.
we you they


Plur. Noi Gissimo, Voi Giste, Coloro Gissero,

The Subiunctiue mode: Present tense. Concio sia cosa che.
Plur. Voi Giate, For as much as you go.

Preterimperfectense. Auegna che.
Io Gissi, Tu Gissi, etc. as in the Optatiue.
Otherwise, Se.
Sing. Io Girei, Tu Giresti, Colui Girebbe, If I thou he should go.
we you


Plur. Noi Giremmo, Voi Giste and Gireste,

The other tenses are declined with these participles Gito, and Ito, ta: Giti
and Iti, te: (gonne): with Io Sono; Io era; Io sia; Io fossi; etc. as before
in the declining of the Verb Andare.

The Infinitive mode: Present tense.
Gire and Ire, To go.
Because there is somvvhat more to do, in forming of the Preterperfectenses,
then of the other te^ses, I have thought good to say some thing briefly thereof:

Therefore all Preterperfecte^ses of the Indicative mode, of Verbes of the first
Conjugation, do end in Ai: as Amai, of the verb Amo: Cantai of Canto: Parlai
of Parlo: Mangiai of Mangio: and Pagai of the Verb Pago.

There are excepted certain Verbes which in the Present tense are of one
syllable: For Sto has stei, and stetti: Do has Dei, Detti, and Diedi: Fo or
Faccio has Fei, and Feci.

All Verbes of the second Co^iugatio^, that have C as it were a proper and
peculiar letter, Do make their Preterperfectenses in cqui: as of Piaccio
Piacqui: the first person Singular; and cque, as Piacque the third. So of
Taccio, Tacqui, and Tacque: of Giaccio, Giacqui and Giacque.

But such as have L, in the Present tense, do add S in the Preterperfectense,
as of Vaglio, is made Valsi: of Doglio, Dolsi: But Voglio has in verse Valsi,
and in prose Volli: Howbeit, I would more willingly use the former in prose,
as (in my judgment) the least affected.

Again certain Verbes Do double the same proper and peculiar letter: as of
Cado, Caddi: which also has Cadei and Cadetti. Again of Tengo is Tenni:
Beuo, Beuui.

And the Verb So, has Seppi, Ho, Hebbi. Godo, Godei, and Godetti. Posso,
Potei, and Potetti. Veggo or Veggio, Vidi. Proueggo, Prouidi. Paio, Parui and
Parsi.

Further toutching the preterperfectenses of the third Conjugation: this is
the rule, that whose participles do end in Vto, the Preterperfectense do end
in Ei, and in Etti. whereupon the Verb Perdo, when it has in the participle
Perduto, it has in the Preterperfectense, Perdei and Perdetti. Compio, has
Compiuto; Compici, and Compietti. Riceuo, Riceuuto; Riceuei and Riceuetti. But
the Verb Concedo, has Conceduto in prose, and Concesso in verse, so that
after his Participle it has in the Preterperfectense. Concedei, Concedetti,
and concessi. Mordo has Morduto or Morso, in the Participle; and Mordei,
Mordetti, and Morsi in the Preterperfectense. But Conosco, notvvithstanding it
has in the Participle Conosciuto, it has in the Preterperf. Conobbi.

Also Verbes of the same Conjugation, when they have in their participles a
double T, they have also in their Preterimperfectenses a double S, as of Leggo
is Letto; and Lessi: of Scriuo is Scritto, and Scrissi: of Eleggo is Eletto,
and Elessi.

There is excepted Stringo, that has in the participle Stretto: but in the
Preterperfecte^se Strinsi: so are likewise his compoundes, Astringo and
Costringo. Howbeit, I think that to happen, either, because it were else to
be said in the Participle Strinto, if any would look for the raison, raither
then for the use of the tongue: or else, because the latin Preterperfectense
has Strinxi, from whence it seems that Strinsi is derived: as of Pinxi,
Pinsi: of Cinxi, Cinsi: of Finxi, Finsi: of Planxi, Piansi: and of Extinxi,
Estinsi.

To conclude, the Verb Ardo has Arso in the Participle, and Arsi in the
Preterperfectense. Rido has Riso, and Risi. Toglio Tolto and Tolsi. Muouo
Mosso, and Mossi. Offendo Offesso, and Offesi. Spargo Sparso, and Sparsi. Metto
Messo, and Misi. Pongo Posto, and Posi. Nasco Nato, and Nacqui. Nuoco Nociuto,
and Nocqui. Sono Suto, and Fui. Rompo Rotto, and Ruppi. Piouo Piouuto, and
Piouui. Diuido Diuiso, and Diuisi. Vccido Vcciso, and Vccisi. Spendo Speso, and
Spesi.

Lastly, Verbes of the fourth Conjugation have their Preterperfectenses ending
in single I, with the accent: as Vdi, Senti, of the Verbes Oido and Sento:
Howbeit many times (as in prose) they have a double I: as Vdij, Sentij. But
Dico has Dissi. Offero, Offersi. Vengo, Venni.

Of words, which commonly are fixed unto Verbes.
These they are Mi, Ti, Si, Ci, Ne, Vi: The which, with what elegancy they
cleave unto Verbes, and what their significatio^s are, shall clearly appear
by that, which shall be said of the use of them.

First, they are commonly set before and after Verbes: as Mi ama, amami, Ti ama,
amati, Si ama, amasi, Ci ama, amaci, Ne ama, amane, Vi ama, amaui. But this
ought to be done with judgment: For it is not always, nor in every place
well sytting. For this manner of speech shall be less affected, Che ti disse
colui? then Che disseti colui? what has he said unto thee? Also we shall
speak with less curiosity, to say, Se tu mi ami non ti nuocera, then Se
amimi non noceratti: If thou love me it shall not hurt thee. But such a
judgment can hardly be taught, or not at all by precepts, since it ought to
be compared with the often reading of Aucthors, and use of the tongue. And yet
this is to be maked, that so often as these words do follow the verb, they
do depend on the accent, as if they were all one word: as Amami, Amati,
Amasi, Amaci, Amane, Amaui.

Further they do double the consonant, when they are set after Verbes, having
the accent in the last syllable: as Amommi, Amotti, Amossi, Amocci, Amonne,
Amonni: of the Preterperfectense Amo, he has loved. And so likevvyse Amerammi,
Ameratti, Amerassi, Ameracci, Ameranne, Ameranni: of the Future tense Amera, he
shall love.

Besides, Mi, Ti, and Si, do always retain the letter I, when they cleave
to a verb having none other word set between them: as by the examples
follovving may appear. But if any other word come between them, the then
change I, into E, vvherof this is an example: Me non battesti tu, thou have
not beaten me. The like does happen in comparing of persons together:
whereupon we say, Tu conosci me and lui, thou have known me and him. Tu
vedi me and io veggio te, thou see me, and I see thee. Tu feristi me, and
quello non toccasti, thou have vvounded me, and have not toutched him.

In like sort they are used, when a verb of the Infinitive mode does follovv
them: For we say, Ragionasi, Me hauer preso moglie, It is reported that I
have taken a wife. corre fama, Me essere inamorato, the rumor is, that I am in
love. But these speeches should be more rightly expressed thus: Ragionasi, che
io ho preso moglie. And Corre fama che io sono inamorato.

Lastly, they change I into E, when the Adverbe Come, goes before them, In
this sort: Io non sono auaro come te, I am not covetous, as thou art. Tu non
sei liberale, come me, thou art not liberal, as I am.

Toutching their signification and the use of them: it shall be more plainly
shevved by these types follovving.

Mi Me: mi batte, or Battemmi, he has beaten me. To me: Mi diede, and Diedemi,
he has given me, or to me.

Ti Thee: Ti batte, and Batteti: He has beaten thee. To thee: Ti diede, and
Diedeti: He has given thee or to thee.

Si Him self: Si vccise, and Vccisesi: He has kylde him self. To him self:
Si diede, and Diedesila morte, He has given him self the death: or to him
self.

Ci Us: Ci percosse, and Percosseci, He has stryke^ us. To us: Ci diede, and
Diedeci, He has given us, or to us. Here or thither: Ci fu, fucci, He has been
here. Ci ando, andocci, He has gone thither.

Here is to be remembered how that these a forsaide words are many times used
for orname^t sake: as Io mi credo, for Io credo. Tu ti pensi, for Tu pensi.
Egli si creed, for Egli creed. And Boccace does thus speak: Natural cosa, e di
ciascuno, che ci nasce, for che nasce.

Ne Us: Ne abbraccio, Abraccionne: He has imbrased us. To us: Ne diede,
Diedene, He has given to us.

Vi You: Vipercosse, Percosseui, He has stricken you. To you: Vi diede,
Diedeui, He has given to you. There or thither: Vifu, Fuuui, he has been
there. Vi Ando, Andouui: He has gone thither.

These words follovving do link together, and are many vvayes vttred in
speech: and that with no mean elegancy. And therefore how that is to be
done, may easly be perceived by these types that follow.

Mi Ti Me to thee: Io miti racommando, and Raccomandomiti, I do recommende me
unto thee. Thee to me: Tu miti raccomadasti, and Raccomandasti miti: thou have
recomme^ded thee unto me.

Mi Si Me to him: Egli mi sielesse; Elesse misi per grandissimo amico, he has
chosen me unto him for a most great friend. Him to me: Eg li misi raccomando,
and Raccomando misi, he has Recomme^ded him unto me.

Mi ci Me there or thither: Mi ci fermai, and fermaimici due giorni, I have
stayed there tovv days: Mi ci fe andare, Femmici andare, he caused me to go
thither. To me here: Mici diede, Diede mici mog lie, he gave unto me here a
wife.

Mi vi Me to you: Io miui raccomando, Raccommandomiui, I recommende me unto
you. You to me: Voi miui raccomandaste, Raccomandaste miui, you have you
recommended unto me. Me there or thither: Miui vesti, vestimmiui, he has
apparelled me there. Miui meno, Menommiui: he has brought me thither. To me
there: Miui compro; Comprommiui, un giardino: he has there bought unto me a
gardyne.

Ti ci Thee to us: Dio tici diede, diedetici per Padre, God has given thee
unto us for a father. Us to thee: Dio tici diede, dieditici per compagni: God
has given us unto thee for compagnions. Thee here or thither: Io tici vidi,
viditici: I have seen thee here. Io tici menai, Menaitici, I have brought thee
thither. To thee here: Dio tici diede, diedetici mo glie: God has here given
to thee a wife.

Ti si Thee to him: Dio tisi elesse, Elessetisi per figliolo: God has chosen
thee to him for his child. Him to thee: Egli ti si raccomanda, Raccomandatisi:
He does recommande him unto thee.

Ci si Him to us: Eg li ci si offerse, Offersecisi: He has offered him self
unto us. Us to him: Ci si press, Pressecisi per compagni: He has taken us
unto him for compagnions. Him here or hither: Ci si vccise, Vccisecisi: He has
here slain him self. Ci si lascio condurre, Lascioccisi condurre: He has
suffered him self to be brought hither. Here to him: Ci si diede, Diedecisi la
morte: He has given him self here the death.

Vi si Him to you: Vi si raccomanda, Raccomandauisi, he does reco^me^de him
unto you. You to him: Vi si elesse, Elesseuisi Dio per sigliuoli: God has
chosen you unto him for his children. Him there or thither: Vi si vccise,
Vcciseuisi. He has there slain him self. Vi si lascio, Lasciouisi condurre.
He has suffered him self to be brought thither. There to him: Visicompro,
Comprouuisi vna vigna: He has there bought to him self a vigne.

Vi ci You to us, or us to you: Dio vicidiede, Diedeuici per compagni: God has
given us unto you, or you to us for compagnions. You here: Vi ci batterono,
Batterouuici, they have beaten you here. You hither: Vi ci menarono,
Menaronuici, they have brought you hither. To you here: Vici compraste,
Comprasteuici vna casa: You have bought unto you here a house.

But when these words are joined with Ne, they do forgo I and take E, in
this sort: Mean, tene, seen, cene, vene, or a vouel follovving Men', ten',
sen', cen', ven' with an Apostropha. Howbeit a consonant follovving, they may
be used wholy, or abridged, but without the Apostropha. Their signification
and use, as hither to we have done, we will show here follovving.

Me ne To me of him, her, them, or thereof: Mean parlasti, Parlastimene: thou
have spoke to me, of him, her, them, or thereof. Me hence, thence, Mean scaccio,
Scacciommene: He has driven me, hence, thence. I hence, thence: Mean vo,
Vommene, I go hence, thence.

Te ne To thee of him, her, them, or thereof: Io tene parlai, Parlaitene: I have
spoken to thee of him, her, them, or thereof. Thee hence, thence: Tene scaccio,
scacciottene: He has driven thee hence, thence. Thou hence, thence, Tu tene
partisti, Partistirene: thou have departed hence, thence.

Se Ne To him self of him, her, them, or thereof: Seen promise, Promisesene
gran cose, He has promised to him self great things of him, her, them or
thereof. He hence, thence: Seen parti, Partissene, He has departed hence,
thence.

Ve Ne To you of him, her, them, or thereof: Ei vene parlo, Parlouuene: He has
spoken to you of him, her, them or thereof. You hence, thence: Voi vene andaste,
Andasteuene: you have gone you hence, thence.

Ce Ne To us of him, her, them or thereof: Ei ce ne parlo, Parloecene: He has
spoken to us of him, her, them, or thereof. We hence, thence: Noi cene
partimmo, Partimmocene: we have heparted us hence, thence.

These words are also joined with Articles, as herafter may appear: where
their use and signification is easy to by known.

Gli Mi, or Me Gli.
Them to me: Gli mi, or me gli raccomando: and Raccomando gli mi, or
Raccoma^dommegli. He has recommended them unto me. Me to him: Gli mi, or me
gli raccomandai: and Raccomandaiglimi, or Raccommandaimegli: I have me
recommended unto him.
Gli Ti or Te gli.
Them to thee: Gli ti, or Te gli raccomandai, and Raccomandaigliti, or
Raccomandaitegli: I have recommended them unto thee. Thee to him: Gliti, or
Tegliraccomandasti, and Raccomandastegliti, or Raccomadastetegli: thou have
recommended thee unto him.
Gli se, or Se gli.
Them to him: Gli si, or Se gli fece, and Feceglisi, or Fecesegli amici: He
made them friends unto him, or his friends. Him to him: Gli si, or Segli
raccomando, and Raccomandoglisi, or Raccomandossegli: He has him recommended
unto him.
Gli vi, or Ve gli.
Them to you: Gli vi, or Vegli raccomandai, and Raccomandaigliui, or
Raccomandaiuegli: I have them recommended unto you. You to him: Gliui, or Vegli
raccomandaste, and Raccomandastegliui, or Raccomandasteuegli: you have you
recommended unto him. Them there or thither: Gliui, or Vegli vidi, and
Vidigliui, or Vidiuegli: I have seen them there. Gliui, or Vegli condusi, and
Condussigliui, or Condussiuegli: I have brought them thither. Him there: Gliui,
or Vegli diedi, and Diedigliui, or Diediuegli il viuere, I have given him there
a lyning.
Glici, or Ce gli.
Them to us: Gli ci, or Ce gli raccomandasti, and Raccomandastiglici, or
Raccomandasticegli: you have them recommended unto us. Us to him: Gli ci, or Ce
gli raccomandammo and Raccomandammoglici, or Raccomandammocegli: we have us
commended unto him. Them here, or hither, Gli ci, or Ce gli vidi, and
vidiglici, or vidicegli: I have seen them here. Again Glici, or Ce gli
condussi, and Condussiglici: or Condussicegli: I have brought them hither. To
him here: Gli ci, or Ce gli diedi, and Diedeglici, or Diedecegli moglie: I have
here given to him a wife.
Lo mi, or Me lo.
Him to me, Lo mi, or Me lo raccomando, and Raccomandollomi, or
Raccommandommelo: He has him recommended unto me.
Lo ti, or Te lo.
Him to thee: Io lo ti, or Te lo raccomando, and Raccomandoloti, or
Raccomandotelo: I do recommende him unto thee.
Lo si, or Se lo.
Him to him: Lo si, or Se lo elesse: Elesselosi, or Elesseselo per co^pagno: He
has chosen him unto him for a compagnion.
Lo vi, or Ve lo.
Him to you: Lo vi, or Ve lo raccomandai: and Raccomandailoui, or
Raccomandaiuelo, I have recommended him unto you. Him there: Lo vi, or Ve lo
vidi, and vidiloui, or vidiuelo: I have seen him there. Him thither: Lo vi, Ve
lo menai, Menailoui, or Menaiuelo: I have brought him thither.
Lo ci, or Ce lo.
Him to us: Lo ci, or Ce lo raccomando, and Raccomandolloci, or
Raccomandoccelo: He has recommended him unto us. Him here: Lo ci, or Ce lo
vidi, and vidiloci, or vidicelo: I have seen him here. Him hither: Lo ci, or
Ce lo menai, and Menailoci, or Menaicelo: I have brought him hither.
Lo ne, or Ne lo.
Him from us: Lo ne, or Ne lo tolse, and Tolselone, or Tolsenelo: He has taken
him from us. Him hence, thence, here away: Lo ne, Ne lo meno, and Menollone,
or Menonnelo: He has brought him hence, thence, or here away.
La mi, or Me la.
Her to me: La mi, or Me la raccomandasti: and Raccomandastilami, or
Raccomandastimela: Thou have recommended her unto me.
La ti, or Te la.
Her to thee: La ti, or Te la, raccomandai, and Raccomandailati, or
Raccomandaitela: I have reco^mended her unto thee.
La si, or Se la.
Her to him: La si, or Sela prese, and Preselasi, or Presesela per moglie: He
has taken her unto him for his wife.
La ci, or Ce la.
Her to us: La ci, or Ce la raccomando, and Raccomandollaci, or
Raccomandoccela: He has recommended her unto us. Her here: La ci, or Ce la
vidi, and Vidilaci, or Vidicela: I have seen her here. Her hither: La ci, or
Ce la menai, and Menailaci, or Menaicela: I have brought her hither.
La vi, or Ve la.
Her to you: La vi, or Vela raccomando, and Raccomandolaui, or Raccomandouela:
I do recommend her unto you. Her there: La vi, or Ve la vidi: and Vidilaui, or
vidiuela: I have seen her there. Her thither: La vi, or Ve la menai: and
Menailaui, or Menaiuela: I have brought her thither.
Ne la, or La ne.
Her to us: La ne, or Ne la raccomando, and Raccomandollane, or
Raccomandonnela: He has recommended her unto us. Her hence, thence, here
away: La ne, or Ne la meno, and Menollane, or Menonnela: He has brought her
hence, thence, heravvay.
Le mi, or Me le.
Them to me: Le mi, or Me le raccomando, and Raccomandollemi, Raccomandommele:
He has recommended them unto me.
Le ti, or Te le.
Them to thee: Le ti, or Te le raccomando: and Raccomandolleti, or
Raccomandottele: He has reco^mended them unto thee.
Le si, or Se le.
Them to him: Le si, or Se le prese, and Preselesi, or Presesele per compagne:
He has taken them unto him for compagnions.
Le ne, or Ne le.
Them to us: Le ne, or Ne le raccomando: and Raccomandollene, or
Raccomandonnele: He has recommended them unto us. Them hence, thence,
heravvay: Le ne, or Ne le meno: and Menollene, or Menonnele: He has brought
them hence, thence, heravvay.
Le ci, or Ce le.
Them to us: Le ci, or Ce le raccomando: and Raccomandolleci, or
Raccomandoccele: He has recommended them unto us. Them here: Le ci, or Ce le
vidi: and vidileci, or vidicele: I have seen them here. Them hither: Le ci, or
Cele menai, and Menaileci, or Menaicele: I have brought them hither. To her
here: Le ci, or Ce le diedi: and Diedeleci, or Diedecele marito: I have here
given to her an husband.
Le vi, or Ve le.
Them to you: Le vi, or Ve le raccomando: and Raccomandoleui: or
Raccomandouele: I recommende them unto you. Them here: Le vi, or Ve le vidi,
and vidileui, or vidiuele: I have seen them here. Them thither: Le vi, or Vele
menai, and Menaileui, Menaiuele: I have brought them thither. To her there: Le
vi, or Vele diedi, and Diedileui, or Diediuele marito: I have there given unto
her a husband.
Hitherto toutching these: in the handling vvherof: if we have been somvvhat
more long, then to some may seem neadfull: yet the knoledge thereof is of
greater effect to the students of this tongue: the^ at the first sight they
would think for. And so I doubt not but you will esteem of them, though you
have but mean skill in the tongue.

Of Verbes Impersonalles.
They, after the manner of the latin Verbes Impersonalles, do want both
nombers, and persons, saving the Singular number and third person: and also,
there is never given them Cases of noumes, which either silently, or expressly
are alvvayes set before other Verbes.

Of these Impersonalles, certain are so called of them selves, and are of the
active signification: as Pioue, it raineth: Tuona, it thundreth: Folgora, it
lightneth: Lampeggia, it glitterith: Verna, it waxes vvinter. Howbeit they
are very often used of the Poets, as though they were personalles, that is
with a nominative case adioined.

There are also certain, which are derived from other Verbes, and are of the
passive signification, having Si, either before or after them: as si Ama,
Amasi, it is loved: si Leg, Leggesi, it is read. Si Corre, Corresi, it is
run. Si sta, stassi, stands, Si va, vassi, it is gone: and not a fevv such
like.

Of Participles.
The Italian speech has certain words, which seem to be like unto the
latin Participles: as Amante, Leggente, Tenente, vbidiente: Also, Amato, Letto,
Tenuto, vbidito: Further, Reuerendo, Tremendo, Osseruando, Orrendo, and
certain other like. But I do skarsly believe, that they may of right be called
Participles, since with Verbes they have nothing in common (that is of those
thing which the latin Participles do borrow from Verbes) and as plainly
Noumes are wont to be used.

For The Italian tongue does all together refuse these forms of speech: Io amo
l'amante la virtu, for Io amo colui, che ama, etc: Neither yet do we say, Io
ho promesso un dono al legente Cicerone, for Io ho promesso, etc. a colui, che
leg, etc. But it is not vnknone to me, how Boccace does many times use the
like Participles: yet, I think none does doubt, which does somtymes read
his writings, but that is done very seldom. VVher upon when we say, Io
fui, or sono, or saro dolente: Again, Il giorno seguente: la veguente, or
venente notte: that is, I have been, or am, or shall be sorrovvfull: the day
follovving: the night coming: every body sees all these to be rather Noumes,
then Participles: Neither according to those forms, may the same be draune from
all Italians Verbes, but from the latin Verbes it may be done.

Further there is altogether lacking in the Italia^ speech the Participle in R
V S: for we do not say for Amaturus, Amaturo: Lecturus, Letturo, and such
like: But Do vendo io, tu, colui, noi, voi, coloro amare, or Hauendo ad amare,
or Essendo per amare: I, thou, he, we, you, they being abovvt to love: or
having to love herafter: The which gerundes are in use with the Italians.
Also we do express Lecturus, in this sort, Io, il quale Leggero, Tu il
quale Leggerai, Colui il quale Leggera, Noi i quali Leggeremo, Voi i quali
Leggerete, Coloro i quali Leggeranno.

The Italian speech does admit a Participle of the Preterperfectense, and of the
passive signification: as from Amatus it reteineth Amato, from Lectus, Letto,
and so of others. But Amato, will not signify the Preterperfectense, without
you add stato: as Io sono stato amato, Tu sei stato amato, etc. Because if I
shall say, Io sono amato: Tu sei amato, there is none but sees, that it does
declare the signification of the Present tense. Howbeit we say, Postomi, or
Messomi l'arme indosso andai contra nemici: which is as much as if thou
saidest Hauendomi (the which gerund is of the Present tense) Posto, or Messo
l'arme, etc. But no body speaks rightly Gli amati dame, son dotti, or Io amo
gli amati da i buoni: but we are to say Quelli, che io amo, son dotti, and Io
amo quelli, che sono amati da i buoni. Although here is to be seen by these
forms of speech rather the Present tense then the Preterperfectense to be
signified.

Toutching the participle passive, and of the Future tense, although we have
theses words Riuerendo, Onorando, and yet they are rather of the Present
tense then of the Future. For Riuerendo is not he said to be and Osseruando,
whom we ought somtymes to reverence and to wait upon, but whom we do
now reverence and wait upon.

Lastly the declining of them does nothing differ from the declining of Noumes.
For Amante (which is of the singular number, and of either gender) has in the
plural number Amanti, Amato, Amati, Amata, Amate, Onorando, Onorandi,
Onoranda, Onorande.

By these things that we have given out hereof before, when we entreated of
the declining of Verbes, may easly be seem which are Gerundes with the
Italians, and what their use is: we say, Leggendo diuento dotto: by reading
I become learned: behold a geru^de of the Present te^se. Again, hauendo let
to ho imparato, having read, I have learned: behold a gerund of the
Preterperfectense. Further, Douendo leggere, Hauendo a leggere, Essendo per
leggere, apro il libro: being to read: or having to read, I do open the
book. Now for breuities sake I speak nothing of examples toutching the verb
passive, since it seems of no necessity (after these, that are disperpledlye
given out before) to give any more. This I will remember, that the Italian
tongue has this more then the latin, that in the gerunde it does admit no
tenses, but the other does. To conclude, it is also to be observed, that the
Italian gerundes of the Future te^se, are expressed by the latin Participles of
the same tense, asvvell of the active, as passive signification.

Of Aduerbes.
Whose significations I will only show here: for the rest they are either
the same or little differing from the latin.

Of place Qui, Qua, Here, or hither.
Ci, Per qui, Here away.
Per qua, Di qui, Hens.
Di qua, Qua giu, down here, or hither. Qua su, up here, or hither. Di qua e
di la, here and there, hens and the^s. Vi, Iui, There, or thither.
Quiui, La, there, or thither. Di la, thens. Per la, there away. La su, up
there, or thither. La giu, down there, or thither. La e qui, there and here.
Cola, thither. Per cola, that way, or there about. Li, in verse, there or
thither. Di li, thens. Per li, that way. Li su, up there, or thither. Li gui,
down there, or thither. Costa, There where thou art, in that place. Thither.
Costi, Costi gui, down thither. Costi su, up thither. Costa su, up there, or
thither. Costa gui, down there, or thither. Per Costa, that way. Di costa,
thence. Oue, Dove, where, whether.
V, poetical Onde, from whence.
Donde, Altroue, else were, othervvhere. Altronde, from some other place. La
oue, La dove, There where, vvheras.
La onde, whereupon.
Quinci, from hence.
Di quinci, Indi, from thence.
Quindi, Di quindi, from thence.
Di quiui, Costiuci, from thence, where thou art. Dattorno, Dintorno, About.
In giro, Ouunque, Douunque, where so ever.
Oueche, Quantunque, Quantunque volte, Although, as often times.
Dentro, with in.
Entro, Fuori, Di fuori, without.
Fuora, Fuore, Su, up, or upon. Suso, vpvvarde. Giu, down. Giuso,
dounevvardes. Da lungi, Da lunge, in verse A far of.
in prose
Di lungi, Di luntano, Sopra, Di sopra, Above.
Sotto, Di sotto, Under.


Of time Oggi, To day. Oggidi, Hoggimai, Now adays.
Hora may, Hor may, Already, or more the^ time
Ho may, Ora, or Hora, Test, Now.
Adesso, Di present, presently: now. Ieri, or Hieri, yesterdaye. Di meriggio,
noonetyde, middaye. Stamane, this morning. Di mattina, in the morning. Sta
sera, this evening. Di notte, by night. Digiorno, by day. Do mani, to
morrovve. Do mattina, to morrovve morning. Or' ora, By and by, eue^ now.
Adhora ad horo, Pur ora, Poco fa, A while sithence, of late.
Dianzi, Ogni hora, alvvayes. Innanzi, before. Addietro, Behind.
Dietro, Perloaddietro, Perlopassato, hertofore, in time past
Perloinnanzi, here after. Perloauenire, herafter, for the time to come. Per
tempo, in time. Il seguente giorno, the day follovving. Da indi in qua,
Hethervnto.
Fin qui, Da indi inna^zi, From thence forvvard.
Indi, Guari, long time. Di gran pezzo, A good while since.
Gran tempofa, Cola, about: as Cola dall'state, about summer. Cola doppo il
vespero, about after the evening. Presto, Quickly.
Tosto, Ratto, Velocemente, Svvyftly.
Di fatto, out of hand. Repent, Direpente, On a sudden: forthwith.
Subbito, Di subbito, Incontinente, Incontinent.
Immantine^te, Spesso, Often times.
Souente, Tardo: Tardi, To late. Rado: Dirado, Seldom. May, Ever: now ever.
Gia may, Non may, Never. Alhora, then. Quando, when.
Quando may, Mentre, vvhilest. Vnque, Vnqua, Alcuna volta, Alcuna fiata,
Somtymes.
Qualche volta, Qualche fiata, Tal volta, Talora, talhora, Qualora, at what
time: as often as. Quando che sia, when soever it be. All volte, At times. Il
piu delle volte, for the most part. Gia, Now, already. Sempre, Alvvayes.
Sempremay, Continually: evermore.
Di continuo,

Of quality Been, well. Male, evil. Ottimamante, most well. Pessimamente,
most evil. Fidelmente, faithfully. Ornatamente, trimly, deckedly.
Voluntiermente, Volontieri, willingly.
Dibuona voglia, Dicuore, Heartily.
Dibuon cuore, Sauiamente, vvisely. Dottamente, Learnedly. Veramente, Truly.
Falsamente, Falcely. Molto, Much. Viapui, Much more. Assai, Enough, well.
Poco, A little. Souente, Often.
Spesso, Rado, Dirado, Seldom.
Tanto, So much.
Cotanto, Quanto, as much: how much.

Of denial Non, No, Not, no. Non gia, Not now. Non mica, Not a crome. Ne,
Neither. Signor no, Seir no. Messer no, Master no. Madonna no, Mystres no,
etc. Nulla, Nothing.
Niente, Appunto, Fully. As Appunto il popolo non ha altro pensiero.

Of Affirming Si, yea, I: as Missersi, Madonnasi, Certo, Percerto, Certamente,
For certain, Assuredly.
Dicerto, Veramente, Inuero, Truly.
Di vero, In verita,

Of Increasing Piu, more. Molto, Much.
Assai, Abbastanza, enough. Troppo, to much. Di souerchio, superfluous. Del
tutto, Wholy: altogether, utterly.
Affatto, Maggior mente, more, rather. Massimamente, chiefly especially.
Potissimamente, chiefly. Dottissimamente, most learnedly. Benissimo, most
well.

Of Diminishing Meno; less. Poco meno, a little less. A poco, a poco, by
little and little. Pian piano, fair and softly. Alquanto, somvvhat. Poco, a
little. Pochetto, very little. Pie innanzi pie, foot before foot or stalkingly.

Of discretion Altrimente, Otherwise. Senza, without. Seperatamente,
severally. Pu^talme^te, pointemeale or by points. Secretamente, secretly.
Apertamente, openly.

Of correcting Appena, Skarse. Quasi, Almost: as though.

Of swearing Per Dio, By god. Alla feed, a fe, in faith. Per l'anima mia, by
my sole. A fededio, by the faith of god.

Of vvyshing O se, O si: O if. O Dio voglia, God grant. O Dio volesse, I
would to God. O che, O that.

Of forbidding Guarda, Take heed.
Guardati, Deh non, fie no. Vedi, see.

Of encouraging Fa, Do. Su, up. Or su, now goto. Corraggio, courage.
Spediscila, dispatch it. Forniscila, furnis he it. Or oltre: an further.

Of Assembling Insieme, Together.
Insiememente, Parimente, In like sort.
Similmente, Dipari, Appari, By couples.
Alpari, A schiera, by troops or companies.

Of comparing Piu, more: Meno, less, Via piu, Molto piu. Assai piu, much more.
Via meno, Molto meno, Much less.
Assai meno, Poco piu, a little more. Poco meno, a little less. Megliore,
Better.
Meglio, Peggiore, Worse.
Peggio, Tanto, Cotanto, As Much.
Altre tanto, Due cotanti, As Much more.
Il doppio, Trecotanti, three fold. Piu del mondo, the most in the world. A
Rispetto, Ampetto, In respect, in comparison.
Allato, Accanto, A comparatione,

Of the greatest comparison. Sauissimamente, most vvysely. Verissimamente, most
truly. Gratiosissimamente, most graciously. Rigorosissimamente, most rigorously.

Of excepting Saluo, Eccetto, Saving, except.
Fuorche, Infuori, Se non, If not, saving, but.

Of similitude Come, As. Sicome, so as. Cosi, so, or thus. Aguisa, in such
wise. Quasi, as though. In modo, In maniera, In such manner or wise.
In guisa,

Of doubting Forse, Perhaps. Perauentura, paraduenture. Per caso, In case: par
chance, or it may happen.
Accaso, A sort, In sort.
Per sort,

of shevvig Ecco, behold. Eccolo, behold him or it. Eccola, behold her, or it:
And so forth, Mi, ti, vi, li, le.

Of choice Meglio, Better. Piu tosto, rather. Anzi, But, rather.

of gestures of the body Tentone, Gropingly. Boccone, groueling. Carpone,
Creping on all four.
Brancolone, Ginocchione, on the knees.

Of calling O, o la, e Oh.

Of order Innanzi, Auanti, Dauanti, Before. Dietro, behind. Poi, poscia,
dapoi, dopoi, dipoi, doppo, after. Fratanto, tratanto, intanto, in the mean
while. Oltre a cio, besides that. Oltre a questo, besides this. Subito,
disubito, on a sudden, quickly. Alla fine, in the end, at last. Pero, percio,
pertanto, therefore. Onde, La onde, whereupon. Prima, Primamente, First, first
of all.
Primieramente, Secondo, Second, or secondarily.
Secondariamente,

Of dividing Separatamente, Severally. Partitamente, perticularly. Avicenda, By
tornes.
Vicendeuolmente, A gara, for the maystry.

Of proceeding Via, On away. Hor suso, now up. Hor oltre, Now forth.
Hor oltra,

Of good, or evil vvishing Benaggia, well be it. Malaggia, evil might it
fare.

Of asking Onde auiene? How does it happen? Onde e, from whence is it?
Perch, wherefore? Per qual cagione? by what occasion? A che modo? how? or in
what sort? A che guisa? how? or in what wise? Oue? where? Quando? when?

Of union Insieme, Together. Insiemamente, To geather like*
Vnitamente, Giuntamente, Jointly. Parimente, in like sort: also.

Of declaration Cio e, That is. Verbigratia, as for example.

Of sorrovve Ha, Ohi, Ohime, He las.
Oime, Hei,

Of abhorring Oibo,

Of a Conjunction.
Of coupling Et, (a vouell follovving) E, (a co^sonant follovving) And.
Ancho, Anche, Anchora, Also.
Etiandio,

Of continuing the sense, In modo che, In such sort as. In guisa che, In such
wise as. Dimaniera che, In such manner as. Per sifattamaniera che In such
manner of sort as,
Sifattamente che, La onde, whereupon. Se, if. Per che, vvherforc: because. Poi
che, Since that. Che, for, that, as. Peroche, Percioche, For because: because
that: therefore.
Imperoche, Impercioche, Come, as.

Of distinction O, or, other. O vero, or else. O pure, or yet. Ma, but. Ne,
another.

Of contrariety Nondimeno, Nientedimeno, Nevertheless.
Nondimanco, Nientedimanco, Tuttauia, Notvvithstanding.
Tuttauolta, Benche, although. Comeche, albeit. Anchorche, Anchorache,
Auengache, Howbeit, although.
Quantunque, Etiamdioche, Contutto che,

Of vvithdravving Almeno, At the least.
Almanco, Pur che, so that: as Purche non vegga, so that I may not see. Tanto,
so much. Solo, only.

of yelding a cause Percioche, Because that. Accioche, to the end that.
Conciosia, for as much. Conciosia cosa, For as much as.
Conciosia cosa che,

Of co^cluding Dunque, Then.
Adunque, In summa, in sum: to conclude. Pero, (poetical) Percio, Therefore.
Impero, La onde, whereupon. Il perch, The cause why. Altrimente, Othervvaies.
Altrimenti,

Of doubt. O si, o'ther yea. O No, or no.

Used for orname^tes sake Ora, Now. Pure, yet. Ben, well, etc.

Of a Preposition.
In, as In cielo, and in terra, In, etc.
Ne, as Nel cielo, and nella terra, A To.
Ad Di, Of.
De, Da, from, or of. Per, for, by, or thorough. Con, with. Senza, without:
as Senza lui. Ver, Toward: as Verte, Verso, and in verso il cielo: or del
cielo.
Verso, In verso, Doppo, after: as Doppo lui. Intra, Within: as Infra te.
Infra, Tra, Amongst: as Tra gli amici.
Fra, Sopra, upon: as Sopra il monte: or del monte. Disopra, above. Sotto,
Under: as Sotto il monte: or del monte.
Disotto, Contra, Contro, Against: as Contrai tuoi: and de i tuoi.
Incontro, Allincontro: over againest: as Allincontro del muro. Oltre, Beyond:
as Oltre il mare: Also Besides: as Oltre cio, and oltre il Prencipe. Dietro,
Behind: as Dietro il monte. Accanto, Near: as Accanto, or allato alla Citta.
Allato, Presso, Near. Appresso, At, or with: as Appresso di me. Also after:
as Appresso a te, or di te. Appetto, in comparison: as Appetto a lui. Rimpetto,
Over against: as Rimpetto, or Dirimpetto almonte.
Dirimpetto, Fin, Sino, Until.
Infino, Sino, Unto: as Insino al cielo.
Insino, Di nascosto, pryuely: vnvvares: as Di nascosto al padre. Auanti,
Dinanzi, Before: as, Dinanzi al Giudice.
Innanzi, Dietro, behind: as, Dietro a cui, Intorno, Attorno, Aboutes: as,
Intorno a cui.
Circa, Fuori, without: as, Fuori della Citta, Dentro, within: as, Dentro
della Citta. Su, upon: as, Su del colle. Giu, under: as, Giu del monte. Di la,
on the other side: as, Di la del Castello, Di qua, on this side: as, Di qua del
Castello. Lungi, Far of.
Lunge,
To conclude are there certain Prepositio^s that are not used but in
compounding of verbes. As, Di, in Diffido, I mystrust. Dis, in Disiongo, I do
vnioyne. Ra, in Raccoglio, I do gather. Ri, in Ripiglio, I do take again. Es,
in Esalto, I do exalt. Inter, in Interrompo, I do interrupte. Tra, in Trametto,
I do put between. Tras, in Trasporto, I do transporte. Fra, in Frastaglio, I
do hacke, or chope, a ridiculous verb: vvherof there is this ridiculous
Aduerbe. Frastagliatamente, hackinglye, or choplogikelike: as, tu parli
frastagliat amente.

Of an Interiection.
Of joy: Oh. Of laughing: Ah, Ah. Of wondering: O, vh, vh. Of sorrovve: Aih,
Ah, Oyme. Of Desire: Deh. Of dread: Baco Baco: Oh Oh Dio.
FINIS.

