Master Basse his Careere, OR The new Hunting of the Hare. To a new Court tune.


LOng ere the Morn expects the return of Apollo from the Ocean Queen:
Before the creak of the Croe or the break of the day in the Welkin is seen,
Mounted Idelia cheerfully makes to the Chase with his Bugle clear:
And nimbly bounds to the cry of the Hounds and the Music of his Careere.
Often does ha trace, through Wood, Park and Chase, when he mounteth his Steed
aloft:
Often he does run beyond far his home, and deceives his pillow soft:
Often he expects, yet still has defects, for still he is crossed by the Hare:
But more often he bounds to the cry of his Hounds, and does thunder out his
Careere.
Hercules Hunted and spoiled the game, wheresoever he made his sport:
Adon did Hunt but was slain by the same, through Iunoes bad consort:
Nep^haly to, did the Heart over go, and he purged the Forests there,
When his horn did rebound, the noise to the hound, he did thunder out his
Careere.
Now bonny Bay with his foame waxes Gray, deep Gray waxes Bay with blood:
White Lilly tops does send for their Caps, black Lady makes it good:
Sorrowful Watte, her widows estate, forgets these delights to hear,
And nimbly bounds to the cry of the Hound, and does thunder out his Careere.
Hills with the heat of the Galloppers sweat, Reuiues their freezing tops:
Dales purple flowers, the spring from the showers, which down from the Rowels
drops:
Swains they repast, and Strangers they have, no neglect when our Horns they
hear:
To see a fleet pack of Hounds in a sheet, and the Hunter in his Careere.
Thus he Careeres ore the Moors, or the meeres, over deepes, over Downs and
Clay:
Till he has won, the day from the Sun, and the evening from the day,
Sports then he ends, and joyfully wends home to his Cottage, where
Frankely he feasts both himself and his Guests, and carowseth to his Careere.
FINIS.
The Faulconers Hunting.
To the tune of Basse his Careere.


Early in the morn, when the night's ouerworne, and Apollo with his golden
beams:
The Day Star ouertakes, and Cinthia forsakes, to frolike with his silver
streams.
We with our delights, and the Haggard in our flights, that afronts the
Celestial Sphere:
With lures and with trains, we gallop ore the plains, to behold a
Cancecleere.
From the fist she goes, and her nimbly throws, to out fly the whistling
wind:
Onward still a^aine, over bush over plain, till her Gelding gen faintly she
finds:
An vpshot then she makes, till the clouds she ouertakes, her ambition rests
not there:
But mounting still she flies, like a Phoenix in the skies, and comes down
with a Cancecleere.
Mounting in the Sky, to the shape of a Fire, like a spark of Elementall Fire:
Upward then she tends to make good her place amends, till the Retriefe gives
her desire:
No Swallow, nor dove, their clipping wings can move like her when in the
Clouds they appear:
She comes down from above, like the thunderbolt of Jove, and does st^^pe with
a Cancecleere.
Both young and old prepare, to the sport that is so rare from their weary
labor coming for to see:
Lifting up their eyes from the Plains to the Skies, where the wonders of the
Welkins be:
The Spirits of the Air in huddles do repair, the Music of the Bells for to
hears,
And quickly fly apart affrighted at the heart, when she stoopes to the
Cancecleere.
The Mallard with complaints in her golden feathers faints while the Haggard
with the coy disdain:
Tryumphant in her prey, concludes the Evening gray with a pleasant and a
lovely gain:
Homeward then we wend, and the twilight then we spen^ in discourse our
delights to hear:
We taste the Quail we killed, and carowse in what is fill^ which goes round with
a Cancecleere.
FINIS.
Printed at London by E. A.


