AN EXHORTATORY Instruction to a speedy resolution of repentance and contempt
of the vanities of this transitory life.

BY SAMSON LENNARD.

LONDON Printed by M. B. for Edw. Blount and W. Barret, 1609.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, my very good Lady, the Lady Dacre of the South.
I Am not ignorant (right honorable and virtuous Lady) how poor a help the
light of a candle gives unto the clear light of the Sun, nor how mean a
means these my labors are to eternize the memory of those your honorable
virtues, which like the Sun in his sphere disperse their gracious rays to as
many as know you, or hear of your name. You are like the Sun adorned with your
own light as with a garment, like the rose in the garden an ornament to your
self. Your honorable progenitors honor you, your honorable virtues your
progenitors. And therefore far be it from you to think that my meaning is
hereby to give light to the Sun, honor to your honors, but as David out of a
consideration of the manifold blessings he had received at Gods hands, cried
out, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon me?
and presently answered, I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord: so I entering into a consideration with my self, what I might
return for those great and manifold bounties received from the hands of your
worthy and honorable husband; when I had considered what I might consider
(being guilty of mine own inabilities to return one for a thousand) I was
enforced to say with David, I will take and not give, I will requite by asking
more. My humble petition therefore to your Ladyship is, that you would be
pleased to honor this little book with your honorable protection, which though
it be offered to the public view of the world, yet it was written for you, as
not unbefitting your years, your zeal, your understanding, your religion, your
honor. This if you do, you shall add unto the heap of your manifold
virtues; and if (with an honorable mind) you shall take this, from his hands,
whose custom it has ever been rather to receive than give, you shall double
your bounties, be liberal in receiving and giving too. And thus wishing to
your Ladyship a long life in this world, and an eternal in the world to come,
I rest

Your Ladyships in all duty to be commanded Samson Lennard.

THE CONTENTS.
The first part.
CHAP. I. THat the life of man is unstable, and therefore repentance not to be
deferred. page 1 CHAP. II. How dangerous a thing it is to defer our
conversion to the hour of death. 17 CHAP. III. That our last day is hidden
from us, to the end that all the days of our life should be as our last. 30
CHAP. IIII. The great inequality betwixt our present pleasures and the pains
of hell. 50 CHAP. V. That it is better to repent when we are young, than to put
it off until we be old. 63 CHAP. VI. that no man can repent, and yet follow
his pleasures. 72
The second part.
CHAP. I. THat restitution is an excellent testimony of remission of sins 91
CHAP. II. That man must not fear his confusion with men, that will find grace
and favor with God. 106 CHAP. III. That the grace of God is to be preferred
before all temporal riches. 123 CHAP. IIII. Alms unlawfully gotten please not
God. 140
The third part.
CHAP. I. THat God does not forgive us our trespasses, except we forgive those
that trespass against us. 149 CHAP. II. That no work that a man does, be it
never so good, can be acceptable unto God, so long as he is not in charity
with his neighbor. 161 CHAP. III. That it is not lawful to strike him that
strikes. 169 CHAP. IIII. That by the example of Christ it is no hard matter
for a man to pardon his neighbor as often as he offends. 186
The fourth part.
CHAP. I. THat God forgiueth sins, when with a true and contrite heart we
consesse them unto God. 206 CHAP. II. That nothing is hidden from God; and that
at the day of judgment, the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed. 217
The fifth part.
CHAP. I. THat God is not subject to passion, and never forsakes a sinner,
before a sinner forsakes him. 235 CHAP. II. A sinner how he falls from one
sin into another, and so is hardened in his sins. 256 CHAP. III. That there
is no man so great a sinner but by the power of the Creator he may be
converted. 277 CHAP. IIII. That God is faithful, who suffers us not to be
tempted above our power. 292 CHAP. V. That the fear of backesliding should not
hinder the rising of him that is fallen. 311 CHAP. VI. ^ow miserable the
despair of a sinner is at the point of death. 330 CHAP. VII. ^f the pains of
hell. 364
The sixth part.
CHAP. I. THat we are sinners and have need of the mercy of God. 398 CHAP. II.
That there is no sin so great, but by true repentance it may be pardoned.
410 CHAP. III. Examples of such as have grievously sinned, and afterward have
been saved by repentance. 421 CHAP. IIII. That God denies not mercy to him
that conuerteth, since be inuiteth him that is auerted from him to conversion.
438 CHAP. V. That a sinner being changed, God changes his sentence. 453 CHAP.
VI. That even at the point of death repentance may be profitable to salvation.
472 CHAP. VII. Of the joys of Heaven. 484
THE FIRST PART of the exhortatory instruction to repentance, and first of the
speed to be used therein.
CHAP. I. That the life of man is unstable, and therefore repentance not to be
deferred.
FIRST thou will perhaps allege against thy self (dear brother) that thou
can not upon the ^udden free thy self from ^hy accustomed pleasures, What a
sinner obiecteth against himself.
and that when thou art old, thou will be more willing to withstand the
temptations and allurements of pleasure, and repent thee of thy sins. Res.
What man is there that lives and shall not see death? The necessity of Death.
Heb. 9.
It is appointed unto men that they should once die: from which general
sentence that no man should wax proud, no man is exempted. Which if it be
true, I would but know of thee how long thou think the pleasures of this
transitory life may continue with thee? For my part I can not imagine that the
uttermost thou can hope can be above fifty years, The uncertainty of the
day of death.
in which time, see how many dangers hang over thy head. First, there is no man
be he never so young that can assuredly promise unto himself to live until
night. Death vshereth an old man, goes before him, comes behind a young man
and takes him unawares, and to them both nothing is more certain than death,
nothing more uncertain than the hour, place, means, and manner of death. Varro
in his proverbs.
Neither is it marvel if thou know not the end of thy life, who can not
comprehend the beginning thereof. Thou know not with what beginning thou
enterest, Man is a bubble, because that like a bubble the life of man vanishes
in a moment.
and thou art as ignorant with what end thou ^halt depart out of this life; And
therefore it is rashness ^o promise unto thy self ma^y years and a long
life, when ^hou have not many days nay not an hour in thy own power. And
therefore why do thou think to live long, when thou can not be secured of
a day, of an hour? Nay why art thou greedy of life, and a wicked life too, as
if thou were immortal? The daily death of many.
Every day thou see such as are young and lusty and sound of body, suddenly
to be arrested with an unexpected death, even in the midst of their delights,
insomuch that of those infinite numbers that every day come into the world
almost three parts die before they come to the age of fifty years. The good
are called of the Lord, that they may no more be oppressed by the wicked; The
wicked are taken away that they may no longer persecute the godly. Tell me
where are all those wordlings which not long since have lived with thee? Job 21.
They have spent their days in wealth, and suddenly they are gone down to
their grave, and nothing remains of them but dust and ashes, and an
intolerable stench. O how much care did they take to provide for this present
life! How long a race did they promise unto themselves, but suddenly, and
unlooked for, death has overtaken them, whereas if they had always looked for
it, death could never have hurt them. And cannot that fever, that death that
came so suddenly upon them, as suddenly oppress thee, and thy procrastinations
draw upon thee as sudden a damnation? The bird that sits singing upon a bough,
A similitude of a bird upon a bough.
thinks he has liberty to fly whither he will, but before he can stretch out
his wings, an arrow strikes him to the heart, and down he falls: So thou
promisest unto thy self a long life, many and happy days, and thou have a
purpose to work woonders in the world, and yet thou know not whether thou
shall live till night, till thou can stir thy foot from the place where
thou stand; To morrow uncertain.
and though thou know what thou art to day, yet how know thou what thou
may be to morrow? If thou be not prepared to die to day, how will thou be
ready to morrow? Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit: He that is not fit
to day, will be less fit to morrow. It may be God has appointed this day to
be the end of thy life, and it can not possibly be avoided; which if it be
so, why art thou secure, why do thou not set thy house in order, 2. Kin. 10.
for thou shall die and not live? Do thou not see the inutilitie of thy life
past, the little comfort that there is in thy earthly blessings, The loss of
time.
the preciousnes of thy time misspent and lost, the wickedness of thy sins
committed; and to conclude, all thy age, thy years, thy months, thy days,
nay thy moments past and spent in sin and iniquity? If therefore thou put
off thy conversion to the last hour, ten to one thy last hour will be thy
worst hour, and thy procrastination hasteneth thy condemnation, for thou must
appear before the tribunal seat of God, in the presence of a seuereiudge,
whom thou have many a time offended, and crucified with the wicked Jews, by
iterating those sins that brought him to the cross. There is no auoidance,
but thou must stand to the fearful judgment of God, and that perhaps even
this very day, where and when thou shall give an account of all thou have
done. What will thou say, what can thou do, when thou shall appear empty,
void of all goodness before so great a Judge? O how fearful shall he be at
this hour, whose presence is incomprehensible, whose power infallible, whose
justice inflexible, whose anger implacable! Consider with thy self how
fearful a thing it would be unto thee, if one should tell thee, and assure
thee of it, that some great and cruel Judge were resolved to burn thee alive,
for some great offense thou have committed; doubtless upon the hearing
thereof, if there were but one days respit left unto thee, thou would leave
nothing unattempted to avoid so heavy a sentence; such as were friends unto
the Judge thou would endeavor to make thy friends, that by their
intercession thou might have hope to escape; thou would leave no stone
unturned, no way untried to free thy self from so cruel a doom; yea so thou
mightestwin thy life, thou would willingly lose all that thou have. And
above all things thou would not fail to call to mind, and to consider with
thy self what might be objected against thee, and what thou could answer
thereunto, that thou may not appear gultie before thy Judge. And why
would thou do all this? The preposterous sear of the judgment of God and
of man.
Is it because there thou art free from all doubt? assured thou must die if
thou acquit not thy self the better; but of the judgment of God thou art ever
in doubt? O wretched man and of a preposterous belief! do thou believe man
rather than God who is the Creator of man? Does God threaten an everlasting
torment, and do thou neglect it? thy earthly Judge a temporal, and do
thou fear and tremble at it? For who or what is he? Even he that after he has
been a man, must be a worm, and having been a worm, must be turned into
stench and rottenness. Since then thou must appear not before a man, a worm,
rottenness it self, but before thy Creator, and the sentence thou art to
hear is the eternal damnation of thine own soul, how can thou be secure?
How can thou still give thy self to thy delights and pleasures, and not
fear the immutable sentence of so severe a Judge? If thou be ashamed and
confounded at the judgment of a man, of dust and ashes, what will thou do when
thou shall stand to the judgment of thy Maker and Creator? The sentence of God
irreuocable.
The sentence of a humane Judge may be revoked, but this is irreuocable. Thou
shall give an account to this severe Judge of all thy years, even in the
bitterness of thy own soul; and for thy many and great offenses committed
against him, he shall deliver thee to the devil and his angels to be
tormented in hell fire. Who shall then take thee from that place, shall free
thee from those that descend into the pit? For in hell there is no redemption.

But perhaps thou will fay that God is loving and merciful: Ez^ch. 33.
and by his Prophets has promised, that at what time soever a sinner repents
him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, The mercy of God toward
sinners.
he will put all his wickedness out of his remembrance. Res. This (dear
Brother) I confess to be true, yea that he is more gentle and merciful than
can be imagined or believed, and that he pardons whomsoever in time
returns unto him; but yet he that has made this promise to him that
repents, has not promised to morrow to him that puts off his repentance till
to morrow, and persists in his sins. Did he not express his mercy and loving
kindness sufficiently unto thee, in that with such patience, so long a time
he has tolerated so many injuries done unto him by thee, and given thee time
to repent? Doubtless great is the mercy of God toward thee, in this his long
stay and attendance for thy repentance. For he staid not at all for the Angels
when they should repent, but in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye he cast
them down into Hell: he staid not for Adam when he sinned, but instantly he
thrust him out of Paradise. But thee he has tolerated and attended many
years, God is slow to revenge.
he has dissembled, forborne, deferred to punish thee, being always ready to
forgive; Esaias 14.
but yet this thou must know, that as he is gentle in forbearing so he is just
in punishing, and whom he attends to convert, not converted, with a heavy
judgment he condemns. For God does so much the more sharply and severely
punish, by how much longer he forbeareth a sinner, and his sentence is so much
the more heavy, by how much greater his patience has been in forbearing; and
for the most part by the just judgment of God it falls out, that he dying
forgets himself, who living forgot God; how miserable then is the state of
that man, who presenting himself before so severe a Judge, has not so much
time as to bewail those sins he has committed?

It is therefore (dear Brother) a dangerous thing to make thy hour of death
thy hour of repentance, and to think that thou may not die in thy sin,
though thou cease not from thy sin, but still continuest in that estate,
wherein if death should suddenly assail thee, as many times it falls out,
thy soul were utterly lost, and for that moment of time wherein thou art to
live, thou leauest thy soul to the danger of eternal damnation, which should
be dearer unto thee than the whole World.

CHAP. II. How dangerous a thing it is to defer our conversion to the hour
of death.
But be it (dear Brother) that thou be mindful both of God and of thy self
at the hour of thy death, A hard thing truly to convert at the boure of death.
and that God do then give thee sometime of repentance; yet it is to be
feared that thou can hardly in so short a time, so momentary a contrition
sufficiently bewail all the sins of thy long life: It will hardly be
brought to pass, that thou that in the whole course of thy life have been
accustomed to sin, should upon the sudden, at an instant be made perfect;
that thou should so speedily quit thy self of the snares of the Devil
wherewith in thy whole life forespent thou have entangled thy self; that thou
should then at the last fall from the Devil, and begin to fight under
Christ his banner, when the war is at an end. Do thou think that that tree
that never was green, never did flourish or yield any fruit, can then begin to
grow and yield any, when he is cut down and cast into the fire? Neither can
that man that in his whole life time never did any good, then yield fruits
worthy repentance when the axe is laid to the root to cut him off from the land
of the living, and to cast him into that fire that shall never be quenched.
But how dangerous a thing it is, and how near to utter destruction to put off
our repentance to the hour of death, S. Augustine tells us. August. de
poenitentia distinct. 7.
If any man in the extremity of his sickness shall repent him of his sins, and
be reconciled unto God, and so depart out of this life, I confess unto you we
cannot deny that he requires, but yet we cannot presume that he departs
the child of God: whether he depart secure out of this life I know not;
repentance we may impose; security we cannot give. Shall I say he is damned?
No, and yet I will not say he is saved. Will thou therefore be freed from
this doubt, avoid this uncertainty? Repent whilst thou art in health, which if
thou do, I dare boldly affirm, thou may be secure, because thou repentest
at that time when thou could have sinned: But if thou will repent when thou
can not sin, thy sins have forsaken thee, not thou them. Thus far S.
Augustine. Defer not therefore thy repentance until thou cannot sin; Seneca.
Plerique metu peccare cessant non innocentia: profecto tales timidi non
innocents dicendi sunt.
for though it be the will of God to pardon thy sins, yet he requires a
willingness in thy self, not a necessity; love and charity, not only fear.
They that at their end, compeld by necessity, turn unto God, seem not to
repent for love of God, but for fear of hell. Then they (...) unto God, when
in the ^orld (which all their life ^me they have served) they ^n no longer
continue; ^heras if they might longer ^^ide therein, they would ^ot yet forsake
those delights which they are never content ^o leave, till they can keep them
no longer. They leave ^ot their sins, but their sins ^caue them, who are not
led by their own wills, but necessity. In the whole volume of the book of God,
there is only one, Luke 11.
and that was the good thief, that truly repented at the hour of his death:
Ille vt nullus desperet, solus vt nullus praes^emat: He is left unto us for an
example that no man should despair, he only, that no man should presume. Who
though he were by this last confession of his, and acknowledgement of Christ
upon the Cross after a sort baptized, and in that innocent state so departed,
yet such as are already baptized have no warrant from thence to sin, and to
persist in their sins. For they that would never be converted when they
might, being converted when they could not sin, do not so easily attain
that they would.

For a sick man has many lets and hindrances that withdraw him from
repentance. Impediments to repentance.
First the presence of his carnal friends, whom perhaps he has loved
unlawfully and beyond measure; ^he remembrance of his pas^^d pleasures, and
temporal ^essings, which he leaves ^t without much grief of ^eart; an
unspeakable sorrow (...) the separation of the soul ^om the burden of the
bo^y, insomuch that a man ^an hardly think of any thing ^lse, but that grief
wherewith he is tormented in his ^ody. For thither is the whole intention of
the mind carried, where the grief is. What astonishment of heart ^s there at
that hour? What ^emembrance of all fore-passed sins? What forgetfulness of
pleasures past? What ^orror and fearful consideration of the Judge?
Doubtless the grief of the disease and the fear of the judgments of God do
hinder the true use of our sense and understanding, insomuch that at that hour
there can hardly be any true contrition of heart.

Then is the Devil most diligent to tempt us, The assaults of the Devil are
most violent at the hour of death.
and to lay his snares to entrap us, when he perceives our end to be at hand,
and when he sees it stands him upon to win or lose that soul, which so many
years, by so many sleights, so many suggestions he has endeavored to make
sure unto him; then especially he tempts him touching the verity of his
belief, and persuades him to infidelity, sets before the eyes of his
mind, the greatness of his sins, the severity of the Judge, the inequality
of all the good he has done in his whole life, to that eternal blessedness
which God has prepared for those that are his children. Thus, and by these
means he assaieth to drive a miserable sinner into despair, and whom in his
^ife time he deceived by flat^eries, at his death he tyran^iseth over him. The
fear of a just man at the hour of death.
And this is ^he cause why many godly and zealous men, who in the whole course
of their life ^aue served God, do neuer^helesse fear this last hour ^f
death, lest that then they should yield to those violent ^mptations of the
Devil, or opeare empty before so ^eat a Judge. And yet do thou think at
that hour to be converted, when the iustest men that are, fear to be
perverted? Will thou adventure the state of thy salvation to that time, wherein
thou art subject to greatest danger? And think thou to perfect that great
and difficult work of thy conversion, which in the best strength of thy body,
and in the whole race of thy life thou could hardly perform, in a moment of
time, when thou art compassed with so many griefs, so many dangers? The
departure of a sinful soul out of his body, not one but innumerable legions
of Devils do attend to require their hire for their service, presenting before
his eyes those sin^ they have tempted him unto, and so carry him with them into
utter darkness. Ioh. 14.
Yea they fail not to attempt the souls of Gods children when they depart out
of their bodies, alleging unto them that this and this they have done for them,
and that they have returned this and this service unto them. If the Prince of
this world, the Devil, sought after something of his even in Christ himself
dying according to the flesh, though nothing he could find, confider how
careful and cruel ^e will be, to require his own of thee at thy hour of
death. ^t is apparent and thou can ^ot deny, but that he may ^inde much of
his in thy self; and miserable and wretched man that thou art, what will thou
then do, and when he shall arrest thee for that that is his own, what will thou
answer? Do thou think that the Angels of God will be ready at hand to
rescue thee, and to deliver thee out of his hold? Forasmuch therefore (dear
Brother) as it cannot but plainly appear unto thee, that death lies in wait
for thee in all places, and at all times, and that it follows thee as thy
shadow does thy body, if thou be wise do thou likewise expect it in all
places, and at all times, being every day, every hour ready, as i^ every day,
every hour were the hour of thy death. Thou know not in what place, at
what hour it will encounter thee, and therefore expect it in all places, and
at all times. If it hasten to come unto thee, do thou make as good speed to be
ready for it, to live well, and like a good debtor be ever prepared to pay
Nature her due whenever it shall be demanded. So husband and order every
day, as if it were the last day of thy life; when thou risest in the morning
think not thou shall live till night; and when thou go to thy bed, think
thou go to thy grave, and that thou shall never see the morning light. From
this time forward so live, that at the hour of death thou may rather rejoice
than fear; and that thou may die well, learn to live well; that thou may
fly from the vengeance to come, yield fruits worthy repentance before it
come. That fear that uses to be in a man dying, let it be always in thee
living. So shall thouvanquish death when it comes, if before it come thou
always fear it.

CHAP. III. That our last day is hidden from us, to the end that all the days
of our life should be as our last.
BUT perhaps thou will say, that I tell thee that death attends thee, and
every hour of thy life hangs over thy head like a sword hanging by a hair
point pendant; that I persuade thee, to be as ready to fall upon thee; that
thou have obeyed my counsel, and oftentimes prepared thy self to entertain
it whenever it come; but it has as often deceived thee, and never came, and
therefore I do thee wrong, to persuade thee by an everlasting cogitation of
death to live a dying life, and to let slip the pleasures and delights of this
world. Resp. O my good brother, suspend thy judgment a while, for I dare make
good unto thee, that by this continual cogitation of death thou losest not the
delights of this World. Prouer. 15
For a good conscience is a continual feast, and thou shall receive greater
comfort by serving the God of all comfort and consolation, than this wretched
world replenished with miseries; yea there is no torment greater than a wicked
conscience; for where God is not, there can no comfort be found. No torment to
a wicked conscience.
O that thou had but tasted even with the tip of thy tongue the unspeakable
sweetness of a spiritual delight! thou would contemn all the fading
pleasures of this life, Cantic. 1.
and run after the sweet odours of those heavenly comforts. Thou see the
crosses and afflictions of spiritual men, their wounds, but not their
ointments; thou see them outwardly cast down like abiects, but inwardly thou
discernest not their happiness, Outward torments of spiritual men inward
ioies.
for their spiritual joy is as insensible, as it is unspeakable, and can never
be in any man that admits any other. Be not therefore so peremptory in thy
censures, and think not that the fear of death and the service of God do
rob thee of the ioies of this life.

But be it as thou say, we will yield so much unto thy obstinacy. A
continual preparation for death is good.
Why do thou complain and afflict thy self, that thou have many times
lived well, and been provided for death, when death came not? That the
remembrance of thy end has taken often times from thee those pleasures and
delights that in themselves are to a man wicked and deceitful? O how happy
were thou, and again and again blessed of God, if in this manner thou did
always expect death; if thou were every day such a one, as thou wishest to be
at the point of death; if from thy youth thou barest the yoke of the Lord; if
thou did always watch, and stand upon thy guard, because thou know not at
what hour the Lord will come! for blessed were thou if when he comes he
shall find thee waking.

God would that the hour of our death should be hidden from us, The day of
death vucertain.
to the end that we being uncertain when we shall die, should be always
found ready for death, that whilst the last day is unknown, we should
observe all, as if all were the last. If thou were set at a Table where there
are many dishes set before thee to eat, among which thou art told, that one
has poison in it, would thou not abstain from them all, lest thou
should happen to light upon that that is poisoned? There is one day of
death, a dangerous day unto thy soul, which because thou know not, is it
not wisdom in thee to suspect every day? For if thou knew at what hour
thou should depart out of this world, thou would divide thy times, some
to pleasure, some to prayer, some to repentance; and knowing how long thou have
to live, thou woldst likewise know when to abstain from thy delights and
pleasures. But forasmuch as a present life is always uncertain, by so much
the more whilst it stealingly comes upon us, it is to be feared, by how much
the less it may be foreseen, and therefore of all other times the hour of
death is most to be feared, because it can never be foreseen, Matthew. 24.43.
and worse avoided. If the goodman of the house knew at what watch the thief
would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be dug
through. Therefore be ye also ready, for ye know not the hour when the Son of
man will come, whether in the evening, or at midnight, at the crowing of the
cock, or in the morning, lest when he comes suddenly upon you, he shall
find you fleeping. When he gave that commandment to his Disciples saying,
Watch and pray, Luke 12.36.
^ee afterward added, That which I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. Watch
therefore (my dear Brother) like unto that man that waits for his master when
he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, he may
open unto him immediately. Which thou can not better do than to be prepared
at all hours, as if every hour were the hour of thy death.

If any grievous sickness happen unto thee, A sick man desires that time of
repentance which a sound neglects.
that has in it any apparent tokens of death, thou presently crauest a truce
for a time and desire to live, that thou may bewail thy sins, and thy
time misspent, and thou promisest repentance, and amendment of life; which thou
have no sooner obtained, but as soon thou forgettest, and with the dog thou
returnest to thy vomit again. The time of repentance is granted thee, and God
expects a time to pardon thee, and yet thou do not only not bewail thy
sins past, but thou take a greater joy and comfort in those that are past,
and in those that are to come. Esaias 30.
If thou borrow a thing of another man, thou take a care to use it whilst
thou have it, because thou know it shall shortly be taken from thee; and yet
this corruptible body of ^hine, which God has lent ^hee for the use of thy
soul, and for the salvation thereof, and is not thine but shall short^y be
taken from thee, thou d^est not only not use to the health of thy soul, but
thou every day abusest to the utter ruin and damnation thereof, and by how much
thy life is longer, by so much thy sins are greater, yea they increase not
with the days, but the hours and moments of thy life.

Yesterday thou might have died, Pro lucro tibi pone diem quic^nque (...).
and yet thou art nor dead. Inasmuch therefore as thou art alive to day, account
it amongst thy gains, Why our days are prolonged.
for therefore does the Lord prolong thy days of grace, that thou may repent
and attain the greater glory. For as the very sleep of the Saints of God, is
not without goodness, so thou should not let pass a moment of time,
without the practice and performance of some good. Rich men and such as are
able to keep and maintain a great family, use nevertheless to belong to
those that are richer and mightier than themselves, in whose service they
deprive themselves of many benefits and freedoms of nature, in hope and
expectation only (which many times deceives them) of bettering their fortunes,
and ioining house unto house, and land unto land. If then such as a^ound in
^^hes, are content with the loss of liberty, and so much labor, to increase
their riches, which then increase most, when the least commodities are not
neglected, how much does it stand ^hee upon, that art the servant of Christ
Jesus to heap up unto thy self those spiritual riches that must save thy
soul? Though thou have lived well, and art rich in good works, yet when thou
art dying thou could be content thou had lived better; and for one good
work thou have done, thou wishest thou had done a thousand: why then do
that now whilst thou live, that thou would be glad thou had done when
thou art dying. One star differs from an other star in glory, 1. Cor.
15.41.
and there are many mansions in the kingdom of heaven; by how much the more
good then thou do upon earth, by so much the greater glory shall thou have
in heaven; As no sin escapes unpunished, so no good that thou do
unrewarded. Matthew. 10.30.
All thy days are no less numbered than the hairs of thy head; and as a hair
of thy head shall not perish, so not a moment of time. God rewards great
labors with great bounties, which though in appearance they seem to be small,
yet in effect and operation they are unspeakable.

Thy labors are but short, the crown eternal; set that which thou here
suffer, Repentance crucifieth, Righteousness pacifieth, Life eternal
glorifieth.
to that that thou there hopest to obtain. The afflictions of this life are
not worthy the sin passed, that for them is remitted, the present comfort
that for them is given, the future glory that for them is promised. Thou
labourest here for a time, that thou may not labor for ever with the
damned; thy labor is mome^tary, thy joy eternal. And if thou sink under the
burden of these afflictions, set before thine eyes the sufferings of Christ.
See what he that had no reason to suffer, has suffered for thee. If it were
necessary that Christ being God and man should suffer, and so enter into his
glory, Luke 24. The passions of Christ.
how much more ought thou, a base unworthy worm of the earth, to suffer for
the attainement of that glory? How much soever thou endure, thou shall never
come near those insultations, those scourgings, that purple garment, that
thornie crown, and lastly that ignominious and shameful death of the Cross
that he endured for thy sake. Do but consider how great glory does instant ly
attend thy miseries and afflictions, and then that which is momentarie in an
instant turned from evil to good shall never seem grievous unto thee. If the
greatness of the reward delight thy mind, let not the greatness of thy
afflictions any way affright it; if the labor deter thee, let the reward
inuit thee, and let the hope thereof be a solace to thy labors. It is not the
manner to attain to great matters, without great pains, and he that runs
not, winnes not the garland. For if a Merchant cares not what he gives for
that merchandise that he knows will yield him a great increase; if to a
Seaman the dangerous billows of the Sea, to a husbandman the stormy tempests
of cold Winter; if to a soldier wounds and bloody conflicts seem light and
tolerable, and all for the hope of a temporal and fading commodity; much more
when heaven it self is proposed unto thee, 2. Tim. 2. 1. Cor. 2.
as the fruit of thy labor, and that unspeakable joy that no eye has seen, no
ear has heard, and has not entered into the heart of man to conceive or
imagine. Where if it were not lawful to make any longer abode, than for the
space of one day, for that one day, the innumerable days of this life with all
the fleeting and temporal delights thereof should worthily be scorned and
contemned. And therefore account not thy perseverance in that which is good,
and thy continual preparation for death amongst thy labors, which though
yesterday thou have escaped, perhaps thou shall not to morrow, for that happens
in one day, that falls not out in a thousand.

Thou must persevere and be constant in good works; Matt. 10.
for it is not he that begins, but that continues to the end, that shall be
saved. It is a vain thing to do good, if we do not good so long as we live;
as it is a vain thing to run swiftly at the first setting out, and to tire
before we come at the end of the gole. Repentance is an excellent remedy
against sin, but yet only to him that shall persevere therein. For without
perseverance the labor has no reward, the race no garland, the service no
grace, the cross no crown. If thou will want eternal punishment without end,
and enjoy eternal bliss without end, thou must necessarily obey the
commandments of God without intermission, without end. And therefore thou must
not say with the servant in the Gospel as thou art wont, My master does
defer his coming, Matthew. 24.48.
and therefore begin to smite thy fellows, and to eat and drink with the
drunken: for the Lord will come in a day when thou look not for him, and in
an hour thou know not, and destroy thee suddenly. If he be patient and of
long sufferance, if he threaten thee, and yet abstaineth, if he defer his
coming to the end he may find less cause to condemn thee: neglect not his
patience and long sufferance, lest he increase his judgment with his
expectation, and by how much the longer he expects thy conversion before he
judge thee, by so much the more heavily his judgment will light upon thee.
For assure thy self that he that with patience bears thy sins, will with
severity judge them if thou repent not, and cease from sinning.

Wherefore (dear brother) always so live, that thou be always prepared to
die. Watch always lest God take thee unprovided; and such he takes thee, if
such he find thee at the last day; and as he then finds thee when he calls
thee, so he will judge thee. Remember thy end, Eccl. 7.36.
and thou shall never do amiss; and whether thou eat or drink, or whatsoever
thou do, let that trumpet of the last judgment always sound in thy cares,
Arise ye dead, and come to judgment; and whatsoever thy comforts are in this
present life, never let the bitterness of thy last judgment depart out of thy
mind.

CHAP. IIII. The great inequality betwixt our present pleasures and the pains
of Hell.
IT is to be doubted that that remainder of thy life that is behind can not
amount to fifty years; but yet suppose that thou have so many years to live,
and that God has revealed unto thee from above, that thou shall not see death
until the term of fifty years be fully complet and ended. This can be no
reason at all to withdraw thee from the service of God, and from turning unto
him by a true and unfeigned repentance. The brevity and instabilitie of
pleasure.
For first the brevity of the pleasures of this life is certain, and the end
of this breuity uncertain. They do many times forsake a man when he is alive,
but they never follow him being dead. The state of humane things is always
moveable and inconstant, and many times it falls out that if a man live
long, he outliues his pleasures. For God does prouidently mingle sower with
sweet, sorrow with joy, that we may thereby be stirred up to seek that
sweetness, that joy that never changes, and that whilst sorrow and grief
and vexation of spirit are the fruits of this world, we should look up after
him that is the God of all comfort and consolation.

But yet (my dear brother) let us yield that thou have so many years to live,
and that free from all adversity whatsoever. First, consider diligently with
thy self to what place thy miserable soul must pass, when those fifty
years are expired; even to hell it self. For from the delights of this world
we pass by a straight line, to the torments of hell, as by the miseries of
this life we attain the ioies of heaven. For no man can pasle from pleasure to
pleasure, rejoice with the world, and with Christ too, here feed his belly,
his corruptible part, there his spiritual. And secondly, let the place to
which thy soul must pass put thee in mind of those intolerable torments thou
must there suffer. Lastly, consider with thy self if it should be said unto
thee, Enjoy the pleasures of this life, and glut thy self with them, but yet
upon this condition, that at such or such a time, after so many years are
expired, thy eyes shall be plucked out of thy head, and thou shall spend the
rest of thy life in hunger, and thirst, and penury, and misery, deprived from
all manner of delight whatsoever, whether thou would accept this condition. I
think thou can not so much forget thy self, as to think of the fruition of
pleasures so dearly bought. What then can all that time be, that thou have
employed in the delights and pleasures of this life, to that eternal
damnation, which has neither end, nor torment like unto it? which far
excels all the tortures and torments of all the martyrs of Christ Jesus, if
they were all conferred upon one? What is a moment of pleasure to an eternity
of torment, one pleasure to a multitude of punishment? All that time that is
spent in the pleasures of this life, what is it but the dream of one night in
comparison of eternity? And who is so mad to incur the danger of eternal
punishment for the delight that he takes in a dream that lasts but a night?

Say then, what times of lust and gluttony, and pleasure can thou compare to
such times of torment? Add a hundred years if thou will to those times thou
have spent in pleasure, add another hundred, yea ten hundred if thou will,
what can all these times be to eternity? Nay suppose the time of pleasure and
punishment to be equal, the one as long as the other; is there any man so
foolish, so mad, that for one days pleasure will be content to endure one
days torment; since the grief and torment of one hour, and every bodily
affliction draws in oblivion all the delights that he has formerly enioied?
Now then if for the mome^tary delight of one day, one hour, there are reserved
the eternal torments of hell, can thou be so forgetful of thy self, as for
that to choose these? Will thou for the base and momentary delight of sin,
undergo the bitter pains of hell fire? And for the love of a temporal good,
lose the eternal, and besides that loss suffer eternally too in that fire
that shall never be quenched? If from the first day of the Creation of this
World to this present hour, thou had ever lived (...) honor, and ease, and
pleasure, what remains now of ^ll those hours and plea^ures, if now thou
must instantly depart out of this life? Can thou say that that time ^is
eternal whose end thou see? And what delight can that give unto a man that
has an end? which end when it comes the delight departs. With time that
passes that pleases, and without end that remains that diseaseth. In this
life good and ill know their end, and with wings they fly unto it; prosperity
and adversity pass away like a shadow, but in the world to come they are both
immortal without end.

Suppose that a bird should but every thousand years eat the hundred part of a
barley corn, and in proportion to that time devour by peecemeale the whole
mass and building of the world, upon that condition that being thus consumed,
the damned in hell should be freed from their torments, yet though the times
were infinite, there would be one day an end, and the damned would hope, that
after innumerable years they should be set at liberty; but alas, if there were
ten hundred hundred thousand Worlds so to be devoured, yet they are as far
from their freedom, from their hellish torments as at the beginning; for in
hell there is no redemption: and as there shall be no end of the joy of the
good, so shall there be no end of the punishment of the wicked. If thou were
to rest thy self for so long a time, nay but a few years in respect of
thousands and millions upon a soft delicate bed, so as no occasion should any
way disquiet thee, thou would never be able to endure it; how then do
thou think thou shall endure the eternal torments of hell fire, that shall
never have end, and yet thou must ever endure? If now in this life the least
affliction that may be makes thee impatient, what shall the torments of hell
do, that have neither end nor measure? How will thou bear that punishment, if
here a short repentance seem burdensome unto thee? Whilst therefore thou have
time, think with thy self whether is better, to live without end with the
Angels in heaven, or without end to be tormented with the wicked in the fire of
hell; whether is better a temporal rest and eternal labor, or a temporal
labor and eternal rest.

But take away if thou wile the fear of hell, The punishment of loss should
be sufficient to withdraw us from sin.
and think there is no hell at all; yet the ioies of that future eternal
glory that is to come, should be sufficient to withdraw thee from sin. If no
miseries followed the present delights of this life, and the pleasures thereof
should never be changed into the torments of hell, but the wicked of this world
were only to be punished with the privation of the presence of God, yet for
the transitory and fading pleasures of this life, thou should not desire to
be deprived of the contemplation of the divine beauty, and the pleasures of
heaven. But yet thou (forgetful of thy self) for momentary pleasures, do
not only deprive thy self of e^ernall joy, but procurest to ^hy self
eternal punishment.

Beasts are carried only with that that they see, and is present before their
eyes, and thy mind more brutish than that of a beast is more moved with
present delights than future, visible than invisible; it rather chooses those
earthly things that are offered to the eye, than those heavenly that are
promised to the soul; it only attends this present life, and cares not to
foresee what is to come. And therefore (dear Brother) it shall be better for
thee in this life to endure a little misery, and afterward to attain to
everlasting happiness, than here to possess a false adulterate joy, and there
eternal punishment. The labor of repentance is but little, and it lasts a
little time, but the reward thereof continues for ever. The labor is light,
the crown eternal. Pleasure pasfeth away with time, but punishment for
pleasure is permanent. For a drop of pleasure there is a sea of bitterness,
here scarcity of honey, there abundance of gall. Future eternal sorrows and
lamentations do ever follow present momentary ioies and pleasures.

CHAP. V. That it is better to repent when we are young, than to put it off
until we be old.
But be it (my dear brother) let me yield unto thee, To sin in hope of
repentance.
that thou certainly know thou shall live until thou be old, and that
thou shall then have time to repent thee of thy sins, yet thou have no reason
upon this assurande, to be the more bold to sin. For in that thou say, I am
young, and therefore will follow those delights that are be^^^ting my youth, and
afterward I will repent, it is as much as if thou should say, I will wound
my self with a sword, and then apply a medicine to my wound. Alas miserable
man that thou art, know thou not that that wound is taken in a moment of
time, that in a year is not cured again? It is speedily and easily received,
but the cure thereof is many times impossible. An inheritance is not so easily
recovered as lost, and the conditions of a purchase are not so short as of an
alienation: For where the alienation is short, the recovery is for the most
part impossible: So the action of sin is short, but the recovery of that
which by sin is ^ost were impossible, if God ^ut of his mercy gave not the
^edicine of repentance. And therefore put not off from ^ay to day, but whilst
thou ^ast time do good. Say not with the sluggard, Yet a little, and yet a
little I will sleep (...) my sins, and then I will ^ise again and repent me
of them, for whilst from day (...) day thou deferrest thy re^entance, thy time
passes a^ay without fruit, and thou never repentest, and so the judge comes
at a time vn^ooked for, and inslicteth a punishment, when thou look for a
blessing. Now is the time precious, and that thou spendest without profit; but
there will come a time when it would glad thee at the har^ if thou had but
one hou^^ to amend thy life, nay tho^^ would give a thousand worlds to have
it, and ye^ thou can not. But happi^ were thou if the loss of time were al
thy loss, and that the heap of thy sins did not every day increase; but out
and alas, by those means thou should please God, thou stirrest him more to
anger; by how much the longer thou live, by so much the more thou sinnest;
and by how much the longer thy life is, by so much the greater thy sin is: And
so those times of thy lise which thou should use as helps to repentance,
thou make helps to thy farther condemnation. Now thou turnest thy time of
repentance into sin, but the severe Judge when he comes will turn those
offered times of mercy into thy greater punishment and condemnation.

Thy sins die not with thy years, Custom hardly removed.
neither are they worn with the course of time, but like a monster with many
heads they grow and ^ncrease with thy years, and with the minutes of thy life;
thou addest sin unto sinue, and thou multipliest them beyond all number. The
longer the ^^st is in the iron, the more it eats into it, and with more
difficulty is gotten out; and by how much the longer thou art accustomed unto
sin, by so much the more hardly art thou drawn from it. Now quit thy self
of the snares of sin, lest the longer thou continuest the more thou be
entangled, and the more hardly thou escape them. The mountain of thy sins
does every day increase, and therewithal the strength of thy years does
decrease, and therefore whilst thy sins are fewest, and thy body strongest,
thou shall shake them off, and bear the burden of repentance with more ease.
There is no reason that thou should put off the whole burden to old age,
which of all other is the weakest, or that thou should think that that
mountain of sin that has been so long a gathering, should by a momentarie
repentance, when all thy spiritual faculties are decayed, vanish away.

If a servant that has received from his lord and master many testimonies of
his ^oue and liberality toward him, shall in the best strength of his years,
when he is fit^est to do him service, for sake ^im, and betake himself to ^he
service of his deadly ene^ie, with a resolution afterward, when he is weary
with offending him, to serve him again, when his strength ^s weakened, and his
time ^hortned; will you not think ^im an undutiful servant, unworthy any
favor at all? If (...) steward shall serve strangers, and the enemies of his
lord and master, with the daintiest dishes at the Table, and set before his
lord the basest and coursest diet, who can think that man a faithful and
honest Steward? What sufficient punishment can a master lay upon such servants?
Are they not worthy even in thy own judgment to be bound hand and foot, and
to be cast into utter darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth? And yet thy self art this wicked servant, and this unfaithful steward,
that seruest the Devil in the strength of thy years, and purposest to serve
God in the weak declining state of thy old age; that sacrificest to the Devil
the flower of thy youth, and (...) God the leese and dregs ^f thy old age.
Matthew. 18
And there^re thou art worthy that a ^ilstone should be hanged a^out thy neck,
and to be cast ^^to the bottomless pit of ^ell. For it is just and right ^^at
thou being dead should ever want torment, that ^hilest thou live would
ever want sin; that then ^est about to do good, when ^ou must cease to do
good (...) ill; that then purposest to ^ght, when the battle is at (...) end,
and there wants ^e prick of the flesh to buf^et thee, and to resist the law
^f thy mind; for he shall never be a valiant soldier in his weak and dying
age, that ^n the strength of his youth ^laies the sluggard and runaway. And
therefore (my de^^^ brother) put not off from day to day to turn unto the Lord;
no, defer it not until to morrow, nay to the next hour, nay moment of time;
but arise, and at this very instant begin to repent, saying unto thy self:
Thou have played enough, thou have eat and drunk enough, now is the time to
fight. These days require a new life, new manners.

CHAP. VI. That no man can repent, and yet follow his pleasures.
But perhaps thou will say thou will repent, Repentance and pleasure stand not
together.
and every day perform the works of repentance; but yet thou will withal
follow the delights and pleasures of this life. Know therefore (dear brother)
that thou art heerin far deceived: for as it is impossible that fire should
burn in the water, so is it impossible that worldly pleasure should continue
with repentance. These two are con^arieties, that the mother of aughter, this
of mourning; that dissolueth, this binds; that adds a burden heavier ^an
lead unto the soul, and ^nketh it to the bottom, this ^iueth wings unto the
soul, ^hereby it is carried unto ^eauen; that in all things o^eyeth the flesh,
this mace^teth it and brings it into o^edience; that withdraws man from
God, this reconcileth him; that obey eth the devil, this serves God. Thou
can not serve two masters, God, and the Devil. Thou can not take up that
cross wherewith thou crucifiest thy flesh, and the concupiscence thereof, and
follow Christ, and yet obey the concupiscence of thy flesh. Luke 9.
Thou an unworthy of Christ, if tho^ be not a companion with him in his
crosses, for tho^ trauellest a contrary journey from God, if thou follow the
pleasures of this life, wh^^ thy Captain and Leade^ Christ Jesus, holds the
quite contrary way. If a^^ man will follow me, sai^ Christ, let him deny
himse^ let him put off the old man and put on the new, let hi^ begin to be that
he was not, and cease to be that which before by sin he was; let him take
up, and always bear his own cross, and therewith crucify his own flesh
with the concupiscence thereof, let him be crucified unto the World, and the
World unto him, live unto me, die unto the World. So at the last let him
follow me crucified, and for the love of me be content to bear what (...)
have borne for the love of him. For he that by the de^ights and pleasures of
this world will save his soul, shall for ever lose it. But he that in ^his
life, for my sake shall lose his soul by refusing the car^all pleasures of
this life, and ^f need be by suffering death for my sake, shall find it again
in heaven and eternal happiness. This (my dear brother) is a strait way, and a
narrow gate which leads unto life, and few they are that find it, and
therefore thou must not so much consider how crooked and thorny it is, as
whither it leads, nor how narrow it is, as where it ends: for by how much
the more strait and troublesome it is, by so much the more large and pleasant
thou shall find it in the progress of thy journey; for it shall not only by
custom, but by the labor and passion of thy Savior be made easy. It is a
broad way to the hope of the faithful, a strait way to the vanity of
unbelievers: and in that thou think it laborious and painful, it is no
excuse of thine infirmity, but an accusation of thy sloth and backwardness. By
many trd^ulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. Act. 14.
But yield that it be painful, must we not thor^w many tribulations enter
into the kingdom of God? And yet thou by the broad and spacious way of
pleasure which leads unto death, hopest to obtain life. Thou can not here
sport it with the world, and there reign with Christ, enjoy future and present
blessings, pass from the delights of this world to the ioies of heaven. They
that have their comfort in this world, are unworthy divine consolation; but
they that for the name of Christ Jesus endure affliction, feel in themselves
the unspeakable comforts of God: for they that partake with Christ in his
passions, are likewise made partakers of his comforts. No man can be happy in
both worlds, but he that will have the one must want the other: otherwise the
rewards of chastity and luxury, gluttony and temperance, humility and pride
were not diverse. That fat and purple rich man in the Gospel had his pleasure
in this life, and Lazarus pain; but after their death their portions were not
alike, the pleasure of the one is turned into misery, the misery of the other
into pleasure and eternal happiness. Bodily pleasure nothing to a dying soul.


But suppose thou would gain the whole world, and glut thy self with all
manner of delights and pleapleasures, what are all these unto thee at the hour
of thy death? If thou being in extremity of sickness shall see thy servants
fare deliciously, what gainest thou by their dainty fare? Will thou say that
thou art the better or gainest the more because thou art their Lord and Master?
No doubtless. Apply this then unto thy own soul. If thy body flourish and grow
fat, thy soul growing lean, this plenty of external things what belongs it
unto thee? For as the pleasure of a servant does no way benefit the misery of
a master, nor costly apparel a weak body; So whilst thou gluttest and
pamperest thy body with pleasure and abundance of all things, and suffer
thy soul to starve, whereby it is subject to eternal damnation, how do the
pleasures of the body pleasure thee? what can thou give for recompense of thy
soul? Math. 16.26.
Have thou any other which thou can give for it? If thou were the Lord and
King of the whole world, and would offer it for a ransom for thy soul,
thou could not therewith redeem it from eternal damnation. What benefit
then is it unto thee, though thou win the whole world, and lose thy own soul?
Or what good is it unto thee, for a few days to rule and reign upon the
earth, and thereby to lose the kingdom of heaven? Christ has shed his most
precious blood for thy soul, Nothing more precious than the soul.
which he would not do for the whole world besides, and and therefore think
the price of thy soul to be very great, since it could not be redeemed but by
the blood of Christ Jesus: And will thou then lose this thy soul, and damn it
too, buie a moment of pleasure with everlasting torments? What comparison can
there be, betwixt that which is finite, and that which is infinite, betwixt
brevity and eternity?

Wherefore (dear brother) it shall be good for thee to endure some pain in
this life by repentance (if that which brings a spiritual joy may be called
a pain) lest thou feel eternal pain in the life to come, by revenge. By
sorrow thou shall come to joy, for Truth it self has spoken it; Matthew. 5.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted; and by joy and
pleasure thou shall come to sorrow, the same Truth affirming it; Luke 6.25.
Woe be unto you that laugh, for ye shall wail and weep. He that sorroweth
not when he is a stranger, shall not laugh being a Citizen, because the desire
of his country is not in him; and therefore whilst thy body is detained in
this world, send thy heart before into heaven. But it is one thing to go
before, or to go forth in body, another in heart; he goes forth in body,
that by the motion of his body changes his place; he goes forth in heart,
that changes the affections of the heart.

Wherefore (my dear brother) for these causes, The conclusion of these former
Chapters.
and many more that might here be spoken of, thou may plainly see, how
frail and unconstant the condition of this life is, insomuch that thou can
not secure thy self of a moment of time. Which since so it is, it cannot but
be dangerous for thee to live in that state, wherein thou would not willingly
depart out of this life, especially considering that the time of thy departure
may happen at this very hour, or the next, nay every moment of thy life.
Whilst thou art sound and healthful, thy repentance is sound; when thou art
weak and sickly, that is weak too, when thou art dead, that is dead too. The
time of life is short, which though thou pass well and blessedly, yea suffer
much affliction for thy Savior Christ Jesus, yet at the hour of thy death,
thou will wish thou had suffered much more. Eccles. 12.
Remember therefore thy Creator in the days of thy youth, and be not slow to
turn unto the Lord, yea defer it not until to morrow, for the day of the
Lord comes as a thief in the night, and an hour that thou know not. 1.
These. 5.
If thou turn not unto God, Psalm 7.
God will draw forth the sword of his vengeance, he will bend his bow, and
make ready his arrows, from whose anger to come that thou may fly, do
works worthy repentance, and that whilst the God of patience and long
sufferance detaineth his anger, whilst he deserreth to strike, whilst he
considers thee a sinner, and yet expects thy conversion, whilst he
bears with thy iniquities, in hope at the last to withdraw thee from them.

But thou, the longer he bears with thy sins, the longer thou continuest
in thy sins, whereby it comes to pass that that long sufferance of God
that should draw thee to repontance, and out of the laws of death and hell,
^andeth thee the faster in the bands of death, and because thou have turned thy
times of repentance unto sin, the severe Judge will turn those arguments of
his love, and mercy, into a punishment; for by so much the more severely will
he come unto judgment, by how much the more before it he showed himself
patient and merciful: That which he now winketh at with mildness and love,
when he comes to judge, he will exact with straitness and severity. Take
heed therefore lest thou contemn those times that God has given thee to
repent, and thou neglect the care of thy salvation; lest thou turn the
clemency of the Judge, and those proroged times of mercy and repentance, into
arguments of thy greater damnation, lest that long life which thou have
recei^ed from thy me^ci^^ (...) God, do (...) grea^er increase or thy
condemnation. Behold, now is the time of reconciliation and repentance, not of
pleasure and carnal delight; hereafter shall be the time of reward of
retribution. Behold, now is the acceptable time, the day of salvation and
mercy; hereafter shall be the time of rigor and vengeance. Shall then these
dales of salvation pass away as if thou thoughtest not of them? There is
nothing more precious than time; and yet to thee nothing more contemptible. It
is the manner of such as get their living by their labor, in the end of their
labors, when they look for their hire to be most diligent and painful: So
thou forasmuch as tho^ know not how soon thy labors shall have an end,
whatsoever thy hand can do, do it instantly. Luke 12.
Be always provided, for thou know not what hour the Son of man will
come, that when he comes, atcording to thy works, he may judge thee. Thou
have no long race to run, for whether thou wake or sleep, or whatsoever thou
do, every hour and moment of thy life, is a step unto death; which
perhaps thou art nearer unto, than thou art aware of. For when thou go to
sleep, thou art not sure thou s^alt awake again, and when thou awakest thou
art not ^ure thou shall go to (...) rest until thou have ta^^^^p thy last
rest. Where(...) thou be wise, in the whole course of thy lise, learn to die,
and be prepared thereunto every hour of thy life as if every hour were the
hour of thy death. Think every moment thou must die, because thou art sure,
though now thou live, thou must die. Which if it be so, take no ^reat care by
what accident then shall die, but dying, whi^her thou must go; for nothing
makes death good or ill, but that which follows death. Death is deadly to
the wicked, but precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints:
Psalm. 115.
which death God of his infinite mercy give us even for his Son Christ Jesus
sake, Amen.

The Second Part of the exhortation to repentance.
CHAP. I. That restitution is an excellent testimony of remission of sins.
SEcondly, perhaps thou will say, thou could be content to repent, but thou
can not find in thy heart to restore that which either by fraud or violence,
thou have taken from another, for now thou art rich and need the help of no
man. Res. Thou know not (my dear Brother) that thou art wretched and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Consider with thy self that if
God at the day of judgment, shall with such anger, say unto those that have
not given their goods unto the poor, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels; For I was an hungered and ye
gave me no meat; Matthew. 25.
I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger and ye lodged me not; I
was naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in prison and ye visited me not;
how shall his anger increase when he shall say, I was hungry, I was thirsty,
and ye took from me that sustinance that I had; I was naked and you robbed me
of that little that remained unto me? We read not of that rich man in the
Gospel, that he got his goods unjustly, but only that he used that which he
had intemperatly and vnfruitfullie, and yet he was tormented in hell fire, and
desired a drop of cold water, but could not obtain it. How then shall thou be
saved that have unjustly scraped thy riches together? Can thou possibly
think that thou shall not be more damned than he? Gather hereby how great a
damnation hangs over thy head, that do wrongfully detain another man's
goods, if they undergo so heavy a judgment, that indiscreetly do use their
own: Consider how heavily goods wrongfullie gotten do press thee down, if
such as are lawfully come by, not well bestowed, bring so unspeakable a
torment. What do thou deserve for wronging another, if charity not well used
deserve such punishment? And if he be subject to damnation that detaineth his
own, what is he that takes away another man's? If he shall have judgment
without mercy, that does no works of mercy, what judgment may he look for,
that is cruel and bloody, that takes from the poor whereas he should give,
and decketh himself with the spoils of other men, that lives in plenty by the
famine of the poor, and pampers his belly with that that should feed them? The
poor being oppressed cry for vengeance unto the Lord, and God who is a
jealous and a mighty God, will be their revenger. The Lord will come, yea he
will come and not stay, and in a time of vengeance he will destroy him.

If thy body be diseased, or thy friend fallen sick, thou art content to
recover it, if need be, even with the loss of all thy goods that thou have;
now thy own soul is falling into eternal damnation, and for the salvation
thereof do thou refuse to make restitution of a trifle which thou detainest
from another man? Thou sellest thy self at a base price, if for another man's
goods thou losest thy own soul. It is a folly to make thy silver and gold
more precious than thy self, that art above all price. Christ once died for
our sins, the just for the unjust, and do thou think the heaping together
of riches to be more precious than the redemption of thy soul by the blood of
Christ? For when thou take another man's goods, thou art taken by the Devil,
and as long as thou detainest them, thou art detained by the Devil. Thou
possessest gold and losest heaven; thou detainest another man's goods unjustly,
and justly losest thy heavenly inheritance. The gain is unjust, the loss
just; the gain in thy chest, the loss in thy conscience: and therefore if
thou be wise, let that worldly gain perish that brings with it the loss of
thy soul. What good is it unto thee if thou gain the whole world, and lose
thy own soul; if thou get unto thy self whatsoever is without thee, and
damnest thy inward essential part, even that that thou art? Woe to thee that
spoilest: Esaias 33.1.
when thou shait cease to spoil, shall thou not be spoiled? Those riches that
thou have devoured, When we die we leave all behind us.
thou shall vomit up, and God will draw them out of thy belly. When thou shall
sleep in death, thou shall carry nothing with thee, thou shall open thine eyes
and find nothing. Naked thou came into the world, and naked thou go out,
thy riches were neither born with thee, neither must they depart with thee: for
as when thou fittest down at a rich man's table, there are set before thee
vessels of gold and silver, the use whereof thou only have, which if out of
simplicity thou think to be thy own, and wilt take them away with thee,
thou shall not be permitted so to do; but rather as a thief be apprehended
and cast into prison. Even so thou broughttest nothing into the world, neither
shall thou carry any thing out, for poor thou came into the world; and
poor thou shall depart. At thy death all that thou have shall be divided into
three parts: Thy body which thou have so carefully pampered, shall be given to
the worms: Thy soul which thou have so carelessly neglected, shall go to the
Devil: Thy temporal goods (which by deceit and villainy thou have scraped
together) shall be left unto thy heirs, either prodigal or unthankful; who
shall make themselves merry with the fruit of thy labors, thy unrighteousness,
whilst thou for them art tormented in hell. Here they shall enjoy thy gooods
whilst thou in hell art deprived of all joy, and everlastingly tortured for
getting those goods: here they shall laugh whilst thou in hell do weep.
Thine heirs too (if God be not the more merciful) when they have here run
their race, shall be companions in thy torments; which company of theirs
shall be no comfort unto thee, but because thy goods ill gotten were a help
to their damnation, thy damnation shall still be increased* If therefore thou
pity not thy self, yet pity thy children, and thy childrens children to the
third and fourth generation, over whose head there must ever hang a judgment,
so long as thy evil gotten goods (which like a cankar fret and consume the
rest of their substance) sticks by them. And by their wills it is likely they
shall ever stick by them, for how should they after so many years past, make
restitutio^ of that which is lawfully descended upon them, though unlawfully
gotten by thy self? Yea it is likely that a long successiue inheritance will
so knit their affections thereunto, that if they knew the restitution of them
would free thee from thy torments, they would not do it; And no marvel
neither if others love their own riches more than another man's soul, since
thou love them more than thy own soul.

How many like unto thy self, have endeavored to be rich in this world, and
have no sooner gotten them, but are enforced as soon to leave them? From whom
sudden death has suddenly, and together taken away, what soever their
wickedness has neither suddenly nor together gotten to themselves. They have
left their riches ill gotten and found punishment never sought for: Their
bodies in the grave are devoured with worms, their souls in hell tormented by
devils. And even so thou deteinest with thy self many things unjustly gotten,
which perhaps because thou art shortly to die, thou shall never spend; and yet
thou shall give an account of them unto God, and for them be damned in hell;
and it shall nothing pleasure thee among thy torments, nay it shall hurt thee
much, that thou did here possess them. But behold, almighty God who
judges our transgressions, and has called those first to judgment, does
still expect thee to repentance, and does bear with thee that thou may turn
unto him. He has already pronouneed his sentence against them, and lest thy
soul should likewise perish with theirs, he patiently expects thy
conversion, and prorogeth his vengeance. But thou still persistest in thy
sins, nay thou every day heapest sin upon sin. For as often as thou
think with thy self, that thou keep another man's goods wrongfully,
against the will of the true owner, and yet purposest still to keep it, and not
restore it, so often thou committest a new sin. Now consider with thy self
how often by this means thou have sinned. Thou have many times since the
detention and possession of thy unlawful gain, repented thee of thy sin,
but God knows to small purpose, for thy repentance is sin. August.
And therefore, says S. Augustine, If goods unlawfully gotten, may be
restored, and are not, repentance is not done but dissembled. If thou have a
troublesome creditor; thou speedest thy paiments, thou give him what thou
have, and thou borrowest of others if thou want; thou fear if thou should
defer thy payment any longer, he will be more troublesome, and either defame
thee or cast thee into prison. Fear thou then a temporal punishment, and
do thou presently make satisfaction; and yet nothing fearing the eternal
punishment of thy soul, do thou not care to make restitution? O miserable
man and of a preposterous judgment! do thou fear the punishment of this
life, and fear thou not the sorrows of hell?

Wherefore (dear brother) quit thy self of those fading and corruprible
goods. which thou unjustly deteinest; restore unto thy neighbor that which is
his own, that thou may be restored unto God, lest thou lose thy temporal
riches, and find the eternal damnation of thy own soul. Without the great
mercy of God thou can not attain to the ioies of heaven, except thou make
restitution of the uttermost farthing. The way to come unto thy own, is to
restore that which is another man's.

CHAP. II. That man must not fear his confusion with men, that will find
grace and favor with God.
But perhaps thou will say, if I should make restitution for all the wrong I
have done, I should wrong my self, and whereas I am rich, become poor, and
unable to maintame my charge, and that pomp and credit I live in, and then
what will the speech of the people be of me, and how ridiculous shall I be to
my best friends? Res. Men perhaps (my dear brother) will speak ill of thee,
but yet only evil men, who for the most part think those mad men, whose
example they cannot, yet ought to imitate, who dispraise that virtue they will
not follow, and commend that vice which they embrace. If this they did out of
judgment, not rather out of ignorance and malice, there were reason why thou
should be moved therewith. It is a commendable thing to be commended by
commendable men, and there is no greater dispraise than the praise of the
wicked.

But let us yield so much to thy obstinacy, that thou art hereby made
ridiculous to good men too; yet this should be no reason to deter thee from
that which is just and right. For the speech of men and their slanders cannot
deliver thee from the fire of hell, A man's conscience a thousand witnesses.
but the fear of God, and thy just dealing proceeding from a lively faith, in
the merits of Christ Jesus; whether thou be praised or dispraised, return
into thy self and thy own conscience, if there thou find not any thing that
is worthy commendations, thou art rather to be pitied than admired; and if
there thou find not that evil for which thou art dispraised, thou art to
rejoice in the Lord, and to contemn the bad speeches of other men. For what is
it to thee, though men praise thee, if thy conscience accuse thee? Or why
should thou be sorry if all men accuse thee, when thy own conscience
shall defend thee? Our glory and our rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1. Job 17.
says Saint Paul, is the testimony of our conscience. And Job says, Lo my
witness is in heaven, and my record is on high. Why art thou troubled with the
censures of men, so long as thou know God to be thy Judge, that must judge
them and thee? If thy witness be in heaven, and in thy heart, suffer fools
to speak their pleasure, and grieve not at it.

So long as thou seek the glory and praise of men, and to please their eye,
and their ear, thou carest not to please him that sees thee from heaven; if
thou will serve men, thou can not be the servant of Christ. What is more
vile, more base, than to affect glory and honor amongst men, and not to fear
confusion and ignominy in the presence of the highest Judge? Thou art more
careful to satisfy the eye of man than of God, and thou art not afraid to do
that before God, which before man thou art ashamed of; yea thou love more the
outward applause of the people, than the inward peace of thy mind, the purity
of thy conscience. Amongst men thou desire to seem that thou art not, pure,
when thou art most impure; outwardly rich, when thou art inwardly poor;
outwardly full, when inwardly empty; outwardly gaie, when inwardly naked;
outwardly a Lord, when inwardly a servant; outwardly the servant of God, when
inwardly the servant of the devil; outwardly a man, inwardly a beast;
outwardly a saint, when inwardly execrable and odious to God and man. If thou
did desire glory in heaven, thou would not fear shame and ignominy upon
earth; for every man where he seeks glory, there he fears confusion. What
shall it profit thee if the world shall commend thee and extol thee to the
heavens, since the praises of men cannot heal a wounded conscience, nor the
opprobrious speeches of a slanderer wound a good conscience? What good shall
the glory of this world do thee, if in hell where thou shall be, thou be
ignominiously tormented, and in the world where thou art, highly extolled?

It is a folly to measure thy own worth by the opinion of the common people,
in whose power it is at their pleasure to praise and dispraise, to give honor
and to take it away again. And therefore if thou place thy glory in their
lips, thou shall be sometimes great, sometimes little, sometimes nothing at all,
as it shall please the toongs of flatterers to commend or condemn thee. Glory
flies him that follows it, and follows him that flies it. There is one only
honor to be desired of a Christian man, and that is, not to be praised of
men, but of God: And if thou contemn humane glory, be sure that God will
glorify thee living and dead too. It is a dishonorable thing for thee, being
a Christian and a follower of Christ, to be affected with the scorns and
slanderous speeches of other men, and thereby to be withdrawn from good
works, since thou know that thy Savior Christ Jesus endured the like
scorns and worse. Matthew. 10.
For if they call the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more his household
servants? Christ Jesus contemning the vain praises of men, refused the offered
glory of a Kingdom, and was content to take upon him the ignominious death of
the Cross; and being the Son of God, was called the son of a carpenter, a
transgressour of the law, a seducer of the people, a blasphemer of God, a wine
bibber, a friend of sinners and Publicans: and yet fear thou, a base worm
of the earth, the slanders of men, for that, for which the God of Majesty, and
the Lord of the Saboth, has suffered by men so opprobrious speeches? Do
thou fear to displease those, whom Christ displeased for thee? Will thou seem
glorious in the world, when Christ would be contemned and scoft at for thee?
Christ was mocked of the Jews, and will thou be honored? Will thou deck thy
self with goodly apparel, when Christ by the Jews was clothed with
ignominious garments, and hung naked upon the Cross for thee? Matthew. 10.
The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. Why then
art thou proud thou dust and ashes? why gloriest thou in thy gay clothes? the
worm is spread over thee, and the worms cover thee. Esaias 14.1.
But to say the truth, thou that think thy self so goodly a creature, when
thou have trimmed thy self in thy best attire, what art thou but a pain^ted
sepulcher, painted without, but full of stench and rottenness within? For
though thy flesh be adorned with pretions garments, what is it more than flesh,
that is, a stinking seed, a sack of corruption, worms meat? Flesh is
dissolved into rottenness, rottenness into worms, worms into dust; what is
more stinking than a dead man's carcass? what more horrible than a dead man?
That countenance which in life was most beautiful, in death is most ghastly,
most horrible. Thou art earth in thy original, a spark in the brevity of thy
life, dust and ashes in the condition of thy death. As fire speedily turns
stubble into sparks, so death as speedily turns thee and thy glory into ashes.
O if thou could truly consider what thou art according to thy body, thou
would presently be ashamed of the beauty and riches of thy garments, and
thou would use them not to please the eye, Our garments cover our shame.
and the tender delicacie of thy flesh, but to cover thy nakedness. For as the
clear beauty and light of the Sun is a sufficient ornament unto it self,
and color and sweetness to the Rose; so before sin man needed not a
garment, but his own proper beauty sufficed him: but by sin he was made
ugly and ashamed of his nakedness, and so had need of a garment to cover
himself, not to be proud of. Thou have not therefore in thy apparel any
matter of glory, but rather cause of shame; as it is no glory to him that has
but one leg to have a wooden leg, which is but a supply of his infirmity.
Thou that art proud of thy gay apparel, art like a sick man that is proud of
the variety of his drugges and medicines If a sack of good corn ^ay be
sufficiently bound with a halfpenny string, and a vessel of precious wine with
(...) wooden hoope, it is a ^hildish folly in a man to ^inde upon his panch,
stuffed with filthiness, a girdle of gold. The ornaments of ^he outward man,
by how much the more they are desired, by so much the greater hurts and
hindrances they are to the inward man; and by how much the more they are
despised, by so much the more do they give beauty and ornament to the inward
man. Thou that desire proud garments can not have humble thoughts.

If there were not a sin in ^ich and beautiful garments, the Lord would
never ha^ commended his Fore-runne^ for the baseness of his apparel; Luke 7.
he would never so expressly have said, that the rich man that was tormented in
hell was clothed with purple and silk; Luke 16.
and the Apostle Saint Paul in an Epistle would never have exhorted women from
the desire of costly apparel, 1. Tim. 2.
saying, Let women array themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastness and
modesty, not with broidred hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel.
Think therefore with thy self how great a fault it is in thee that art a man,
to desire that, from which the Apostle warns women: for the Lord requires not
the beauty of the body, but of the mind. Thy rich apparel, in despite of
thy self, at thy death thou must leave; Thou came naked out of thy mothers
womb, and naked shall thou return again. Thou shall travel that journey
alone, thy works only good or evil shall follow thee. Where then shall thy
precious garments be? where thy multitude of followers? Is there any of them
that shall dare to take thee out of the hands of the living God? That shall
pluck thee out of the snare of the hunter, and shall save thee? What shall
thou then gain by possessing thy riches? Because thou were lord of much in this
life, do thou think that in the other life, thou shall have the more of him
that is King of kings, and Lord of lords? God who accepts no man's person,
waigheth al men's works with an equal balance; he prefers not the king
before the beggar, nor the beggar before the king, but according to every man's
work shall his reward be: There the last shall be first, and the first last.

Wherefore (dear Brother) fear God, and then thou shall not fear men, and
take heed lest whilst thou seek to please men thou incur the displeasure of
God; and whilst thou desire to please the eyes of men, thou be execrable to
God, and to thy self. Let not the vain reports of men terrify thee from
doing well, but let the fear of God drive away all humane shame. It is far
better to displease men that thou may please God, than to please men, and to
displease God.

CHAP. III. That the grace of God is to be preferred before all temporal
riches.
BUT perhaps thou will say, If I shall make amends for all the wrong I have
done, I fear I shall be poor and in want my self. Res. Yea rather (my dear
brother) I dare say, according to that in the 28. Prou. 11.
of the Proverb. He that gives unto the poor shall not lack, and he that
despises him that asks, shall want himself. If he shall want that
despises the prayer of the poor, much more shall thou want that take from
the poor what is their own. For ill gotten goods never prosper, and there is
not any to whom oppression has succeeded luckily, that has long inioied it.
Some scatter their own, and are the more rich; others take from other men, and
are still the poorer. Pro. 11.
He that slandereth the poor to increase his riches, shall give to him that
is rich, and want himself. For, for the most part when a man scrapeth much
together, it melts away by gluttony and luxury, and goods ill gotten are
worse spent: what covetousness is a long time gathering, gluttony and luxiury
do speedily consume, or at least some adversity or other happens, that in a
moment cuts off the labors of many years.

If thou cast thy care upon the Lord, he will care for thee: and if thou serve
him, he will minister all necessary things unto thee, for he never forsakes
those that put their trust in him. He that so made man that he should have
need of nourishment, will not suffer him to perish by withdrawing from him
things necessary. For if God out of his goodness feed and cloth a little
sparow, do thou think he will forsake that man that puts his trust in
him? will not he that promises to man great and heavenly things, bestow upon
him small and earthly? Yes doubtless he that has given thee far greater
things than these, will likewise give thee the less. Small matters suffice
nature, life is short, what need thou then great provision for a short
journey? And therefore let the shortness of the way shorten thy desires. In
vain thou ladest thy self with many things, when the place whither thou go
is hard at hand. Consider the course of thy life, and thou shall quickly know
a little may suffice thee.

But admit (my dear brother) that if thou restore thy ill gotten goods thou
shall be poor and beggarly. If to gain God thou lose all thy temporal
substance, can thou be poor and needy? God will give thee greater things
than those, yea himself that created these. What are these to faith and
piety, and the goods of the inward man, whereby thy soul is made rich before
God? Yea before God thou shall be made rich in good works, and receive a
hundred fold, possess eternal life. Such as abound in temporal goods, for
the most part want the spiritual, or at leastwise have them in a less
proportion. A true Christian in comparison of those spiritual goods he
hops, makes no more account of gold than of dust. Christ to him is the only
joy, who in heaven must be the only reward. Let the heathen to whom heavenly
things are not due; seek after earthly blessings; let them desire things
present, who believe not things to come; possess fading riches, that with them
they may perish for ever. The soul cannot be without delight, for either it
is delighted with heavenly things or earthly, and by how much the more it is
inflamed with the desire of earthly things, by so much the more does it grow
cold toward heavenly. For the eye cannot at one and the same instant look
toward heaven and earth too.

But what do full bags benefit thee, if thou have an empty conscience? Will thou be accounted good, and not be good? Will thou have good meat, good
garments, good servants, to be short, all good, and thy self only evil?
Prefer thy life before them, let not al these be good and dear unto thee,
and thou only vile and base and villainous to thy self. If thou will be lord
of so many good things, endeavor that they have thee a good lord too: which
thou can hardly be, except thou make restitution of that which thou unjustly
detainest. A good life is better than to possess much goods. Temporal goods
are only good, inasmuch as they are helps to virtue; but if they exceed this
end, and hinder the use of virtue, they are no more good things, but to be
accounted among the evil. Can thou think that another man's goods unjustly
detained, which make thee evil, can be good unto thee? Or can thou think
those things good that subject thee to eternal evils? What good soever there
is in this world, whose gift is it but his that created it? But that gift of
God ought not to please thee, that by the delight thereof separateth thee from
the love of God. Prefer not the gift before the giver; and when thou
receiuest good things, be not evil thy self, and let not that that should
increase thy love toward God, separate thee farther from him, and so thou love
a base creature more than thy Creator, to whem thou owe all that thou art,
and all that thou have, who has made thee, and made thee good, who when it
pleases him, can take that from thee, that he has given thee, who can cast
both thy body and soul into hell, and bestow thy temporal goods upon another
man. But thou that love thy gold more than God, honor it more than God,
for if thou did not so, thou would not for that lose the grace and love
of God. Thou sellest God for a halfe-penny, because for the gain of a
halfe-penny, thou breakest the commandment of God. God forbids thee to steal,
and thou obeiest him not; covetousness bids thee to steal, and that thou
do: God commands thee to cloth the naked, and that thou omittest;
covetousness mooues thee to take from another what is his, and that thou art
ready to put in execution.

Thou possessest riches no otherwise, than a prisoner does his shakles, which
he seems rather to be enthralled to, than to have. For thou art not a little
afflicted with thy self, when thou beatest thy brains, and with wearisome
desires, and a wounded conscience, deuisest which way thou may make such a
man's goods thine own, by flattery get such a bargain; by threats such a
farm; by cosenage and deceit and watchings and labors such a lordship; and
still the more thou gettest, the more thou seek. For as wood cast into the
fire, seems for a time to press down the flame, and dead the fire, but
presently makes it burn with greater violence, so thy covetousness is not
extinguished with gain, but more inflamed: And when by right or by wrong, thou
have heaped thy riches together, and glutted (as it were) thy own desires,
whereas before thou did hope for rest out of abundance, thou shall find
thy self more afflicted than ever, by the care thou have to keep that thou
have gotten, and thou shall ever keep thy riches with no less fear, than with
labor thou have got them. Thou art every day in fear to be assaulted, and
the wrongs thou have offered to others, thou fear will be offered by others
unto thee. If thou see one mightier than thy self, thou fear his power, his
violence; if poorer than thy self, thou suspectest his theft; and so thou that
in adversity did hope for prosperity, in prosperity fear adversity,
and art carried hither and thither, as it were with so many billows, and
tormented with the diverse vicissitude of thy own fortunes.

Do thou that art a Christian, the disciple of Christ and his poverty, that
art called to the heavenly riches of Paradise, admire as matters of greater
moment these temporal goods (which do more with care and anxietie afflict thy
miserable soul, than refresh it with the use of them) and in them place thy
greatest felicity? and in a country where as a stranger for a few days thou
dwell, do thou place thy whole heart, and thy whole affections? So long
as thou desire transitory things, and either understand not eternal, or
understanding them contemnest them, thou wallowest in the dung of thy earthly
riches, and think of nothing but earth and earthly things, in stead of thy
country thou love that exile which thou suffer, and in that darkness thou
live in, thou exultest as in the clear light: The helps of this thy
peregrination thou make thy stumbling blocks, and being delighted with the
nightlie light of the Moon, thou refusest to behold the bright beauty of the
Sun, and the benefit of thy passing life, thou turnest into an occasion of
eternal death.

Is not that traveler besides himself, that in his journey passing through
beautiful and delightful meadows, there stays, and forgets to go to his
iourneyes end? If thou had power to rule some small country, so long as
upon a swift horse thou can run it over, will thou be content to lose thy
right of rule for ever in a far greater country, for that transitory
dominion? What is the time of this present life, but a continual race unto
death, wherein no man is permitted to stay a little, or to slacken his pace?
What is it to live, but incessantly to run unto death? By how much the longer
thou live, by so much the nearer thou art unto death; and as life passes, so
death draws on. As a barrel the more it runs out, the more it is emptied,
and yet is not said to be empty till the last drop be fallen from it; so by
certain drops of time, the life by little and little drops away, but yet
until the last moment of thy life thy body is not said to be dead. In the
middle of thy life thou art in death, and whether thou watch or fleepe, thou
die continually. Every day thou die, every day thou art changed, and yet
do thou think thy self immortal? He easily contemns all things, that
thinks every day is his dying day. If thou did think that these earthly
blessings must one day perish, thou would use them whilst thou have them,
for the benefit of thy soul. In death, with sorrow enough, thou shall see how
base, and worse than nothing, that is that thou have loved. Wherefore (my dear
brother) prefer the grace of God before the remporal blessings of this life;
lose these, to get that. Restore to thy neighbor what is thy neighbors, to
God what is Gods. So possess the things of this world, that thou be not
possessed by them; so pass by thy te^porall blessings that thou lose not the
eternal; use thy temporal goods, desire eternal; those thou must lose
whether thou will or no, these thou shall never lose except thou will. Let the
world be thy peregrination, heaven thy rest. *

CHAP. IIII. Alms unlawfully gotten pleases not God.
But perhaps thou will say I confess that I unjustly deteine other men's goods;
but yet I give much alms, and do much good with them; I comfort those that are
in prison, I cloth the naked, I receive strangers. Res. Thou do benefit thy
self nothing at all (my dear brother) if thou comfort one by wronging
another: Thou think thou give, and thou give nothing that is thine own;
take not away, and thou have given. Do thou think to justify thy theft thy
extortion, if out of the goods of the poor thou give a small alms? One is
fed, where many hunger; and with the spoils of many, few are clothed. He to
whom thou give, rejoices; he from whom thou take, mourns; he prays
for thee, the other cries for vengeance unto the Lord against thee: which of
these two will the Lord hear? Fear thou that he will hear him that curses,
as the Lord himself witnesses. There was a Judge, says he, in a certain
city, which feared not God, neither reverenced man: and there was a widow in
that city, which came unto him, saying, Luke 18.
Do me justice against mine adversary. And he would not do it for a time:
but afterward he said with himself, Though I fear not God, nor reverence
man, yet because this widow troubles me, I will do her right, lest at the last
she come and make me weary. And the Lord said, Hear what the unrighteous
Judge says. Now shall God avenge his Elect, which cried day and night unto
him, yea though he suffer long for them. I tell you, he will avenge them
quickly.

Thou see hereby, that God approoueth not such alms, neither does it please
him that one should be relieved out of the loss of another, or that that
should be violently taken from one, which is mercifully given to another.
That alms is not acceptable unto God, which is gotten by unlawful and unjust
means, but that only which is given by a just possessour, out of goods justly
gotten. And this is the reason that sacrifices gotten by robbery, the Lord
refuses, saying, Esaias 61.8.
I the Lord love judgment, and hate robbery for burnt offering. Which Solomon
does likewise insinuate, saying, Eccl. 34.21.
Whosoever brings an offering of the goods of the poor, does as one that
sacrifices the son before the fathers eyes. With how great hatred God
beholds such a sacrifice, appears in that it is compared to the sorrow of a
father for the death of his child: for what thing can be more intolerable
than a slain son before the eyes of his father? But thou that gettest by
violence, what out of pity thou give unto God, think with thy self how
much thou give, but not how much thou have taken away; thou numbrest thy
gift, but thou think not of thy sin. Thou give thine, nay another man's,
unto God, and thou give thy self to the devil. Thou think that God puts
his justice to sale, if whilst thou give unto God for thy oppression, thou
think thou may therefore oppress scotfree; yea, thou make God a
companion in thy sin, in that thou think he consents to thy sin, by
accepting an alms of goods gotten by sin. It is one thing to do the works
of mercy for sin, another to sin to do mercy: if that may be called
mercy, which by an interposed sin of robbery or oppression confounds
whatsoever good there is in mercy.

But suppose thy goods are lawfully gotten, and thou have never wronged and
man, yet can thou think that it is lawful for thee, to keep those goods
unprofitably that may do good to many, whereof thou art made by thy heavenly
master, not a lord, but a steward? When thou ministrest necessary things to
those that want, thou give not thine, but thou restorest to them their own;
thou do rather pay a debt of justice, than execute a work of mercy; and in
doing otherwise, thou do every day almost kill as many as die for want of
comfort, when thou can give it them. But thou, when thou give a small
matter to thy God, in his poor members, that gives all thou have unto thee,
having oppressed thy neighbor, can thou think him abundantly satisfied if
thou give that unto him thou have wrongfully taken from another? Thou must not
help one with the hurt of another: Though thou give much to the poor, yet
thou art not quit of thy theft, until thou have given to him from whom thou
have taken. Thou ought not to detain unto thy self, that thing thou have
found, if thou be any way assured that the right master thereof has not
forsaken it, but seeks after it. And therefore says S. Austin, That which
thou have found and restored not, thou have robbed: he that denies it being
demanded, if he could he would take it: God searches the heart, not the
hand. Wherefore (dear brother) think not thy self hereafter justified in
this, if of thy goods wrongfully gotten thou give unto the poor; if thou
violently take from one, and mercifully give unto an other; for alms out of
thy goods well gotten cannot justify, as being but the fruits of that faith
that must justify.

The Third Part of the exhortation to repentance.
CHAP. I. That God does not forgive us our trespasses except we forgive those
that trespass against us.
THirdly, thou will perhaps say, thou art content to repent, Matthew. 7
but thou can not forgive him that has offended thee, yea thou art resolved
to revenge thy wrongs. Res. First thou must understand (my dear brother) that
according to that measure that thou measurest to others, it shall be measured to
thee again; and this is a certain rule set down by God himself, that as thou will have thy sins forgiven thee, so must thou forgive the trespass
committed against thee. Thou art in debt, and others indebted unto thee. Thou
art a debtour to God for many and grievous offenses, thy brother is indebted
unto thee for small and slight injuries. Behold then how loving and easy a
condition God offers, that is, that thou should forgive what is owing
thee, and what thou owe shall be forgiven unto thee. Otherwise thy sins
can no way be forgiven thee, if thou show thy self inexorable to forgive thy
neighbor; in vain thou hopest of pardon for thy sins, except thou first
pardon his. For though the God of peace and consolation can without this
forgive all thy sins, yet forasmuch as he is willing, to minister unto thee
an occasion of pity and meekness, he considers thy charity and mercy
toward thy neighbor, that he may confer upon thee his charity and mercy.
And therefore he commands, When ye shall stand and pray, forgive, if ye have
any thing against any man, that your father also which is in Heaven may
forgive you your trespasses. Mark. 11.25.
For if you will not forgive, your father which is in Heaven will not pardon
you your trespasses. So that thou see, that to obtain forgiveness at Gods
hands, thou need not to pass the Seas, to make long iourneies, to clime
high mountains, to disburse great sums of money: but the Lord that desires
rather to find him that he may pardon, than that he may punish, puts it
as it were in thy own power to avoid the severity of his judgment.

As long as thou continuest in this life thou can not be without sin, and
therefore it were wisdom in thee to embrace so gentle a condition, as by
forgiving another man's sins, to blot out thy own; being offended by another
man to forgive him, if thou desire to be forgiven of God; to pardon a light
offense to thy neighbor (for whatsoever one man can commit against another is
but light) that God may pardon thee so many millions of sins. There is no
better means (after thy sin) to be reconciled unto God, than that thou
being offended with thy brother be reconciled unto him. If thou seek after
the multitude and magnitude of the mercies of God, do thou likewise multiply
and magnify thy own mercies toward thy neighbor, that showing mercy, thou
may receive mercy. For though God have need of no man's help, and be free
from all sin, yet he forgiueth his servant those infinite wrongs he receives;
how much more then ought thou, that have need of remission, and art guilty
of a thousand sins, to forgive the wrong that is offered by thy fellow
servant? With what face can thou look that God should pardon thee thy
sins, when thou will not pardon thy neighbor his? Will thou have God to
exercise his mercy upon thee, and will thou exercise thy severe judgment upon
thy neighbor? Thou shall have no excuse at the day of judgment, because thou
shall be judged according to thy own sentence, and that thou halt done unto
others, thou shall suffer thy self: Thou shall have judgment without mercy,
that show no mercy unto thy brother; For what punishment art thou not
worthy of, who may with so great facility obtain mercy at Gods hands, and
yet art content to betray thy own salvation?

Our Savior Christ Jesus when he prescribed a form of prayer unto us, and
taught us to pray, promised his fatherly mercy; but yet he added a law, that we
should so beg forgiveness for our trespasses, as we forgive those that
trespass against us. Yea sorasmuch as he knew that all men are liars, and
that if their sins should be first forgiven them, they would not afterward
forgive their trespassers, he commanded we should first forgive them, before
we ask forgiveness at his hands. But thou, with what hope can thou pray,
that still reseruest rancour in thy heart against another? For as thou praying
lie, when thou say, I forgive others their trespaspasses, and yet
forgiuest them not; so when thou praiest that thy trespasses may be forgiven
thee of God, they are not forgiven. For it is as much as if thou should say,
forgive not me my trespasses committed against thee, because I forgive not
others their trespasses against me. When thou powrest out such prayers unto
God (who considers the heart, not the word) thou art for a threefold cause
made guilty. First because thou art a beggar, and go about to deceive God,
whilst thou praiest unto him, to forgive thy debts, as thou forgiuest thy
debtors, and yet thou forgiuest them not, thou sparest them in nothing.
Secondly, because though thou made not this prayer unto God, yet thou
ought to forgive thy brother his debts. Thirdly, though it were not thy
duty to do it, yet forasmuch as being warned by thy Judge, thou ceasest not,
thou exasperatest the anger of the Judge against thee. What hope of
forgiuenesle can thou have, if at that very instant when thou praiest unto
God, and beggest mercy at his hands, thou minister greater occasion to stir
up his anger against thee? As if a man should fall down before thee, and beg
mercy at thy hands, and in the midst of his petition should epsy his
enemy, and surceasing to entreat thee, should go about to murder him; would
it not move thee to greater anger against him than before? Could thou
possibly think him worthy of mercy? think it is thus and no otherwise with God
himself. But perhaps thou will say, from this time forward, or so long as I am
not in charity I will not say the Lords prayer, or at leastwise, I will omit that
condition (As we forgive those that trespass against us.) Resp. Except thou
pray as Christ has taught thee, thou art not Christ's disciple: He that made
this prayer, is he that hears it; if thou shall omit this condition, Christ
will not know that prayer that he has made; and as thou have shut out mercy in
thy prayers toward thy neighbor, so God will shut the gate of mercy against
thee.

Wherefore (dear brother) if thou will have thy sins forgiven thee of God,
forgive thou thy brother, not only with thy outward lips, but thy heart too;
not with a fained peace, but a sincere love; so as by thy actions thou work no
revenge, and in thy heart thou reserve no malice. Drive away all hatred from
thy mind, and love thy enemy with all thy heart. And forasmuch as the proof
of thy love, is the performance thereof in thy actions, thou shall always do
him good in thy affections, wishing him the blessings of grace and of glory,
of nature and of fortune, as they may be helps and furtherances to salvation:
And thou shall do him good in effect too, as time and place shall serve,
especially in those things that appertain to the health of his soul.

CHAP. II. That no work that a man does, be it never so good, can be
acceptable unto God, so long as he is not in charity with his neighbor.
FOrasmuch as all sins are extinguished and blotted out by subsequent good
works, proceeding out of a true and lively faith, the sin of discord must be
very great, which if it be not utterly extinct, it suffers no good work to
follow it. For it is written: Mat. 5.25.
If thou bring thy gist unto the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the altar, and go
thy way: first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Judge then how great an evil discord is, for which that must be undone, by
which sins are released; the gift of an uncharitable man is not received, his
prayers are not heard, for God loves more the love and agreement of men, than
his own honor. O the admirable goodness and mercy of our God, and his
unspeakable love toward men! he resuseth his own honor, for our charity one
toward another. If two be at enmity one with the other, no man can be a
faithful friend to them both, and therefore God will not be a friend, no not
to the faithful, so long as they be in hatred one toward another, so long as
they profess Christ, and yet are enemies. God to the end he might impose upon
thee a greater necessity of reconciliation, did not say, If thou have any
thing against thy brother (for to a man that is willing, it is a matter of no
difficulty to forgive an other) but he said, If thy brother has any thing
against thee; go with a willing heart and a good conscience, and an humble
submission unto him, though he be far distant from thee; or if thou can
not come where he is, in thy heart be reconciled unto him, that when thou
come in his presence with thy love thou may make amends for the wrong thou
have done him, which to a furious man that thinks he has just cause to be
angry, is a matter very difficult. But thy brother has nothing against thee,
but thou bear an intestine hatred against thy brother, which thou may
easily pardon, and be reconciled if thou will. And yet thou presumest with
this hatred and malice, not only to offer thy prayers unto God, but to come to
the Communion of the body and blood of thy Savior Christ Jesus; and that mild
Lamb, that peace maker, that lover of peace, thou presumest to ^eceine into
thy cruel and bloody heart, boiling with hatred and malice against thy
brother. This thy hatred makes thee unworthy that corporalll bread that thou
eateft, and do thou presume to eat the bread of Angels? It cannot be well
with thee if thou wickedly receive that which is good. Thou can not have life
in thy self, when the receiving of life brings death. Mat. 5.44.
Love (says the Lord) your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, pray for them which hurt you and persecute you. Whom then
can thou hate, when thou art commanded to be good to thy enemies? And yet
thou hate thy neighbor, that art forbid to hate a stranger; and thou
persecutest thy brother, being commanded to do good to thy enemy. Thou art
enjoined to pray for him, and dare thou to pray unto God against him? Can
thou call thy self a Christian, and yet not keep the preceps of Christ?

Neither is it sufficient for thee to make up the heap of thy punishment, by
trangressing the commandment of Christ, but thou praiest unto him to do so
too. God commands thee to love thine enemy, and thou praiest unto him to kill
thine enemy; and whilst thou so praiest, thou fightest with thy prayers
against God, who commands thee to forgive whatsoever thou have against thy
enemy. Mark. 11.
When ye shall stand, says he, and pray, forgive if ye have any thing against
any man; but thou call upon God to do quite contrary to his own rule; but
so far is he from doing that that thou requirest, that he turns the
malicious darts of thy profane mouth against thy self, and that mischief
that thou wishest to another lights upon thine own head. He lives yet, whom
thou cursest, and thou that cursest art already made guilty of his death,
because since thou can not kill him with thy sword, thou killest him with thy
prayers. If thou lay not aside thy anger against thine enemy, at that instant
when thou beggest mercy at Gods hands, but even then remembrest thy grudge,
when is there hope thou will be merciful? So long as thou nourishest this
rancor in thy bosom, no prayer, no work shall do thee any good, but every
hour, yea every minute of an hour thou addest sin unto sin, whilst thou
remembrest thy wrongs, and forgiuest not thy neighbor, but purposest to
revenge. If every one that is angry with his brother be guilty of judgment;
how much more shall thou be guilty, which continuest a deadly hatred against
him? If it be not lawful to be angry with thy brother, or to say unto him
Raca, Ephesians 4.
or fool, much less to nourish hatred in thy heart against him.

Wherefore (dear brother) let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath; and lest
of a mote thou make a beam, and thy soul a man-slaier, as speedily as thou
can be reconciled to thy brother and pardon his wrongs. Yea pray for thy
enemy that pursues thee, and slandereth thee, that either God will turn his
heart, or rightly defend thee, and preserve thee, ever wishing his salvation,
whose iniquities thou do detest, that thou may be the son of the father
which is in heaven.

CHAP. III. That it is not lawful to strike him that strikes.
BUT perhaps thou will say, he has wronged thee greatly, not thou him; he is
a wicked man, and not worthy to be forgiven; I had rather die than not to be
revenged of him: I will answer a fool according to his folly. Res. First (my
dear brother) what shall it profit thee, if being stricken, thou strike thy
striker? Shall that make amends for thy blow? If thou pluck out another man's
eye, thou recouerest not thy own; but with thy eye, thou losest thy patience,
and have hurt thy own soul more, than thou have hurt his body. The Devil
procures the wounds of the body, to procure the wounds of the soul: If thou
strike not again, thou seem to be overcome of thy enemy, but in the mean
time, thou have overcome the Devil; thou have lost a member of thy body, but
thou have gotten honor by thy patience. And therefore if thou spare thy
enemy, thou have got more to thy self than to him; and thou art not to
consider so much thy own loss, as the gain of thy patience. Whereas if thou
strike again, thou procurest a loss to thy body and thy soul too, and thou
art not so much hurt by being stricken by thy enemy, as thou hurtest thy self
by thy own impatiencie. Whereas outwardly thou desire not to be conquered
inwardly thou art grieuouslie wounded; whilst outwardy thou desendest
trifles, inwardly thou losest matter of moment; and then thou art most
overcome, when thou will not suffer thy self to be over come, because thou
yeeldest to the dangerous passions of anger, and can not rule thy own
affections. But thou will say, he is worthy to be stricken, he deserves
blows. Res. Be it so (my dear brother) but yet thou art not worthy to strike
again, because thou art his disciple, Exodus 21.
that being stricken, struck not again; who likewise abrogating that old law,
A soul for a soul, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, Matt. 5.39
a hand for a hand, a foot for a foot, a wound for a wound, hatred for hatred,
presently added, But I say unto you, resist not evil, but whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. Which law he
himself observing, was ready for the salvation of us all, not only to turn
the other cheek, but in his whole body to be crucified, that being taught by
his example, thou should rather offer thy other cheek, than being stricken,
to strike again: for scholars must be followers of their master: And yet will thou, being stricken, strike again; when thou art commanded rather to turn
thy other cheek? But perhaps thou think, that if thou strike him, thou have
given him cause to fear to strike again: yea thou have provoked him the
rather to strike again: for wrath is not pacified by wrath, but more inflamed;
and an injury received, by revenge is not taken away, but increased. For what
end can there be of mutual injuries, if every man proceed in the revenge of
his own wrongs? Enmity on both sides increases, hatreds grow strong, revenge
more bloody. If therefore he have wronged thee, have recourse to thy
superiors, take a lawful course against him, by which means thou shall right
thy self better, and hurt him more.

If he have justly stricken thee, be angry with thy own fault, not with him,
because he persecuteth not thy self, but thy sin. It is lighted upon thee
for thy own correction. Thou have sinned, but thou have not yet received
worthy punishment for thy sin, but thou art less hurt than thou deseruest,
and the revenge is far inferior to thy sault, the punishment comes far
short of thy desert. It was his purpose perhaps to punish thy sin, it is thy
part thankfully to accept of this discipline. If thy conscience tell thee thou
deseruest as much as he gave thee, why do thou add sin unto sin by thy
impatiencie? Forgive him therefore, lest thou forgive not thy self; for he
could not persecute thee, if he were not permitted by the Lord either to
punish some sin that is in thee, or thereby to double thy joy, in that being
wicked thou art corrected, being good, exercises. If a child had discretion
he would not hate the rod which his mother takes into her hand for his
amendment. But suppose thy enemy do offend thee unjustly; perhaps thou have as
unjustly offended him, and yet he has taken no indirect course to be
revenged upon thee, but with patience has borne thy wrongs: or perhaps, though
he now wrong thee, yet in former times he has pleasured thee as much; and if
so, it is the part of an ungrateful mind, by remembering one wrong to forget
many benefits.

But let us yield unto thee that thou did never offend him, and that thou
never receiuedst any benefit at his hands, yet it is an unworthy thing to make
thy self more wicked by revenging another man's wickedness, and to commit a
new sin by punishing another man's iniquity. He has offended thee, but yet
such are his offenses, as they no way equal those for which thou beggest
forgiveness at Gods hands. As often as he offends thee, so often does he
minister occasion to thee of the remission of thy sins at Gods hands, if thou
remit his. Whereas if all men were perfect, how could thou suffer any thing
for Gods cause? Many times it falls out, that thine enemy does thee more
good than thy friend; for he whilst he accuses thee of thy faults, compels
thee to fly from them, ministers unto thee matter of patience, and occasion
to humble thy thoughts touching thy self, whereas thy friend by flattering
thee, cheereth thee up in thy infirmities, provoke thee to iterate thy
sins, and whilst thou hear thy self commended by him, he is an occasion
either of vain glory or error.

But perhaps thou will say that thy enemy is not worthy to be forgiven. Res.
Yea (my dear brother) is not thine enemy worthy to be forgiven, and is there
any worth in thee, why God should pardon thee those manifold transgressions
committed against him? What were thou when he laid down his life for thee? were
thou not his enemy? What had thou deserved at his hands, that he should
pardon thee? The Creator forgiueth his creature, and shall not one creature
forgive another, one sinner another sinner? If God as often as thou have
offended him should as often have revenged himself upon thee, and entered into a
strict examination of thy sins, thou had long since perished, and been
damned in hell. With how great love does the Lord tolerate thee every day
iterating thy old sins ^ With how great mercy, yea being grievously offended,
does he receive him that repents him of his sins, and turns unto him? With
how great liberality, though thou every day offend, does he every day suffer
thee to enjoy his benefits! O evil servant! the Lord forgave thee all thy
debt, Matthew. 18.32.
because thou praiedst him; ought not thou also to have pity on thy
fellows, even as he had pity on thee? If therefore thine enemy be unworthy to
be forgiven, and that thou do good for ill, yet there is worth enough in Christ
that for his sake thou should do it, with whom thou have deserved to be
thus punished, howsoever thou have not deserved of thine enemy to be thus
afflicted. The good are scourged by God the Judge of all, by the ministry and
help of wicked men, whom he uses as his torturers, and the executioners of
his justice: and as a loving father, after the chasticement of his child
casts the rod into the fire; so our God the father of us all, those wicked
that he uses in this world for the chastisement of his children, when he has
finished his work he casts into hell fire, and reuengeth himself upon them,
for the revenge they have done upon his children, according to that he has
premised, Romans 12.
Vengeance is mine and I will repay. Has not God sufficiently revenged thy
wrong upon thy enemy, in that for thy cause he has withdrawn from him his
grace? In that he has powered forth his wrath upon him, and condemned him to
eternal punishment, which deservedly he inflicteth upon him if without
repentance he depart out of this life? And therefore thou have not so much
reason to be angry with him, as to be moved with compassion toward him.
Howsoever thine enemy rage against thee, better is thy just sorrow in bearing
thy wrong, than his unjust joy in offering it. Leave therefore revenge unto
God, whose it is, and when he has revenged thy quarrel sufficiently, let not
thy cruelty ever wound thine enemy and persecute him. The servant is not above
his lord, nor the disciple above his master, nor man above God. Thy fellow
servant, thy condisciple, thy brother, the lord in his justice has corrected
and murmurest thou that art in the same condemnation, and contentest thou not
thy self with his sentence, but still think the law is in thy own hands,
and thou may be Judge in thy own cause?

Perhaps by this time he has repented, and God has pardoned; and if God
have, wilt not thou? Will thou still persecute him whom God has absolved, and
require that debt that God has pardoned? God is made a friend to thy penitent
brother, and art thou still his enemy? Will thou hurt him whom God loves?
Take heed, I say; for if thou be contrary to God in his works, thou art not
Gods friend, but his enemy. What good would this thy furious and reuengeful
mind do thee, if to day (which may fall out) thou should happen to die?
Do thou think that when thou art buried in hell, thou can hurt thy enemy
yet living, and revenge thy wrongs? Yea rather he is strongly revenged of thee,
in that thy hatred toward him has brought thee to that place, and that he
whilst thou art in torment, has time to beg mercy at Gods hand to obtain
his grace in this life, and his glory in the life to come.

Wherefore (dear brother) that thou may truly love thy brother, being hurt,
hurt not; being slandered, slander not; hate not him that hates thee; detract
not from him, that detracteth from thee; for it is a more grievous thing to
overcome a wrong by patience, than by revenge. Whether the wrong be justly or
iniustly offered, bear it patiently, ever remembering that thou have deserved
more and greater things for thy sins. Which thy great and manifold sins if
thou will have forgiven, thou must needs forgive those few and small
trespasses thy enemy has committed against thee.

CHAP. IIII. That by the example of Christ it is no hard matter for a man to
pardon his neighbor as often as he offends.
BUT perhaps thou will say, it is not once that he has wronged me, but many
and sundry times, and still he hates me and persecutes me, and therefore who
can endure it? Resp. My dear brother, as often as thy brother shall sin
against thee, Matthew. 18 21.
so often does the Lord command thee to forgive him; To whom Peter came and
said, Master how often shall my brother sin against me, and I shall forgive
him? Unto seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not to thee unto seven times,
but unto seven times seven times. See here, he sets down a finite number
for an infinite, as if he should say, as often as thy brother shall sin
against thee, so often forgive him. How greatly and how often soever thou
sinnest against God, so often (out of an humble and contrite spirit, and an
assured hope in the mercies of Christ Jesus thou asking forgiveness) he
forgiueth; and yet shall it seem a grievous and an irksome thing unto thee, a
vile and base worm to forgive thy brother? Man can but lightly wrong thee:
and seems it so heavy a thing to thee not to be revenged? If thy brother
sin against thee seventy times seven times, forgive him, yea if a hundred
times, nay how often soever, yet forgive him. As often as he offends thee, so
often forgive him, if thou will that Christ shall forgive thee as often as thou
offendest. If thy brother hate thee, hate not thou him; if he persecute thee,
persecute not him, but arm thy self against him with the armor of patience,
not of fury, that if he will needs perish, thou perish not with him, but he
die and be damned alive without thy company.

But thou will say, it is a hard thing ever to bear and forbear, and to
bridle thy wrath against him. Res. Yea rather (my dear brother) it is a more
hard and difficult thing to keep malice and rancor in thy heart, than to quit
thy self of it: there is no labor in learning it; much in retaining it. To be
freed from anger brings rest and peace to the mind, and it is an easier thing
to forget injuries than to remember them. There is nothing more grievous to a
man than the remembrance of forepassed wrongs, and one man cannot wish a
greater mischief to another, than to wish him haunted with this devil malice,
and desire of revenge. For as the first thing that a worm feeds upon, is the
wood wherein he is bred, so wrath does first hurt and afflict his heart, from
whence it springs. Thy mind of it self is unquiet enough, and do thou
with hatred and malice increase and exasperate it? Thou have many other crosses
from outward causes, and yet thou increasest thy burden, and art not at peace
with thy own heart. First suppress thy familiar enemy, that is, thy carnal
concupiscence, before thou provide to make war against others. For though
thou be able to overcome all the enemies thou have, yet new will arise, whereof
some will sooner oppress thee than thou all. See now which of the two is the
more easy, to retain rancour, or to leave it. As it is easy and light for an
humble man to quit himself of envy and malice, so is it a matter of great
difficulty to a man of a proud spirit. If thou call to mind the passion of
Christ, there is nothing so hard that with a willing mind thou may not bear.
Do thou not remember how much more hard and bitter things Christ has
suffered when he laid down his own soul for thee? How great and how many
slanderous reproaches sufferered he of the Jews? How many blows? How many
scourgings being mute and silent? How patiently turned he not his face from
the profane spittings of wicked men? How meekly did he yield his divine head
to the crown of thorns? How contentedly when he was thirsty, did he take the
bitterness of gall? How willingly being life it self, did he suffer death?
But who? and by whom has he suffered these cruelties? The creator by his
creatures; God by men, the lord by his servants: the giver of all good things,
by ungrateful wretches, than which, what thing can be more intolerable? And
yet being scourged with whips, crowned with thorns, wounded with nails,
crucified, being unmindful of all these his miseries and torments, he still
pitieth those that pity not him, heals those that wound him, gives life to
those that kill him, when with a pleasing acceptance, much devotion of spirit
and fullness of charity, he does not only spare unto his enemies the life of
that holy Lamb, but prays unto his Father for them, saying, Luke 23.
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Here consider, the manifold
miseries of his body, there the manifold mercies of his heart, and never forget
his abundant charity and wonderful patience; for he tolerateth those he
could punish, and cast into the bottomless pit of hell. He that judges, and
to whom the Father has given all judgment, will not revenge himself, but
forgets and forgiueth his wrongs, yea prays for his persecutors, leaving
unto us an example of his patience, that we may follow his steps, that as often
as others shall offend us, we may be stirred up to patience, not revenge. For
if our master when he was murdered did love his enemies, how much more ought
the disciple to love them whilst he lives? But thou a base and contemptible
worm, a polluted piece of dung, when thou see the King of glory forgiving
his contumelies, pardoning the agonies and torments of his Cross, art yet
(being provoked with the least wrong that may be) stirred up to fury and
desire of revenge, and offerest greater wrongs than thou have received: Thou
do what hurt thou can, and thou threatnest more than thou can; and when
thou can not or dare not openly to revenge thy wrongs, thou inwardly
frettest and boilest with malice, and in vain thou afflictest thy self, and
not thy enemy. For as the good will of a man when there wants ability of
performance has a reward, so thy ill will, seeking after revenge scapes not
unpunished, because God considers not so much what thou have done, as what
thou would have done, if thou had been able. Wherefore (dear brother)
incline the obstinacy of thy impatient mind to mercy, and following the steps
of our lord and master, let it not seem hard unto thee to forgive thy enemy,
as often as thy enemy shall offend thee; that every day those sins may be
remitted, that thou do every day commit, that whilst thou pardonest thy
neighbor light and small wrongs, God may pardon thee great and grievous. For if
thou truly repent, thou must prepare thy self to endure wrongs, and never be
moved, when thou hear thy sins objected against thee.

By this which has been spoken thou plainly see, in how damnable a state
thou live, so long as thou harborest malice and rancor in thy heart against
thy neighbor. To the end therefore thou may become a new man, The
conclusion.
if thou have any thing against thy neighbor forgive it, and God will forgive
thee; which if thou do not, think it is vain for thee to beg forgiveness at
Gods hands; for such as thou art toward thy fellow servant, thou shall find
him. Thou have power, nay there is a necessity imposed upon thee to forgive any
man that shall wrong thy self for any cause whatsoever, but if he shall sin
against God, or his neighbor, it is not in thy power to remit, but thou art to
use thy best endeavor to have him punished by law, not out of ill will, but out
of that will wherewith a father corrects his child whom he cannot hate. But
thou contrarily in the wrongs of God and thy neighbor art calm and quiet, but
in thy own thou art furious and violent, wherein thou expressest thy little
love toward God and thy neighbor. Neither is it any wonder at all, if thou
love not God whom thou can not see, when thou can not love thy neighbor
whom thou see and know; whom if thou have first offended, be first
reconciled unto him; if he be thy enemy be friendly to him, that thou may so
win him to be thy friend; and though he have first offended thee, yet be
thou first reconciled unto him, and so thou shall win unto thy self a
twofold blessing, one because thou have patiently endured wrong, another
because thou art the first that inuitest thine enemy to unity and concord.
Consider with thy self what S. Paul for our instruction says: 2 Cor. 5.20.
Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through
us, we pray you in Christ's stead that ye be reconciled to God. So that we
see that by sin we have made an enmity betwixt God and us, and yet God
preuenteth us, and first sends his messengers of peace unto us, that we that
have sinned may be at peace with God. Blush therefore if thou be backward,
since thy Savior Christ Jesus is so forward, who is blessed for ever and ever.

The Fourth Part of the exhortation to repentance.
CHAP. I. That God forgiueth sins, when with a true and contrite heart we
confess them unto God.
FOurthly, it may be thou will say, thou could be content to repent, but
that it is necessary to repentance that thou confess thy sins unto God, and
that thou art ashamed to do. Resp. First, (my dear brother) let me propose
this example unto thee. A thief steals before the king, and is taken in his
theft, and yet though his theft be manifest, he will not confess it,
whereupon he is condemned to die, and being bound hand and foot, conveyed to
his execution. His king being moved to compassion, says unto him, my friend,
thou know that I took thee with the theft in thy hands, but thou fearing
least by me thou should be thought a thief, obstinately deniest thy
offense, whereof I am an eye witness; and for this cause, as thou see, art
thou condemned. Nevertheless to the end that my good nesse may overcome thy
wickedness, I will have mercy upon thee, and deliver thee from this shameful
death, If thou will acknowledge thy offense and say, I have sinned, O Lord, and
done wickedly in thy sight. What think thou it is fit this thief should do
upon so kind, and so merciful an offer? Should he not confess his offense
and say, I have sinned? But if he be so obstinate that he will rather die than
acknowledge his offense; has not this king reason to execute his judgment
upon him, and is not the thief for his obstinacy worthy to be hanged?

Thou art this wicked wretch, who in the presence of God (to whose eyes all
things are naked and open, Heb. 4.13. Psalm. 118.
and in whose sight are all thy wares) have greenously offended, and art
apprehended in the works of thy hands. And because the reward of sin is
death, Romans 6.
and the soul which has sinned shall die, therefore the sentence of eternal
death is pronounced against thee. And whilst thou refusest to foresee those
imminent dangers that interrupt thy present ioies, thou runnest blindfold to
the pit of hell, being fast bound in thine iniquities, with no other irons,
than thy iron will. The devil has captiuated thy will, whereby he has made
an iron chain, wherewith he draws thee fast bound to the pit of hell. But
behold the goodness of God has covered thy wickedness, his piety thy impiety,
he has seen thee sinning, and yet forbeareth; he tollerateth thee resisting
him, and still calls thee unto him by his Prophet, Esai 43.25
I even I am he that puts away thine iniquities, for my own sake, and will
not remember thy sins; Put me in remembrance, let us be judged together,
count thou that thou may be justified. O upon how easy a condition does the
Lord promise to forget thy sins! Only call thou to remembrance and count
them, and thou shall be justified. Only forget not thy sins, and he
forgiues; uncover, and he covers thy shame with righteousness; open, and he
shuteth. Prevent the wrath of an angry Judge by accusing thy self, yea be
angry with thy self, and let not thy own mouth spare thee: for then thou
beginnest to be justified, when thou beginnest to be thy own accuser.

Open the eyes of thy faith, and consider how great ioies are promised unto
thee in heaven, how great torments are prepared for thee in hell, which that
thou may avoid, and attain the ioies of heaven, see how easy a thing it is
that is required of thee in this world, that is, Psalm 51.4.
only with a contrite heart, and an assured faith in the merits of Christ
Jesus, to cry out, against thee, Psalm. 32.5.
O Lord, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight; I will
confess against my self my wickedness. Which if from thy heart thou utter
unto God, he will remit thy sins, and will remember thy iniquities no more;
yea before thy mouth can utter this confession, thou shall feel in thy heart
thy remission, and with joy and comfort thou shall assure thy self thy sins
are forgiven thee.

God requires this confession out of a pure heart to no other end, but to
forgive. The mercy of our redeemer has tempered the severity of the old law,
wherein it is often written; Exodus 19.
He that does this or that shall be stoned to death. But our Creator who has
turned the rigor of the law into mercy has appeared in our flesh, Leuit. 20.
and has promised mercy, not death, to as many as shall truly repent and
confess their sins. O wonderful compensation and strange vicissitude of
things! That a man should reveal those sins unto God that were never hidden
from him, and yet for so poor a service receive so unspeakable a reward as
remission of sins. The prophet David having committed that heinous and
blooddy sin against Vriah, had no sooner cried out unto the Lord, I have
sinned, but presently he received comfort: The Lord has removed thy sin
from thee. The prodigal son, Luke 15.
who departing from his father, spent his substance with riotous living, did
only say, Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee: and presently
his father running out to meet him, kissed him. O short speech! I have sinned:
three words, that shut the mouth of hell, and open the gate of Paradise. O
pity! o clemency! o the unspeakable mercy of our God, who in many things is
grievously offended, and with one word of repentance is presently pleased,
forgiueth all our sins, and opens his bosom of mercy unto us! There is no
offense so grievous, but by repentance it may be pardoned; and the Lord knows
not how to deny him, that with an humble and contrite heart falls down
before him: for he that before this humble confession was the God of revenge,
becomes afterward the Father of mercy; and of a severe Judge, he is made a
pitiful Father. It changes the sentence of his divine justice, and opens to
the bottomless depth of thy misery, the bottombles depth of his mercies; to
the fountain of thy iniquity, the fountain of his goodness. It gives unto
thee (to whom neither the heavens nor the earth are secure) refuge and
security in the bowels of Christ Jesus. Christ has opened his side unto thee,
do thou likewise open thy mouth unto him, and say, Lo, I will not refrain my
lips, o Lord, thou know.

And therefore (my dear brother) why fear thou to confess thy sins unto
God, since by not confessing thou can not hide them? By confessing thou shall
make God propitious unto thee, whom by denying thy sins, thou can not make
ignorant of them. In his judgment he will spare thee, if in thy confession
thou spare not thy self. If we acknowledge our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

CHAP. II. That nothing is hidden from God, and that at the day of judgment,
the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed.
THou slave of sin, whither fliest thou? Thou carriest with thee thy self
whither soever thou fliest. Thine own conscience flies thee not, it has no
place to fly unto. It follows thee, it departs not from thee; The sins it
has committed are within, which do miserably afflict it; and whilst the
gnawing worm dies not in it, even in this life it feels the torments of hell.
The corruption that is in an ulcer greeues not being cast out, and sin
tormenteth not, when by confession it is detected. But thou think otherwise,
and so long as thy sins are secret unto thy self, all is well. But thou must
understand that howsoever men are ignorant of the^, yet from God they cannot be
hid. Men look upon the outside; God searches the heart. God sees not as man
sees, man looks upon the face, God upon the heart. There is no creature
invisible to his eyes, but all things are naked and open unto him. He sees, he
beholds all things, neither is there any place hidden from his omnipotency.
To him all hearts lie open, all wills speak, and he pierces into the depth of
every man's thoughts; he inquireth more exactly into them, than the heart it
self, and knows them more inwardly. And therefore there can be no place to
lying, none to dissimulation, and it profits nothing to include thine own
sins within thine own conscience: for thy inward parts lie open unto God,
and as thy ears are to thy voice, so the ears of God are to thy thoughts.
Can thou then think thy self hid from God, since the secrets of thy heart
lie open unto him? Can thou think he sees thee not committing uncleanness,
that saw thy first thought when thou wentest about it? He knows all things
before they are, and can thou think he knows them not when they are? Before
thou did commit these sins he knew them, when thou did commit them
he was present, and can thou think, if thou confess them not, he can be
ignorant of them? Yea by how much the more thou refusest to confess thy
sins, by so much the more do thou lay them open before God.

Thou hidest not thy self from the Lord, but the Lord from thee; for thou
take a course not to see him that sees all things, not that he should see
thee: Thou can not see him, but yet inuisibly he sees all that thou do.
Do thou think thy sins are not seen by him, because they are not
punished by him? Yea he is so much the more angry with thee, because he
vouchsafes not even now to be angry with thee. Now is the beginning of thy
damnation, because thou abusest the patience and long sufferance of so good and
merciful a God. For the Lord has seen thy sins, not that he might approve
them, but condemn them; not to favor them, but to punish them; not that he
might always suffer and attend, but at the last punish thee with a more heavy
revenge. For do thou think that God is like unto thee? That he sees thy
sins, and will let them pass unpunished? Indeed he were like unto thy self
if he would do so, but assure thy self, he does but defer the punishment, he
takes it not away. Thou on the other fide wilt not only not punish them, but
castest them behind thy back, lest thou should see them. And as a man with
a deformed countenance refuses to look in a glass lest he should loath
himself; so do thou turn thine eyes from thine ownesinnes, lest thou
should grow sad with the sight of their pollution, and so because thou see
them not, thou think that God is blind too. But thou art deceived (my dear
brother) and much deceived, for God searches the very hidden secrets of thy
heart, and he knows not only thine outward actions, but thine inward
intentions, and that God that thou have now a witness of thy sins, thou shall
have one day a revenger of them. He is a Judge, and a just Judge, and a
revenger of iniquity; How then shall he judge unjustly? He has held his
peace, shall he ever hold his peace? He has been silent, because he has
proroged his mercy; because he has not presently punished thy sins, but he
has dissembled thy iniquities, and given a time of repentance, but will he
ever be silent? No, he will call thee to an account, and in a time of
vengeance he will destroy thee.

The day will come, yea it will come and not stay, when with angels and
archangels, and thrones, and dominations, and with all the host of heaven, the
great Judge will appear, 1. Cor. 4.5.
the heavens and earth being on fire, and all the elements armed for their
Creator against his creatures. Then will the Lord lighten things that are hid
in darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts manifest, and every man's
actions, words, and thoughts shall be laid open; men's hearts shall speak, their
tongues shall be silent. In that fearful day shall all the pollutions of
sins be discovered in the sight of the whole world. Esai 47.3.
Then shall thy filthiness be discovered, and thy shame shall be seen of all
the angels, good and evil, of all men, elect and reprobates. The day will come
wherein thy whole life shall be set down as in a table, and thou shall stand
before the tribunal seat of God, where it shall appear unto all how thou have
lived. Thou shall carry the book of thine own condemnation, and shall show it
open to all the world. Consider therefore thine end, and in what manner thou
shall stand before so severe a judge to whom nothing is hid, from whom thou
can hide nothing by holding thy peace, and whom thou can not deceive by
denying; who is not pleased with gifts, and takes no excuses, but what is just
that he judges. There it shall be impossible to be hid, intolerable to
appear. Then as a straight Judge he shall require, what as a kind and loving
father he now commands; as masters teach children the first elements of their
learning with flattery, but if they profit not use the rod. Now the
admonitions of God calling us are pleasing and flattering, but then the justice
of him that judges justly shall be strait and severe. By how much the more
gentle he has bin dissembling thy sins, the more patient in expecting thy
conversion, the more ready to co^fer his grace upon thee, by so much the more
cruel will he be in his chasticement, the more hard to hear, and the more
implacable to punish.

What terror do thou think there shall then be, when without thou shall
see a severe Judge; within before thine eyes thine own sins? What fear when
there shall be no remedy in punishment? What astonishment to see him angry,
whom the mind of man can not conceive bebeing mild and merciful? What
confusion when by reason of the guilt of thy own conscience, thou shall blush
and be ashamed in the presence of men and angels? Thou art ashamed to see the
secret parts both of the soul and body, much more to see those of another
man; how much then will thou be ashamed, that thine own should be seen of
all? A modest and chaste matron would blush, though she were never so
beautiful, if to her shame she should be stripped naked before as many as can
behold her; much more if she were deformed in her body, but most of all, if
besides all this, all the infirmities and corruptions of her heart should be
laid open. Hereby gather what thy shame shall be, when bebefore all men and
angels thou shall appear naked of good works, nay ouerladen with many grievous
and enormous sins, even horrible to thy self. If a man should now ask thee
whether in the sin of pride, or avarice, or luxury, or any other sin thou be
the servant of the devil, though it be so, yet thou will blush to confess it;
how much more will thou be ashamed at the day of judgment, when thy works
shall prove thee a slave to the devil? It will happen unto thee as to
children, who being asked of their parents deny their offense, and therefore
are more grievously punished for their lie, than for their offense, and so
being compelled with stripes they confess the truth; whereas if at the first
they had confessed and craved pardon, they had escaped the rod.

Wherefore (dear brother) set before thine eyes thy fearful Judge; fear he
is coming, that when he is come, thou be secure, and not fearful to appear
before him. For as here upon earth, when two shall stand before a Judge, the
one fearful by reason of his guilty conscience, the other secure by reason
of his innocence, the one to be punished, the other rewarded; so in that
fearful day, the elect, and reprobate shall both stand before their Judge,
but not both after one manner, because he shall be a mild and a merciful God
unto the just, a God of vengeance unto the wicked; they shall receive the
reward of eternal blessedness, these cast out from the presence of God to
eternal torment in hell fire. Fear therefore now, lest thou fear then; and
let his fear provoke thee to confess thy sin, and banish the fear of men.
By so much the more secure shall thou be in his presence, by how much the more
careful thou art here of thy conscience. Look therefore now upon the foulness
of thy soul, that thou may amend it, lest hereafter thou see it, and be
ashamed of it. Ascend into the tribunal of thy own soul, and set thy self
before thy self, be thine own impartial Judge; And so in this judgment let
thine own thoughts be thy accusers, and thy conscience thy witness; Let the
fear of God urge this judgment, reason judge, and repentane mortify thee.
For if in the world to come thou will fly the judgment of God, in this
present world judge thy self: for if thou judge thy self thou shall not be
judged of God. If thou will fly from the anger of God, fly unto his mercy by
confessing thy sins, not by concealing the^. Thou may confess, hide thou
can not.

Begin therefore with an humble confession of thy sins, to enter into the mercy
of God, and to the end thou may be justified, be thine own accuser. For
God is just, and hates sin, and will not suffer it to go unpunished, but yet
he is likewise merciful, and pardons sin to him that repents; he
keeps justice in mercy, and mercy in justice; and therefore it cannot be but
that a just God will justly have mercy upon thee. And therefore can it seem
unto thee but just and requisite, that thou confess thy self a miserable
creature that thou may obtain mercy? Will thou that thy sins be forgiven
thee, and yet will thou not seem a sinner? What can it profit thee to have a
close and a hidden conscience, since thou have God a witness of all thy
wickedness? Whatsoever thou do, God is a spectatour, and a perpetual
obseruer of all, even the least thoughts of thy heart. And as when we know
that our enemy lies in wait for us, by so much the more we fear him, by how
much the less we see him; and when we cannot find his snares where they are,
we fear them where they are not: So the creator of Heaven and Earth (who being
wholly every where, sees thee, and cannot be seen of thee) is so much the
more to be feared, by how much the more (being invisible) when, and how, and
what he sees of thy actions thou know not. Sin there where thou know him
not to be, and if there be no such place, but that he is ever present with
thee, and sees all thy secrets, how much reason have thou to watch thy hands
and thy tongue, and thy heart too, that do all things in the presence of an
alseeing God? Which if thou would duly consider of, thou would be
ashamed of many shameful actions thou committest in the sight of so great and
so omnipotent a God.

The Fifth Part of the exhortation to repentance.
CHAP. I. That God is not subject to passion, and never forsakes a sinner,
before a sinner forsakes him.
Fifthly, thou will say, that thou could be content to repent, but that God
(who has mercy on whom he will, Romans 9.18.
and whom he will he hardneth) for thy manifold and grievous offenses has
withdrawn his grace from thee, has forsaken thee, and hardened thee in thy
sins. And therefore since it is not in him that wills, Ibidem.
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, to shake off the yoke
of sin from thy shoulders, thou despairest of power to decline from evil,
and to do good, because thou have made God (without whom thou can not so much
as think a good thought) thine enemy. Ibidem.
Res. O man, who art thou that pleadest against God? Shall the thing formed,
say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Forasmuch (...) is made
of the earth, (...) worthy to enter into the bottemelesse depth of the
judgments of God, neither are the senses of thy flesh sufficient to penetrate
into the secrets of so high a majesty. Better is faithful ignorance (though
ignorance of good things cannot be good) than rash knowledge. God has created
thee not to pry into him, but to honor him, to the end thou should be an
obedient servant to his precepts, not a Judge of his actions. It should suffice
a Christian, who lives by faith, and as yet sees not what is perfect, but
only hopes to see it, to believe, that with God there can be no injustice,
though the cause of his justice may be unknown: otherwise he that searches
into the majesty of God shall be oppressed by his glory.

But yet thou iudgest of God, in whom there is no gall nor bitterness, who is
immutable, impassible, as thou iudgest of men. It seems just unto man to
revenge his wrong; to God to remit and forgive an offense to him that is
penitent. It is the manner of a master, when he is offended by his servant, to
forbid him his sight, to turn his face from him, to deny him forgiveness;
but yet betwixt God and thee it is otherwise: for though thou by the pride of
thy heart be turned from God, and God in justice turned from thee, yet when
with an humble and contrite heart thou turnest to him, he disdaineth not with
mercy and compassion to turn unto thee. And yet notwithstanding he that from
all eternities has been always immutable, is no way subject to change or
alteration: the simplicity of his nature no perturbation can wound, no passion
can affect. But forasmuch as we can not speak of God but after the manner of
men, therefore we call the temporal punishment of God his anger, the sentence
of eternal damnation his fury, the free bounty of his goodness his mercy,
and so of the rest, because these are the works of a man angry, furious,
merciful, and diversely affected: but yet so, that always we censure him a
good God, we seek him in the simplicity of our hearts, and we assure our
selves there is nothing in him that is not God himself. For he executes a
heavy judgment without passion, and punishes the unrighteous being mild and
merciful. Neither in these or any his other works whatsoever is there in him
any alteration or shadow of changing. And as here by the heat of the sun
many things are brought to pass, without any change in it self, or in the
heat thereof, but only in those things upon which it works: so the God of
the whole world according to his eternal will does every day create many
things, and gives them existence without any motion or change of himself. But
yet as a mariner when the ship lancheth from the shore thinks the shore parts
from him, whereas that remains firm and immovable, and he departs from it:
And as if a man shut his eyes, refusing to behold the sun, there is no
alteration in the sun, but in his eyes: so God whilst he does any thing that
seems new unto us, though it were in his will before all beginnings, and
either shows mercy, or powers his vengeance upon a man, whilst man by
sin is turned from God, there is no change in God, but only in man carrying
himself after a diverse manner. But thou departest from God, not by any local
distance, because as the soul of a man is all in all the body, and all in
every part thereof, and yet because it has the greatest operation in the heart
is said especially to reside there; so God though especially he be said to be
in heaven, because there he communicates his glory to his saints, yet he is
wholly every where substantially, and fills the globe of the whole world,
though to our carnal eyes the simplicity of his nature be invisible. This
his presence in all places is known every where, whilst in all things that
are created there appears his cooperation, sustentation, and gubernation,
without which they would presently vanish and fall to nothing; as the presence
of our own souls can no otherwise be descried, than by the vital operations
thereof in it own body. Thou departest therefore from God not by any local
separation, because thou interposest the bar and partition wall of thy sins
betwixt God and thee: for as a wall makes a separation betwixt the eye and the
light; so sin betwixt God and man. And as the life of the body is the soul,
so the life of the soul is God: and as the body dies if the soul forsake it,
so the soul dies if God forsake it: as the outward death separateth the soul
from the body, so the inward death the soul from God. O how great a
wretchedness is it to be far from him that is every where, and to be
without him, without whom no man can be in safety! And yet he always departed
unwillingly from man, and by his will forsakes no man. He is never absent, if
not first expeld; whom whilst by sin thou shuttest out of doors, thou
excludest thy self from thy own salvation, but God thou harmest not. As if
from the root of the vine (I am the vine, John 15.
you the branches, says the Lord) a branch be not plucked, it bears much
fruit, and receives nourishment from the root, which if it be plucked from the
vine hurts not the vine, because the vine ministers vital nourishment to the
branches, not they to the vine; so to those that are in Christ Jesus, and
Christ in them, many gists and graces flow from him, which are beneficial unto
Christians, not to Christ. One branch being plucked from the vine, another
springs from the root thereof, but that which is plucked can not live without
a root, but withers, and is gathered up, and cast into the fire. And as he
that turns his eyes from the light, hurts not the light, but himself, in
changing darkness for light; so whilst thou refusest to stick unto God who is
the light of thy soul, thou fallest into blindness and darkness, not of thy
eyes, but of thy manners; not of thy outward eyes wherewith thou discernest
white from black, but of thy inward, wherewith thou should judge of that
which is just and unjust. For as in that place that is not lightened by the
beams of the sun, the motes are not discerned, so thou that art fallen from
the grace of Gods divine illumination, committest many things that are sins,
and yet perceiuest it not; whereas they that are enlightened with the sun of
righteousness, do both diligently pry into them, and straightly reprehend
them. Thou that art fallen from the inward grace of Gods divine illumination,
(but yet not altogether so long as thou art in this life) into the inward
darkness and blindness of thy mind, if thou persist in this thy blindness
to the end, and neglectest the receiving of the grace of his illumination from
the Sun of righteousness, at the last thou fallest into utter darkness, and
a night of eternal damnation, being far removed from him, that dwells in
that light that is inaccessible. Moreover, whils by sin thou departest from
God (who is all good, only good, and without whom nothing is good) thou no way
damnifiest God (who has no need of thee or thine) but being deprived of thy
chief and greatest good, thou fallest into the greatest miseries that may be.
And this let me tell thee, that though of thy self, and by thy own will thou
had power to fall from good to evil, yet of thy self, and by thy only
will, thou have not power to arise from evil to good; thou art fallen by thine
own will into the pit of sin, but yet at thine own will and pleasure thou
can not be freed from thence. For the wound is not so easily cured as given,
and no man can so easily get out of the pit as fall into it. But as he can
hardly get out, except some one or other let down a line unto him, which he
taking hold of may dragge him out; so except the grace of God descend upon
thee, thou can never get out of the pit of sin; but yet thou must know that
this grace of God, is always ready to help thee, and to draw thee forth of
the pit, do thou only take hold of the mercy of God when it is offered, and
apply thy will unto his will, and all shall be well.

It is not therefore in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy, who like a careful nurse directs and bears up her
little infant, until it be able to go of it self; So the Lord (who can
deny himself to none) in the beginning of our conversion, bears with our
infirmities, and annointeth our wounds with the oil of his mercy, lest the
danger of our disease, and the difficulty of the cure should any way terrify
or amaze us. And this he does four manner of wais: For to a man that by
repentance turns unto him, but yet by long custom is entangled in his
sins, sometimes out of his mercy he sends tribulations, which possess
the mind of him that repents, and expel that delight of sin that steals
upon him: Sometimes he takes away the opportunity of falling, and suffers
not the weakness of a man to be tempted: Sometimes he gives strength to
resist temptations, which manfully resisting, he may feel, but not yield unto:
Sometimes he cures the affections, that he does not only not consent, but not
feel the power thereof.

But to a sinner that neglects the grace of God, and refuses to follow the
good inspiratio^s of his spirit, he gives not his grace in so great a measure,
but yet so long as he lives he does not altogether withdraw it, but he
stands and knocks at the door of his conscience, to awake^ his drowsy will
and dead desires. But yet many times he withdraws some special helps
heereunto, as infirmities of the body, loss of temporal goods, and the like,
which are means to draw a miserable sinner to repentance. For many times he
gives temporal blessings out of his anger, which out of love he would not
have given, and permits a sinner to do that, which he should not so much as
intertaine into his thought. As a Physician that has used all the Art he can
to cure a disease; so soon as he sees his patient to refuse that Physic he
ministers unto him, he leaves him to himself, as a man that refuses to
live; and because he despaireth of his health, he gives him leave to take
whatsoever he desires: So God in his just judgment suffers a sinner to be
given over according to the desires and lusts of his own heart to a reprobate
sense, as into the hands of a cruel master, to do those things that are not
sit. Not because God inclines his affections unto evil, but because he
withdraws his grace, whereby man should be converted. Yea and he sometime
permits a man to do wickedly, and yet to live happily, not exercising his
fury upon him, nor revenging his sin with any temporal punishment, but
reserueth him to eternal damnation, than which nothing can be worse; for then
is the anger of God greatest, when he shows not himself to be angry with
a sinner. Again, sometimes the Lord punishes some things, to the end that a
sinner yet living, might learn to fly from future vengeance; somethings he
leaves unrevenged, to the end he may know there remains yet a farther
judgment for him. Sometimes he begins that punishment here in this life,
which he ends after this life with eternal damnation. For if God should
near revenge himself of all his wrongs, to what end should we look for the
last judgment?

By that which has been spoken, thou may gather (dear brother) that God
hates thee not, but before he forsakes thee, thou have forsaken him, neither
is the fault in him, that by repentance thou turnest not unto him, but in the
obstinacy of thine own will, who refusest to hear his voice, or obey his
divine inspirations. The Sun shines upon the window, only do thou open it,
and it will enter in. Accuse not therefore God, but thy self; for in God, who
is just in all his ways and holy in all his works, there is nothing to be
reprehended, or condemned. For as if by reason of the weakness of thy body
thou art not able to go, another should lend thee his hand to lift thee up,
and to hold thee whilst thou walk, thou refusest his help, and had
rather lie upon the ground, than be holpon by him, the fault is not his, but
thine, if thou rise not; even so the Lord of his own accord offers himself
unto thee, and is always ready to help thee bear the burden of thy sins,
and to direct thy steps into the right way; do thou only apply thy will unto
his will, and be willing to receive that grace and favor which he offers
unto thee.

CHAP. II. A sinner how he falls from one sin into another, and so is
hardened in his sins.
AFter that the God of patience and long sufferance has a long time expected
the conuerfion of thee a sinner, he gives to thee not converting, but
contemning his patience, greater stumbling blocks to fall: for whilst thou
art earelesse to redeem thy lesser sins, by little and little thou fallest
lower and lower, and being insensibly seduced by use and custom, thou growest
bold to commit greater sins. When the tongue has once liberty to utter idle
speeches, it shortly after grows bold to utter any wickedness; and whilst
thou art given to gluttony, thou fallest into drunkenness, yea madness it
self: for as for the most part it falls out, that one disease ingendereth
another, and that he that is ouerladen with a great burden does easily fall;
so the burden of sin which by repentance is not speedily shaken off, with
the burden thereof presses a man to other sins, and one sin is the cause
of another, and the latter a punishment to the first; as a righteous man
ascends from one virtue to another, and from one good work takes occasion
to do another. One sin may be the cause of another three manner of ways;
sometimes by reason of the final cause, as murder is committed for
covetousness; sometimes by reason of the material cause; as when by
superfluity of diet gluttony ingendreth luxury; vain glory whilst it
seeks the glory of a vain name, lest another should attain unto it,
ingendreth envy: sometimes by reason of an inueterat custom, as when the
custom of one sin induces a man to another. By these three means a sinner
falling from sin to sin, at the last runs himself into the bottomless
pit of all sin, and God in his just judgment hardens his heart in such a
manner, that he that by repentance would not cleanse his sin, heapeth up sin
upon sin, and wallowing in his own filth, grows more filthy. Sin that by
repentance is not taken away, is both a sin and the cause of another sin,
because thereby the mind of a sinner is farther engaged; but that sin that
arises out of another sin, is both a sin and the punishment of a former
sin, and sometimes the cause of a following sin too. So that in this life
sins are revenged by sins, and the punishment of sins are not torments,
but increase of sins: the facility likewise of committing sin is made the
punishment of precedent sins: of all which the last punishment is the fire of
hell. Nevertheless, a sinner being hardened in his sins, by reason of his
insensible hardness, knows not himself to be punished hereby, until against
his will he feel by a manifest punishment, how great that sin is which he
willingly committed. Psalm. 69.27.
And therefore says the Psalmist, Lay iniquity upon their iniquity, and let
them not come into thy righteousness. And the Prophet Hosea, Hosea 4.2.
By swearing, and lying, and killing and stealing, and whoring, they break
out, and blood touches blood. Blood touches blood when sin is added unto
sin, and the soul by multiplying of sins is wounded before the eyes of
God, and made a burden unto it self. How strait are thy, judgments, O Lord?
How great a punishment of sin is the multiplying of sins? Far greater
doubtless than any temporal punishment, nay than hell it self.

The will which first turns from God, is the first beginning of sin; by
sin the grace of God is neglected, by which neglect man is continued in
sin, by continuance he is confirmed, and by confirmation hardened therein.
And so being fallen into the depth of sin, he does not only grow careless
in the desire of Gods assistance to rise again, but he likewise resists his
divine inspirations, that he may continue in his sins. God on the other side
resisting him, freeth him not from his sin, but withdraws from him many his
gifts of grace, suffers him to fall into greater sins, and sometimes
inflicteth upon him temporal punishments, and at the last eternal.

Whereby we may not gather that God (who loves righteousness and hates
iniquity) compels a sinner to sin, but only permits him to continue
in his sins. For from whom he withdraws certain of his graces for sins
past, to him not willing to repent, he yields not the grace of justification;
the effect of which grace being the mollifying of the heart, that being
withdrawn there must necessarily follow hardness of heart, as the Lord
speaks of Pharo, Exodus 4.
I will harden his heart. The Lord hardneth not the heart of a sinner, but as
he that takes away the prop of an house, is said to pluck it down; so God
is said to harden a sinner, because he freeth him not from it. God hardens
not by imparting malice, or that any thing can come from him whereby a man is
made the worse, but only by not imparting mercy, and that nothing comes from
him whereby a man is made the better. He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and though he harden, yet he is still just, whilst he permits the
reprobate heart of a sinner, void of piety, ignorant of compunction, free
from the dew of all spiritual graces, to persevere in hardness, and not to be
mollified with his grace. It is a hard thing and only possibly to the power of
God to soften the heart of a man; for that which neither by the patience and
long sufferance of God is won to repentance, nor is touched with compunction;
that which is not broken with fear, nor sofrned with love, but is hardened as
well with scourges as with benefits; and lastly that which fears neither God
nor man, who can rent in sunder, but he that in his passion rent the veil of
the Temple, Matt. 27 51.
and cloue the stones? Who can take away a stony heart, and give a fleshy
heart, but he from whom comes every good and perfect gift, even the Father
of light? A great sinner has need of great mercy, that where sinue did
abound, grace may superabound.

The Lord is faithful, Wisd. 1.13.
he has not made death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the
living; he will not the death of a sinner, but that he convert and live. For
he whose desire it is that sinners do repent, and thereby return unto God, will
not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but with the temptation will
give us power to resist; and by how much the more frail we are and in greater
necessity, so much the more ready is he to help us, if the fault be not our
own; as in the siege of a city the greatest aid is sent to defend that place
that is weakest, and where the enemy is strongest. The Lord is faithful and
he that says; Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will refresh you, cannot deny himself.

For as a Physician suffers many wrongs, and railing speeches of his lunatike
patient, and yet is not angry with him, but does nevertheless whatsoever the
nature of the disease does require to the curing thereof, wherewith though the
sick man be afflicted, yet on the part of the Physician his affliction is no
revenge of the wrongs received from his patient, but the cure of his
infirmity; in as much as if the sick man being to recover health, the
Physician receives joy and comfort thereat, and with greater alacrity
proceeds in his cure, and forgets his former injuries: even so our Lord
God (whose property it is to have mercy and to forgive) who judges with love,
and with great respect disposes of us, when we are in our greatest madness of
sin, is never moved against us with any affection of revenge for those sins
we hane committed. And forasmuch as he is impassible he punishes not our
sins in this life with passible anger, but with unspeakable clemency; with
the affection of a Physician, not a torturer; and that he does not for
himself as revenging his wrongs (for the nature of God is not capable of any
such thing) but for our correction and benefit. As a loving mother is angry
with her son that has offended her, reprehendeth him, chidech, beats him,
whom nevertheless if she shall see, to run into any danger of his estate or
life, she presently helps him, puts forth her hand, nay endangereth her
own life to save his, and that child who^ being angry she did beat as if she
had not loved him, now she holds him up and saves him, as if she had not
been angry when she beat him: Even so God chastises us for our finnes to
protect us sinners, and for the most part out of his mercy he sends a
temporal punishment, lest out of his justice he should inflict an eternal
revenge. And if any man shall persist in his hardness, and with Pharo grow
more ^ whose (...) the (...) has long expected, not connerted, he adiudgeth to
^ernall damnation. As a (...) in his garden or (...) planteth a tree, not that
(...) should be cut down (...) cast into the fire, and, (...) when after a
long expest^^ on he sees it to bring (...) no fruit, he cutteth it down and
burns it: So our (...) full God cutteth off no (...) from the land of the
(...) that yields any fruit (...) testimony of a true faith (...) in that
he wills the (...) of a sinner, it is by (...) sin committed, not of (...)
self, but by his conseq^^^ will (as Divines call it) (...) by he wills for
some (...) already done, or before all beginnings foreseen, and according to
this will, he would that all reprobates should bedamned, who^ afterward by his
anteced ent will he would save, by all means ministing them occasion to attain
salvation. As it is the will of a Lawgiver that all his Citizens should be
good and peaceable, far from committing those offenses, which upon pain of
death he has forbidden, and yet if his ownsonne (be he never so dear unto
him) transgress the law, he must die the death, though it be much against
the will of his (...) by his own (...) served, death. (...) ture (which in our
(...) rents was whole and entire) by their sin is wholly corrupted, and has
altogether lost both righteousness and immortality, whereby it could beget no
other but corrupt, unrighteous and mortal children, who as in Adam sining they
have sinned, so in the same Adam dying they are dead. And therefore whosoever
he be that has escaped death, let him give thanks unto God, in that he has
escaped death that was due unto him, and found life not due unto him. To him
that is delivered, mercy is shown without desert, to the end he may give
thanks unto God; upon him that his damned justice is executed with desert, to
the end he should reprehend nothing in God; that neither he should glory in
his own worth, nor this complain of his own unworthiness. For how should
God justly be accused in his judgments, when he justly condemns a guilty
offender? When a debt is truly demanded, how can the creditour be justly
condemned? So that neither in requiring, nor remitting what is due, is God
(with whom there can be no injustice) unjust. There is mercy acceptable where
revenge is just, that thereby it may more plainly appear to him that is freed
from just punishment, and freely justified, how great a benefit is conferred
upon him, in that another not more guilty than himself, without any injustice
in him that punishes is justly chastized. To. 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God^ how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? For who has
known the ways of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?

From that which has been spoken thou may gather (dear brother) how thou
runnest from one sin into another, and by long custom art hardened in them,
thou working it in thy self, and God withdrawing hi^ special grace from thee.
God is patient and of lon^ sufferance, he tollerate^ thee, for bears and
expects thee to repentance, being always ready to take from thee thy stony
heart, and to give unto thee a fleshie heart, and to mollify thy benumbed
insensible hardness, with the deaw of his grace. And though he be Lord over
all, and has care of all, providing for all, and every particular person, and
governing al by his providence, yet so may thou see him wholly employed, to
the custody and preservation of thy self, if thou stand upon thy own guard,
and apply thy will unto his will, as if he intended only thy self and nothing
else. Only do thou depart from evil and do good; repent thee of al thy
sins that thou have committed, and keep the commandments of God, and thou
shall live and not die: for it is not the will of God thou should die, but
that thou return from thy wicked ways and live. Contemn not the treasures of
the goodness and patience of God; for the will of God provoke thee to
repentance, and inuiteth thee to amendment of life; but thy hardness whereby
thou obstinately perseuerest in thy sins, increases the severity of thy
judgment, to the end thou may receive the due reward of thy sins.
Forasmuch therefore as thou art wicked, and have so good a father, continue not
always wicked, lest with Phara^, if thou persist in thy obduration, thou
purchase to thy self eternal damnation.

CHAP. III. That there is no man so great a sinner but by the power of the
Creator he may be converted.
BUT perhaps thou will say, I have been so long accustomed to sin, that I
can hardly change my life, and turn from mine iniquiquities. According to that
in the 22. of the Prou. Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is
old he shall not depart from it. And in the 13. of Jeremiah, Can the
blank-more change his skin, or the leopard his spots? that may ye also do,
that are accustomed to do evil. Res. I confess (dear brother) that it is a
hard thing to make him that is old in evil days, young in good, because the
custom of sinning does so enthrall the mind, that it can hardly be set at
liberty; nevertheless faint not, nor despair at all, if thou be either
overcome by the concupiscence of thy flesh, or deceived by error, or slipped
into the way of iniquity, because there is no impossibility, but that thou
may be reduced into the right way, and freed from thy sin. There have
been many other grievous offenders, who by the right hand of the most high,
have been changed in their old age from the sins of their youth, and of the
servants and slaves of sin, have been made the sons of God. Of drunkards
they have been made sober men; of cruel, merciful; of oppressors, liberal;
of proud, humble; of incontinent, chaste; of negligent, diligent; and whom the
concupiscence of the flesh has made base and vile, the grace of God has made
beautiful. In as much that they have been willing to suffer wrong, that were
wont to offer it; to give their own, that were wont to take away other men's;
to punish their bodies by abstinence, that were wont to pamper them; to love
their persecuters, that were wont to hate those that loved them.

Nabuchadnezzar after his great fall from a man to a beast, Dan. 4.
came to himself, after innumerable afflictions repented, and was restored to
that kingdom which he had lost. Mary Magdalen after many slips of humane
fragilitie, by true repentance was so kindled with the love of Christ, that of
a proud and unchaste harlot she was suddenly changed into an humble and chaste
matron. Matthew of a Publican became an Evangelist; and the thief of a wicked
transgressor, a true conuertite, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven:
when Stephen by the consent and assistance of Paul was stoned, Stephen was
good, and Paul wicked; and yet Paul became a more zealous preacher of the
Gospel than Stephen, and afterward he was made the Apostle of the Gentiles,
and he that before was a blasphemer and a persecuter, was made a zealous and
humble furtherer of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. The beginnings amongst
Christians are not looked into, but the end: these began ill, but ended well.
The beginning of Judas was commendable, the end damnable; from his Apostleship
he fell into hell, and the thief from the cross ascended into paradise. What
need I say more? The Holy Ghost does not only set down the good deeds of the
saints of God, but their evil too, that the fall of the just may be the hope
of the wicked: and when thou read that a righteous man sinned, and repented,
thou may not despair of thine own salvation.

We often times see men spotted with infamy rise to honor and dignity, and
iron eaten with rust recover his ancient brightness, gold and silver purified
with the fire, and trees cut and lopped adorned with boughs and leaves. The
merchant after his losses at sea returns to sea again, and repaires his
losses, he despaireth not, he is not cast down, but many times made rich by
his new adventures. After a desperate sickness many recover health, and after
desperate sins many recover the health of their souls. That in the Proverbs,
Teach a child in the trade of his way, etc. is therefore spoken, because a
vessel does a long time keep the sent and relish of that liquor that is first
put into it, and by nature we keep those things best, which we have learned in
our younger years, not that it always falls out so, but for the most part:
whilst the age of a man is unsettled, and the mind easily led, it is a happy
thing to be led unto the best, to the study of virtue, lest being stricken in
years he hardly shake off those sins which he gave himself unto in his
youth. An Ethiopian can hardly change his skin, nor al^^pard his spots;
neither can thou that of thy self art fallen into sin, of thy self rise
again, except God (who raises the needy out of the dust, Psa. 113.7
and lifts up the poor out of the mire) put forth his right hand to help
thee, by which his help thou shall be able to do any thing, but yet not thou,
but the grace of God which is in thee. For how should he want power to raise
thee being fallen, that was able of nothing to create all things? With him all
things are possible, that with men are impossible: his power is no less than
his will; if he will he can make thee clean, who as he cleanses and
heals, so he saves with his only word. If thou despair of thy disease,
presume of the omnipotency of thy Physician; the power of thy Physician is
greater than thy disease is dangerous: the danger of thy disease thou see,
but the power of thy Physician thou see not; his power to convert thy will
unto God is greater than thy inueterate custom of sinning to inthrall thee to
sin.

If the devil were able to pluck thee down from the highest step of virtue,
to the nethermost depth of all sin and iniquity; how much more is God able
to raise thee to thy former height and perfection? and not only restore thee
to that thou were, but to increase thy happiness above that it was? Only be
thou of a good courage, and constant in the hope of thy salvation, he has
satisfied for all thy sins, he has taken away the sins of the whole world;
how much more the sins of one man? When thou were not, he made thee; being
conceived in sin, in thy baptism he cleansed thee; how much more after this,
being again polluted, can he purify thee? He took the slime of the earth,
and made man; tell me, if thou can, how of earth made he flesh? how the
sinews? how the bones? how the skin? how the veins, the eyes? how framed he
every member? Was it not earth he took up? was it not one only substance?
only the art and virtue of the artificer was added thereunto, and so he made
this excellent creature. As thou can not tell how thou were created, so thou
can not tell how thou shall be cured: for as fire when it is put to briers and
brambles suddenly consumes so frail a matter, so the goodness of our Lord
God with the deaw of his mercy suddenly quenches the fire of our sins, and
for ever consumes them. For his will is, that none do perish, but that all
do convert and live.

Thou know not how good and gracious the Lord is, how great his mercies are:
Thou imaginest him to be severe and cruel, that is mild and gentle; him hard
and implacable, that is merciful; fierce and terrible, that is amiable, and
thine own iniquity lies to it self. For the will of God is thy
sanctification: he heals the broken hearted; refreshes those that labor,
and come unto him; and in the beginning of our conversion, annointeth our
wounds with the oil of his mercy, lest the greatness of the disease, or
difficulty of the cure, should seem to be more dangerous than it is. And
therefore says the Prophet Isaiah, Esai 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for
he is very ready to forgive. Behold here it is sufficient to please God, if
thou do but rest from doing wickedly, and learn to do good. Only confess
thou have sinned, and the beginning of thy conversion is already done: only
purpose a new life, and thou have made one step to heaven: Herein is all the
difficulty, to begin to enter into the way of repentance, which thou have no
sooner begun, but he that gave thee the grace to begin, takes thee by the hand
and leads thee to the end. Yea he that began thy good work in thee by
preventing, by prosecuting will end it: He that gave thee the will, will
likewise give thee the power to perfect it. If thou put thy trust in him, he
will after thy strength, thy youth shall be renewed like the eagle; thou shall
take unto thee the wings of the eagle; thou shall run, but not labor; thou
shall walk, but not be weary, because the Lord shall be with thee, who shall
comfort thee in all thy tribulations. There is no man to whom this corruptible
body, and earthly tabernacle is not bu^ thensome, but yet thou must endeavor
to overcome the concupiscence of the flesh by the vigor of the spirit: and thou
that always feel thy self to be resisted by thine own concupiscence,
always expect an assured assistance from God. As the earth expects from
heaven rain and light, so should thou expect from God grace and mercy.

Wherefore (dear brother) since thou want not an able and willing Physician
to cure thee, and to cleanse thee from all pollution of sin, neither neglect
nor defer it. Thy repentance he will not despise, if it be hearty: and though
thou have sinned in the highest degree, yet if thou return, he will gladly
receive and embrace thee, and cure the sickness of thy soul. Only despair
not thou, but that thou may return to the state of thy first innocence, if
thou do but begin to affect a new life.

CHAP. IIII. That God is faithful, who suffers us not to be tempted above
our power.
BUT perhaps thou will say, When I begin to return unto God, and set forward
my self in the way to heaven, and forsake my ancient custom of sinning, I am
presently assaulted with new desires of the flesh; and whatsoever before has
been pleasing unto me in this world is made a snare and a temptation unto me,
and those things that were accustomed to love me being a sinner, being a
conuertite withstand my endeavors to live well. My ancient pleasures return
unto my mind, and whilst I resist them afflict me with strange combats. That
sin which in the sight of God is blotted out by repentance, I call to mind
again, and sin conquered brings me delight. And so by little and little
being overcome by new temptations, I yield and return to my old vomit again,
and so my last error is worse than the first. Res. It is a token (my dear
brother) that God with great love and clemency watches over thee, in that he
presents before thy eyes thy bewailed sins; which the merciful GOD would
not fet before thee to ^ewaile, if his purpose were ^o call thee to a strict
account for them, and to punish thee: for it seems that he is willing to
hide them from his judgment, because in his mercy preventing thee, he makes
thee thine own Judge, that being judged by thy self, thou may not be
judged by him. The best way to satisfy the anger of God is an often
detestation of sin: he that truly repents is always in sorrow and labor,
he sorroweth for sins past, laboreth to avoid sins to come. When the Lord
loses thee from the band of thy sins, he binds thee with a band of
everlasting detestation of them, that whenever thou remembrest them, thou
should be sorry thou have committed them. Rejoice therefore when thy
conscience is touched with those sins that by repentance are wiped away, if
thou approve them not, nay reproouest them, if it please thee not that thou
have committed them, naie displease thee. And yet I deny not, that he that is
lately turned unto God by repentance, by the remembrance of his sins past may
again be tempted, because as wood nourishes fire, so desires feed our
cogitations; and he that enters into the way of repentance is more strongly
tempted by the enemy. For our adversary the devil neglects the tempting of
him, of whose heart he has already taken quiet possession.

For if thou resist temptation, thy labor is great, but if thou yield, though
it seem to be nothing, yet it is far greater; because whilst thou sleep
securely under the intolerable yoke of a cruel tyrant; Eze. 13.10
thou say, Peace, peace, and there is no peace. There is no peace I say with
God, with the devil, no not with thy self. For after that thou ceasest to
resist temptations, and thinking thereby to find peace in this world, yeeldest
and consentest unto the^; after that thou have executed what thou desire, and
made thy self a slave to thy subtle enemy, presently will thy conscience
sting thee, because thou have followed thine own passion, which thou shall
quickly find can n^ way help thee to that peace thou seek after; and by so
much the more intolerable do thou make the devil, by how much the more
after thou subiectest thy self, thou consentest unto him: insomuch that thou
can now resist him in nothing, to whom (forgetting thy self) thou have in
one thing consented. Yea, and that which is most miserable, for the most part,
thou preuentest thy temptation, and lest the temptor should want, thou
becommest a temptor to thy self; thou expectest not the temptation, but
preuentest the pleasure: But the true peace of the heart thou shall find by
resisting temptations, not by yielding to them; and it is better to have the
devil thine enemy, than thy partner and friend; to fly him following, than to
follow him going before thee. He goes before thee when he sends
temptations, but thou followest him, when thou give place to his suggestions.
For first the temptor suggesteth, and offers a wicked object; then the flesh
yields to the delight of the thing objected; and lastly, the will being
overcome consents: thou must therefore valiantly resist the first suggestion,
because if in the beginning thou be not courageous in thy resistance, the
temptation presently gathers strength, and by little and little, it grows
to delight, and afterward to consent. That ancient enemy the devil is
slipperie and nimble; if he once get in his head, his whole body glideth
after. Tread down the Serpents head, that is, resist the first suggestion,
consent not to it, and then thou art secure. For the thought polluteth not the
mind, where delight corrupts it not. As the eye is fed by the object, so
the mind by cogitation: Every thing may be thought upon without sin, but if
we attend the delight, in every thing, we may sin by thinking. By resisting
those first morions, thou art troubled with a present labor, but freed from
that which is everlasting; whereas by not resisting them, thou shall be freed
from thy present labor, and labor for ever in parpetuall torment. But what
shall it profit thee, for a short time, to be cased of a momentary labor, and
ever afterward to be tormented in ever lasting pains? The battle is short
and transitory, but the reward continues for ever.

Thou know not, alas thou know not, that through many temptations, and
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Many are the
temptations, not of whomsoever, but of the righteous, that when they are
proved, they may receive the crown of life. A crown is proposed, and
therefore a battle must be undertaken. No man can be crowned except he first
conquer, and no man can conquer except he first fight. But how shall there be
a fight, if there want wherewithal to fight? Yea and the fruit of this crown
is greater unto him, that has made the greatest fight for it. Take away the
battles of the martyrs of God, take away their crowns too; take away their
afflictions, thou have taken away their blessings; and therefore temptations
cannot be but good, since it works in us an unspeakable weight of glory. The
temptation hurts not, but it exercises him that consents not thereunto; and
thou know not what comfort there follows the victory of temptation. Will thou not be tempted? thou may as well say thou wiltnot live, because
temptation is the life of man upon earth. The life of man is not said to have
temptation, but that it is a temptation; because as the sea cannot be without
waves and billows, so cannot the life of man want temptations. And as, when
thou walk by the way, the dogs bark at thee, whom if thou neglect and
provoke not, yet though they bite thee not, they will still follow thee
barking: so though thou withstand temptations, yet thou shall not free thy
self from them; but if one shall depart, be sure to expect another. The devil
suggesteth wicked things, the world allureth unto it, the flesh, being
conquered, consents whither soever thou go. The devil leaves thee not,
the world whithersoeuer thou turn offreth it self, and our corruptible flesh
depresseth our souls. There is a deadly fight with the world and the devil,
but more dangerous with the flesh, because it is intestine. Thou have no enemy
more deadly than thy self, neither art thou to take heed of any more than thy
self: for if in this thy fight thou chance to be overcome, think it
proceeds of thine own treachery.

For though that ancient enemy of ours never cease in all places to lay the
snares of temptation, by what means soever to entrap us, and considers every
man's manners, that though he be overcome in one, he may attempt another way, by
offering means and opportunities to those sins which he knows by nature
we are prone unto: yet this is our comfort, that he can only suggest, he can
not compel. He compelled not our Savior, he touched him not, but he only
said, Cast thy self down: Matt. 4.
that we may thereby understand, that he that obeys the devil, casts down
himself, and he that is overcome by temptation, is overcome by himself. He is
a weak enemy that conquereth none but such as are willing to be conquered.

With this enemy whilst thou fightest, God animareth thee; when thou faintest,
he susteineth thee, that thou yield not; when thou yeeldest not, he helps
thee that thou may overcome, and ouercomming he crowns thee that thou
may reign with him. Outwardly he seems to leave thee to thy proof, and
inwardly he keeps thee that thou perish not. Thou art stricken with
temptations outwardly, but inwardly the hand of thy Creator holds thee up,
lest thou fall. The Lord never forsakes him that is in the way to
righteousness, lest he fall; who preuenteth a sinner by his grace, that he
may rise again when he is fallen. Many times he suffers one temptation to
continue long, lest a stronger than that should succeed, to which the weakness
of man may yield. He frames our temptations to our strength, and sets a
measure unto them. For if the devil could hurt as much as he would, in a short
time there should not a righteous man be left. If God should altogether forsake
man, what were man in the hand of so mighty an adversary? ^et the devil
challenge nothing unto himself, he is worth nothing, he can do nothing,
except he be permitted of God: he has a will to hurt, but except he have it
from God, he has no power. He is only permitted to attempt, so far forth as
shall be good for thine exercise and thy trial, to the end that thou that
would not know thy self except thou were tempted, should be known by
thy self. God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that
you are able, but will even give the issue with the temptation, 1. Cor. 10.13.
that ye may be able to bear it. If God be with thee, what can the devil do
against thee? Temptations, if thou look into thy self, are great, if unto
God, a strong and a mighty warrior, they are a play, and a shadow. Look upon
little David, fighting with great Goliath in the name of the Lord, and killing
him; and from Gods assistance therein hope thou for the like. Thou must not
fear a strong enemy, so long as thou have GOD thy helper stronger than he;
but watch and pray, lest thy confidence in a stronger than he make thee too
careless of thy strong adversary; against whom if thou fight valiantly thou
art stronger than he, but if thou neglect him, thou art weaker. The negligence
of man makes the devil strong, not his own power: for he tempts daily, that
whom by force he can not conquer, he may at the last overcome by a tedious
pursuit. Take thou only heed thou consent not to his suggestions, remembering
always that he is a lier, and the father of lies; but rather resist him
valiantly: which if thou do, trusting upon Gods assistance, thou shall easily
supplant him.

Christ was tempted of the devil in the desert, Matt. 4
that making experience of our infirmities, he might learn to compassionate
them; he overcame his temptations, that he might likewise give us power to
overcome ours, as he was willing on the cross to suffer death; that by his
death he might destroy ours. If then the tempter was not afeard to tempt his
Lord God, how much more will he dare to tempt others? Thy Lord GOD was not
freed from temptation, how then can thou a poor worm of the earth think to
escape it? Thou art therefore provoked by his example to bear thy temptations,
whose help thou want to overcome them. Wherefore (dear brother) when thou
art tempted, fly with faith unto Christ that was tempted: Go unto his throne
of grace, that thou may obtain mercy, and thou shall easily obtain it. Lay
open thy afflictions before him, reveal. unto the Lord thy ways, and hope in
him, and he will help thee, and hide thy sins; For who has called upon the
Lord, and has been forsaken? Who has hoped in him, and has been
confounded? Psalm. 37.
The Lord is a merciful protector unto all that call upon him in truth.

CHAP. V. That the fear of backesliding should not hinder the rising of him
that is fallen.
BUT thou will say, that thou art assured thou can not wholly abstain from
sin, and therefore because thou fear thou shall fall again, thou will not
begin to repent, lest thy last error be worse than the first. Res. There are
two vessels (my dear brother) that are often times polluted with filth,
whereof the one is many times made clean, the other never touched; which of
these two will thou say is the fouler, or the more hardly scoured and cleansed?
Doubtless thou will say, that which is often fould and never made clean. Apply
this to thy self. Can thou think it shall be more happy for thee, if without
repentance thou never cease to add sin unto sin, than if thou often fall,
and often rise again, and as often have thy sins forgotten and forgiven
thee? He that often rises cannot fall so often as another, because by a
frequent repentance he is withdrawn from many of his sins, and offends God
with more fear; neither is he burdened with so many sins, who of God is
absolved of many by repentance. But he that takes no care to arise from sin,
is ouerladen with the heavy burden of al his sins, and out of the malice of
his own will sins incessantly, and many times that is turned into sin, which
in another is a help and furtherance to salvation. As a spider turns wholesome
sustenance into poison, To. 8.28.
but all things work together for the best unto them that love GOD. For in the
good all things are good, even those things that to the evil would be cuill.
And no otherwise with the wicked many things are done wickedly, which with the
godly are free from sin. As we see that poison is death to a man, that is
life to a serpent; and that fire takes away the rust from iron, that
consumes a softer matter.

It is not so great a sin to fall, as being fallen to lie still, or to be
unwilling to rise; and it is a worse thing to contemn repentance, than to
transgress the law of God, for so indeed the last error is worse than the
first. If being cast into prison thou refuse to come forth, because thou
fear to be committed again, will not men think thee a fool, or a mad
man? If thou should lie sick of a dangerous sickness, would thou refuse
to have thy health restored, because thou fear to fall into the same disease
again? If therefore thou art fallen, arise; If thou cease not to fall again,
cease not to rise again. The ship that does often times take a leake, is as
often emptied: and thou brushest thine apparel as often as it is fouled. Pro.
24.
The just man falls seven times a day, and as often he rises, but yet he
loses not the name or title of a just man, that always rises by repentance:
So thou, so soon as thou know thy self to sin, presently fly back to
an inward contrition of heart, have but a desire to repent, and to amend thy
life; in which desire if sudden death shall prevent thee, thy soul is at rest,
which otherwise being taken in thy sins by sudden death is damned in hell.

Do thou not know that it is not the condition of a combat, that a man do
never fall, but that he never yield? for he is not said to be overcome that
is often overthrown, but that cannot rise again to renew the fight. And can
thou repair thy strength, or make resistance, when having left thy target, and
cast off thine armor, thou yeeldest thy self to thy enemies, and submittest
thy self to their wills; when as soon as thou art wounded thou fliest, and
returnest not to the battle? If in the midst of the fight thou art fallen,
make speed to rise again; If thou art wounded, apply presently a medicine
thereunto. If the devil have given thee a fall, by tempting thee to sin;
arise again by repentance, and make head against him. David fell into the
sin of adultery, and to adultery he joined murder; but what fell out
afterward? Did he lie still and continue therein? Did he not arise again, and
became more strong against his enemy, and at last overcame him?

The devil, as much as in him lies, helps thee sinning, gives the means and
opportunity, lest if thou should desist from sin, and rise by repentance,
thy soul should escape out of his hands, and his labors should be frustrate.
The devil by how much the longer he possesses a man, by so much the more
hardly does he let him go; for because he cannot arise unto life, he desires
the more to have thy company to death; whom thou can not better obey, than
if thou daily sin by his suggestion, and being fallen carest not to rise
again. Wherein whilst thou yeeldest thy consent thou seem to have made a
sure bargain with him, and because thou art irrecouerably fallen, thou must
necessarily be his companion in his fall too. To live, to thee that art
infected with the dangerous plague of so many sins, is not to live, but to
confound life, and to approach nearer and nearer to the gates of hell. Thou art
alive in thy body, but dead in thy mind. That life is not to be called life,
whereby thou live only unto death; for it were better for thee that every day
do die in thy soul, that in body thou die quickly; better that thou live
not at all, that thou were not borne, than by sin to die daily. As often as
thou sinnest, so often thou deseruest eternal death; which if for one sin
thou deserve, what do thou for many, for millions of sins? For so many
and so great sins, how intolerable shall hell be, when for one. so many and
so unspeakable torments must be endured? For there shall every man have his
damnation so much the more intolerable, by how much the greater iniquity he
has here. But to thee that have no good thing to allege for thy self, but
whole mountains of sin against thy self, it is not possible to utter what
plagues and punishments do belong.

I can not wonder sufficiently, how thou can sleep securely, and enjoy thy
pleasures without fear. For if thou were odious to a King whom thou have
offended, and did every hour expect from him the sentence of a cruel
death, would thou laugh, and attend thy pleasures? Now then ^ince for thy
many and great offenses the sentence of eternal death is pronounced against
thee, and the Lord to the end he may have mercy on thee, still expecting thy
conversion, has deferred his sentence, which perhaps to day, nay this very
hour he will execute upon thee, how can thou, as it were in an assured
peace, be secure? Thou art in greater danger that go to thy rest with a
conscience clogd with one mortal sin, than with seven of thy deadliest
enemies. Doubtless if thou did but see thine own soul, thou would
blush at the foulness thereof; and if thou knew how great dangers thou
runnest into by sin, thou would think of nothing more than how to avoid
it.

By sin thou make God thine enemy, the devil dry lord, and thou that were
first by adoption the son of God, after sin art made the servant and slave
of the devil, yea of sin it self, and that which is woorst of all, of so
many lords as of sins. Whosoever commits sin, Ioh. 8.34.
is the servant of sin. A wicked man though he reign is a servant of sin;
a just man though he serve is a free man, nay he wants not kingly power,
that knows how to rule his own affections.

God so hates sin, that for the hatred thereof he destroyed almost all his
works, the whole world by a general flood; yea to the end he might utterly
kill it, he gave unto death (yea the shameful death of the cross) his only
begotten son. And is not his hatred great toward his enemy, that to be
revenged upon him, will kill his own son? God neither in heaven nor upon
earth has a friend so dear unto him, but if he find him polluted with
mortal sin, he is presently odious unto him; and that vessel of sin, that
is, that sinner he throws down into hell fire: for a wicked man and his
wickedness are alike odious unto God. As if thou had rather to cast a
vessel full of corruption, yet of great price, into the sea, than to scour and
cleanse it of the filth thereof, must not that filth and corruption be very
hateful unto thee, for which thou art content to lose so precious a vessel?
And as a loving mother, if she should cast her little infant whom she dearly
loves into a burning furnace there to perish, must it not be some great matter
very hateful unto her, that can urge her to such cruelty against her own
child? Sin, as much as it displeases God, so much it pleases the devil;
insomuch that from the creation of the world he has ever watched without
weariness how to allure men unto sin; and though he obtein his purpose with
innumerable numbers of men, yet he is never satisfied. After thou have once
sinned, thou art so far forth in the power of the devil, that presently by
his own right he may challenge thee to be his, and cartie thee with him to
eternal torments, if he were not stayed by the great mercy of God expecting
thee to repentance. It were better for thee to have a thousand devils in thy
body, than one deadly sin in thy mind. And therefore says Anselme, If I
should here see the shame of sin, and there the horror of hell, and that I
must necessarily be overwhelmed by the one, I would rather cast my self into
hell, than suffer my self to fall into an insensible feeling of my sins, yea
I had rather being purged and purified from sin to enter into hell, than
polluted with the contagion of sin (if it were possible it might be so)
possess the kingdom of heaven. If sin be more to be detested than hell,
what can be more detestable than sin? If there were no sin, there were no
torment in hell. No adversity could hurt, if no iniquity did bear rule: for
it is only sin that can hurt, and bring to pass that no other thing can do
good.

So long as thou continuest in sin, thou can do nothing that is good: For
as a root gives no moisture to a rotten bough, nor the sun any light to a
blind eye; so thou as a rotten and dead member of the Church (for who will say
thou art living that have no feeling of compunction in thy heart) art deprived
of all that good that is or can be in the Church; and thou art robbed of all
that good that ever thou have done in thy whole life, and of all those virtues
and graces, which at the first thou receiuedst at Gods hands, in as much as
they stand thee in no stead to the attainment of eternal life, as a dead man
has no power either to enjoy his own goods, or to get others. And besides a
thousand other evils that follow sin, the miserable torment of thine own
conscience follows thee whithersoeuer thou go. For sin whilst it is
committed pleases, being committed it tormenteth; for the worm thereof never
dies, and in this life the torment thereof is but an entrance to that which is
to come. Ps. 49.20.
O man, when thou were in honor thou vnderstoodest not, but were compared to
the beasts that perish, and art made like unto them: Thou that through the
merits of Christ Jesus were made worthy of heaven and all spiritual graces,
by sin art made unworthy the bread that thou eatest, and being deprived of
thy greatest good, art fallen into thy greatest misery. As virtue is the
beauty of the soul, so sin is the deformity thereof. If thou saw thy soul,
thou would blush at the baseness and misery thereof, and would endeavor
to recover the grace of her ancient dignity. If thou have an arrow in thy
body, thou hastenest to pluck it out, and if thou fall into the dirt, thou
arisest presently. The hurt and silth of thy body do thou with such
diligence desire to free thy self of, and yet art thou content to suffer thy
soul to wallow in her pollution? And though the soul was not made for the
body, but the body for it, yet thou neglectest the care of thy soul, and
followest that of the body with all that is in thee. Thou that neglectest thy
soul, though thou take care to trim up thy body, yet thou neglectest them
both; whereas if thou tookest care to adorn thy soul, though thou neglect thy
body, thou sauest both.

CHAP. VI. How miserable the despair a sinner is at the point of death.
Consider a little (my dear brother) how often and how grievously thou have
offended thy Lord God; yea more often and more grievously than many who are now
deservedly tormented in the fire of hell; and then call unto mind how great a
benefit God has bestowed on thee, in staying and attending that he might have
mercy on thee, in yielding unto thee, out of his mercy, a time of repentance,
who long since should have been tormented in hell fire. Whereas if God a
just Judge, strong and patient, in all those hours and moments wherein thou
have offended him, had permitted thee, as he has diverse others, to have died a
sudden death, alas where had thy soul been? The Lord has brought thy soul
out of hell, Psalm. 30.
he has revived thee from them that go down into the pit, and yet thou
ceasest not to sin, but more and more thou drawest near to the gates of
hell. If all that are damned in bell, had but half an hour of thy life, that
by repentance they might rise to a glorious life, do thou think that (as thou
do) so they would spend it unprofitably, and neglect their present
opportunity? What would they not do, to free themselves from the torment of
that fire? But thou on the other side whilst the merciful God gives thee a
time of repentance, abusest it, out of the malice of thy nature, to the
committing of greater wickedness. The days will come, yea they will come and
not fail, Luke 23.
wherein despairingly thou shall say to the hills fall upon me, and to the
mountains cover me, and then thou shall cry out for a time of repentance,
but thou shall cry and not be heard. For it is just that thou that would
not turn unto God whilst ^hou might, should not have power to do it,
when thou would do it too late. God after death forgiueth not him, that
before death thought scorn to ask forgiveness. Wherefore whilst thou have
time do good, for the night will come when thou can not labor. Consider a
little, unhappy man that thou art, if sudden death should have invaded thee
impenitent, ouerladen with many sins, not giving thee any time of repentance,
in the time and instant of death, how miserable had thy despair been? How
great had the terror of thy mind been, how unspeakable the fear of the Judge,
how great a horror of imminent torment in hell had invaded thee? Then with
million of tears, thou would thus have bewailed thine own damnation:

O fading and deceitful life full of many snares! The complaint of a sinner
dying.
Yesterday I did rejoice, now I am sorry; then I laughed, now I weep; then I
was strong, now I am weak; then I lived, now I die; then I seemed happy, now
am serable and a wretched creature. I do not so much lament my departure out of
this life, as the loss of those days, and months, and years, wherein I have
labored in vain, and in vain have spent the strength of my days. All the
time that was given me to live, I have spent in all manner of sin and
iniquity, and so long as I lived, I rather obeyed mine own concupiscence, than
the inspirations and precepts of God. This rotten carcass of mine, which the
worms are presently to denoure, I ever took care to help and to comfort; but
my soul, which presently shall be brought before God and his Angels unto
judgment, I contemned, 2 King. 4.27.
and took no care with virtue and religion to adorn it: and this is the cause
why my soul is vexed within me. O my vanity, o my pride, o my pleasure!
whether are ye gone, what have you profited me? What have you left unto me for
all the service I have done unto you in the whole course of my life? Nothing
but a gnawing and tormenting conscience. For your service I made my self an
enemy unto God, a slave to the devil; I lost heaven and got hell; I lost
infinite ioies, and got eternal lamentation; I am deprived of the society of
Angels, and have made my self a companion to the citizens of nell. Pleasures
and riches and honors, with all the fading allurements of this deceitful world,
are past and gone, and they are as if they never had been, Wisd. 1.
they quickly appeared, and as speedily they vanish, yea they are past away
like a shadow, like an arrow flying in the air, like a messenger that passes
and is gone, like a ship in the sea, whose path is not seen. The time of my
life is past and glided away, and it cannot return; in whose, though shortest
delay, o how much good could I have done; o how great a treasure of spiritual
goods could I have gathered unto my self, which now in my fading time might
have made me friends in the eternal tabernacles of God! of the least whereof
I should now more rejoice, than of millions of gold and silver. But a good
purpose without a beginning, a will without work, good promises without
execution, and the expectation of a morrow that never came, have undone me: Woe
be unto me that so long put it off, so long delayed my conversion. How happy
is a mature repentance and conversion, because secure! Whereas he that
repents too late can never be sure, because he knows not whether he
repent truly or fainedly, for it is likely that he rather repents out of a
fear of punishment than out of love toward God. O my gold and silver, o my
possessessions, my precious garments wherein I was wont to content my self! I
fail you, you fail not me; I leave you, I can not carry you with me. Oh
that I had been so happy as never to have seen you, that of all men living I
had been the poorest! for then had I never been called to an account, either
for misspending, or unjustly detaining you. O that I had been of all the
shepherds in the field the basest, and had had the charge but only of my
self! for then would not the Lord require at my hands the souls of those my
subjects, whose salvation I have neglected. O my riches, my honors, my
delights! ye cannot free me from death, from stench, from worms, from
rottennes, ye cannot pluck me out of the hands of the living God. O death
do thou oppress me unawares? How bitter unto me is the remembrance of thee!
how fearful is thy presence! Whereas if living and in health I had foreseen
thee, and by living well had learnt to die well, I had not now feared thee.
Blessed art thou Arsenus, who always had this hour before thine eyes.
Three things there are which I now greatly fear. First, when my soul shall
depart out of the prison of this my body, into a place which it knows not.
Secondly, when it is to appear before the Judge, and to be presented before
his tribunal seat. Thirdly, when it is to hear that irreuocable sentence
either with it, or against it.

But thou my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, whose property it is always to
have mercy and to forgive; who have said; That at what time soever a sinner
repents him of his sin, thou will put out all his wickedness out of thy
remembrance; though I have contemned those times of repentance that thou have
affoorded me, of all other men have most offended thee, am altogether unworthy
to be called thy son, yet mindful of thy mercies which have been from the
beginning, give me thy assistance to escape this death, and some small time to
my wished repentance. Add some few years to my life, some months, or at
least some days. Give me leave a little, that I may lament my sins, and
call to mind my forepassed years in the bitterness of mine own soul;
because if I die in this state I am now in, my end must needs be eternal
damnation. But if out of thy mere mercy and goodness thou shall pardon me, I
will be bold, with thy gracious assistance to promiseamendement of life: only
in this state let not my soul die, lest it be buried in the bottomless pit
of hell.

Now hear how the malignant spirits laugh at thy miseries, and with one voice
say unto thee:

Behold the man that took not God for his strength, Psa. 52.7.
but trusted to the multitude of his riches, and put his strength in his
malice. Let us sing to this miserable caitife a dirge of death, because he is
the son of death, and his mear is unquenchable fire; he is an enemy of the
light, and a friend of darkness. He has labored for us, has always bound
himself unto us, has gotten us many followers; let us therefore pay him the
due hire of al his labors. But what other reward have we to bestow upon him,
but that eternal unquenchable fire, which is prepared for us and our consorts?
He is ours, because he was apprehended in our service, full of sin and
iniquity. Why do we stay? Why stand we here idle? Come let us bind him
hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, where shall be weping and
gnashing of teeth. Come let us prefer him to plagues and punishment enough,
and never be there peace with him. For what other end do we stay, but to see
his wretched soul separated from his body, that passing out we may receive it,
and together draw it to the bottomless pit of hell, there to remain in
unspeakable torment for ever and ever?

Now hear how in thy discomforts they comfort thee.

O wretched, poor, and miserable man, since those pleasures which thou have
followed in thy whole life have forsaken thee, not thou them, since unwillingly,
and for fear of punishment, thou turnest unto God, and fear any longer to
serve the world, which thou would not do, if yet thou had any hope, to
live any longer. Every man has his time appointed to die, and this is thy
time, for thou shall die, and not live. Look a little upon the multitude of
those sins, which as yet thou have never confessed unto God, which as yet
have never touched thy heart with the least contrition that may be: how dying
can thou for shame confess them, when living and in health thou would
never? Look upon the small number of thy good works in respect of thy wicked,
and how mean a proportion thy good deeds carry, to the infinite ioies of the
elect. Look upon the severe justice of a just Judge, which requires a strait
account, even of an idle word. In the whole race of thy life thou have
persecuted God, and now think thou that a momentarie repentance can win
him to mercy? No, no, never doubt but that thou art surely ours, for in our
service thou were apprehended, day and night thou have served us, yielded to
our suggestions, thou have performed the works of darkness, gotten us many
souls, greatly enlarged our kingdom. Come therefore, come into that furnace
of fire, into a land of burning pitch and sulphur, where we may give thee the
due reward for all thy labors, make thy condition like ours, for like lords,
like servants.

O wretched creature that thou art, why did thou yield to our persuasions?
See he ere the reward that thou have for it, and see the company that thou have
made ch^^ce of, with whom thou must for ever burn in hell fire. O thou
proudest amongst men; Why art thou not now proud? Why take thou not from
other men, that is not thine own? Why reuengest thou not thy wrongs? Why do
thou not give thy self to gluttony and drunkenness? Why art thou not sorry
for another man's felicity? Where is thy immoderate appetite to libidinous
pleasures? Where thy inordinate love of riches? Where are thy precious garments
and ornaments? where thy dainty fare, thy plays and sportings? Thy immoderate
joy, how it is vanished, whether is it departed from thee? Luk 16.
Remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure; thou have played
enough, thou have eat and drunk enough; there is no rest for thee after death,
no pleasure; Thou art ours, let God take thee out of our hands if he can.
Come therefore, come with us, into the land of misery and darkness, where is
no order, but everlasting horror, where thou must remain for ever and ever.

Now hear into what despair of salvation thou fallest by these devilish
insultations, saying:

Truce till to morrow, o truce till to morrow: Now at the last I see that I can
live no longer, that the last day of my life is come, which cannot be past; I
would stay, but I am compelled to go. The way of salvation is shut up from
me, mercy is denied me, and all hope is taken away from me. Now there is no
time of repentance, or changing my life, for the devils have compassed me about
frighting me with strange and horrible apparations, who as dogs watch a Hare
when she is put forth of her Form, attend my miserable soul when it shall
depart out of the prison of this my body, that they may catch it and carry
it, to be tormented in hell. O wretch that I am, where shall my soul be this
night? Out and alas, hell is my house for ever and ever, there I must dwell;
because whilst I daily sinned against mine own conscience, I made my self a
fit inhabitant for so infernal a place. Psa. 18.4.
The sorrows of death have compassed me, the snares of hell have ouertooke
me. O great God, to what end did thou make me, and broughtest me into the
world? Why was I not carried from my baptism to my grave? It had been better
for me never to have been born; and therefore let the day perish wherein I came
into the world. Cursed be my creation, and thou accursed Satan, be thou more
accursed, with all thy hellish rabble, all thy suggestions; cursed be the earth
that bred me, the womb that bare me, the parents that begot me; cursed be
every creature upon earth.

What is that (my friends) you talk together? Do you not counsel me to
confess my sins? Do you not tell me that the mercy of God is great? That is
true I confess, but yet my sins are greater than that they can be forgiven;
by the just judgment of God I am condemned: what he has written, he has
written, and his sentence is irreuocable. When I was in health and the strength
of my body, I could hardly confess my sins, they were so numberless, much
less now in this agony of death, the sentence of my condemnation being
pronounced, am I able to do it. O repentance, where art thou? By the just
judgment of GOD hereafter I can not repent; when I might I would not: now I
would I can not. All ye that are present (my friends) learn to be wise by my
fall, and defer not your repentance till your dying day, lest doing as I have
done, ye suffer as I do. Remember my judgment, such shall be yours also; mine
to day, yours to morrow: happy is he that by other men's harms can learn to
beware. For ever farewell my friends, and again, and again fare ye well.
Behold, the devils take hold of my miserable soul, and carry it with them
into hell. Isa. 30.10
I go to the gates of the grave, I am deprived of the residue of my years; I
shall not see the Lord in the land of the living: I shall see man no more among
the inhabitants of the world.

Now hear how God vpbraiding thee with his benefits condemns thee.

O wretched man, of no worth, unprofitable worm of the earth, what could I
have done for thee, that I have not done? I created thee not a stone, a tree, a
toad, a bird, nor any other creature, but a man capable of reason, according to
mine own image and similitude; and for so much as I made thee like my self by
nature, it was thy part to have done thy best endeavor to make thy self like
unto me by will; which forasmuch as thou have not conformed to my will, thou
have profaned my similitude in thee. Nevertheless, though thou louedst me
not, I loved thee; yea, thou displeasing me, I so loved thee, as to work that
in thee whereby thou might please me; being proud, thou did contemn my
commandments, but I thus contemned, ceased not to love thee though thou were
proud; but to the end I might recall thee unto me, I gave thee my law and my
faith. To thee I sent my preachers; nay, for thee I once appeared visible to
the world in the flesh of thy mortality, and from the abundant plenitude of
the kingdom of heaven, I descended poor upon the earth: I raised the dead,
gave sight unto the blind, reduced the wanderers, and justified the wicked.
Three and thirty years being seen upon the earth, and conversant with men, I
refused not to serve thee, and to procure thy salvation; by preaching, by
labor, by watching, by fasting: and that I might take away thine infirmities,
I willingly became weak; for thee I was sold, betrayed, bound, spit upon,
hudwinckt, buffeted, scourged, crowned, crucified, derided of all, drank
vinegar and gaul, and that I might be the death of thy death, for the nocent I
died innocent. For thee base worm as thou art, I powered out, not my gold, nor
my silver, but my precious blood; and for the redemption of so base a worm, I
spent my most precious wares, yea I spared not my self, but I willingly
offered me wholly to redeem thee: all my members I gave to the redemption of
thee, but thou have employed all thine to offend me; for thee I gave mine eyes
to weeping, whereas thou have given thine to behold the vanity of this world;
I gave mine ears to the hearing of wrongs and opprobrious speeches, whereas
thou have given thine to the hearing of detractations and filthy speeches; I
gave my mouth to taste vinegar mixed with gaul, whereas thou have given thine,
to gluttony and lying, and blasphemy; I gave my hands and my feet to be
fastened with nails to the cross, whereas thou have given thine, to murder
and the spoil of the poor; I gave my heart to be wounded with a lance,
whereas thou have given thine to the delights and pleasures of this life.

I have loved more thy salvation, than mine own glory with men, whereas thou
have loved more a vile and base creature, than thy Creator; to whom if thou be
indebted for thy creation, how much do thou owe me for thy recreation, thy
redemption ^ If thou did dest owe thy self unto me, when I gave thee to thy
self, thou should twice owe thy self unto me for restoring thee to thy
self, when thou were lost: Because thou were both given and restored to thy
self, thou do owe thy self wholly unto me, once and again to me I say,
who gave thee thy life, thy senses, thy understanding, who made thee, and made
thee good, gave thee thy being, and thy well being. Neither was it enough for
me, to offer my self for thee an oblation to God my Father, but that I
must-euerie day offer my self unto thee, to be seen and kissed and handled,
yea eaten too by a lively faith, though not carnally. Coming into the world I
gave my self unto thee as a companion, Iam. 1.17.
more stricken in years as thy sustenance, dying as thy prise, reigoing as thy
reward. What better thing could I, even I, from whom every good gift, and every
perfect gift comes, bestow upon thee than my self? What should I say more?
Tit. 3.5.
My Angels I have given unto thee as thy gardians, but thou contemnest their
charge. By the washing of the new birth I cleansed thee from all thy sins; I
have instructed thee in my faith; having often died a spiritual death, I have
often raised thee; and justly deprived of the kingdom of heaven, I have
restored thee to thine ancient inheritance; I have often spared thee, and thou
fallest the more often; I have opened Paradise unto thee, and thou would not
enter; I have offered thee my grace, and thou have neglected it. I have a long
time forborne thee sinning, being ready to receive thee repenting, Psalm. 147.20
and yet by all these testimonies of my love, thou have not turned unto me.
Matt. 11.21.
I have not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known my
judgments. If these things had been done in Tirus and Sidon, they had
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. What could I have done more for thee
that I have not done? Tell me o mortal and passible man; what have thou ever
suffered for me, thy Creator, thy benefactor, who being impassible and
immortal, have suffered and died for thee? and yet thy reprobate heart
obdurate, and obstinate, so great benignity, so fervent love, so vehement a
lover has not mollified. I that so loved such a one freely without desert,
how, yea how without measure did I deserve to be beloved again, especially
considering that when I was not beloved, I first loved thee?

For these and other innumerable benefits bestowed upon thee, though thou can
never yield sufficient thanks, yet I required no other at thy hands, but that
thou would return love for love, and that for my sake thou would tender
thine own salvation, and abstiane from those sins which I hate. What I
commanded the^ was no way beneficial to my self, but to thee only that were
commanded, for I had no need of thy goodness, but thou of mine. But thou
nevertheless have returned me hatred for love, and evil for good; yea thou
have fallen from me to the devil thine enemy, ungrateful and inconsiderate
of thine own salvation, and of thine own accord have bound thy self to an
unjust tyrannical lord and master. Nevertheless al these thy foresaid wrongs
and ingratitudes, I have patiently borne, I have a long time attended thy
leisure to have mercy on thee, being always ready to forgive, if in any
indifferent time thou had come unto me, yea and to that end I called thee,
and in a manner entreated thee, whilst I stayed at the door of thy mind
knocking and calling thee, Turn unto me, and I will turn unto thee; and yet
thou would not harken unto my voice. It is therefore just and necessary,
that thou that contemnest me in thy life time, should be contemned by me
being dead. And therefore depart from me thou accursed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the devil and his angels, there to remain for ever and
ever.

CHAP. VII. Of the pains of hell.
IT remains (my dear brother) that thou hear what punishment, in that
bottomless pit of hell, worthy thy wickedness, thou were, or yet art to
endure, except in time by repentance thou auert the sentence of so severe a
Judge.

First, thou that have not sinned but willingly, in hell shall endure all manner
of torment unwillingly. There shall be unspeakable variety of tortures and
miseries, intolerable torments, and eternity without end: the affliction both
of body and soul shall be diverse, bitter and everlasting. Because thou have
committed diverse sins, therefore thou shall suffer diverse punishments; for
every sin thou have here committed shall have a torment answerable thereunto,
and according to the measure of thy offenses shall the retribution of Gods
vengeance be; such as thy sin has been, such shall be thy pain. For
notwithstanding the fire of hell be one and the same (for by a metaphor of
fire does the Holy Ghost especially express the torment of hell unto us) yet
it burns and tormenteth not all the damned after one manner: As even in this
world many live under one and the same Sun, but yet all do not equally feel
the heat thereof, because (...) are not alike in the quality and constitution
of their bodies. And as with one and the same fire straw does otherwise burn
than wood or iron; so there in one and the same fire, there is not one and the
same heat, because what here the diverse quality of the body works, there
does the diversity of sins the same.

But touching this fire of hell, forasmuch as it is but a metaphor, which the
holi^ Ghost uses to express (...) to us the greatness of the torments that
there are, an^ no material fire, as some (...) dream, give me leave, as the
spirit of God herein humbles it self to the capaci^^ of man, so to express
by this material fire that thou see and feel, at the least some shadow of
those torments thou shall feel in hell. For notwithstanding it be beyond the
capacity of man to conceive what these torments are, yet by those things we
see and feel and can conceive, let us guess at those we know not. The holy
Ghost has compared it to fire, so let me, though I confess there can be no
proportion betwixt corruptible and incorruptible things, whether they be good
or ill. Nevertheless to the end thou may have a taste of this fire of hell;
consider with thy self if thou put the tip of thy finger into this visible
material fire, never so little time, what misery, what pain, what torment
do thou endure? And yet this our fire, to that everlasting fire, is as a
painted fire to a true: In the middle of which our visible material fire, if
thou should put thy whole finger, how great a torment should thou endure?
how great if thy whole hand, if thy whole arm? how much more great if thy
whole body, one whole day together, nay one week, nay a whole year together?
From hence gather if thou can, how unhappy thy soul shall be, which must
be tormented in so great, and so durable a fire. Measure by this temporal
torment, how intolerable it shall be to thy soul, to endure the heat of that
unquenchable fire, on both sides, within and without, and that for ever and
ever. For in this does our material fire differ from that, that ours
consumes whatsoever it fasteneth upon; that where it once takes hold, it
always tormenteth, and reserueth it whole and entire to a pain eternal; that
does naturally yield heat and light, this unspeakable heat with palpable
darkness.

In this for ever and ever desolate land of burning pitch and sulphur, to the
miserable damned souls, there is nothing but desolation, from which desolation
there arises despair, from despair hatred of God, and blasphemy; eternal
terment, continual lamentation, hourly yelling. There nothing can be heard,
but mourning and howling and weeping and gnashing of teeth. They that in this
life were glutted with satietie, in hell shall be totmented with famine; they
shall beg a drop of water, and shall not obtain it. By that they finned, they
shall be punished, and in what they most offended God, in that shall they be
most tormented. They shall always burn in unquenchable fire, but never die,
be filled with stench and glutted with torment, they shall have no comfort, no
counsel, no hope of evasion, but the sorrows of death shall for ever compass
them. In this life the intermission of pain is some comfort to a sick man,
and the fruition of the comfort and conference of his friends; but in hell (for
the greater increase of torments) there is no interruption, but an eternal
continuance thereof, comforts cease on all sides, and plagues and punishment
gather strength. In hell there is no redemption, no ease of pain. In the world
fear has no grief, nor grief fear, because fear afflicts not the mind,
when it begins to suffer what it did fear; whereas they that are condemned to
the torments of hell, in the midst of their punishment suffer grief and
sorrow, and with the extremity thereof do ever fear; inasmuch as what they
fear, they do incessantly bear, and again what they bear they incessantly
fear. The inflicting of the punishment is the augmentation of the fear.

All things in the world as ^vel good as evil, are mingled with their
contraries, and a^taine not to the highest degree of perfection, but that they
always may be increased and diminished, and possessed more or less: but in
hell all evils are in the highest degree, never mixed with their contraries, but
yet every man as he has sinned more or less, so he suffers. There is
extreme sorrow, extreme misery and desolat on in all things, in the body
and the soul affliction in the highest degree, fire unquenchable, heat
immitigable, the worm immortal, stench intolerable, sorrow comfortless,
horrible darkness, fearful spectacles, confusion of evils, and desperate
despair of all goodness whatsoever. The damned have in their eyes weeping and
lamentation, terror in their ears, stench in their nostrels, gnashing in their
teeth, groaning in their voices, bands in their hands and feet, and intolerable
heat and torment in all their members. As if thou should set before thine
eyes any man, that as well in the very apple or sight of his eyes, as in all
his other members, on both sides, both within and without, has a hot burning
non fastened, insomuch that neither the marrow in his bones, nor his entrails,
no not the least part of his whole body be freed from torment, or feels it
less than the very apple of his eye: what? will thou not confess such a one
to be in great extremities, and strangely to be tortured? And yet what is this
one torment to the multitude and magnitude of the intolerable torments of one
damned man, upon whom millions of miseries do fall besides this?

The torment of one damned creature is so great, that if it were divided
equally among all that have been, are, and shall be, and every particular man
should bear his own particular punishment, yet so great would the torment of
every one be, so great the grief, and so horrible the punishment, that it
would far excel the torments of all the martyrs in the world conferred upon
one, and all the evil that can be seen, felt, or understood. The punishment
therefore of one damned soul can not but be very great, which being
distributed into innumerable multitudes would be nevertheless insupportable.
The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, what God has provided for those that offend him. All the
punishments, affl^ctions, and torments which may be thought of in this life, if
they be conferred to the least pain of hell, are solaces and comforts, and a
damned creature would rather choose to endure them all a thousand years, than
to be tormented with the torments of hell one day. What punishment think
thou will God require there of those he has forsaken, if here so strictly he
correcte^h those whom he loves? If here in this life he so scourge his
chosen children for their trial, how will he torment the reprobate for their
punishment? If the devils do so much afflict holy men, as inst Lob and diverse
others, notwithstanding they can do no more against them than God does permit
them, how much will they afflict those whom God has delivered unto their hands
for ever to be tormented? O what will they be in their torments, if the very
sight of them be intolerable? They are never weary with torturing, neither does
a sinner die in his torments, but as he shall be tormented without end, so
shall he be compelled to live in pain without end.

For if gold shine in the fire and is not consumed by it, and the mountains
in Sicilia from the beginning of the world unto this day burn with continual
fire, and yet continue whole and entire; if the Salamander can live in the fire
without pain; how much more possible is it that the body and soul may feel
the pain of this fire, and yet always live? Again, as the soul giving life
unto the body can suffer grief, but yet can not die; even so whilst the
body has put on immortality and incorruption, the soul with the body shall
always be tormented, but not consumed: for by a fire unquenchable (which in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye is able to consume the greatest hill that
is) a sinner shall not be extinguished nor consumed, but ever there shall
remain and abound something in him to be extinguished.

And because there is no true life, but where a man lives happily; and where an
unhappy man is not permitted to die, in him death it self dies not: therefore
a sinner that has both lost his well being, and yet has not left essentially
to be; that is ever dead to eternal life, and for ever living to eternal
death, is compelled daily to suffer both death without death, and want without
want, and end without end. So he dies that he may always live, and so he
lives that he may always die; so he decays as that he may always subsist,
and so he subsisteth that he always decays; so he is ended, that he is
without end, and so is he with an end, that he is never ended. And he whose
dead life was here in sin, there his living death is in pain. There he
desires only death, which here he so much hated; he seeks death, and
finds it not; he desires to die, and death flies from him; here it is
unwillingly drawn forth of the body, there in the body it is unwillingly
detained; the death of nature does violently drive the soul out of the body,
the death of hell more violently detaines it in the body: of both deaths that
is commonly had, that the soul suffers of the body what it would not.

What end of years may be imagined, so it be finite, to the damned is
exceeding comfortable; but out and alas, in hell there is no redemption;
neither was there ever any man known to have returned from thence: for hell is
so deep, that no man may ascend from thence; so close, that no man may get
out; so kept, that no men can escape; he that is once gone thither, can no more
return; that is once entered, can never get forth: whom the justice of God has
once drawn to punishment, the mercy of God never reduces unto pardon.

It belongs to the justice of a severe and rigorous Judge, that there be no
end of revenge given unto them, who so long as they were in health would never
make an end of sinning; that there they should never want punishment, that
here would never want sin; who make an end of sinning, because they must make
an end of living; whereas, if they could, they would have lived without end:
for they make manifest, that they would never have been freed from sin,
because they never gave it over so long as they lived. Again, it is fit and
requisite, that according to the delight of sin the bitterness of their
torment should be measured unto them, not only which the wicked have had, but
which they would have: for God does not only consider the outward actions, but
he likewise examineth the inward wills. Since therefore out of the corruption
of their own wills they have given no measure to the delight of sin, nor
ever could find so great delight in sin but that they would have greater,
therefore God (who considers the heart, not the outward action) inflicteth
punishment, not according to the delight received, but sought after; that the
time of their torment for sin might be infinite, who were infinitely delighted
therein. Again, forasmuch as there is a proportion of greatness between the
offense and the party offended, therefore sin, whereby God infinite in
goodness and majesty is offended, must necessarily be judged infinite, and
deserves an infinite punishment; infinite in continuance, not in pain or
torment: for the finite capacity of a creature is not capable of what is
infinite; whom likewise the Lord (who deteineth not his mercies when he is
angry) punishes not according to their desert, for he is merciful, and takes
no delight in their affliction; but yet because he is just he is never
pacified from revenge. For as they that forsake life, run into death, so they
that fear not to offend, and to forsake him that is good in the highest
degree, deserve in the highest degree to be punished; and they are made worthy
of eternal evil, who destroy in themselves that good that might have been
eternal. As we see that a temporal or transitory punishment brings a death
which is perpetual, a temporal treason a yoke of perpetual servitude; a
disease is taken in a short time, which a man perhaps shall never shake off: so
the sins of the damned have an end, but yet their punishment for sin is
deservedly endless, who are sorry they have sinned, and yet cannot but sin

And though God be merciful and willing to pardon all sins whatsoever, yet
when he punishes the reprobate for their sins, he leaves not so much as
an idle word, nay thought, unpunished; and they that are debtors for great
sins, being condemned, must pay the uttermost farthing. And as he that has
his arm bound can do nothing with it; so out of the bitterness of the pain,
not the love of God, they have a willing will to rise from their sins, but
yet being forsaken of GOD. Which will of theirs though it have lost the effect
of power, be not able, yet it has always the affection to sin, and though
they cannot sin, yet they lose not their will to sin. For it is true that
death separateth the soul from the flesh, but yet it changes not the purpose
of the soul. For as with the elect the good will of a man is turned into
glory; so with the reprobate their ill will is turned into punishment; and that
shall be a torment in ^hell that was a sin in the world.

As they that have offended their king are banished their country; so the
damned for their offense committed against God, are banished Paradise; to whom
though all the aforesaid torments are intolerable, yet if a thousand helles
were added thereunto, they are nothing to that Paradise, that glory they have
loft: For to the damned it is a far more grievous thing to be excluded from
glory, and to be deprived the grace of God, and to endure the hatred of a
merciful Creator, and to have an omnipotent God their adversary and enemy,
which is so unspeakable a torment unto them, that if no pain at all did
outwardly afflict them, this only were sufficient. For they see that for a
momentarie delight in sin, they endure unspeakable punishment, and for the
love of their temporal goods, they have lost eternal; who nevertheless by a
short repentance, might both have attained these, and by not sinning have
avoided the other. And if the worm of one sin never dying do so afflict in
this life where all hope is not taken away; how much more does the worm of so
many sins in that eternal desolation afflict and torment? whilst the
wicked do daily behold, as in a glass, all the evil they have committed, all
the good they have omitted. For as a merchant when the Fair is ended, is not
only sorry for that gain which ^he has lost, but for that also which he
might have gotten, but yet neglected it; so the damned are not only sor^ie for
their sins committed, but for their good works omitted; for all which they
then repent, though it be an unprofitable and unfruitful repentance, because
now they find no mercy, that lost the fit time to attain it: But after a
hundred thousand thousands of years, their torments shall still be iterated, as
if they had never suffered any thing, and so without end they shall remain in
that place of horror for eue^ and ever.

Who can, The conclusion.
relating these things, refrain from teares^ who can hear them with dry
cheeks? These are horrible things to think upon terrible to relate, and
grievous to behold; how hornrible then, terrible and grievous are they to
endure? For if they be terrible to hear, what will they be to seek (...) If
the very fear of this punishment do here so much afflict thee; what will the
intolerable suffering of them do there? It is a horrible thing to fall into
the hands of the living God; into a living death and a dying life. But thou (my
dear brother) think not of these evils; but like a man secure thou hastnest
unto them, and thou will prove them, before thou will think of them. But yet
to prevent this, lest thy beautiful members should be fuel for that
unquenchable fire, descend in thought whilst thou art huing into hell, lest
thou descend thither body and soul when thou art dead: study therefore both
to fear this, and fearing it to avoid it. For what good will the foreknowledge
of these things do thee, if thou avoid them not? Now therefore whilst it is
possible in a short time, if thou turn unto the Lord, to escape all these
afflictions and torments, and to enjoy besides that eternal happiness, which
is prepared for his saints; why deferrest thou? why staiest thou? and take
not hold of the mercies of God before thou go, and return not, to a dark
land, covered with the shadow of death, a land of misery, mourning and
lamentation, where is darkness and death and no order, but everlasting horror:
from which Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior save and defend us, Amen.

By this and much more that may be spoken, The conclusion of the fifth part.
thou plainly see (dear brother) how much it stands thee upon whilst thou
have time, to turn unto God. Wherefore thou that would not stay whilst
thou were well, return whilst thou haft time; and thou that would not
stand when thou were upon thy legs, now thou art fallen rise again. What
sins soever thou have committed in thy youth, bewail, with tears wash away
the spots of thy forepassed life; what thy works have polluted, let thy
lamentations purify. As a newborn babe, 1. Pet. 2.
desire the sincere milk of the word; return as a little child into the lap
of thy mother, the eternal wisdom of God, and suck the teats of his divine
mercy, that so thou may grow unto salvation, and taste how sweet the Lord
is. Be sorry for what is past, endeavor to avoid what is to come; which that
thou may do, in all thine actions remember thy last end, and thou shall
never sin. Labor by so much the more to recover that thou have lost, by how
much the more thou haft endamaged thy self by sin. Thou that know thy self
to have committed things unlawful, endeavor likewise to abstain from some
things that are lawful; thou that have committed things forbidden, forbid thy
self things granted, and reprehend thy self in small matters, who have
offended in great.

Thou must every day by little and little banish vice. First determine one
day to abstain from gluttony and luxury, which (by the assistance of God)
shall succeed well; which day being happily ended, resolve with thy self to
continue two days together, and it shall succeed more easily, then a whole
week, then a month, at the last the grace of God preventing thee, and
following thee, it shall be no difficult matter for thee to spend whole years
in abstinence and continency: And if every year in this manner, thou quit thy
self but of one sin, in a short time thou will grow to be a perfect man in
Christ Jesus. For by this means, thou shall every day root out thy sins, and
grow in goodness. For not to profit in the discipline of manners, is to wax
worse and worse; not to go forward, is to go backward. When the mind of a
man endeuoreth the bettering of it self; the ship saileth as it were against
the stream, which if it once cease to ascend, without labor it is carried
downward; for in ascending is pain, in descending idleness. Even so, except
by ascending from virtue to virtue thou go about to attain the top of
righteousness, tumbling from one sin into another, thou fallest into a
headlong downfall. Take heed therefore lest after repentance thou please thy
self too much, and being secure thou live more loosely, but rather be the
more wary, and settle thy salvation in the haven of tranquillity, and though
the grace of God give thee daily victory, yet it takes not from thee matter
of combat: but lest thou should wax proud, as if the battle were at an end,
the mercy of God protecting thee, always remains to assist thee, that how
often soever thou overcome, thou should never cease to fight, always
thinking, that there is somewhat behind that thou should overcome, until
that which is perfect happen unto thee, and thou be quit of that which is
imperfect in that perfect glory of happiness. Amen.

The Sixth Part of the exhortation to repentance.
Against despair of remission of sins.
CHAP. I. That we are all sinners and have need of the mercy of God.
SIXTHLY and lastly, thou will say perhaps that thine iniquity is greater than
that it may be forgiven, and therefore being sure of thy damnation, thou take
no care to repent. Res. I cannot but congratulate thy happiness (my dear
brother) and give thanks unto God, that thou art not as many other men are, who
daily sin, yet know not that they sin; who always do wickedly, and are
never touched with that they have done; who as it were blindfolde run the race
of their life, and never know what state they are in till they feel the
punishment. For what thing can be more unhappy, than for a man not to know his
own unhappiness, and among all the dangers of this life to feel no grief, no
infirmity, to be ignorant of his own disease? Even so there is nothing more
dangerous, than not to know when we sin. There is now in thee the beginning
of salvation, in that thou acknowledgest thine own sins: Thou have made no
small journey to eternal felicity, in that thou know thine infelicitie;
Now thou appliest thy self to inward purity, in that thou deniest not thine
inward pollution and impuritie. For by so much the more precious is a man in
the eyes of God, by how much the more contemptible he is in his own eyes. Not
to think thy self a sinner, is to make thy self the greater offender, and
thou were much to be bewailed, if thou did not bewail thy self. The God
of mercy and compassion preventing thee by pitying thee, sets before the
eyes of thy mind thine own sins, and foretells thee what danger there
hangs over thy head for them in time to come, by all means that may be
ministering occasion of thy conversion, that at the least by the fear of
punishment thou may turn unto him, since thou will not do it for the love
of himself, and so by little and little thou may turn thy servile fear
into filial love. If GOD would strictly punish thy sins, he would not
present them to thy self to bewail them. For to that end does he offer them
to thine own view, that thou may be sorry for them, and by true repentance
blot them quite out of sight. This is the mercy of God preventing sinners, to
the end they may arise from their sins.

There is no man so circumspect, but that he sometimes falls into sin, and
therefore God knowing our weakness, has provided a medicine against this
necessity, which the infirmity of the flesh is subject unto. It is a humane
thing to sin, but a devilish thing to persist in sin. So long as we bear
about us this frail body of ours we can not be without sin; no man can
say, My heart is clean, I am pure from sin. 1. Ioh. 2.
But if we shall say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us, because we all have offended in many things. He cannot be in the
world without sin, that came into the world with sin; he that is conceived
in iniquity, cannot live without iniquity; for in this flesh of sin, no man
can challenge a freedom from sin. No man lives without it, no not the infant
that is but a day old: Job 15.15.
the heavens are not pure in the sight of God, and he found no steadfastness in
his saints; Ps. 143.2.
In his sight shall none that lives be justified. We every day descrie in our
selves many sins, and yet cannot know how often we sin. For who can
understand his faults? and therefore it follows, Ps. 19.1^
Cleanse me o Lord from my secret sins. Forasmuch therefore as there is no man
which has not sinned; he only is blessed, Psa. 32.2.
to whom the Lord imputes no iniquity, and whose sin is covered. Let it be
sufficient to us to the attainment of all righteousness, to have him propitious
unto us, whom only we have offended. Whatsoever he has decreed not to impute
unto us, is as if it never had been, for who shall accuse-them, whom God has
absolved? Nevertheless lest any man should please himself as being innocent,
and so by extolling himself should fall the more, he is put in remembrance
that he sins daily, in that he is commanded to pray daily for his sins,
saying; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us.

When a man hears a sentence out of the Word against covetousness, being
pricked in heart, he hates that covetousness, he commends the contempt of
all things, and he accounts no more of gold than of the dust; but so soon as
his mind shall behold what it may desire, he forgets that which before he
commended. We are many times fraighted with our sins; and we confess them
unto God, but presently we return to the same sins again: for the most
part we repreliend our own lives, and yet we gladly do that which we
reprove in our selves. The spirit raises us up to righteousness, and the
flesh binds us to the custom of sinning; the mind withstandeth the delights
of the flesh, but presently with the delights thereof it is captiuated. Woe be
even to the laudable life of men, if they should be judged without mercy;
because they many times offend God with that whereby they imagine they please
him: for many times our righteousness being brought to the touchstone of his
divine justice is unrighteousness; and that is loathsome in the sight of a
severe Judge, that shines in the eyes of him that does them. Esa. 64.
All our righteousness is like a menstruous cloth. If our life should be
strictly examined, in that fearful examination none should be found just. If
God should only show severity, and in his judgment should not add mercy; if
he should observe our iniquities, and not pardon our transgressions, no man
could expect the glory of eternal felicity, no man could endure the rigor of
so strict an account. If the mercy of God were not extended over all, no man
could ever be saved; for a^ their own merits could not create them, so their
own righteousness can not save them: for whosoever is saved, must be saved by
the mercy of God, and not his own merits.

Perhaps it was good for thee, as to such as are proud, that thou have
fallen, to the end, that thou that were carried by pride beyond thy self, to
which condition, by sin thou were obnoxious, by thy fall thou might be put
in mind of thy self, and being taught to know who thou art, lay aside the
pride of thine own presumption. And as for a little dirt thou make not
clean thy garment, but thou staiest until it has gathered more filth; so
thou art fallen into greater sins, that thou may cleanse thee of thy less.
For a great offense by how much the sooner it is known, by so much the sooner
it is amended; but a small fault, whilst it is thought to be none at all, is
so much the worse, by how much the more securely it is kept in use, and at the
last a mind accustomed to small sins, fears not to commit the greatest;
and by so much the more is he careless in great sins to fear, by how much
the more he has learned in light, by not fearing to sin. Wherefore (dear
brother) distrust not, faint not, despair not: thou art fallen, but thou may
rise again; thou have offended God, but by repentance thou may please him
again. He gave thee commandments that thou should not sin, and yet he
has given to thee sinning the remedy of repentance, that thou might not
despair: for how much soever thou sinnest, God will pardon if thou do repent.

CHAP. II. That there is no sin so great, but by true repentance it may be
pardoned.
BUT perhaps thou will say, I have offended God more than any man, and my
sins are more in number than the sands of the sea: many of my sins are of
that nature of which S. Matthew speaks in his twelfth chapter: If any man
sin against the Holy Ghost, he shall not be forgiven neither in this world
nor in the world to come. My iniquity is greater than that it can be forgiven.
Res. My dear brother, thou lie as Cain did: Genesis 4.
the piety of God is greater than thy impiety, his mercy greater than thy
misery; and therefore doubt not but thou may obtein pardon for thy sins,
because the goodness of GOD overcomes the malice of man. All the sins that
have been committed from the beginning of the world unto this day are finite
both in quality and number, but the mercy of God has neither number nor
measure, and therefore it far exceeds the number and greatness of all our
sins. God can pardon more than man can sin. All sins, if they be compared
to the mercy of God, are as a drop of war^^ to the whole sea, and as a spiders
web, which when the wind blows vanishes away. Thou see the greatness
of thy disease, but not the power of the Physician; and therefore thou
despairest of pardon, and comparest the mercy of God unto thy sins. To
despair is nothing else than to compare God to our sins. If God, being
overcome by the greatness of our sins, can not forgive, thou detractest from
his omnipotency; if he will not what he can, thou make him a lier, in that
he will not perform that which by the mouths of so many his Prophets he has
so often promised unto us, saying; I, even I am he that puts away thine
iniquities, Esa. 43.25
and will remember them no more: Put thou me in remembrance.

I despair more of thee because thou despairest, and thou condemnest thy self
more by despairing than by all the sins thou have committed. Thou vndoest thy
self for ever, if with the father of mercy thou have not recourse to the
remedies of repentance. It is the death of the soul to commit any sin, but to
despair of pardon, is to descend into hell it self: and therefore Judas is
said to offend God more, in that he despaired of mercy and hanged himself,
than in that out of malice he betrayed him: for despair makes a man accursed,
and unworthy the protection of God.

But lest thou should gather from hence, that God will not pardon thy
despair, and thy greater sins, but only thy lesser, hear what he says in
the three and thirtieth of Ezekiel; At what hour soever a sinner repents him
of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I will put out all his wickedness
out of my remembrance. He excepteth no manner of sins, neither little nor
great; for he that died for all, can pardon all: only be thou sorrowful and
turn unto God, and he is ready to forget and to forgive. If thy sins are
many and great, the mercies of the Lord are more in number and greater than
they. God will be merciful unto thee, and according to the multitude and
magnitude of his mercies will he pardon the multitude and magnitude of thy
sins.

Whereas thou obiectest unto me that in the twelfth by S. Matthew, Whosoever
shall sin against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, etc. I
answer, that it is true, That the sin against the Holy Ghost (that is that
committed out of malice against the goodness and mercy of God, which is
properly attributed to the Holy Ghost) is therefore said to be irremissible,
because it directly oppugneth the goodness and mercy of God, which is the
beginning of the remission of sins; and so that is excluded whereby sin
should be forgiven: as that disease is said to be incurable, which directly
takes away the remedies of the cure. This sin is said to be irremissible,
not because it can not be forgiven to him that repents, but because he that
so sins, does either despair, or presume of the mercy of God, and so adds
sin unto sin, and never repents: and so being obstinate in his
wickedness, as seldom or never he comes to repentance, so seldom or never he
obteineth remission of his sins. But yet we are not to despair of any sinner
whatsoever, so long as he lives, and the long sufferance of God expects him
to repentance. He is a Pagan or a lew to day, may he not be a Christian to
morrow? He is an heretic to day, may he not be a true Professor to morrow?
He is a Schismatike to day, may he not embrace the peace of the Church to
morrow? We are not therefore to despair of any man, so long as he remains
in this life, because sometimes that repentance which by the diffidence of our
age is deferred, by more mature counsel is perfected. Whilst we are in this
life, there is no sin, no iniquity, which may not be healed by the medicine
of repentance, if it be pure and sincere. What offense can be greater in a man
that is sick, than to k^^ his Physician? and if this may be forgiven, what may
not be pardoned? Christ Jesus being fastened to the Cross, prayed for his
crucifiers, saying, Luke 23.
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. If there were hope of
salvation in those that killed their Savior, who should despair of salvation?
The Lord invited Judas that betrayed him to repentance, and to beg mercy at his
hands, when he forewarned him of his treason, when he washed his feet, when
he called him friend when he took a kiss at (...) hands. If then our Savior
di^ not only forgive his crucifers, but prayed unto his father for them; if he
invited Judas to repentance, how much more will he pardon thee if thou do
repent? thou that art an adorer of his Majesty, not his murderer; a lamenter
of his death, not a derider of his passion; a contempler of his mercies, not a
contemner of his infirmities.

Wherefore (my dear brother) let neither the quality nor the quantity of thy
sins discourage thee from the assurance of thy hope; yea, though thou were
guilty of all the sins which have been committed since the beginning of the
world, yet ^hou oughtst not to despair, because the goodness of God far
exceeds the malice of man. If thou could sin as much as God is good,
thou may despair, but since that can not be, tho^ that despairest of thy
self being wicked, trust in God who is better than thy self. Have thou
sinned? repent thee of thy sins. Have thou sinned a thousand times? repent a
thousand times. Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. GOD would never
have exhorted thee to repentance, if his purpose were not to pardon thee if
thou do repent. Between repentance and the kingdom of heaven there is no
distance of time, but repent thou of thy sins, and instantly the gate of
mercy is set wide open unto thee* Thy sins make a separation between thee
and GOD: which obstacles if by repentance thou take away, thou shall stick
unto God, and be one spirit with him. Yield fruits worthy repentance;
contraries redeem with contraries; and thou which before did that which
was contrary to God, do now that which is opposite to the devil.

CHAP. III. Examples of such as have grienously sinned, and afterward have
been saved by repentance.
But thou will object that in the 7. by S. Matthew: Mat. 7.1^
Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it. And that in the 4. of the first by S. Peter: If the righteous
scarsely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? Res. It is
true (my dear brother) that few find the way of life; but what is the reason?
Doubtless, because few there are that seek it. But every one that seeks,
finds; that asks, receives; and to every one that knocks it shall be
opened. Who is he therefore that finds it not? who receives not? or to whom
is it not opened? Certes, only to him that seeks not, that asks not, that
knocks not. The reason why the righteous shall hardly be saved is this,
because there is no man found worthy salvation by his own righteousness: for
God will not save us by the works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his free mercy in Christ Jesus. It is the work of God, not our
endeavor, that we are saved: for that little of goodness that is in us, nay
which God works in us, is nothing, if it be compared to that eternal
blessedness in the life to come. Heaven belongs to the righteous only, by the
rigor of Gods instice; but to the end that all may be saved, it belongs unto
sinners also, by the bounty of Gods grace. Christ has deserved Paradise for
us all, and has restored unto us by his death his fathers inheritance. Luke 14.
He calls us to that heavenly banquet, he will have his house filled with
ghests; yea, he compels the weak, and the blind, and the lame to come in,
that it may appear that no man is shut out, from those celest^all and eternal
joys, the number of the saints of God, being (out of the number of sinners)
ever supplied.

But forasmuch as examples move more than words, there is hope that thou that
hearkenest not unto my words, wilt be stirred up by the examples of other men;
that when thou shall see many that were sometimes entered into the broad and
spacious way (that would have led them to destruction) afterward to have found
the strait way (that leads unto life) thou should not despair to find
the same as they did; and when thou see many unrighteous men by the grace of
God justified and saved, thou likewise should not cast away the hope of thy
salvation. Aaron. Exodus 28. Numb. 15. Marie.
Aaron after his repentance for the molten Calfe, was chosen by God to be high
Priest. Marie his sister, after she was stricken with a leprosy because she
murmured against Moses, by repentance was cured, and received her ancient gift
of Prophesying. David.
David, who was a king and a prophet, a man that God had found out according to
his own heart, and out of whose loins the Messiah was promised to come, into
how foul and grievous sins did he fall? He received by the mouth of the
Prophet Nathan strange comminations of a grievous revenge, and yet all that
anger of GOD, with two words he turned into mercy; I have sinned, says he,
against the Lord, and presently the Prophet did not only answer him; The Lord
has removed thy sins from thee; but that spirit of prophecy which by sin
he had lost, he recovered again, and for David his servants sake, God turned
away much evil from the children of Israel. Achab.
Achabs heart was hardened, he many times contemned the Lord chiding him, he
added sin unto sin; 1. Kin. 21.
and Naboth being slain he possessed his vineyard; yet at the last, being
terrified by the threatenings of God, and guilty of his own sin, he repented
in sackecloth and ashes, and so provoked the Lord God unto mercy. And the word
of the Lord came to Eliah saying; See thou how Achab is humbled before me?
because he submits himself before me, Manasseh.
I will not bring that evil in his days. Manasseh exceeded all that were
before him in the impiety of his sins, 2. Chro. 33.
over threw the observation of the Law and the worship of God, and yet after
those bloody finnes he was reduced to his kingdom and numbered amongst the
sons of God. Nabuchadnezzar. Dan. 4.
Nabuchadnezzar of all men the proudest, acknowledging no Lord, did arrogate to
himself divine honor; and yet God being willing to reclaim him, after he had
been seven years a mad man, and lived like a beast, he brought him to
himself again, and restored him to his kingdom, who being thus restored, and
having thus made trial of the mercy of God, he praised and glorified his holy
name. But to omit innumerable examples in the old Testament; The prodigal
child. Luke 15.
The prodigal child, who had consumed his substance with harlots, being
returned to his father by repentance, received not only a kiss from him, but
had the fat calfe killed, and received his former grace and favor. Zacheus.
Luke 19.
Zacheus a Publican, yea the chief amongst them, made rest^tution four fold
of all he had taken from other men, and received Christ into his house. Matthew.
Matthew of a Publican, became an Apostle and an Evangelist. Marie Magdalen.
Mary Magdelen consumed the unlawful love of the flesh that was in her, with
the fiery zeal of the love of God, and so much favor she found with God, that
she was a messenger to the Apostles themselves of the resurrection of our
Savior. Peter.
Peter an Apostle and pillar of the Church (...) Christ, but he went forth and
wept bitterly, and so was received unto mercy. Paul.
Paul of a persecutor of the Church of God, became a Doctor, and an Apostle of
the Gentiles. Dismas the thief. Luke 23.
But that which gives us greatest hope of remission is the thief upon the
cross, who even by his own judgment had deserved death, whose offense was
certain, and therefore had deserved both temporal and eternal damnation, who
now was condemned to a temporal death, and was near an eternal, and yet at
the very instant of death acknowledging Christ, he only said, Lord remember
me when thou come into thy kingdom, and presently it was answered; This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise. To a thief, he promised a kingdom;
to one crucified, heaven; and to one condemned, paradise. The grace of God
promising was more abundant, than the prayer of the thief entreating; for he
promised more, than the thief asked. He that came such unto the cross by
sin, see what he departed from the cross by grace: From the prison he
ascended to the cross, and from the cross into paradise; from the punishment
of his offense, he mounted to the reward of his virtue. But to what end do I
produce so many examples, so many testimonies of the mercy of God? There is not
a leaf in the book of God, wherein the mercy of the Lord does not shine, yea
the whole earth is replenished therewith. Thou that hear how many there have
been cured of their sins, what receiuest thou else but an earnest penny of
the mercy of God? Therefore has the omnipotent God permitted his elect in
some fi^^ to fall, that as they have risen again, so they that have fallen in
the like, should likewise hope to arise, and whom they followed sinning, they
should likewise follow repenting. What other thing in all these can thou see,
but the unspeakable mercy of our Redeemer, who has set those before thine
eyes as examples of true conversion, whom after their fall, by repentance he
made to live?

But if yet thou hear me not, and beleeuest not that a sinner can be saved,
hear God rather than my self, believe him and not me; he is the truth it
self, he cannot be deceived, he cannot deceive. I will not, says he, the
death of a sinner, but that he convert and live. God will not the death of a
sinner, who would die for his sins: his will is that his death be fruitful,
and by it his redemption plentiful. Yea the very name of Jesus, that is, our
Savior, what else does it promise to a sinner, than mercy and salvation? He
came into the world to faue sinners, and to free them from that damnation
wherewith they were held. Mat. 9.
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick; and therefore he
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: Mat. 15.
He was sent unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. It is not the will of
the sheapheard, that one of his sheep should perish, who having a hundred
sheep, if he lose one of them, leaves ninety and nine in the wilderness,
and seeks him that he has lost, until he have found him. Even so it is the
will of our Father and our Creator, that not one of his children perish; and
if he perish, it is by his own will, not the will of God; for the mercy of God
is common to all, granted to every one that asks, and he offers himself
to every one that seeks him. No man wants his help but he that refuses it,
and neglects the asking of it. Read over the whole life of Christ, and thou
shall find none, that has ever cried out, Jesus thou son of David have mercy
upon me, but presently he obreined mercy. He healed the sick, fed the hungry,
eased those that labored, strengthened the weak, cleansed the leprous, gave
sight unto the blind, raised the dead, absolved the penitent.

Wherefore (dear brother) say no more hereafter unto me, I am proud,
covetous, wanton, polluted with all manner of iniquity, and therefore I cannot
be saved. I will not have thee allege these or the like excuses; thou have
examples of all sorts, thou may fly unto what haven thou will. If thou have
fainted in thy faith, look upon Peter: If thou have robbed thy neighbor,
consider the thief; if thou have been unchaste, look upon Marie Magdalene;
and so of the rest, who have fallen into the same sin that thou have, but yet
have not despaired of pardon, as thou do; and therefore coming with faith
and confidence in the merits of Christ Jesus, to the throne of his divine
mercy, have found more grace and mercy than they had reason, in respect of
their own sins, to look for. Be thou likewise by their example as confident
as they were, faint not, but by repentance turn unto God. If thou ask the same
mercy that they did, doubtless thou shall obtain the same mercy that they
did. Ask, and thou shall receive; seek, and thou shall find. The Lord
knows not how to deny it unto him that with an humble and contrite heart shall
beg it at his hands.

CHAP. IIII. That God denies not mer^^^ him that conuerteth, since (...)
inuiteth him that is auerted from him to conversion.
But thou will say, I consider with my self what a difference there is betwixt
God and me, and that I am deservedly excluded from his presence; and therefore
despairing to obtain mercy, and accounting my self unworthy to come unto
him, I dare not lift up mine eyes unto heaven. Res. God (my dear brother)
whose nature is goodness it self, is altogether mild and merciful, and more
prone to pity and compassion, than to revenge: he is rich in mercy, and
bountiful in grace. It is his property always to have mercy, and to
forgive, and therefore he cannot deny him mercy that with a co^trate heart
beggeth it at his hands. He despises no penitent sinner, but him that doubreth
whether he may ask; for no man has hoped in him and has be ene confounded:
No man in time has begged mercy, and has taken the repulse. If God did not
hear sinners, in vain had that Publican said; O Lord be merciful to me a
sinner. He that judges will be entreated not to punish sinners; he that
knows how much reason he has to be angry with us, looks that they that have
as much reason to entreat, should by prayers obtain mercy at his hands. He
will be pacified by entreaty, that knows how insupportable his anger is. He is
a witness to himself, that he desires to have mercy on those that call upon
him, in that he provoke us thereunto. Ps. 50.15.
Call upon me, says he, in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and
thou shak glorify me. And in another place; Math. 7.7.
Ask, and it shall be given unto you; Seek, and ye shall find; Knock, and
it shall be opened unto you. If our carnal parents, yea which are evil, can
give to their children good gifts, how much more shall your Father which is in
heaven, give good things to them that ask him? If thou doubt to come unto God
because of thy sins; be confident to come, because of that goodness which as
a father he owes to his son. Be bold with him in whose image thou see thy
self wonderful, in whose similitude surpassing excellent. What fear thou
his Majesty, who may gather confidence from thy original? The generous
alliance of the soul with God is not idle, and the similitude is a witness of
the ^lliance: Every like does willingly admit his like into society, and by
nature like will to like.

The Mediator betwixt God and man Christ Jesus, made man for men, shewe^
himself mild and merciful to men. And lest there should remain unto thee any
cause of despair, and to the (...) he might show unto the man, what hope thou
maie^ have with God; God wa^ made man, and thy aduocare thy Judge. He will not
deny himself to him that asks who of his own accord offered himself to him
that asked not; and he seeking shall find him, who gave the mean^ to find, to
him that sough^ not; and will open to him that knocks, that stands a the
door and incessantly knocks. The conversion (...) a sinner delights him,
and can thou converting despair of forgiveness? He desires more to pardon,
^han thou to be pardoned; to ^orgiue thy sins, than thou ^o forsake them, and
to re^ent thee of them. He is more willing to sane thee by his ^ercy, than thou
to perish ^y thy sins; thou would ^ie by sinning, but he will not ^hy
death, but still expects he to repentance. He stand^th with much love and
cha^itie at the door of thy heart, ^rying, Pro. 23.
My son give me ^hy heart; and he professes ^f himself; Apoc. 3.
If any man will ^pen unto me, I will come in unto him.

If a poor man having ^ighly offended his king, hall first be solicited by
his ^ing to peace and reconcilement, it is a great argument of his princely
benignity now since with great con^^dence a poor man should come unto God,
do tho^ fear to be converted unto him, that entreats thee to turn unto
him? and yet not only is not turned from those that turn unto him, but turns
to those that turn from him, and exhorts them to conversion. Eze. 18.31
Why will ye die, says the Lord, o house of Israel? return and come unto me,
Iere. 3.1.
and ye shall live. And i^ another place: If a man put away his wife, and she
go from him, and become another man's, shall he return again unto her? shall
she not be polluted? But thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet
turn again to me, says the Lord. He brings in the similitude of a woman
that has been untrue to her husband, and is put away by him, that he may tell
us how merciful he is, that he puts not us away. Thou have played the
harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me, says the Lord. See here, he
calls unto him that sinful soul, which before he pronounced polluted, to
receive it into the bosom of his pity which is always open, neither does he
contemn a spotted life.

What tongue is sufficient to express the inward compassion of so merciful a
God? What heart is not astonished at the riches of so unspeakable mercy? He
is despised, and yet expects; sees himself to be contemned, yet cease not
to call. He has a long time stayed the sentence of revenge from him that
contemns, that at one time or other he may offer his grace of remission to
him that repents. The Lord deferreth his coming: if he would he had been
already come, but yet he puts off his coming, lest he should find that in
thee that he must punish. If he would thy damnation whilst thou were in thy
sins, he could have cast thy soul into hell: it is the mercy of the Lord
that thou art not consumed. For whereas thou fear not God, and yet live,
thou ceasest not to sin, and yet prosperest; what is it else but that the
merciful God is willing by long expectation to correct thee, whom by seeing
thy sin, he will not instantly destroy? whose goodness that it may overcome
thy malice, and patience mollify the obstinacy of thy heart, like a good
mother, by flattery he allureth thee unto him, whom he can not recall by
threatenings; in that he draws not from thee his blessings, he suffers the
sun to shine upon thee, as well as upon others, and provides all things
necessary for thee, as well as for others. O the unspeakable mercy of God! we
sin and he spares, we offend and he pardons; we have offended him in many
things, he withdraws his blessings from us in nothing: whereby he shows
how good a God he is toward the just, who is so merciful toward sinners.

In the Gospel, even with tears he follows Jerusalem, which by her
pertinacy in sinning had procured her own damnation. How often, says he,
would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers her chickens
under her wings, and thou would not? Our merciful Father weepeth, that he
might not save those that were desperately wicked, and do thou doubt he
will not be merciful to thee, turning unto him? There are two arguments in him
of his natural goodness and clemency, his longanimitie in expecting, and his
facility in pardoning; because he both patiently expects sinners, and
lovingly receives penitent sinners: he both by his patience tolerateth the
sins of men, and by their repentance releaseth them, that they may return,
though late, and be ashamed that they should be expected. Whenever they are
converted, he forgets sins past, and he promises future amendment. Oh
the great patience of God! he spares contempts, pardons denials; he sees
thee to sin, and yet he suffers thee: first he forbids thee to sin,
and when thou have sinned, he attends thy repentance to pardon thee. If thy
servant should speak proudly unto thee, and turn his back toward thee, thou
would no doubt severely correct his contempt; but thou turnest thy back to
God, and he turns toward thee; thou fliest from him, and he follows after
thee; he sees that his pity and compassion is despised, and yet he yet
expects thee to pity thee, with all exhortation, bounty, inward inspiration.
Thou will not do the will of God for thine own good, thine own commodity,
how then should he hear thee in the day of thy tribulation praying unto him,
when thou refusest to hear him, entreating thee for thine own good? For how
often has God said unto thee; Turn unto me; and yet thou have not turned? If
he would not have mercy on thee, thou would entreat mercy at his hands, now
he would have mercy, and thou will not; he inuiteth thee to repentance, and
thou neglectest it. If thou fear not the justice of God revenging, at the
least blush at his goodness calling thee unto him; and thou that being
stricken could have suffered the punishment due unto thy sins, blush at
the least being expected; lest whom thou now see calm and peaceable, thou
be not able to behold angry and implacable. For whilst he sees those
remedies which he has ordained for thy salvation, turned to the increase of
thy sin, that love which he has conferred upon thee, he turns to thy
greater condemnation; that by so much the more he may punish, by how much the
more he has expected.

Wherefore (dear brother) whilst our merciful God forbeareth thee, whilst
he staieth his hand from revenge, beg his mercy, whose law thou have
contemned: It is lawful for him to ask pardon, to whom it was not lawful to
offend. Ask remission of thy sins by prayer, seek it with watching and
fasting; do what thou can, that thou may increase in well doing, and by
perseverance, thou shall receive what thou ask: that importunity is
pleasing to a merciful God, which is odious unto men. Let the remission of
sins be entreated with instant prayer, that that God whom thy sins has
made angry, thy dutiful service may pacify; and he that for thy sins was
offended with thee, by repentance may become loving and merciful unto thee.

CHAP. V. That a sinner being changed, God changes his sentence.
BUT thou will say, God is not as man is, that he should lie, Nu. 23.19.
nor as the son of man that he should be changed. And in the 18. of
Ezechiel, he says; The soul that sins shall die. This sentence of God is
immutable, because God can not be changed. Res. It is true (my dear brother)
that that soul that sins shall die, because by sin he deserves eternal
damnation: but repentance heals this death of the soul. Repentance restores
what sin detracteth; by this the life of grace is repaired, wherein the soul
departing, flies unto the life of glory; neither do forepassed sins more
hurt him, than forepassed diseases and wounds a sound man. Though this soul
have sinned, yet it shall not die, because by repentance that sin is blotted
out, by which it was obliged to eternal death. The cause ceasing, the effect
likewise cease, and God knows how to change his sentence if thou know how
to change thy life. If thou beleene not me, believe God: The wickedness of the
wicked shall not cause him to fall therein, Eze. 33.12
in the day that he returns from his wickedness. And in another place; Hier.
18.8.
If this nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I
will repent me of all the plagues that I thought to bring vpen them. God who
is immutable and impassible, can be affected with no change, no passion, and
yet he is said to change and to repent, not according to the verity of the
thing, but according to the manner and similitude of man. For as a man is said
to change and to repent, when he changes his counsel, and will not do that
evil, which he had purposed to do: So God is said to change and to repent,
when he brings not upon a man that evil which he threatened. Wherein he
changes not his counsel: for those things which he appointed from beginning,
do immutablie come to pass; but that thing which of it self is mutable, he
alters as it pleases him, as the goodness or wickedness of men require,
which argues no change in God, but in the will of man.

Hezekiah was sick unto death, 2. King. 20.1.
and the prophet Isaiah came unto him, and said; Thus says the Lord; Put thy
house in order, for thou shall die, and not live. Then he turned his face to
the wall, and prayed to the Lord, and wept sore: And before Isaiah was gone out
into the middle of the court, the word of the Lord came unto him saying: Turn
again, and tell Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord God of David thy father; I have
heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears: behold I have healed thee, and the
third day thou shall go up to the house of the Lord; And I will add unto thy
days fifteen years.

The Nineuites heard Jonah the Prophet threatening them; Jonah 3.
Yet forty days and Nineuy shall be overthrown: but the men of Nineuie fainted
not in their minds, but though they doubted whether the Lord would be
entreated, yet they did all fly to repentance as to the gate of salvation,
believed in the Lord, proclaimed a fast, and from the least to the greatest put
on sackcloth, and sat in ashes, saying, Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? And God saw
their works that they turned from their cuill ways, and he repented of the
evil that he had said that he would do unto them and he did it not. Hezekiah
by prayer and tears obtained of God that he recalled his sentence past. The
repentance of the Nineuites prevailed with God so much, that he revoked his
sentence touching the destruction of that city; and yet neither were they false
Prophets, who at what time they had deserved to die for their sins, foretold
it; but the great bounty of the mercy of God deferred their death and ruin at
that time, which before all worlds he had preordained.

If therefore these barbarous and heathenish people despaired not, and though
their sentence were past against them, yet fainted not in their hearts; why
do thou, wretch that thou art, despair? why faintest thou? Thou robbest GOD
of his mercy, without which kings are not kings, but tyrants. That sentence,
The soul that has sinned shall die, is to be understood of that soul which
has not repented of her sins; as is said of humane judgments, That if any
man has done this or that, he shall die the death; and yet always it is to be
understood, except the party condemned, by the kings mercy be pardoned. The
justice of God is not as the justice of man; in this, by how much the more a
guilty man confesses his fault, by so much the more punishment does he draw
upon himself; but in that of God, by how much the more a sinner accuses
himself, by so much the more does he find the mercy of God toward him: as
God repelleth him that defends his sins, so he receives him that
confesses them. If thou knew the power of repentance, thou would not
despair of the forgiveness of thy sins: our merciful God does gladly
forget that we are nocent, and he is always ready to esteem our repentance
as innocence; for if we repent us of our sins, we have already escaped the
rigor of a severe sentence. God imputes not unto us our former life, so we
repent us of it, but seeing our works changed, he gladly changes his sentence,
because he would the life of a sinner, not the death; neither does he take
pleasure in the perdition of souls, but his will is our sanctification. To
those that stand, if they fall, he threatens punishment, that fearing that,
they may not fall; but yet he promises mercy to those that fall, that
trusting thereon, they may rise again: those he terrifieth, lest they presume
in their goodness; these he comfort, lest they should despair in their
wickedness.

As a kind and loving mother threatens stripes to her beloved son, whom, if
acknowledging his fault, he beg mercy at her hands, her motherly love does
easily pardon; so likewise our merciful God, patient, of great mercy, though
he be justly angry with our sins, yet asking pardon, with much facility he
is pleased. Can a mother forget her child, Isa. 49.15
and have no compassion on the son of her womb? though she should forget,
yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord. A loving mother does greatly desire
the health of her sick son, but much more does God desire the salvation of a
sick soul. Though no humane goodness may be compared to the infinite goodness
of God, yet forasmuch as there can be no greater example found of affection in
the highest degree, than of a mothers toward her son; therefore the love of
God toward sinners is compared to a motherly affection. There is no man so
inflamed with the love of his spouse, as GOD with the love of thy soul.

Greater love than this has no man, Ioh. 15.13
when any man bestows his life for his friends. Christ if thou had been
alone, he had suffered and died for thee, before he would have suffered thy
soul to have fallen into the jaws of the devil: For, for whom died he? For
the just? Ask Paul: Christ (says he) died for sinners. If there had been no
sin in the world, Christ had not shed his blood: for what necessity had
there been that God should shed his blood, but to redeem both thine and the
sins of the whole world? The least drop of his precious blood did
abundantly suffice for the redemption of all mankind; but yet to the end he
might express his great love toward us, he powered out his whole blood for us:
he spoke many things, he did many things, he suffered many things to redeem
us, though those whom he created with his only word, he could likewise have
repared with his only word. He took upon him our death, that he might give us
life; he gave life unto us, he received death from us, and yet not for his
own desert, but for us. He came into the land of our perigrination to take
upon him what here abounded: reproaches, scourgings, blows, spittings in the
face, contumelies, a crown of thorns, the cross and death; these abound in
our country: to these and the like merchandise he came. What gave he here,
for that he here received? He gave exhortation, doctrine, remission of sins;
he brought unto us from that country many good things, and in ours he endured
many evil. So much his love prevailed, that he would be with us where we were,
and where he is, we shall be with him. Where I am, Ioh. 12.26
says he, there shall also my servant be. What does God promise unto thee a
man? That thou shall live with him for ever: and do thou not believe it?
Believe, believe, it is more that he has done, than that he has promised: It
is more incredible that a dead man should be eternal, than that a mortal man
should live for ever. Thou art to live with him for ever, for whose sake he is
dead that lives for ever: Secure thy self that thou shall receive his life,
whose death thou have for an earnest penny. And therefore says S. Paul; Romans
5.10
If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to GOD, by the death of his
Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. It is a
greater thing to die for sin, than to take away sin. To the reparation of the
celestial mansions, not to eternal damnation has the Lord created and
redeemed thee: For if he had desired thy damnation, when thou sinnedst, he
had cast thee into hell.

Hereby thou may gather that he delights more in thy reparation, than thy
damnation: that there is greater joy with him and his Angels for one sinner
that conuerteth, Luke 15.7.
than for ninety and nine just men, that need no amendment of life. Which the
Lord himself has proved by a threefold example; of the lost sheep, which
being found, the shepherd with joy laid upon his shoulders, and brought him to
his fold; of the lost groat, which being found, she calls her friends and
neighbors saying; Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which was lost;
and of the prodigal child, for whom, being returned to his father, the fat
calfe was killed, which was not done for that son which continued with his
father. By how much the more we are sorry for a thing lost, by so much the more
do we rejoice when it is found: and therefore there is more joy in heaven for
a sinner that repents, than for a just man that needs no amendment. For a
repentance inflamed with love after sin is more acceptable unto God, than an
innocence dull and careless with security, by grace: As a captain in the
wars loves more that soldier, that after his flight returns, and valiantly
encountreth his enemy, than him that did never fly, and never performed any
valorous exploit: A husbandman loves more that ground, that after the thorns
and brambles be dug up, yeeldes a plentiful increase, than that ground
which never had thorns, and never gave any increase. If therefore thy tears
upon earth be so great a joy to God and his Angels, how great a joy shall thy
pleasures in heaven be to them? This is the meat they feed upon, the fruits
they are delighted with, if by a true contrition of heart thou mortify thy
sins, and by a true and unfeigned repentance turn unto God.

Wherefore (dear brother) though thou think thy self condemned by Gods
justice, appeal unto his mercy; for it sometimes comes to pass, that whom
justice accuses, mercy absolueth, and that punishment which the Lord may
justly inflict, he does mercifully pardon. For those whom God freely created
and redeemed, he will not willingly oppress; and therefore if thou repent thee
of thy sin, he repents him of his sentence: The unchangeable God will
change his sentence, if thou change thy life: So shall thou conquer the
invincible, bind the omnipotent, and a fearful Judge thou shall change into
a merciful father.

CHAP. VI. That even at the point of death repentance may be profitable to
salvation.
BUT perhaps thou will say, I come too late, I have spent my whole life in
sin; I am now at the brinke of death, and therefore it is too late, at my
last hour to turn unto God. Res. Thou art a young man (my dear brother) in
the strength of thy years, thou may yet live many a year, and have time
enough to repent. But yet because there is no man be he never so young, that
can ass^redly promise to himself to live till night; and a sudden death may
every hour of the day overtake thee, wherein despairing thou may object
this unto me; therefore I have thought good to satisfy this objection, though
thou had never objected it.

Whilst thou live, whilst thou yet breathest, yea when thou lie in thy
bed, at the point of death, thou may repent, yea and then especially, there
is yet hope of mercy, time of forgiveness, place of repentance. God witnesses
of himself, Eze. 33.
that at what hour soever a sinner repents him of his sins, he will blot
out all his wickedness out of his remembrance. He that has said, he will put
out all his wickedness out of his remembrance, has excepted no kind of
sin. Though thou want time to confess thy sins unto God, yet in a moment,
even in the twinkling of an cie, he can have time to pardon all thy sins.
Thy will is accounted for thy work, and the gronings of thy heart for thy
words. If therefore at the hour of death thou cease to be wicked, by
repentance thou need not despair of pardon, because thou art near thine
end. For God whoconsidereth the end of all men, judges every man according to
his end, not his former life; neither does he respect so much, what we have
been heretofore, as what we are at the end of our life. It is no matter how
long, but how well a man lives; neither does the quantity of the crime, nor
the enormitie of a man's life, nor the breuity of the time, nor the extremity of
the hour, exclude a man from pardon, if repentance in the end be true and
perfect. The great and manifold mercy of God is neither limited by time, nor
equalled by our great and manifold offenses. He that truly repents, and is
loosed from that band of sin wherewith he was tied, and lives well after
his repentance, whenever he dies he may secure himself he goes to God; he
shall not be deprived the kingdom of God, he shall not be separated from the
people of God. Matt. 20.
For as they that went into the Vineyard to labor at the eleventh hour of the
day received a penny for their hire as well as they that began their labor the
first hour and did bear the burden and heat of the day; so not only to
those that from their childehood do bear the yoke of the Lord is the reward
promised, but to the last too, who in the end of their life turn unto God, is
the earnest penny of eternal life given.

The innumerable sins of the Nineuites a short repentance wiped away, and the
Publican went presently out of the Temple justified. Marie Magdalen was so
great a sinner, that the Pharisey disdained to see her, and yet in a short time
she was justified, and cleansed from all her sins. The thief hung upon the
Cross, and being instantly to die, despaired not of salvation; he confessed
the Lord upon the Cross, and even with the words of his confession he ended
his life, and yet the Lord possessed him of Paradise before Peter; and lest any
man should think repentance too late, he turned the punishment of murder
into a martyrdom. It is true that his repentance was late, but yet his pardon
came not too late: he made speed in turning unto God, and God was as speedy in
pardoning. These show thee the fruit of repentance, the fountain of mercy, the
celeritie thereof: for they began late to repent and to do good, and yet by
doing it truly, of the last they are made the first, and far excelled those
who being sooner were more slow in their proceedings. And therefore fear not
but that it is likewise as possible for thee to outrun the first, and to be
before them in the kingdom of heaven.

Though thou forsake not thy sins, till thy sins be ready to forsake thee,
yet if thou then repent, despair not of mercy; for though thy conversion be
short and momentarie, yet it shall not be unprofitable. But as he that gives
a cup of cold water loses not his reward; Matt. 10.
so notwithstanding thy repentance be no way answerable to the weight of thy
sins, yet that moment of repentance, be it never so small, shall not want
reward.

No man can make any satisfaction unto God, answerable either to his
greatness, or to those sins he has committed against him. Sin deserves a
greater sorrow and contrition of heart, than to be lamented even of those that
truly repent; for an infinite offense against God requires an infinite
reconciliation: but yet forasmuch as the finite capacity of man's wit is not
capable of that which is infinite; therefore our righteousness not sufficing,
the passion of Christ supplieth it, which abundantly satisfies for the sins of
the whole world. God for our sins requires no other price, than the precious
blood of his only begotten son: for there is no sin so deadly, but by his
death is forgotten and forgiven. 1. Ioh. 2.
Christ himself is the propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours,
but for the sins of the whole world: for as if some poor and wretched
creature being afflicted with a grievous disease should be advised by his
Physician to take such physic for his recovery as were beyond his ability
to reach unto, and he shall answer the Physician that he is not able by reason
of his poverty to buy it, whereupon the Physician out of the goodness of his
nature shall reply, saying, Do thou what thou can, and I will supply the
rest; even so our merciful GOD (who much desires the salvation of thy soul)
requires of thee nothing but what thou may do, and yet may not do
neither without his gracious assistance, the rest out of his goodness he
supplieth, and being easily pleased and contented with a little at thy hands,
he pardons both the sin and the punishment of thy sins. He gives that,
that thou shall give unto him, and is pleased with that which he gives thee;
for his unspeakable mercy toward us, he only requires this at our hands, To
do that which by his assistance lies in us to perform.

There is a man of high and eminent honor, whom though according to his worth
thou can not honor, though thou spend all that thou have; yet thou offendest
not, if thou honor him according to thine own ability, if thou do what thou
can, not what he deserves: So our Lord God, because he is infinitely good,
deserves an infinite love and reconciliation, but yet he willingly receives
the least that we can do, because he knows our inabilitie, and therefore
refuses not the least repentance that may be, that proceeds out of an humble
and contrite heart. For if he should not have respect of our weakness, we
could never satisfy him for the least of our sins. But he (as the Psalmist
speaks) is merciful and forgiueth sinners, Ps. 78.38.
and destroieth them not, but often times calls back his anger, and does
not stir up all his wrath, for he remembers that they are but flesh. But
where mercy is, there judgment is not rigorous; where mercy is granted,
there punishment is pardoned.

Wherefore (dea^^ brother) though thou be at the point of death, lose not thy
hope of salvation; so long as thou see this light, thou have time to repent,
and afterward too; but when thou art departed this life, and art condemned by
the irreuocable sentence of God, it will be too late to repent. It is true that
thou will repent in hell, but there it will not help, for in hell there is no
redemption.

CHAP. VII. Of the joys of Heaven.
But because hope (which is contrary to despair) is a certain expectation of
future blessedness, proceeding from the grace and mercy of God; and this
virtue (my dear brother) thou want, without which thou can not be saved;
it remains that I confirm this hope in thee, and stir up thy mind to the
desire of the ioies of heaven, that if thou turn not unto God for fear of
punishment, yet at the least, thou do it, in an assured expectation of so
great a reward.

Our good and gracious God, out of his only goodness, not constrained by
necessity, would that others should be partakers of that blessedness
wherewith he is eternally blessed in himself; which he saw might likewise be
communicated to others, and yet in nothing di^^^ shed. He created therefore in
the beginning of the world, that tenth heaven ^^moueable, and of exceeding
brightness and glory, which so soon as he had created, he replenished with
Angels. And as the beauty of an house is a solace and delight to the
inhabitants; so the glory and riches of heaven increase much the joy of the
blessed. If the glory and ornament of the earth and firmament be such, that of
Paradise can not but be far more great; for because God created it for his
friends, he gave it a greater beauty than to other things. There is a
continual light and splendour, not such as is here, but so much greater than
this, as the light of the Sun exceeds that of a candle. There is not the
Sun to shine by day, but the Sun of righteousness, who shines for ever,
full of all sweetness, a sweet light, delightful to our eyes, to see the Son
of righteousness both God and man, the Creator of mankind.

Of this blessed estate of the Saints of God in heaven, I had rather not
speak, than derogate from the unspeakable excellency thereof by speaking too
little. The eye has not seen, the care has not heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man, what God has prepared for those that love him. What can
a man say more to commend that, which he knows not how to commend
sufficiently? Yet give me leave, by the shadow to judge of the substance, and
by that happiness we enjoy upon earth, to guess at that we shall enjoy in
heaven.

Because such as are condemned have need of a strait prison; Bar. 3.24.
and kings of a large palace; therefore great is the house of God, and large is
the place of his possession. It is great and has none end; it is high and
unmeasurable. The kingdom of God exceeds all report, all praise. For there
is all good and no evil; there nothing that is beloved is wanting, and
whatsoever can be desired is present. I can more easily express what is not
there, than what there is. There is no death, no disease, no weariness, no
mourning; there is no hunger, no want, no adversity, no enticement to sin.
There is life without death, rest without labor; unspeakable joy without
sorrow; charity without discord; security without care; beauty without
deformity. How happy is that city, wherein there is everlasting solemnity,
and how pleasant a court that knows no care? Here is neither labor, nor old
age, nor deceit, nor fear of enemies, but one voice of reioicing, one
agreement and feruencie of hearts, because God shall wipe away al tears from
their eyes and sorrow from their hearts. There verity reigns; eternal
salvation abounds; there no man deceiues, nor is deceived; none that is
blessed cast out; none that is accursed admitted. There is assured security,
secure peace; peaceable delight; delightful happiness; happy eternity in that
blessedly eternal, and eternally blessed life. There the essential reward
(which belongs to the essence of blessedness, and without which the soul can
not be truly blessed) consists in the clear sight and presence of God, The
sight or presence of God, the first gift or grace of the soul.
and this is the reward of faith; because those things that are here believed
b^ faith, are there seen in the^ true form and likeness. But both these are
the gift of the inward man; because God whilst we are in the way, is known
of us in spirit, as it were in a glass, obscurely, but in heaven our true
home, he is seen face to face, not with corporal cies, but spiritual; as
the Prophets being absent in body, saw many things done in the spirit, and by
dreams, sleeping, knew many things by the spirit, though their outward senses
were bound. And as in a glass we see only the image of the thing, and that
imperfectly; so whilst we here know, as it were by a similitude, the
invisible things of God, by those things that are made, we come to the
knowledge of God, as it were by a glass and obscurely; but there
directly-looking one upon another, we shall see God clearly and nakedly, even
face to face; one in substance, three in the difference of persons. As many as
are there, shall together see the whole essence of God, bet forasmuch as by
reason of his infinitenes, he cannot totally be comprehended, therefore he
shall not be equally seen of all, but by a spiritual vision of one more darkly
than of another; according to that measure wherewith every one shall be more
or less enlightened with the light of glory. For as the material sun (which
equally offers it self to the eyes of all) is not seen without the emission
of the light, or beam thereof into the eye of a man, and yet all do not alike
see it, and look upon it, but diueisly, more or less, according to the diverse
disposition of the eye to see: so the eye of the mind being weak, is not
capable of that excellent light of God, except it be strengthened of God, by a
created and infused light of glory; as it is written: In thy light shall we
see light. The light of the divine substance is seen in the light of glory;
whereby the natural light of the understanding, and the spiritual eye is
elevated more or less to the knowledge of God, according to that great or
less faith and charity whereby it is carried unto him. The face therefore and
form of God shall be seen more clearly by one, than by another, as one and
the same thing is better seen from far, by one than by another, and one and
the same writing being read by diverse, is diversely understood; which
diversity proceeds not from the thing or wr^ting, but the diverse disposition
of the seer and the reader.

And because God is every where present by essence, therefore he shall not
there be seen by distance, but whersoeuer the soul is, there shall it see God
present with it. It shall see God in it self, and it self in God; God in
others, and others in God. By an unspeakable means shall it depart from it
self, and be turned wholly into the similitude of God. Otherwise, how shall
God be in all, if in man there remain any thing of man? 1. Cor. 15.
The substance of man shall continue, but in another form, another glory. For
as a small quantity of water powered into a great deal of wine, loses it own
nature, and is turned into the taste and color of the wine; as burning iron
changes his proper form, and is made like unto fire; as the air being
inflamed by the beams of the Sun, is transformed into the same cleerenesse
of light, insomuch as that it seems not to be enlightened, but light it self;
and as a looking glass directly stricken with the beams of the sun,
receives into it self the similitude of the sun, insomuch that a man may
think it another sun: so the saints of God in heaven are totally penetrated
with the clear light of God in their inward parts, and so being deiformed are
transformed into the similitude of God. So to be affected is to be deified,
as it is written; Psalm. 82.
I have said ye are Gods; that is, by participation, for there is one only
God by essence. You are deified by him, he deifying you. And in another place;
1. Job. 32
When he shall appear, we shall, be like unto him, for we shall see him as he
is.

And as looking in a glass a man sees himself, and many things besides there
present, and about him; so the blessed seeing God, together and at once, with
one and the same vision see themselves and whatsoever is necessary to the
perfection of their happiness. They see that their sins are forgiven them,
not to their confusion, but to glorify the great mercy of God, whereby whilst
they rejoice for their delivery from so great a misery, they always magnify
his holy name. For how should they give thanks unto God, if they should not
remember why they are to do it? If there be there so great comfort for sins
forgiven, how great is there for good works done? Though every man's conscience
lie open to one another; yet there is no man there more ashamed of his sins,
than he is here of his wounds that are healed; or than an old man, of those
things he did in his infancy: as Peter is no way abashed at his triple
denial, nor Mary Magdalene and diverse others at their sins formerly
committed, now pardoned.

Touching their knowledge, if the Prophers as yet mortal men could know many
things past, present and to come, how much more can God, who is a voluntary
and free looking glass, represent whatsoever, to whomsoever; and whenever?
and therefore an old doting decrepid woman in that glory knows more than all
the Philosophers in the world can know in this life. There they know by what
means the father begot the son equal unto him, and that from both the holy
Ghost proceeded coequall unto both. What do not they know, that know him that
knows all things? They have always liberty to behold God, always to have
him, always to possess him; always to see with a pure intention of the mind
the beauty of his glory, and the honor of his regal power. They behold him
without weariness; they enjoy him without tediousnosse, and ever thirst to
enjoy him. By so much the more he is desired by those that possess him, by
how much the more he is possessed by those that desire him; By the abundant
fullness of his unspeakable goodness they are satisfied, and with a continual
desire of his fruition they are never sat is fied. There is sacietie and hunger
together; that takes away want, this loathsome weariness. A thousand years in
the fruition of God are as yesterday that is past. God is so delightful to be
seen, so sweet to be possessed, and so pleasant to be enjoyed, that his
continual presence brings no tediousness with it, Secure f^uition the
second gift of the soul.
but rather sorasmuch as the blessed are for ever secure thereof, it is an
addition to their happiness. The blessed fruition of God without end,
continual delight without interruption, eternal possession without amission,
and secure temptation without doubt of hope, follow one another: because the
blessed enjoy that, which sometimes they did hope to enjoy, then at the last
are their desires satisfied, whilst the glory of God appears unto them. God
who is the end of all desires, can only satisfy their hearts; without him
nothing is sought for, because in him there is whatsoever can be desired.
Being made companions with angels, and partakers of the kingdom of heaven,
they reign with their king Christ, and desiring nothing, possess all things;
without covetousness they are rich, and without money in plentiful abundance.
If the tears of the penitent be sweeter in this life, than all the delicates
of the rich: and if here it be so pleasant a thing to weep for it, how
pleasant think thou it is to rejoice with it? If the least taste of the
joys of heaven in this life, be so delightful, how great a measure of
perfect joy and delight have the blessed in heaven, where with a full mouth, as
it were, they taste and see how sweet the Lord is? They fear not to lose the
fruition of so great a good, otherwise they should not be truly blessed: The
joys of that eternal city are eternal, where they are secure of that glory
that never withers. which neither varieth, nor shall slide away, because they
shall enjoy an immutable peace. None stronger than themselves can assail them,
to cast them from thence; neither will God, who is their chiefest good,
withdraw himself from them, for he loves them with a more indissoluble band
of love, than they love themselves, and they love God more than themselves.

And as it is one thing to see a thing, Charity the third gife of the soul.
another to possess it, another to love it; because we see many things, which
we possess not, and possess many which we love not: so there are three
distinct gifts, three rewards, and three glories; The clear light and fruition
of God which succeeds faith; secure fruition which succeeds hope; and
perfect charity which never falls away, because it continues even in
heaven. Now the thing it self, not which is believed and hoped, but which is
seen and possessed, follows faith and hope; but charity (which is greater
than they) does never decay, but is perfect and increases, having attained
what it hoped. If believing and hoping we love that so much, which as yet we
see not, and to which we have not yet attained, how much more shall we love
it, when we shall see it, and possess it? In that fullness of love, that
commandment of loving God, with all our heart, with all our soul, and with
all our mind shall be fulfilled, whilst the whole man, no way entangled with
carnal concupiscence as he is now, shall wholly and incessantly be carried
unto God; whilst with a kind of unspeakable sweetness the blessed shall love
God more than themselves, and one another as themselves.

In all, there shall be one and the same will, because there, there shall be no
other but the will of GOD. They will that which God wills, and not that which
he will not; and as God can do what he will by himself, so whatsoever they
will they can do by God. As many as are there, are one Church, one spouse of
Christ, and one body. How then shall the head be at variance with the body,
or the body with the head? As one eye can not be turned, but the other must
turn with it; so whatsoever one wills, to that do all other wills consent.
And as the eye would not be the hand, nor the hand the eye; so though there be
a difference in their glory, yet every one is sati^fied with that he has, and
being perfect in their joy and glory, are capable of no more than they (...).
And therefore no infe^^^^ enuieth his superior, as the angels envy not the
archangels; there is no envy by reason of inequality in glory, where the
unity of charity ever reigns; because all love all others as themselves,
the good of every one by charity is made the good of all, and every one, what
in himself he has not, he rejoices to have received in another. How great
then think thou the joy is, in that perfect charity of innumerable angels
and men? because no man loves another less than himself, and reioiceth no
otherwise for all, than for himself. Doubtless if any other whom thou love
as thy self, should enjoy that reward of happiness that thou do, thy joy
would be doubled, because thou reioicest no less for him, than for thy self;
but if two or three or more should possess the same joy with thee, how do
thou think thy heart which is scarce capable of thine own joy, should be
capable of so many? How many then and how great ioies has every Saint in
heaven, who ioieth more in the glory of God, than in his own; and of every one
whom he loves not less than himself, he ioieth not less than of his own
glory? If the capacity of a creature were capable of what is infinite, the eye
of every particular person would be infinite; and nevertheless it is
immeasurable, unspeakable and incomprehensible, according to the capacity of
every particular soul. The joy it has above it self is the fruition of God,
beneath it self the evasion of hell, within it self glorification and
blessedness. The number of the blessed diminishes not that inheritance,
whereof they are coheires, nor in any thing makes it the less. It is as much
to many as to few, as much to every particular person as to all; because it
is one and the same to all, and all to every one; yea and by so much the
greater it is, by how much greater the number is of coheires. There our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus, according to his deity whereby he is God, siteth at
the right hand of his father, in glory coequall, in like majesty, in essence
consubstantiall, in the self same eternity. There are innumerable multitudes
of all sorts of people, and tribes, and languages, who all, at all times praise
the Lord, his praise is always in their mouth, never ceasing to cry out,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of host. There are sung his everlasting praises upon
the Violl and the Harp. Psalm. 150.
And in that eternal blessedness, which is a perfect state by by the
aggregation of all good whatsoever, all happiness is perfect and simple, not
mixed with their contraries. Whereby so great is the felicity, joy, and
pleasure, as if thou might be permitted to stay there but one day, thou
would presently contemn all the delights of this life. All sweetness
compared to that is bitterness; all mirth mourning; all beauty deformity;
and whatsoever may any way delight, molestation and anguish. There is there as
great pleasure and facility in obeying God, as there is felicity in living
and reigning with him.

But yet the blessedness of the saints of God, and their glory cannot be
perfect, their joy complete, being always urged with a natural desire of the
resurrection, and the glorification of their bodies. For their happiness can
not be entire and perfect, before the number of their fellow servants, and
brethren be complete. Before the resurrection they all receive their garments
of glory, because as yet they enjoy the blessedness of their fowls only, but
after the resurrection they are adorned with another, the incorruption of their
bodies. At that time their bliss shall be doubled, when with the felicity and
rest of their souls they shall arise to the immortality and glory of their
bodies.

The bodies of the blessed are here sown, Impassibilitie the first gift of
the body. 1. Cor. 15.
and by nature begotten in corruption, but they shall rise in incorruption,
because they are incorruptible, impassible, and immortal. All fragilitie and
earthly pollution shall vanish away, and be turned into celestial purity and
stabilitie: for there can be no evil with GOD, who is the chiefest good; and
therefore though they were in hell, they can take no hurt; no more than
Sidrach, Dan. 3.
Mishach and Abednego in the burning furnace.

They are sown in weakness, Subtilty the second gift.
they shall rise in power, because they are subtle, penetrable, and able to
overthrow whatsoever they will: By glory the grossness of their bodies shall
be so taken away, that no obstacle can hinder them, but that they may freely
penetrate any thing, as the beams of the Sun pass through a glasen window.
An example whereof there is in the body of Christ, who rose, the sepulcher
being shut, went in unto his disciples the gates being fast locked, and did
penetrate the heavens no way dividing them. And as the soul is now with the
body, and hot burning fire with iron, so a glorious body may be with an
inglorious. Such shall be the subtlety of spiritual bodies, that
nevertheless the truth of flesh and bone is reserved in them, and that which
subsisteth of a living spirit, cease not to be a body. Because they shall be
true bodies, not vain or fantastical; they may be touched, and make
resistance against that which touches, or made none, because they can
penetrate by the subtlety of their spiritual power the organe or instrument
of feeling. As the soul shall there have her inward senses, so the body shall
have his outward, the sight shall be delighted with the contemplation of the
humanity of Christ, the ear with the melody of the praises of God: In God
the soul shall be inebriated with such delight inwardly, as it shall not need
any other delight in the outward senses. For God shall be all in all, he shall
be a looking glass to the sight, a harp to the hearing, Honey to the taste,
Balsum to the smell, a delectable flower to the touch. Agility the third gift.


They are sowed earthly bodies, because heavy and slow to execute the desires
of the soul, they shall rise spiritual: not because they are turned into
spirit, air, or wind (for a spirit has neither flesh nor bone) but because
like spirits they are, Luke 14.
quick, light, and swift, inclining no more downward than upward. The flesh
serving the spirit, is said to be spiritual, because by an excellent
facility of obeying it is subject to the spirit, for whether soever the spirit
flies, there is presently the body also. As Soon as the Sun rising with the
beams thereof enlightneth the Western part of the world, and the eye looking
upward sees the stars: as speedily as angels move themselves without a
body, so speedily can the soul move her body from heaven to earth, and from
earth to heaven. In which motion it is not wearied; and because it is subtle,
by the resistance of the medium it is no way slowed. Yea whatsoever it will, it
can move and overthrow, and that with as little labor and endeavor, as a man
moves his eye. Whersoeuer it is, it is always alike happy, because it has
God always present. This so great agilitie shall be acceptable and pleasant,
not because it is necessary, or that it has it because it has any need of
it, but only for the greater increase of glory; as we use not all those
perfections that we have, and rejoice to have.

How great O Lord is the multitude of those joys thou have prepared for those
that fear thee! Oh how much do thou love us, who reseruest us miserable and
wretched sinners to so great glory! Glorious things are spoken of thee, o city
of God; and therefore it shall be more possible for me to number the stars
in the firmament, and to enclose the whole sea in a little vessel, than to
express the least part of the blessedness of one soul. The joys thereof are
such, and so great, that all the Arithmeticians of the world can not number it,
the Geometricians measure it, the Rhetoricians with their tongues express it.
It does not only exceed the power of our eloquence, but the capacity of our
intelligence. Our thought can conceive it greater than our tongue utter it, and
yet it is greater than we can conceive, and whatsoever we think thereof, is
less than it is, because the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for those
that love him. Faith apprehends it not, Hope attaines it not, Charity
comprehends it not, because it far exceeds all our vows, all our desires.
It may be obtained, estimated it can not, for there is more to be gotten, than
Faith could believe. Hope look after. The rewards of GOD are greater than the
desires of his saints: for so great is the sweetness of that heavenly
country, as that if a drop thereof should descend into hell, it would
sweeten all the sorrows of the damned: and if God could be seen by the damned
in hell, hell were a Paradise. By this it evidently appears what and how
great a good God is, since it can be well with none that depart from him. Let
us return at the last unto our selves, and descending as it were from heaven,
let us look a little upon what is our own. Do we think we shall go into
the house of the Lord? What are we, that we should go thither? Mortal and
abject creatures, earth and ashes. But yet he that has promised is our father,
and is omnipotent. Can not he make an angel of a man, who made a man of the
earth? By life we are men, by hope angels, to whom in our country we shall be
like and equal. A merchant when he buys a thing and takes assurance for it,
though as yet he have not his wares, yet he secures himself he shall have
them. God the Father has promised unto us his glory, and for an earnest
penny, in the mean time, he has given us his only Son, in the Sacrament of
his body and blood, and has inspired into our hearts his holy Spirit. There
with an open face we shall see him, with greater joy and more securely, whom
here we see mystically, yet fruitfully in his Sacrament. Despair not
therefore to come to this place, and expect the promise of thine inheritance.

Hope is necessary for a wandering pilgrim, it is that that comforts him in
the way; for a traveler that laboreth in his journey is therefore content with
patience to bear his labor, because at last he hopes to come to the end
thereof: take away his hope of the end, and his strength fails him, he is
presently weary with going. A Physician draws forth his instrument to lance a
wound, and he says to his Patient, Be patient and bear a little: in the pain
he requires patience, but after the pain he promises health: but the sick
body, except he proposed unto him hope of recovery, he would faint in that
pain which he endures. In the wars the hope of honor mitigateth the grief
of the wounds: so to those that bear the yoke of Christ, the hope of glory is
a great comfort, raises the mind unto God, and that evil which they
outwardly bear, inwardly they feel not.

Hope brings no small pleasure, when that which was hoped is once attained.
Temporal things not had, afflict; when they are had, seem base and
contemptible. Thou love thy wife not yet married, whom perhaps thou hate
when thou have her. What is the reason thereof? Because she appears not such
being married, as thou did conceit her to be before thou had married her. But
God who is beloved being absent, grows not more base being present; the
fruition finds more in him, than the cogitation could form or imagine of him.
We shall love God more when we shall see him, if we can love him before we see
him: he is more fervently beloved being gotten, than desired. Except he be
first loved, he can not afterward be possessed; and yet he is not therefore
possessed because he is beloved, because it is necessary and our duty, that
above all things he be beloved. Vanity of vanities and all is vanity; how
great a misery is it to lose the Creator for the creature, to follow the
shipwreck of this world, and not rather fly to the Sanctuary of God, and to
taste how sweet the Lord is, and how great the multitude of his mercies? If
thou would consider what and how great things are promised thee in heaven,
all things thou enioiest upon earth would seem base and contemptible.

What then is the reason (dear brother) that thou runnest not unto heaven?
where thou shall see God without end, possess him without loss, love him
without loathing. Many of thy parents, brethren, sisters, and friends expect
thee there, millions of saints desire thy company, now se^^^ed of their own
happiness, and careful of thine. Of whose company lest thou should be
deceived, thou must use thy best endeavor: it is no difficult matter if thou will, not burdensome if thou attend it. Only repent, and the kingdom of
heaven is at hand: To which he bring us that lives and reigns without end.
Amen.

By that which has been spoken, The Conclusion of the sixth part.
thou plainly see (my dear brother) how good and merciful God is* and how
ready to pardon sins. The riches of whose goodness the (...) considering
calls him not only a merciful God, but mercy it self. Thou God have taken me
up, thou art a merciful God, nay mercy it self. Consider the bosom of his
divine goodness, how open the lap of his mercy is, and despair not, cast not
down thy self, faint not with mourning; the gate of mercy and the treasury of
his goodness is set wide open unto thee, and will thou fall into the bottomless
pit of despair? God inuiteth thee to repentance, he offers forgiveness, he
puts forth the right hand of his help, and do thou turn thy face from
him? Heaven is set wide open unto thee, and will thou descend into the pit of
hell? The devil knowing how excellent a thing repentance is, has tempted thee
to this despair, has taken from thee thy hope, which is the foundation and
anchor of thy salvation, and the conductor of our journey unto God. If
therefore thou desire to escape the snares of the devil, and by hope to take
hold of the mercies of God, only depart from evil and do good: for the first
step to salvation is to decline from evil, the second to hope for pardon.

Which hope of Gods mercy is not sufficient to save thee, without the fear of
his justice, for in vain shall thou hope in his mercy, except thou likewise
fear his justice. For God who is merciful, is likewise just, and therefore
considering how merciful he is, despair not; considering how just, neglect
not thy sins. There is no securer way, than under hope to fear, and to join
those two together: lest perhaps an unwary mind may deiect it self by
despair, or fall by presumption. It is to be feared lest thou fall into another
bottomless pit, and thou die by presuming of the mercy of God, that could
not die by despairing of it; and thou have in thy heart cogitations diverse from
the former, but not less dangerous; and so thou beginnest in thy heart to say:
At what hour soever I shall repent, God will put out all my wickedness out of
his remembrance, and therefore why should I rather convert to day than to
morrow? But (my dear brother) what if thine end be before to morrow? For he
that promises unto thee so much mercy if thou repent, promises not to morrow,
if thou persist in thy sins. It is to be feared lest whilst conversion is
put off to the end, an unexpected death may rather prevent, then repentance
help. Lest therefore by hoping thou should increase thy sin, the day of
thy death is uncertain; and lest by despair thou should increase it, there
is offered unto thee the haven of repentance. Which notwithstanding that in the
(...) of thy days it be good, yet that is better, that is before thy end, and
a much more assured way to attain unto heaven, where we shall see God without
end, love him and praise his holy name for ever and ever. Amen.

The conclusion of this exhortation to repentance.
WIth the help and assistance of God, I have at the last, according to that
little measure of knowledge that is in me (my dear brother) ansvvered thy
objections. Now it is time to grow to an end, and to conclude these labors,
if I shall first admonish thee (when these exhortations which were written
for thy good, shall come into the hands of many, that shall be bettered by
them) not to suffer them to die in thee, and to do thy self no good. For as it
is a dangerous thing unto the body, not to be able to receive corporal
sustenance, so is it more dangerous to the soul to loath spiritual delicacies.

I know and am well assured, that when this my exhortatory Epistle shall come
unto thy hands, thou vvilt call thy friends together and show it unto them,
and of them take counsel what thou shall do; who vvhilest they love not
thee, but that which is thine, vvil speak nothing that may offend, but
flatter thee, which thou may the rather think, because their former
counsels, even in thine own judgment, have corrupted thee; who to the end
they may withdraw thee from that good counsel I give thee, to follovv
theirs, they will perhaps say unto thee, I see a mote in thine eye, but cannot
see the beam in mine own; that I dispraise thee, being to be commended, and
praise my self being no way praise worthy; and that I go about to heal
others, being full of ulcers and corruption my self. I ingenuously and from my
heart confess (my dear brother) that those hands had need be clean, that
go about to cleanse others; and he had need to see the light, that will judge
of darkness; and such a one I am not, for I have pictured out a fair man,
being a foul painter, and I confess, I have not alvvaies so lived, as not to
have within me an accusing conscience. But yet I direct thee to the shore of
repentance vvhilest I flote in the sea of mine own sins; I am austere about
thy life, over gentle about mine own, whereas thou should rather hear
me, commanding thee what is easy, practicing that is hard, and difficult in
my self. Nevertheless he that has said. Do what they say, Mat. 23.
not what they do, does thereby forbid us to neglect the sound counsels of
the righteous. For as a good master by the service of a bad servant, may give
good a (...) so by me though impenitent, (...) merciful God may call thee to
repentance. But forasmuch as the authority of the speaker is lost, when the
voice is not assisted with the work it self, and that voice does more
pleasingly penetrate the hearts of men which the life commends, let me desire
all that shall either read or hear this short exhortation, and gather comfort
unto their souls out of these my labors, to pray unto God for me, and to beg
at his hands, that what I preach with my tongue, or write with my pen, I
may in deed perform, that vvhilest I endeavor to raise others, I may rise my
self from my sins to the glory o^ Gods holy name, and the salvation of mine
own soul, Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 10. lin. 17. guilty before thy Judge p. 97. l. 18. shall cease to
spoil. p. 185. l. 9 more glorious. p. 187. l. 3. ^e^enty times seu^ times. p.
189. l. 19 damned alone. p. 190. l. ^ in leaving it. p. 330. l. 6. of a sinner.
p. 45^ l. 17. from the beginning.


