A CONSVLTATION WHAT FAITH AND RELIG^^^ is best to be embraced.

WRITTEN IN LATIN By the R. Father Leonard Lessius, Professor in Divinity, of
the Society of JESUS. AND Translated into English by W. I.

IHS

blazon or coat of arms

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE ALDERMEN,
AND TO THE RIGHT WORTHY CITIZENS OF LONDON, The Translatour wishes all Health
and Happiness, Temporal and Eternal.

RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND RIGHT WORTHY.
I Was p^rswaded to present you with this Treatise translated by (...) into our
mother tongue, that has appeared far better (...) in ^^ow^yde it was first
invested, only through the love and respect I bear to your so we deserming
persons; whose special endeavors amidst your other sor^ous employments in that
famous City, should be, and I hope is, the attayning of such a traffike, that
may more redound to the profit of your Souls, then your temporal Estates:
since you know well that a sure and solid foundation of true Religion works
Eternal Salvation; and the contrary eternal woe and misery, though otherwise
one were never so fortunate in all worldly prosperity.

The work it self is but of some few hours reading, and the Author I hope
will not be distasteful unto you in respect of his person, though otherwise of
a different Profession and habit. And though I doubt not, but that many of your
have already seen other learned Books of like subject: yet because this
affoardeth so great variety of forcible Motives, both singularly chosen, and
most aptly expressed, to settle men's Consciences in so weighty an affayre as
this is; I have therefore thought good to present it to your View, though in a
more humble, and far less polished style, then so profitable a subject
deserves.

And heerunto I was the more encouraged by understanding the great fruit and
profit which many have all ready, and do daily reap by a diligent perusal of
this Book in other languages, hoping for no less in our own then it has
produced in the Latin, French, and Dutch; especially in men so zealous in that
Profession, which has by in these later times preached unto you: Which zeal
of yours would no doub^ be more fervent, if Gods Grace by other moth^es
proposed, should open your eyes to see the cleernes of the Catholic Verity.

Neither should it offend you, that (your Consciences having been settled* these
60. years last past in the Faith that was then proposed unto you) now a new
reuiew of matters belonging to Religion should be offered. For since the
Scripture does premonish us that Heresies must of necessity be, and false
Teachers would come to disturb the peace and unity of the Church (of which
sort, as is apparent by her contrary doctrines, this our unfortunate Age has
been most fertile:) it is doublesse no disgrace, or sign of leuity or
inconstancy by a diligent and judicious examen to try which of all these diverse
spirits is of God, and which is that Catholic Church so often commended unto
us in the Scriptures, as nothing more plainly and seriously.

In which important search the Reading of this little, but golden Treatise,
will by Gods grace affoard such light to discern Truth from Falsehood, and such
means to find out the true gate of Catholic faith which only leads to
salvation, as may satisfy the most Judicious; especially if they read with
that humblenes of spirit, as they ought to do, who desire to know the Truth.

In reading therefore, consider attentively every Passage, and ponder the weight
and substance of each Reason, not posting the same over, as many do, transpotted
with curiosity to read all new Books that come forth; and I doubt not you will
receive abundant satisfaction.

Read then (most worthy Citizens) the ensuing Consultation, with an
indifferent and impartial eye, that you may enrich your souls with the
treasure of true knowledge and doctrine which leads to eternal Life and
Happiness. Whereof I humbly beseech his divine Majesty to make you partakers, to
whom I have heerewith dedicated both my self and service, to remain

Your servant ever in Christ Jesus. W. I.
This 30 of September. 1618.
THE TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of the ensuing Consultation.
THE Preface. page 1. The I. Consideration, Of the desire of Perfection,
whereunto Christian Religion leads. page 8. The II. Consideration, That
Christian Religion excludes liberty of sinning. page 11. The III.
Consideration, Drawn from the Sanctity of the followers of true Religion. page
2^. The IIII. Consideration, From the miracles wrought by the imbracers of
Catholic Religion. page 36. The V. Consideration, From the Conversion of
Nations by the imbracers of Catholic Religion. page 48. The VI. Consideration,
From the Name Catholic, and from the thing it self, signed or marked with
this Name. page 55. The VII. Consideration, From Succession. page 59. The VIII.
Consideration, From the consent of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
Church: and from the decision of controversies, without which there is no
sodality or fellowship. page 65. The IX. Consideration, From diverse causes and
reasons, for which these new doctrines are to be suspected and shunned. page
74. The I. Reason, Deduced from Nouelty. page 75. The II. Reason, Taken from
the defect of Succession. page 87. The III. Reason, From the defect of their
Mission. page 9^. The IIII. Reason, From the want of Miracles. page 106. The V.
Reason, From the conditions of their lives and manners. page 116. The VI.
Reason, from their errors and inconstancy in Doctrine. page 125. The VII.
Reason, Taken from the frauds and deceipts which the Sectaryes commonly use.
page 135. The VIII. Reason, Drawn from the overthrow of good Works. page 153.
The IX. Reason, Deduced from the liberty of life, which they yield unto. page
158. The X. Reason, That they renew old Heresies. page 166. The XI. Reason,
From want of a Rule of Faith. page 171. The XII. Reason, Drawn from Absurdity.
page 181. The X. Consideration, And conclusion of this Consultation. page 189.
An Appendix of the Author Whether every one may be saved in his own Faith and
Religion. page 214.
A CONSVLTATION, WHAT FAITH AND RELIGION IS TO be embraced.
GREAT is the variety of Religion in this our age, and great is the contention
about the truth thereof. Many in this point do continually waver, nor can they
determine any certainty, passing from one Religion to another, as it were from
house to house for trialls sake, thereby to find tranquillity of mind. Others,
through an inconsiderate boldness, do embrace any Religion which by chance they
light upon, without either examining or under standing the same: who, when they
are demanded why they prefer that Religion before others, they have no other
answer, but that it seems better to them, or else (which commonly all do
oragge of) because they follow the very pure word of God.

This business, notwithstanding, is most worthy of great deliberation and
discussion, seeing that heerin consists the very center of our salvation.
Everlasting salvation or damnation is no small matter; but even such, as all
other things, be they good or bad, are nothing in comparison thereof. And this
damnation or salvation depends of good or bad Religion. If thy Religion be
good, it shall be easy for thee to obtain salvation; but if it be evil, it is
impossible for thee to be saved. By evil or false Religion thou can not
please God, Hebr. 11.
and consequently not obtain pardon of thy sins; not true Justice, nor yet
by any means be made partaker of Christ's redemption; but remaynest in death,
and the wrath of God remains upon thee. For that all men without the
redemption of Christ, Romans 3.4.
and living again in him, do remain in death of sin, and are the sons of
wrath: but whosoever imbraceth not true Religion is made void of the Redemption
and quickening of Christ: wherefore of necessity he must remain in death, and
be the son of wrath, and fuel for eternal fire.

Furthermore, true Religion is only one, and not manifold; for that there is
but one verity, one faith, Ephesians. 4.
one baptism, one God and Lord of all: whereof it follows by consequence:
First, that all Religion, all Faith, all Confessions of faith, besides this
only one, are false, hurtefull, pestilent, and brought in by the Devil, as
author thereof, and the Father of lies.

Secondly, no man that has not this only Faith, can possibly obtain
everlasting faluation: and all that shall be destitute thereof, although
otherwise they live never so well, shall infallibly perish eternally. 1. Cor.
13.
For that which the Appostle says of charity (to wit, If I should speak which
the tongues of men and Angels; if I should know all mysteries; if I should
distr^bute all my goods to be meat for the poor; if I should deliver my body,
so that I burn, and have not ch^^rity, it does profit me nothing;) may with
better reason be spoken of true faith and religion, which is the vary
foundation of charity, and of all other christian virtues.

Thirdly, it is a very gross error of certain simple people, that think it
to be enough to their salvation, if they believe in Christ, and that he dyed
for their sins, although they believe not many other things; for examples
sake, those which belong to Sacraments, sacrifice of the Church, and other such
like points of faith: for so should almost all Sects of beretikes be saved,
for that all (except some few) do embrace Christ (or else they should not be
heretics, but Apostataes) and believe that he dyed for their sins. And so by
this means shall be saved the Montanistes and Nonutiam, the Donatistes and
Sabellians, the Arrians, Macedonians, Aerians, Eutichians, Monethelites, and
such like pestes of the Church. Tit. 3.
Wherefore then, has the Church in all ages vehemently opposed therselfe
against heresies? wherefore does the Apostle command us to aouyd an heretical
man after one or two reprehensions. 2. Tim 2.
Wherefore should we beware of their very speeches, as a certain infectious
canker? In vain then are all these things spoken and done, if salvation may
be obtained together with heresy. Then truly is that a mere forged tale
against the consent of all Ages which S. Augustine recites in these words:
Constituamus aliquem etc. Let us imagine (says he) a man to be chaste,
continent, not covetous, not a seruer of Idols, liberal to the poor, no man's
enemy, not contentious, Aug. l. 4. cont. Donat. cap. 8.
patient quiet, emulating or envying no man, sober frugall etc. but yet an
heretic; let there be no doubt at all to any, but that such a one, for this
only thing, in that he is an heretic, shall not possess the kingdom of God.

For as that man (as witnesses S. Iac. 2.
James) who offends in one commandment is made guilty of all and loses his
whole justice, although he keep the rest of the commandement^, because he
contemns the lawmaker himself who made the whole law: eue^ so he that
denies obstanately but one article of faith, though he retain the rest, i^
made guilty of his whole Religion, and loses all his Faith and Religion,
because he contemns the Author thereof. For that the chief and supreme Verity
being one and the same has revealed all the articles of faith, and does
propose the same to be believed of us, by the Church her spouse, 1. Tim. 3.
which is the pillar and firmament of truth. He therefore, that does obstinately
reject but any one the least article of Faith, not relying upon the judgment of
the Church; by that very act is he judged to contemn the Author of the first
and principal Verity, whose preacher, interpreter, and instrument is the
Church, and by this means he loses al his lively faith, which is necessary
to salvation.

Neither helps it any thing at al, that he yet believes some principal
heads or articles of faith; because he believes them not with a lively faith,
which consists upon only divine authority proposed unto us by infallible
means; else he should believe the rest also that are propounded to him by the
same means: but he belieueth them with a certain humane faith, that is to
say, because by his own private judgment or opinion he so thinks them to be
believed; taking unto himself authority to judge and discern what things are
to be believed, and what are to be rejected: so as the chief reason of his
belief, is his private judgment; and therefore all that faith and belief is
humane, and of no value. For most certain it is, that as true Justice does
extend it self to all the commandments: so does true faith in like manner
which is required to salvation, extend it self to all those things, that are
revealed unto us from God; in such sort, that we either expressoly believe, or
be ready to believe them all if they be accordingly proposed unto us. Whereby it
is manifest, how carefully we ought to endeavor to obtain true faith and
Religion, seeing that the same is the very foundation of all our salvation, and
without which most certain damnation is to be expected. Wherefore I have
thought good in this place to set down certain Considerations or Reasons,
manifest and perspicuous to every one of ordinary capacity, whereupon may be
framed a certain and infallible Deliberation concerning this business of
Religion.

I. CONSIDERATION. Of the desire of perfection, whereunto Christian Religion
leads.
THAT Religion is always to be preferred that sauoureth of purity and holiness
of life, That Christian Religion leads to desire of Perfection.
which draws our minds from earthly affections, and styrreth us up to the
love of heavenly. For that the chief end and scope of Religion is to sequester
men's affections from these base and temporal things, and to lift them up to
meditate, love, and pursue celestial and everlasting. Such is the only
Catholic Religion, and no other. For she persuadeth to abstain from pleasures
of the flesh, and alluiements of this life: She teaches to contemneriches and
honors; and when at any time we do enjoy them, Only Catholic Religion teac^^^
perfection of life.
to renounce them for the love of Christ: She counsels fasting, hairecloath,
lying on the ground and other bodily afflictions, wherewith the flesh is tamed,
and subdued to the spirit.

Hence comes it to pass, that there are so many in the Catholic Church, who
conte^ning riches, honors, and pleasures, which they either enjoyed, or might
have done, have forsaken the world, giving themselves wholly to austerity of
life, and contemplation of heauently things. Amongst whom may are Noble men,
and Noble men's sons and daughters, many gentlemen many rich men, many
excellent wits, many most eloquent, and famous for all kind of learning. This
is that most worthy enfigne of divine spirit and true religion. For that this
religion can be no other then celestial, which thus by violence draws man's
nature from these base earthly things, whereunto it cleaves, and raises it up
to contemplate heavenly: which van quisheth the desires of temporal things,
and ingrafteth the love of eternal; and to conclude, which works such
wonderful changes in men. But the tree is known by the fruit.

Now, other religions, of pocially Lutheran, Caluinian, and ^nabaptisticall of
which we mean chiefly to treat, and do frame this our Consultation) do
perform no such thing. Other Religions take away desire of perfection and good
works.
For that they are so far from teaching austerity of life, or contempt of
wordly delight, as they call fasting a humane tradition, whereby God is honored
in vain: Abstinence from flesh, they call superstition: monastical vows,
they say, are wicked, vain, and not to be kept: chastity they teach to be
impossible, lib. de vita coniugali.
all must marry, and employ their time in wyuing, which, as Luther says, is as
necessary, as to eat, drink sleep etc. Out of which doctrine it follows,
that none of those, who follow any of these new Religions, do either came their
flesh by abstinence, keep chastity, or abstain from marriage and fleshly
pleasures, or exercise poverty for for the love of Christ, by forsaking their
riches: but do al embrace a loose, vulgar, worldly life, agreeable to the
inclination of the flesh, and corruption of nature. No man in this religion can
once find in his heart to imitate an Angelical life here in this world, as
many holy men have done before, and many do at this present in the Catholic
Church: no man goes about to shake of the carkes and cares of this life,
breaking in pieces the bands of the world; that being free and discharged
thereof, he may follow Christ our Lord, imitating his most holy life, and
representing him in his mortal flesh: for what soever is above the common and
popular manner of living, these new Religions do not allow.

Who then sees not, that in these there is no Christian religion? For although
Christ, considering man's infirmity, does not command poverty, chastity, single
life, contempt of ones self, and the like: yet notwithstanding does he
counsel us, and inuit us thereto with great reward, giving us an example
thereof in himself to imitate the same. So as by this his example and
inuitement, infinite numbers of all orders, ages, sexes, nations and
conditions, being stirred up, have attained unto this high sanctity, and have
bin therefore admired of all the world. But contrari wise these now Religions
altogether disallow the desire or study of perfection, as inpossible or
superstitious.

Neither do they alone hinder this most excellent sanctity, but therewith al
seek to suppress all other endeauours and desires of good works: ^uth. art.
31. and 36. and deliber ch^^^tiana. Calu. l. 3 Inst. cap. 12.. 4. and cap. 14..
9. Luth in assert. art. 1. Calu l. 4. Inst. cap. 11.. 13. and 14. and cap 19..
2.4. and 7.
For that they teach, That man offe^deth in all his works, though this sin be
not imputed to those that believe. Then they teach, That man by any good works
whatsoever meriteth nothing with God, is never the more grateful unto him;
never the more just, nor shall have never the more reward for his works,
whether they be more or less, or any at all; but that only faith is esteemed
and crowned with God etc.

This doctrine being the^ once set abroach, what man, trow you, will be stirred
up or moved to good works, prayer, alms, abstinence, or help of his
neighbors? For if in all these works there be sin, and neither merit, nor
reward, nor profit, what should move me^ to perform them? Who will bestow his
labor and goods in vain, and without any profit, but with hindrance to
himself? So as these new religions, as you see, quite take a way all good
works from men, and leave them only faith, which they esteem in place and
volue of al. It is not the^ credible that Christ by so many sweats and labors,
by such his manifold doctrine and heauen^^ admonitions, by his blood, cross
and passion would leave unto us, or be the Author of so barren a Religion.

Neither do we any way obscure the merits of Christ by attributing the force of
meriting everlasting life by our works, as our adversaries object, An
objection refuted.
but rather do we illustrate, and extol the same. For we assign the merits of
Christ to be so forcible and universal, that he did not only merit Eternal
Salvation thereby for us, but also gave us force and strengh to merit for our
selves. As for example, that man should not iniure the Omnipotency of God, The
force of Christ merits.
but rather extol it, that should say, that the said Omnipotency does not only
work and produce all things, but also gives force to things created, to work
and produce the like. For there is nothing that does more declare the
excellency and perfection of the cause, then if the cause does not only work
or cooperate it self, but gives also force and strength to others to do the
same.

Therefore when as we say Christ did not only merit for us, but gave us also
force to merit for our selves; we do far more extol the force of his merittes
then they who teach, that he alone did merit all, and left us no strength to
cooperate to his merits. Nay rather those men do greatly iniure Christ, because
they take away this force and efficacy from him: like unto certain
Philosophers, who taught that things created had no force in themselves to
cooperate, but that the only increated power of God did al, and thereby injured
his Omnipotency, as if he could not give force to things created to work and
cooperate with God. For as he should iniure Christ, that should attribute to
man any force or strength to merit, that is not derived from the merits of
Christ: so also should he iniure God, that should attribute any force or power
to things created that is not derived from the omnipotency of God. Furthermore
as the operations of things created are referred unto God, as the Author of
all, because he gave them force, and together concurreth with them as the
universal efficient cause: even so are all the meritts of just men referred
unto Christ, as Author of them all, because he gave them force and power
thereto, and together concurreth with them as the universal meritorious cause.
I omit many other things which might be brought to this purpose.

II. CONSIDERATION. That Christian Religion excludes liberty of sinning.
THAT Religion is also to be preferred, as most grateful to God, which
allows no liberty of sinning but by all means excludes it. For as the
Religion which is of God ought to stir up and incite men's minds to the study
of good works, and perfection of Christian life: even so ought it also to
fear them from synning, keep them in the fear of God, and, as much as in it
lies, hinder all sins and offenses. Such then is the Catholic Religion. For
many ways does she remove al liberty of sinning

First, by the Sacrament of Penance: For that it greatly fears very many
from synning, seeing they know that all their sins must be discovered one by
one in Confession, and Penance done accordingly; and if any thing be stoine,
or any loss or damage done, the same must be restored, and satisfaction made.
Moreover in this Sacrament is required sorrow for their syns, and purpose to
amend their life: whereunto is also conferred grace and aid to perform the
same: and last of all heerin are given wholesome admonitions to live well and
uprightly. Whereby we see, that this Sacrament does greatly restrayneliberty of
synning.

Secondly by the doctrine of Satisfaction and Purgatory. For it teaches that
after the syn and eternal pain is forgiven (in Confession) there remains
for the most part an obligation of some great temporal pain, which unless we
redeem in this life by the exercise of good works, to wit by prayer, alms,
abstinence, and the like; we shall pay it in the next life, with the cruel
torments of Purgatory. For that with God no evil shall remain unrevenged.

Thirdly, for that it teaches, that one only mortal sin unless it be
washed away in this life by Penance, is enough to everlasting Damnation:
neither shall faith any thing profit to the forgiveness of sins, without true
penance.

Fourthly, for that it many ways strikes into man the fear of God, proposing
unto him diverse of his judgments; when as he will never have him secure of his
salvation, but always to watch, pray, to be sober, to be always intent to do
good works, least at any time he be either overcome by tentation or suppla^ted
through the fraud of the Devil, or fall by some in consideration, or else not
prepared, suddenly surprised with unexpected death. And hence it is, that in
good Catholics, who endeavor to live according to their Religion, we daily
see a wonderful care and solicitude in avoiding of sin: and if through
humane frailty, they shall at any time commit any offense, they straight ways
wash it away with Confession, and amendment of their lives.

Now, other Religions do perform no such thing at all, but shaking of all
fear of God, open the wide gate to all liberty of sin and licentiousnes.

First, because they take away the Sacrament of Confession, whereby men, as we
have said, are greatly hindered from synning. Heretics take away all fear of
God, and admit all liberty of synning.
For that they say, it is an humane invention, a torment of men's Consciences,
and a mere superstition. It is a wonderful thing, that any superstition, or
invention of men's brain should have such force to the amendment of our life
and quietting of our Consciences! This force also have the Lutherans
themselves, being taught by experience, sometimes witnessed. For as Sotus
relates, who was present, that when the Emperor (Charles the fifth) was in
Germany, In 4. d. 18. q. 1. art. 1.
there was sent unto him an embassage from the famous City of Norimberge, by
which the Senate demanded, that the Emperor by his Imperial power would
command auricular Confession to be practiced: for that they said, they had
found by experience, that their Co^monwelth after Confession had been taken
away, to abou^d with diverse crimes against Justice and other virtues, which
were unknown unto them before. This embassage, says Sotus, caused great
laughter. For if by Divine law men were not bound to reveal their secret
sins to any, neither could the Priest, as they thought, absolve them: how
could they be compelled thereunto by any humane precept, without fruits of
remission of their sins.

Secondly, they do not only take away Confession, Luth. art. 6. Calu. l. ^.
Inst. cap. 19.. 17. Calu. l. 3. cap. 4.. ^8. Luth. in assert. art. 5. and 6.
Luth. ep. ad Waldensis de Euchar. Calu. l. 3. cap. 5. and 6. Luth. supra. and
in assert. a. 5. Calu. supra. d. l. 3. c. 4. (...)
but also the virtue of penance; in that they deny Contrition or sorrow for
sins past to be necessary. For as Luther says. Contrition makes a greater
sinner: and Calvin says, That S. Hierome who affirming penance to be the
second table after shipwreck, it being impious doctrine, cannot be excused.

Thirdly, because they deny the necessity of satisfaction, and say, that, that
redoundeth to the injury of the satisfaction of Christ: as who should say, if
our satisfaction be of any value, that of Christ is insufficient.

Fourthly, because they deny Purgatory, and all temporal punishment of souls
after this life.

Fifthly, because they deny any obligation of temporal pains to remayre,
after the guilt of sin is remitted. For that together there (...) pains and
punishments are forgiven.

Sixthly, because they teach, that only faith is sufficient to the remission of
all guilt and pain, Luth. in assert. art. 2. Calu. l 3. cap. 11.. 13. and 14.
Luth de liberate Christiana. Calu. l. 3. cap. 4.. 28. and l. 2. cap. 8.. 58.
nor any thing else to be required.

Seauenthly, because they teach, that no sin shall be imputed unto him that has
a lively faith. And for this reason Luther said, that the Commandments did no
more belong to us, then the ceremonies of the old law, but that all obligation
thereof was taken away at once by Christ, to wit, because the violating thereof
is no less imputed to the faithful, then the violating of the cerimoniall
law. That al these things are thus taught by them, is manifest by the places
here cited in the margent; and every man that is but mean^ly conversant in
these Sects does know it to be true.

These things standing thus, it is evident that al fear of God is utterly
taken away from the hearts of men, and the raynes of liberty are loosed to all
kind of syn. Nay, there is as much or rather more liberty given by these
Religions, as by Atheism. For if there be no syn imputed to a man that has
that forementioned special or lively faith, either for guilt or pain: what
should let him to commit never so gr^euous or emormous wickedness? What should
he fear Hell or Purgatory? Neither: for by lively faith alone, no syn shall be
imputed to any man, although it be never so grievous and filthy. What then?
Shall he fear the Divine wrath, or the subtraction of heavenly Grace? No: for
that God does not impute the same unto him: and for the satisfaction that
Christ made, he cannot be offended with him. Does he fear temporal
satisfaction, or Confession? Neither: For that these things are taken away as
superstitions. What then does this man more fear then any Atheist? Or how does
he not open as wide a gate to all wickedness and impurity as the Atheist? What
Atheism teaches, the Scripture witnesses, when she faith: The fool said in
hic heart, Psalm. 13.
there is no God: they are corrupt, and are made abominable in all their
endeauours: There is not one that does good, there is not so much as one. And
this does Atheism teach, for so much as it takes away the fear of Divine
punishment, whereby men are held as with a bridle from synning. But these
Religions do no less take a way the fear of heavenly reueng and chastisement,
when as they teach, that nosyn shall be imputed, either for offense or pain, nor
any man punished therefore.

Moreover I say, that by these Religions, this wholesome fear of God, is sooner
taken a way then by Atheism. For few Atheists do certainly believe, that there
is not any God at al; but many doubt it, and fear the contrary, and so they be
not without fear of punishment of him, They take away all fear of God four
manner of ways.
that may in many things repress them. But these Religions do for certain and
without all doubt teach, that sins are not imputed to the faithful, and this
they command to be most firmly believed; and therefore they leave no fear,
but do shake of all suspicion and imagination of punishment whatsoever: so, as
they give a far greater scope to all wickedness, then Atheism does. Neither do
they this by one manner of way only, but by a fourefold.

First: For that they teach, that through says sins are not imputed unto us,
be they neuey so many, or never so heynow; whereof we have spoken enough before.

Secondly: For that they say, that all those who have true faith are
predestined, Calu. l. 3. c. 2.. 6.7.11.12.15.16. and 38.
and that they ought to believe the same most assuredly. And if all the
followers of these Sects be predestined, and that they are bound to believe
the same most firmly: wherefore then should they be sollicitous, either to live
well, or to shun the works of the flesh, which the Apostle recounteth? For
neither can they doubt of their salvation, or that they shall go to hell;
because Gods predestination is potent and immutable, and those who are so
predestined cannot possibly perish. Neither can they fear the pains of
Purgatory, which they believe not: nor yet can they fear punishments in this
life, when as sins are not imputed to them by God.

Thirdly: For that they take away the liberty of Freewill, and do teach, Luth.
in Assert. art. 36. l. 1. cap. 16.. 8.
that all things happen by an inevitable necessity; and that a man cannot make
his works better or worse. For if there be no liberty, there is properly no
sin: like as a lion when he demoureth a man, although he commits evil,
yet sins not; because he does it not freely, but by the vehement instigation
of nature; nor is it in his power to moderate this his instigation. Noe man
shall be then worthy of punishment, because that which is done by force of
necessity, deserves no punishment: Wherefore there shall be no hell nor any
punishment at all after this life. For that it should be a great and
intolerable cruelty to damn a man to everlasting torments for those things
which by no means he could avoid. Wherefore then should they fear to follow
their hearts desire, or do any thing that may please their appetite?

Fourthly: For that they teach, all men's works, Luth. supra. Call. l. 1. cap.
17. 5. and cap. 18.. 1.
as well good as bad, to have bin preordained of God from all eternity; and to
that end, the wills of men are by him inclined, incited forced, and determined
to perform the same. For if God do work in us as well bad as good, there is
no reason why we should endeavor to avoid evil, or fear the punishment
thereof. For that God is not the revenger of that whereof he is the Author, nor
can he punish that which he will have done in us, and causes us to do. For
that this should be more then Tyrannical cruelty, from which God is known to
be fare off, and free.

Here by then it is as clear as the funne, that these Religions, by these
four ways now declared, do take from the minds of me^ all fear of God, and
do give as large a scope to all wickedness, as ever any Atheism in the world:
and that the more perniciously, because the are not exercised in the open view
and show of impiety, but under the color (forsooth) of divine religion and
honor, to wit, under the fair titles of only faith, satiffaction of Christ,
liberty of the new Gospel, divine providence, and predestination. Under these
shaddows thus covertly hid is swallowed so much venom, that it wholly poysoneth
the minds and manners of men. Who then that has but the least dram of an
upright judgment, that will think such Religions to come from God?

III. CONSIDERATION. Drawn from the Sanctity of the followers of true Religion.
THAT Religion is to be preferred, wherein very many men have been famous for
sanctity of life. For it cannot be that a naughty religion should lead a man to
sanctity, or that true sanctity should abide with a naughty religion. But
Catholic religion has had very many in her Church in all ages, who by common
confession and wittnes of all the Christian world were most holy men. Amongst
whom, to omit innumerable others were, S. Ant^ny the great, S. Hilarion, S.
Gregory Thaumaturgus, S. Nicolas Bishop of Myra, S. Athanasius, S. Gregory
Nazianzen, S. Basil, S. Simeon Stelites, S. Cipryan, S. Hilary, S. Martin, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Benet, S. Gregory the Great, S. Vedastus,
S. Ama^dus, S. VVinock, S. Bertin, S. Romwald, S. VVillebrord S. Boniface, S.
Bruno S. Bernard, S. Romuald, S. Nortbert, S. Dominicke, S. Francis, S. Themas
of Aquine, S. Bonauenture, S. Francis a Paula, and many more in our age.

That all these men were followers of the Catholic religion, there can be not
doubt; as well for that they adhering to the Roman Church, did profess the
faith thereof, and wonderfully propagated the same: as also for that most of
the^ were Monks, and vowed religiou: men: nay all monastical institutions and
professions had their beginning by them. That they were most holy men; it is the
common consent of all Christian people for so many ages past that lived in
their days. Neither was there ever made any doubt thereof. And this the
heretics themselves do also confess of diverse of them, and specially of S.
Bernard, S. Dominick, and S. Francis. For it were a great impudency to deny or
call into doubt, that which the consent of the whole world auerreth.

If these men therefore were Saints and Catholics, as all the world does hold
them to have been, it follows necessarily that the Catholic and Roman
religion which they held and embraced, is the true religion, and proceeds
from the Holy Ghost.

First, for that it is impossible, that a false religion should lead to true
sanctity, for that religion is the foundation of sanctity. That heavenly
edifice cannot be built upon vanities, nor upon pernicious and sacrilegious
falsities, as is every falsity, in religion. It cannot be, that a false
religion should withdraw the mind from earthly things, and so fix it upon
heavenly, that being kindled with divine love and feruor, should force the same
to undergo so great labors and pains for procuring the health of her
neighbors souls. Not. withstanding the re^igion which these men embraced, did
perform in them al these things; and consequently it cannot be, that their
religion was false.

Secondly, for that, without true religion, Hebr. 11.
it is impossible to please God. But by the consent of all, these men pleased
God and were his great friends and familiars: Therefore their religion was the
true. For how could they please God who is verity it self, by a false religion?

Thirdly, if their religion were not true, then was it from the Devil; for
that he is a liar from the beginning, and the Father of lies, who by his lying
and deceytes does ever seek to corrupt the true religion, thereby to destroy
souls. If it came from the Devil, how could it then lead them to sanctity,
and make them enemies to the Devil, 2. Cor. ^.
and friends to God? For what society is there between light and darkness? and
what agreement with Christ and Belial?

Fourthly: It is altogether incredible that God should permit men so innocent,
so contemning themselves and worldly affairs, so studious of his divine glory,
and ardent lovers of him, to be deceived for so many ages, in a matter of so
great moment, to wit, in the business of religion and foundation of all piety.
Who is he that will think so impiously of Gods divine goodness? They
pretermitted nothing on their behalf, whereby then might please God and
advance his glory, taking upon them the greatest pains and labors for the
obtaining thereof, and wholly implying and co^secrating their lives unto him. How
ca^ it be, that his divine goodness, that true Light which enlightemeth every
man that comes into this world, should not reveal the truth and his light to
so worthy servants and lovers of him, but should leave them sticking fast in
their blind and pestiferous errors?

Then is that false, which our Lord so often repeating, promised, to wit, Ask
and it shall be given unto you: seek and you shall find, Matthew 7. Luc. 11.
knock and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks receaueth and
he that seeks, finds and to him that knocks it is opened. For that S.
Francis, S. Dominick, S. Bernard, S. Benet, and the like lights and wonders of
the world, did all their life time, ask, seek, and knock, that they might
obtain of our Lord things necessary for their health, and to know and fulfill
his will perfect^ly in all things; and yet notwithstanding obtained nothing
heerin. False also shall that be, which our Savior says: If you then being
naught know how to give good gi^^es to your children, how much more will your
Father from heaven give a good spirit to them that ask? for that these men did
daily and carnestly ask this spirit, and yet obtained it not. For that a good
spirit can never be without a good Religion. I omit many other things which
might be brought for confirmation heerof.

But if it be blasphemy to say, that divine promises be false, then is it
necessary to confess, that these men did receive the true faith and
Religion-Wherfore, seeing that they embraced the Catholic Religion, and were
most addicted to the Roman Church, detesting and hating all other faith and
Religion that was contrary to this; it cannot be doubted, but that the
Catholic and Roman is the only true, and heavenly inspired Religion. And all
Religions besides, are false and invented by the Devil.

Finally, if their Religion were not the true, but rather some of the
Adversaries the true Religion; then is it necessary to confess, all the
forsaid men, whom the whole world has held for Saints, not to have been not
only holy men, and friends to God, but to have been impious and enemies to him,
and so damned and adiugded to everlasting punishments. For without true
Religion it is impossible to please God. Neither can it be said, that they were
to be excused by ignorance: for that ignorance does not excuse, except in
certain secondary cases, which by reason of some positive precept are
necessary; but in no case does it excuse in any fundamental and chiefehead.
For otherwise any man may obtain salvation without any knowledge of God or
Christ at al, which is repugnant to al Scripture. But if these men erred (as
some of our Adversaries do pretend that they did) then erred they in the chief
heads.

First, because they acknowledged not a special faith, whereby only we are
justified and made partaker of the redemption and justice of Christ, and sin
is not imputed unto us, as the authors of other Religions do teach: Therefore
they remained in sin, being deprived of the participation of the Justice of
Christ, and consequently were children of Hell.

Secondly, because according to their judgment they were out of the true Church
of Christ (out of which, by consent of all, there is no salvation) and did
adhere to the whore of Babylon (for so do they call the Roman Church) and were
the chief ministers and instruments of Antichrist.

Thirdly, because they were Idolatours, adoring a creature for their Creator,
to wit bread and wine instead of Christin the Eucharist, worshipping Saints
and their Images etc. These things may not be excused by any ignorance
whatsoever. And therefore all these were wicked men, and adjudged to hell
torments. But how improbable, and incredible are all these things, and against
the common consent of all Christian men that ever were? And on the contrary
side, in other Religions there were never any of famous sanctity, nor can they
name so much as one. For that their very first Authors were given to temporal
commodities, and were followers of pleasures; having nothing singular in their
lives above the common sort of people, but rather given to greater vices and
wickedness. But of this point we shall speak more hereafter.

Nor does it any way prejudice our cause, that among Catholics, there be many
who do not only (...) live well and holily, but do defile their body and mind
also with diverse wickedness. An objection of the Adversary answered.
For that they do not these things with leave and approbation of their religion
but against the express prohibition thereof, and against the threats of
punishment, and promise of rewards, which their Religion does propose unto
them, and does se^ke by all means to hinder them. Therefore this wicked^es of
life is not any way to be imputed to their religion, nor does it argue the
imperfection thereof. For whereas there be three things whereby to revoke men
from committing evil, and to incite them to do good, to wit, fear of
punishment, hope of Reward, and the excellency it self of the good work
wroght; the Catholic Religion does most highly commend, propose and inculcare
the same to her followers; omitting nothing whereby to stir them up to avoid
sin and follow virtue. And if perchance some of them do not aspire or attain
heerto, that is not to be imputed to Catholic Religion, but to the liberty of
their own free will which strives against all these former incitements: But
if the said Catholic Religion should take away all fear of punishment, and
hope of reward, esteeming all her good works to be stained and defiled with
sin, then might the wicked life of men, and their neglect of good works be
worthily imputed and laid unto her charge. For even as he that should take away
a proppe from a house that were ready to fall, should be the cause of the fall
of that house: So he that should take away the fear of God, and of future
punishments, whereby men are kept in awe from falling into the pit of sin,
should be the cause of these ruins and miseries. And in like manner he that
should take away that which is wont to incite men to the study of good works,
should be the cause of their neglect and contempt of the same.

Whereby it is manifest, that evil life and neglect of good works, which is
found in some Catholics, is not to be imputed to their Religion but to the
liberty only of their freewill: Whereas the same notwithstanding amongst
Lutherans, Caluinistes, and other followers of new Religions is properly
imputed and laid upon their Religion, which takes quite a way all means that
are wont to hinder evil, and incite men to do good, adhering only to the
liberty of their freewill, for as much as it has chosen such a Religion of
purpose.

IIII. CONSIDERATION. From the Miracles wrought by the Imbracers of Catholic
Religion.
THAT Religion, in which very many miracles have been wrought throughout all
ages, is to be preferred before those which be destitute of miracles. For that
miracles are as it were cortaine divine seals and Testimonies, whereby Religion
is confirmed. And whereas in Religion there be many things that, being above
nature and humane understanding, cannot be comprehended or understood by
natural reasons; some supernatural arguments are therefore needful, whereby
man's understanding may be convinced. And these be miracles. But only Catholic
Religion does shine with true miracles, and therefore is i^ the true Religion,
and to be preferred before all other Religions, as having testimony thereof only
from God. That in this Catholic Religion very many miracles have been wrought
in all ages, even from the Apostles times, and are wrought at this day also, it
is very e^ident and known to all Christian people, being made manifest unto
them out of the histories and Chronicles of diverse Kingdoms, and out of the
lives and acts of diverse Saints.

But these miracles (say our Adversaries) were not true, Calvin. Praef, in
Institut.
as partly feigned and partly wrought by the Devil. But in this there is no
show of probability: it being against the judgment of the whole world and of
all ages: for that all Nations have now for so many hundred years held them
for true miracles without any doubt at all. Who did ever doubt of the miracles
of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, S. Antony the Great, S. Hilarion, S. Martin, S.
Nicolas, S. Benet, S. Malachias, S. Bernard, S. Dominick, S. Francis of
Assisium, S. Francis of Paul^, B. Father Xauerius, to omit infinite others?

Moreover that miracles in the Catholic Church are not feigned, That miracles
in the Catholic Church are not feigned.
may be convinced by many reasons. First, for that they are written and
recorded by most grave and learned Authors. The miracles of S. Gregory, who
therefore is surnamed Th^umaturgus (to wit for the multitude and greatness of his
miracles) are written by S. Gregory Nissen in his life, and by S. Basil lib. de
Spiritu sancto cap. 39. The miracles of S. Antony, by S. Athanasius and S.
Hierome. The miracles of S. Martin, by Seuerus Sulpitius. Of S. Nicolas by
diuer's Greek writers; of S. Benet by S. Gregory the Great and others; of S.
Malachy by S. Bernard; of S Bernard by diverse most grave Authors of that age;
of S. Francis by S. Bonauenture; of S. Dominicke by those who received it from
men of very great credit. The miracles of S. Francis de Paula are recounted in
the bull of his Canonization. The miracles of B. Father Xauerius after most
diligent inquisition made, and witnesses deposed, were approved by the public
tostimony of the Viceroy of India. Who then will ^hinke that these men
excelling in sanctity, learning, and authority, would to the destruction of
their souls, and to the everlasting infamy of their names, feygne these
miracles, thereby to beguile the world? For that a lie in those things which
belong to Religion, is a most pernicious and grievous sin. Again: if these
miracles were feigned, they might easily have been convinced and refuted of
vanity by men of those ages, amongst whom they were said to have been wrought:
But never yet did any man reject the^, except he were a Pagan, a Jew, or an
Heretic. Moreover very many of these miracles have been confirmed by public
testimony of Bishops or Magistrates, who with mature diligence and deliberatio^
examined the causes thereof. Finally, to say that they were feigned is to take
away all credit of historyes, and to overthrow all knowledge of former times:
for that it may be as well said of all things anciently done, that they were
feigned, when as they cannot otherwise be proved, then by the writings and
testimony of Authors.

In like manner, that these miracles were not wrought by the help of the
Devil, is manifest many ways. First, because they were done by most holy men,
and such as were most intrinsecall with God. For who will think that S.
Francis, S. Dominick, S. Bernard, S. Benet, S. Martin, and their like had any
familiar conversation with the Devil?

Secondly, because these miracles did far surpass the Devils power: for that
the Devil cannot give sight to the blind, cure the lame, raise up the dead,
suddenly streng then sick of the palsy, in a moment quicken dry and benumbed
members, and the like, which do exceed all force of nature. Neither could any
Magitian ever do the same by any help or art of the Devil; and yet
notwithstanding very many and innumerable such like did our Saints work, and
that by only touching, or a few prayers, or the sign of the Cross, and
sometimes also by a command only.

Thirdly, because those miracles that be wrought by the Devil, do either
continue but for a small eyme, as being decoyts and delusions only of the eyes,
such as nagitians are wont to do; or if they do continue, they are wrought by
natural causes, and so do not exceed their natural force and power. Besides
such false miracles are for the most part not only unprofitable to men, but
hurtful also and wicked: as for example, to make fire descend from heaven, to
make statua', speak, and the like, which Antichrist and his false prophets
shall do in the last days, as out of the Apocalypse is gathered; Apoc. 13.
neither do these false miracles profit any to the amendment of life. But the
miracles of Saints have a perpetual and solid operation, and are very
profitable to men, styrring them up to the fear of God, and the amendment of
their lives.

Fourthly, New miracles were never approved in the Catholic Church without
great and diligent examination thereof before made: for that the witnesses are
examined, and that for the most part under their Oaths; the fact it self i^
narrowly looked into, whether it may be wrought by the force of Nature, or
power of the Devil: all circumstances are considered, by what means, order,
what occasion, what time and place, to what end, before whom, and upon whom
the miracle is wrought. And oftentimes there want not those, who would
willingly exaggerate the matter, or else make it doubtful and suspected, if
they could, and therefore they leave nothing untried or discussed. So as it is
impossible, that the deceyt, if any be, can longly hidden; besides it does
belong to the divine providence of God not to permit men to be so miserably
deluded, especially after so great diligence used, to search out the truth of
the matter.

Fifthly: If the miracles of the Catholic Church be wrought by the Devil to
retain men in their false Religion; why does he not the like then in other
Religions, to wit, among the Turks, Arians, Anabaptists, Libertines, and the
like? Why does he leave to work miracles amongst these, and makes famous only
Catholic Religion therewith? Is it for that perhaps she is more grateful or
pleasing unto him then all the rest? but he ought not to neglect others also,
from whom he receives so large and ample increase: he is delighted with
variety of false worship, that he may accomodate himself to the inclinations
and affections of all men. Therefore seeing that only Catholic Religion has
miracles, and false Religion has none; it is an evident token that the
miracles of the Catholic Church are not wrought by the Devil.

Finally, what color of reason can there be, to say, that these miracles
should be feigned, or wrought by the Devil? Is it because they could not be
otherwise done? But God is omnipotent and he has wrought many the like by his
Apostles, as out of Scripture is manifest. Or is it because they be repugnant
to Scripture? But our Lord has plainly promised this grace of working miracles
and curing, when he said: Joan. 14.
Verily, verily. I say unto you, be that belieueth in me, the works that I do,
he also shall do, and greater then these shall he do, because I go to my
Father; and whatsoever you shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the son. By which words he insinuates, that the
grace of working miracles should always remain in the Church, and that not
the Apostles alone, but many Apostolical and holy men also should from time to
time work miracles: so as we see this promise of our Lord fulfilled, when Holy
men do miracles.

Or is it then, because there is no witness of these miracles? But besides the
witness of most faithful writers, we have the testimony and consent of the
people: we have in many of them the testimonies of Bishops or Magistrates after
most diligent examination made of the thing it self, and deposition of sworn
witnesses. Besides that, very many of these miracles have bin publicly done in
the presence of many people; and there are no ancient histories extant (besides
those that are contained in holy scripture) that have so many and worthy
witnesses for their truth, as these of miracles have. To these may be adjoined
the great miracles that are done in every age, yea almost every year in diverse
places by Saints now reigning with Christ, but specially by the most Blessed
Virgin, which in those places where they are wrought are manifest to all men,
and may be seen and felt of all, and which are also confirmed by the public
testimonies of sworn witnesses, after diligent discussion and examination
made.

But, say our adversaries: Calvin. Praef. in Instit.
True miracles do confirm the Ghospel Marc. vltimo: But these do overthrow the
Gospel, and set up Idolatry, to wit, worship of relics and Images,
invocation of Saints, Mass, and the like: and therefore they be wrought by the
Devil. But this is a plain sophisme, which is called Petitio Principij; for
that, that is here taken as granted for true, which should be first proved,
and whereof the whole controversy depends. For it is supposed for certain and
undoubted that Catholic religion is false, and thereupon is consequently
gathered, that the miracles whereby it is confirmed are false and mere
illusions of the Devil. In this very manner did the Scribes and Pharisees
suppose the doctrine of Christ to be false and contradictory to that of Moses,
and therehence gathered that his miracles were false, and that he himself cast
out Devils in Beelzebub the chief of Diueils. Matthew. 22.


So also did the Pagans calumniare the miracles of ancient Martyrs, saying
they were done by magical arts: and the same did the Arians, Eunomians, and
Vigilantians of the miracles of Catholics, as wittnesseth Victor Vticensis
lib. 2. de persecut. VVandal. and S. Ambrose, sermon. de ^S. Geruasio and Protas.
Hierom. contr. Vigilant. But we on the contrary side by the evident truth of
miracles, which may be clearly known seen and perceived of al men do gather
the verity of Catholic religion, whereof the controversy now is. For that we
never yet read of miracles wrought in confirmation of false doctrine, such as
many Saints have done in confirmation of true. We never read that dead were
raised to life by heretics, the blind made to see, the lame straightened, the
palsy euered, Devils cast out of men. Such miracles as these were never
wrought by Luther, Calvin, or any of their followers. Indeed Luther sometime
did attempt to cast out a Devil from a feminine disciple of his, but he was in
danger to have been strangled himself by that devil, Cochlaeus in actis Lutheri
en. 1523.
as witnesses Fredericus Staphilus, who was present at the act. And at another
time, he would have raised to life one that was drowned in the river of Alba,
but in vain. In like manner Calvin attempted to raise one to life who by his
persuasion feigned himself dead, but with that success, that of alive man he
became dead indeed: for that by the just judgment of God, when as Calvin came
to raise him, he was found without life. The whole story whereof with all
particulers is at large recounted by M. Hierome Bolsecke in vita Caluini cap.
23. Wherefore seeing neither true nor feigned miracles do succeed with them, they
endeavor to take quite away from the Catholic Church this most strong rock
and firmament of miracles, which altogether conuinceth the understanding of
man: but with no show of probability at all, as we have showed.

As those therefore, who pondering and weighing well the miracles of our Savior
and his Apostles, with a quiet and humble mind, setting aside all hatred and
other evil affections, could not doubt, but that their doctrine proceeded from
God: even so now, they that without hatred and passion of mind consider well of
the miracles, that have been wrought in the Catholic Church, by holy men in all
ages both alive and dead, cannot doubt but that their Doctrine and Religion
proceeds from God, and that the Church whereunto they adhere, is the true
Church of God.

V. CONSIDERATION. From the Conversion of Nations by the imbracers of
Catholic Religion.
THAT Religion is esteemed to be the true, and consequently to be embraced,
whereunto always Nations have been converted. For that our Lord has often
promised in Scripture this conversion of Nations, Psalm. 1. and 21. Ose. 1.
matthew. marc. Luc. vltimo.
to the true faith and worship of God, which promise must be fulfilled: But the
Religion whereunto Nations in all ages have been, and now in this our age also
are converted, is the Catholic and Roman Religion. Ergo, there can be no
doubt, but that this is the true Religion of Christ.

Now then, that Religion, whereunto these nations have always being and are
converted is the Catholic and Roman Religion, is most manifest by that which
has been done as well in this our age, as in former before. For that in this our
age, there have been infinite, and daily still are converted in the East Indies,
in Iapone, and in the vast Kingdom of China, besides in many Islands of the
Indian seas. All these pass from their Gentility to the Catholic Religion,
and are united to the Roman Church; and this by Religious men's endeavors, sent
thither by authority from the Pope.

In the last, or fourtenth Age, one only S. Vincent surnamed Ferrerius, of the
order of S. Dominicke converted to the Catholic faith five and twenty
thousand, partly Jews, and partly Saracens, as testifies S. Antoninus a
famous Writer of that age 3. p. Histor. tit. 23. cap. 8.. 4.

In the 13. Age were converted very many to the Catholic faith in-the Kingdom
of Tartary, by two Friars of S. Dominickes order, being sent thither from the
Pope; the Emperor of Tartary himself whom they call the Great Came desiring
the same, as writes Paulus Venetus, whose help and endeavor the said Emperor
used in effecting of this business.

In the 12. Age, the people of Nor why were converted unto the Roman Faith by
This Adrian was an Englishman and called Nicolas Break-speare before he was
aslu^pted to the Apostolik Sea.
Adrian the fourth, before he was Pope, as writes Platina in the life of Pope
Alexander the fourth.

In the 11. Age were the Hungarians for the most part converted, and Bishops
ordained and appointed there by the Pope of Rome, at the request of their King
Stephen after wards a Saint, that was newly converted to the said Roman faith:
as write the Centuriators of Magdeburge, Cent. 11. cap. 2.

In the 10. Age, were many provinces converted to the Roman faith, by the
endeauours of Henry the first Emperor, Adalbert and Methodius Archbishops of
Bohemia, and Morauia, as testify the Centuriators above mentioned, cent. 10.
cap. 2.

In the 9. Age, were the VVandalls Bulgarians, Sclauonians Polonians, with
those of Denmark and Morauia, converted to the faith, and united to the Roman
Church. Centur. 9. cap. 2.

In the 8. Age, was converted a great part of Germany to the Roman faith by S.
Boniface, sent thither for that purpose from Pope Gregory the second. Cent. 8.
cap. 2.

In the 7. Age were converted those of Franconia (or Franke-County) by S.
Kilian, sent thither from the Pope of Rome also. Cent. 7. cap. 2.

In the 6. Age, were the Englishmen converted to the Roman faith, by Monks
sent thither for that purpose from S. Gregory the Great. Cent. 6. cap. 2.

Finally, those of Brabant, Flaunders Holland, Frizeland, Westphalia, France,
and other adjoining Nations, by whom were they converted? Were they not
converted by disciples of the Roman Church, to wit, S. Seruatius, S. Eloy, S.
Rumwold, S. Amandus, S. Vedastus, S. Leuin, S. Remigius, S. VVillebrord, S.
Swibert, S. VVulfrane, and others, who all were most addicted to the Roman
Church? By which it is manifest that all Nations, which have been converted from
Paganism or Iudaisme to Christ, for these thousand years last past, were
converted to the Catholic Roman faith, and united and incorporated to the
Roman Church.

This is also confirmed, besides other tokens, to have been the Roman faith and
Religion, by Priests, by altars, by worship of holy Relics and Images, by
pilgrimages, by Invocation of Saints, by Monasteryes, by Monks, by Obedience
to the Pope, and by very many other things proper to Catholic Religian which
were in use among all Nations after their Couuersion, until of ^ake they were
take away and abolished in some places, by these new vpstart Religions. What
man is there, that maturely considering these things, can any way doubt, but
that Catholic Religion is the true? For that in her, he sees fullfilled Gods
divine promise of the conversion of Nations. To her do fly so many people, so
many remote Nations, so many most porent Kingdoms, forsaking their Idolatry,
abandoning the impurity of life, rejecting the multitude of wives, forgetting
their barbarous and savage manners, banishing all former liberty of life, and
as it were, to become tame and tractable under the yoke of Christ, sweetly to
taste of the fear of God, to comforme themselves to all modesty of life, and
last of al to be inflamed with the contempt of temporal things, and love of
celestial. How is it possible that, that Religion should be false and impious,
which does work such wonderful mutation in the hearts of barbarous people? To
conclude how can it possible be, t^^t the Divine Frouidence should permital
these Nations so many years to be deceived, when as they have forsaken their
Idolatry, so heartily embraced verity, and united themselves to the Church of
Christ: and now to force them as it were into other abominable errors, and new
Idolatry; and that by such who were accounted and accepted of all men for
lawful Ministers of the Church, and were famous for sanctity of life, wisdom
and miracles? God for bid, that ever we should so think of his Divine goodness
and providence, which he uses for man's salvation.

Furthermore* to Lutheranisme, Caluinisme, or Anabapt^sme there was never heard
of any conversion of Nations, or Pagan Kingdoms, but only a defection of some
few, who professing the name of Christ, and weary of their ancient Religion and
discipline, did follow the liberty of their lust and nouelty, which is a
manifest argument of heresy. For that heresy is nothing else, but a corruption
of Catholic doctrine, and a defection, or falling away from ancient Christian
Religion, only retayning the name of a Christian ^^esides the study of
heretical teachers, is not to convert Ethnicks, but pervert Christians; which
Tertullian excellently describes in his book of Prescriptions. Of
administration of the word (says he) what shall I say? Seeing that their
business is not to convert Ethnicks but to pervert ours (Christians:) They do
take more glory to bring to ruin those that stand fast, then to help those up
that are fallen: because that this their endeavor comes not from their own
building, but from the destruction of truth. They dig up ours, to build up
theirs. So as it comes to pass, that they work the downfall of standing
edifices more easily, then the building of decayed ruins.

VI. CONSIDERATION. From the Name Catholic, and from the thing it self,
signed or marked with this Name.
FVRTHERMORE that Religion is to be esteemed for the true Religion, which has
always been accounted and called Catholic, according to that of the
Apostolical creed, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, I believe the holy
Catholic Church: But the Roman Church of all other Churches is only called the
Catholic, and her followers Catholics: Ergo, only the Roman Religion is the
true Religion of Christ. That the Roman Church is, and always has been only
called Catholic, is manifest. First by the very use and custom of so calling
her, received throughout the world: so as oftentimes the heretics themselves
in their wrytings do call her Catholic, and her followers Catholics: neither
did any Sect whatsoever deserve that name. For never were the Marcionites,
Montanistes, Donatists, Pelagians, Vigilantians, Waldenses, Lutherans,
Caluinists, or Anabaptists called Catholics, or their doctrine Catholic:
Only the Roman Church, with the people adhering unto her, is called the
Catholic: and the Religion, faith, and doctrine of this Church, is called the
Catholic Religion, the Catholikefaith, the Catholic doctrine, and her
followers Catholics.

Secondly, Catholic is extended to all Nations.
because Catholic is the same that Universal, most largely extending it self
to all. And such is the Roman Religion, for that it being dilated and spread
ouerall the world, does extend it self to all nations and Kingdoms. For that
there is no Kingdom nor Nation unknown to us, which either does not, or
somtymes did, or does not now begin to embrace this religion. Nay, now adays
the profession of this our religion is almost public amongst all Nations; to
wit, amongst those of Iaponia, China, India, Persia, Tartariae, Turkey, Africa,
Brasile, Peru, Mexico etc. For that in all these places are found Catholics,
Churches, Altars, Images of Christ, and of Saints: Mass is there celebrated,
our Sacraments are there administered, holidays and fasting days are there
kept, and finally the Roman religion is there publicly observed. Who can then
doubt, but that this is the true way of salvation to all, which our Savior
would have taught, preached, and proposed to all nations? which he would have
to increase and fructify in all Kingdoms in due time and season? and which he
does still conserve by some means or other in every place, ordayning that
Catholics be so dispersed throughout the whole world, that by them Infidels
may come to the knowledge of true Religion.

Moreover this Catholic Religion does extend it self to al times, It
extends it self to all times
even from the Apostles. For that there can be no age from that time assigned,
wherein this Religion did not flourish. In all ages has Mass been celebrated
both for the live and dead, feasts solemnized, fastes observed, Monastical
vows made, Saints worshipped, their relics honored, and such other like
proper ensigns of our religion have been in use and practice, as is manifest
out of the writers of all times.

On the contrary side, No sect ever called Catholic
let us look upon all other sects, and we shall never find, that any one of
them was ever called Catholic nor their followers Catholics, as we have said:
but that every one took their names of their first Authors, as the Simonians,
Valentinians, Pelagians, Lutherans, No sect ever spread over the world.
Caluinists etc. No sect was ever spread over the world. When Catholic
Religion began once to appear, in short time it was spread over the whole
world, and began to increase and fructify almost in all Kingdoms, Romans 1^.
Colo^ss. 1.
as S. Paul affirms. But Lutheranisme, Caluinisme and Anabaptisme now after
70. or 80. years are yet confined to certain strayt corners, and do rather
daily decay, by either going into other sects, or else returning to Catholic
Religion, then any way increase. For that none of them has continued from the
Apostles times, but all sprung up and invented within these 70. or 80. years
last past: and therefore neither in regard of time, place, nor otherwise, can
they be called Catholic. Again, I say, that Catholic Religion is one, and
the self same every where. But these religions are exceeding different amongst
themselves, and disagreeing in their chief heads and members, one damning
another to the pit of hell of heresy: how therefore can they be called Catholic?

VII. CONSIDERATION. From Succession.
FVRTHER MORE, that Religion is to be accounted the true, whose ministers do
all descend from the Apostles, and are either the Apostles successors or have
received their order and authority from their sucessours. For by this reason it
will appear manifest, that that Religion and Church which does honor and
embrace a religion so descended, to be Apostolical: Ergo etc.

Now that all Ministers of the Catholic Religion, whether we consider the
power of their order or Iuris diction, have descended from the Apostles, it is
clear. For that all inferior ministers especialy Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons receive their order from Bishops. Bishops also have their order from
other Bishops: and these likewise again from others: and so futhermore upwards
to the Apostles, who received this power immediately from Christ.

As all men therefore, according to their vital and natural power, do by a
long course of genealogy descend from our first Parent Adam: so do all
ministers of the Catholic Church, according to their supernatural power, by a
long succession of ordination and sanctification, descend from Christ our
Lord, who is the second Adam.

And there is no minister in the Church but can deduce the power, wherewith the
co^secrateth, sacrifices, absolueth from sins, administreth other
Sacraments, and sanctifies Christian people, from Christ himself, as the
first head and Author thereof. So as also, all those works, which by this power
he effects, are attributed to Christ, as to the first and chief Author, who
instituted this said power, and does inuisibly protect and assist the same, man
being only but the instrument, whereby all these things are done, as S.
Augustine and other Fathers do excellently declare. Tract. in Joan. Chrysostom.
bom. 60 Ambros. l. 4. desacram. cap. 4. and 5.
In like manner all the power of Iuridiction of Ministers in the Catholic
Church, by which they govern Christian people, preach the word of God, and
exercise all other Pastoral offices does descend from Christ, and may be
perspicuously reduced to him. For that Pastors have their Jurisdiction from
Bishops, Bishops from the Pope; and the Pope himself, for that he is the
successor of S. Peter, in the same Chair and government of the Catholic
Church, does necessarily also suceed in the same Jurisdiction, which was given
immediately by God to S. Peter, and in him to all his lawful successors. And
those also in the Church who have not power ordinary but only delegated, to
wit, no proper Jurisdiction of their own, do receive the same from their
Pastors, Bishops, or the Pope. So as there is no minister in the Catholic
Church, no preacher or teacher of the word of God that cannot eleerly
demonstrate his mission, and show the same to be derived from Christ. And
truly except they could so do, they were by no means to be heard or regarded,
but had in suspicion for wolves when as they entered not into the sheepfold
through the door, but crept in secretly some other way.

This argument always did the ancient Fathers greatly esteem and allege,
Irenaeus l. 3 c 3. Tertul. de praescrip. August. epist. 165. Optatus. l. 2.
contr. Parmen. cap. 4.
for the conuincing of all heresies. For thereby is showed the continual
succession of our Religion throughout all Ages, up to the Apostles times. I am
held in this Church (says S. cap. 4. contra E^ist. Fundam.
Augustine) by the Succession of Priests (and Bishops) that have come down
eue^ from the Sea of Peter the Apostle, to who^ the care of feeding our Lords
flock was committed, to the present Bishop of Rome (Anastasius) that holds
the sea at this day. And the very same has S. Hierome in his dialogue against
the Luciferian Heretics, which by and by we shall have occasion to recite.

Now, none of the ministers of the reformed religion can show this. And as for
the power of order, whereby to administer Sacraments, and sanctify the people,
truly they cannot reduce it to the Apostles and Christ, as we have done, for
that they have utterly taken all such power away. Neither is there any Bishop
or Priest among them (except perhaps some Apostata from the Catholic Religion
whose degree ordignity amongst the^ is now no more of value:) whereas not
withstanding the Church of Christ has always had these degrees, and been
governed thereby. Neither have they any power of Jurisdiction, whereby to preach
the word of God, administer Baptism, and govern the people with divine
reverence in spiritual affairs of their souls. For I would demand of whom
Luther and Calvin received this power of Jurisdiction? By whom was cyther of
them sent to preach the new Gospel, and reform the people? That they were
not sent by the ordinary Pastors of the Church it is evident: therefore they
came of themselves, being sent by none. But what can be a more certain sign,
that they are not to be heard, but rather to be fled from? For how shall they
preach (says the Apostle) unless they be sent? Romans 10. Joan. 10.
He that enters not (says S. John) by the door into the sheepfold, but
clymbeth up another way, he is a these and robber: but he that enters by the
door is the Pastor of the ^heepe. Now, whosoever without ordinary and lawful
authority do exercise the office of a Pastor, they enter not in by the door.

But perhaps, they will say, that they were sent immediately by Christ, and of
him received authority to reform the Church. Whether sectaries be sent of
Christ or no.
But that is not enough so to say; for that all Archeretikes do say the same of
themselves. Wherefore it behooves them to bring forth and show their evidence
whereby to witness it, and so to convince us, that they were sent of Christ, as
the Apostles did confirm their mission with many and great miracles: otherwise
we ought not to accept of their reformation. Nay we are rather bound to reject
them as false impostors. Again, how is it possible for them to be sent of
Christ, when as they teach so diverse and disagreeing opinions among themselves?
For if Luther were sent of Christ, then can not Calvin be also sent of him, who
in many points impugneth Luthers doctrine, and damneth it to the pit of hell,
as impious and heretical? And contrariwise, if Calvin were sent of Christ,
then could not Luther be sent of him also, for that God is not contray to
himself, neither do the spirits of his true Prophets impugn or contradict one
another. Other things I omit, which might be alleged to the same purpose.

VIII. CONSIDERATION. From the consent of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of
the Church: and from the decision of controversies, without which there is no
sodality or followship.
THAT Religion is thought to be of Christ and to be preferred before al other,
in which the whole and full consent of Doctors of every age and Nation, about
the principal heads of our faith, has concurred, and wherein there has been an
easy determination of all Controuersyes: from which if once thou chance to
decline or fall, thou have no certainty left, which way to betake thy self.
But such is only Catholic Religion, and therefore the true religion of Christ.

And first of all, concerning the consent of Doctors, about the chief heads of
our religion, it is manifest out of their wrythings. For what ancient Doctors
soever, either in Greece, Asia, Aegipt, Asricke, Spain, Italy, France,
Germany, or England, that have written of the mysteries of our religion, they
do all agree about the liberty of Freewill, about merit of good works,
sacrifice of the Mass for the quick and the dead, Monastical vows, fastes,
invocation of Saints, and the like, which are by these newfangled Religions
rejected and reproved, Calvin l. 2. c. 2.3.14. and 16. and l. 3. c. 4. and 5.
l. 4. c. 22. Centurtatores cent. 2.3.4.5. c. 4.
and cannot be denied by the Lutherans and Caluinistes themselves: only they
say, that these things were blemishes of the ancient Doctors, inclining as it
were to superstition and human traditions: and so they appeal to the word of
God, expounded by themselves in their own sense. But how improbable is it
think you, that all these Ancients, writing with so great consent of one and
the self same thing, and in diverse places, should err? And the consent of
many about one thing, especially when as there has been no consult or
comunication had thereof before, is a very great sign of truth, drawing unto
her, and as it were, binding together in one, the minds and judgments of many
enlightened from heaven. For as it is the property of Verity, because she is
only one, to gather together in one consent: so is it the property of Falsity
because she is manifold, to dissipate, and separate herself into diverse
opinions and errors. Whereby it comes to pass that Heretics writing of one
matter, in diverse places, do never lightly agree, but are divided into very
many opinions among themselves, when as once they have departed from the truth.

Moreover, there is not one opinion of Catholic Religion, which can be showed
to have been brought in a new into the Church by any man, which is a manifest
sign, that it always remained in the Church, and came from the Apostles. For
if any new opinion should have been so brought in after the Apostles time,
against the Apostolical doctrine; it would easily be discovered in what time,
and age the same began: In what place, who was the Author, and who they were
that opposed th^mselues against such a nouelty: seeing that no new opinion can
be brought in without great stir, and contradiction. For if it be so, that we
can show of every least heresy, in what time and place the same began, who was
the Author, and bringer in thereof, who opposed themselves against it, what
tumults were raised therabout, by what Pope and Council the same was
condemned: If all this, I say, can be showed of every heresy: how much more
easy were it to show the same of the principal and chief heads of our
Religion, if any innovation had been made therein? It is therefore manifest
and clear, that this our Catholic Religion does not only agree in succession
of Ministers, but is continued also and conjoined in consanguinity (as old
Tertullian speaks) with the ancient and Apostolic, Tertul. l. de Praescript.
as now we have said.

That the opinions of the new reformed Religions do not agree with the ancient,
our Adversaries themselves confess, when as concerning the former beads
mentioned, they reprehend and tax the Ancient Doctors of superstition,
affirming, that thy cannot be excused from error, as afterward more largely we
shall demonstrate.

Again, concerning the Controuersyes which now and then do rise up in the
Catholic Church, the continual use and practice of the same Church does witness
that they are soon determined and ended. Controversies quickly decided in the
Catholieke Church.
For that this Catholic Church has an infallible Judge of Controversies, to
wit the Pope with a general Council, by whom all controuersyes hitherto have
quickly been decided, all heresies that have risen in diverse ages been
condemned, and put to flight, by whom Catholic people have been preserved in
one faith, one Religion and doctrine throughout the world. By this means was
condemned the heresy of Arius by the Council of Nice, under Pope Siluester:
that of Macedonius by the first Council of Constantinople under Pope Damasus:
of Nestorius by the Ephesine under Pope Celestine: of Eutiches by Calcedon
under Leo the first: that of the Imagebreakers by the second of Nice, under
Adrian the first: and to omit others, that of Berengarius concerning the
Eucharist by the Synods of Rome, and Versells in France under Leo the 9. by
that of Towers under Victor the second, and by two other again of Rome, under
Pope Nicolas the 2. and Gregory the 7.

And furthermore in all reason it is required that the cause and weight of
Religion, being common to the whole Church, should not be judged of any private
man, with has no eminency or dignity in the Church, but of the universal
Pastor thereof, together with other particular assistants and Judges, to
whom the government of the Church is committed, and who do also represent the
universal Church it self as certain heads united together.

And so likewise the controuersyes that arise in a Commonwealth about Laws and
privileges are to be decided of no other, the^ the King, his Counsel and
chief Nobility of the Kingdom, who represent the whole Kingdom. For look to
whom it belongs to govern any Community or Commonwealth, either in
temporal or spiritual affairs, to him it belongs also to end contentions,
and determine all Controversies, concerning any Matter belonging to his
government, taking away and putting to silence all contradiction arising
therabout for the time to come. And truly unless the Church had such power and
authority, it would be a very imperfect and maimed Church, and more miserable
then any temporal Kingdom, or politic Commonwealth. For that there should
never be any end of contention concerning the principal heads of our faith, no
decision of debates and contradictions, whereby it would necessarily come to
pass, that the said Church should soon be turned and divided into a thousand
several sects as we see it daily fall out in the Heretics conuenticles.

Herehence it follows, that all the chief heads and articles of our faith
are certain and determined; neither is there any iarring or variance
therabout, but rather aspeciall concord and union amongst all. Nothing certain
out of Catholic Religion.
Whereby is deduced an another evident consequence, that so soon as ever one
falls from Catholic Religion, he has no certainty whereupon to rest, or
whither to turn himself, or to whom he may safely commit the care of his
salvation. For let me ask this question. In this so great variety of
Religions, which would thou embrace? The Lutheran? And why not the Caluinian
or the Anabaptisticall? why do thou prefer the Luthera^ before the rest? do
not the Caluinistes and Anabaptists allege Scripture for their part, as fast
as the Lutheran does for his? Again if thou will needs be a Lutheran, whether
I pray thee would thou be a soft or riged Lutheran? to wit, whether would
thou embrace that pure religion, which Luther the Dutch Prophet delivered, or
rather that which Philip Melanchthon did polish and trim anew? But this also is
variable, for that the Confession of Augusta has oftentimes been changed. If
thou would be a Caluinist, why not ^ather a Lutheran, seeing that Luther was
the first Father that begat this light of the new Gospel to the world? Again
if thou would needs be a Caluinist, whether then Puritan or Protestant: For
so much as these two (being the brood of Caluinisme) do not a little differ
among themselves, as they that live in England do well know? I omit very many
differences wherein to every one of these sects are divided and mangled; as also
the Anabaptists. No solid reason therefore can be given why thou should
embrace or prefer any one of all these religions before another; for that every
one of them do both brag and boast, that the word of God makes for the^; that
they have the spirit of God, that the sense of Scriptures is perspicious for
their doctrine, and what soever is contrary herto is false and manifestly
repugnant to holy Writ. Nor have they any other proof for all this, the^
that it is evident to him that has the spirit. And seeing then, that every one
of these Sectaries do allege the self same reason for their doctrine, and do
build upon the self same foundation; it follows therefore necessarily, that
thou must either embrace all these religions, or else none of them.

But Catholic religion does far otherwise prove their opinions and doctrine,
to wit, out of Holy Scripture, expounded according to the common sense and
understanding of the Ancient Fathers, and by the doctors of all ages, by the
sanctity, miracles and prophetical spirit of all such as have embraced this
religion: as also by the constancy and uniformity of doctrine in all ages by
the purity of life whereunto she leads, and lastly by the conversion of
Nations, and who have bin converted unto this doctrine.

IX. CONSIDERATION. From diverse Causes and Reasons, for which these new
doctrines are to be suspected and shunned.
ALL other Religions, but the Catholic, and namely the Lutheran, Caluinian,
and Anabaptisticall (of which principally we treat in this place) are worthily
to be suspected, and as heretical sects are to be shunned for many reasons,
which here I mean briefly to ponder, and recount.

The I. Reason, Deduced from Nouetty.
ALL Nouelty, and (as S. Gregory Nazianzen calls it) new Invention, in every
Common wealth, but specially in matters of religion is to be shunned. Christian
Religion is a thing most ancient, solid, unchangeable, and durable to the
worlds end; it being the form, vigor, and, as it were, the very life of
Christ's Church. For as flesh, by life, is quickened in a living man: even so is
the Assembly of men in Christ's Church by religion (which otherwise of it self
is only flesh) formed into a spiritual Kingdom. And again, as the Church and
kingdom of Christ is a thing most ancient and indeleble, Against which Church
the gates of hell shall not preua^le: Matt. 16. and vlt.
and to whom Christ prom^sed his assistance to the worlds end: Even so is
religion, upon which the Church and kingdom of Christ does stand firm and
steadfast. Nouelty therefore is repugnant to the religion of Christ.

Now that these religions are new it is manifest. First, for that we can
nominate and bring forth their first Authors, time, place and manner how they
were brought first in, and who they were that opposed themselves against them:
what great styrres and troubles also were raised every where about them; and
lastly how, and by whom they where condemned as noueltyes and heresies. And
what can be a more manifest sign of nouelty then this? In like manner all other
heresies, that have been brought in against the Apostolic doctrine of Christ
are convinced of nouclty, for that we can show what time every one of them
began, in what place, who was the Author, who were the opposers thereof, and
lastly by whom they were condemned of nouelty.

Secondly, before the year of our Lord 1517. Lutheranisme was never heard of
in the world, nor likewise Caluinisme nor Anabaptisme, which are the daughters
of Lutheranisme. For that it is manifest out of Authors that when Luther first
began to peep out his head, there was no other religion known to be exercised
in the world (besides the Jewish, Mohammedan and Pagan) but the Catholic, and
that of the Hussites.

Thirdly, if you say, that any of these Religions, for examples sake the
Lutheran, always was, but yet lay hid: then I ask in what place the same lay
hid, in what kingdom or town and who were the patrons and defenders thereof?
Again how know you, that this religion was before, when as the same cannot be
known but by some authors, who do not so much as insinuate any such thing, but
the quite contrary. Furthermore, whereas in every age, and place there have been
Inquisitours of heretical noueltyes; by what means then could this religion
ly hid for so many ages, that it should never be discovered or that never any
one of the followers or teachers thereof should fall into their hands, and be
punished? Surely never any heretical Sect could yet ly hid so cunningly, but
that she should often have been deprehended, and publicly called into
examination and question. Moreover if before Luther, that Religion had been in
the world, how chance that the followers thereof, who had hitherto layn hidden,
did not then come publicly forth, when Luther began to preach, and acknowledge
him for the Doctor of their faith and League-maker of their religion? How
happened it then, that they came not abroad in public, and embraced him as
their fellow, and Patron, who had now at last set at liberty this their
Religion, so long before layn hidden and oppressed in secret corners? But no
such appeared that were ever followers of that Religion before, but that as
many as joined themselves with Luther, De Missa Angulari lib. 2. cont. Zuingl.
did profess Catholic religion before; as Luther himself was also Catholic
before and a Friar, who for 15. years together had daily and denoutly said
mass, as himself confesses.

By all which it is more clear then the sun, that Luthers Religion is
altogether new, and was not known unto the world before his time: nor that
there was any company of men, no not perhaps so much as any one particular
person before Luther, who professed the same Religion, that is to say, held all
and every of the same heads of belief, or the same body of doctrine, which
Luther did. And although Luther took some of his opinions from the old
heretics, notwithstanding Lutheranisme is not therefore the same Religion with
that of the old heretics, but only in part: for that a Religion is the
embracing and comprehending of all the heads of belief, which are ordained and
determined to belong to faith: but none before Luther did ever teach this
embracing of opinions.

The same is likewise convinced by another reason: for that it is manifest,
that the Ancient Fathers and doctors of all ages, were not of Luthers religion;
seeing they teach Frewil, necessity of good works, Merit of life everlasting,
and possibility of the Divine Law: They do also allow of the Invocation of
Saints, worship and honor of holy relics and Images, sacrifice of mass for
the quick and dead, Order of ministers in the Church, monastical vows,
Evangelical Counsels, the fast of Lent, and the like; all which things the
Lutheran Religion does reject as superstitions, impious, and injurious to God.
Now that the ancient Fathers did profess and allow all these things before
rehearsed, is most manifest out of their own wrytings: neither can the
Lutherans or Caluinistes deny the same; but only say that these things were
moles, or blemishes amongst the a^cient Fathers. Goodly moles surely,
superstition, Idolatry and Impiety! But if the doctors of former ages did not
profess this religion, but for the most part reprove and disallow it: then is
it evident, that the same is not ancient, but new. For no religion was ever
accounted in the Church for true, but that which the ancient Fathers and
doctors of the Church did hold and profess.

Whereof it evidently follows, that Lutheran religion is not Christ's religion.
For that Christ's religion is not new, but ancient: but Lutheran religion is new
(as we have showed) and not ancient. Christ's religion has always flourished in
the world ever since the Apostles time: but Luthers religion has not so done,
but began within these 100. years: and before that time we have showed that it
was not. Again, if Luthers religion be truly Christ's religion, then is the
visible company of men that embrace the same, the true Church of Christ:
Therefore Christ's Church was not before Luther, because the Lutheran Religion
which does make the true Church, was not before Luther, as we have
demonstrated. For if you say, that Luthers religion was in the Apostles times,
and in some of the former ages; then must you prove, that there were some men
in those times, who embraced and professed his opinions. Surely we easily prove
the contrary: for that it is evident, that Mass for the quick and dead, Order
of Ministers in the Church, monastical vows, and the like which are repugnant
to the Lutheran religion were in use in the Church in the Apostles times, and
the next succeeding Ages.

But let us grant, that Luthers religion was in the Apostles times, and somewhat
after: yet at leastwise in the third and fourth age it began to fail and fall
quite away. Which thing the Lutheran Doctors themselves do also confess, as
may be seen by that great Centurian work setforth by them, in the
2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. Century, or age, and 4. Chapter of every Century. Therefore
by this account the Church of Christ, at least for 1300. years has fallen away
and perished: for that so long time at the least, it is evident that Lutheran
religion was not, but the quite contrary to have been extant and flourished. As
also by this account, the true religion was extinguished for so many ages, the
Gospel obscured, Christ's Church overthrown, until the Dutch Prophet Luther
rose up, and dispersed that lamentable darkness, through the light of the
Gospel, to the world, and reedified the ruins of the Church. This do the
Lutherans often insinuate in diverse towns of Germany when as they write upon
the forefronts of their houses, in great Capital letters, these, or the like
words: Such a year etc. appeared the true light of Christ's Gospel to this
City, Superstition put down etc. But if the Church of Christ perished for so
many ages, how then is it true, that she is built upon a rock, and not rather
upon sand? How then is it said, that the Math. 16.
Gates of hell shall not prevail again her? How is she the house of God, the
1. Tim. 3.
Firmament and Pillar of truth? How then is the Daniel 2.
Kingdom of Christ (which is the Church) stable, firm, everlasting, and never
to be ruined?

Again, if you say that Luthers Church and religion was in all Ages from the
Apostles times, but yet in secret and hidden: besides that such a fiction
wants an Author, to affirm it, the same is void of all probability as we
have now showed. But, be it so: The Church of Christ cannot be hidden.
let us grant that it was hidden all that while; but then was it not the Church
of Christ: for that she is a Matthew. 5.
City placed upon a mountain which cannot be hidden: She is the Isa. 2.
mountain of the house of God, prepared in the top of mountains, and placed
above the hills, clearly seen of all men, and to whom all Nations in the
world have recourse. She is the Kingdom of Christ, that reaches from Psalm. 71.
sea to sea, and from the river to the bounds of the earth. She is that great
Dan. 2.
mountain, that fills the whole earth. For that the Church of Christ must be
conspicuous and manifest to the world, that by her excelleny and comlines, by
her manner and outward show she, as it were, may entice Gentiles unto her: so
as they that will become Christians, may know whither to go, to whom to have
recourse, and from whom to receive instruction.

Likewise her Doctrine and faith must needs be also manifest, or else the same
would be unprofitable to the world, nor could she convert Gentiles. So as in
the greatest persecutions that ever were, she never lay so hidden, but that she
might be known to all, as out of the Ecclesiastical historyes is evident;
whereby it came to pass that she had so many martyrs. Again, if she had layn
hidden for so many ages, she had been altogether unworthy of the Name of a
Church. For how may she be called the Church of Christ, that dares not
publickely to profess the true Doctrine of Christ? or that she should be so
faintharted and fearful of death, as to hide herself in a dark cormer, so
many ages together and dare, to come abroad into the light, least she should
be seen? And last of all, how can she be called the Church of Christ, that for
so many ages has not only hidden herself, and suppressed the true profession
of faith; but has professed also a false faith, to wit Papistry, adored Idols,
and defiled herself with a thousand superstitions and sacriledges? For that
before Luther, all Christians did carry themselves outwardly in all points as
Catholics, or else straight would they have been apprehended and accused by the
Inquisitors and Bishops, and punished as heret^kes. And therefore should the
Church of Christ have been more miserable, then the ruins of the Synagoge, or
the lewish Sect, which always in some place or other had their Synagoges and
free profession of their Religion, nor was ever constrained, at least
generally, to the worship of Idols. She should, I say, have been more miserable
then all heretical sects and Conuenticles whatsoever. For that there was never
any Sect of any name, which had not her temples, her religious houses, her
Couuents, her Bishops, the form and profession of her faith, that so she might
be known of all.

Whereby it is manifest, that nothing can be more absurdly said, then that the
Church of Christ has layen hid for so many ages: and therefore I do conclude
with this Dilemma: That the Lutheran or Caluinian religion, was either before
their Authors (to wit Luther and Calvin) or it was not. If it were not, then is
it altogether new, and therefore cannot be the religion of Christ: which is
ancient. If it were before the Author, then was it secret, and therefore cannot
be the religion of Christ, which is a ways apparent and manifest. And
whatsoever in this discourse has been said and proved concerning Lutheran
religion, you must understand to have been said and proved also of Caluinisme
and Anabaptisme, for that the self same nouelty and reasons belong to all
three, but that for perspicuityes sake, and not often to repeat with tediousnes
all three names, we have only nominated one.

Therefore do I conclude with the words of S. Hierome, Hier. Dial. contra
Lucifer. in fine.
who writes thus: That I way set thee down briefly and plainly any opinion.
Thou must (says he) remain in that Church, which was founded by the
Apostles, and continues until this very day. And if by chance thou should
he are those that be called Christians, to be named of some other, and net of
Jesus Christ, to u it of the Marcionites, Valentinia^s, Montanistes etc. know
thou certainly that, that is not the Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of
Antichrist: for that because they were institued afterward, they do demonstrate
themselnes to be those, whom the Apostle foretold etc. Nor let them flatter
themselves, if out of certain places of Scripture they do seemete affirm that
with they say: for that the Devil did also alleagde Scripture for his purpose:
and the force of Scripture does not consist in reading, but in understanding.
So S. Hierome. Nouelty therefore is a sign of heresy fortould by the Apostle:
denomination is a sign of nouelty: and the usurping of Scripture, is common to
the Devil himself, and all heresies.

The II. Reason, Taken from the defect of Succession.
ANOTHER reason why these religions are not to be allowed of, is, The want of
succession
for that they want an orderly and continual Succession of Ministers in the
Church, from the Apostles; which succession is necessary, that any Religion or
Church should be deemed Apostolical, for without the same it cannot be
continued with the Apostolic. So as the Ancient Fathers for the most part
teach, that they, who say, they have the true Church of Christ with them, must
bring forth the succession of their Bishops, and reduce the same upwards to
some one of the Apostles, by an orderly continuation: which if they cannot do,
it is an easy matter to convince them, that the true Church of Christ is not
with them. For so Optatus Mileuitanus in his second book against Parmenian,
when he would convince the Donatistes, that they had not the true Church with
them, said: Show forth the origin or beginning of your sea, you that wildaime
the Holy Church to your selves. And Tertullian in his prescriptions againg
heretics, says: Let heretics show forth the origin of their Churches, let
them recount the order of their Bishops succeeding from the beginning; that he
who was the first should have some Apostle or Apostolic man for his Author and
predecessor. etc. The same argument do the rest of the Fathers commonly use,
as lib 3. cap ^.
Irenaeus, hoeresi 27.
Epiphanius, cont. Lucifer.
Hieronymus, S. cap. 4. cont. Epist. Fundam.
Augustine, and others.

Now it is well known, that neither Lutherans, Caluinistes, nor Ana baptistes
can with any the least color do the same. For to whom, I pray you, did
Luther, who for the most part was the Author and first parent of these new
religions, succeed? Whose Chair and authority did he occupy? who before him
was the prelate of the Luther an religion? as also before Calvin and Zwinglius,
who was their predeceslour? And if none can be assigned, it is clear, that
they want that succession which the Ancient Holy Fathers do require, that any
Church should be joined with that of the Apostles.

Again, Want of Ordination.
they do not only want succession of Chair and authority, but even the
ordination of degrees, descending from the Apostles. For that there was always
requisite a double power in the Ministers of the Church, both of them by an
orderly continuation derived from the Apostles, as before we have showed in the
7. Consideration, to wit, Power of Order, by which Sacrifice is offered and
Sacraments are made to sanctify the faithful: and Power of Jurisdiction, by
which the authority of governing and feeding the Church with the word of God,
is given etc. But these new religions, can reduce neither of them to the
Apostles. Not the power of Jurisdiction, because they want succession, as
before we have said: nor yet the Power of Ordinatio^ or Order, for who ordained
Luther or Calvin a Bishop of their Church?

And if they say that order is not needful, they do contradict all antiquity
and the perpetual use of the Church. For never yet was there Bishop in the
Church, so as he had authority to exercise all Bishoply functions, but that he
was ordained by some other Bishop, to whom by the Constitution of the Apostles
themselves, must be adioined two other bishops, as is expressly commanded in
the first Canon of the Apostles, and fourth of the Nicene Council: as also
insinuated by S. Paul writing to Timothy a Bishop, 1. Tim. 4.
and warning him thus: Do not neglect the grace which is in thee, which grace
is given thee by prophesy, with imposition of the hands of Priesthood: that is
to say, of those Bishops who together with the Bishop that does ordain, do
lay their hands upon him that is ordained, as the Ancient Fathers do expound it.

By which it is clear and evident, that the Lutherans and Caluinists have
neither of these forsaid powers from the Apostles, nor can they derive the same
from the Apostles, and consequently in that they do not descend from them, they
have not the true religion and Church with them. For that the true Church,
according to both powers ought to be derived, and to have continued with them
from the Apostles, as we have showed before: seeing that all power spiritual
ought to be derived from Christ through the Apostles and their successors, by
a continual and orderly succession, and communication to other ministers of
the Church, as the corporal life of man is derived by certain means, through
a continual succession from our first parent Adam, to the last.

For even as in the old Testament, there were no priests except those that
descended from the Tribe of Leui* thorough Aaron: so in the new, there are no
priests or Bishops, except those that descend in degree of Order, and power of
Jurisdiction from Christ the chief Priest, through the Apostles and their
successors. And therefore as the Sinagogue could not be without priests,
descending by a continual succession from Aaron: so the Church of Christ
cannot be without Priests, or Bishops, descending by the same continual
succession, from the Apostles and their successors. But the Congregation of
Lutherans and Caluinistes, had never any such ministers; had never any
Bishops-lawfully ordained amongst them, descending in power of Jurisdiction
from the Apostles or their sucessours, to govern the people. And therefore it
is clear, that the Church of Christ is not with them.

The III. Reason. From the defect of their Mission.
THE third reason is; because these Religions were brought in by them that were
sent by no lawful authority, but came of themselves: and for this cause are
they and their Authors worthily to be suspected of error, least perhaps they
prove to be wolves, and seducers. For that no man may preach in the Church,
unless he be sent by lawful authority, according to that of the Apostle: How
shall they preach, Romans 10.
unless they be sent? otherwise there should soon arise a great confusion in
the Church, for that every one might take upon him the office of preaching and
governing the Church, and sow abroad what errors he listed. And if in a
temporal Common wealth and humane Policy, no man may intrude himself, and
take upon him the office of a magistrate to govern the people in temporal
things, only pertaining to this life, but that he must first be appointed
thereunto by the Prince: How much less then in the Church and spiritual
kingdone of Christ, may any man assume unto himself the office of Pastor to
govern the people, in those things which belong to eternal salvation, but he
that is ordained and appointed thereunto by the supreme rector of the Church,
and Prince of Holyes? For that confusion in government of the Church is much
more to be avoided the^ in Policy; when as the one threatens destruction to the
soul, the other only loss of goods and fortune.

Again, Joan 10.
he that enters not by the door into the theepfold, but climbeth up some other
way, is a thief and robber, says our Lord. But he that takes to himself the
office of a Pastor in the Church without lawful Mission and Auchority, he
enters not in at the door, but climbeth up some other way, as the holy Fathers
do commonly expound the place, and is manifest of it self. For what is it, to
enter in at the door, but to enter by the lawful way, and by lawful
authority? The door is the ordinary way, and made of purpose whereby to enter
into the sheepfold, and whereby is designed that authority, by which the
Ministers of the Church are to be admitted into the sheepfold of Christ, to
govern and feed his sheep.

Furthermore, our Lord says in S. John's Gospel: Joan. 7.
he that speaks of himself seeks his own glory: but he that seeks the
glory of him that sent him, he is faithful, and in him there is no injustice.
By which words we are warned not to believe them, who are not lawfully sent,
but come of themselves, because they seek their own glory, and therefore they
do not speak for truth, but for their own praise and comodity, and thither do
they direct all their doctrine.

And finally the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, does account this
mission so necessary that he does require the same in our Savior Christ,
saying: Neither does any man take the honor to himself, but he that is called
of God as Aaron. Hebr. 5.
So Christ also did not glorify himself, that he might be made a High Priest;
but he that spoke to him: My Son art thou, this day have I begotten thee.
Whereby our Savior did so often inculcate to the Jews his mission, to wit,
that he came not of himself, but was sent of his Father; and confirms the
same many ways.

From whence it is clearly deduced, that Luther, Calvin, and the rest of these
new Doctors are not to be heard, but their doctrine altogether to be shunned:
because it is manifest, that they were not sent by any lawful authority, but
came of themselves. It is also manifest, that they usurped unto themselves the
offices of magistrates and Pastors, and the Authority of reforming the Church.
It is manifest. I say, that they came not in at the door, and by the lawful
way, but cl^mbed over some other way into the sheepfold: and therefore according
to our Saviors judgment and sentence, they are to be accounted for thieves and
robbers.

Perhaps they will say, that they were sent of Christ immediately, as in old
time the Prophets were sent by God in an extraordinary manner to reform the
people; and as the Apostles were sent by Christ our Savior to convert the
world, and as S. Paul, after the Ascension of our Lord, who was not sent of
men, nor yet received the Gospel from men but immediately from God himself.

To this I answer first, it is not enough to say, and stoutly to affirm but
it must be proved, and convinced to be true, least it may seem to the people
and ordinary pastors to reject them as deceauers, for a lawful cause: as the
Prophets and Apostles, did not only say that they were sent of God, but showed
the same also abundantly by heavenly signs.

Secondly all Archeretikes and false Prophets throughout every age have
affirmed the same, to wit, that they were sent of God, and from him received
their Authority. And therefore either we must receive them all or none. For why
should I (for example sake) rather believe that Calvin was sent of God, then
Luther, or Menno, or Munzer, Arius, or any other Archeretike, when as he can
produce no greater signs or testimonies for his mission then they?

Thirdly, if Calvin were sent of God, then Luther was not sent of God; and so
likewise to the contray. Because if two men do prophesy contrary things, and
that the one does condemn the others prophesy and doctrine of error and
heresy, the one does so destroy the others religion: and therefore if they were
both sent of God, it seems that the spirit of God does oppugn, deny, and
overthrow it self, destroying by one, what he had built by another. But
amongst the Prophets truly sent by God there has always bin a principal unity
and consent in doctrine.

Fourthly, if Luther or Calvin were set of God to reform the Church, I demand
then what time, and in what place, God gave them this Office? what words did he
use unto them, cyther internal or external? In what manner did he declare
unto them the chief heads and points of this Reformation? what order and
manner did he prescribe them? How, or in what form did he appear unto them?
Externally in a visible shape, as he did to S. Paul? or internally by imaginary
vision, in some extasis, as he did to the Prophets, and to S. John Evangelist
in the Apocalypse? For that he is wont to observe al these things with those
whom he sends. And the Prophets themselves presently in the beginning of
their preaching did explicate and declare all these things to the people, that
they might understand of whom they were sent, or what comman^dement was given
unto them to perform, as out of the Prophesyes of Isay, Jeremy, Ezechiel,
Daniel, and others is manifest, that they were all wont to premit these things
first of all. And so likewise is it manifest what time, and with what words our
Savior sent the Apostles, and what he enjoined them to do etc.

But now these our new Prophets were so simple, that they did not think of
feigning any such thing, if they would have had themselves thought to have been
sent immediately from God: and therefore they made no mention at all thereof;
which is a most certain and manifest token of lying and falsehood, when of
necessity they be driven to say they were sent from God.

For who can doubt, but that, if they had felt the least semblance or shadow
of this Divine mission, they would have presently published the same in the
first front of their writings, and have manifested the same to the world, to
wit, the express time, place, manner, commandment of God, and other
circumstances belonging thereto?

Fifthly, I add, that if they were sent of God, they were not only sent as
reformers of Manners, as the Prophets were; but as reformers also of the whole
doctrine and Religion: and therefore a most exact description of this mission
and an express mention of such things as God would have reformed, had by
naltogeather necessary: and that the same should have been propounded to the
Church, in God his name, and in the very word^ that he spoke them, as the
Prophets were wont to do when they did propound to the people Gods divine
commandments in his name. But these new Prophets have not proceeded so, but
have gone from one opinion to another upon mere chances, and as times and
things have so required: as it is wont to happen in contentious and debates,
when men's minds be more and more provoked to anger and revenge; and as they
learned by experience to prefer most their own comodityes, and oppugn the
Sea Apostolic, that condemned them. For whatsoever they thought might most
endomage the Popes authority, or profit and confirm their own, that they
estabished as a point of faith, and the very kernel of the word of God, as
afterward we shall show.

Sixthly. In humane Policy and Government it is not enough for a man that is sent
from a Prince, who is far off, and cannot be spoken with, to say that he is
sent from him to execute such or such Authority; but he must have letters
Pate^ts sufficient, sealed with the Princes seal, which are notwithstanding
carefully examined for fear of deceyt; and if by chance any sign of imposture
be deprehended therein, he is not admitted until further testimony be produced.
The same we see in like manner in the Popes Legates and Nuntij, who all must
show their Patents Authentical, wherein their Mission and Commission is
contained; or else they are not received nor have Authority. What sottishness
then is it to admit into the Church and Kingdom of Christ, not only new
Pastors and Teachers, but Reformers also of the whole Religion, whereon the
Church consists, upon pretense and color only, that they say they are sent
of Christ, and have the spirit God, not showing their Patents, nor any other
sign or token, whereby to confirm the same?

Seauenthly. The very computation of time is also mightily against them. For if
the Church from 600. years after Christ has been decayed and fallen away, and
consequently been made the Synagoge of Antichrist, as they say it has: then how
happens it, that the Mission of these new Reformers has been delayed until
now? Why has God forsaken his Church for whole 900, years, and suffered her
to be thus ruinated, and swym in all Idolatry and superstition, as though she
did nothing belong to him: and now after all this time at last to send these
new Reformers or Architects unto her? Is this the love of Christ, think you,
toward his Church, which he washed with his blood, quickened with his spirit,
and adopted to his Spouse? Far more lovingly the^ so, did he bear himself
toward his hand maid, to wit, the Jewish Synagoge, to whom he sent Prophets,
and did not forsake her, although she fell into Idolatry and wickedness, sonding
unto her continually, even to her very last end and destruction, his servants;
and endeavoring by all means possible to reclayme her. And therefore if these
men will needs seem to be Reformers, they should have feigned the Church to
have perished a little before, and not to have layne rotten and putrisyed in
her fall, for so many ages; or else the great space of time between, does
confute their mission, and show it to be imprudently feigned.

Eighthly, To these may be added other most certain signs of their not sending
from Christ: as for example, their bad life, their pride, their contempt of the
holy Fathers, their errors and untruths wherein they are every day deprehended
and taken, their inconstancy of doctrine etc. of which I mean to treat in the
ensuing reason.

And last of all, they teach that nothing is to be believed but what is in
Scripture. Let them then show us out of Scripture that they were sent of God to
reform the Church; in what place and in what words the Scripture says this
Authority was granted unto Luther or Calvin; or otherwise we may not believe
them (themselves being witnesses) and much less accept them for Reformers of
the Church.

The Lutherans indeed do go about to establish the mission of their Prophet, by
a certain Chronographical prophesy out of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine
insinuated in this verse of Te Deum: Tibi Cherubin and Seraphin incessabili
voce proclamant. For that a few years ago they set forth a picture of Luther
cut in brass with this inscription: Diuinum atque admirabile Vaticinium D.
Ambrosy and Augustini de tempore and aduentu S. Lutheri, quo contra
Antichristum Romanum scribere coepit, vt in litteris huius versiculi numerum
anni represent antibus continetur, quod est apud Christianos Fideles
admiratione and notatu dignum. A divine and admirable Prophesy of S. Ambrose
and S. Augustine, concerning the time, and coming of Saint Luther, when he
began to write against the Roman Antichrist, as it is contained in the letters
of the verse following, representing the number of the years: a thing worthy
to be noted and admired of all faithful Christians.

tIbI CherVbIn and scraphIn InCessabILIVoCe proCLaMant.

The numbers of the letters of this verse, they say do make M. CCCCLL.
VVIIIIIII. or 1517. in which year of our Lord Luther began to preach.

But this verse does little help the pretended cause of Luther. For first no
certanity can be gathered by such numbers, as by many examples in former years
of the event of things has been seen. And then secondly let us grant it to
be a prophesy insinuated of Luther by the number of these letters; yet thereby
should not be signified a reioyeing and exultation of heavenly Spirits for
Luthers preaching, as his Sectaryes would have it; but an excecation or
blinding rather of Luther, and of althose which were to embrace and follow his
Doctrine: like as in the 6. of Isay, where the Seraphim do cry in the same
manner, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, all the earth is full of thy
Glory (out of with place these verses were taken, and put into the Hymn of Te
Deum) is designed the excecation of the Jews, as is gathered out of that which
follows in the same place. For that God is there provoked in such sore that
he reuengeth with condign punishment so great wickedness and impiety, showing
by the beauty of his sanctity how greatly all kind of sin does displease him.
And in like manner shall the Seraphim thunder out revenge toward the end of
the world. Apoc. 4. And last of all if we write these Names, according to the
Hebrew, by M. and not by N, to wit CherubIM and SeraphIM, as they are truly to
be written, then will there arise out of that verse Three thousand five hundred
and 17. years: which being ended notwithstanding shall the Cherubims and
Seraphims cry Holy, Holy, Holy; but yet this voice shall not be a rejoicing or
exultation for the increase of Luthers Ghospel, but rather an approving or
approbation of the just punishment, wherewith he and his followers shall be
tormented for all eternity.

The IIII. Reason, From the want of Miracles.
THESE new Religions together with their authors are to be suspected, Miracles
necessary.
because they were brought in without any miracles: which miracles were very
necessary, and that for many reasons.

First, that they might show they were not falsifiers, but true Pastors sent
from God, and thereby convince, that the Church ought to receive them. For
whereas it is manifest out of Scripture, that many false prophets were to come
into the world in these last days, Matthew. 24. Marc. 13 1. Tim. 4.
who should brag that they were sent from God, and of who^ our Savior did
warn us to beware, 2. Tim. ^. 2. Pet. 3. Matthew. 7. and 24.
therefore no new teacher is to be admitted but rather to be suspected, that
cannot give a full testimony of his doctrine: which full testimony can not any
way be given, but by divine and heavenly signs, as are, for example, Miracles,
fortelling of things to come, revealing of mysteries, and the like: which
things, for so much as they do exceed the force of humane power, it is mnnifest
that they are from God; and are as it were Patents and witnesses signed and
confirmed by God, whereby this divine mission is approved.

Heerhence it is, that so many as ever have been sent of God immediately to
teach or instruct the people, have come endued from him with miracles, or other
supernatural signs, whereby their Mission has been made manifest to the
people. For so did Moses, when he was to bring the children of Israel out of
Egypt, and to give them a Law, come with a mighty power of miracles, and
wrought very many either himself, or God by him, as often as he appeared unto
him in a visible shape. So did all the Prophets confirm their mission, either
with miracles, or with revelation of mysteries. The same also the Lord of
Prophets himself, who although he might have clearly convinced out of
Scripture, that he was the true Messiah, and that by the testimony also of S.
John Baptist: yet notwithstanding presently in the beginning of his preaching,
he showed by many miracles, that he was sent from God the Father, for the
salvation of men; in so much as he said unto the Pharisees who for hate and
malice believed him not, that if they would not believe him for his own sake,
yet at leastwise being convinced which the greatness of his miracles, they
should believe him. In like manner did all the Apostles confirm their mission
with miracles amongst the Jews and gentles: as also did the first preachers
and Apostles of diverse nations who brought them from Paganism to our faith and
religion. Wherefore let these new Prophets brag never so much that they be sent
immediately from God, except they confirm the same with miracles and
supernatural signs, as all those who were sent indeed inmediatly from God,
have done, they be not any way to be heard or regarded.

Nor does that argument any thing avail against us, that S. John Baptist
wrought no miracles; because God did many and supernatural things about him,
which well witnessed his mission. Besides the austerity and sanctity of his life
was no small miracle; so as no man can doubt, but that he was sent of God.

Secondly: Miracles were very necessary to have proved, that they were not only
sent as correctors of manners, but also as reformers and correctors of the
whole religion, to build up a new the Church that was fallen, to raise to life
the kingdom of Christ that was dead and to make all things new again. What
great miracles had there needed to have been; to have convinced the world to
believe these marvelous and wonderful things; and to have received the
workers thereof for such? For although they had raised a thousand dead men, and
had cu^red an hundred thousand lame, blind, and diseased, yet had it scarce been
enough to have given credit to so great an innovation. First because the
Apostle says: Gal. 1.
Although we, or an Angel from heaven do euangelize unto you any other
doctrine then that which we have euangelized unto you, let him he accursed. And
repeating the same again for greater confirmation, he adds: As we have said
before, so now I say again: If any do euangelize unto you besides that which
you have received, let him be accursed. And if we should not believe an Angel,
that should preach any least thing against the received says and doctrine of
the Church, what great need of miracles should there be to give credit to any
man that should preach so great matters as these, to wit, that the Church of
Christ is (...) ruinated, full of Idolatry, her says extinct, al her children
in the state of domination; that the principal heads of religion are to be
reformed;, and that ^^ut her or Calvin were sent froth God to make this
reformation? Should it not be (...) (think you) that all the miracles of the
Apostles, yea of Christ himself, should be renewed again in such a reformer?

Secondly, for so much as the Catholic religion, which now florisheth, has
been in possession for more then a thousand years (which our adversaries do
also confess) in such sort that the same is accounted throughout the whole
world for the true religion, and those that depart from her are held for
heretics: therefore without very great and most evident signs it be manifest
that this possession was wicked and unjust, it cannot now be thrust out and
owerthrowne. Again these signs must be so perspicuous for the conuincement of
man's understanding, that there be left no place of doubt or tergiuersation; for
else their be not bound to believe, but rather still to adhere to this so long
possession and no ways to forsake their religion. Moreover seeing that the
Catholic religion has shined with the greatest glory of miracles, of wisdom,
and of sanctity of her followers throughout all former ages, and does at this
day also shine: it is needful therefore of greater and more evident miracles
now, whereby lawfully put her out of possession and reject her; as also there is
more need of greater knowledge, sanctity, and public fame in the followers of
these new religions now, then ever was in the old.

And lastly: if the religion of the old Testament amongst the Jews was to be
changed, and that they were to pass from a shadow to the truth, or from a
type or pattern to the true sampler it self; although our Lord might most
clerly have convinced and showed out of the Scriptures that this mutation and
change was to be made, and that himself was sent of God for the same purpose
he thought good notwithstanding to confirm the same with very ma^y and most
wonderful miracles, that there might be left unto them no occasion of doubt or
turning back: how greatmiracles then shall we think to be needful now for
the changing of religion in the new Testament, when as the Scriptures do
clearly denounce that there thalbe no more changes made but that God will be
present with her, for her assistance to the worlds end, and that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against her. For what wisdom were it for any man to
believe so great a thing, so new and paradoxicall so much against Scripture and
judgment of all the ancientt Fathers, without extraordinary great miracles?
Nay, what miracles can there be great enough to make a man at least probably to
believe so strange a thing?

Heerhence it is manifest, that we have great cause to require of them such
miracles, and that they deal perfidiously with us when as they would have us
to give them credit in matters of so great importance, without miracles; and
unless we do believe all upon their bare word, they presently raise up
grievous presecutions against us.

But they will say. Whether do they prove there doctrine out of the Scriptures.
We prove our opinions and doctrine out of the Scripture. Be it so; but yet
according to your own sense and judgment, and not according to the consent of
the Ancient Holy Fathers, and the received Doctors of the Church, who lived
before these our controversies, and so could not be any way partial therein.

Again, their arguments like unto spiders webbs are very easily dissolved by
Catholic Doctors: besides that there are so many new Reformers sprung up
within these 80. or 90. years, so many repayrers of the decayed Church, so
ma^y reniuers of the extinct Religion, who also be most contrary one to
another: and what one builds up, another pulls down: yet notwithstanding
do they all confirm their opinions out of the Scriptures, all do rest upon her
testimony alone, all do make Scripture the only foundation of their building:
and therefore, the proof of all is to be admitted, or of none.

And lastly, seeing that nothing is to be believed unless Scripture say it:
Where I pray you, does it say, that you, or he, or such a one was sent of God
for the reforming and restoring of the decayed Church and Religion?

They will say, Whether it be a miracle to have many followers.
perhaps, that they want not miracles; for that it is a very great miracle,
that in so short time, so many have embraced this new Gospel. And this
perhaps might have some color, if their religion were more austere, and strict
unto the flesh, then is the Catholic. But seeing that this their new Doctrine
does banish all austerity and sharpnes of the Catholic Religion, and give all
liberty to the flesh, what miracle is it, if many follow and embrace the same?
what marvel is it, if weighty things fall to the ground, when as their props
be taken away, or that rivers run into the sea, their da^mes and stops removed?
our corrupt nature does most of all incline to liberty, which it finds in
these new religions, and therefore we do the sooner embrace and follow them, not
because we being persuaded by the force of reason, do believe that they are
more holy; but because we find in them, that which we sought for, and that
which without fear we might enjoy, under the color of religion and piety.

Moreover this miracle may as well be brought on the behalf of all the Sects of
all these new Reformers, as of one: for that many have joined themselves not
only to the Caluinists, but also to the Lutherans and Anabaptists; and
therefore they must be all holy and come from God as their Author. But God
cannot deny himself, nor destroy that which he has established, and therefore
cannot be Author of so contrary religions, and the one damning the other to the
pit of hell.

The V. Reason, From the Conditions of their Lives and Manners.
THE fifth reason is, because that these Religions were brought in by men of
bad life, and such as were noted of infamy, pride, envy, and notorious
detraction, giving show of nothing less then an Apostolical Spirit. For as
for Luther, we know, that he was somtymes a professed Monk and Priest, and
thet by bound with a double vow of continency. We know also, that leaving his
Monastery, and casting of his habit and profession, be returned to a secular
life again, where joining himself to a professed Nun whom he enticed out
of her Cloister, he lived daily in her company; by which fact in the judgment
of all the world, he committed a twofold sin of Sacrilege, and did always
reiterate the same as often as he abused her body: What manner of life can be
more scandalous then this?

Moreover we know, that he was so exceedingly given to good cheer and lust,
that he was daily occupied in banqueting and drunkenness, lib de vita
coniugali.
affirming that a woman was more necessary then, to eat, drink, or sleep: and
that it was Sermon. de matrimonio.
lawful to use the maid, if the wife refused to do her duty.

The life of Calvin is written by Hieronymus Bolsecus, Julius Brigerus, and
others, being full of most notorious wickedness, to wit, false accusations of
others, murders, robberyes, filthy and lewd behavior: all which things have
been objected against him by diverse writers, whereunto I could yet never see any
answer.

Of Luthers infamy it is manifest to all the whole world, that whereas he being
a professed Monk and a Priest, he joined himself to a professed Nun: which
fact by the judgment of all learned Doctors purchases infamy. For if by the
Emperors laws, that man be infamous, who is taken in adultery (L. Palam. S.
Quiin adulterio. ff. de ritu nuptiarum) how much more is he infamous, that has
twice contracted sacrilegious marriage, and daily uses sacrilegious copulation?
For that it is a far more filthy thing to be an Adulterer of Christ, then an
Adulterer of the wife or husband.

The infamy of Calvin is also manifest out of the Judicial Acts and process
of the City of Noyon in France, Bolsecus in vita Calui. ni cap. 5. Iul.
Brigerus page 59.
that he was convicted of a wicked crime, and by sentence condemned to have been
publicly burned, if by the intercession of the Bishop of that place, that
punishment had not been changed into whipping and burning upon his back with a
hot iron. Whereby it is cuident that both by law and deed he was infamous. L.
1. ff. de his qui not antur insamia. and L. Quid ergo.. Ex compromisso. ff. de
his qui not antur infamia.

Of the pride and railing of Luther it is evident. First, because from this
fountain, to wit of pride, all his doctrines took their beginning. For when as
certain Indulgences were to be promulgated in Germany, and that the office
thereof having heertofore belonged to the Augustine Friars, now they being at
this time pretermitted, the same was given in Commission to the Dominicans.
Which thing Luther taking in very ill part, began with a spleen to preach
against Indulgences: and though he were thereof admonished, and reprehended,
notwithstanding by little and little he not only continued the same, but
adjoined heerunto many more and greater articles of faith against the Authority
of the Pope; whereby he caused wonderful troubles and garboyles throughout all
Germany, as largely writes Ioannes Cochlaeus (that was an eye wittnes of all
these things) in the Acts of Luther an. 1517. This pride and anger then was the
first origin, and offspring of all Luthers doctrine, without which perhaps
Lutheran Religion had never been, nor, so many other new sects neither, which
since that time have sprung up, and risen from thence.

Secondly, for that Luther in his Epistle to those of Strasburge writes, that
he would gladly deny the Real presence of Christ in the holy Eucharist, thereby
to trouble and vex the Popedom, if the Scriptures were not clear against the
same to the contrary. And in another place he writes thus: If a Council
should appoint, or permit the receiving of the Sacrament under both kinds; lib.
de formula miss.
we by no means would use both; but in despite of the Council and appointment
thereof, would either use one or neither; cursing all such as by order of that
Council should use both kinds etc. Here you see he teaches us to abstain
from a thing necessary for our Salvation, and that only in despite of the
Council that should command or appoint it: when as notwithstanding we may and
oftentimes ought to obey even a Tyrant, when he comaundeth things lawful.
Whereby we may see with what spirit he was carried way. For what may be compared
to this fury of his? The same Luther in his book against K. Henry the 8. of
England writes, that Kings, Princes, Popes are not worthy to loose the lachet
of his shoe, and that himself will be accounted for a holy man, whether men
will or no. Also, that he cares not for a thousand Cyprians, nor a thousand
Augustines. Also, Christian Princes, Kings, and Emperors he calls Tyrants,
Idiots, fools, simple fellows, wild beasts, hangmen, nittes, bubles, enemies
of God, most wicked knaves; and inuenteth scurrilous songs and rithmes against
them.

Of Caluins pride and railing besides that which D. Bolsecke has abundantly
written, the same is most evident in lib 2. Inst. c. 14.. 3. lib. 3. c. 4. 10.
lib. 4. c. 12.. 20. and alibi.
Caluins own books also: for that he does every where contemn all the holy and
ancient Fathers of the Church and male partly accuses them of error. The
School doctors he calls Sophistes. In his Sermons he oftentimes brake forth
into these, and such like words: I am a Prophet: I have the spirit of God: and
if I err, God has deceived me, and brought me into error for the sins of
the people etc. He wrote also diverse letters and pamphlets of his own praises,
dignity and merit in the Church, which he always published, either in other
men's, or some feygned name, as D. Bolsecke and others do write. Many the like
tricks might I allege as well against these as against other Authors and
defenders of the new Religions of this Age, but that I am very unwilling to
occupy my self in such affairs. He that will see more in this kind, let his
read the life of Beza, written also by D. Bolsecke, Flores ^ulij Brigeri,
Surius his Comentaryes and others.

Now then, considering these things, who can once think with himself, that
God would choose and use such men as these were (to wit infamous by all law and
judgment of the whole world, of a most filthy life, of an unbridled and railing
tongue, of a proud, ambitious, angry, and envious mind) to be the reformers of
his Church? Who ever noted any such conditions or qualityes either in the
Apostles or Prophets, who were all most humble, and no ways infamous for any
wickedness? And although they were unlearned and simple, notwithstanding upon a
sudden the were endued with admirable wisdom, sanctity of life, and grace of
miracles. They were wonderfully lowly of mind, of wonderful meeknes, they
contemned the pleasures of this life, and the earthly delights of all things;
they were endued with wonderful charity toward their neighbors; they were
wonderfully modest and circumspect in all their words and actions. These and
the like conditions and qualities we fee, to have been in all such, whom God
has used for the Conversion of Nations, and reformation of Christian people.
As for example in S. Augustine the Apostle of the English, in S. Bonisace the
Apostle of the Germans, in S. Adalbert, S. Etto, S. VVillebrord, S. Eloy, and
other Apostles of other Nations. Also in S. Benet, S. Bernard, S. Romuald, S.
Dominike, S. Francis, and others, by whose example and doctrine, very many have
been stirred up to the contempt of earthly and transitory things, and love
celestial.

And if God did use such men as these to the Conversion of any Nation or
Province, or to the reformation or correction of manners in any people, whose
life was admirable to the world who notwithstanding did not receive their
mission immediately from God, but from the Pope, by whom they were sent to do
and execute these offices: then I pray you, what manner of men had it been fit
that these should-haue been, who are said to have been sent inmediatly from God,
and this not only for the reformation of the chief heads and points of
religion; but also to the reedification and instauration of the whole Church
and Kingdom of Christ now ruined? And although all the sanctity and excellency,
all the virtues, and spiritual gifts, which were either in S. John Baptist,
or any of the Apostles, had been all heaped together in one, and had been all
infused into these men; yet had the same not been sufficient, to warrant their
Authority of so great a business. And shall we be so sottish then as to believe,
that God would ever use such men, for so meruaylous and high an enterprise, as
were not only not endued with any holiness of life at al, but rather to the
contrary, full of all infamy, impurity, pride, reueng and railing? For to what
end had this been else, but to give occasion to such as have but the least dram
of wisdom not to admit them, but as false impostors to avoid and detest them?
For if those, who be infamous, may not by the Cap. infamibus li. 6. L. Qui
accusare ff. de accusat. l. 1. ff. de postula^ do.
law be admitted to any dignity, or to any office either Ecclesiastical or
secular, no, nor to accuse, or demand: How then shall such be admitted as
reformers of religion, as chief architects or heads of the Church, or as
Judges of Bishops, Popes, and general Counsels?

The VI. Reason, From their errors and inconstancy in Doctrine.
THE sixth reason is, for that the Authors of these new religions have manifest
errors, and are very inconstant in their doctrine; which is an evident sign,
that they have not the infallible direction of the Holy Ghost, and therefore are
not sent immediately from God, nor any trust is to be given unto them.

For how many soever have been sent of God to teach, and instruct the people
were so governed by his heavenly assistance and direction, that they could not
be deceived in anything, either in their teaching, preaching, or writing. So as
there was never any the least error found in the doctrine of the Prophets or
Apostles; which our Savior insinuates, saying; Iota vnum, aut vnus apex non
praeteribit a lege, donec omnia fiant. One jot, or one tittle shall not pass
of the law, till all be fulfilled. Matthew. 5. Epist. 19.
The same thing does S. Augustine teach largely in his Epistle to S. Hierome,
where he says: That if in any writer one fault only should be found, it were
enough to discredit the whole authority of that writer. For he that is deceived
in one, might be deceived in more, and therefore we may not firmly rely upon
him. Luther himself also teaches us the same thing in many places of his
works, Lib. contra Empseru^.
whose words are these: Si semel deprehenderer etc. If I should be once found
so lying, false, and grossly ignorant, then should all my learning, honor and
fidelity utterly have an end, In assert. Teuton. art. 25.
for that every man, as reasen requires would account me for a lewd and
infamous knave. And again: Qui semel mentitur etc. whosoever is once taken in
a lie, know most certainly that he is not of God, but ought to be suspected in
all things etc. Which thing (...) inculcateth in six other several places of
his works. Nay moreover our Savior himself gave unto us this sign in the
Scripture, that if a tany time we deprehended a Prophet fortelling any thing
that was false, we should certainly know that he was not sent of God.

This being laid as a sure foundation, I make this argument: Whosoever in his
doctrine does err but in any one point, he is not sent from God: but Calvin
and Luther in their doctrines do err in many things; Ergo it is certain that
they are not sent of God. The Mai^r is already sufficiently proved: which our
Adversaries themselves do also confess. The Minor I prove thus. For to omit
all those things which they do falsely object to Catholics, and which they do
falsely affirm to be noueltyes in our Doctrine, and unknown to the ancients:
To omit also all historical and chronographicall errors, I will lay forth only
two of theirs of most moment which are common to then both. The one, That we
have no frewill, but all things do happen through an inevitable necessity. The
other, That God is no less the Author and sorcer of evil works, then of good.

That these be most manifest and pernicious errors, is evident, because they
take a way all policy, all good counsel, all laws and precepts, all Judges
and Tirbunales. For that all these are in vain, if there be no frewill in man.
Moreover the punishing of all kind of wickedness shall be unjust also: for that
whatsoever is not free of it self, and what soever is done by God as the
author and compeller thereof, deserves no punishment. And finally by this
means they take away hell it self, and all punishment of the life to come,
and bring in a most profuse liberty to all kind of vice and sin, as before we
have showed in the second Consideration.

These very two opinions, have given occasion to many, to go from Caluinisme to
Turcisme, or else to Atheism. For that it is much better to have no God, Flores
Calu. page 49.
then such a one, who is compeller and Author of all wickdnesse.

Now as concerning the inconstancy of their doctrine, even in most special
things, the same is incredible. Since the world began, there was never found a
writer so inconstant, so forgetful and so contrary to himself and ouerthrower
of his own doctrine, as Luther. For that he does no less impugn himself,
then the holy Fathers and Counsels, and that almost in all the chief heads of
faith, as In oper^ inscripto Lutherus Septiceps.
Ioannes Cochlaeus and others do show at large. And about that only controversy
of the Eucharist, out of Luthers own works, himself being yet alive, were
noted 36. manifest contradictions by one Gaspar In tabula contradict. Lutheri.
Querhamer a lay man of Saxony, and published to the world, to Luthers utter
confusion, and no small crack of his credit. In like manner about Communion
under one kind, were noted by Cochlaeus seven different heads contradictory
one to the other. And finally the whole book of Cochlaeus entitled Lutherus
Septiceps, conteyneth nothing else, but Luthers contradictions, and contrary
opinions, almost of every article in controversy, set down and expressed in
his own very words. And in every contradiction you know, it is necessary that
one part be falst.

Of Caluins Contradictions, 24. are set down by Coccius in his own words: two
whereof will be sufficient to set down in this place. Of Gods omnipotency in
one ad cap. 1. Lucae.
place he says: Verbo Dei etc. There is no impossibility to be objected to the
word of God: And in ad Cap. 2, I saiae.
another place he says: Illud somnium etc. That dream of the absolute power
in God, which the deuynes have introduced, is an execerable blasphemy. And de
praedestinatione.
again. Ego detestor etc. I do detest this doctrine, wherewith the ^apisticall
deuines do please themselves, when they feign a certain absolute power in God
etc. About the divinity of Christ, in one ad cap. 1. loan. verse. 1.
place he writes: Christum esse verum Deum etc. That Christ is true God, and
of the same substance with his Father. And in Cont. Gentil. refutat. 10.
another place: Nomen dei etc. The Name of God by excellency does pertayne only
to the Father: and he is only and properly the Creator of heaven and earth:
Nay more the Son is subject to the Father also according to his Divinity.
Again in the same place: Impropriam and duram etc. That is an improper and
hard speech of the Nicene Creed, God of God, Light of Light. And in his 2.
Epistle to the Poloniam, he affirms, that Christ according also to his Divine
Nature, is inferior to the Father. Behold then whither this nouelty is come
at last.

These things being considered, what wise man can ever be brought to believe,
that these men were sent of God to reform the Church? For how should they
repair this ruined Church, who so shamefully destroy their own doctrine? Who
can be thought so simple, and of so small wisdom and circumspection, that he
cannot avoid so manifest contradictions, in matters of so great moment?
Certainly whosoever is contrary to himself, and what he now establishes, by
and by destroys again, he without all doubt does not speak from the spirit
of God. For if I build (says the Apostle) the same things again, which I have
destroyed, I make my self a preuaricatour. ad Galat. 2.
The spirit of God cannot be contrary to it self, nor deny it self.

Whereunto is added, that although they contradict themselves in many things,
and overthrow their own pleas, yet notwithstanding they are so bold and
malepart, that they dare affirm themselves to be certain of their own
Doctrine, and the same to be most true, and the very Doctrine it self of
Christ. For so says Luther: Certus sum quod etc. Contra Rege^ Angliae.
I am certain that I have my Doctrine from heaven. And, I am most certain
that my Doctrine is not mine, but of Christ; and that my doctrine cannot be
contrary to it self, seeing that it is the Doctrine of Christ. And in another
place he says. Se ita esse etc. that hit Doctrine is so certain that he will
not have it judged of, Contra Statum Ecclesiast.
or contradicted by any man, no not of the Angels. And, that no man can be
saved, unless he receive, and embrace his doctrine.

In like manner Calvin was wont often to exclayme in his sermons, that he was a
Prophet, and, that be could not be deceived, unless God had deceived him etc.
as before in the 5. Reason we have showed.

By which it is manifest, that these men did not only, not speak out of the
spirit of God, when as they are so full of errors and contradictions; but that
they be impostors also and deceyuers of the people. For whosoever affirms his
Doctrine, wherein there be so many errors and contradictions, to be of God; is
presumed not to deal sincerely, but to speak against his conscience, and to
beguile the people: seeing that it is evident that he that does so, can have no
in ward light from God, whereby to make him certain of the verity of his
doctrine, or the testimony of God, because God cannot witness or reveal
Doctrines contrary or repugnant one to the other. With what force then do they
so bouldly affirm, that their Doctrine is of God, or the Doctrine of Christ?
therefore they do not deal uprightly in this affayre, but would only deceive
the world.

Some perhaps may answer herunto and say, that now and then they erred in the
beginning when as they had not as yet fully the spirit of God; but afterward
they neither erred, nor changed their opinions. But this answer has no color
of truth. For whosoever have been sent immediately from God to teach and instruct
the people, they had presently in the very beginning of their mission an
infallible assistance and direction from God, so as they could never err the
least jot in their Doctrine, as it is manifest of the Prophets and Apostles.
Nay in that beginning, they had most of all need of that direction, because
then every thing is more narrowly sifted and looked into, and their authority
and mission is compared with other learned men and their Doctrine* For if they
had been taken in any error or contradiction, all their credit and authority had
been lost, and they had worthily been rejected as false impostors and deceyuers
of the people. And so if Calvin and Luther had been sent from God to repair and
reedify the Church, it had been specially necessary that straight in their
beginning, their Doctrine had been solid, and without all contradiction, least
they might have been rejected and contemned as deceyuers, and that worthily.
Again I demand, of them, when and at what time did they at length receive
that fulness or plenitude of spirit, that they could not err any longer? How
should this be manifest to the world, that men might know when to believe them,
and when not, to wit not in the beginning, but yet in the later end? For if
this were not known, they might presume, and that worthily, that they would
err as well after, as they had done before.

And finally it is evident, that in all their life, they were variable,
changing, correcting, or contradicting themselves almost in every book and
work they set forth; as before we have showed by that little we have alleged,
and may do much more out of the many places produced by Cochlaeus, Coccius, and
others, out of their own words and wrytings. For the further they went,
commonly the more bitter they were; and what they spoke but mildly in the
beginning, that they either exaggerated, or changed it into some contradiction
in the end.

The VII. Reason, Taken from the frauds and deceipts which the Sectaries
commonly use.
THAT Religion is always to be had in suspicion, whose Authors and mantayners
do use guile, deceyts and lies to uphold and establish the same. For that true
Religion does not need any such helps, but false Religion; which when she is
destitute of true and solid reasons, she must necessarily place all her hope in
lies. But now the Authors and mantayners of Lutheranisme and Caluinisme do use
many fraud^ and lies, wherewith to propagate their religion; Ergo, they are
worthily to be suspected.

That they use deceyts, it is manifest. Heretics impose false doctrine upon
Catholics.
First, for that they do falsely charge the Catholics with many absurdityes,
whereby they may more easily impugn and defame their Religion: as for example,
that the Papists do worship images wood, stocks and stones, even as Ethnicks
do adore their Idols: so as whatsoever they find in Scripture that is against
the worshipping of Idols, that they bring in against the veneration of Images.
In which case they deal not sincerely. For they know well inongh, or may know
if they will, that in the Catholic Church Images of Saints were never adored
as Gods, or with any worship that is due unto God alone, as Idols are adored by
Ethnickes: Nor that this worship is in that manner done to Images, as though
there were any excellency in the^; but so as the same does pass to the first
pattern thereof, to wit to the Saints themselves reigning with Christ in heaven.
For that the external sign of adoration, Which is made before an Image, is
the worshipping of the first pattern or prototype thereof. As for example to
errect a Statua or Image to a King, and to do reverence thereunto; now this
reverence is done to the Image materially only; but the honor it self
redoundeth to the King, whom the Image represents.

That this honor which is thus done to Saints, is not the worship proper unto
God, is manifest; because we do not worship any Saint as supreme Lord and
Author of things, but only as a friend of him who is supreme Lord. For that we
do so highly respect God, that we think those whom he has so highly exalted
in glory, to be worthy also of some honor. Which thing truly does not any way
redound to the injury, but to the honor of God: even as it redoundeth to the
honor of a Prince, when we honor his Nobles and Courtiers for the respect we
bear unto the Prince; to wit because they be his domestical servants, friends
etc. And this I have here spoken, because that many simple people are
beguiled, and misled about this point.

Secondly, they say, that Papists do adore bread as God, and therefore they be
Artolatrae, which is as much to say, as Breadworshippers; by which name Calvin
oftentimes calls Catholics. But in this also they use deceit. For they know
well enough that Catholics do not believe, that in the Eucharist there
remains bread, but that there is present truly, really and substantially the
body of Christ, together with his soul and divinity; and so do not adore
bread, but the whole body of Christ there present.

Thirdly, they affirm, that Papists do not put their trust in the merits of
Christ, but in their own, and the merits of Saints.

Fourthly, they say, that Papists do teach, that men be not justified through
the faith of Christ, but by their own merits, and the like: which are nothing
else indeed, but mere impostures and deceytes, invented to defame the Catholic
doctrine. I could produce more then an hundred of like articles, falsely
imputed either to the whole Church, or to Catholic Doctors thereof. And now,
who will say, that in such men as these be, there is the spirit of Christ; or
that they do proceed sincerely in this business, and go about to establish the
Truth?

Moreover, these fellows do not only impute unto Catholics these and such
like absurdityes of opinions, They object fal^e crimes to Catholics.
but they lay to their charge also false crimes especially to such men whom
they most fear will withstand their wicked endeauours, to wit, Murders,
Treasons against Princes, and diverse kinds of such like villainy. Good God! How
many libels and pamphlets have been set out these years past by the Caluinists
and Lutherans, and do daily at this day come abroard, wherein they accuse
Religions men (innocent God wot from such crimes) of most outrageous and
filthly wickedness? But these wily deceyts are easily discovered. For either the
innocence of these men is wittnessed by the public letters of Magistrates, and
the others falsity made manifest: or else their accusations are clearly refuted
by the manner of their relation, and the circunstances themselves. For in some
of their Accusations there have been noted above 50. most manifest untruths: In
others 12.15.20. etc. so blind is that their fervent hatred, that they care not
with what probability they charge their Adversaries, so they may hope to hurt
them thereby. But this hurt they do, is but for a little while; for after that
the impudency of their calumniations is once discovered, it redoundeth to the
great comendation of those who were accused, and shame unto them that were the
plotters and abbetters thereof.

And finally for confirmation of their absurdityes, Their corruption of
Authorityes.
they use egregious frauds and deceyts, either by adding, taking away, or
altering something in the allegations of Scriptures and Fathers; or else by
omitting the plain words, and producing those that seem obscure, thereby to
make them seem to favor their Doctrine. For Luther, to establish his opinion
of Justification by only faith, cyting the words of the Apostle to the Romans 3.
Arbitramur hominem iustificari per fidem, we do think that man is justified
through faith; he adds of his own the word solam, Epist. ad amicum devoce
SOLA.
only. And when he was demanded why he did so, he made answore thus: Situus
Papista etc. If thy Papisticall friend be froward, and hard to please
concerning the word (only) presently tell him, that a Papist and an Ass is one
and the same thing: Sic vole, sic iube^, sit pro ratione voluntas: I will have
it so, I comaund it so, let my will be a reason. For, we will not be scholars
unto Papists, but their masters. And we will this once glory in our pride
against such like asses. anda little after: I pray thee give no other answer
to these asses concerning the word (only) but tell them, that Luther will have
it so, and that he is Doctor of all Doctors in the Popedom etc. Behold the
modesty of this Prophet in excusing that fraud.

The same Luther in the second Epistle of S. Peter, translating this sentence,
Quapropter fratres etc. wherefore brethren, labor the more, that, by good
works you may make sure your vocation and election, leaves quite out the
words, per bonaopera, by good works, because they were plainly against his
Doctrine, who taught that good works nothing auailed to faluatio^.

In the 75. Psalm, and 12. Verse, where it is said: Vow, and render unto your
Lord God etc. Luther makes thereupon this gloss in the margent, containing a
threefold fraud and deceyt: Quod pro Deo vero illum habere velitis, quemadmodum
requirit primum praceptum, and nolite vouere Sanctis, vel alia vota. Because
you will have him for your God, as the first Commandment does require;
therefore do ye not vow unto Saints, nor make ye any other vows.

In the 31. of Proverbs, where it is said: Mulierem fortem quis inueniet? who
is he that shall find a constant Woman? Luther upon these words puts in the
margent a Loue-song in rithme, to this sense: Nothing is more amiable on earth
then the love of a woman, to him that has the fortune to obtain it.

1. Corinthians. 9. where it is said: Numquid non habemus potestatem mulierem
sororem circu^ducendi? Have we not power to lead about a woman-sister? Luther
adds here unto of his own, in vxorem, for our wife; as though the Apostles
lead wives about with them, for conjugal use.

Zwinglius in place of those words Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body:
against the truth and authority of a Greek and Latin Copyes, in the Dutch
Bible, translateth it thus: Hoc significat Corpus meum: This signifies my body.

In the 2. Act. 27. where it is said: Non derelinques animam meam in inferno:
Thou will not leave my soul in hell. Beza translateth it thus: Non relinques
cadauer meu^ in sepulchro: Thou wiltnot leave my carcass in the grave;
changing the greek word (...) (which signifies animam) into cadauer, and (...)
orcum, into sepulchrum. And is not this, think you, to corrupt Scriptures?

Calvin does so expound almost all the places of Scripture, whereby the Ancient
Fathers did prove the Trinity of Persons, and the Divinity of the Son, or the
Holy Ghost, that he does eueruate all the force thereof; wherein he does not
alittle symbolize with the Jews, Sabellians, Arians, and Macedonians.

Again, the 53. whole Chapter of Isay, which is manifestly meant of the
passion, death, and satisfaction of Christ, Calvin expounds it metaphorically
of the griefs and molestations which the Jewish people, by their sins did
cause unto Christ. And what can be more violently or absurdly spoken? or what
can be more fitly accommodated to the Jews perfidiousnesse?

Matthew. 19. verse. 17. where it is said, Si vis ad vitam ingredi, serua mandata:
If thou will enter into life, keep the Comaundements: Calvin will have this
speech to have been uttered by Christ in a scoffing manner, or mockingly.

Allo ad Hebr. 5. verse. 7. Exauditus est pro sua reuerentia, He was heard for
his reverence, Calvin expounds the greek word (...), to signify metum, or
dubitationem, fear, or doubtfullnes: and says, that hereby is signified, that
Christ was stricken with so horrible a terror of death, that he was ready to
fall into delperation of his eternal salvation, I omit many other places.

Monsieur du Plessis a principal Caluinist in France, in a little book of his
which he published Of the supper of our Lord has corrupted more then an
hundred testimonies of Fathers and Doctors, partly by cutting of and mangling
their words, and partly by adding thereto of his own. As also in this book of
his, he produces many arguments, which by Schole doctors, as the manner is,
are objected against the truth, and afterward solued and answered by
themselves, as if they had been set down expressly by them for their own
doctrine and opinions. Of which fraud he was, these years past publicly
convinced, in presence of the late king of France, and many of his nobility, by
the Bishop of Eureux, now Cardinal: as is well known to all France. And the
very same deceypt and craft do all their writers use, when they go about to
prove their opinions and doctrine out of the Fathers.

Moreover, Their alleging of obscure Authorityes.
this is another common trick amongst these men, to wit, that in citing the
Fathers opinions, they do always omit their clear and perspicuous sense which
may explicate and plainly declare their mind, and instead thereof they produce
commonly some obscure^ and dark sentences of theirs, were they do but by
chance, and as it were by the way, touch the controversy in hand. Of which
fraud very many testimonies are alleged, not only against the Real presence
of Christ's body in the Eucharist, but against many other evident articles of
Catholic faith also; as for example against free will, against internal
lustice, against merit of good works, against the Authority of Counsels etc.
And there is nothing so clear and evident in our faith, which by certain
obscure places of Scripture, or Fathers may not seem to be impugned; nor is
there any thing so absurd which by that means may not be defended. For what is
more absurd then to say, that Christ's body is every where, alwel as his
Divinity? And yet do these men go about to confirm the same by many
restimonies both of Scriptures and Fathers. What is more absurd, then to say,
that God is the Author of all sin? Or that man has not free will? And yet do
they alleadg many obscure places, both out of Scriptures and Fathers to
establish those their fancies.

Y^ they seek for truth, why then do they omit those places which be plain
and perspicuous, and fly unto such as be obscure and dark? and why do they not
stand to the judgment of the ancient Fathers and Doctors, for explication
thereof, who were long before our time, but will only rely and rest upon their
own sense and interpretation? When as any obscure speeches of the Fathers do
but seem to f^uour them, those they do diligently and readily produce, and do
endeavor to confir me their Doctrine therewith: but when Catholics to the
contrary do alledg any thing out of the Fathers, which is evidently against
them, then they make answer presently, and say^ that the Fathers were me^^ and
consequently subject to error, but they rely upon the word of God, which cannot
err^.

Y^ you reply and say, that the Fathers do also rely upon the word God: they
answer, that the Fathers have not attained to the understanding of the Divine
word, and therefore were deceived. Y^ you ask them how they know that the
Fathers have not attained to the true sens^ and understanding of the word of
God, and themselves have: they answer^, that (...) is evident out of the word
of God. But how is it evident, seeing there beso many, and so diverse
interpretations amongst them; and that all the ancient Fathers have interpreted
otherwise them they; and the Lutherans otherwise then the Caluinists, and they
again otherwise then the Anabaptists? The interpretation (say they) is evident
to him that has the spirit, but to others not. And thus do the Patrones of
every Sect answer, and reduce their final judgment of every controversy to a
prin^^ spirit.

Therefore the Caluinists say; that all the ancient Fathers, all the Doctors of
the Church, all general Counsels wanted the true-spirit of understanding the
Scriptures, as also do the Lutherans and Anabaptists at this day want the same:
only themselves have the true spirit, and to them it is specially granted from
above: and therefore to them ^n is spirit is manifest, in so much that
whatsoever they teach, that is the pure Word of God. The very sum thing say
the Lutherans, to wi^, that the Counsels Fathers; and Doctors of the Church
did want this true spirit, as also the Caluinists, and Anabaptists do: only to
them it is granted and therefore say they, it is evident and certain, that
our doctrine is agrable to the Word of God. And finally the Anabaptists do take
away this spirit from all others, and claim it as proper only to themselves.

But how absurd (think you) and void of reason are al these things? How
incredible is it, that all the Catholic Doctors, and Fathers of the Church,
should want the true spirit of understanding Scriptures, and that it should
begiuen now to the Caluinists only, or to the Lutherans only, or to the
Anabaptists? How vain and frivolous is it, that every sect should challeng
this spirit as proper only to her followers, and have no other proof thereof,
then that the same is manifest to him that has the spirit, and he, to whom it
is not manifest, has it not? And is not this now to walk round in a circle,
running to the beginning, and reuoluing every controu^^sy to that which is most
obscure, and known to no man else? For now should I know, that you have this
spirit? When did ever the Doctors of the Church prove their assertions on this
fashion? Every proof ought to be made by that, which is most manifest to the
Adversary, so as it may be thereby the more easily granted by him: but this
proof of theirs, whereon all their opinions are founded, does proceed from
that which is most obscure, and only relyeth upon the judgment of a private
man, who is both a party and an accuser in the cause. For you cannot prove unto
me, that you have this spirit, but only by your own testimony, which you give
of your self: Joan. 8.
But he which giue^^ testimony of himself, his testimony is not true, to wit,
it is not to be accoumpted true, unless it be witnessed other ways. But they
(to wit the Caluinists) cannot prove themselves to have this private spirit by
other ways, but would have us to believe them on their bare word and
asseueration, because they say, that they are certain thereof. Therefore there
is no reason why we should believe them; but great reason father to the
contrary not to believe them at all. For that the spirit of God cannot be
contrary to himself: but these men are most contrary to themselves: Ergo, they
are not governed by the spirit of God.

To this now I add (and it belongs to no small deceit, and guilefull
machination of their that seeing these men have forsaken the ancient faith,
which has flourished for so many ages, and embraced now a new and vpstart
Religion, when Catholic Princes, according to the received custom from the
times of Constantine the Emperor, do go about to compel them to return to
their ancient Religion, which once they professed, and forsake their new, then
they complain grievously, and accuse them of tyrany, calling them enemies of
the Gospel, and stir up the whole world in hatred against them, as though
they offered violence to their consciences against their eternal salvation:
and withal under pretense of this their liberty, they raise up tumults and
seditions against them. But when they have once gotten the upper hand (God so
permitting the same for our sins) they will not grant any liberty to
Catholics, but stir up most sharp persecution against them, and force them
with diverse torments, and loss of goods to forsake the old Religion, and
embrace their new, which they never learned, never heard of in former tyms, to
which they have no obligation, which is confirmed with no sound arguments, and
which by my most grave and weighty reasons they see condemned of the Catholic
Church throughout all Christendom. Is this then to deal uprightly, and with a
sincere mind and equal right? Is it not rather a kind of lionish society, whose
right consists in strength and power of arms, and which does make and
repeal laws for it own interest? And what greater tyranny can be used over
men's consciences then this?

In the Catholic Church, none are forced to embrace her faith, but those that
sometimes have professed it, and now forsaken it, and this neither, until it
be fully proved that they have so done, and cannot deny it. But these our new
Masters do force and constrain men to embrace their Noueltyes, who never
before professed the same, and this also before they can convince them of
error. In which point they do also against their own doctrine. For that they
teach, that man has no freewill, but that he does all things by the decree and
impulsion of God, whereto he cannot resist; and that God does infuse his faith
only to the elect. By what right then do they force Catholics to embrace their
faith, which is not in their own power to do? And again seeing that their
whole form of faith is reduced to the testimony of every ones private spirit;
they do most wickedly, in compelling Catholics to believe, not only against the
testimony of their private spirit, but also against the public testimony of
the spirit of the universal Church. For it is most certain out of the holy
Writ, that the Church is governed by the spirit of God, and therefore cannot
err, which notwithstanding is not any way certain in private men.

The VIII. Reason, Drawn from the overthrow of good Works.
THAT religion, that takes away all affection and love of good works, is not
to be attributed unto Christ, who every where recomendeth good works, and the
observation of Gods comandments: but the Religion both of Luther and Calum
takes away all care of good works, therefore neither of them is to be deemed
Christ's Religion. And that these two religions take away the study and care of
good works, is manifest. First, for that the one and the other teaches that a
man by all his good works is made no whit the more just before God, meriteth no
everlasting reward, shall have neither less nor more reward in heaven when her
he do few good works, or many, or none at all. For as much as, say they, sole
faith is esteemed of with God; and that in faith alone is all justice
contained. For so affirms Luther in these words: De december praecept. c. 1.
I would not give an half penny for S. Peter's merits for helping of me,
because it is not in him to help himself, but whatsoever he has, he has it
of God by faith in Christ. Where he plainly teaches that S. Peter was not the
iuster, or received the more good in heaven for his good works, but that his
faith alone was crowned. And else where: So you see, how rich a Christian man,
or he that is baptized is, De captiu. Babil. c. de Baptismo.
who though he would never so feign, cannot debar himself of his salvation
by never so great sins, unless he will not believe. For no sin can damn him
but his vnbele^uing alone: all other sins, if his says return, or stand
stable upon gods promise, be in an instant absorpt by the same faith. Again in
another place: De votis monast.
Good works cannot be ^aught unless you prejudice and hurt says: since says
and good works be in matter of justification most contrary, whence it is that
the Doctrine of works is necessarily the doctrine of the devil, and a revolt
from the says.

The same is the opinion of Calvin, Lib. 3. c. 13.
as appears in his Institutions, where he says: That justice of faith can in
no sort have any association with the justice of works: and that not only the
works, that be effected by the only forces of nature, Lib. 3. c. 16. 2. and
sequent. etc. 19.6.2.4. and 7.
but all other also under what specious title soever, be excluded by the
justice of faith. And the same he teaches in many other places. If then there
be no merit at all in good works, if they make us nothing the more accepted to
God; nor we for them shall receive any reward in heaven; wherefore should we
weary our selves in exercising them? Wherefore should we spend our goods in
works of mercy toward the relieuing of the poor? why should we insist, and
spend hours in prayer? wherefore should we fast or punish our bodies? It is a
folly for us to weary our selves out in them, and to be sollicitous about the
exercising of them if no fruit return unto us by them. Who sees not that by
this doctrine all desire, and care of good works is extinguished, and clean
taken away?

Secondly, for that both these Religions teach, that all our good works do not
only merit no good at all before God, but further then this be also syns, and
that indeed of themselves mortal, though for their faith they be not imputed
to the believers. And Luther in many places teaches no less. As when he
says: In resolut. contra Eckium, and in assert. art. 31.
The just sins in every good work. Again In assert. art. 32.
a good work done in the best manner, is according to gods mercy a venial
sin, but according to his judgment a mortal sin. In another place: In assert.
art. 29.
Our best works whereby we labor to procure of God grace, help and comfort is
to be reputed unto us for sin, as the Prophet says, Psalm. 108. And his prayer
be unto him to sin. The same he inculcateth in ma^y other places.

Calvin delivers the same doctrine. For this he says: Lib. 3. Instit. c.
12.. 4.
All the works of men if they be censured as they deserve, be nothing but
foul stains, and filth. Neither can any work proceed from holy men, that
deserves not the just reward of reproach. The same he teaches c. 14. and else
where. Lib. 3. c. 14. 9.
If all our good works be truly sins, foul stains, and filth that merit
Gods ire, who sees not that it is much better to abstain from them, then to
do them? For by forbearing them we sin not, but by doing them we sin: and much
better it is not to sin then to sin. We must therefore abstain from giving of
alms, and from doing other works of mercy, yea we must cease to pray, because
all these, as they are done of us be sins. And how may all study and desire of
good works be better overthrown then by teaching that they do not only make
us nothing the more just or better before God, but that they be further silth,
foul staynes, and syns indeed.

Neither makes it to the purpose that they so often say that God requires
good works for a testimony of faith, Whether good works be required as the
sign of faith.
or as signs of faith, since they affirm it least they may seem to the people
to take away al good works clear. But this their pretense is vain. For how
does God require them if they be syns, which, unless he of his mercy should not
impute, the^ he should punish with everlasting pain? how does he for a
testimony of faith require those things that do rather give a testimony of want
of faith? For those who be follicitous about the doing of good works do there
by testify that faith suffices not. For if faith were enough, as they will
have it, and good works avail nothing at all, how be good works a sign of
faith? Therefore the study of good works is not a sign of that special faith
whereof they speak, and whereunto they ascribe all; but of the Catholic faith,
whereby we believe that faith is not enough, but that works be further
required that be meritorious of everlasting life: with which faith they have
nothing to do at all but reject it wholly. By what has been said, most evident
it is, that by those Religions all study and care of good works is taken away
and banished quite.

The IX. Reason, Deduced from the liberty of life, which they yeald unto.
THOSE Religions cannot possibly be thought to have been instituted by Christ,
that do utterly spoil men's minds of the fear of God, and do open a most wide
gate to all wickedness, and to all manner of impurity of life. For holy writ
does every where inculcate unto us the fear of God, neither it there any thing
that is more often repeated and more recomended unto us, sith thereof especially
depends all goodness and honesty of life. But the Religion of Luther, and
Galuin both do quite thrust out of men's minds the fear of God, and yeald a
liberty to all manner of wickedness, as far as does Atheism: therefore neither
the one nor the other can pretend Christ to be the Author of their Religion.

That they do this, and that by four different and diverse ways, has been by
us most plainly set down, and declared in the second consideration before,
and now I will in few words again manifest and prove the same by these reasons
following. First, for that the Lutherans Religion teaches, that the decalogue,
or ten Commandments appertain not to the faithful, as neither the ceremonial
and judicial laws also. For thus he says in his sermon of Moses: By the Text
it evidently appears, that the ten precepts also do nothing concern us: for
as much as our Lord brought not us, but the jews only out of Egypt. Moses is
not held in the new testament: for if I should observe him in one article, I
should be bound to the observation of the whole Law. The same be teaches in
many words* c. 4. Epist. ad Galat. and in c. 20. Exodi, If the ten
Commandments bind us no more, then the cerimoniall laws, as he expressly
teaches, c. 4. ad Galat. therefore as I am not bound to keep the cerimoniall
law, for example to circumcise the flesh, to eat the Paschall ^ambe, to
observe the Sabboaths etc. so neither the moral law, or the ten Commandments.
If I be dispensed from observation of the ten Commandments, what may it not be
lawful for me to do? I may then in outward show adore Idols, contemn parents,
make no reckoning of Magistrates, commit murders, adulteryes, robberyes give
false testimouies, and such like, that be prohibited and forbidden by the
decalogue, even as I may do those things, that have repugnance with the
cerimoniall law.

And though Calvin does not in express manner deliver the same Doctrine
couching the commandments, yet underhand he sufficiently infi^uateth it. Lib.
2. Instit. cap. 7.. 5.
First, when he teaches, That it is impossible also for holy men to keep Gods
law. For if it be impossible, it binds not at all: since none is bound to what
is impossible. No Tyrant ever bound his subjects to impossibilityes, and should
God do it, from whom so barbarous cruelty is most far? wherefore for this very
thing, that the ten commandments began to be impossible to be kept, they
ceased also to bind, and therefore they appertain nothing unto us. Further,
because Calvin teaches, that al our works be foul staynes, filth, and sin
before God: but none ca^ be bound to commit sin: therefore we are not bound even
to labor, or o^ce put our hand toward the fulfilling of the decalogue, or of
any part of it. The same I might confirm by other reasons, but these may serve
the turn: by which it is also manifest out of Caluins doctrine, that the
dealogue appertains nothing unto us.

Secondly, these two Religions make no difference of good and bad works before
God, but only before men. For as the works that are said to be evil, have their
manifest malice, even so to the good works of the just they attribute a secret
malice in regard of the internal concupiscence, by reason of which malice they
will have them to be mortal syns before God. And if it be so, wherefore should I
rather attend to good works with the affl^cting and punishing of nature, and
with the wasting of goods, then to bad that go accompanied with great
pleasures, and ofte^tymes with profit and commodity also. For since both be bad
before God, wherefore should I not prefer those, in which there is a temporal
both pleasure and ga^ne, before them which are not done without molestation,
trouble, and loss.

Thirdly, for that both Religions teach, that a man is by special faith alone
just before God, without any good work; of his part: and that to him who has
this faith, no syn is imputed. So teaches Luther in very many places, as has
been declared before. Of which Doctrine he infers, l. de libert. Christ. and
de capt. baby^ tib. ^. Instit. c. 8. 68. and l. 3. c. 4. 28.
That incredulity alone is syn, and that the incredulous, and vnbeeleuing alone
are to be damned: and that he, who retayneth his faith, cannot be damned at
all. The same teaches Calvin, when he says. All syns be to unbelieving
mortal: to the believing all be venial. He calls them venial, because God
imputes them not unto them, but in what they are done, pardons and forgiueth
them. And to is doctrine plainly follows of this principle, whereby they
conclude, that special faith alone is the cause of justification, that is,
that a man is just before God by this alone, that he firmly believes, that
Christ has fully satisfied for his syns, for that by this faith Christ's
satisfaction is applied unto him, and is made as it were his own, so as by it
be is reputed just before God, though he find no change of will at all within.
And therefore, while this faith continues, no syn can hurt him, because he
abides in Christ's justice, and he firmly ret^yneth it by faith. And if we
ground our selves upon this doctrine, we have no cause to fear the committing
of any wickedness whatsoever. For no punishment, nor vengeance is for it to be
feared at Gods hands, since God imputes it not for a fault, by occasion of
Christ's satisfaction communicated unto us by faith. And can Atheism give
greater liberty to all manner of wickedness, and to all impurity of life?

Some Caluinist Ministers in England confess it plainly enough, who of that
opinion of Calvin touching the justification of faith, Refert ex Foxo Guil.
Reginaldus l. 4. page 1020.
among others do deduce, and man tayne these conclusions. 1. All those do err,
who think, that they are to be saved, when they shall have done many good
works. 2. It is nothing necessary for us to lavour for the purchasing of life
everlasting by our good works, since we have it even now. 3. This is one of the
principal errors* that bears sway in the Christian world, to think, that
good works profit any thing to Salvation. 4. Our syns withdraw nothing from
Gods glory, for as much as all the burt of syn consists in the scandal of
our neighbor. 5. Christ h^th with his blood redeemed, and delivered us from
all s^ns, and laws, in so much as from this time forward no law binds us in
conscience. (Here we are in express words freed from the decalogne, and from
all precepts of Sacraments.) 6. You owe nothing unto God but faith, that you
confess Jesus Christ, and believe that he is risenfro^ death: for so you shall
be saved. In all other things God leaves you in your liberty to follow your
own will. For you may do all things without scruple of conscience: for you
cannot perish, nor be damned, whatsoever you shall outwardly do, or leave
vndo^e. All this they deduce (and that most rightly) out of that foundation of
Justification by special faith, first laid by Luther and Calvin, in whose
writings also all these former grounds almost are expressly had. Who now could
wish, or imagine greater liberty to all wickedness?

Add hereunto what has been said before in the second Consideration, where we
laid down three other manners, by which this liberty is granted. I omit to
speak of that window, that Calvin has opened, when he taught, l. 2. Inflit.
c. 25.. ^2.
That the pain of the damned is nothing else, then to feel God an adversary,
and to be put in fear by him, though that pain be represented us by things
corporal, as by darkness, weeping, gnasshing of teeth, the inextinguible fire
etc. By which words he plainly insinuates, that hell is nothing else, but
vain terrors. For if God inflicteth not any pain, but only affrigteth the
damned, certainly vain is that terror and to be laughed at, vain be the
pains of hell, and nothing to be weighed, or regarded at all.

The X. Reason, That they renew old Heresies.
EVERY Religion is to be avoided, that contains heresies formerly condemned
by the Catholic Church, which have ever been held and reputed for heresies:
But these new Religions contain such heresies; yea they seem to be nothing
but a mass, and heap of diverse heresies, in scueral ages taught by diverse
arch heretics, and in former times by the Catholic Church condemned: therefore
they are to be shu^ned. We are to prove our minor: and therefore let us consider
the principal points of doctrine, that these religions maintain.

1. Both, as well Luther, as Calvin teach, that there is no liberty of will And
Luther in his 36. article affirms, that it is the principal soundation of
his religion. But this was long ago the heresy of Simon Calvin l. 1. Recognit.
Magus, and Valentinus, as testifies S. Augustine haer. 11. and of the Aug.
haer. ^6 Hier. in prlog contra Pelag.
Manichies, and of in ^ont. Constant. sess. 8.
VVicliffe etc.

2. Both do teach, that God is the instigatour or mouer to all wickedness; and
that all euylls be done by virtue and power of Gods decree. And this again was
in times past an heresy of Simon Vince^t. Lirin.
Magus, and of Eusebius l. 5. c. 20.
Florinus.

3. Both teach, that good works be not necessary to salvation, and that faith
is enough. But this was an heresy of the same Simon Iren. l. 1. c. 20^
Magus, and of Aug. haer. 54.
the Eunomians about the year of Christ 360.

4. Both also teach, that syns, though never so many and great, do not hurt him
who has faith, for that the malice of them is not imputed to him who
believes. And this was also in times past an heresy of the Aug. haer. 54.
Eunomians, and of Basilides, and Carpocrates, as witnesses Irenaeus l. 1. c.
23. and 24.

5. Calvin denies the real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist. But
this was again an heresy of Berengarius, about the year of our Lord 1051.
Where it is to be noted, first, though some privately before Berengarius
doubted of that matter, and moved the question about it, yet none was so hardy,
as to profess it in public, as testifies Hugh of Langres, and Adelman of
Bressia in their epistles to Berengarius, and Paschasius in his book of the
words of the Institution of this Sacrament. In so much, as this was the
constant and uniform doctrine of the Church, not opposed against by any
arch-heretike until the time of Berengarius. Secondly, that Berengarius his
opinion was, whiles he yetlyued, condemned in five Counsels, and that
Berengarius himself thrice abiured his opinion, and in conclusion died very
penitent in the Catholic faith. He being dead the same heresy lay buried up
welneere two hundred years, until the time of the Lollards, who brought it to
light again, as is gathered out of Trithemius in his Chronicle about the year
1315. After this again VVicliffe held the same, as appears by his third
article. After his death again there was a deep silence of that matter for the
space of an hundred years, until Swinglius renewed it, and Calvin, and some
others after him. Whereby it evidently appears, that this opinion was ever in
the Church held for a manifest heresy: and therefore either the Church has ever
erred in a principal article of faith, and so consequently it was never
Christ's Church, or that opinion which abrogateth, and disclaymeth from the
Real presence of Christ's body, is an heresy indeed.

6. Both take away all traditions, and would have all things to be comprehended
in Scriptures alone. The same was the heresy of the Arians, as is recorded by
S. Augustine: also of Nestorius, l. 1. contra Maxim. c. 2. and vlt.
Dioscorus, and Eutiches, as is declared in the seventh Synod, Act. 1.

7. Both deny the Sacraments of Penance, and of Confirmation. The Nouatians
taught the same opinion long ago, as witness S. Cyprian, l. 4. epist. 2. l. 3.
baer. fabularum.
and S. Theodoret.

8. Both teach, that the Church consists of good alone, and that the Church
in former times visible, perished notwithstanding for many ages, and that in
this time it only remains in their congregations. The very like was the
heresy of the Donatists, as testifies S. Augustine, l. de unit. Eccl. c. 12.

9. Both of them teach, that prayer is not to be made for the dead; that (...)
fast of Lent, or any other stable fasts be not to be keep, but every one is
then to fast, when it shall to him seem good. The Aerians taught the very same
in former ages, if we believe Epiphamus haer. 75. and S. Augustine l. dehaer.
c. 33.

10. Both deny the veneration of holy Relics, of Christ's and Saints Images,
and call it Idolatry. Vigilantius did no less many ages past, as witnesses S.
Hierome. The same did the Image breakers, as testify Zoneras, Cedrenus, and
Nicephorus touching them who made war against Images.

By these it is more then manifest, that the chiefest opinions, whereof
Lutheranisme and Caluinisme consist, be ancient heresies, long since condemned
by the Church, and that the same were always held in the Church for heresies,
The same may we easily exemplify and declare touching the rest. Vide Bellar. de
notis Eccl. c. 9. and Coccius de signis Eccl. l. 8. art. 3.
Wherehence it follows, that these Religions be nothing but the very sincke
of heresies of old, long ago put to silence, and now in these latter days
brought to light again.

The XI. Reason, From the want of a Rule of Faith.
THESE new Religions have no certain rule of Faith to follow; therefore they
are not to be received. For the principal heads of Religion must be
determined, certain, and withal immutable. And that they have not any
certain rule of belief, whereby it may be resolved what is necessary to be
believed, and what not, is evident. First, for that they admit neither the
traditions of the Church, nor the authority of general Counsels, nor the
judgment of the ancient Doctors of the Church, and of those who flourished and
lived before these our Controversies.

Luther rejects all traditions in c. l. 4. c. 8.. 6.7 8 in Antid. ad 4. fes^.
Conc. Trident.
1. ad Galatas, as does Calvin also l. 4. Instit. and they teach that nothing
is to be believed, nothing to be received an holy Scripture.

Luther so contemns General Counsels, which have hitherto had most great
authority in Gods Church (for they be as it were the Parlaments of Princes, In
art. 115 and sequentib.
and Peers in Christ's Kingdom) as he will have the definitions thereof subject
to the judgment and censure of every private person. And he further says, that
it is a mad thing, that the Counsels will conclude what is to be believed. And
in the same place, he teaches that what is to be believed, what not, is to be
left to the judgment of every spiritual man.

Calvin insinuates no less, l. 1. c. 7. 1.2. and 4.
when he says, that it is not for the Church to judge what books be
Canonical, but that appertains to the inward spirit alone.

Finally as touching the Fathers, Luther cares not for a thousand Augustines,
l. contra Regem Augiae.
a thousand Cyprians. Calvin also in very many places contemns them, and
affirms that they erred. Wherefore none of all these is unto them a rule of
faith.

But say they: The Scripture it self is unto us a rule of faith, and it cannot
err. But it is an easy matter ^o show, that this rule serves not the turn.
First, because we by this rule cannot judge of the Scripture it self, and so
the rule it self will remain unto us uncertain, which yet should have the
greatest certitude of all. For by the Scripture it cannot come to be known for
certain, that such a book is truly Scripture, is not Apocripall, nor composed.
by some deceiptfull person: that this, or that sentence is not perverted,
northrust in. Finally that nothing is added, or taken away, that makes to the
substance of doctrine. All this cannot to be known by Scripture, but proved
only by certain humane weak conjectures, if you take away the traditions of
the Church, and so the whole foundation of our faith shall rely upon uncertain
conjectures. Moreover the virtue and efficacy of the Scripture consists not
in the sound of the words, but in the sense and meaning, which is the life and
soul of the Scripture. But there may be a thousand controversies about the
sense, which cannot in any sort be decided by the Scripture it self, if you
take a way Traditions, and the exposition of the Fathers, as experience
teaches. For about the sense of these words, Hoc est Corpus meum, and of many
more, there is most eager disputation between the Lutherans and Caluinists etc.

If you say with Calvin, that the judgment touching the Scriptures, and the
understanding of them, belongs to an inward spirit, this is nothing but the
dictamen of an internal spirit, that is, for the private judgment of every
particular person to set down the first rule how to believe. For every one may
say, that he has the spirit, and by the inspiration thereof can judge and
determine, that this part, or book is holy Scripture, and not that: that this
is the sense not that. So a^ Lutheran out of his spirit gives judgment, In
prologonou^ Testamer. ti.
that S. James Epistle is a strawy Epistle, and the Apocalypse of S. John, of
doubtful authority. But the Caluinist out of his soiri^ judges the one and
the other to be the word of God. So Luther out of his spirit judges, that this
false opinion is to be abolished, that there be four Gospells: for that S.
John's Gospel is but one, fair, true, and principal, and to be far preferred
before the other three. In like manner S. Paul's and S. Peter's epistles do sar
go beyond, says be, the three Gospells of Matthew, Mark, and Luke. He would
willingly have rejected them, because they plainly prove and establish the
merit, and necessity of good works, and the observation of the commandments,
and do recommend chastity, and poverty. But when he durst not clean reject
them, he would extennate their authority, and insinuate, that they were not
written with the spirit of God.

In like manner Calvin out of his own sense judges, that these words, Hoc est
Corpus meum, have this meaning, This breed is the figure of my body: and Luther
will have it; This bread is truly my body. I omit other thing without number,
by which it appears, that every ones private judgment is proposed for arule
of belief, or which is the same, that the Scripture it self is expounded and
interpreted according to every ones private judgment.

Secondly, that is not any fit rule of belief, that is a like accommodated to
contrary doctrines: but the scripture is accommodated to contrary Religions and
doctrines; for as much as all the Sects of this time, though they do in an
hostile manner dissent and contend in very many, and those the most inportant
heads and grounds, do nevertheless make this rule to serve their turn, and do
use it for the mantayning of their opinions and heresies. For the Lutherans say
they rely upon Scripture: the Caluinists affirm the same: the Anabaptists also
are nothing behind them in auerring, that the Scriptures be for them. And no
marvel, because every one of them takes and interpreteh the Scripture, not
conform to the common understanding of the Church or the common exposition of
the Fathers as do the Catholics, but according to the sense of every private
spirit: in which sort it may be easily accommodated to all heresies. Whence
it is evident that this rule so taken, serves not the turn, whiles all is
reduced to the judgment of every ones private spirit.

Thirdly, if there were some judge who in every Controuerly, wherein he were to
give sentence, should so do it, as it could not be certainly understood for
whether party he pronounced the sentence, but both parties should contend, that
the matter were adjudged and determined on their side, and that the sentence of
the Judge was expressly and plainly pronounced for them, such an one in the
opinion of all men could not be thought a competent Judge, since no matter in
controversy could be determined or ended by sentence given by him. For after
sentence, there would be as greata contention about the sentence it self,
whether of them it might seem to favor as there had been before about the
right that each party had. And such a Judge is Holy Scripture, if you take away
the Churches interpretation and declaration, and the exposition of the holy
Fathers; for as much as the sentence thereof is ever such, as it cannot be
evident to both parties, whether of them it favors whiles the one and the
other does stiffly maintain, that it is most plain, that it holds and
stands for them. And hence it is that controversies be never ended: and
therefore it is not only a vain, but also a ridiculous thing to appoint the
Scripture alone for Judge. For in every controversy there ought such a Judge to
be designed, who may so give sentence, as it may be manifest to all, and most
of all to those parties, on whose behalf the cause is adiuged, otherwise such a
controversy can never be ended.

Wherefore those, who make the Scripture alone the Judge of matters in question,
do therein plainly manifest, that they admit not any judge at all, by whom the
cause may be determined, besides their private judgment alone. For they do, as
if Titus and Caius having a suite at Law, would not have any other Judge in the
matter but Justinian his Code, together with the Pandects, without having any
thing to do with the interpretation of Doctors: and Titus producing for his
own right some law, should by it maintain that the cause was manifestly
adjudged for him. And Caius again should deny it, who by citing an other law
for himself should say, that it was clear, that that law favored and made
for him, which Titus would in lake manner deny; and so they should both depart
without any decision of the cause or controversy in hand: would it not be a
matter worthy of laughter? and all would say, that neither of them desired the
determination or decision of the cause? And that neither admitted other Judge,
then his own judgment? In the very like manner, in this, that they will not
have any other Judge then Scripture, and every one reserueth the interpretation
thereof to his own spirit, they plainly show, that they have no will, that
the cause should be decided or defined by any lawful way, nor to admit any
Judge, but their own judgment.

Fourthly, how very insufficient this rule of belief is, experience it self
plainly teaches. For we see, that there is not any end of controversies among
them, even about the greatest matter of faith, since at this very time the
Lutherans, Caluinists, and Anabaptists are at bitter wars one with another
about many points of faith, and do impeach one the other of heresy. The
Lutherans do dissent both among themselves in many things, and from Luther
himself, their Father and Apostle: in so much as at this time there be
reckoned thirty one principal Sects of Lutherans, different in name, and
disagreing in many points of doctrine. The Caluinists be at variance among
themselves, especially in the Article touching the head of the Church. For a
great part of them gives that power to the secular Prince, though she be a
woman, and these be called Protestants. Others of them hold the same for
impiety, and blasphemy, and those they call Puritaus. The Anabaptists differ
among themselves in very many things, so as of them there be numbered 14. diverse
Sects, distinct both in names, and in points of doctrine.

Finally, it is now come to this, that where every one follows this rule of
Scripture alone, and relyeth upon it, there be almost as many heresies, as
there be heretics. For the greater part of them, especially the more simple,
affirm that they little regard, or care what Luther, or Calvin taught, since
they cleave fast to the holy Scriptures, and recur to the word of God, in which
there cannot be any error; and so they think themselves very secure. And
every one understands the Scripture according to his own capacity and sense.
Wherhence it follows, that where they think they have the Scripture for an
infallible rule of their belief, instead of Scripture they have, and follow
their own imagination. For whatsoever they imagine to be signified and meant
by the words of scrip ture, they take for the true fense of Scripture: and so,
lookehow many diverse imaginations of men there be, so many rules there be of
belief.

But whence is it, that to every one his own imagination should seem the most
true verity, and the very fense of Scripture? It proceeds partly of a certain
exceeding selfe-pleasing lone, and estimation. For he, who makes any great
reckoning of himself, easily persuades himself, that all his own
innentions, and conceits of mind be great and extraordinary: partly by working
of the Devil, who does in wardly pernert mensphanfyes, so as what they
apprehend, they forth with, for every most light and idle poor reason, think
to be most cuident truth. For whiles men wearied with the ancient Religion,
and loathing it, do auerse the truth, and long to hear nou^lt yes, they are
by Gods just judgment suffered to be begnyled by the Devil. Whereupon, whiles
he work the inwardly in their senses, they think themselves to have recevued
the light of Gods spirit, and unto it they refer all judgment touching
matters of faith. Hence it is, that to every sect, and almost to every private
man their own apprehension seems to be the pure word of God, neither care
they for all the reasons, that are brought to the contrary. The Apostle
insinuates no less, when he says: 2. These. 2.
For that they have not received the Charity of truth, that they might be
saved, therefore God will send them the operation of error, that they may
believe lying. He shall send, not by way of command, but by giving more power
to the Devil for the deceyuing of them, who have contemned the truth, or
ancient Religion, and the thrusting of them into a thousand errors.

But the most of them, especially the simple, say: God will not permit them to
be deluded, who search the truth with an humble heart: for the has promised,
that, he will give a good spirit to them who ask him. And this do I: for I
make my petition to God, that he would please to illuminate me, and open unto
me the true sense of the Scriptures, and I cease not continually to search
them. This is a great deceit of the Devil. For how do they with an humble
heart search out the truth, who contemn and makeno esteem of the judgment of
the Doctors of the Church, of the interpretation and exposition of the holy
Fathers, and of the definitions of General Counsels? who refuse to use the
way appointed, and showed by God, and require unnecessary revelations? For from
them they might understand the truth, and exempt themselves from all error:
but they have not a will to submit themselves unto them, thinking that they may
by their own industry, their own wit, and private spirit, with a more
facility, and certainity find the truth out of the bare and naked Scriptures.
As though the holy Fathers, Doctors and Prelates of the Church, did either not
search the Scritures, or wanted the spirit of God, and sound judgment, so, as
it passed their skill to ariue to the true understanding thereof? What greater
pride can there be thought, then that a priuare person, and commonly an Idiot,
ignorant of all antiquity, and good literature, should prefer himself before
so great authority and holiness, and so great a number of Doctors? And therefore
they must not think, thatso long as they be of that mind, they shall obta^ne
any thing at our Lords hands, because they ask both ill, and prowdly, but that
they shall rather be deceived by the spirit of pride and of lying, whereunto
they are by Gods just judgment for so great a crime delivered.

This is that spirit, whereof all heretics, though they be never so different
in Doctrine, have their part, and vaunt themselves, and of which every one
thinks the truth to be revealed unto him: which, certes, he that is not
blind, may casily observe and see, because Gods spirit reucaleth not
contraryes. Moreover, the holy Scripture no where remitteth private men in
doubts of faith to the fearch of the Scriptures, but to the Church, and to them
who be the Prelates of the Church. So in Deu^eronomy c. 17. in matters of doubt,
they are remitted to the Priests, who have charge and rule for the time: whom
he, that shall refuse to obey, is sentenced to die. Therefore has God appointed
pastors, and doctors in his Church: therefore would he have it conspicuous to
the whole world: to be the pillar and firmament of truth, that all might with
case make their recourse unto it, and most securely repose upon the
determination of it. There is not given to all the spirit of understanding the
Scriptures, as is plain by testimony of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 12. 1. Joan. 4.
2. Cor. 11.
We are not to give credit to every spirit; but the spirits are to be tried, if
they be of God. Wherefore though your spirit suggest unto you something, you are
not therefore secure: for you are not sure, that it is of God. For it is
certain, that infinite numbers have been, and are deceived, and cuery heretic
vaunteth himself of this spirit. The Angel of Satan oftentimes transfigureth
himself into an Angel of light. Wherefore by what has been said it is most
evident, that a private spirit cannot possibly carry it self for the rule of
belief.

The XII. Reason, Drawn from Absurdity.
IF any of these new Religions, for example that of Calvin, were Christ^true
Religion, besides other absurdities insinuated before, this would further
follow that all Catholics, which have been from the Apostles times until this
present, be damned, and adjudged to pains cuerlasting: for as much as
according to a principal doctrine of the Caluinists, they wanted justifying
faith, and therefore justice also before God: whence it is, that they continued
in their syns, and died in them. For faith necessary to justification, as this
religion holds, is that whereby a man steadfastly believes, that himself is
just before God for Christ's satisfaction, which is to him by this faith
applied, and imputed. And certain it is, that this faith was unknown to the
world until Luthers time: neither does he deny it but gloryeth rather, that he
notified and revealed to the world the true manner of justification, obscured
by antiquity.

The same is manifest by the writings of all the ancient Fathers, both for that
besides faith, they require an inward chaung of the will, and purpose of keeping
the whole law; and also for that they condemn that security of salvation, and
will have a man to work his salvation with fear and trembling, and to be
always sollicitous and careful: and therefore they do all with one consent
reject that special. Faith, by which a man certainly believes himself to be
just, as mere presumption. For though we are to bel^eue, that Christ has on
his part most fully satisfied for us, yet it is not manifest unto us, whether
we have done all that which is on our part necessary for the making of
ourselves partakers of this satifaction, and whether we have not at one time or
other lost our part in it.

Manifest therefore it is, that all those of former times wanted this faith and
consequently they are all dam^ed so many holy Fathers, so many (...), so many
Virgins, and Saints; Irenaeus Iustine, Gregory Thaumaturgus, Nazianzen, Basil,
Chrysostom, Damascene Hilary, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Martin, Nicolas,
Antony, Benedict, Bernard, Dominicke. Francis, Laurence, Vincent, Sebastian,
Catharine, Cecily, Agnes, and infinite others, who were admirable to the world,
either for their sanctity and miracles, or for the glory of martyrdone. Finally
all, that have been before us even from the Apostles time till now, be damned.
And to use Tertullians words: l. de praescript. adue^sus haereticos.
In vain has the Gospel been so many ages preached: in vain have so many
thousands been baptized: in vain have so many works of says been exercised,
so many virtues, and so many gifts of grace to no purpose wrought: so many
priesthoods and so many offices admitted in vain: and to be short in vain
have so many martyrdomes been crowned.

But how past belief, absurd, and blasphemous a matter is this? How contrary
and repugnant to the judgment of the whole world, and of all ages past?
Neither can it be said, that their ignorance excused them, because none can be
saved without faith, without the justice of Christ, without the participation
of Christ's satisfaction, without the remission of sins, as the Scripture,
especially of the new Testament, every where teaches: no ignorance can make or
cause, that any may be saved without them. Wherefore there is no ouasion here:
for they either be all damned, or else Luthers and Caluins Religions be false,
and impious in their principal doctrine touching Justification.

Lo here 12. Reasons, by which it is made plain, that these new Religions be
to be shunned, as false and pernicious: and now we come to our last
Consideration.

X. CONSIDERATION, and conclusion of this whole Consultatio^.
LASTLY, that Religion is to be embraced during life, that we would wish we had
followed, and held at the hour of our death, and whereof we may be able to
give a just account, when we shall stand before the tribunal seat of Christ.
For touching what is to be done, there cannot a better Co^sultation be had,
then by the consideration of death, and of the latter Judgment; namely that we
make an election of that here, which in the article of our death may make most
to our profit; and shun that which may at that time procure or cause our
certain ruin and perdition: or at least hazard the same. And such is the
Catholic religion: and that we shall have a will to prefer it when we come to
dye, is evident.

First, by the example of very many, who, though they have lived as heretics,
yet when they come to dye, do desire to die Catholics: for so to do they deem
it most for their security.

Secondly, for that every one then wishes he had done many good works, and
that he had carefully taken heed of all sins, to both whereof the Catholic
Church has effectual iuducements: and Lutheranisme and Caluinisme have
neither the one, nor the other, but rather brings in a contempt of good
works, and liberty of life.

Thirdly, for that the Catholic Religion has many remedies, and preseruati^es
which are not in that dreadful passage to be contemned, as repentance for heir
sins, the absolution of Priests, the Sacraments o^ Extreme Unction and holy
Eucharist, which cause great comfort, and confidence to the faithful: for by
them Christ's satisfaction is communicated unto us. But a naked faith is a very
cold, and weak help in that article. For how may you in earnest persuade your
self, that Christ is propitious and merciful unto you, that you are just, and
to be by Christ saved, who contemn the ^emedyes by him appointed, and
determine to dye out of the communion of the Catholic Church? All lects of
this time do brag of this faith, but all of them shall not be saved: for as
much as there is but one true religion of Christ, out of which none can be
saved, as not only all Catholics, but Lutherans also, Caluinists, and
Anabaptists do also teach. And therefore your special faith will not profit you
any thing, unless you profess Christ's true religion.

That also such as have embraced the Catholic faith, and perseuered in it,
shall easily be able to give an account of that they have done, unto the
supreme Judge, and that not any danger at all i^ on that part to wards them,
is clear. For suppose, that I stand before that dreadful Tribunal, and am
asked, wherefore I embraced the Catholic, or Papistical religion, as they now
term it; and that I did not rather, leaving it, pass to that new religion,
created, and reformed ^y Calvin. I will with great security answer: That I
therefore held the Catholic says, What a Catho like will answer at the day of
^udgment.
because it teaches me to abstract my mind from ^errene things, and to
transfer it to the love of c^^estiall. It further ^eacheth me to master and
mortify my flesh, and to crucify it with the nails of the f^are of God, to
insist in good works, to obey Superiors, to attend to prayer, and to cut off
all liberty of synning. Therefore I held the Catholic Religion, because in it
I see very many, admirable to the whole world, for wisdom, sanctimony,
miracles, and the spirit of prophesy, whom it is impossible to have been in a
matter so important deceived: for that I see that God himself has, and does
in every age give testimony of it by many mi^acles: because I see Gods promises
fulfilled in it, as being dispersed and spread all the world over. Unto it have
the Gentiles been hitherto converted, and still continually are. In it there has
been in all ages exce^^^ing concord, and consent of Doctors in the grounds of
faith. In it has been and still is a perpetual succession of the Chair, and a
continuance in the ministers thereof from the Aposties. In it is a speedy
decision of all con^rouersyes. It has for so many ages stood immovable
against all heresies, and persecutions of Tyrants, neither could the gates of
hell any thing prevail against it: whiles all the contraryes be found in the
new Religions. And therefore I had no reason at all to revolt from this
religion, or to make any doubt of it at all.

But to omit further to prosecute other things of this kind, is it not enough
for my security, that I am sure, that I have followed that religion, in which I
see men of most holy life, and most celebrated for miracles S. Malachy, S.
Bernard, S. Dominicke, S. Francis, and alothers, who were five hundred years
since by their heavenly conversation, and wonderful works, an admiration to
the world, to have lived, and died? For most clear it is, that those
celestial souls, so addicted and devoted to God, so dear and familyar to
him, could not possibly be deceived in a matter of so great consequence. And
therefore in this cause of religion and faith I securely follow such captains
and guides, that have gone before me.

But now tell me, you, who have embraced another religion, what reckoning can
you give of that your deed, when you shall in that dreadful examen be asked
about it. You will perhaps answe^e the judge, What will an Heretic answer.
I did therefore forsake the Catholic faith, because I thought it full of
Idolatry, superstitions, and humane traditions: because I thought that
Antichrist did command and bear sway in it: because I thought the Catholics
did rely upon their own meritts, and not upon the price of thy blood. But what
if the Devils bewitching you, which now has a possession of your mind, should
then be taken away, and you should plainly see your self deceived, what
counsel would you take? for then there will not be any more time for
penance, and repentance. Will you peradventure allege ignorance? But that
will not excuse you, because you might easily have known the truth, if you had
used the diligence, that you were bound to do in so important a matter. Neither
ever wanted you just reason of doubting, which should have moved you to seek
for resolution. Wherefore as it shall not excuse the Jews that they erred of
ignorance, because they might have known the truth, so shall it not excuse
you. For that you might without syn depart from the Catholic Church, it was
your part not only to think, and upon certain light suspicions to conceive,
but also most certainly to know, and setting aside all affection to be most
assured, that there were those evils in the Catholic religion, so as there
might be left no further scruple in your mind, nor any just cause of doubting
in the matter. But you were so far from having such a certitude touching the
Churches errors, as you had not any probable reason to persuade you to the
contrary. For by what probability, or pretense of truth could you be persuaded
to think that, that religion was obnoxious to Idolatry, and to so great
errors, which you saw embraced for so many ages, of so many men, renowned for
their wisdom, and holiness of life? Which you saw honored with such, so great,
and many miracles, and martyrdomes? Which you saw spread all the world over? In
which there was an exceeding conspiration and concord of the Doctors, a
perpetual succession, and a most manifest and known continuance from the
Apostles? How can it possibly be, that none of the Doctors, nor no holy man did
for so many ages together note and observe this Idolatry, these superstitions,
and errors?

Again, how could you persuade your self that, that is Christ's true religion,
that makes God the author, and mouer, yea compeller to all wickedness? that
spoyleth men of the liberty of free will? that takes away the care of
exercising of good works? that opens a most wide gate to al manner of
wickedness, as does Atheism? that under show of Christian liberty, exempteth
and freeth the subjects from the laws and obedience to their Princes, that
reuiueth and brings many ancient and condemned heresies to light again, the
authors whereof be not recommended for any austerity, conversation, or
sanctimony of life, nor celebrated for any miracles, but me^ given to the
pleasures of the flesh, covetous of things of the world, ambitious, foul
spoken, seditious, infamous for Apostasy and sacrilegious Marriages, given over
to lust, and withal wonderfully inconstant in doctrine?

Finally, if any of these new vpstart Religions be true, then there was not any
religion of Christ for so many ages past: Christ's Kingdom was ruyned and
overthrown: Gods promises touching the stability and continuance of his Church
were made void; the gates of hell prevailed against it. The Gospel was then
for so many hundreds of years preached in vain: in vain was it believed: in
vain were so many converted from paganism: in vain were Baptism, and other
Sacraments administered: in vain were fasts kept, and mortifications of the
flesh practiced: in vain were martyrdomes endured, and the blood of so many
thousands shed for the confession of Christ's name. Therefore all those of our
religion who are gone before us, are perished, so many thousands of martyrs and
Confessors, so many souls consecrated to God, celebrated for holiness,
miracles, and the spirit of prophesy. For all of them had not any part of true
religion in them, nor true justice, and all were given to Idolatry.

But if all this be false, blasphemous, and even horrible to think, how could
it be, that you could not think, that those religions, out of which so horrible
things are manifestly deduced might be false, or at least that you doubted not
of the^? And if you doubted, wherefore labored you not to understand the
truth, on which your whole souls good depends?

Our Lord admonished, that we should carefully take heed of false Prophets, who
come unto us in sheep clothing, and inwardly be ravening wolves. Matthew. 7.
How did it not come at one time or other into your mind, to think and to
fear, least Luther, Calvin, Menno, and the like, were of the number of them,
of whom our Lord premonished us to beware? For these men under a glorious show
of Gods word, and of the pure Gospel, presented themselves unto the world, as
sent of God for the saving of the sheep, and in the mean time they destroyed
the sheep with the poisoned food of their doctrine By their fruits, says our
Lord, you shall know them. And what fruit is this? Seditions, wars, the
spoiling and overthrowing of Churches and Monasteryes, the ruining of Cittyes,
the abolishing of ancient piety and devotion, the giving scope to all
enormityes and wickedness.

We know by testimony of the Apostle, that many heresies shall rise in the
latter times, and that many false Prophets, and seducers shall by the
instigation of Satan show themselves. Wherefore as often as any new doctrine,
that opposes it self against the Church, puts the head forth, we must at
least suspect it, together with the Author thereof.

Wherefore I desire and beseech all, The conclusion of the whole work.
that be out of the Catholic Church, by the goodness of God, whereby we be
created, and by Christ's blood wherewith we are redeemed, by the everlasting
inheritance, which we expect in heaven, and by that torrent and full measure of
Divine pleasure, wherewith they shall be there made dru^ke who shall persevere
in truth and justice to the end, that they would apprehend and conceive of this
busynes thoroughly; and attentively consider, whether they stand upon a solid
and sound foundation: whether they are likely to be secure, touching their
religion, at their hour of death, and when they shall stand before the
Tribunal of Christ, in that instant of time, when an eternal, and immutable
sentence is to be received. Let them examine this our Consultation, which we
have written to that end: Let them not rest until they shall have duly
discussed all, and gotten the plain euidency in a busynes so greatly importing
them.

Let then think, how great a punishment attends on them, if the religion
that they hold, be heresy, and themselves be heretics. And that it is heresy,
and a most pestilent one indeed, all Catholic Doctors, all Universities, and
all the Christian world (excepting those who follow it, the number of whom,
compared with others, is very little, and their learning very mean) do hold
for undoubted, and most certain: in so much as an infinite number there be,
who be ready to dye, and to expose the everlasting salvation of their souls
for confession thereof.

And in very deed Heresy is a most grievous syn. First, How great a syn Heresy
is.
because it is the cause, that a man prefers his own judgment before that
of all the Fathers, of all the Doctors of the Church, of all Counsels, and of
all the Bishops of the whole world. For he contemns them all, as men
destitute and deuoid of Gods spirit, which he arrogateth to himself alone, and
to others his like: and therein a wonder it is, how great pride there is.
Secondly, he censureth Christ's Spouse which is the Church, to have committed
adultery with Satan, and to be the child of perdition. Thirdly, he charge it
with the crime of Idolatry, and with diverse superstitions. Fourthly, he casts
forth many blasphemies against the holy Eucharist, and Gods Saints. Fifthly, he
handles al holy, and sacred things after a most unworthy manner. Sixthly, he
calls Christ's Vicar on earth Antichrist, and calumniateth and reproacheth him
a thousand ways, without any color of truth at all. The same does he with all
degrees, and orders of the Church. To be short, every Heretic has a good will
to overthrow the whole Church, and to extinguish al Catholic religion. Thus
you see, that the heresy of our age contains extreme pride, many foul
blasphemies, How grievous punishment heresy deserves.
many calumnies, slanders, and most injurious proceedings, many sacriledges,
and an extreme and deadly hatred against Christ's Church. For all these evils,
and many more be intrinsecally in heresy, and it habitually inclines unto
them, and daily does (even actually) move, and drive unto them. So do all
Doctors of the Catholic Church hold of Heresy, and the thing is more then
plain of it self, as experience teaches. And therefore Heresy, consorted
with these her Impes and offspring, is a greater syn, then be an infinite number
of sins of Catholics.

And now according to what we have said, let them, I beseech you, daily weigh
and consider, how great will be the punishment of this sin. ad Gal. 5. Col.
^. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Tim. 1. etc.
For if but for one sin of theft, or of fornication, unless a man here help
himself by the antidote of penance he is to endure fire everlasting, as the
Scripture teaches: what and how great pain and punishment is he to expect for
the sin of heresy which exceeds a thousand thefts, and a thousand
fornications. If the pain, that our fire naturally inflicteth, should be a
thousand times more hoate and schorching then now it is, and one were cast into
it, how sore, incomprehensible, and insufferable a pain would it be?

Let none flatter himself, that there shall not be in that placee the pain of
fire but only I know not what terrors of God incensed with anger, as Calvin
feigneth. But this assertion of his is over plainly repugnant to Scripture,
Math. 25. Marc. 9. Psalm. 10. Psalm. 20. A pocal. 20.
for as much as it says: Go ye into fire everlasting. Again: Their worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Again: He shall upon sinners rain
snares, fire, and brimstome, and the spirit of tempests shall be the part of
their cup. Thou shall put them as a furnace of fire in the time of thine anger.
Our Lord in his anger shall trouble them: and fire shall devour them. The false
Prophet was thrown into a poole of fire and of brimstone. The same is the
opinion of all the ancient doctors besides: wherefore we must hold for
certain, that there shall be a true fire there more intensiue and more
scorching then our fire here, wherein all heretics shall burn, and shall be
tormented both day and night for all eternity, as long as there shall be an
hell, as long as heaven shall stand, and as long as God shall live who dies
not. And the smoke of their torments shall ascend in the sight of our Lord for
ever and ever. These words be most faithful, and true.

Then shall they accurse them, who deceived them, and their masters by whom
they were drawn and brought into that misery. They shall accurse the devil who
blinded their eyes, that they saw not the truth, and under a pretense of piety
diuersely bewitched them. They shall also accurse themselves for giving ear
unto them, for so foolishly embracing a new doctrine without diligently
examining it before: and for having been so blind, negligent and slothful in
discussion of a matter, that so nearly concerned them. Wherefore, to the end
they may not cast themselves headlong into this gulf and sea of miseries, let
them with all care, study, and diligence examine this whole business of
religion, and there about use the counsel and advise of men of greatest
wisdom, learning, What things be required for the searching out of the truth.
and virtue.

But one thing there is, that is most of all wont to hurt this sincere
deliberation, and that is a certain anticipating and foregoing opinion, that
possesses very many touching the Idolatry, superstitions, and abuses of the
Catholic Church. Wherefore let them in the first place for a time lay aside
this their precipitate and fore-running judgment, and think that they may be
deceived in the matter. For it seems a thing beyoud belief, that most holy
and most learned men, such as the Church ever had very many, did either not see
this Idolatry, if there were any, or if they saw it did not only not reject
it, but also did with all diligence retain and embrace it. This is a
calumniation of old, both of the Mahometans, and of the Image-breakers. And
there never was yet any Sect of heretics, which did not with extreme rancour
and malice oppugn and oppole it self against the Church, and impose very sore
and great errors and abuses upon her. For such a pretense meet was it for them
to use, that they might seem to have had just cause of their revolt and
departure from the Church.

Secondly let them not cease to crave light from God, whereby they may clearly
understand, which is Christ's true religion, and true Church, and let them yeald
themselves ready to embrace it. For faith is Gods gift. Joan. 6.
None, says he, can come unto me, unless my Father shall draw him. None can
come to Christ by true faith without light given him from the father of heaven:
and therefore let them labor to procure this illustration, this light, and
this drawing, by earnest and contynuall prayer: let them say with the prophet:
Psalm. 12.
Lighten mine eyes, that I may never sleep in death: least when I am to depart
out of this life, mine enemy may say. Psalm. 42.
I have prevailed against him. Put forth thy light, and thy truth, let them
conduct and bring me unto thine Holy mount, Psalm. 1 42.
and into thy tabernacles. Make known unto me the way where in I may walk,
because unto thee have I lifted up my soul. Deliver me out of the hands of the
enemies of my souls good. O Lord, to thee have I fled for succor, teach me to
do thy will, because thou art my God. And the like.

To prayer let them join alms and beneficence toward the poor and needy.
For how much these two avail, and profit toward the obtaining of light for
the embracing of the true religion, is manifested by that example of Cornelius
the Centurian, Act 10.
to whom it was said by an Angel: Cornelius thy prayers and thine alms have
ascended to be remembered in the sight of God. And now send to Ioppa, and send
for one Simon, who is surnamed Peter: he shall tell thee what thou must do.
Let them therefore propose this example unto themselves, and imitate it, who in
this business of true religion have a desire to be directed of God.

In the mean time let them with diligence, and with an earnest desire of
knowing the truth, ponder and consider those things, that be in this
Consultation proposed: and if they find therein any thing either doubtful, or
not sufficiently understood, let them repair to Catholic doctors, who will
with facility give them such satisfaction in all matters as their mind may in
conclusion find full repose, and quiet in the light of true religion.

This is that which we desire and crave, and with most humble petition and
suite beseech at thy hands, o true light, light eternal, and the light both of
men, and Angels. For notwithstanding they have been seduced, misled, and
carried away by the guile and deceit of the devil, and have revolted from
thee and thy Church, and have made war against thee, and it; yet they be thy
creatures, formed to thine Image, and likeness, redeemed and ransomed with the
price of thy blood, made, and called to the inheritance of heaven, and to be
consorts in thy kingdom.

Let not so noble a work of thine perish, which cost thee so dearly, which
will yeald thee eternal praises, if it once know the truth, and which will to
thy glory shine for all eternity. Dissperse and dirue away the foul darkness,
that has now possession of their mind. Disolue and undo the devils
bewitchings of them, whereby the eyes of their mind be blinded, and their fancy
and imagination perverted. Put into them a true and sensible apprehension and
fear of that inextinguible and everlasting fire, prepared for all those who
have not communication with the true religion. Inspi^e them with a burning love
and desire of understanding the truth, and of procuring their own salvation.
Present unto them the light of thy mercies, that they may know thy fold, and
have a true understanding of the fold wherein they formerly were, that it was
not thine, but the devils, in which all such, as continue as sheep, be
reserved not to life, but to utter perdition, to be food for the fire, and
meat for death: Death shall feed upon them. Psalm. 4^.
Reduce and bring them back again into thy fold, that in it they may refresh
themselves with the healthful refectio^ of thy doctrine: and by thy wonderful
Sacraments may receive cure of the old wounds, that Satan had formerly given
them, and increase in thy spirit, in the spirit of humility, and fear of our
Lord, in the spirit of meeknes and charity, and may receive forces and strength
to life everlasting, wherein made together with us, after the instant of this
life, companions of thy glory and bliss, they may praise thee, An admonition
to Catholics.
and glorify thee for ever and ever.

And now am I in the second place briefly to admonish Catholics, that they duly
ponder with themselves, how exceeding great a benefit this is of true religion,
which has by divine favor happened to them before infinite others, who are
debarerd of it: and how much by occasion of ye they be obliged and bound to the
Divine majesty. This is the gift and priuiledg but of a few, if we consider the
infinite number of such as go astray, or stand in doubt, and therefore for this
respect the more is it to be esteemed. Let them think, that in humane things
nothing is to be compared with it, not pleasures, nor honors, nor millions of
gold and silver, no not Scepters, Kingdoms, or Empires. The margarite perle of
true religion does exceed all these by infinite degrees: and he that is
possessed of it, though he want other things, and is most poor of al tertene
things, is most truly rich, as being a citizen with the Saints, the son of
God, an heir of a Kingdom, and coheire with Christ, yet so as he must have a
will to live conformably thereunto. He that wants it, is thrice miserable
indeed, though he otherwise abound in all the goods of this life, and has them
at his will.

This is the most certain and only way to life everlasting, and none there is,
who strayeth out of it, that is not most assured to run into everlasting
perdition. It is a Doctrine of Atheism, that every one may be saved in his
own religion. But as there is one God, one Christ, one truth, one certitude,
one justice: so there is one faith, and one religion, and one Church or
Congregation of God and Christ, out of which there can be no Salvation. Let
them take heed, that they spoil not themselves of so great a good, either out
of a curiosity of reading or hearing, or by an improuident and uncircumspect
conversation with heretics, or out of a desire of pleasing, and contenting
some, or for fear of some hurt in temporal life also, or out of an hope of
commodity, and gain, or for desire of honors, or for any other cause. What
profits it a man if he gain the whole world, and suffer the detryment of his
soul? or what exchange shall a man give for his soul? But he, that
sustayneth hurt in his religion, cannot but hurt his soul withal: and
therefore let him not be afraid to expose all for the retayning of it, the
loosing and forgoing whereof is the loss of life everlasting withal. Unhappy
be those souls, and unworthy a Christian name, that make but a little
reckouing of the overthrow of the Catholic religion, so they may themselves
enjoy temporal peace for the gathering and keeping of the poor things, and
trifles of this life. This madness, and light estceme of so great a good, will
cost them dear, when this short time and moment of life shall be once past,
and they shall upon the sudden be brought to that eternity, that never ends.

Many seducers have come into the world, many do under a sheeps skyn, and under
a fair and flattering show of Gods word hide and conceal their woluish fury,
to the utter ruin of Christ's sheep. Our Lord admonished us more the^ once to
take heed of them: the Apostles inculcated no less, as did the holy Fathers
also: He, Eccl. 13. Eccl. 3.
that shall touch pitch, shall be defiled of it: he that loves danger, shall
perish therein. The times were never more treacherous to man's salvation, then
now they be: the devil was never more frequent in bewitching and deceiving:
men were never more easily carried away with the spirit of inco^stancy: the
operation and working of error never of more force: and finally men's minds
never more foully blinded then now, and all these do worthily seize upon their
minds who do make a light esteem of that noble and great gift of the Catholic
and Orthodoxe Religion, and prefer their temporal and external goods before
it.

Wherefore let them, who make a reckoning of their own salvation, conserve
this beauenly gemme, and keep it with all diligence, for that of it proceeds
life. And because it is a supernatural gift, which can neither be obtained,
nor kept and held without Gods help, whiles so many and so great dangers, and
enemies beset us on all sides; they mustimplore and crave help at Gods hands
incessantly to that end, both for themselves, their children, and their family,
and seek to appease God by alms, and other offices of piety. For good is
prayer with fasting and alms, Tob. 12.
and better then to lay up treasures of gold. Let them lead a life
correspondent to their religion, and let them quench their thirst of terrene
things with the expectation of the celestial, and everlasting goods, ever
mind^ull of that saying of the Apostle: 1. Timoth. 6.
They that will become rich, fall into temptation, and into the snares of the
Devil, and many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which drown a man into
destruction, and perdition. For the root of all evil is desire, which some
coveting have strared from the faith, and thrust themselves into many sorrows.
With these helps they may walk on in safety amidst the dangers of these
times, conserve and maintain unstained the gift of the true and only Religion,
and by it with facility and case purchase life everlasting: to which God, of
his infinite mercy, bring us all. Amen.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE FORMER CONSVLTATION. WHETHER Every One may be saved in his
own Faith and Religion.

WRITTEN By the same Leonard Lessius of the Society of JESUS.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XVIII.

THE PREFACE.
We have before in the Preface of our Consultation set down and briefly
confuted a certain gross error, which holds it enough for our salvation to
believe in Christ, and that he died for our sins. But because it is much
spread, and has sunk deeply into the minds of many; I was requested to treat
of the matter more at large, and therefore now I will divide it into two
several Questions, bringing arguments for either part.

The first Question shall be, Whether it be sufficient for salvation to believe
in God, and do no man injury? which is as much to say, as, Whether every man
may be saved in his own Faith which he professes, if therein he endeavor to
live honestly?

The second Question, Whether it be sufficient to salvation to believe in
Christ, and that he dyed for our sins, although we believe not many other
articles of faith?

THE I. QVESTION.
CONCERNING the first Question many in these times do hold and are of opinion
that every man may be saved in his own religion, The ground of ou^ Adversaries
opinions.
and their principal reason wherewith they are moved to this, is, because it
seems unto them incredible that al Jews and Turks, many of whom do devoutly
worship God, and deal justly with their neighbors, should perish for all
eternity, only because they have not believed in Christ, especially since for
want of this belief they seem not to deserve much blame, they being from
their infancy trained up in a religion different from Christianity. For why,
say they, should God who would all men to be saved, so strayten the way unto
heaven? why should those miserable souls, who according to their capacity do
their best to please him, do wrong to no man, and do lead a just and honest
life, be condemned to eternal pain for the ignorance of that thing wherein
they were never sufficiently instructed?

The I. Reason.
But this opinion of theirs, The same refu^ed by four Reasons.
although in natural reason it may seem to carry some color of truth and
equity, yet considering those things which are revealed unto us in holy
Scriptures, it is a mere Paradox For if every Turk and Jew may be saved in
their belief, then iuvaine have the Apostles and holy Fathers so much labored
in preaching and planting of the Christian faith. In vain so many Martyrs by
all manner and kind of torments have shed their blood, and spent their life in
the confession thereof. For they might have abstayned from this doctrine and
profession without any prejudice to their salvation, and have rested contented
with the Jews in the profession and acknowledging of one God. I add further:
Then in vain was Christ made man; in vain did he work so many Miracles, that
so he might be acknowledged and believed to be the Mossias and Savior of the
world; in vain was he crucified, and dyed. For none of all these things was
necessary to man's salvation, it being sufficient to send preachers about the
world to persuade men the belief of one God. After this manner reasons the
Apostle Gal. 2. If justice be by the Law, then in vain (says he) is Christ
dead: which is as much to say, if Justice can be obtained by the knowledge of
one God, and observation of the Law, in vain was Christ crucified, because
then the death of Christ had not been necessary for our salvation.

The 2. Reason.
Besides, Romans 3. Apoc. ^. and 7. Act. 4.
hence it must necessarily follow, that the whole Scripture is false, since
that it tells us how Christ is our Savior, Mediator, and Redeemer, and
propounds him unto us as a Propitiatour by ^aith in his blood, by whose
Sacrifice ^e are reconciled unto God by his blood, our sins are washed away,
and with whose faith we are justified. N^^ther is there any other name under
h^^^en given unto men in which they ^^ght to be saved. Thus speaks the (...)
Scripture: and all this must needs be frivolous and false, if every man may be
saved in his own Religion.

But some may perhaps object, that Christ is indeed our Redeemer, and that all
our good comes from him, yet his faith notwithstanding is not absolutely
necessary. For it is sufficient that we believe, that all our good comes and
proceeds from the bountiful goodness of God unto us: neither is it needful
for us to know by what means it is bestowed upon us.

But this not only repugneth to the holy Scripture, but also it is against the
reason of the holy Scripture, because the said holy Scripture does evidently
teach us that Christ's redemption is not applied unto us but by faith, and
therefore, all such as are destitute of the faith of Christ are void of their
justification, and remaining still guilty of sin; are the children of wrath,
and in danger of eternal damnation.

It repugneth to reason, Why Christian says is necessary to salvation.
because to the end that we may become partakers of any great and unaccustomed
benefit, all reason requires, that we acknowledge the benefit, and our be
^^^^ctor, and that we honor him as it be comes us with all thanksgiving:
for ^oth the condition of the benefit and of our benefactor does require of us
this gratefulness of mind. Seeing therefore that the benefit of our redemption
is so great and unaccustomed, and he who bestowed it upon us so great and
famous, as also the means whereby he bestowed it upon us, so strange and
meruaylous; it is requisite we should acknowledge all these things, least we
should live and dye ungrateful toward so great a benefactor, and least instead
of blessing and thanking him after the manner of the Jews, we curse and
blaspheme him. It is therefore an absurd thing, to esteem those who do not
believe in Christ, to be partakers of eternal salvation prepared for us by
Christ. The which also by this may be confirmed, because none can be saved who
does not know God and the benefit of his creation, for otherwise all Idolators
might be saved: neither therefore can he be saved, who does not know the benefit
of his redemption, because the benefit of our redemption is far greater and
more admirable, and does more appertain to the Glory of God, and of Christ our
Redeemer, and requires also of us greater honor, service, and thanks giving.

Neither is it sufficient for us to know in general that all good things come
unto us from God, for this is not sufficient for the honor and gratitude which
is dew unto him, but we must also know what, and how great the benefit is, as
also by what manner, way, and means he bestowed it upon us: that is to say,
that he has delivered us from sin, and everlasting death, and that he has
opened unto us the way to eternal life, and that after a most admirable
manner, to wit by joining our nature unto his, and by suffering therein death
for us. For this especially commends his charity, mercy, and justice: this
also exacteth at our hands all duery, praise, and thanksgiving: these
therefore are most necessarily to be known to salvation.

The 3. Reason.
If every one may be saved in his own faith, then therefore that faith is
sufficient to salvation which is not a gift of God, but an humane persuasion,
The ground of faith among ^e Jews and Turks is false.
conceived by our private judgment, relying upon humane authority, and built
upon a deceitful foundation. For the Turks, although they believe one Go^ to
be the Creator of heaven and earth, and to be the rewarder of both good and
evil works, their faith notwithstanding is not of the holy Ghost, but of
their own private judgment, or rather of the Devil: for they do not believe
so, because God has revealed it unto men by any true Prophet, but because
Mahomet, whom they think to be the Prophet of God, and his instrument to
teach mortal men, has so set it down in his Alcoran. Albeit therefore that
which they believe be true, yet because the ground of their belief, and the
whole reason thereof is f^lse and pestilent, to wit, that Mahomet is a Prophet
of God; the faith it self whereby they believe, is deceytfull, and the
foundation thereof whereupon it is grounded is hurtful to salvation,
necessarily inclining and forcing the mind to cast it self into all the
p^stiferous errors of that sect. How therefore ca^ that faith be called
sufficient for them unto salvation, or that they can be saved by that faith?
How can that which is uncertain, deceitful, and pestiferous, be made the
foundation of our instice before God, or of eternal salvation?

In like manner, albeit the Jews do believe the same, or rather more things
agreeable unto truth, yet the faith whereby they do believe them, is deceytfull
and void of the spirit of God. For the whole reason or cause of their belief
is, because the Rabbyns and Doctors of their Synagogue, do so interpret the
holy Scriptures unto them. For they are the rule of their belief, or which is
all one, the holy Scripture, as it is subject to their interpretation. But this
whole reason of their belief is deceytfull, and no less hurtful and
dangerous, then that of the Turks: for it is no less hurtefull to believe,
that their Rabbyns interpreting the holy Scriptures are endued with the spirit
of God, then to believe that Mahomet is the Prophet of God: neither are they
drawn into lesser absurdityes by the force of that principle. How therefore can
that faith be the foundation, or ground of salvation?

The 4. Reason.
Finally this opinion makes no difference betwixt Turcisme, Iudaisme and
Christianisme, but in some few indifferent matters, and nothing necessary unto
salvation; in so much that it is all one in what religion thou live; seeing
that thou may indifferently in all of them obtain thy salvation; the which
is nothingels, but to open the way to Alcoran, and to make Mahomet equal with
Christ, or rather manifestly to bring in Atheism. For to approve every
Religion is to take away all Religion, and to think none necessary, seeing that
the true Religion can be but one.

The fundamental reason whereupon this opinion especially relieth, is of no
moment. For first, if it be not incredable that God for the space of some
thousands of years has left the whole word in Idolatry, excepting only the
Jewish nation being but a little portion or corner of the whole world, and to
have permitted it to be utterly overthrown, albeit there were so many rare
wits among them, so many diligent worshippers of God, and all humane justice,
and honesty; it should not also seem incredible, if we say that now, also he
suffers the Turks and Jews to perish.

Secondly, the Turks and Jews are less to be excused now, in that they do
not believe in Christ, then the Heathens were in times past in not
acknowledging one God to be the Creator of heaven and earth. The reason is,
because when almost the whole world was in Idolatry, the fervent heat of the
common custom carried all by force away with it: neither was there any reason
offered unto private me^ why they should greatly doubt of their religion:
neither if there had been doubt objected unto them could they find out any easy
way to know the truth. But now after that the faith and Religion of Christ is
diu^lged throughout the whole world, and that Christians are every where
extant, it cannot be, but that many occasions are offered unto the Turks and
Jews of doubting of their Religion. They are bound therefore to discuss, and
confer the matter with the Christians dwelling night unto them; the which if
they do not, but auert their minds from these kind of thoughts, by reason of
the hatred they bear unto Christian Religion, or upon some other cause, they
make themselves inexcusable before God: for the business of our Religion and
salvation is of so great weight and importance, that it ought to be preferred
before all other things, and when there is any just reason of doubting offered,
it must with all diligence be examined, albeit we should for that purpose be
forced to go into far countries for our resolution.

Lastly, if there be any who have hard nothing of Christian Religion, or which
do think that there is nothing whereby they may be justly moved to any further
inquisition, those men shall not be damned for the sin of Infidelity, that is
to say, because they have not believed in Christ, but for some other things,
which they have done against the law of nature, the which by help of God they
might have eschewed: for God has not left them so destitute of his providence
and help, but that they may avoid those sins which they do commit, if they
would, as they may and ought to cooperate with Gods holy inspirations, and take
comfort and pleasure therein. None therefore can impute his damnation unto God,
albeit the way be strait to salvation, but unto himself, to his own
negligence, I say, and wickedness, whereby he has neglected Gods holy
inspirations, and contemned his profitable admonitions, and willingly and
wittingly against his own conscience has thrown himself headlong into
sin, it being his utter overthrow.

THE II. QVESTION.
THE other Question is, whether it be sufficient to salvation to believe in
Christ, and that he dyed for our sins albeit we will not believe many other
things. Many, especially of the common sort of people, The opinion of the
vulgar people.
do esteem it sufficient, so that those things be believed which are set
down in the Apostles Creed, of God and Christ, other things they account
indifferent, and every one may believe what with a good faith he pleases, but
they will have the Apostles Creed believed of every one, in that sense which
seems best unto any of them. They conclude therefore, that any which
confesses Christ may be saved in his own faith, whether he be a Papist, or a
Lutheran, or a Caluinist, or an Anabaptist, or of any other sect, for all these
have the same head, which is Christ, Coloss. 2. 1. Cor. 3.
all do rely upon the same Foundation which is Christ Jesus; they cannot
therefore be deceived of their salvation albeit they disagree in all other
things. Herupon some noble men who do use these new religions to the
establishment and increase of their power and dominions, do labor very much
to make one Church of the Lutherans and Caluinists, and they go about to
persuade us, that there is no difference amongst them, but in some small
points, and indifferent matters.

But this opinion does include in it many inconveniences.

The 1. Reason.
First, because it saves almost all the ancient Heretics: The same refuted
by ten Reasons.
for most of them do confess Christ and believe the Creed in their ownesense.
The Arians therefore might be saved in their herefy who denied God the Son to
be consubstantiall with his Father. The Macedonians who made the holy Ghost
lesser then God the Son. The Nestorians who affirmed there were two persons
in Christ. The Eutichians who held, that the flesh of Christ was converted into
his divinity. The Apollinaristes who said, that the divine Word was united in
Christ, as a reasonable soul united to the body. The Monothelites, who
affirmed that there was one only will and operation in Christ. The Pelagians,
who denied original sin; and taught that a man by his natural forces might
deserve the grace of God, and his salvation. The Donatists who affirmed, that
the Church of God was every where perished, but only in Donatus his company.
The Nouatians who denied penance to those that had denied their faith. The
Montanists who thought Montanus to be the holy Ghost. All these according to
this opinion every one in his own faith and heresy may be saved, because they
have believed in Christ, and did hold the Apostles Creed no less to be
believed, then now adays the Lutherans and Caluinists do. But what can be said
more absurd or more like a paradox in the Church of God? For if eternal
salvation may be obtained by this kind of faith, why have there been holden
s^^any Counsels against those heresies, the Bishops throughout the whole world
being assembled together with so great labor and charges? why have those
heresies been so often condemned by excommunication? why have the holy Fathers
so much labored in the extirpation threof? why have Catholics so much
detested the conversation and company of those heretics? why would some of
them rather chose to suffer banishment, death, and all kind of torm^^ts then to
subscribe unto any of these heresies? All these things truly had been done in
vain, foolishly, and wrongfully, if in these sects eternal salvation might
have been obtained: the which seeing no wise man can say, we must of necessity
confess, that those heresies are the plagues of souls, and that salvation can
by no means consist with them.

The 2. Reason.
Secondly, because it condemns all antiquity of error, who has always
judged, that an heretic cannot be saved, and therefore it has opposed (...)
self so vehemently against them, and has always very diligently confuted
them.

The 3. Reason.
Thirdly, because it condemns the Apostle himself, who in his third to Titus
commands us in this sort: Tit. 3.
Eschew an heretic after one or two admonitions, knowing certainly, that he
which is such a one, is ouerthrown, and sins being condemned by his own
proper judgment. Why does he command him to be esehewed, if his error be not a
hindrance to salvation? why does he say, that he is overthrown and condemned?
2 Timothy 2.
In like manner in his 2. Tim 2. Their speech (says he) creeps as a canker.
Even as therefore the canker is a disease which kills a man's body unless it
be cut away, so is an Heretic unto a company of Christians and Catholics.

But some peradventure will object, and say, that none is to be accounted an
heretic, but he which rejects Christ, or denies some thing belonging unto
the Creed. But this is absurdly, and unwisely spoken, for so he should not be
an heretic who should take away both the old, and new Testament, and should
say, that those things are either feygn^d, or written by the spirit only of a
man, and as the writings of profane authors subject to many errors: he were
not an heretic who should deny hell, or the eternity of the pains thereof, or
should affirm that all the devils should once besaued, seeing that there is no
mention made of these things in the Apostles Creed: he should not be an
heretic who should forbid marriage, and who should fay that marriages were
ordained by the Devil, who also should affirm that some kind of flesh is of it
own nature unclean; all whom notwithstanding the Apostle judges to be
heretics 1. Tim. 4. He were not an heretic, who should say that there are two
persons in Christ, whom notwithstanding S. John calls an heretic, and
Antichrist Epist. 1. c. 4. He were not an heretic who should deny Baptism,
and all other Sacraments. And finally none of those of whom we have spoken
before, were to be accounted Heretics: the which is contrary to all antiquity,
and all the Doctors who have lived in these ten or twelve ages.

The 4. Reason.
Fourthly, this opinion does make all the foresaid heresies, and sects equal
with the Catholic faith and Religion, affirming that we may as well be saved in
them as in it. The Catholic Religion therefore shall be no better then
Arianisme, Pelagianisme, Nestorianisme, Eurichianisme, and other false
Religions, the whith both in it self is most absurd, and nothing else but to
induce a new Atheism. For to affirm all Religions to be good, and that it
little imports the work of our Salvation what Religion we profess, is to
make no account of any Religion: for if there be any Religion, it cannot be but
one, as there is but one Truth, one Justice, one Faith, one happiness, one Lord
and God, and one Man Jesus Christ, mediator of God and man.

The 5. Reason.
Fifthly, it is a skornefull thing to say, that it is sufficient for every one
to believe the Creed according to their own sense and understanding thereof,
seeing there is but one only truth, the which if we do not attain, we believe
that which is false: but a false faith avails nothing to salvation. It is
therefore all one whether thou belieuest the Creed after such a manner, or after
no manner at all: one therefore may be saved albeit he does not absolutely
believe many articles. The same also may be said of the holy Scriptures. For if
it be sufficient to believe the holy Scriptures understood in their own sense,
seeing that this sense may often times be erroneous, it will also suffice,
albeit thou do not believe them at all, for a false faith can be no more
needful to salvation, then no faith at all, that is to say, whereby one does
absolutely believe nothing at all.

If thou do say, that the Creed must be believed in a true sense, then thou
condemnest all the Sects of this time, whereof there is none which belieueth
all the articles of the Creed in the same sense with Catholics, or which does
not differ one from another in the explication of the Creed. Wherefore seeing
that there is but only one Truth, it necessarily follows that all Religions
saving one do err from the truth, and therefore are not sufficient to
salvation.

But it is evident, The disagrement of fectaries in the sense of the Creed.
that they differ much in the understanding of the Creed, for that Article, And
in Jesus Christ his only Son, the Arians, Tritheitans, and many Caluinistes
affirming the Son lesser then the Father, do other wise explicate then the
Lutherans, and Catholics do, who hold God the Son to be equal and
consubstantiall with his Father. The article of Christ's descending into hell,
the Caluinists do otherwise understand, who do think that Christ suffered
there the torments of the damned souls, and that he doubted of his salvation,
and that he was affrayd least he should be wholly consumed by everlasting death:
otherwise Catholics and Lutherans hold, who say that such a^ exposition is not
the sense of that Article, but a blasphemy of Calvin. The article of Christ's
ascending into heaven, is otherwise understood by the Lutherans, and
Vbiquitarists who hold Christ's body to be present every where and in all
places, as his divinity is present every where: otherwise the Caluinists and
Catholics hold, who do not doubt to affirm but that by this exposition the
whole Creed is overthrown, and that Christ's Incarnation, Nativity, Passion,
death, ascending to heaven, and his coming to Iudgmente is thereby quite taken
away. The article of judging the quick and the dead, the Catholics do
otherwise expound, who hold that God shall so judge us that he will reward our
good works with heaven, and punish our evil deeds with hell: otherwise the
Caluinists, and Lutherans, who deny all reward to good works, and that God
only in his divine judgment will principally esteem, and reward a special
faith only. The aricle of the Holy Ghost, the Catholics, and Lutherans do
otherwise understand then the Arians, and many Caluinists. The article of the
Church, the Lutherans and Caluinists do understand of the invisible
congregation of those which are predestinate: the Catholics do understand it
of the visible company of Catholics, wherein many are predestinate, many are
reprobate. The article of Communion of Saints, the Lutherans, and Caluinists do
so extenuate that they take away almost all the communion holden by Catholics.
The article of remission of Synns, they explicate of not imputation only, not
acknowledging any inward renouation by inherent justice and the infused gifts
of God, after which manner the Catholics do hold that sins are forgiven.

By these it is manifest, how great a difference there is in the understanding
of the Creed. Seeing therefore that there is but only one truth, and this in our
Consultation we have showed to be among Catholics; it necessarily follows ^^
one God Creator of all things, because his Alcoran does teach him so, which he
thinks to be written by the spirits of God; his faith, albeit he believe that
which is true, relyeth upon a false and deceytfull reason: by the force whereof
he is moved to believe many false and blasphemous things, as that there are
not three Persons in the B. Trinity, and that Christ is not God, and that
Christ is inferior to Mahomet, and that Circumcision and the like are still to
be kept. That faith therefore by reason of the foundation is both deceitful and
hurtful: the same happens unto alheretikes; the which being supposed I urge
the argument in this manner.

That faith which relieth upon a false foundation, albeit it belieueth
somethings which are true, cannot be sufficient to salvation: but the faith of
all the sects of this time relieth upon a false foundation: it cannot be
therefore sufficient for salvation. The first proposition is manifest in it
self, for how can that which is deceitful and uncertain be the ^oundation of
our eternal (...)? How can the true Religion where^^ we please God, be
grounded in a false deceitful faith? Truly it is no less repugnant to reason,
then if thou should say, that truth is grounded upon lies, wisdom upon
error, and virtue upon folly.

The second proposition, The faith of all sectaries depends upon a false
ground.
to wit, that all Sects are grounded upon a false and deceitful foundation, I
prove in this manner: for either they believe their opinions for the authority
of their Apostles Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Zwinglius etc. whom they judge to
be endewed with the spirit of God, or because every one of them in their own
private judgment do believe those things to be contained in holy Scripture, or
lastly because their own private spirit does inwardly testify unto them, that
those things are true, or that this is the meaning of holy Scripture: for
whatsoever the sects of these times do believe, they are moved thereunto by one
of these three reasons, and they appoint one of them to be the foundation or
reason of their belief: but these foundations, and reasons be altogether
false and deceitful.

As for the first reason, to wit the authority of Luther, Calvin, and the rest
who first invented these new Religions, that it is deceitful, is many fest,
because we see by experience that both they might, and have been often deceived,
for they have revoked many things, corrected many things, and in many things
have they contradicted themselves, as has been declared in our Consultation of
Religion in the 9. Consideration, and the sixth Reason. Hence it comes to
pass that few now adays will rely upon their authority, because they say,
they were men, and therefore subject to error, wherefore their followers also do
leave them at their own pleasure, when they think they have found any thing
fitter for their purpose: their authority therefore is deceitful, and
uncertain, even by the judgment of their own scholars, and followers.

Neither is the other, to wit, the private judgment, whereby they expound the
holy Scripture, less deceitful: for many false things by that private
judgment seem to be true, and many things which before seemed true are
afterward judged false. From hence arises so great variety and inconstancy in
many of them concerning matters of faith, because indeed man's judgment is
weak, especially in the mysteries of our faith, and the understanding of holy
Scripture, the which far exceeds the reach of man's wisdom and reason.

Many do answer, that they do not rely upon their judgment in matters of
faith, but upon the holy Scriptures which cannot err, Whether all sectaries do
rely upon the Scripture.
wherein how miserably they are deceived by this appears, because almost all
the sects do say, that they rely upon holy Scripture, whereas notwithstanding
they differ among themselves in most of the matters, one teaching contrary unto
another, the which could by no means come to pass, if they did not rest upon
their own judgments, but upon the lawful and common understanding of the holy
Scripture: for the holy Scripture is no where contrary unto it self, neither
does it any where disagree from it self: that therefore they so greatly jar
and disagree among themselves, is caused, by that they make a sense to the holy
Scripture according to their own private judgment, the which is diversely
framed by them, according to the diversity of judgments and understanding among
them: they rely therefore upon the holy Scripture, not as it is interpreted by
the Catholic Church and the holy Fathers, but as they in their private
judgment do interpret it: for the virtue and force of the holy Scripture does
not only consist in the bare words, but in the sense and meaning thereof: but
the private judgment inuenteth this sense, and joins it to the words of the
Scripture as life unto the body: the whole reason of their faith therefore is
their private judgment, the which how deceitful oftentimes it is, may easily
be declared by the disagreement of so many sects. For it is all one whether
thou say, that thou reliest upon Scripture as it is interpreted by thy proper
judgment, or that thou reliest upon thy own judgment precisely in it self.

Finally, the third reason whereupon many now adays do rely, is most
deceitful and skornfull of all, a manifest sign whereof is that among the
Anabaptists, who above all others are guyded by the instinct of the spirit,
there is the greatest variety of sects, and disagrement of faith, the which
could not be, but that the spirit whereupon they rely, and by whom they are
governed is deceitful and variable. The same also is to be seen among
Caluinists, and Lutherans, and amongst their sects and diverse factions, for
their own opinion is certain and evident unto every one of them by the
testimony of their own private judgment, the which inwardly teaches every one
of them and affoardeth the testimony of truth unto every one of them, whereby
it is manifest that this spirit is not the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, who
cannot teach contraryes, or be opposite unto it self, but it is a wicked
spirit, the spirit of error, who is a liar from the beginning, and the father of
lies, who works in the children of incredulity, of whom the Apostle says,
Because they have not received the charity of truth, 2 Thessalonians. 6.
he will therefore send them the operation of error, that they may believe in
lies. And in another place. 2. Tim. 4.
In the last days there shall some depart from their says attending to the
spirits of error, and doctrines of the devil. For every heresy is the doctrine
of the Devil. And S. John says, 1. Joan. 4.
Do not believe every spirit but try their spirits, whether they be of God or
not. For many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

This therefore is the spirit which bears rule in the hearts of heretics,
whose testimony and operation they feel inwardly engrafted in their hearts, and
yet they think it to be the work of the holy Ghost, who so blinds their
mind, and fancies, that they judge light to be darkness, and darkness light,
that they think the most clear truth of the Catholic faith to be an error,
and most filthy errors to be the clear truth. And truly if they were not wholly
blinded and bewitched, they might easily perceive that spirit whom they feel
inwardly, not to be the spirit of God, or at the least they might begin to
doubt thereof, seeing that all sects among whom there is so great dissension and
variety of opinions, do all equally feel, boast of, and follow that testimony
of this spirit, and rely upon it in the confirmation of their most contrary
opinions: but this happens by the just judgment of God: for as the Jews who
would not receive Christ were permitted to be blinded by the devil, as it is
manifest by the Apost. 2. ad These. 2. so heretics because they have forsaken
the Catholic faith (the which is no less a fault then that of the Jews) are
delivered unto him, that he may as it were bewitch their minds, and drive them
into all kind of error.

But if any will attentively consider he shall easily preceyue a more potent
operation of the devil and bewitching of minds in our Heretics, The devil
does sooner bewitch Heretics then Jews.
then either in Jews or Mahometans, and that for two reasons. First because
the Jews agree in the same faith, neither is there any variety of sects among
them: among the Mahomets there are only two sects, and there is no great
difference betwixt the^. But among heretics of these times there are many
sects, some arising by the increase of new opinions, who condemn one another
of heresy, and all these are risen within the space of 90. years, the which is
a manifest sign, that the devil meruailously possesses inwardly the hearts
of these men, troubling their fancies, perverting their imaginations and
judgments, that they cannot remain or be quiet any where.

Secondly, because the common sort of people among the Jews and Turks do not
rely upon their own judgment, or upon the testimony and instinct of the
private spirit, but upon the judgment of their doctors, or (which is all one)
upon their own Scripture, as it is interpreted unto them by the doctors of
their Religion; they have therefore the rule of their faith and ground of their
belief conformable as it were to reason, that is to say, the common consent of
their predecessors, or the Scripture explicated unto them by the consent of the
doctors of their Religion. But most of the heretics of these times do not
respect their Superiors and Apostles from whom they first received this new
Gospel, but they forsake them as men subject to error, and they rely wholly
upon their own judgment, or upon the testimony of the private spirit, or which
is al one, upon the Scripture only, understood after the sense of their own
judgment and private spirit, the which is an evident sign, that Satan does so
effectually work in them and bewitch their minds, that not only every one
feygneth unto himself new heresies and opinions, but also that he places the
foundation of his belief and rule of faith in himself, and in his own inward
sense and judgment: for every one thinks himself to be taught by our Lord
and endued with the Magistery of the spirit, albeit they be women and young
girls, and therefore to be free from error; but all the holy Fathers to have been
men subject to error. The same they judge of their Apostles and Ministers. But
what greater bewitching or deceiving of people can there be, then this? Hence
it comes to pass that they have no certain and established opinions amongst
them, neither can they set down or frame any body of doctrine and religion,
but they must wander up and down in vncertaintyes, as the private spirit
leads them; neither can there any disputation be made with them concerning
their opinions, seeing that they do not defend any one opinion, they being by
reason of the ignorance of their predecessors altogether unlearned. But of
this spirit of folly and madness we have written more at large in our
Consultation in the 9. Consideration, and the 11. Reason.

By these it is manifestly concluded that all the ground and foundation of
faith whereupon the sects of our times rely, is false and uncertain, and
therefore their faith which relyeth thereon is unprofitable, and avails nothing
to salvation.

The 8. Reason.
Eighthly, if every one, who does acknowledge Christ may be saved in his own
faith, Why is there so great disagreement among religions? Why do they
excommunicate and condemn one another of heresy? Why do ye Lutherans refuse to
acknowledge the Caluinists for their brethren: and in their public sermons and
books do call them wicked and blasphemous persons? Why do the chief of the
Caluinists, among whom Theodore Beza, the Father of them all, and as it were
their Pope next after Calvin, handle the Lutherans in like manner? why do the
Anabaptists call those only of their own sect, to be the faithful, and
Christians, and account all others as Infidels? Whereby it is evident, that this
new opinion of doctrine is not only contrary to Catholic religion, but to all
other sects also, who have in them any zeal of piety and religion, and to be
banished as Atheism only.

The 9. Reason.
Ninthly, that any man be saved it suffices not to keep only one, two, or
three commandments, but it is necessary to keep all, according to those words
of Christ Matthew. 19. Matthew 19.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. As if any be an
adulterer, or thief, albeit he keep the other commandments he may not be
saved, as the holy Scripture often teaches. In like manner therefore it is not
sufficient to salvation to believe two three, or four articles, but it is
necessary to believe all those things which God has revealed and set down to
us in his Church to be believed, for faith is no less necessary to salvation
then obedience of the comma^dments of the law of God: neither should faith be
less perfect then the obedience and keeping of the law of God. As therefore
obedience must extend it self to all the commandments, so must faith extend it
self to all things which are revealed; the which may be confirmed by the words
of S. James in the 2. Iac. 2.
Chap. Whosoever has kept the whole law, but offends in one, he is made
guilty of all: for he who said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also thou
shall not kill: as if he should say, he is made guilty of all, and shall be
punished as a breaker of the whole law, because he has despised the law maker,
who is the author of the whole law. In like manner therefore he which shall deny
one article although he believe all the rest is made guilty of violating his
whole faith and Religion, because he contemns God who is the first Truth, who
no less revealed this then the other, he conte^neth the Catholic Church the
spouse of Christ, who is the pillar and strength of Truth, whereby he has no
less determined we should believe this then the other. And this is the reason
why he is no less an heretic who with pertinacy denies one point of faith,
the^ he which denies a hundred, because in that he denies one, he contemns
God, who is the first truth and did reveal it: he contemns the authority of
the Church, the which did propose it unto us: he makes the Church subject to
error and a liar, whereby he is made also uncertain of all the rest, and
loses all his divine faith: for the ground of his divine faith being taken
away, his whole faith must needs perish, and consequently there remains only
an opinion or humane faith, subject to error, whereby he belieueth all the rest.

The 10. Reason.
Tenthly and lastly, this opinion is very dangerous in ye practice thereof, for
it makes a man that he cares not what religion he hold, what he belieueth or
not belieueth: he does not therefore seek after ye truth, and he does as easily
and with as great security lay hold on false as true things, yet all men not
only Catholic but even the more principal sects, and those which are learned
wise men do absolut'y affirm, that none can be saved without the true faith
and religion, and whosoever are deprived thereof shall perish for ever. The
followers therefore of this opinion are condemned of all, and they only promise
unto themselves salvation without any author, testimony or reason for it,
relying and trusting only in their own vain imagination of their foolish
brain: let then therefore hear out of S. Fulgentius what antiquity has
always holden, and what the Catholic Church has taught in all ages. Thus
therefore he writes, setting down the rules of our common says in his book
de fide ad Petruin Diaconum, Cap. 38. Believe assuredly (says he) and doubt
nothing at all, that not only all Pagans, but also all Jews, Heretics and
Schismatikes who shall die out of the Catholic Church, shall go into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. And in the
39. Cap. Believe assuredly and doubt nothing, that every heretik or Schismatik
christened in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, if
he be not within the number of those which are of the Catholic Church, what
alms soever he has made, albeit he shall shed his blood for the name of
Christ can by no means be saved: for neither baptism nor large and charitable
alms, nor death it self suffered for Christ's sake, will avail that man, who
(...) unity of the Catholic Church; as long as this heretical or schismatic
wickedness wh^th leads to perdition; shall continue in him.

This has always been the faith of the Catholic Church, and the most certain
and undoubted doctrine of the holy Fathers: the which I would to God al those
who remain out of the Church of God would attentively and diligently consider;
they would truly and easily preceiue in how dangerous a state they continue.
Thou, O Christ, the light of the world, shine unto their minds, and lighten
their hearts. Amen.

FINIS.

