A LETTER sent by a Gentleman of England, to his friend, containing a
confutacion of a French man's errors, in the report of the myraculous star
now shyninge.

symbolic celestial configuration

Anno Domini. 1573.



Misopseudolugos Philomathei, Salutem.
SIr, whereas ye require my opynion touching ye French Pamflet of a blasing
star lately Englished: Surely I cannot but condemn ye rashness of him that
did translate ye same, for that at one time he offered two iniuryes. First to
the French man yt made the same, for whom it had been sufficient that
France had known his dotinges, and not England also to have been made
partaker of his follyes. Secondly the ill opynion he seemed to have of his
own countryemen, that among the abundant choice of so many excellent
Mathematicians, would rather publishe such a toye, then use thaduise of such
as might have taught a veritye. For the Book although it have few lines,
yet has it many errors and that of all sorts. Geometrical, Astronomicall,
Physical, Cosmographicall and Historical First in the portrayture of
Cassiopeia the very stars are mistaken, and the new star misplaced. For the
three other stars that frame a figure with him of Geomitricianes commonly
called Rhombus, are these, one of the third light in her breast, an other of
the same light in her chair nighe unto the thighe of Cassiopeia, the third
in the middle ascense or back of her Chair, this being of the third light
also, is by him quite misplaced, and in steed thereof another little star of
the fifte light placed, and the new star that is beneath the foot of her
seat, is there situate far higher. He wants also one star in the top
of her chair, and an other in her foot, and notwythstandynge he has clapte
in one where never any was, yet wants he one of his number, which although
he had never read Aratus Ptolomey, Copernicus or other Mathematicianes, yet
of Poets as Palingenius, he might have learned how Cassiopeia december atque
tribus stat lucida flammis. He proceeds to his observations, and declares
this new stars distances from Alrucuba commonly called the Pole star, and
another of Queen Cassiopeia inferring that such as be skillful in the doctrine
of tria^gles Sphericall, will soon find his place to be in the end of about
the 29. grade, whereby it appears that his own knowledge in Sphericall
triangles was very small, for admittinge his own distances true, it falls
out in ye first face of, but his true longitude and place in deed, is esilye
by sight without Instrumente within one degree to be coniectured, of the
meanest scholar in observations Astronomical, being more then that In sedis
pede, a little star hard by him whose longitude by Copernicus is delivered
8. grades. 20. minutes, and less then that other by him mentioned in
Cassiopeia her thighe whose longitude is also. 10. grades. This star
therefore being very nighe in the mean between these two, is soon found
within 10. minutes of nine grades in longitude, making account as Copernicus
does from the little star in the horn of the Ram, which in the old
Astronomers time stood in the very intersection of the line Ecliptike and
Equinoctial, but since by the stealinge course of the stars fixed, or
rather of the earth as Copernicus with better reasons proves, is removed
since that time 27. grades 49 minutes, which I have by certain Calculatio^
found to be Precessio Aequinoctiorum vera, for the Natiuitye of our Savior
last past, nine grades therefore the longitude of this new star in the eyghte
sphere by sight only collected, as I have before declared, unto yt number of
the true Praecession adjoined, produces 6. grades 49. minutes in for his
longitude or place, and therefore I muse the more that any man should so
much err yt would presume in a cause Mathematical to write, but perhaps
his meaning was yt this stars right Ascension should be about that grade,
wherein though it be very improper to apply the Computation of right Ascension
to the line Ecliptike, yet had his error been that way the less, but not
contented with these inferioure causes being in deed but Elementa artis, he
ascends to discover a Parallaxe, and produces observations flat repugnaunt
between theymselues. I mean not so much for that he gives his new star
several distances from Alrucuba at his greatest heighte, (which in deed is
nothing so) but he attributes also unto him his greatest Parallaxe above the
Pole, and his lesser underneath, which is a matter so absurd, as our
Mathematical infantes will laughe to scorn. And these he says are the
principal matters he noted in him since his first appearau^ce the 15 of
November, wherein his credit may something be doubted also, considering others
of as good judgment as he seems to be, obseruinge ye same figure of
Cassiopeia could see no such star the 16. night of the same month: His
Mathematical causes thus handled he enters to judge of ye effects ensuing,
and for discovery thereof translateth the opinions of other writers concerning
Comets, which by Aristotle in his book of Meteores are affyrmed to be in the
Region of the air, and within the concauitye of the Moons Orb engendered,
affyrming them to be nourished with vapors and resolutions from the ball of
earth and Occeane, and therefore rather to signifye then to cause scarcity and
sterilitye ensuinge, but by this Auctors own Parallaxis allowing him his own
witnesses, they give it to be above ye Moon, as any man may know that has any
mean sight, I say not in Sphaerickes triangles, but plain and right lined,
and therefore unless he will make war with natural Philosophers and explode
Aristotle, he cannot term him a Comet. Also Comets are into three kinds
divided, Crinitas, Barbatas and Caudatas: And this surely by any sound sight
to be well found none of them: for though he do suppose it has a tail
recching into the Orient, whereupon he foundeth his fantastical
diuinations. Truly the star is troubled with no such thing, howsoever his
head was at the viewing thereof. Again whereas he coniectureth by his
imagined tail, that his effect should fall out in the Orient and East parts
of ye world, he seems also therein to be as sle^der a Cosmographer, that
knows not no part of the world to be East or West simplye or of it self:
But the thing he harpeth on and has belike hard some talk of, as of the
Parallaxe also, is this: Astronomers first by the sign wherein the Comet is,
his Parallele, his situation in respect of the intersection of the Horizon and
Meridian, his latitude, and by many other means also pronounce first of ye
provinces whereon their effect shall light* and then by the direction of the
tail judge of the parts of those provinces and the countries adioyninge, and
so in respect of some one place determined, others may be called East or West,
Occident or Orient, at pleasure. Again where he pronounces horrible effects
always to ensue Comets, Historyes would have taught him that sometime they
promise unto some great felicitye, as Iustine when he speaks of the Comet at
Methridates birth says: Huius quoque viri magnitudinem Coelestia portenta
nuntiabant, and at ye inuasio^ of Tamberlane, that famous Captain that took
the Turk and vanquished his Empire (ascending by militare virtue from base
estate) had also a Comet which is noted to signifye his felicitye. But had al
his Physical Collections been true, yet unfitly are the significations of
Comets applied to stars, or Phenomenon that are about the Region Elementare.
To conclude because you require my opinion of the book and the Authors
knowledge etc. For ye matter as ye may perceive, it is farced so full of errors
apparent, that every one that sauoureth any thing in the sciences Mathematical,
shall sone find them. Of the man I cannot judge but ab affectu, and so take his
audacity much more then either his learning, or his descretion, that would
presume to put himself in prease to tell a tale in presence of such a number
of Geometers, Philosophers, Astronomers Cosmographers, and that of a matter in
part concerning all their sciences, and proceed so weekelye furnished. It had
been better for him to have first read Erasmus Apothegmata, where he should
have found how Apelles to a Shomaker that presumed to talk in his science
lest this Proverb Ne suitor vltra crepidam, which well noted might have caused
this Auctour to content himself to look on, and give others leave to play yt
part on the Mathematical stage.

His conclusion is not to be disliked for that it contains both piety and
verity, and no doubt it is as he says a forewarning of Gods inscrutable
pleasure, which will fall out to be no less straung and myraculous in effect,
then this sign whereby it is forewarned is rare and supernatural, I commend
therefore herein his modestye, that he would not give judgment whether the
same should happen in France or else where. For surely it were hard for a man
of greater science then he seems to be, so to do: But wheresoever any
heinous outrage has been committed, either by great or small, head or foot,
they have as he truly collecteth, great cause to stand in horror of this
myraculous sign, as a forerunner of Gods just Judgment. And thus exhortinge
you to proceed in the passinge pleasant studyes of the noble sciences
Mathematical fit only for fre and noble minds that stoop not at filthy
lucre I commit you to the protectino, of the Almightye.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Marshe.


