A Sermon preached the third Sunday in Lent before the Kings Majesty, and
his honorable Counsel, by Thomas Leauer.

Anno Domini. M.ccccc.l.



In nomine Jesus Christi.
GOD be merciful unto us: For the time is even now coming, when as God must
needs either of his mercy here in England, work such a wonderful miracle
unto our conforte, as far passes man's expectacion: or else of his
righteousness take such vengeance of this land to the example of all other
lands, as shall be to our utter distruccio^.

Ye know, that immediately after the preaching of Noe, came the great flood
that drouned ye world. After the warnyng of Loath, came fire, and brimstone upon
the Sodomites and Gomorrians. When Moises had declared Gods thretngynes in
Egypt, king Pharao and his people were plaged upon the land, and drouned in
the red sea.

Such plages came ever where gods word truly preached, is not believed,
received, and followed. But it the preaching of Jonas, the Ninevites repented
wonderfully. When the book of the law was read unto Josias the king, he,
with all his people spedely repenting, found exceadyng mercy blessing, and
grace: as likewise all other shall be sure to find, which hear the word of god
and keep it.

For when Christ and his Apostles had preached the gospel unto the Jews,
those that believed were delivered from the curse of the law, unto the blessing
of grace out of worldly miserye, to be inheritours of the heavenly kingdom: and
those that did not believe, were cast from god, oppressed of men, overcome,
spoiled, murdered, and destroyed of their enemies.

Wherefore England, which at his present time, by reason of the word of god
set fourth, read, preached, and comuned, does in every place hear ye counsel
of Noe, the warning of Loath, the law of Maises, the threatenings of ye
Prophets, and the grace of the gospel, as it was declared and taught by Christ
and his Apostles: This England must needs, either by beleuynge of these
things, obtain of god wonderful grace of ame^dmente, or else by neglectinge
them, provoke the vengeance of god, as a dew plage and punishment.

Take heed therefore England, for if thou by unbelief, let and stop god from
workynge of miracles to thy comfort, then surely do thou provoke god to
power down vengeance upon the, to thy utter distruccyon: But if thou do
regard, receive, and believe gods word, he will work wonderful miracles to
thy conforte, wealth, and prosperity. Yea, let every man, of what estate or
degree soever he be, grope his own conscience: for if he do not there feel
that the word of God does take place to move him to repentance and amendment
of life, then shall he be sure sone to have experience, that the vengeance of
God, by a shameful short end of his wretched life, will bring him unto an
everlasting dampnable death. For all those that will not crepe under the
merciful wings of god, as the chikinnes of Christ, shall be caught and devoured
of puttockes, hawks, and kytes, as a pray for the devil. The wings of God
be stretched abroad here in England, by the kings gracious majesty and his
honorable counsel, or mighty power, with ready will to shadow, defend, and
save all those that with reverent love, come humbly crepinge under their
ordinance, rule, and gouerna^ce, which is ye power, ye wings and the honor of
god.

The filthye gredy puttockes, wild hawks, and rauenyng kytes, be
supersticious papists, carnal gospellers, and sedicyous rebels, which as ye
have seen by late experience, have most cruelly caught, spoiled, and devoured
the lambs, the chekynnes, the children of God, redeemed and boughte with
Christ's blood. Wherefore as Christ in his own person did once lamente and
bewail Jerusalem, so does he now many times in the persons of his
prophetical Preachers, lament and bewayl England, saying: O England, how
often would I have gathered thy children, as a hen gathers her chikens under
her wings, and thou would not? Even with the same affeccion that the
shepeherde cries, seeing the wolf leryng toward the sheep, and with the
same affeccio^ that the hen clocketh and calls, spyeng the kyte houeryng over
her chekyns: with the same affeccion it behooves the minister and preacher of
god, seeing intolerable vengeance hanging over England, to cry, to call,
and to give warnyng unto the people saying as is written in ye first of Esaias: If
ye willingly will hear and obey, ye shall eat the good confortable fruits of ye
earth: but if ye will not, and provoke me unto anger, the sword shall devour you:
Quia os Domini locutum est. For it is ye mouth of the lord that has spoken.

Now your reverend majesty, most gracyous king, and you honorable wise godly
counselors, you are the chief shepeherds, you are the most reverend fathers
in Christ, having the wings of power and authority, to shadow, save, and
keep these lambs of god, these chekens of Christ, and these children of the
heavenly father, redeemed with Christ's blood, and committed unto your hands,
to be saved, kept, and provided for.

God be praised, with thankful obedience, and loving reverence dew to your
gracious majesty and honorable counsel, which have surely wisely provided
for, dylygently kept, and charitably saved this realm, by driving away the
wild fox of papisticall supersticion, and by casting out the unclean spirit
of ignorance, to gods glory, your honor, and our conforte.

But alas most gracious King and godly governors, for the tender mercyes of
god, in our Savior Jesus Christ, take good and diligent heed when ye be*
chasyng the wild fox of papisticall supersticion, that the gredye wolf of
covetous ambicion, do not creep in at your backs: For surely he will do more
harm in a week, then the fox did in a year.

Take heed, yt the unclean spirit of ignorance, returning with vii. other
worse then him self, find no place vnwarded, where he may crepe in again. For
if he returning with his fellows, enter in again, then will he make the end of
this generation to be worse then the beginnynge. Then shall you leese the
reward of your former dilygence, and be damned for your later negligence. Then
shall the welspring of mercy which of long time has watered this Realm with the
grace of god, be closed up, and the blody floods of vengeance gushing out from
the wrath and indignacion of God, over flow al together. The^ will not god by
workinge of miracles declare mercy, but by taking of vengeance execute
rightousnes.

But God being as merciful yet, as ever he was, if you contynewe as faithful,
wise, and dylygente as ye have been to handle the wolf, as you have done the
fox, to keep out the denyll, as to cast out the devil: then shall the people
of this land feed in quyetnes, without fear of evil: then shall you continuyng
to the end, be sure of an hunderdfold reward in this life, and afterward,
everlasting life, iaye and glory. Then shall God do wonderful miracles in
England, to declare how mercy shall triumph over rightousnes.

And that we may all dyspose our selves the more conuenientlye for god to
work such a miracle among us, we have appointed for the gospel of this day,
written in the.vi. of John, a wonderful miracle of.v. thousand men, fed and
satisfied with.v. loaves and ii. fyshes, whereas every man may and ought to
learn his own duty, which shall clear appear too a king in Christ, to head
gouerners under the king, in the Apostles being most near about Christ, and
to all other men, in that multitude of the people, which following Christ,
were obedient to sit down at the commandment of his Disciples, not knowing,
nor enquiring why they were so commanded.

And as surely as this wonderful miracle was done to ye great comfort of the^in
Christ's time, so truly is it left in writing for to learn us by patience and
comfort of ye Scriptures, to have good hope at this time.

An as Christ, having always special respect unto his audience, did teach the
fishers by talking of nets, preaching unto the Jews by diverse parables, and
called the Gentiles by the eloquence of Paul: so I, in handlyng of this
miracle, having respect unto this audyence, will aply the wonderful great
charitable provision of Christ, unto the Kings Majesty: the fayethful
diligence of the Apostles, unto the nobility: and the dew obedyence and
hertye thankfulness of the multitude, unto all other of the communaltye. Not
doubtyng but that charitable provision of liberal benefytes, will be a thing
most pleasant and honorable for the Kings Gracious Majesty: and faithful
diligence in disposing great benefits most convenient, and co^me^dable for all
that be in high authority: and finally, humble obedience and unfeigned
tha^kfulnes to be most necessary, requisite, and looked for at this time, in all
inferiors and commune sort of people in England.

Mark a little after the beginning of the sixth Chap. of John, and ye shall
hear, when as much people eat, what Jesus did. I will pass ye description of
the wilderness with the causes and the manner of the peoples going together, and
begin at ye which Christ did, when they were cummyng toward him.

Jesus lifting up his eyes, and seeing much people come unto him, said unto
Philyp: From whence shall we bye bread, that these may eat? This he said
temptyng him: for he him self knew what he would do. Philippe answered unto
him: Two hundredth penye worth of bread will not be sufficient unto these so
that every one might take a little. One of his discyples Andrew, Simo^ Peter's
brother, says unto him: There is one boy here, which has.v. barely loaves
and.ii. fyshes, but what ar those amongst so many? Jesus said Make the me^ to
sit down. There was much grass in the place. The men therefore sat down about
the number of.v. thousa^des Jesus took the bread, and after thanks geuynge,
did divide it unto his disciples, and the dyscyples to them that were set*
And likewise of the fyshes, so much as they would. And when they were filled,
he said unto his disciples: Rather up the broken meats remaynyng, that
nothing be lost. They gathered therefore, and filled.xii. baskettes full of
those meats which remained, after that the had eaten. The men therefore
seeing what a sign Jesus had done said that this is truly the Prophet
which cummeth unto the world.

O Merciful Lord, what a grefe is it to se those which a man loves heartily,
with such diseases infected, that every thing ministered by the Physician to
do them good, by their own unquietness and misusinge of the same does increase
their grievous dangerous sickness? For these people, having great occasion of
comfort, by reason yt in this place, through the true preaching of gods word,
al sin is plainly and freely rebuked, and those things especially which
do appertain unto magystrates, whereby any man of indifferent judgment,
may think that these magistrates being present, and willingelye hearing,
be purposed to amend: These people I say, that thus have a great occasion of
comfort offered unto them, by their own mistakinge of it, do turn all to
their further gryefe and danger. For they speak irreverently, and untruly
slander the magistrates, not only with the faults that be here named, but
also with rebukynge, imprisoninge, and forbiddinge of the Preachers. And when
as by the same mouth of the true preacher, their venomous tounges be rebuked,
the^ they spare not to say, that the Preacher has learned his lesson in Jack
an apes court: doing as much as lies in them, to make other men, neither to
reverence the magistrates, nor believe the Preacher. What they them selfs mean
thereby, peradventure by reason of blyndenesse; they wot not. But we knowinge
the craft of the devil, as Paul writes.ii. Cor. ii. perceive that he would
have nothing in this place laid to the Rulers charge: Not fearing how much
be spoken to those of the people, which be past any amendment by words: But al
yt the devil fears, is lest that the rulers be put in remembrance of the
great danger that they be in, for suffering to great enormities unpunished
amongst the people.

I therefore trusting to do most good in that which the devil labors the
most to hinder, will lay great and many fautes unto them that have most power,
and authorytye. For sure I am, that rulers ordained of God to see the
ignoraunte instructed, and the evil punyshed, be in great danger of Gods
vengeance, for the great and manifold enormytyes which do grow and spryng of
ignorance for lack of knowledge, and of dissolutenes for lack of due
correccion.

And you people be ye sure that the more their danger is, for lack of
provision and punishmente for other men's faults, the greater is the damnacion
of them that commit and do these faults.

Now I trustinge to God, and not fearinge the devil, will proceade to declare
and apply this part of scripture unto this Audyence, so that for no man I
will cloak or flatter any vice.

Jesus lyftnge up hysepes, and saying much people cummynge unto him. etc.

Here note two things: in the people note coming unto Christ, and in Christ,
note charitable provision for the people. For in this people does Christ
declare by example, and prove in experyence his doctrine to be true, which he
had before taught, saying: First seek for the kingdom of God and the
ryghtuousnes thereof, and al these other, meaning necessaryes, shall be
ministered unto you. For here they folowinge Christ, to seek the kingdom of
God, had not only this kingdom of God, this bread of life, this word of
salvation preached unto them, but also all their diseases healed, and their
hungry bellies with good meats ple^tifully filled.

Yea the plentye of these people having inoughe even so much as they would,
was far more then the plenty of crafty Lawers, disceitful Merchauntes,
covetous greedyguttes, and ambicious prollers, which can never have enough:
but always continewe in insatiable hunger, and need of covetousness. As
the.xiiii. Psalm. declares: Diuites eguerunt: The rich have felt need and
hunger: but they which seek ye lord lack no goods.

He that seeks to be rich, be he never so poor a slave, or so myghtyea
Lord, he falls into diverse temptacions and snares of the devil: but they
that seek the Lord, shall lack no goodness.

Seek for to be rich, and thou shall find sorrow, mysery, and mischief: Seek
for to be godly, and thou shall find coufort, wealth, and prosperity, with all
manner of felicity.

If thou will be godly, thou must follow Christ: thou must not follow the
steps of his fete, which be taken up into heaven out of thy syghte, but thou
ought to follow the doctrine of his word, which is here left upon carthe, to
guide the steps of thy life, in the way of peace. And whyther will gods
word gyde the in the time of thy trouble and necessytye? Surely unto the Lord,
which says: Propter miseriam inopum. etc. For the miseryes sakes of the
comfortless, and syghynges of the poor, now will I rise, says the Lord.

O Lord, seeing thou haste many people in Inglande, that as yet be in
myseryes without confort, and in pouertye, and lack help, how dooest thou
arise unto them? Unto this the Lord answers, in the.xxxiiii. of Ezechiel:
Suscitabo super eos pastorem unum. etc.

I will set up over them one pastor, even my servant Dauyd, he shall feed
them, and he shall be their pastor, and I the Lord will be their God. This
prophecye was written long after David's time. Wherefore by David here named,
is sygnyfyed and meante such a King as shall be as faithful and diligent to
keep, feed, and cherysh his subjects within his own Realm, as was David to
his people within Israel. We hope, trust and believe, that our gracions
King, endued with the faithful diligence of David, is ordained of God, to
govern, cherish and feed us the people of this his realm. Wherefore
according to the example of Christ Jesus, most Christian and Gracious King, for
the reverence of God, which has set you upon the high hill of honor and
authorytye, lift up your gracious eyes of charytable pity, and behold much
people througheoute all England, coming to seek relief, ease and comfort,
sent from God unto them, by your excellent Majesty. For although there
has been to much mercy showed upon the generation of vypers, the ungracious
rebels: Yet is there many poor people, which like simple sheep, shorn to
the bare skin, have as yet little provision and great need. Even as.v.
thousands in wilderness followed Christ and his Apostles, so many thousands in
England, past all other hope and refuge, follow your gracious majesty and
honorable Counsel.

For their parsons, which should like shepheardes feed them, do like thieves,
rob, murder and spoil them. And their landlordes which should defend them,
be most heavy masters unto them: Yea, all manner of officers do not their
duties to keep the people in good order, but rather take such fees as makes
the people veraye poor. Who so has eyes, and will see, may easily perceive
that those personages, which be most in number and greateste in value
throughout al England, be no shepherds houses to lay up fodder to feed the
poor sheep of the parysh, but theeuysh dens, to convey away great spoil
from all the rych men of the parysh. I say there is no person there, to releue
the poor and nedy with natural sustinau^ce in keeping of house, and to feed
all ingenerally with the heavenly food of gods word by preachinge:

But there is a persons deputy or fermer, which having neither habilitye,
power, nor authorytye to do the persons duty in feedyng and teachinge the
parish, is able, sufficient, and stout enough to challenge and take for his
masters duty the tenth part of all the parysh. Likewise other officers take
many fees, and do few duties: And especially landlordes take exceadynge fynes
and rentes of their tenauntes, and do no good unto their tenauntes.

Now my Lords, both of the laity and of the clergy, in the name of god, I
aduertyse you to take heed: for when the Lord of all Lords shall se his
flock scattred, spylte and lost, if he follow the trace of the blood, it
will lead him even straight way unto this court, and unto your houses, where
as these great thieves which murder, spoil, and destroy the flocks of Christ,
be received, kept, and maintained.

For you maintain your chaplens to take Pluralities, and your other servant
mo offices then they can or will discharge.

Fie for sin and shame, either give your servants wages, or else let them go
and serve those which do give them wages. For now your chaplaynes, your
servant, and you your selves have the persons, the shepherds, and the
officers wages, and nether you nor they, nor other does yt persons, the
shepherds or the officers duty, except peradventure ye imagine that there is a
parish priest, curate, which does the persons duti. But although ye do so
imagine, yet the people do feel and perceive that he does mean no other thing
but pay your duty, pay your duty. Yes forsouth he ministers Gods sacraments,
he says his service, and he reads the homilies, as you fine, flatring,
courtiers, which speak by imaginacion, term it: But the rude lobbes of the
country, which be to simple to paynte a lie, speak foul and truly as they
find it, and say. He minisheth Gods sacraments, he slubbers up his service
and he can not read the humbles. Yet is there some that can read very well,
but how many of those be not either supersticious papystes, or else carnal
gospellers, which by their evil example of living, and worse doctrine, do
far more harm then they do good by their fair reading and saying of
service. But put the case, as it may be, that there be at a benefyce in some
place at sometime, some good curate, all those sums will make but a feewe in
number, and yet ye see many persons in many places absente from their
benifices, which if they be seldom absente, may be good, but if they be
contynually or for the most part absent, then can they be neither good, honest
nor godly. For if their duty be undone, then can no man excuse them: if it be
done, then is it by other and not by them: and then why do they live of
other men's labors? He that preaches the gospel, should live upon the
Gospel, as God has ordained: As for those, Qui mollibus uestiuntur, in
domibus Regum, which goo gaye in Kings houses, and either mosell the
labouringe ox, or else spoil the poor parish in the country, be of the deuyls
ordinance. As there is in all offices some put in by Christ, some by the
devil: so is there in personages, some sent from Christ as shepherdes to
feed, and some from the devil, as thieves to devour. Yea amongst all kinds
of officers, some be true Prophets and sheppeheardes in deed, and some have
sheep skynnes, and be raueninge wolves in deed. The one takes pains in doing
of his duty, and the other seeks gaynes in professyng of his duty. Take heed
of those, for they are erraunt thieves.

Alas, if all those which take the names and professyons of officers, for
desire of luker and honor, and do not execute the duties belonginge to their
offices with painful diligence, be errant thieves as they be in deed, then is
there mani a strong erraunt thief amongst the^ yt be called honest, worshipful,
and honorable men.

For they have the names, the authorytyes and vauntages of those offices given
and paid unto them, the duties of the which be very slenderly or nothing at
al executed amongst the people.

If I were in any other place in all England, I could and would use another
trade of preaching before another audience: but being called of God by your
appoyntement, unto this place at this time, my conscience does compel me to
use this trade and no other, before this solemn audience. Wherefore with dreede
and fear of God, with charitable pyty of the people, with most reverend love
and homage unto your honors, I must needs cry with the Prophet Esaye:

Principes Sodom, populus Gomorre: Hear the word of the Lord ye Princes of
Sodom, ye people of Gomorra: Quo mihi multitudo uictinarum uestrarum. What
care I for the great number of your sacrifyces, Dicit Dominus, says the Lord:
rebukyng all the sacrifices, Cerimonyes, and feasts of the Jews which he him
self had commanded to be observed and kept: by the which thing left in writing
he does teach and command me how to speak of your well doing here in England.
Hear therefore ye Princes of Sodom, and ye people of Gomor, thus says the
Lord: What pleasure have I, yea what care I for all your Englysh Bibles,
Homelies, and all your other books? set forth no more godly service to honor
me with: I hate them al with my heart, they are grievous unto me, I am weary of
them: Yea, it is a great pain for me to suffer them. Why, O Lord these be
good, these be godly, and these be necessary things.

Truth it is, the fault is not in the things that be set forth, but in you yt
have set them furthe. Manus enim uestre plene sunt sanguine: For your hands
are full of blood.

Your hands, your service and your houses be full of persons livings
preachers liuinges, and officers lyuynges. And by you, the person has his
dyspensacion, the preacher is put to scilence, and the offycer unpunished, for
neglecting of his duty. And so through the negligence of the kepers (good
order, which is ye pale of the park of this co^munewelth dekated) the dear
thereof most dearly bought with Christ's blood, have strayed out of their
own feeding, to dystroye the corn of all men's liuinges: Where as very
necessytye has compelled you with such force to drive the^ back, as must
needs distroye many of those dear. Those people I mean, which you have
cheryshed and kept and as yet do love and pity above al other jewels,
commodities and pleasures. Alas, these that take the liuinges, and do not the
duties of Persons, Preachers, landlordes, Bailyes, and of other officers: These
flaterers, these wolfes in la^bes skins, these devils in men's vysers, have
caused you to be thought and taken as cruel oppressers of those people, whose
furyous wild rage ye did suppress and keep under, of veraye charitable pity
toward them, and all other, which with that rebellious ragei should have be
al together distroied, if the help of your power and authority had been any
longer differted.

Surely, until that these prollets for them selves, these children of the
dyuell, these sowers of sedicion be taken out of the way, either by
reformacion, or by distruccion, your charitable pity and provision for the
people, and their reverend love and obedience toward you, shall never be
seen, felt, and known. Now, as Helye was giltye of the whordome, extorcion,
and abhominacion of his sons, so are your hertes full of crueltye, and your
hands full of blood, not so much by doing, as by sufferynge all these euyls.
Wherefore Lauamini, mundi estote: Wash, and make your selves clean, with the
tears of repentance. Auferte malum cogitacionum uestrarum ab oculis meis:
Away with the evil of your thoughts from before mine eyes. Open your hearts,
that the sword of Gods word may come to wipe away covetousness, which is the
root of all evil, planted in your hertes. For if that root contyneue there,
than ca^ no good spring from you: but even the most pure and wholesome word of
God set forth by you continuinge in couitousnes, will be abominable in the
syghte of God, offensive unto the people, and damnable unto you your selves.
Wherefore, Quiescite agere perverse: Seasse to perucrte, many things from
evil unto worse. Discite benefacere: Learn to do well, in conforminge al
things that be a miss, unto a good order. Querite iudicium: Search for
ryghteous judgment which is almost banyshed out of England. Alas what a
judgment is this, a supersticious papiste, which has made the fault shall
have a pension out of a Chauntrye, so long as he lives, and a poor parysh,
which has great need and done no fault shall lose and forfayte many
Chauntries utterly for ever Subuenite oppresso: Help the oppressed people that
be laden with heuye burdeyns of payinge wages to many offices, and faynte for
lack of releife, and dew service of the offycer. Iudicate pupillo: Judge so
to the fatherless chyldrens behofe, that wardship may be a good provision for
fatherles children, and not an uncharitable spoil of young men's lands.
Defendite uiduam: Shield the widow from al men's iniuryes, and compel them not
to mary your unthrifty servants.

Thus has God by Esaye in his time, and by me at this time described Rulers
Faults, with a way how to a mend them. Therefore, Principes Anglie: Ye head
Rulers and governors of England, first see, acknowledge, amend your own
faults: and then, perusynge all under officers, consider and note how few
shepherds and offices do feed and keep* by doing duties, and how many
thieves and wolfes do rob and spoil the flocks, by taking sees here in
England: and then shall ye perceive that there must needs be many sheep,
that with their hertes, minds, and expectacion, do follow the Kings Majesty,
and you of his honorable counsel so far past the houses and cities of their
own prouysion, that if they have not spedy relief at your hands, many of
them is like to fainte and decay by the way.

Therefore this considered and known, as Christ liftinge up his eyes did teach
you to see and consider the people: so learn by that which follows in
Christ's dooynge, what shall be your duty after that ye se and know the
multitude, the state and condition of the people.

And he said unto Philyp: From whence shall we bye bread, that these may
eat? But this he said to prove him: for he him self knew what he would do.

Christ said to Philip as every Christian King ought to say to his Counsel:
From whence shall we that be governors kepers and feders, bye and provide with
our own costs, labor, and diligence, bread, food and necessaryes, that these
may eat and be relieved, which be our subjects in obedience, brethren in
Christ, and fellow heirs of the heavenly kingdom?

Pharao with Counsel in Egypt, consulted how to bring the welthy people unto
misery: so that he is a very Pharonicall tyra^t, which labors by oppression
to thrust down the welthy people: And he is a faithful christen king that
humbles him self by diligence to releive, conforte, and set up the afflycted
people. For the one, by worldly policy, would have much honor, and the other of
godly charity will do much good. Christ also said this, to prove and try
Philip, knowing him self what should be done. So that here, Kings and great men
may learn to try, and prove the honesty, wit, and fidelity of their
Cou^sellers, in such matters as they them selves be so perfect that they can
diserne with what discrecion and mind the cou^seller does answer.

Philip au^swered, that two hundredth penny worth of bread will not serve unto
these, so that every one might take a little

In the which answer, as concerning his wit, he declares it to be to
slender to provide for so great a matter in so short time.

And his mind seemed to be such as would not have Christ to trouble him self
with so great cares but rather as the other Evangelists do declare, to send
the people away, and let them (...) for them selfs. The same mind and
affeccion was in Peter, after that Christ had told his Disciples how that
we must go to Jerusalem to suffer sore pains and miserable death. For then
Peter took him a side and said: Master favor your self, do not enter in to
such danger and sorrows.

And it is not unlike, but if your Majesty, with your Counsel speak unto
your nobles for provision now to be made for the people: ye shall find some
that be Philippians and Peter's, which by setting before your eyes the
hardness of the matter, the tenderness of your years, and the wonderful charges
that should be requisite, will move and counsel you to quiet your self, to
take your ease, yea to take your pastime, in haukyng, Huntyng or gamnyng. Unto
whom your Magestie may answer, as Christ did unto Peter: Avoid fro me Satan,
thou hyndrest me by thy carnal temptacion, to do that thing which God has
moved me unto by his gracious inspiracion. Thou have no taste nor savor how
delicious God is unto a pure conscience, in Godly exercise of good worckes.
But all that thou regardest and felest is voluptuous pleasure in worldly
vanities. And therefore you do not perceive, how yt they which be endued with
a special grace of god may find more pleasure and pastime in godly governance,
to keep together and save simple me^, then in hauking and hunting, to chase
and kill wild beasts. Yea, a godly king shall find more pleasure in castinge
lots for Jonas, to try out offenders, which trouble the ship of his commune
wealth, then in casting dice at hasarde, to allow and maintain by his example,
such things as should not be suffered in a commune wealth. Yea surely, a good
King shall take far more delight in edifiynge with conforte and deckynge with
good order the Congregation of his people, the Church and house of God, the
heavenly City of Jerusalem, then in buildinge such houses as seem gaye and
gorgeous, and be in deed but vile earth, stones, timber and claye. Such like
answer ought your Majesty, and all noble men to make, if ye find any of your
Counselors more carnal than spiritual, more worldly then godly. Or else turn
away your ears from such Philipians, and hear other, as Christ did.

Then said unto him one of his Disciples, Andrew Simon Peter's brother, There is
a boy here that has five barely loaves and two fyshes, but what avail those
among so many?

Note here that this boy was the Apostles page, and these loves and fishes
were their vittayles. For as appears in Mark, when they had made search how
many loaves they them selves had, this answer was made, yt they had.v. loves
and.ii. fishes: but what be they amongst so many? As who should say: although
these be al yt ever we have and seem more mete to be kept amongst a few, the^
to be given to many, yet for because they yt becum which being many have more
need then we: therefore ar we willinge to give the^ to be disposed, and wish yt
they were of more value to do more good amongst ye people.

These men cared more for the Commune people, then they did for them selves,
and therefore were very mete to be Counselors, and near about a great King.

Here we perceive what simple Phylippe, and good Andrewe think, but here is
nothing declared of covetous Judas counsel. No, for Christ being fully
purposed to do a good deed does neither ask, nor hear any counsel of
covetous Judas: teaching all them which intend any goodness, never to ask nor
admit any counsel of those whom they know to be covetous. For truly the
covetous man's council, although it seem never so good and honest, yet is it in
deed naught and deuilish. For what could seem better counsel then yt a little
ointme^t, the sweet smell of the which continued but a while among a few,
should have been sold for three hundredth pence, the great price of the which
bestowed amongeste many poor, should have done them good for a great season?

The Euangelyst does show how that Judas did give this counsel, not for
that he had any care of the poor, but because he was a thief, and bare the
bags.

Judas pretense was wonders godly, to sell the oyntmente for a great sum of
money, to relieve the poor with, but his purpose was deuelyshe, to get the
money in his bags, and keep it to him self. And those in England which did
pretend, that besides the abolishinge of supersticion, with the lands of
Abbeys, Coliges and Chauntries, the King should be enryched, learning
mayntayned, pouertye relieved, and the common wealth eased, and by this
pretense purposely have enriched them selves, setting a broad incloystered
papists, to get their liuinges by giving them pencions, yea, and thrustynge
them into benefices to poison the whole commune wealth for the risignacion of
those pencions: and so craftly co^ueying much from the King, from lerning from
pouertye, and from all the commune wealth, unto their own private vauntage:
These men's counsel seemed better then Judas counsel was: and their
covetousness, by their own deeds appears no less then Judas covetousness
did. Well, beware, for if ye play Judas part on still, and make no restitucion,
until ye go to hangyng, ye are like to find desperacio^ at the end of your
life, because ye would not by restitucion amend your life. Ye noble me^, and
especialli you of the kings counsel, for the reverence of God, pity of the
common wealth, and safegarde of your selfs, away with these Iudasses, let
them go hang them selves: except perauenture ye thyncke it fytte and
necessary, that you first hang them before they betray you. For undoubtedly, he
that has the covetousness of Judas in his heart he will play all the other
parts of Judas, if he ever have such opportunity as Judas had.

A way with Judas, and learn at Andrew, to say unto this king and his
council intending to releive the multitude of his people here in England,
learn ye noble men to say: Here is a boy, Here be servants and retayners
of ours which have five loaves and two fyshes, many benefices, some
prebendes, with diverse offices: yea, and some of us our selves have mo offices
then we can discharge. Pleases it your majesty to take these into your hands,
which have been kept for us, that they now in this great need, may be better
disposed amongst your people. Quid hec inter tantos? These be very small
things toward the amendeme^t of so many lackes in so great a multitude. How
be it these will serve, so that there may be mo good Persons, good preachers,
and good officers placed a broad in every country, which in doing their
offices, keeping of houses, and preaching of gods word may teach the
ignoraunte, relieve the poor, punyshe the fautye, and cheryshe the honest, and
so repair the pale of good order about this commonwealth. For the love of God
give your servants wages, and cause the^ to restore these liuinges, which
coming of the sweat of the labourer, be in deed the relife of ye poor, the
mayntenaunce of honestye, and the reward of virtue, yea the very pale, wall,
and bulwarks of the commen wealth. The Apostles gave all that they had of
their own, freelye unto other: stycke not you to restore that now which ye
have of long time uncharitably kept from other.

Hear what follows: when these fishes and loaves were brought unto Jesus,
make (says he) the people to sit down. God always bestows his benefits
upon them that sit down in quietness, and powers forth his ve^gau^ce upon
those that be impatient, unquiet, and full of business. For as appears in
Genesis, the people gathered together in the plain of Sanner, and made a
great uproar, buildyng a tower like rebels against god, to get the^ a name.
How be it god destroyed their ha^dyworke, co^fou^ded their la^gage, and
scatered the^ abrod.

The Scribes and the Phariseys came unquietly, temptyng Christ, and required a
sign from heaven. Christ rebuked them sharply, and showed them no sign, but
called them a froward and aduoutrous generation. So the people in England
gathered together, they would make maisteryes, and be notable fellows: yea,
the tower of their presumpcion should be built up unto heaven, in dyspite of
gentle men and nobilitye: they have partlye felt, and we have right
pitifully seen how sore God was therewith offended. Now I hear say there is
as yet remaininge in England sum stiff necked Jews, which come presumptuously
temtyng God, and say: if these our rulers be sent of God, to take better order
then other have done, well then, let them begin betime to give us a notable
sign and token, for else we will not believe, trust, nor obey them.

Well, I will tell you that thus whysper: Even as Christ was Positus in
resurreccionem et ruinam multorum in Israel: Set to restore and decay many
in Israel: So be Christen rulers in every comune wealth, set and ordained of
God, to beat down and keep under these sturdye rebels, which be so evil
the^ selves, that they cannot think that any man does intend to do them
good, and to raise up, conforte and cherish the simple pacient people, which
be of a good trust toward their rulers, knowing that they them selves have
deserved no evil: or else if they have done evil, yet by repentance and
amendment, do not doubt to obtain mercy at their rulers hands. So God has
ordained rulers to cheryshe ye, if thou be meke quiet and paciente, or else to
punyshe the, if thou be unquiet, busy and stubborn. Learn at Paul. Romans
xiii. If thou do well, to trust well of thy rulers, and if thou do evil, not
to be without fear of their powers, for he bears not the sword without a
cause. Take heed therefore ye rulers, for gods sake, and pitye of people,
seeing that God has given you a swerd to cut of rotten cankred members for the
safegarde of the hole body* knowing no ca^ker to be so dangerous as rebellion
in a commen wealth: If ye find one person infected with that canker, away
with him, for ye safeguard of the body of that house. If one house be infected,
away with it, for the safegarde of that town. If the town be infected, away
with it, for the safegarde of the country. Yea, if a shyre or contrye be all
poisoned, away with it, for the pitye, and safegarde of the hole body of the
commen wealth. So ye se, that the sharper that your sword is, and the sooner
that ye strike rebellion, the more pyty show ye in cutting away the less, and
saving the more part and portion of the people, being all of one body, of
one realm and commonwealth. Consider that Christ went from Jerusalem unto
wilderness, to draw the Gentle people from among the stoborne scribes: and so
Christen rulers must now needs defer the time to draw the people that be
good and trust well, from among this froward generation, which of
presumption look to have order taken as they require, and appoynte the time,
the place and the thing. Wherefore, ye that be good quiet people, beware of
these busye fellows, and as this multitude which ought to be your example,
followed Christ into the wyldernes, so follow you Christen rulers, gods
officers, your chief gouerners in England. And as they did not murmr,
saying: why shall we sit down here in the wyldernes, being an infinite
number, where no meat is, seeing that in the cities where was more meat, and
less gatherynge of the people, we had never feast given of him by his
Apostles?

So I say, do not you grudge and say: why shall we quiet our selves now,
trusting to relief, where we see nothing, and were nothing at al releued
when there was great plentye of lands, and goods of Abbeys, Colegis, and
Chaunteries? Do not murmour so ungodly, but see that there be no fault in
you, and ye shall find no lack in GOD. Suerlye, except ye do sytte down
quietly, ye shall sooner provoke gods vengeance to your damnacion, then
deserve any relief of gods officers, to your comfort. Sit down and be
quiet, for the same rulers and ministers are ordained of god to feed you with
plentye: which be commanded of God to make you first to set down in order
and quyetnes. Yea, and herke all ye that be godly Rulers: there was much
grass in the place, god had provided much grass for them that looked for no
carpets: geuyng all godly governors example to provide things necessary for
those people that at looks for no superfluities. But alas, here in England,
superfluous gorgeous building is so much provided for rich men's pleasures,
that honest houses do decay, where as laboring men ought to have necessary
lodging. It is a commen custom with covetous landlordes, to let their
housynge so decay, that the fermer shall be feign for a small reward or none at
all to give up his leasse, that they taking the grounds into their own
hands, may turn al to pasture: so now Old Fathers, poor Wydowes, and young
children, lie begging in the mirie streets.

O merciful Lord, what a number of poor, feable, haulte Blind, Lame,
sycklye, yea, with idle vacaboundes, and dissembelinge kaityffes mixed among
them, lie and crepe, begging in the myry streates of London and Westminster?

Now speaking in the behalf of these vile beggars, for as much as I know that
ye vilest person upon earth, is ye lively image of almightye God, I will tell
the that art a noble man, worshypfull man, an honest welthye man, especially
if thou be Maire, Sherif, Alderma^ baily, constable or any such officer, it is
to thy great shame before the world, and to thy utter da^nacion before god, to
se these beggi^g as they use to do in the streates. For there is never a one of
these, but he lacks either thy charitable alms to relieve his need, or else
thy due correction to punyshe his fault. A great sin and no les shame is to for
him that says he is a Christian man to se Christ lack things necessary, and to
bestow upon the devil superfluousli. It is Christ Jesus hi^ self that in the
nedy does suffer hunger, thrist and cold: It is the devil him self, that in
the wealthye fares deintely, goes gorgeously, and uses superfluity. Look
Mathewe the xxv. and there shall ye se plainly that it is Christ which lacks
sufficient in the neady: and therefore the devil being contrary to Christ,
contrariwyse has to much in the wealthye.

You also that do provide that your cattle do not long tarry pinned in a fold
where there is no grass, why do you suffer your own brethren in Christ,
without prouysyon to lie in the streates, where is much myer? These selye
souls have been neglected through out all England, and especially in London
and Westminster: But now I trust that a good ouerseer a godly Bishop I mean,
will se that they in these two cities, shall have their need reliued, and their
faults corrected, to the good ensample of al other tounes and cities.

Take heed that there be much grass to sit upon, there as ye commau^d the
people to sit down, that there be sufficient housynge and other provision for
the people there as ye commau^d them to be quiet. The men satte down about
five thousands in number. If they had not been obedient to sit down, Christ
would not have been liberal to have given them meat.

Meat was provided for the Co^mens of England, and ready to have been
delivered. But when they were bydden to sit down in quietness, they rose up by
rebellion, and have lost all the chere of that feast. Yet that notwithstanding,
I trust that those which sat quietly in deed, shall sone be fed with ple^tye, if
they sit still until it may conveniently be disposed. I pray GOD they may,
I trust they shall. The Euaungelist says that the men sat, namyng neither
women nor Children, how be it there was both women and Children, as appears
in the other Evangelists. And men be here named only, because al women and
children did follow the example, and obey the commandment of me^: children of
the fathers, and women of their husbands.

Let not therefore your wives and children, when they come abroad, be so bold
openly, as to say or do any things of them selves, but as they have example
and commandment of you. Now the multitude placed in quyetnes,

Jesus took the loves, and when he had given thanks, he divided them unto
his Disciples: and the Disciples unto them that were set down: and likewise of
the fyshes, so much as they would

Here learn first of Christ, to take nothing, be it never so little, but
with thanks rendered therefore unto God: For of God surely thou haste
received it, by what messenger or mean soever thou came unto it. Then
secondarilye, learn at the Apostles to give unto other, that which the Lord
has given unto the, that thou may truly say with the Apostel Paul. Quod
accepi a domino, hoc tradidi uobis. That which I received of the Lord, have I
given unto you.

Beware that thou play not the wicked servant, which kept his talent hyd, and
not delivered unto any use, for then it shall be taken from the, and thou shall
be cast into utter darkness.

Now, to apply this miracle unto this present time, the kings Magesty may
learn at Christ to take of his servants, Prebendes, Benefices,
Improperacions and all manner of Offices, that be not presently occupied and
executed of a faithful diligent officer, and after thanckes given unto God
therefore, to deliver them unto his Counsel and Nobilyty to be disposed
amongst the people of his Realm, which be in such hunger and lack of
faithful officers, and house kepers, and godli preachers that they must needs
faint, except they be sone provided for.

And in this dystrybucion of offices and benefyces, your Majesty with your
Counsel had need to stand and behold the dealyng of your Nobles, as Christ
did of his Apostles. For it is not unlike but as there was amongst Christ's
Apostles, so will there be amongst every Christen Kings Counselors and
Nobles, some Judas which is to be trusted no further then he can be seen. For
in syghte Judas does as other of his fellows do: but being out of syghte he
sold his Master. And so the most covetous of them all, will be afraid to do
any thing amysse, if you look upon: but if your backs be turned, then will
covetous Judas sell dearly that which his liberal master gives frelye. As for
example of late days, the Kings Majesty that dead is, did give a Benefyce
to be appropryat unto the Uniuersitye of Cambrydge. In liberam et puram
eliemosinam: As fre and pure alms. How be it, his hands were so vnpure,
which should have delivered it, that he received.vi. hundredth pounds of the
Unyuersytye for it. Whether that this.vi.C. pou^ds were conveyed to the kings
behoof pryuelye for that alms, which by plain writing was given freely, or
else put into some Judas pouch, I would it were known. For now, by such
charitable Alms, the king is slaundered, the parish undone, and the vniuersyty
in worse case then it was before.

Pleases it your Majesty, with your honorable Counsel, for the reverence of
God, the pytye of the poor, and the godly zele that ye have to good learning,
hear what has been done in your time.

Your Magesty has had given and received by Act of Parliament, Colleges,
Chauntries, and guyldes for mani good consideracions, and especially as
appears in the same Act, for exectinge of grammar schools, to the educacion
of youth in virtue and godlynes, to the further augmentynge of the
universities, and better provision for the poor and nedy. But now, many
Grammar schools, and much charytable provision for the poor, be taken, sold,
and made away, to the great flaunder of you and your laws, to the utter
discomfort of the pore, to the grievous offense of the people, to the most
miserable drownynge of youth in ygnoraunce, and soore decay of the
Uniuersities.

There was in the North country, amongst the rude people in knowledge (which
be most ready to spend their lives and goods, in seruinge the king at the
burning of a Beacon) there was a Grammar schole founded, having in the
University of Cambrydge, of the same foundation.viii. scholerships two
felowshippes, ever replenished with the scholars of that schole, which schole
is now sold, decayed, and lost. Mo there be of like sort handled: But I recyte
this only, because I know that the sale of it was once stayed of charytye,
and yet afterward brought to pass by brybrye, as I heard say, and believe
it, because that it is only brybrye that customablye over comes charytye.

For gods sake you that be in authorytye, look upon it.

For if ye wink at such matters, God will scouse upon you. Think not that I
do burden you with more than that which God by his ordinance, not without your
wills and co^sentes, has charged you wythal. For by whose fault or negligence
so ever it was, that things before time have been vncharytably abused, suerlye
it is your charge, which be now in authorytye, to se at this time all such
things as yet remain out of order, rightuously, spedely, and charitably
redressed.

And as I do perceive, that the abuse of these things before time, has
offended God, troubled the common wealth, and brought some men toward shame
and confusion: So do I wyshe, pray, and trust, that now the redress of the
same may be to gods pleasure, the peoples comfort, and to ye honor and
establishment of them that be in most high authorytye.

Hear therefore, and I will tell you more: There were in some towns.vi.
some.viii. and some a dosyn kyne, given unto a stock for the relyefe of the
poor, and used in such wise, that the poor cotingers, which could make any
provision for fodder, had ye, milk for a very small hyre, and then the number
of the stock reserved, al manner of vayles besides, both the hyre of the
milk, and the pryces of the young veales, and old fat wares, was disposed to
the relief of the poor, these be also soulde, taken, and made away. The
King bears the slander, the poor feleth the lack, but who has the profit
of such things, I can not tell: but well I wot, and all the world sees,
that the Act of Parlimente made by the Kings Majesty, and his Lords and
Commens of the Parliamente, for the mayntenaunce of learning, and relief of
the poor, has served some, as a most fit instrument to rob learning and to
spoil the pore.

If you that now be in authorytye do not look upon such things to redress
them, god will look upon you, to revenge them. Here have I rehearsed them, that
the Kings Majesty, with you of his counsel may learn not only by the
doctrine and examples of scripture, but also by experience in his own land, to
se and consider how his benefytes, put into the hands of his nobles and
officers, be disposed and used amongst his inferior people.

For if landed men and officers by keeping of houses, and doing of their duties
in their countries, do bestow among the people, all that they have received
of god, by the kings gift, their fathers inherytance, or other ways: then
shall god give such encrese, yt every man shall have enough.

As Solomon, the.xi. of the Proverbs testifies: Alii diuidunt propria, et
ditiores fiunt: alii rapiunt non sua, et semper in egestate sunt: Some dispose
and give their own, and become rycher and rycher: some do rauine and spoil
that which is not their own, and be ever in lack and deed. As ye see in
daily experience, those that do their own duties in executinge their
offices, and bestow their own goods in keeping good houses, baue ever such
plentye, that all other men maruayle from whence god sends it. And those yt
do no duties, nor keep no houses, but brybe in their offices, and polle their
teuau^tes, take so much and have so litel, that all men wonder how the devil
they waste it.

Nothing is more true then the Gospel: Date, et dabitur uobis: Give and it
shall be given unto you. Give plentifully unto other, and godwil give more
plenty unto you. For God will always be before hand, in giuyng good gifts.
For as appears in this gospel, when the Apostles had given unto the people
so much good meat as they desired, then says the Euangeliste.

When they were filled, Jesus says to his dysciples: Gather up the broken
meats that remain, so that nothing be lost. They therefore gathered and
filled.xii. baskets full with the broken meats remaining of that which they had
eaten.

Here they gave but.v. loves and two fishes, and there was given unto the^.xii
baskets full of meats.

The Wyddowe of Sarepthat gave but one handful of flower, and a little oil
unto Elias, and had given unto her again so much as served her and her son,
all the time of the great drought.iii. Reg.xvii. Learn therefore that covetous
bribry and extorcion has never enough: and charytable lyberalytye ever has
plentye.

Here also may rych men learn, when and how to fill their store houses.
Surely, even as the Apostles did fill their baskettes, when the people have
inoughe, then by gatherynge up that which else should be lost. So did
Iosephe in Egypt, suffer no corn to be lost in the years of plentye, but
stored it up in barnes, to releue the people with, in the time of darth: Not as
covetous Carles do here in England forstall the markets, and by corn at al
times, to begin and increase a dearthe.

Blessed be they that sell, to make good cheap, and cursed be they that bye,
to make it dear. For Solomon says. Proverbs.xi.

Qui abscondit frumenta, maledicetur in populis: benediccio autem super caput
uendencium: He that hydeth up corn, shall be cursed amongst the people: But
blessing be upon their heads, that sell.

Now, to teach Christen rulers their duties, in the example of Christ's
Apostles: mark how the Apostles did first minister unto the people, and than
gathered up for them selves, teaching thereby all Christen ministers,
landelordes, officers, and rulers, first to minister unto the people, every
one the duty of his own vocacion, before they gather of the people, rentes,
tithes, or fees, by the name and aucthorytye of that vocacion. Qui non labor
at, says Paul, non manducet: He that does not labor, should not eat. He
that does no work, should take no wages: he that does no duties, should
take no fees. Alas, this is gods word, written in his will and Testamente,
sealed with Christ's blood, and yet the customs and laws of England be
clean contrary. For it has been customeably used, yea, and by laws
commanded, to pay wages, tithes, and fees, although no labor, no office, no
duty be done. Yea, although he be not a labourer, a pastor or an offycer in
deed, but only by a pretenced name, unto whom these for the most part be
paid.

For he that has the propertyes and uses the trades of a false theife, and
cruel murderer, can never be a faithful offycer in deed, although he be so
named by his own flatery, in the Patrons presentacion, in the Bishops
induccion, yea and in the Kings Patent, sealed with the broad Seal. I had
need to take heed how that I speak openly against any thing in any man's
Patent, sealed with the kings great seal: Much more need had you to take heed,
how that ye do any thing expressedly against gods will and Testamente, sealed
with Christ's precious blood.

It is expressedly against Gods Testamente, to clothe a Wolf in a Lambs
skin: to call a thief, an officer, and a cruel murderer a charytable
pastoure: to call evil by the name of good: and good by the name of the evil.
Esaye.v.

Ve qui dicitis in alum bonum. Woe be to you that call evil good. To you I say,
which not only by sayings but also in wrytynges, do name and call theiues,
murderers, and wolfes that be evil, by the names of officers, pastors, and
lambs, which be good. I do not only mean Persons, Prebendaryes, and other
benefised men, but also all manner officers, which have wages, fees, or
liuinges, because you give them such names, and not for that they do such
duties.

These be al Wolfs, and the names and titles that you give them, be nothing
else but sheep skynnes.

Some say, they will take better heed hereafter, but that which is now
past, can not now be called back, and amended. Yea, and it were great pytye,
seeing that they have paid the first fruits unto the Kings Magesty, and no
small reward unto other men, perchance bought their offices dearelye, now to
put them out of those lyuynges, with the loss. of. all those charges which
they have bestowed in rewards, as other ways, to get such lyuynges.

Woe, woe woe unto you hypocrytes that stumble at a straw, and leap over a
block, that strain out a gnat, and swalowe up a camel, that pytye more the
loss of men's brybrye, which was given to corrupt some men, then the treading
under foot of Christ's blood, which was shead, to save all men, that do
imagine it pytye to drive the thieves, murderers and wolfes from amongst ye
lambs of God, redeemed with Christ's precious blud, and committed unto your
governance and keeping.

As God shall help me, I speak with fear, pytye, and reverence: if you do not
rather pulle the shepes skins over the wolfes ears, and hang their carcases
upon the pales, then suffer them to contynewe still, God will pluck you down
with some sodein mischief, rather then maintain or suffer you in so high
authorytye, to use such uncharitable, ungodly, and cruel pytye. You know that
some of the^ have bought their benefyces, have bought their offices, than must
ye needs know, that either Christ is a liar, or else that they be entered in as
thieves, to spoil, murder, and to destroy.

If you suffer thieves, murderers and wolfes to take their plesures amongst
Gods lambs, I tell you plain, God will not long suffer you to be ye
hedshepherds, and governors, and feders of his la^bes.

And take heed you people that on the otherside ye run not into an
intolerable stobernes, deniyng your re^tes, your tithes, or other duties: for
ye scripture forbydoeth you utterly, to deny or withdraw any thing from the^:
thou art commanded if he conte^d to take thy cloak to give him also thy cote.
What soever is asked, rather give more, than by denyinge of that, not to show
thy self to be an innocent sheep that gives his fleese, but a noisome Goat,
that strikes with the horn. You are always bounden to give the flese. It is
the magistrates duties, to consider and note, whether they be thieves or
shepherds, dogs or woulfes, that takes the fleese. Meddle not with other men's
duties, for if ye do, surely ye shall find no remedy, but provoke vncolourable
vengeance.

Now to turn to our particular purpose, let all them that do receive
offices, lands, power, or authorytye from God, by the kings gift, or by
other means, First bestow and dispose the duties of those things
faithfullye amongst the people, before they gather up to them selves the
revenues and commodities of the same from the people. And then when as no man
can come to meat, but by doing of labor, nor none to receyuynge of fees, but
by doing of duties, surely every man shall have as much as he deserves, and no
man shall lack that which he needs.

For he, that by doing of great duties deserves the most, by atteininge the
fees and rewards due for the same duties, shall have the best. And he yt is in
need, having no trust to get any thing by idleness, craft, or flattery,
shall be compelled to use that labor and honest exercise, which shall relyeue
his need sufficiently. Yea, by this mean no man shall spend his time in
idleness, nor use any labor or dyligence, without due recompense, For need
shall drive all men from slothful idleness, unto labor and diligence: and
where as no labor nor dylygence lacks his just reward, there every
laboring and diligent man, shall have sufficient plenty: So ye see how this
does consequently ensue, that every ma^shal have sufficient enough and
plentye, whereas men do first dispose, minister, and give according to their
duties, and afterward receive keep and save that which God does send as a
reward, increased and augmented, for doing of their duties.

So did the Apostles, after the faithful diligent disposyng of the v. loves
and.ii. fyshes receive and keep their reward wonderfullye augme^ted, to
replenish and fyl.xii. baskets. So God grant, that all officers in England may
with such faithful diligence do their duties yt it may please God to give to
all the people sufficient enough, and unto every minister, the basket of his
honest desire, heaped up by the brim

The men therefore seeing what a sign Jesus had done, said that this is yt
Prophet, which comes into the world. This is even he whom Moises, the law,
and the prophets do teach, to be the fully and only sufficient savior of ye
world. Moses saying, in ye.xviii. of Deuteronomy. A Prophet of thy nation and of thy
brethren, like unto me, shall the Lord thy God raise up unto the, him shall
thou hear. The law, as a tutour, leads and brings al men to this savior,
to receive of him that perfeccion, which the law it self lacks. The
Prophets did tell long before of this savior which is now comen in our time,
after their days. This was the peoples confession of Christ, after that they
were by so great a miracle, so plentyfullye fed. Christ often before had wrought
wonderful miracles, disputed learnedly, and preached plainly: but by all those
means did he not so much persuade the people, and win their hearts, as by
this one miracle, in feeding and cheryshinge the people. Yea, and whosoever
lists to mark through out all England, he shall se that a mean learned
person, keeping an house in his paryshe, and being of godly conversation, shall
persuade and teach mo of his parishners with communicacion at one meal, than
the best learned doctor of divinity keeping no house can persuade or teach in
his parish by preaching a dosen solemn sermons.

Like wise the gentle man that keeps a good house in his country shall be in
better credit with ye people for his liberalitye, then the best orator or
lawier in England, for all his eloquence. I do not praise those men which brybe
and pol all the year to keep riot in their houses for a fortnyght, a month, or
a quarter of a year: But those I se beloved, trusted and obeyed, that
according to their ability, keep good houses continually.

And the chief cause why the commens do not love, trust, nor obey the
gentlemen and officers, is, because the gentlemen and officers build many
fair houses, and keep few good houses, have plentye of eloquence to tell
fair tales, but use little faithful dylygence in doing of their duties.
Wherefore, send forth, and place in every country godly preachers, well
disposed persons, and faithful diligent officers of all sorts. Yea, but where
should we now find liuyngs for all those?

Forsooth I do tell you: Outand away with the wily foxes, the false flatteryng
thieves, and the rauenyng wolfes, and than se how many loves, how many offices,
prebendes, and benefices ye find void, how mani you have amongst your
selves that your boy caryeth, that your chapleynes, your servant, and your
household officers have, and let all these be brought forth: and although at
the first syghte they shall seem to little, and few to serve so great a Realm
with so many shyres, being all run now out of civil order into rude
wilderness, Yet, after equal diuidyng and faithful diligent ministering of those
loves and fyshes, of these prebends, personages, and all kind of offices
amongst the people, God of his goodness shall give such increase unto the
people, having thereby sufficient plenty of Christ's holy word of good civil
order, and of charitable relief, that there shall be remaynyng so much tithes,
offrynge, rentes, fees, and rewards, as will fill the.xii. baskets of the
Apostles, I mean the barnes, the houses, and purses of all sayethfull
diligente ministers and officers. Then shall this one act persuade and allure
the hertes of al Englyshmen, more then all that ever was done before: For when
they shall see, that by this King and this Counsel, the wilye fox of
supersticion is utterly banyshed, the false these of flaterye apprehended and
taken, and the cruel wolf of couetousenesse slain and hanged up by the heels,
so that the preachers, the persons, the officers, and all manner of pastores
restored to their places, do feed, cherysh, and keep their flocks which
were before pylled, spoiled and devoured: then shall they of hertye courage,
with one mind, and one voice confess and acknowledge, that this is a King
sent from God, in dued with the wisdom of Solomon, and the faithful diligent
stoutnesse of Dauyd his father, now guyded by godly counsel to bring out of
mysery, and prosper in wealth us the people of this his Real pe. Dixit Dominus.
The Lord has spoken it.

God grant you grace to do it, with thanks and praise to him for ever.

Imprynted at London by John Day dwellinge over Aldersgate, beneth saint
Martyns. And are to be sold at his shop by the little conduit in Chepesyde at
the sign of the Resurrection.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septennium.


