THE ART of Reason, rightly termed, Witcraft, teaching a perfect way to argue
and dispute.

Made by Raphe Lever.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Imprinted at London, by H. Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider streate, at the
sign of the Mermayde. Anno. 1573.

These Books are to be sold at his Shop at the Northvvest door of Paul's
church.

To the right honorable Lord, Walter, Earl of Essex, Uiscount Hereford and
Lord Ferris of Chartley, Lord Bourghchier, and Louaine, and Knight of the mo^
honorable order of the Garter: Raphe Lever wishes increase of knowledge,
with the true fear of god.
IT pleased you, (^ighte honorable) about nine years ago, to accept me into
your service: and being then desirous to study the art of reasoning, ye made
me your reader: and used at sundry times to confer with me in that kind of
learning. There was in you (be it spoken to the praise of God, and without
all suspicion of flaterie) both a gentle nature, easy to be ttained to take
pleasure in study: and also a sharpnes of wit, ready to conceive at the
first any doctrine that was orderlye taught. So that doubtless, if there had
not been a lack in me, your L. had long ago profited right well in this
art. The lack which was in me then, and which I now remember with
grief, was this: I used no good trade to cause your L. to take pleasure in
study, and not to fail of your appointed hours. Verilye it is requisite in
all them, which shall be readers to men of noble birth, that besides knowledge
and diligence to teach, they have also a certain slight, and cunning, to
cause their scholars to delight in learning: and so to use the matter, that
personages of high estate be neither drawn from the love of their book, by
to much forced exercise: nor suffered to lose their appointed time of study,
for lack of a grave and alurable calling upon, for the one breeds a
lothsomnesse, and the other a forgetfulness. But albeit that your L. has had
loss through my lack of skill in this point, yet it so falls out now, that
many are like to make gain of your loss. For the lack which was in me,
when I served your honor, has since been the chief occasion why I have
written this book, to make some part of recompense to you. In consideration
whereof, I most humblye desire you, to take in good part, that I dedicate
this simple work unto your L. for my desire is, that it may pas^e forth
under your protection. If you like well of it, I shall not only think my
pains well bestovved: but my self also to have a sufficient defense against
all ill reports. Martine Bucer read over this art, in his old days, and
renewed in his age, the rules that he learned thereof in his youth. If you
mind to renevve your study, and once again to assaye, what you can do to
obtain this excellent art, I offer unto you my service and diligence, as may
best stand with your pleasure and my calling. The rules of this art are
general, and upon them grows a general knowledge. Who has a pregnant
wit, and is cunning in this faculty, shall have both to speak, and to judge,
of any matter whatsoever. If learning be joined to virtue and honor, so that
they three take place in one person at once, it is a vvonder to see, how all
men's eyes are bent upon such a one, and what hope they conceive of his
vveldoing. My prayer is therefore, that your L. may so consider of this, that as
you, in two of these, do exceed almost all: so in the third ye might not be
inferior to many. But having alvvayes before your eyes the fear of God, the
love of your Prince, and the duty, you do owe to the common wealth, your L.
may live many joyful days with your loving spouse, increase your noble house
with immortal fame, and finally, at the good time appointed, rest with the
Lord Christ for ever.

The Forespeache.
TO prove that the art of Reasoning may be taught in english, I reason thus:
First, we Englishmen have wits, as well as men of other nations have: Whereby we
conceive what stands with reason, and is well done, and what seems to be
so, and is not. We have also framed unto our selves a language, whereby we do
express by voice or writing, all devises that we conceive in our mind: and
do by this means let men look into our hearts, and see what we think. Then,
as English men can compass this Art by wit: so can they also declare and
set it forth by speech. Now whereas a number of men do suppose, that our
language has no words litte to express the rules of this Art: and where as
some men do argue, that it must needs be so, because they that speak or write
thereof at large, use terms and words, that no mere English man can
understand: It is plain, that neither their supposition is true: nor yet their
reason good. For as time does invent a new form of building, a strange
fashion of apparel, and a new kind of artillery, and munitions: so do men
by consent of speech, frame and devise new names, fit to make known their
strange devises. As for strange and inckhorne terms, (used of many without
cause) they argue a misuse to be in the speaker: but they prove not directly,
that there is any lack in our language: no more then the rudenes of Lawyers
latin, proves that there is a want of good words in the Latin tonnge. I see
and confess, that there be Plura rerum, quam verborum genera, (that is, more
things, then there are words to express things by) and do know withal, that
Aristotle found that want in the Greek tongue, which for finenesse of
speech, and store of words, far excels all other languages. Yet is
there this help in speech, that we often use many worms to express one
thing: yea and sometimes one word is used to signify sundry matters. Moreover,
one language boroweth of another, and where there is want, men sometimes devise
new names and compounded terms. So that after a man has conceived any new
devise in his head, and is desirous to have the same published, and made
common to many, he finds ever some shifte, by one mean or other, to make
the same known. And because there is none so good a way to do it by, as
speech, man makes that his chief mean. Thus ye may see the original
groundworke, and beginning of arts, Man first does conceive trim devises in
his head, and then (as the Poets do feign of Jupiter) is pained as a woman
in travail, till he have uttered and published them, to be seen, and commended
of others. So that when as arts are begone at the first by one, and after
labored by many, they grow by continuance of time to perfection, as well in
the vtteraunce of the speech, as in the devise of the mind. As for devising
of new terms, and compo^ding of words, our tongue has a special grace,
wherein it excels many other, and is comparable with the best. The cause is,
for that the most part of English words are short, and stand on one
si^lable a piece. So that two or three of them are often times fitly joined in
one.

Of these kind of words, I have devised many, and am now to give a reason of
my doing. But first I desire thee (gentle Reader) not to scoff at them before
thou know what they mean: or that thou have found out thy self, or learned
of others, more apt and fit terms then they are. And if any man do cast out a
reason, and say, Loquendum vt vulgus, that is to say, he that speaks, must
use such terms as the common people is in ure withal: and therefore that we
may not devise new names, but reteyne and use the old. I answer, this common
saying takes place, where there are words already extant, and in use, fit to
make the mind of the speaker, known to his audience: but the matter stands
not so with us. Therefore consider the case as it is: An art is to be taught
in that tongue, in which it was never written before. Now the question lies,
whether it were better to borrowe terms of some other tongue, in which this
said Art has been written: and by a little change of pronouncing, to seek
to make them English words, which are none in deed: or else of simple usual
words, to make compounded terms, whose several parts considered alone, are
familiar and known to all english men? For trial hereof, I wish you to ask of
an english man, who understands neither Greek nor Latin, what he conceiueth
in his mind, when he hears this word a backset, and what he does conceive
when he hears this term a Predicate. And doubtless he must confess, if he
consider ye matter aright or have any sharpness of wit at al, that by a
backset, he conceiueth a thing that must be set after, and by a predicate,
that he does understand nothing at all. The like shall fall forth when
comparison is made, betwixt any of our new terms compounded of true english
words, and the inkhorne terms derived of strange and forain languages: For he
that is an englishman born, and understands no tongue but his own, shall at
the first, either conceive the meaning of our words by himself, or else soon
learn them upon an other ma^s instruction and teaching: but for these inkhorne
terms, it is certain, that he shall neither understand them by himself: nor
keep them in remembrance when he is taught their signification of others,
because the word can make him no help. We therefore, that devise
vnderstandable terms, compounded of true and ancient english words, do
rather maintain and continue the antiquity of our mother tongue: then they,
that with inckhorne terms do change and corrupt the same, making a mingle
mangle of their native speech, and not observing the property thereof. They
that will have no new words devised where there is want, seem not well to
consider how speech grows, or wherefore it was devised by man: For names
are not given unto things before the things themselves be invented. Therefore
old names will not serve to make new devises known. It is a fondness (I
grant) to devise new names, where there are old in use, which agreeing to
the property of the speech, may serve the turn well enoughe. For no man is of
power to change or to make a language when he will: but when fit names are
devised and spoken, they force the hearers to like of them and to use them: and
so do they by consent of many, grow to a speech. Therefore (gentle reader) if
thou doubt, what is meant, by any of our strange and new devised terms,
consider their parts, as they are taken by themselves alone: and the
consideration of the parts, shall lead thee to the knowledge of the whole.
But if this shall not serve thy turn, thou may look in the table placed in
the end of our book, and it shall show thee in order their meaning, either by
numbers referring thee to the places, where they are plainly taught: or
making some short exposition of them, if there be none in the book before.
There shall be added also (for some men's better contentation) the Latin terms.
And thus much, for proof, that this art may be taught in our mother tongue,
and for defense of the terms that we have devised to teach and set forth the
same. New let us answer them, which judge it hurtful, to have this art
written and setfoorth in english. They build chiefly upon two points.
First they suppose, that it should be a great decay and hynderaunce unto
learning. Secondlye, that it should minister unto many, matter of contention
and strife. The first part of their supposition is proved to be false by plain
experience: for what man of experience and wit sees not, that learning did
never so flourishe in England in our forefathers days, as it does now, and
has done of late, even since men have begone to write of Arts in our english
tongue? And as for contention, which grows betwixt party and party, when
they argue and dispute of matters to and fro: that is no fault to be imputed or
ascribed unto art: but an infirmity and heat of choler, incident to the
nature of sharp wits, and commonly chancing* when men leave the cause, and
bestow their speech upon by matters: which thing the art of reason
reproves, terming it a shift, and a wranglers point. But let us consider the
profit that comes of this art, so shall we best see, that learning has
no enemies, but them that are ignorant, and those which know not what profit
comes of knowledge. This art serves to many singular purposes. For she
does not only teach an order to reason wittily of doubtful matters, and to
speak forceably of them either of or on, But she also yeldeth to them, that
are cunning and expert in her, a general understanding to judge of all
matters whatsoever, and to discern what is said or done according to reason,
and what is not. And where every particular science has but one special
matter to entreat of, as Arithmeticke to entreat of numbers, Geometry of
bigness, Physic of health, etc. This faculty that we here speak of, is
tied to no special matter: but takes in hand the debating of all things, so
far as wit and reason can extend. Her precepts are very general, and are
used for grounds, and principles in all sciences. She tries whether y^ rules
of art be true or false: she is a searching faculty, by reason whereof she
teaches a man the sooner to espy, what is right, what is wrong, what makes
for him, and what makes against him. But to speak more particularly of her
work, she sorteth all words, and places every kind by it self, eaching
what they signify, as they are considered, and taken alone: she declares
what sense words do make, when they are coupled and knit together: she
painteth forth the perfect form of a reason by rule. And to conclude, she
does minister matter to confirm, and lay forth a troth: and teaches a way,
how to disprove, and discover an error. He that is cunnyng in this facultye,
shall seem ignorant in no learning: and who that is altogether unseen in
this, can be depely seen in none. Doubtless a wise man must needs take great
pleasure, and wonder, to see a few rules lead men to an infinite knowledge.
These things I trow may profit many, sure I am, they can harm none. A
scholar or one that is but a beginner, may not think that he should
understand at the first sight, if perchance he read in this book at
adventure here or there: For the rules of this Art are couched together like
to billets in a pile of wood: so y^ things that are laid down in order, must
be orderlye taken up: neither do men draw^ out billettes at the breast of the
pile: but they ascend to the top, and taking them in order as they rise, they
quickly dispa^ mu^e with ease: otherwise they shall hardlye in long time, writh
out one from among many. And though these ^les and terms sems hard at the
(...) all strange and unacquainted thin^ (...)) yet use shall make them easy.
And (...) understanding of hard points, use these helps. First consider with
yourselfe* what the authors purpose is in (...) place, how that special point
may agree with the general issue: then seek to know, what every word in the
sentence may signify by it self alone: and after weigh what sense they ^ake
as they are all knit, and coupled together: then try if ought may (...) put
to the sentence, or taken from it, to make it plainer or truer* Last of all,
seek for diverse and (...) examples* etc. by these means ye shall at the
length not only understand the meaning of that ye read, but also discern*
and judge, whether the saying be true or false: plain, or obscure. Now to let
every writer have his deserved praise, I confess (to them that desire to
know whom I follow) that in my three first books, I ^ely follow Aristotle:
both for matter, and also for order: who is in my judgment, an author, y^
far passes all profane writers: not only for that ^he writes more true,
and profitable things then others do: but also, for that his manner, and trade
of writing, is more perfect and playner, then any others is y^ I have red. As
for Ciceronians and sugar tongued fellows, which labor more for fi^nes of
speech, then for knowledge of good matter, they often speak much to small
purpose, and shaking forth a number of choice words, and picked sentences,
they hinder good learning, with their fond ^hatte. But in my fourth book,
which entreats of the places, and shows a way how to provide store of
arguments: I have thought good neither fully to follow Aristotle: nor yet any
other that I have seen. For Aristotle's invention serves best, for university
men, when a question is brought to some general issue, as to prove that the
backset is, or is not, the saywhat, the kind, the property, or the Inbeer of
the foreset. Howbeit, men use in disputing or writing, to argue to and fro,
never bringing the matter that lies in question, to any of these four
general issues. Now though the latter writers, think they find just fault
with Aristotle in this behalf: yet in mine opinion, they themselves neither
devise so many places as may be devised for store of matter: nor yet name them,
or handle them so aptly or handsomely as is meet. If it be my hap, dissenting
from all men in this point, to find out a playner and more easy way, then
has been found out heretofore, thou ought (gentle reader) neither to blame
their lack of skill: nor much to praise my mending. For Arts are like to
Oaks, which by little and little grow a long time, before they come to their full
bigness. That one man begins, another often times furthereth and mendeth: and
yet more praise to be given to the beginner, then to the furtherer or mender,
if the first did find more good things, then the follower did add. Experience
teaches, that each thing which is invented by man, has a beginning, has an
increase, and has also in time a full ripeness. Now although each work is
most commendable when it is brought to his full perfection: yet where the
workme^ are many, there is often times more praise to be given to him that
begins a good work, then to him that ends it. For if ye consider the
books that are now printed, and compare them with the books that were printed
at the first (Lord) what a diversity is there, and how much do the last exceed
the first? Yet if ye will compare the first and the last Printer together, and
seek whether deserves more praise and commendation: ye shall find that the
first did far exceed the last. For the last had help of many, and the
first had help of none. So that the first lights the candle of knowledge
(as it were) and the second does but snuff it. This I write, for that some
adding but patches to other men's works, and after publishing the whole in
their own name, conueigh to themselves (as it were by stealth) the fame and
praise that others do deserve. As for those that mar y^ thing they take in
hand to mend, do not only publishe to ye world their own vnskilsulnesse, in
finding out any profitable matter: but also do bewray their vnhabilitie to
judge of things well found out to their hands. To such I say, it is far
easier for a mean crafts man, to make a work of his own devise, then to
finishe the work, that a cunning man has begone. I write thus much, because
some men by such kind of dealing, have misused both my doings and my name.
For the book, named the Philosophers game, and printed about nine years ago,
is entitled to be set forth by Kaphe Lever, and to be augmented by one W. F.
But I assure thee (gentle reader) that, ye pamphlet or work never passed from
me, with so many and so gross ouersightes, as in the book now printed are
common to be seen. For trial whereof, I refer my self to the copy that this
day is extant in sundry of my friends hands. Surely I think my self much
discredited, and that great wrong is offered unto me, for that the same is set
forth, and suffered to pass under my name, without my knowledge, or assent.
Reason would, that each man should bear the blame of his own deault. But I
marvel most at him, which would correct and augment the tables that I drew
forth, for beginners to look on, when they played at this game. For sure I am,
that I comprised in them, both plainly and briefly, all the examples of taking
and triumphing, which are possible to be found, in that kind of exercise. Now
has this correcter or augmenter (term him as ye will) altered, and changed
mine examples, in an hundredth places, and more: committing in each place, a
manifest error: either leaving out them which are necessary: or interlacing
them, which are altogether impertinent to this play, or utterly false, and not
agreeing, to the rules and principles of Arithmeticke. It were therefore to be
wished, y^ no man's work should be printed, nor no man's name put to any work,
except the party first knew thereof, and were welwilling thereunto: and that
they which take in hand to amend or augme^t another man's writing, should use
certain marks, whreby each man's doing might appear by it self. So should
each person bear the report of his own desert, whether it were good or bad.
There are two common marks, y^ this art shoots at: the first is, to make a
good reason: the second is, to show the faults of an ill reason. Of the
first, I have written so much, as I thought convenient and meet: of the
second, I mind to write hereafter, if the Lord God shall make me able, and
occasion me so to do. In the mean time, I have yielded to the earnest request of
my friends: and have published this first part, without the second: not
mynding for mine own ease to stay that, which is thought, will yield present
profit to many. Learn thou (gentle reader) by this which is already written,
to make true reasons, and to use an upright kind of dealyng: and then shall no
colored or deceivable arguments drive thee from the truth, or lead thee
into error. Farewell from Duresme, the. 24. of November. 1572.

In the table of the faults, read for Fol. side, and for ly^e, verse. And
know, that a shevvsay in Latina is called Pronunciatum, Enunciatio, or
Propositi^. Why I term it so, look. 66. 11.

THE FIRST book of Witcraft.
What VVitcraft is.
1 WItcraft is a cunning to frame and to answer a reason.

The parts of a reason.
2 A reason stands of certain sayings, and a saying of words.

3 So that words are the first and the least parts of a reason: and therefore
first to be taught and learned.

4 For he that will keep a good trade in teaching, must begin with small and
easy matters at the first, and by them proceed to greater and harder points,
so far till at the last he attain to the end, which is first in purpose,
and last in work.

What words are.
5 Words are voices framed with heart and tongue, uttering the thoughts of the
mind.

The first dividing of words.
6 Words either agree in sound, and differ in meaning: or they agree in
meaning, and differ in sound: or they agree in both: or else they dissent in
both.

7 They of the first sort may ^ee termed Lykesounding words: They of y^
second sort, like meaning words: They of the third sort, playne^: ^ng words:
and they of the fourth sort, words fully differing one from an other.

Words Lykesounding. Lykemeaning. Playnemeaning. Fully differing.

8 Lykesounding words, are words of double understanding, which have one
sound of letters, and according to that one sound, diverse say what is,
expressing sundry substances.

9 For example thus: The Woodcocke has let my woodcocke fly away.

10 Now this word Woodcocke in both places of this ^ne sentence, for sound
of letters is one and the same:

11 But if ye seek the true meaning of this word Woodcocke, as it is twice
placed in this one saying: ye shall find in either place, a sundry sayewhat,
expressing in the first place, an vnwittie man:

12 And in the second place, a bird haunting the woods, and making his flight
of pleasure only in the twylight.

13 The double understanding of words and sayings, must be warely marked, and
declaration made of their sundry meanings: that it may certainly be known,
in what sense they are to be taken.

14 Words restrained to one saywhat ar no longer words of double understanding.

15 Lykemeanyng words are one in meaning, and diverse in sound as rich,
welthie: color, hue, quickening, bar^e, yest:

16 Plainmeaning words have one sound, and according to that one sound, one
saywhat.

17 Here we understand such a saywhat as declares the substance of a thing:
and not such a one as only notes y^ force and signification of a word.

18 Words fully dissenting are such as have neither one sound, nor one saywhat:
as an herb, and a tree.

The second division of words.
19 Words are also thus divided, some signify a thing that has his being
by it self: some signify a thing that has his being in an other.

20 The first may be called an Inholder: the second an Inbeer. For example
thus: Man, beast, herb, tree, corn, grass, stones, metal, fire, air,
water, earth, and all other substaunces bodyed, or bodylesse, are Inholders:

21 But length, breadth, thickness, weight, measure, number, power, shape,
virtue, cunning, slight, vice, ignorance, heat, calde, moystnesse, dryness,
and all other words placed in any storehouse, (except the storehouse of
substance) are inbeers.

an Inholder is called in latin Subiectu^. Inbeer Accidens.

The third division of words.
22 There is a third division of words to be likewise considered.

23 For some words are common, and are affirmed of many things, as man is
said of many several men.

24 Some are sole words, and are said but of one thing alone: as John, or this
man, are said of no more men then one.

a common sole word.

Certain precepts or general rules to be learned before ye enter into the
treatise of the storehouses.
25 There are rules in every art, which authors use as grounds and sure
principles, not to be denied or doubted of.

26 For if nothing should be clear and certain of it self: then should we
be driven by wranglers from point to point, to make reason upon reason
infinitely, and never come to issue of any one matter.

27 Therefore has God appointed some things to be evident and certain of them
selves, that they might be as stays to man's wit, and as helps to find out
and to discuss things that are not so evident as they are.

28 And this is the cause why ye may not ask of a Principle why so? yet may
principles be opened to beginners by examples,

29 Which is a kind of proof by Experience, though it be no proof by rule.

30 A common Inholder is said of others: but it has not his being in an
other.

31 A sole Inholder is neither said of any other thing, besides it self: nor
yet has his being in any thing, but in it self.

32 A common Inbeer is both said of others: and has also his being in
others too.

33 A sole Inbeer, has his being in an other: but it is not said of any
other.

34 Diverse kinds, whereof one is not subject to an other, have sundry
kynreds, and sundry differences, as a wight and an art.

35 For the kinreds of a wyghte, are man and beast: but the kinreds of art
are, The art of numbryng, the art of measuring, witcrafte, speachcraft,
starrecrafte. etc.

36 Again, the differences of a wight are flyable, goable, swimmable, and
creepable: For one wight differs from an other by these means:

37 But the differences of arts are, some to teach, to number: some to
measure: some to speak: some to reason: some to tell things to come.

Of the ten storehouses, and of their use.
38 There are ten general words which may well be called storehouses,
not only for the store of words, which they conteyne (comprising all plain
meaning words,)

39 But also for the good order they keep in placing of words in their
particular roumes, with brief rules, (as notes set on packets,) declaring
their nature and properties.

40 So that storehouses teach ye nature of simple words as they are considered
by the^ selves. For there is no playnmeaning word but it signifies either,
The names of the storehouses.
a Substance. Quantity. Quality. Respect. Doing. Suffering. Where. When.
Placing. Having.



Of the ten Demaunders.
41 There are also ten demaunders, every one peculiarlye perteyning to some one
storehouse.

The names of the ten demaunders.
1 What? 2 How much, or how many? 3 Whatkynone? 4 To whom, or then what? 5
Doing what? 6 Suffering what? 7 Where? 8 When? 9 How placed? 10 Having what?
42 What? demands a substance: how much or how many? demand a quantity:
whatkinone? demands a qualitye: to whom? or then what? demand a respecting
term: doing what? demands a doing: suffering what? demands a suffering:
where? and when? demand time and place, with some circumstance either of the
person, of the fact, or of the matter: how placed? demands a placing: and
having what? demands an having.

43 For example thus. If you be asked what is a man? ye must answer that
which does appertain to the substance of a man, saying a man is a wight endued
with sense and reason.

44 But if ye be asked, how much is a man? or how many men are they? then
must ye answer such matter, as pertains to the quantity of a man.

45 And say for his bigness, according to his length, breadth, thicknes, talnes,
grossenes, and so forth, and for the multitude, according to the number they be
of, more or less.

46 If ye be asked whatkinone is a man? ye must answer, such things as
appertain to the quality of a man, as wise, folishe, liberal, covetous,
learned, ignorant, a runner, lame, sober, hastye swart, fair, black, foul,
proper, ill fa^ored or such like.

47 If ye be asked to who^? or then what? man is this or that: ye must
answer, father to his son: husband to his wife: higher then this thing, or
lower then that, which answer stands of respectyng terms.

48 If ye be asked what does a man? ye must answer that a man diggeth,
ploweth, sows, reapeth, buyldeth, plays, hauketh, hunteth, rydeth, goes,
walks, which words and such like are placed in the Storehouse of doing.

49 If inquiry be had, what this man or that man has suffered: y^ return is
made that he has been spoiled, robbed, maimed, stiefeled, killed, and these
words do importe a suffering.

50 If ye be asked where this or that man is? ye must answer, within,
abroad, at home, from home, in the City, or in the field, which sayings are
referred to the Storehouse where.

51 If ye be asked when this man or that man did this or that: ye must
answer, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year ago, which sayings are
ascribed to the Storehouse when.

52 If ye be asked how is man placed? ye must answer, he lies, be sits,
he boweth, he leans, he frowneth, he smileth, which words do ever
thsynuate a placing.

53 If ye be asked how man is appareled or furnished: ye must answer, he is
naked, clothed, armed, weaponed, booted, shodde, frended, monyed, wyued, which
words do always importe an having.

54 Here ye must take heed that every demaunder have such an answer
shappen unto it, as may be placed in the Storehouse, whereto the Demaunder
properlye belongs: other ways, ye shall not answer directlye nor to the
purpose.

Of Substance the first Storehouse. Chap. 2.
1 Substance is an inholder, the very groundworke, stay, and vpholder, of
quantities, qualities, and all other inbeers.

How substance is divided.
2 There is a sole substance, and a common substance.

A Sole Substance. Common

3 A Sole substance, is a substance peculiar and proper to one self thing
alone, as John, William, this man, or that man.

4 For although many men be called by the name of John, or William, yet when
we add John, William, or any other proper name to man, or else add this, or
that to any common word: we mean to separate it from all other things, and
to point out a sole thing: so that though these names be referred to many men,
yet the thing meant by them is one selfething.

5 A common substance is either a kindred, or a kind, containing many sole
substaunces, as a horse is a kindred, containing al particular horses: and a
wight is a kind containing al kinredes of beasts, flying, swymming, going,
creeping, drawing, or stilstanding.

Of certain peculiar rules which belong to the storehouse of substance.
1
6 A Sole substance is neither said of another: nor yet has being in another.

7 That a sole substance is not said of another it is plain by examples.

8 For John is verified of nothing in the world, but of himself.

9 He is verified of himself when we say, this man is John, for in this
saying, John and this man signify both one substance, though the terms be
diverse.

10 And where we say, that a sole substance has no being in another, it is
proved of the general rule: which is,

11 That every substance has a being by it self: and not a being in another
thing.

12 That has being by it self, which is known to stand in nature by it
self, and to have need of no other thing, to supporte and bear up his being,
as an horse, an Ox. etc.

13 But that has being in an other thing, and no stay of it self, which is
in an other not as a part, and yet can not be without the thing in which it
is.

14 As learning is in man, as no part (...) man, and yet can not be without
man, or some other substance apt for the same: as for substaunces they have
being of themselves, and need no other thing to support them.

2
15 Sole substaunces occupye at one time, but one place. Common substances are
in no place properly and fitly.

16 We say properly and fitly, because they are said, unfitly and after a
sort, to be in many places at once: by reason, all their parts (which are
Sole substances) do at one moment of time, each one occupy his several room.

3
17 A part of any sole substance is no substance: but if it be cut of from his
whole, the^ is it no longer a part, but a substance by it self.

18 For if the parts of a Sole substance should be substaunces: then should
there ^ee no diuersitye between a common and a Sole substance.

19 For they differ in this, y^ a Sole substance contains but one substance
where a common substance conteyneth many: now where every whole conteyneth many
par tes, it should follow, y^ if every part of a Sole substance were a
substance: the^ should Sole substaunces conteyne many substances, as common
substaunces do.

20 How be it, in very deed a Sole substance conteyneth many parts and is
but one substance in the whole.

4
21 Sole substances are most properly called substaunces: among common
substaunces that always which is nerer to a Sole substance is mere properly
called a substance, then that which is further of: as kindred rather then kind:
yet substa^ces of like condition and sort, do admit no degrees of more or less.

22 As one man is no more a substance, nor no less a substance then an other
man is: this man rather then this horse.

23 For though this man be greatter or lesser, worse or better then that man
is: yet they are not so said, in respect of substance: but in respect of
quantityes and qualities.

24 The like reason may serve for kinreds and for kinds.

5
25 Sole substaunces receive contraries by a certain change that is in them
selves, as one man some times good, some times bad, some times hot, some times
cold.

26 Certain other things may receive contraryes as well as sole substances do.

37 For this saying: Socrates is sick, may be both true and false at diverse
times.

28 Yet is there this diversity, that when sole substaunces do receive
contraries, it is ever by a certain change, which is in ^e substaunces
themselves: but when a saying receives contraryes, there is no change in the
saying, but in the matter expressed by the saying.

6
29 One substance is not contrary to an other substance, neither is there any
other thing contrary to a substance at all.

30 For contraries are two inbeers which drive by course one another out of
their inholder* as hot and cold drive one an other out of some bodied
substance.

31 Though water drive air, and air water out of some vessel: yet these and
such like drive each other as out of a place, being inholders, and not as out
of an inholder being inbeers.

32 Every Sole substance stands of one inholder and many inbeers, in such
sort that neither the inholder could have any being, if all inbeers were taken
from it: neither could the inbeers, have their being alone by them selves,
without some inholder, to support and bear them.

33 The thing that stands of one inhol^er, and many inbeers, is called a sole
substance: for example thus.

34 Any one man is a Sole substance, his inbeers are length, grossenes, talnes,
years, virtue, vice, learning, ignorance, sight, hearing, smelling, tasting,
feelyng, sowernesse, sweetness, color, shape, beautye, doing, suffering,
office, Lordship, and other things in manner infinite: his inholder is that
Sole nature, that bears all these.

35 Now as quantities, qualityes, and other inbeers can not be but in some
substance: so Sole substaunces should have no being in deed, if all inbeers
were seque^red and taken from them.

36 Further if all Sole substaunces were taken away, then should both all
common substaunces be taken away, and all inbeers too.

How Substance is divided.
37 Substance does admit many deuisions according to his manyfolde and
gaynse^ differences, as. 1. a bodyed substance, a bodylesse substance. 2. a
mortal substance, animmortall substance. 3. a natural substance, an
artificial substance, or a substance partlye artificial partly natural. 4.
a living substance, a lyuelesse substance. 5. a feelyng substance, a
substance void of sense. 6. a reasonable substance, a wytlesse substance. 7.
a moveable substance, an immovable substance. 8. a tame substance, a wild
substance. 9. an earthlye substance, a watery substance, an airye substance,
a ^yerye substance. ^c.

Here follows the table of Substance.

Of the second Storehouse called Quantity. Chap. 3.
1 Quantity is that whereby all things are known, how many or how few, how
much or how little they are.

How Quantity is divided.
2 Some quantities stand of severed and ^ncoupled parts: as number, speech:
(...) of parts that are ^ed and ^ed together by some common bounder: as a
line, an ouershew, a body, time and place.

3 A common bounder is the end of one thing and the beginning of another, and
^et part of neither.

The common bou^der of a Line is a Prick Ouershew Line Body Ouershew Time
Moment Place Line

4 That the parts of number are not joined or knit together (...) any common
bou^der it is plain by particular examples.

5 For three and five being the parts of eight* are not coupled together by
any common bounder: neither can one show in a number any common bounder where
the parts do meet and join together.

6 The like may be said of speech, for though sillables and words have some
more time in pronouncing, and some less, yet are they not joined one to
another, without pause at all, for then there should be no distinction in
speech.

7 That speech is placed in this storehouse, it is plain, because it is
measured by sillables short and long.

Another division of Quantity.
8 Quantity admits also this division that some stand of parts which have
a placing one by another, some stand of parts which have no placing at all.

9 A line, an ouershew, a body and a place stand of parts that have a placing,
for that their parts are seen to lie somewhere.

10 But in number no man can show how his parts are placed one by another, or
where they are set, or how they are joined or coupled together.

11 The like may be said of time, for seeing the parts of time stay not, how
can they admit any placing.

12 Yet there is an order among the part^ of time and number: because one time
comes before, and another time comes after, and in the natural rewe of
numbers one is reckned before two, and two before three, but placing of parts
are not either in number or time.

13 The like may be said of speech also, for each word and syllable passes
away as it is spoken, so that the parts of speech tarry not, nor stay not to
have any placing.

14 The least thing that can be imagyned in a number is one: and the least
thing that can be imagyned in a line is a prick: here note that one is a part
of each number, but a prick is a bounder of a line and therefore no part thereof.

15 A number is a multitude of ones.

16 A line is length without breadth.

17 An ouershew is length, and breadth, without thickness.

18 A body is length, breadth, and thickness.

19 No man can mount by adding to the greatest number: nor come by diuidyng to
the smallest bigness.

20 For as number is able ever to admytte some number to be added to it, to
make it bygger: so is bigness able ever to admit some bigness to be taken from
it to make it less.

21 For every body is deuisible and hable to be divided into many bodies,
and every ouershewe into many ouershewes, and every line into many lines:
and all bygnesse consists in these three.

23 All kind of measures which are considered in respect only of length, are
referred unto a line, as an intch, a foot, a pace, a fatham, a mile. etc.

24 And those that are considered in respect of Length and breadth, are
referred unto an ouershewe, as a tryangle, a foursquare, a circle, a r^de, an
aker. etc*

25 And those that are considered in respect of length, breadth, and thickness,
are referred unto a body, as a foot of timber, a tun^ of timber, or any other
measure where respect is had to these three kinds of bigness.

26 All other measures and weightes which have no respect to length, breadth or
thicknes, are referred unto number, as an ounce, a pound, a stone, a pynt, a
pottle, a penny, a ^rote, a shilling etc.

27 Time is a space or number measured by the course of the heavens, as a
mynute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year, an age, a world.

28 A place is an hollow ouershew of an hollow body.

29 These things before rehearsed, are properly of them selves called
quantities, other things vnfitlye, that is, not of them selves but by reason
of another, to wit, respect had unto these.

30 For we use sometimes to say, here is much white, or here is a long work,
for that the ouershew where the white is is much: or that the time is long
while the work was a doing.

Of the propreties of Quantity.
31 One quantity is not contrary to an other: As for many and few, great
and little, they are not quantities, but respecting words, neither are they
contraries at all.

32 Respecting words they are, for things are said to be many or few: great
or little, in respect of others of the same kind: else should there never be
little hill, or great musterseede: few in a City, or many in cribbe.

33 And contraries they are not, because they may be said of one thing at one
time, as twenty in respect of two are many, but in respect of a thousand, they
are but few: so Gogmagog hills in respect of the Sophisters hills by
Cambridge are great: but in respect of the Alps, they are but small. These
therefore and such like, as hang only upon respect, can have no contraries at
all.

34 One quantity is bygger or lesser then an other is, as sixteen is a bigger
quantity then six: and a shilling is a lesser quantity then a pound: yet is
not one ^e quantity rather a quantity, or less said to be a quantity then
an other.

35 For six are as well a quantity a^ ^xscore: and a long line is no more a
line then a short line is.

36 This is a thing most peculiar and propre to quantity, that by it things
should ^e equal or unequal one to an other.

37 As one body is equal or unequal to an other body: one ouershewe equal or
unequal to an other ouershewe: one line to an other line: one time to another
time: one place to an other place: one number to an other number: as for like
and unlike they are ever said of qualities proprely, as one color like or
unlike to an other color: one voice like or unlike to an other voice: one
fashion ly^e or unlike to an other fashion.

Of the third Storehouse called Quality. Chap. 4.
1 Quality is that whereby men are led to know whatkinone each thing is.

Of the division of Quality.
2 This storehouse is parted unto four several rooms.

3 The first room conteyneth those qualities which are given to the inholder
by nature, and those also which come by reason nature is let of her course.

4 The second room conteyneth those which the inholder gets by doing.

5 The third conteyneth sensible qualities, and affections of the mind.

6 The fourth contains the shape and form of every thing.

Of Qualities first room.
7 In the first room are placed all the powers either of the body alone, of
the soul alone, or of that, that stands of the^ both: to this place are
added also, al weakness and want of power natural.

8 Weakness and want, differ in this, for that of Weakness there both
proceed imperfecte actions: but of ^ant there can arise no action at all.

9 As blearednesse causes a man through weakness of sight to judge
vnperfectely of colors: but blyndnesse through want of sight, lettes a man to
give any judgment of color at all.

10 Power is a gift of nature, whereby the Inholder may the better do, or with
less harm suffer.

11 The common Inholder of words placed in this room is very general. For
there is no substance which has not some power.

12 Here is to be noted, that no inholder is said to want any power, which
either nature has not appointed it should have: or else the time of having it,
is not fully expired.

13 For it is vnproprely said, that either a stone, or a child new borne,
wants power to go or to run of it self. For God has not ordained that a
stone should go or run at all: and the time is not yet come, for a new borne
child to do either.

14 But if the time be fully expyred when as nature has appointed, that
children should go and run of themselves, and that certain children at that
time can do neither: then may it well be said, that such children lack
power to go, and are lame.

15 Here is to be noted, that from power to want, we may fall both by nature
and by chance: but to return from want to power again, it is impossible.

16 As from sight to blyndnesse, from speech to dumbness, we may fall at any
time: but the return from dumbness to speech, or from blyndenesse to sight,
is a thing that can not be brought to pass, either by art, or nature, or
any other mean, (Gods extraordinary doings only excepted.)

17 Note further, that the power is not always taken away where the
instrument is hurt for a time, or let: as if a man's eyes, tongue, and ears,
were so hurt for a time, or let, that he could neither hear, speak, nor
see,

18 Yet were it not for all that to be said, that the power of his seeing,
speaking or hearing were taken away or diminished: but rather that the action
and work of his ears, tongue, and eyes, were let for a time.

19 If the instrumente of sense be so hurt, that it be incurable, and never
able to do any part of his work, then do we say, that the power is utterly
destroyed or taken away.

20 Memory of things past, judgment of things present, forsight of things to
come, and other qualities of the mind, as they are given to any inholder by
nature, are placed in the first room of quality: but as they are increased by
art and diligence, in the second.

Of Qualities second room.
21 Qualities that are gotten by doing, are either deeply rooted in their
inholder, and continue in it long: or else they come and go lightly, and tarry
but a short time.

22 Virtue, vice, science, knowledge, art, craft, cunning, sleyght, vr^. etc.
which a man can not soon alter and change, are are such dispositions, as
commonly take deep root in their inholder, and by reason of long use, and
many actions whereof they grow and spring, they may be called grounded
dispositions.

23 But sodeyn anger, light displesure, small knowledge, a smattering sight.
etc. for that they spring and rise of few actions, come and go lightly, and
therefore may be termed wavering dispositions, these being as it were, the
first entry into settled dispositions.

24 The inholder of qualities placed in this room is not so general, as is
the inholder of those of the first room. For this inholder is but each wight,
which by practice can attain to any good or badde trade, in doing of things
well or ill.

Of Qualities third room.
25 In the third room of this storehouse we place all such qualities as
either proprely move one of the five senses: as color moves sight: sound
hearing: savors smellyng: taste tastyng: heat cold, moystnesse, dryness,
hardness, softness, and feeling.

26 Or else the affections of the mind, as mirth, gladness, grief and fear,
with other affections which spring of these in manner infinite: as mercy,
pity, love, lenity, softness of mind, hope, affiaunce, trust, envy, hate,
disdain, spyte, distrust, contempt, palenesse, blushing, trembling. etc.

27 Affections considered as they are given of nature, must be placed in the
first room of this storehouse: but considered as they are gotten by doing,
in the seconds: and being taken as they move the outward or the inward sense,
in the third: we see, hear, smell, taste, and feel,

28 By receiving a certain influence, and suffering of an action that does
proceed from the thing seen, heard, smelt, tasted, or felt, into such
parts of each wightes body, as has in it those foresaid senses.

Of Quantities fourth room.
29 In this room are placed the form and figure, shape, and fashion of every
thing.

30 The inholder of words in the third or fourth room of this storehouse, is
the same that is of those which are placed in the first room.

Of Qualified things.
31 There are certain words which do signify qualified things, relation
had, both to the quality, and to the inholder thereof.

32 As a just man, a liberal man, a craftesman, a lame man: or just, liberal,
lame, without adding the inholder in which they are. These are to be placed
in the rooms of the qualities, whereof they are derived.

Of the propreties of qualities, and of qualified things.
33 Some qualities and qualified things have contraries, and some have none: as
right is contrary to wrong: and a righteous man is contrary to an unrighteous
man.

34 But qualities and qualified things which are placed in the first and
fourth room: yea and many of those which are placed in the second and third
room, of this storehouse, admit no contraries at all.

35 Qualities and things qualified, admit degrees of more and less, as among
many learned men it is commonly seen that one is more or less learned then an
other.

36 This rule takes place not in all. For among many circles, triangles, and
squares, one is not said to be rather a circle, then an other: or rather a
triangle, or a square.

37 Here is to be noted, that qualities considered as they are in foam
inholder, admit degrees of more and less: but if ye in mind sever them from
their inholder, and consider them apart, (as ye define them and tell what they
are) then do they admit no degrees of more or less.

38 For all and every art of Physike do equally and indifferently agree to
the say what of Physike: but Hippocrates physike, and (...) physic admit
degrees, the one being more and the other less, and so does Fuchsius
physic alone considered, when he had great experience, and when he had small.

39 To make things like or unlike, is a work belonging only to quality.

40 If any man gaynsay this rule, affirming that it is commonly and truly
said, how that one man is like or unlike to an other, in going, ryding or
speaking: which things being deeds and no qualities, the foresaid rule may
seem untrue:

41 It may be answered, that the lykelynesse standth not in the action it self
proprely and in very deed: but in the manner of doing, which is referred to
the store house of quality.

42 For the murderer and the hangman do both kill and commit one general
action: yet the manner of doing in them is diverse, which causes the one to be
guilty, and the other guiltless.

43 For it is not the deed, but the manner of doing, that makes the crime.

Of Respecting words. Chapter. 5.
1 Respecting words be of two sorts, some are called respecting words
proprely: some are termed respectyng words in part.

2 Respecting words, proprely so called, are two yokefelowes, whose nature and
being is, the one to depend and have his being upon the other, as a
husband, a wife, a master, a servant.

3 Respecting words in part depend not so straightly each upon other, that of
force they must be and cease to be both at once: but the one may be though the
other were not at all: as knowledge and knowable:

4 For though there were no reasonable creature in the whole world, (which
thing presupposed there could be no knowledge) yet should many things remain to
be known, which may be termed, and are in deed, knowable.

5 Though one husband have many wives: one father, many sons and
daughters: one friend, many friends: one king, many kingdoms: yet these being
many in number, bear no other respect to their yokefellowes, nor their
yokefelowes to them, then if they were but one a piece.

6 For he is as well a husband, a father, a friend, a king, that has but one
wife, one child, one friend, one kingdom, as he that has never so many: so
that many and few in this case, have all one respect in reason.

The propreties of respecting words.
1
7 Respecting words proprely so called are and cease to be both at once: but
respecting words in part do not so.

2
8 He that knows and is able to say what one of the respectyng words is:
must of force know and be able to say what the other is also.

3
9 There are degrees in some respecting words, but not in all:

10 For one man being like to many men, may be lyker to one man than to an
other: but one father can be no more, nor no less a father to one child than
to an other.

4
11 Some also have co^traries, some none at all, as bondage is contrary to
liberty: riches to poverty: but single, double, threefolde, father, mother,
and such like, have no contraries at all.

5
12 Respecting words depend and hang each upon other: and so that one of
them is not before or after an other in time.

13 In this storehouse are placed al words that signify any comparison or
proportion, any equalness, or vnequalnesse, any lykelynesse or vnlykelynesse,
any office or officer, any cause or effect, any whole, or any part, any
end, or means tending to any end, any age, any degree, any diversity of
kind, any kinrede or affinity, any society or fellowshippe, and other more
in manner infinite.

14 If ye doubt in what storehouse to place any word, the surest way is to
place it here.

15 For many kynds and kinreds which considered by them selves alone, are to be
placed in some other storehouse, may (upon respect had with others) be also
right well assigned unto this.

Of doing and sufferyng. Chapter. 6.
1 Doing and sufferyng are respectyng words, and differ not in matter, but in
respect.

2 For they both are but one mouyng, which considered as a thing being in the
inholder from whence it comes, is called a doing: But if the same moving or
action be referred to the inholder which receives it, then it is called a
suffering. For example thus.

3 The murderer and the murdered, communicate in one moving or deed: which
deed or moving considered as it comes from the murderer, is an action or
doing: But considered as it is received of the thing that is murdered, it is a
suffering.

4 Of this it is plain, that doing is a moving, proceeding from the dooer:
and suffering is a moving received of the sufferer.

Of the propreties of doing and suffering.
1
5 Doing and suffering are both at once, and one is not before nor after an
other.

2
6 Doing and suffering are in two diverse inholders: yet may two bodies meeting
together in one act, be both doers and both sufferers at once: as when two
cups do pushe together, either putting force unto other, and either
receyuyng force from other.

7 They admit degrees of more and less: and some have contraries, and some
have not.

Of the two Storehouses, Where, and When. Chapter. 7.
1 Where and when, differ from place and time, for that they have always
respect unto some matter that was mentioned before: where as time and place are
known and defined as they are considered by themselves, without respect had to
any other thing.

2 For if any man should hear one say where? (no talk had before hand) he
would straight way think with him self, where what? looking for some person,
fact or matter, that he might appoint to some place, thereby to answer the
question.

3 Therefore where, is not a place but a declaring of things which shall be,
are, or have been in place.

4 And when, is not a time, but a showing of things done or to be done in time.

How, where and when, are divided.
5 As time and place are divided, so are where and when.

6 Time is divided into time to come, time present, and time past.

7 It may also be many other ways divided, by reason of the manifold variety
of matters that chance in it.

8 As the time of war, y^ time of peace, the time of dearth, the time of
plenty, the time of sickness, the time of health, the time of shutting in the
doors, the time of opening of the doors.

9 Furthermore, spring, summer, harvest, winter, are several seasons and times
of the year.

10 Likewise a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year, an age, a
world, are common words, used of men to note and set forth particular times.

11 There are six differences of place, as above, beneath, on the right side,
on the left side, before, and behind.

12 These are two ways taken, either as they are placed in respect to us
ward: or else as they are appointed by nature.

13 Although above and beneath: on the right side, and on the left: before,
and behynd: in respect to us ward, be not always one and the same, but alter
as we are altered: yet in nature they are always certain.

14 For above, by nature is that where unto light things ascend.

15 Beneath, that where unto heavy things descend.

16 The right side, which is toward the Weast.

17 The left side, which is toward y^ East.

18 Before, which is toward the South.

19 Behind, which is toward the North.

20 For trees and plants have heels, which whiles they grow in the earth,
are always toward the North.

21 Above and beneath, are the begynninges of length: the right side, and the
left side, are the beginnings of breadth: before and behind, are the beginninges
of thickness.

22 Places are thus divided, some are natural, some artificial, some fained,
some near, some far of: some holy, some profane: some common, some private:
some healthful, some contagious: some fertile, some baren: some hot, some
cold, some temperate.

23 There are many other deuisions of time and place, and they in manner
infinite: but of these few any mean wit may with ease find out many more
to serve his purpose as he shall be occasioned.

Of the ninth Storehouse, called Placing. Chap. 8.
1 This Storehouse contains al words that signify any placing, setting, or
ordering of a thing, as to hang, to sit, to lie, to bow, to bend, to compass,
to mow, to fleare, to frown, to be scattered, to be imbaulmed, to be
enrolled. etc.

2 Here is to be noted, that frowning taken for a moving, is an action: but
being taken for the brows knit and drawn to gether: it is a placing.

3 Words placed in this Storehouse, have no contraries at all, some admit
degrees of more and less, and some do not.

Of the tenth Storehouse called having. Chap. 9.
1 Some take having only for an apparelling, howbeit, it is much more larglye
taken.

2 As for an apparelling, it is but either when one thing is hanged upon
another, as when a horse is trapped,

3 Or when one thing is set to another, as when a shaft is fethered,

4 Or else when one thing compasses an other in part, or in whole, as when one
is ringed or armed.

5 But having, is of any thing whatsoever, whether the thing had be a
substance a quantity, a quality, or else referred to any other of the
Storehouses, or of things exempted out of the Storehouses.

6 And therefore this storehouse teaches us not so much to consider the nature
of the things that are had: as to mark what comes of the having of such
and such things.

7 Many men think, that many words placed in this Storehouse, admit degrees
of more and less: and that some have contraryes also.

8 Because it is commonly said that some men are better monyed then others,
better frended, better weapned: and that this man is armed, and that man
unarmed: that he is frended, and he foed.

9 Howbeit, if the matter be thoroughly ^ted, the increase and the contrariety
stands not in the having of these things: but in the things that are had.

10 Though every plain meaning word have his proper place in some one
Storehouse alone: yet may the same indirectly and after a sort be also referred
to some other.

11 As a father is properlye a respecting word: but indirectly he may be taken
for a substance, because a father is a man, which is properly a substance.

12 The cause is, for that things which directly perteine to an inholder, are
so^e times in common speech indirectly sayd^ of his inbeer.

13 And again, such things as properly belong to some inbeer: are said of
his inholder.

14 So we say, a line is an inholder of straightness: yet indirectly, for
directly a bodyed substance, is the proper inholder of straightness, and not
a line.

That Storehouses help to enlarge a matter, and that every word may after a
sort be deduced through them all.
15 The Storehouses serve: not only to teach us the sorce and nature of each
plain meaning word, as whether it does signifye a substance, a quantity, a
quality, a respect etc.

16 But they serve also to amplify and to set for the a matter at large, and
then they teach us to seek the substance, the quantity, the quality, the
respect, the place, the time, the ordering and the having of the thing we
speak of, and so to deduce one word through all the Storehouses. Which
though it be properly placed in some one: yet indirectlye and after a sort,
it may be deduced and brought through them all.

Words exempted out of the Storehouses. Chap. 10.
1 These nine kind of words following, are exempted out of the Storehouses, as
not properly placed in any one of them.

1
2 The words of art invented to express y^ rules of any science, as a nown, a
pronown, a verb, etc. a foreset, a backset, a shewsay. etc.

2
3 Unperfite words, which by them selves teach the hearers no matter, but
serve only, to help to furnishe out a sentence, and to make it perfect, as,
or, if and, etc.

3
4 Words that signify lack or want of any natural power, as, dumbness,
deaffenesse, darkness. etc.

4
5 Words that signify matters which are not in deed, but are feigned to be,
as Hobthrus, rawhed, purgatory.

5
6 Words that signify a part of any whole thing, as an hand, a soote, a
leg, an arm: so long as they remain parts not severed from their whole.

6
7 God for that he is infinite, and not able to be comprehended of any thing,
howbeit some men do judge him to be a most perfect substance.

7
8 Words that signify all things without destinction, as a thing, a matter, a
whatsicallit.

9 The Storehouses are called general words, for that they contain many,
but these may be termed surmounting generals, because they contain all.

8
10 Two or more words expressing matter that is contained in diverse
Storehouses, as a white horse a righteous man.

11 For white and righteous are placed in one Storehouse: and man and horse in
another.

9
12 Words of double understanding: for these before they be restrained to one
saywhat, may have place in diverse Storehouses: and therefore unfit to be
assygned to one.

How words of double understanding may be known. Chap. 11.
1 What like sounding words are, and how in arguing and conference of talk
they are to be restrained to signify but one thing, we have said before.

2 Now for the better discussing of y^ matter, we shall show a mean how one
may be sure, that this or that word is of double understanding: and yield a
reason for the same.

3 But here we will only set forth certain rules, to discern such as cannot
easily be perceived of many: for those which easily show themselves, need no
teacher.

1
4 First if any of his gay^ettes be of double understanding: then is the
principal also, as:

5 Sharp, is a word of double understanding: for his contrary gainset, in
voice is, flat: and in edge, dull.

6 Therefore it must follow of necessiti^ that it is not one sharpness, which
is contrary to flatnes in voice, and to dullness in edge.

2
7 If it be found to be in many storehouses, as this word gray sig^fiyng a
beast that pastureth in the night, is a substance: but signifying a color
mixed, and made of black and white, it is a quality.

3
8 If it be perceived by diverse senses, as clearenesse, for it is not one and
the same clearenes that is seen and heard: the one consisting in color and the
other in sound.

4
9 If his offspring be diversely taken, then is his original also: or contrary
wise if in the original there be doubleness, then is there dublenesse in the
offspring too, as,

10 If to judge rightly ^e two ways taken, the one to give sentence according
to the evidence brought in: the other to give sentence according to the truth
of the matter:

11 Then must a ryghteous judge be two ways taken, that is, righteous so far
as ^idence leads: and righteous so far as truth requires.

5
12 If a word have diverse saywhattes, not differyng only in words, but also
in meaning.

13 And here it is sometimes good to consider the say whattes of words as they
are defined and set forth wh^ they are coupled and joined with other words.

14 For taking so much away from the saywhattes, as is proper to each word
annexed to the original: the rest in all the saywhattes, must be one and the
same.

15 For example thus: if ye join to this word clear, air, and voice,
defining a clear air, and a clear voice severally: and then after take so
much from either say what, as properly apperteyneth to air and voice: the
rest that remains in both the saywhattes, shall be one, if clear were a
plain meaning word.

16 Now the thing that remains* is not one, and therefore clear is diversely
taken.

17 For a clear voice is a voice pleasant to the ear, without horsenesse, or
iarring.

18 But a clear air, is an air void of clouds: so that voice, and air,
taken from these two saywhattes, the rest that remains is not one in them
both.

19 For pleasant to the ear, and without horsenesse or iarring, is a thing
dissenting much from that which is void of clouds.

20 By these means and such like, words are proved to be of double
understanding,

Of disagreeable words. Chap. 12.
1 Words which cannot be coupled and joined together in a true and perfect
yeasay, are either differing words, or gainsettes.

2 Differing words, are those whereof one differs from many, in like manner
and sort.

3 Gaynsettes are two disagreeable words whereof the one so sets foot
against the other, as against no other thing in like sort: in so much that
neither the one can be affirmed of the other: neither they both of any third
thing, at one time, and in one respect.

4 These gaynsets are divided into four sorts: into contrary terms,
respectyng terms, depriving terms, and denying terms.

5 What contrary terms and respecting terms are: we have said before.

6 Depriving terms are taken in this place, not only for words that note a
want of natural power: but for want and power compared together, as Light,
Darkness.

7 In like manner denying terms are taken, both for the yeaword, which
affirms: and also for the nayword, which denies: as a man, no man: a stone,
no stone.

8 Here is to be noted that the nayword, which is infinite, conteyneth all
things, save his yeaward, which has his limitation and is certain, and as
they both are said of no one thing, so the one of them is verified of every
thing.

What difference there is between depriuyng terms and contrary terms.
9 Depry^ing terms differ from contrary terms which have no mean, for that
the one of such contrary terms, must at all times be in his inholder: where as
the depriving terms, may for a time be both absent.

10 I mean the time, before power comes to the inholder by nature.

11 Now from contrary terms which have a mean, they differ in this:

12 For that there is a time appointed by nature, when as the one of the
depriving terms must of force be said of his inholder: but of contraryes
which have a mean, there is at no time any such necessity.

13 For example thus. After nine days that a bitch has whelped, her whelps
must of force either see or be blind: but before the time be expired that
nature has set and appointed that whelps should see in, ye can not ryghtlye
say that the whelps are either blind or do see.

14 As for white, and black, which are contraryes that have a mean, they have
no such force in a whelpe at any time, that the one must be in it, and the
other from it,

15 Because the whelps may at all times be of some other mean color.

How many vvayes one thing is said to be before or after another. Chap. 13.
1 The first and principal way that one thing is said to be before another,
is, in time.

2 For that which is more ancient, is said to be before that, which had his
being in a latter season.

3 As, King Henry the eight, was in time before King Edward the sixth.

4 The second way that one thing is said to be before another, is, by nature:
as when the being of the latter, inforceth, a being of the former, but
contrary wise, the sequel of the former, shall not infer a necessary
sequel of the latter.

5 The kind and the kindred, the general and the special, are fit examples to
teach the meaning of this rule.

6 For if there be a man here, it follows of force, that the same be a wight:
but the sequel on the contrary part, is not good: that if there be a wight
here, the same should be a man*

7 For there are many wightes which are no men.

8 Therefore we hold, that the general is in nat^re before the special, and
that John, William, and other several men, must first be substaunces,
creatures, bodies, and wightes, before they come to be men.

9 The third way that one thing is said to be before an other, is, when things
go one before an other in order: as letters are learned before syllables, and
syllables before words: substance is placed before a quantity, and quantity
before quality.

10 The fourth way that one thing is said to be before an other, is, when one
thing passes and exceeds an other in woorthynesse: as the king is a^ore his
subject in honor: the master before his servant, by estimation:

11 For that the King and the master, pass and exceed, the subject and the
servant, in worthiness.

12 Of this it is clear, that one thing is said to be before an other four
manner of ways: as, Before in 1 time. 2 nature. 3 (...). 4 woorthynesse.



13 After, is so many ways taken as before is.

14 For gaynsettes have like trade in teaching: and he that knows one
gaynset, must needs know the other.

Of the being of things at once. Chapter. 14.
1 Those things are most proprely said to be at once, which are done, or
have their being, both at one time.

2 As twins are both at ones: or as the Eclipse of the Sun and the direct^
placing of the Moon, between our sight and it, are both at once.

3 In nature those things are said to be at once, which are such as the being
of the one, follows upon the being of the other, and yet neither of them
cause of others being.

4 As a husband and a wife, a double part, and an halfepart, are both at
once by nature.

5 For if there be a wife, then is there a husband: and if there be a
husband, then is there a wife.

6 Again, if there be a thing that is a double part: then is there a thing,
that is an half part to that double.

7 And yet is an husband no more cause of the being of a wife, then a wife
cause of the being of an husband: nor a double part any more the cause of an
half part, then an half part is cause of a double part.

8 Members of one diuysion are also said to be all at once, as,

9 Man and beast being members of one deuisyon, are supposed by Nature to be
both at once, and one of them not to be before or after an other.

10 But a man and a wight are not both at once, in the respect of nature.

11 Because a wighte is man's general, and Nature always supposes the
general, to be before his specials.

Of moving. Chap. 14.
1 Moving is not only taken for the passing of a bodied substance from place
to place: but mouyng is also taken for the begetting or corrupting of a
substance: for the increasing or diminishing of a quantity: or else for the
altering of a quality.

2 Begetting or inge^oring is a moving, making that to be in deed, which
before was but in power to be.

3 Corrupting is a moving, causing that thing not to be which before had a
being.

4 Begetting and corrutyng are but one moving, considering the act in it self,
being in deed but one act, and done at once.

5 They differ, only in respect of the sundry bodies, whereunto they are
referred.

6 For whatsoever is corrupted, is corrupted into some thing, that succeeds
in his place:

7 And whatsoever is engendered or begotten, arises of some thing, which
cease to be, that the other may succeed in his room. For example thus:

8 In the burning of wood or any other matter, this act referred unto the wood
that is burned, is called a corrupting: for it takes away the wood, and
causes it to have no longer a being in nature.

9 But if you refer the self same act of burning, unto the smoke, flame, and
ashes that arise of the wood, when it is consumed by fire: it is called an
ingendring or begetting.

10 Now look how the wood consumes by little and little: and so do ashes,
smoke, and flame, arise and spring.

11 So that a man may plainly see, that as one substance passes away, and is
consumed to naught: an other substunce springs up, and succeeds in his
room.

12 And again, as one substance comes up and is begotten, an other substance
^asseth to be, and makes (as a man would say) room for it: For else it could
not have any being in nature at all.

13 There is no space or distance of time, betwixt begetting, and corrupting:
neither is the one of them before, or after an other, but both at once, even at
one instant and moment of time.

14 If this were not, ye should be forced to grant, that either two bodies
might be in one place at once: or else that there were a place in nature
utterly void of any body at all.

15 For when a new thing is made, which must fill a place by it self, and no
former thing taken away to make room for it: th^r must be either a void place
in nature to receive it: or else there must be two bodies in one place at once,
that which is newly made, and that which was before.

16 Now neither of these two ways can be, as we may learn by many
experimentes.

17 Therefore it follows of necessity, that the bringing in of a new body
into the frame of nature, is a taking away of some former body, which had a
being in the same frame before.

18 Increasing is a mouyng that causes a greater quantity: and diminishing
that causes a less.

19 Altering is a changing from quality to quality: as when a man changes
from virtue to vice.

20 Many men d^ hold an opinion, that nothing can be increased or diminished in
quantity: but that the same does withal admit an alteration of quality* a
change of place, and an ingendring of substance.

21 Howebeeit experience does teach the contrary.

22 For a square just compassyng the two sides of a fouresquare platte,
augmenteth the quantity, and nothing alters the for^e thereof.

23 Likewise, when things are altered in any quality, they are not of force
withal, either increased or diminished: engendered or corrupted: or else moved
from place to place.

24 The form of a square in numbres is this, ^ ^ in bigness this (...)

25 The form of a fouresquare platte in numbres is this, ^ ^ in bygnesse,
this, ^

26 Moving in our English tongue is most proprely, and in manner altogether
taken for moving in place, so that it being but a part, boroweth in our
speech, the name of his whole: for that it has no special name of his own,
as other particular mouings have.

Of contrariety in moving.
27 Generally, rest is contrary to moving: but particularly begetting is
contrary to corrupting: and increasing to diminishing: and moving in place, to
resting in place: or else moving upwards contrary to moving downward.

28 And as for alteration which is a moving in quality, it has either rest
from such a moving, to be his contrary: or else a change into a contrary*
quality.

The second book of Witcraft.
Chap. 1.
1 IN our former book we have entreated of the Storehouses, showing the nature
and dis^nction of words, and began with that which was the smallest part, and
portion of this art.

2 It follows now in due order, that from words we proceed to entreat
of sayings, for that sayings are immediatlye framed of words.

3 Both words and sayings are means to express the thoughts of the mind:
but sayings express the thoughts of the mind, as matter is coupled to matter:
and words express the thoughts of the mind without any joining of things
together at all.

4 Thoughts of the mind, and matters whereof men use to speak and to write,
us in all countries one and the same in kind: but letters and the voice whereby
such things are uttered, are not.

What a saying is.
5 A saying is a voice whose several parts do by consent signify some matter.

6 I say by consent, for that every language or speech grows by consent,
and is learned by imitating and followyng of others: neither is there any tongue
given naturally to man without a teacher, as weeping and laughing are.

That there are diverse kinds of sayings, and which of them are proper to this
art.
7 There is a perfect saying, and an imperfect saying.

8 A perfect saying makes a perfect sense of it self, as, man is mortal.

9 An imperfect saying causes the hearer to look for more words to make up a
full meaning, as, man mortal.

10 Again a perfect saying is divided into three sorts, into a shewsay, a
bidsaye, and a wishsaye.

11 In the first we show or declare, in the second we bid or command, in
the third we wyshe or desire things to be or not to be.

12 For example thus: John comes hither, is a shewsay: come hither John, a
biosaye: I would John came hither, a wishsaye.

13 Of these the shewsaye only appertains to this art, for it only may
be true or false.

Of the Shevvsay, and first what a shevvsaye is. Chap. 2.
1 A shewsaye is a perfect saying standing of a nowne and a showing verb.

The matter of a shevvsay.
2 A nowne and a verb are the matter whereof a shewsay does stand.

Of a Novvne.
3 A nowne is a voice signifying some thing by consent, and noting besides no
difference of time, whose parts severally taken, signify no matter: as a man,
an herb, an house, virtue, righteousness. etc.

4 As for letters and syllables, they signify a sound only, and do not
further importe any matter.

5 An hour, a day, a month, a year, do lymit and appoynte times: but yet
they note no difference of time, as the Uerbe does, who ever includes either
tyms present, time past, or time to come, which are ryghtlye called the
diff^rences of time.

Of a Verb.
6 A Uerbe is a word notyng some difference of time, unto the which if ye
add a nowne in fit order, there does arise a perfect understanding, as, is,
was, shall be.

Of the form of a shevvsay, and what appertains to the perfect knowledge
thereof.
7 More things appertain to the form of a shewsay then to the matter.

8 For to the form it appertains to consider whether the shewsaye be simple
or compounded, one or many: secondlye whether it be a shewsaye of the first
order or of the second: thyrdlye, how the backeset agrees or disagreeth with
the foresette: fourthly, how the one of them may be changed into the room or
place of the other: fiftlye, which shewsaye is general, which special: 6,
which affirms which denies: 7, which is true, which is false: 8, which is
an impossible shewsaye, which is a necessary shewsaye, and which is a
chaunceable shewsaye: 9, what gaynsettes each shewsaye has: 10, which be
shewsayes of like force and strength.

Which is a simple shevvsaye and one and which is a compounded shevvsay and
many.
9 A simple shewsaye stands of one Uerbe: as man is mortal. A compounded
shewsaye of many: as if you marry my Daughter I make you mine heir: or
impossible it is, that a stone should have feelyng.

10 Often times in a shewsaye one verb is but once spoken: and yet the meaning
of the same shewsaye requires the same verb to be diverse times understand:
such a shewsaye is compounded, and not one, but many.

11 For, John and William are rich and in health, is not one shewsaye, but
many: for it is as much to lay, as John is rich: John is in health: William
is rich: William is in health.

12 First we will entreat of a simple shewsay, and after of a compounded
shewsay, in his proper place and order.

Of the two orders of a simple shevvsaye.
13 There are two orders of a simple shewsaye: a shewsaye of the first order,
shows only the being or not being of a thing, as, man is, or, man is not.

14 A shewsaye of the second order, affirms or denies one thing of another,
as, man is just: man is not just.

15 A shewsay of the first order, stands ever but of one nowne and one verb:
a shewesaye of the secoude order, of two nownes and one verb, one always
placed before, and another after the verb.

Of the foresets and back sets that are in a simple shevvesaye. Chap. 3.
1 The foreset is a nowne placed before the verb, and the backset after, as,
man is just: man is the foreset, and just, is the backeset.

2 Sometimes a whole sentence or a clause of a sentence is a backset, or a
foreset: as to rise early is a wholesome thing: in this shewsay, to rise
early, is the foreset, and a wholesome thing is the backsette, they both
supplying the room and office of an nowne.

To what use foresettes and backesettes serve.
3 The storehouses serve to show the nature of words as they are taken and
considered by themselves alone.

4 The foreset and backset of a shewsay declare the respect that words have
one to an other, as they are coupled and linkes together in a perfect saying.

To know what respect the backset has to the foreset in every simple
shevvsaye of the second order.
5 If the backset ^is divided and parted a sunder from the foreset by a naysay,
then does it but either differ from it, or else it is a gainset to it.

6 What differing words and gaynsets are, we have showed before in the. 12.
Chapter of the first book.

7 If it be affirmed and coupled to the foreset by a yeasay: then must the
foreset and backset be such as either may be said of other turn for turn, or
not ^ide.

8 If either may be said of other turn for turn, then is the one of them the
kindred, and the other his saywhat: or else one the kindred and the other his
property.

9 For only the saywhat and the property compared to the kindred, may be
said of it, and it of them, turn for turn: but the saywhat expresses what
the kindred is, and the propretie does not.

10 If the backset be said of the foreset, and the foreset can not be laid in
like sort of it again: then is the backset to be reckened, either in the number
of those things, that are used to be placed in the sayewhat of the foreset, or
not used to be placed there.

11 If the backsette be (...) the number of those that are used to be placed in
the saywhat of the foreset: then is it either y^ kind or the difference: for a
saywhat stands of these two.

12 If the backset be said of the foreset, and be neither his sayewhat,
propretie, nor difference: then is it an Inbeer.

13 For that we count an Inbeer, which being in a thing, is neither his
saywhat, propretie, kind, nor difference.

Of a sayvvhat, and of things that are handled and entreated of in like manner
that it is. Chap. 4.
1 A saywhat is a saying, showing what a thing is, as man is a wighte, endued
with sense and reason.

2 Those that make declaration of any thing by a word, or by any other means
whatsoever comes to hand, do not by and by give a perfect saywhat, of the
thing they take in hand to speak of.

3 Yet such declarations, because they are handled and entreated of in like
form and manner, that a saywhat is, are taken in arguing, as a thing that
occupies the room and place of a saywhat.

4 For he that says the formoste of yonder company, is the King: Or this
city is London: or to behold, is to see: would seem after a sort, to express
the thing whereof he speaks.

General rules appertyning to a sayvvhat.
5 Five points are to be observed in a perfect saywhat.

1
6 First, that the saywhat show what the kindred is.

2
7 Secondly, that it conteyne neither more nor less matter, then it should.

3
8 Thirdely, that it stand of the next kind, having most propre differences
put thereto.

4
9 Fourthly, that it be plain.

5
10 Fifthly, that it be brief.

Of a Propretie. Chapter. 5.
1 A propretie does not express what the kindred is, as the saywhat does: but
is said of the kindred, and the kindred said of it turn for turn: as each man
is apt to langh: and each thing apt to laughe, is a man.

2 No man accompteth that for a propretie, which is in any other thing than in
one kindred: or which chances to be in one kindred, but for a time.

3 If any such thing be said to be a propretie, it is not proprely so to be
taken: but a propretie for a time, or in respect of an other: and thus there
are four sorts of propreties.

1
4 Some appertain to one kindred alone, though not to all the self things of
that kindred: as to be cunning in physike, pert^yneth only to man, but not to
eachs man.

2
5 Some appertain to each self thing of one kindred: and yet not to that
kindred alone: as to have two eyes appertains to all men, but not only to man.

3
6 Some appertain to one kindred alone, and to each self thing of that
kindred: but not at al times: as to ware grayheaded in age, appertains only to
man, and to each man that is aged, but not at all times.

4
7 Some apertain to one kindred alone, to each self thing of that kindred, and at
all times: As feelyng appertains only to a wyghte, to each wyghte, and at all
times. And this is most proprely called a propretie.

Why we entreat in this place of self things and kinreds, and what they
are. Chap. 6.
1 Many self things make a kindred, and many kinreds, a kind. Therefore to
proceed by order from the lessc to the more, we here interlace the treatise
of self things and kinreds.

Of self things.
2 A self thing is that which is said but of one solo thing alone: as London,
England, this man, or this horse.

3 Self things are not proprely handeled of any a^te, but so far as they are
contained in some kindred or kind.

4 For art entreats of general masters: as physike teaches not to cure
William, or Robert, but man thus or thus diseased.

Of a kinrede.
5 A kindred is said of many, differing but in number only, and aunswerabl^
when drmaunde is m^r, what self t^nges are.

6 Or t^us, a kindred is that, which is contained of a kind, or whereto a
kind is answerable, when it is demanded what a kindred is.

7 The first of these saywhats appertains to the lowest kindred: the other two
say whattes appertain to a large kindred.

8 The lowest kindred is next unto self things, and ever called a kindred, w^er
it be compared to self things that are under it: or to the kind that is above
it.

9 A large kindred is that which death other kinreds under it, and may be taken
both for a kindred (as it is referred to the kind that is above it:) or for a
kind (as it is said of kinreds that are under it.)

10 For example thus: A wight is a large kindred, for it has under it, a man,
and a beast, which are kinreds them selves: so that if ye refer a wighte to
a substance, then is it a kindred: but when ye refer a wight to a man, or a
beas^, then is it a kind conteynyng many kinredes of wyghtes under it.

Of a Kind. Chapter. 7.
1 A kind is that which is said of many kinreds, and answerable when it is
demanded what kinreds are.

2 As a wight is a kind, for it is said of man and beast, which are many
kinreds.

3 And if it be demanded what a man or a beast is, y^ answer ought to be
made, man is a wight, or a beast is a wight.

4 There is a general kind and a special kind.

5 A general kind is that which is taken always for a kind, as ever referred
to that which is under it: such are the te^ general words called storehouses.

6 A special kind is that which may (...) both a kind, and a kindred: as a
wighte is a kind, referred to a man: but referred to a creature, it is a
kindred.

7 The thing that is placed in any storehouse, is in that respect always,
either a self thing, a kindred, or a kind.

8 Self things are said but of one: kindred, and kinds (...) many.

9 All kinreds are specialls, which lie betwixt the lowest kindred and the
general kind.

10 We must never by asce^ding amount above the general kind: neither by
discending fall beneath the lowest kindred.

11 For self things to us are infinite, and do not belong to art, but are
judged by sense: And by surmountyng generals we are not taught.

12 For they contain all things without disc^ion.

Of a difference. Chap. 8.
1 A difference is a mark whereby one thing is discerned from an other.

How differences are divided.
There are three sorts of differences, a common difference, a propre
difference, and a most propre difference.

3 A common difference is a remouable mark, whereby a thing differs from it
self, or from some other thing, by any manner of means.

4 A propre difference is an inseparable mark (chaunceable notwithstanding)
whereby one thing differs from another.

5 A most propre difference is that which is that which is said of many
differing in kindred, when we demand whatkin a one, a thing is.

6 This difference is either taken in a saywhat to shew^ what a kindred is: or
in a division to (...) a kind.

7 A difference differs from a propretie, for a propretie is said ^ut of one
kindred: and a difference of many kinreds.

8 One word according to diverse respects, may be both a difference, and a
propretie: as feeling referred to a wight, is a propretie: and compared to a
man, it is a difference.

Of an Inbeer. Chap. 9.
1 An Inbeer is that which may be or not be in one self inholder.

How inbeers are divided.
2 There are two sorts of inbeers, one remoueable, the other unremovable.

3 A remoueable Inbeer may in deed be severed from his inholder: as knowledge
from a man.

4 An unremovable inbeer may in thought, but not in deed be severed from his
inholder: as blackness from a crow, and heat from fire.

Of the tourning of a shevvsay. Chapter. 10.
1 The tourning of a shewsay is the removing of the backset into the room of
the foreset.

2 There is a right tourning of a shewsay and a wrong tourning.

3 A shewsay is rightly turned when as both are necessarily true: but if when
ye have turned a shewsay, the one shewsay be false, and the other true: then
is the shewsay turned amiss.

4 Again a shewsay is rightly turned two ways: either when the sign does
remain, whether it (...) general or particular: or else when the general
sign is rebated into the particular.

5 The general naysay, and the particular yeasay are rightly turned, when
their signs and marks remain: as no man is a stone, and no stone is a man: or
some me^ are apt to swim, and some things apt to swim are men.

6 The general yeasay is not rightly turned, but when the general sign is
rebated into the particular: as all men are creatures: and some creatures are
men.

7 The particular naysay, is not of force apt to be turned at all.

8 Because the kind may be denied of his kindred in part: but the kindred
(being wholly contained under the kind) cannot again be denied of him in
part.

9 For we may well say: some creatures are no men: but we can not rightly say,
some men are no creatures.

10 When the backset is a saywhat or a property, the general yeasay is
rightly turned, the general sign not rebated.

11 As all men are apt to laugh: and all things apt to laugh are men, or
every man, is a wighte endued with sense and reason: and each wight endued with
sense and reason is a man.

12 These sayings and such like are thus turned, not by force of any rule
that perteyneth to the turning of a shewsay: but by reason the foreset and
backset of such shewsayes, are terms that may indifferently be said each of
other, turn for turn.

Of a yeasay, and a naysay. Chapter. 11.
1 Every simple shewsay, whether it be of the first order, or of the second
order, is either a yeasay, or a naysay.

2 A yeasaye of the first order, affyrmethe the being of a thing, as man is.

3 A yeasay of the second order, coupleth the backset to the foreset, and
affirms one thing of an other: as man is a wyghte.

4 A nayesaye of the first order, denies a thing to be: as, man is not.

5 A naysay of the second order, denies a thing to be this or that: as, man
is not an angel.

Of the quantity of a shevvsay. Chapter. 12.
1 The quantity of a shewsaye depends only upon the foreset.

2 For as the forset is generally, or particularly taken: so is the shewsay
either a general or a particular saying.

3 If the foreset be a sole word, then is the shewsaye singular: as London is
a City.

4 But if the foresette be a common word, then has it, either an universal
sign before it, and is called an universal shewsay: as, all men are
creatures: or else a particular sign, and is called a particular shewsay: as,
some men are learned: or else it has no sign at all, and then it is called an
undetermined shewsay: as, man is mortal.

5 The singular and vndetermyned shewsayes, are always taken in a reason, as
particulars.

6 No shewsay is true, where the backset being a common word, has an
universal sign joined unto it: as, All men are all creatures: or men are al
creatures.

7 But in a singular shewsay it may^* as, these men are all the friends, I have.

Of signs and marks which show the quantity and quality of each shevvesay.
Chapter. 13.
1 There are four sorts of signs and marks, so termed, because they note
the quantity and quality of every shewsay. a General yeamarke as all
General naymarke none Particular yemarke some Particular naymark somenot

2 The particular naymarke is commonly expressed in our mother tongue, by two
words, some and not (some other words always being placed betwixt them:)
for we use not to say, some not men are learned: but some men are not learned.

Of a true and a false shevvsay. Chapter. 14.
1 If men do affirm that thing to be, which is not: or do deny that thing to
be, which is: they make a lie, and their shewsay or saying is false.

2 But if that thing be in deed, which they affirm to be: or if that thing
be not in deed, which they deny to be: then is their saying true.

3 So that the truth or falshod of men's sayings, depends wholly of the
matter, that is uttered by their words.

4 To know whether each matter fall out according to this or that man's saying,
or not: it apperteyneth not only to witcraft to decide, but each saying is
tried to be true, or false, by that art where unto it does properly appertain.

To know which is a necessary shevvsay, which is an impossible shevvsay,
and which is a chanceable shevvsay. Cha. 15.
1 If the backset be a saywhat, a propretie, a kind, a difference, or a
natural and an unremovable Inbeer: the shewsay is necessary.

2 If the backsette be a remoueable inbeer, the shewsay is chaunceable.

3 But if the backset be none of these: then is it an impossible shewsay.

4 A necessary shewsay differs from an impossible shewsay: for that, this is
always false: and the former always tru^.

Of gaynsaying shevvsayes. Chapter. 16.
1 Gaynsaying shewsays are two shewsayes, the one a yeasaye, and the other a
naysay, changing neither foreset, backset, nor verb.

2 There are three sorts of gaynsaying shewsays: Contrary shewsays: less
than contrary shewsays: and more than contrary shewsayes.

3 Contraries are two general shewsayes, the one a yeasaye, and the other a
naysay: as each man is good: and, no man is good.

4 Less then contraryes are two particular shewsayes: the one a yeasaye, and
the other a naysaye: as some men are good, and some men are not good.

5 More then contraryes are two shewsayes, the one being general, the other
particular: the one a yeasaye, the other a naysay: as all men are good, and
some men are not good: or no man is good, and some men are good.

6 Contraryes are never both true: yet chances it sometimes that they are
both false: as when the backset is a remoueable inbeer: as each man is learned,
and no man is learned.

7 Less then contraryes are never both false, but may in chaunceable such
says be both true: as some men are learned, and some are not learned.

8 More then contraryes are most repugnant one to another: for if the one be
true, the other of necessity is false: or if the one be false, the other of
necessity is true: as all men are learned: and, some men are not learned: or
no man is learned, and some man is learned.

Of Shevvesayes that are of like force. Chap. 17.
1 Those shewesayes are of like force and strength which differ in words and
agree in meaning.

2 It does properlye pertain to grammar and not to Witcrafte, to know which
sayings agree in sense, and which do not.

3 Yet for so much as arts are knit together, in such a band of knowledge,
that no man can be cunning in any one, but he must have some knowledge in
many, they do by usurpation some times borow one of an other, so much as
does serve their present purpose.

4 Therefore many writers of Witcraft, entreat in this place, of shewesayes
that are of like force, only by reason of this nay word (not) diversely placed
before, or after tho signs.

5 But here is to be noted, that the same rules hold not in our English tongue
y^ the Latyns use hereof in their tongue.

6 Therefore take these as certain: and as for the rest, know that either they
are not in use, or ^they held not in such sort as the Latin authors do appoint.

7 In our mother tongue we use to ^e this word (not) either only before
the sign: or only after the sign, as for to place it before the sign, and
after two, in one sentence, it stands not with the property of our speech.

8 (Not) joined in a shewesaye, to a general yeamarke, alters the quality
and diminishes the quantity thereof, and makes the saying all one, whether it
be placed before or after the sign.

9 For of a general yeasay, it makes a particular naysaye: as not all that
speak you fair, are your friends: or all that speak you fair are not your
friends.

These two sayings are both one in sense and meaning: and as much to say as
some that speak you fair are not your friends.

10 Now it is plain that this last sentence is a particular naysay: therefore
the two former sayings, must needs be so too, being of like force and value
that it is of.

11 If (not) be placed in a shewesaye before a particular yeamarke, it alters
the quality, and augmenteth the quantity thereof, for not one is as much to
say, as none.

12 (Not) being placed before few, signifies many: and being placed before
many signifies few.

13 More ways of placyng of (not) before the sign to make any good sense in
our mother tongue, I find not.

14 These few examples do show all in small room, that is necessary to be
spoken of, touching this matter. 1 Not all are All are not is as much to say as
1 some are not 2 Not one is 2 none are 3 Not a few 3 many 4 Not many 4 a few

Of a compounded Shevvsay. Chap. 18.
1 What a compounded shewsay is, we have said before, side. 66. verse. 9.

2 There are two sorts of compounded shewsayes.

3 They of the first sort do speak with adding of, if, and, or, cause, or time.

4 They of the second sort, add the manner of being by some one of these four
preambles, as: it chances: it is possible: it is impossible: it is
necessary: or else by some other terms of like force, that these, or some one
of these is of.

5 A shewsay compounded with, an (if), may be called an ifsaye, and does
simplelye neither affirm nor deny, but upon condition, as, if ye do well, ye
shall be well reported: or if ye do ill, ye shall not be well reported.

6 In these two sayings nothing is affirmed simplye or divided, but upon
condition of well doing, or ill.

7 A shewsay comp^unded with (and) is called a coupling shewsay, and this is
never true, except all parts be true.

8 As John, William, and Robert are learned, is not true: except all parts
be true: but false it is, when any part is untrue.

9 Also John is learned, discrete and rich: this saying is false, if John be
either not learned, not discrete, or not rich: and true it is not, but when
all the things recyted, take place in him.

10 A shewsaye compounded with (or) is a parting shewsaye, and is true when any
part is true: and never false ^cepte all parts be false: as John, Robert, or
William, is at home.

11 This is true if any of them be at home: false, when none of them is at home.

12 A shewsay compounded with adding the cause: as, because you served
faithfully I give you this form: and a shewsay compounded with condition of
time: as, when I dye you shall have my land, may well be referred to an ifsaye:
for in affirming and denying, they observe the same law that it does.

Of Shevvsayes compounded by adding the manner of being or not being. Chap. 19.
1 There are four Preambles, whereby the manner of being or not being of things,
is set forth. as it chances. it is possible. it is impossible. it is necessary.



2 When any shewesaye has any of these preambles put unto it, then it is
called a shewsaye compounded by adding the manner of being, or not being.

3 Two things are chiefly to be handled in these compounded shewsayes.

4 The first is to show, when they affirm and when they deny: the second is
to show, how they agree and how they follow each upon other.

Of the affirming or denying of a Shevvsay compounded by adding the manner of
being or not being.
5 Generally they never deny, but when this nayworde (not) is placed before the
preamble.

6 For if it be not put to at all: or else placed after the preamble, they
affirm.

7 For example, it chanced that John coming from London, was robbed: the
naysaye is, it did not chance, that John coming from London was robbed.

8 As for this saying, it chanced that John coming from London, was not
robbed, is a yeasay: and thus in like manner of the rest.

9 This saying it is impossible, for man to fly, is in form and manner of
speaking, a yeasay, and in meaning a naysay.

How Shevvsayes compounded by adding the manner of being or not being follovv
one upon another.
10 Shewsaies compounded by adding the manner of being, or not being follow one
upon another, but not in like sort. It chances to be has these following upon
it 1 1 it is possible to be 2 it is not impossible to be 3 it is not necessary
to be It chances not to be 2 1 it is possible not to be 2 it is not
impossible not to be 3 it is not necessary not to be It does not chance to be
3 1 it is not possible to be 2 it is impossible to be 3 it is necessary not to
be It does not chance not to be 4 1 it is not possible not to be 2 it is
impossible not to be 3 it is necessary to be

11 For where we before divided a shewsay, Side. 87. ver. 1
reckning some to be (...), some necessary, some impossible, we had (...) how
the foreset was coupled or not coupled to the ba^kset upon the sequel of the
matter.

12 But here dividing a shewsay, into a chaunceable shewsay, a possible
shewsaye, an impossible shewsay, and into a nessarye shewsay, we do respect
the pr^amble only for the naming of the shewsay. As for the truth of such
sayings, that is to be considered, as it falls forth in matter uttered by
them.

The third book of Witcraft.
Chap. 1.
1 WE have spoken heretofore of words and sayings: it remains that we now
proceed to entreat of a reason.

2 Let us therefore here set down those things which are necessarilye required
for the due understanding of a perfect reason.

3 First we will show what a reason is: secondlye we will declare how many
kinds of reasons there are: thirdlye we will lay forth the parts of a reason:
fourthly, we will tell how such parts are to be found out, and how they are
to be ordered and disposed, to make a reason that shall infer a necessary
endsaye.

What a reason is.
4 A reason is a compounded shewsaye, proving that which lies in controversy
by known and granted sayings.

5 For even as certain words must be coupled together in due order to make a
perfect sentence: so must certain shewesayes be joined together in a due
(...) to make a perfect reason.

That there are but two kinds of reasons and what either kind is. Chapter. 2.
1 There are but two ways to prove a doubtful matter.

2 For either we rise by examples of selfethings and specialls, to the
knowl^dge of the general: or else contrariwise we fall by the rule of the
general, to the knowledge of special and selfethings.

3 The first way may be called a reason by example: the second a reason by
rule.

Examples of a reason by example.
4 If a skillful Lawyer be the best Lawyer: and a skillful Mariner the best
Mariner: and a skillful Physician, the best Physician: then is he accounted
best in each art, that has most skill therein.

5 Another: all light things ascend: for smoke, breath, flame, and fire do so.

6 Here are we brought by diverse particulars (...) by examples, to come to the
knowledge of two general rules.

7 The first rul^ is, that he is best artificer, that has most skill in his
art.

8 The s^conde is, that all light things ascend.

Of a Reason by rule.
9 A reason by rule, is a reason that stands of three shewesayes, framed in
such sort, that two of them being granted to be true, the third must by
force of them be true also: for example thus.

All light things ascend,
Breath is light,
therefore,
Does breath ascend.
10 For he that grants that all light things do ascend, and also that breath
is light, must needs grant by force of these, that breath does ascend too.

What diversity there is betwixt a reason by example, and a reason by rule.
Chapter. 3.
1 A reason by example pertains so common sense and experience.

A reason by rule belongs to art.

2 A reason by example serves to prove the principles of art, by certain*
particular examples: A reason by rule proves particular cases by principles
and general rules.

3 So that a reason by example ascends to the general: a reason by rule
descends to the particular.

4 A reason by example allureth the ignorant: a reason by rule forces the
learned.

5 The number of shewesayes in a reason by example are uncertain, sometimes
many, and sometimes sewe: but the number of shewesayes in a reason by rule, is
ever certain, and so that they are never more nor less but three.

What things are chiefly to be noted in a reason by rule.
6 There are in a reason by rule (as in each other thing whatsoever) two
special points to be mack* the matter, and the form.

Of the matter whereof a reason by rule is made. Chap. 4.
1 Three shewesayes, and three terms, are the matter whereof a reason by rule
is made: but shewesayes are nearer, and terms further of.

2 For a reason is resolved into shewsayes, and shewesayes are resolved into
terms.

What names the three Shevvsayes have, which are in a reason by rule.
3 The two first shewsayes that are placed in a reason by rule, are called
foresayes, the third may be t^rmed, an endsay.

4 This is proved, and they do prove.

5 This is first in purpose, and last in order: they are first in order, and
last in finding out.

6 When you go precisely to work, you must express three shewsayes in each
reason that is made by rule: yet men in writing, and common speech, use often to
leave out some one of them.

7 When any one is left out, to know which it is: ye shall have a rule for it
hereafter.

Of the three terms which are in a reason by rule.
8 The three terms that are chiefly to be noted in a reason by rule, and
whereof the three foresaid shewsayes are made, be thus named: the general
term: the special term: the proving term: each term being twice repeted in
one reason. the general term. special proving

9 The backser of the endsay, is always the general term.

10 And the foreset of the endsaye is ever the special term.

11 The proving term is that term, which is placed in both the foresayes: and
is the mean whereby the other two terms agree or disagree among themselves,
in the endsaye.

Of the form of a reason by rule. Chapter. 5.
1 After ye have thus generally considered of the matter of a reason by rule:
ye must proceed to the form.

2 Which is in very deed nothing else but a right ordering and disposing of
the matter.

3 For it stands in the right placing of the terms: and in the due
quantity and quality of the shewsayes.

4 So that when the three terms are ryghtly placed in each shewsay, and when
the due quantity and quality of shewsays is kept withal: then is the form of
a reason by rule alwais necessary, and the endsay is true, by force of the
foresayes.

5 But if either the terms be not rightly ordered, or that the due quantity
and quality of shewsayes be not kept: then the form of the reason is not
good, and that reason it self, is in deed, a deceyuable reason.

6 Now for the placing of the terms, there are ranks devised, and for the
furnishing of the shewsayes with due quantity and quality there are seats
appointed.

7 So that the ranks teach where the three terms are placed in each shewsaye:
and the seats tell what quantity and quality the three shewsayes must have
whereof a reason by rule is framed.

8 A rank is a rue of seats, teaching where the three terms are placed in
each shewsaye of a reason.

9 A Seat is a special form of arguing, notyng the quantity and quality of
each shewsay, which is placed in a reason by rule.

10 There are three ranks or rewes of seats, where all reasons framed by
^ule, are couched.

The 1 rank. 2 3

11 The first rank is a rewe of those seats, which ever place the proving
term betwixt the general and the special term, in such sort, that it be
under the general, and above the special.

12 The second rank places the proving term above the general and the
special term, so that it is said of them both.

13 The third rank places the proving term beneath them both, so that they
both are said of it.

14 This is further to be marked concerning the ordering of the terms, that
the general term and the proving term, make always the first foresaye: the
proving term and the special term make the second foresay: and the general
and the special term make the endsay.

How many vvayes a reason by rule may be made.
15 A reason by rule may be directely framed fourteen ways, and more ways it
can not. Four ways in the first rank: and four ways in the second rank:
and six ways in the third rank.

16 Now for these four^ several fourmes of arguyng, there are fourteen
words artificially invented, each word appointed to his propre seat, which
parte^ into three syllables a p^ce, serve for diverse purposes.

The names of the particular seats, and what is generally to be learned in
each one of them. Chap. 6.
1 The four seats which are placed in the first rank, are thus named and
ordered.

The First Bar ba ra. Second Ce la rent. Third Da ri j. Fourth Fe ri o.

2 The four seats that are placed in the second rank, are named and ordered
thus.

The First Ces a re. Second Came es tres. Third Fes ti no. Fourth Ba to co.

3 The six seats which are placed in the third rank, are named and ordered
thus.

The First Da rap ti. Second Fe lap ton. Third Dis am is. Fourth Da it is i.
Fifte Bo car do. Sixte Fe ris on.

4 For cleerenesse and memory sake, I think it good to set forth the names of
the seats, as they are appointed to their several ranks, in four english
verses.

Proper seats appointed for each rank.
Barbara, celarent, darii, ferio, to the first rank.

Cesare, Camestres, festino, Baroco, darapti: Felapton, Disamis, datisi.
Bocardo, Ferison. Six last here down set, be seats proper aye to the
third rank.

6 Besides the name of each particular seat, learn also of this that
follows, what matter each one of these artificial words does include in it
self.

7 First, as each reason by rule stands of three shewesayes: So each seat
is parted into three syllables. The first syllable is set against the first
foresaye, the second syllable against the second foresay, the third syllable
against the endsaye.

8 The first and capital letter of each word shows to what seat each
imperfect reason must be reduced unto.

9 For the reasons made in the second and third rank, must (or they be
accounted perfect) be reduced to those seats of the first rank, which
begin with the same capital letter that they do: as,

Baroco to Barbara. Bocardo

Cesare to Celarent. Camestres

Darapti to Darii. Disamis Datisi

Festino to Ferio. Felapton Ferison

10 M. p. s. c. show how the vnperfect^ seats must be reduced.

11 M. notes, that the foresayes must be changed each into others place.

12 P. notes a turning of the shewsay, with rebatement of the sign.

13 S. Notes a turning of the shows a without rebatement of the sign.

14 C. If it be not placed in the first syllable, notes a reducing of the
reason by way of impossibility.

15 The vowels note the quantity and quality of each shewsay: as,

A E I O notes that the shewsay set against it, must be a general yeasay,
general naysay, particular yeasay, particular naysay.

16 The rest of the Letters serve to no purpose, but to make up the verse.

17 Although this which we have now said concerning the matter and form of a
reason by rule, may seem to a pregnant wit, to be sufficient: yet to make the
matter plain to beginners, and to those that lackes an instructor: we will
declare what manner of three terms will serve, and how they must be furnished
and set forth with quantity and quality, to make a good reason in every
particular seat, setting forth the same by plain examples.

Of the first rank. Chap. 7.
1 To this rank are assigned four seatt, as is aforesaid, in the first seat is
concluded a general yeasaye: in the second a general naysay: in the third a
particular yeasay: in the fourth a particular naysaye: So that there is no
shewsay which may not be proved in the seats of the first rank.

2 The proving term in this rank, is placed betwixt the general and the
special term.

What manner of terms vvil serve to make a reason in the first seat of the
first rank.
3 When ye have three terms, whereof the first may wholly be said of the
second, and that the second also may wholly be said of the third, they do
serve to make a reason in Barbara concluding that the first term is generally
said of the third: as,

1 Creature this is y^ general term. 2 Wight proving 3 Man special



4 If ye will lay forth this reason at large, and furnishe every shewsay w^h
due quantity and quality, you must utter it thus.

Bar ba ra All wights are cereatures, All men are wightes, therefore All men are
creatures.

What manner of terms vvil serve to make a reason in the second seat of the
first rank.
5 When ye have three terms whereof the first is wholly denied of the second,
and the second wholly affirmed of the third: they serve to make a reason in
Celarent, concluding that the first term is generally denied of the third:
as,

1 Natural this is y^ general term: 2 learned by imitatio^ proving 3 langage
special



6 Set this reason down at large thus

Ce la re^t nothing learned by imitatio^ is natural every language is learned by
imitatio^, therefore, No language is natural.

What manner of terms vvil serve to make a reason in the third seat of the
first rank.
7 When ye have three terms whereof the first is wholly affirmed of the second,
and the second partly affirmed of the third, they serve to make a reason in
Darii, concluding that the first term is affirmed of the third in part:

1 Commendable this is y^ general term 2 Uertues proving 3 Sparing special



8 Set this reason down at large thus.

Da ri i All virtues are commendable Some kind of sparing is a virtue
therefore, Some kind of sparing is co^me^dable

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the fourth seat of the
first rank.
9 When ye have three terms whereof the first is wholly denied of the second,
and the second partly affirmed of the third, they serve to make a reason in
Ferio: concluding that the first term is denied of the third in part: as,

1 To be used this is y^ general term 2 wa^ton tricks proving 3 daunces
special



10 Set this reason down at large thus.

Feri o No wanton trick is to be used, Some daunces are wa^ton tricks, therefore
Some daunces are not to be used.

11 If the terms whereof you be willed to make a reason by rule, bear not
such respect one to an other, as is set forth in these foresaid rules:
know for a certainty, that no good reason can be made of them: to be placed
in the seats of the first rank.

12 For when the three terms are such as none can truly be said of an other:
or when the first is said of the second but in parts: or the second is
denied of the third, either in whole, or in part: y^ reason that is made of
such terms, has no necessary sequel, but is called in Greek (...), that
is a reason which stands in rank and makes a show of an argument, but it
is not placed in any seat that keeps a necessary form of arguing.

Of the second rank. Chap. 3.
1 In the second rank the proving term is the backsette in both the forsayes:
and as the three terms are placed in order, it is the highest.

2 To this rank belongs also four seats: two generals, and two specials:
but they all serve to disprove, and none of them to prove.

3 For it follows not, because one kind is said of two differing kinreds: that
therefore the one kindred should be said and affirmed of the other.

For though all wheat be corn, and all rye be corn too: yet it follows not
therefore, that any rye is wheat, or any wheat rye.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the first seat of the
second rank.
4 When ye have three terms whereof the first is wholly denied of the second,
and wholly affirmed of the third: they serve to make a reason in Cesare,
concluding that the second term is wholly denied of the third: as,

1 to have a tala^d this is y^ proving term. 2 tame by nature general 3 hawk
special



5 Set down this reason at large thus.

Ces a re Nothing tame by nature has a taland, All hawks have talandes
therefore, No hawk is tame by nature.

6 C. in this word Cesare, shows that the reasons placed in this seat, must
be reduced unto Celarent: and S. tells how, even by turning of the first
foresay without rebatement of the sign.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the second seat of the
second rank.
7 When ye have three terms, whereof y^ first is wholly affirmed of y^ second,
and wholly denied of the third, they serve to make a reason in Camestres
concluding that the second is wholly denied of the third: as,

1 to have a talant this is the proving term 2 hawk general 3 tame special



8 Set down this reason at large thus.

Came es tres All hawks have talands no tame foul by nature has a taland
therefore no tame foul by nature is a hawk

9 C. in this word Camestres, shows that the reasons placed in this seat,
must be reduced to Celarent: and M. and the two S. S. teach how, to wit, that
the foresayes must be changed each into ethers place: and that the second
foresaye and the endsaye, must both be turned without rebatement of the sign.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the third seat of the
second rank.
10 When ye have three terms whereof the first is wholly denied of the second,
and affirmed of the third in part, they serve to make a reason in Festino,
concluding that the second is denied of the third in part: as,

1 Forbidden 2 Lawful 3 Apparel.


11 Set down this reason at large thus.

Fes ti no No lawful thing is forbidden, Some apparel is forbidden, therefore
Some apparel is not lawful.

12 F. In this word Festino shows that the reasons placed in this seat must
be reduced to Ferio: and S. shows how, even by turning the first foresaye,
without rebatement of the sign.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the fourth seat of the
second rank.
13 When ye have three terms, whereof the first is wholly affirmed of the
second: and denied of the third in part, they serve to make a reason in Baroco,
concluding that the second is denied of the third in part: as,

1 Indifferent this is y^ proving term 2 Lawful general 3 Apparel special



14 Set down this reason at large thus.

Ba to co All lawful things are indifferent, Some apparel is not indifferent,
therefore, Some apparel is not lawful.

15 B. In Baroco notes that the reasons placed in this seat must be reduced
to Barbara and C. shows that they must be reduced by way of impossibility,
taking a sentence more then a contrary to the endsay with the first foresaye,
and concluding more then a contrary shewsay to the second foresay: as, Bar ba
ra All lawful things are indifferent, All apparel is lawful, therefore All
apparel is indifferent.



16 The endsaye in this reason is manifestly false, therefore one of the
foresayes must needs be false too, but the first foresaye it can not be, for
that was granted to be true in the first reason, therefore it must needs be
the second, whose more then contrary shewsay, was denied to be true before, so
that by this means y^ answerer is forced to grant that which can not be, to
wit, that more then contrary shewsaies should both be false.

Of the third Rank. Chap. 4.
1 In this rank the proving term is the foreset in both the foresayes, and
as the three terms be placed in order, it is the lowest.

To this rank belongs six seats, three yeascates and three nayscats, but
all concludyng particular sentences.

What manner of terms, will serve to make a reason in the first seat of the
third rank.
2 When ye have three terms whereof the first and the second, are both said of
y^ third generally, they serve to make a reason in Darapti, concluding that the
first must needs be said of ye second in part: as,

1 Evil this is the general term 2 Creatures special 3 Devils proving



3 Set down this reason at large thus.

Da rap ti All Devils are evil, All Devils are creatures, therefore, Some
creatures are evil.

4 D. In this word Darapti, notes that the reasons placed in this seat, must
be reduced to Da^ and P. shows how they must be reduced, even by turning of
the second foresaye, without rebatement of the sign.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the second seat of the
third rank.
5 When ye have three terms whereof the first is generally denied of the
third, and the second generally affirmed of it too, they serve to make a reason
in Felapton, concluding that the first is denied of the second in part: as,

1 Forgotten upon (the sudden this is the general term 2 A gotten qualititie
special 3 Art. proving



8 Set down this reason at large thus.

Fe lap ton No art is forgotten upon the sudden, All arts are gotten
qualities, therefore, Some gotten quality is not forgotten upon the sudden.

7 F. In this word Felapton, notes that the reasons placed in this seat are
reduced to Ferio, and P. shows how they must be reduced, even by turning of
the second foresay without rebatement of the sign.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the third seat of the
third rank.
9 When ye have three terms whereof the first is said in part of the third, and
the second wholly affirmed of it too: they serve to make a reason in Disamis,
concluding that the first is said of the second in part: as,

1 Necessary this is the general term 2 Better for the present time special 3
Correction proving



9 Set down this reason at large thus.

Di^ am is Some correction is necessary, All correction is bitter for the
present time, therefore Some thing bitter for the present time is necessary.

10 D. In this word Disamis, notes that the reasons placed in this seat, are
reduced to Darij: and the two. S. S. and M. show how they must be reduced.

11 For the two. S. S. do note, yt the first foresay and the endsaye must be
turned without rebatement of the sign: and M. notes that the foresayes must
be changed each into others place.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the fourth seat of the
third rank.
12 When ye have three terms whereof the first is generally said of the
third, and the second is said thereof but in part: they serve to make a reason
in Datisi, concluding that the general is said of the special in part: as,

1 Reprouable this is y^ general term 2 Magistrate special 3 Offender proving



13 Set down this reason at large thus.

Da it is i All offenders are to be reproved, Some offender is a magistrate,
therefore, Some magistrate is reprouable.

14 D. In this word Datisi, notes that the reasons placed in this seat, are
to be reduced to Darij: and S ^eweth how they must be reduced, even by turning
the second foresaye, without rebatement of the sign.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the fifte seat of the
third rank.
15 When ye have three terms, whereof the first is denied of the third in
part, and the second wholly affirmed of it too: they serve to make a reason in
Bocardo, concluding that the first is denied of the second in part.

1 Evil this is the general term 3 Minister special 3 True preacher proving



16 Set down this reason at large thus,

Bo car do Some true preacher is not evil, All true preachers are ministers,
therefore, Some minister is not evil.

17 B. In this word Bocardo, notes that the reasons placed in this seat, must
be reduced to Barbara: and C. shows how, to wit, by forcing the aduersarye to
grant an impossibility in reason, which in Bocardo is done thus.

18 Ye must take more then a contrary to the endsay, with the second foresay,
and conclude more then a contrary to the first foresaye: for example,

Bar ba ra All Ministers are evil, All true preachers are ministers,
therefore, All true preachers are evil.

For the rest, look the. 16. sentence of the third chapter.

What manner of terms will serve to make a reason in the sixte seat of the
third rank.
19 When ye have three terms, whereof the first is generally denied of the
third, and the second affirmed of it in part: they serve to make a reason in
Ferison, concluding that the general is denied of the special in part: as,

1 Pleasant this is the general term 2 Profitable special 3 Correction
proving



20 Set down this reason at large thus.

Fe ris on No correction is pleasant, Some correction is profitable,
therefore, Some profitable thing is not pleasant.

21 F. In this word Ferison, notes that the reasons placed in this seat, must
be reduced to Ferio: and* S. shows how, even by turning the second foresaye
without rebatement of sign.

22 In this rank, no form of arguing is good, where the second foresay is a
naysay: that is to say, when the special term, is denied of the proving
term, either wholly or in part.

If either of the foresayes be left out of a reason by rule, to know which
it is. Chap. 10.
1 If the backset be one in both the shewsayes, the second foresaye wants,
either in the first, or the third rank.

2 But if the foreset be one in both the shewsayes, the first foresaye
wants, either in the first, or the second rank.

3 If ye have two shewsayes, concluding a reason, and one word a foreset in
the first, and a backset in the later, there wants the second foresaye in
the second rank.

4 If ye have two shewsayes concludyng a reason, and one word a backset in
the first, and a foresette in the latter, there wants the first, foresaye
in the third rank.

5 Try these rules by the examples set forth already in each seat, and ye
shall see they never fail.

To know in how many seats each endsay may be concluded.
1 An universal yeasaye is only proved in Barbara.

2 An universal naysaye is three ways concluded, in Celarent, Cesare, and
Camestres.

3 A particular yeasay is four ways proved, in Darij, Darapti, Disamis, and
Datisi.

4 A particular naysaye is concluded in six seats, in Ferio, Festino, Baroco,
Felapton, Bocardo, Ferison.

5 By this it is plain, that an universal yeasaye is most hard to prove,
and most easy to disprove: and that a particular naysaye is most easy to
prove, and most hard to disprove.

The fourth Book of Witcraft.
Of Invention or fynding out of arguments. Chap. 1.
1 How the proving term must lie, to the foresette and backsette of each
demand, that a necessary reason may be made of three terms, we have
showed before, in our third book.

2 It follows now, that we teach a way, to get store of proving terms.

3 For as the good and ready merchant provides store of sundry wares, and
sorteth every kind by it self, adding special marks for his better
direction, that he may with convenient speed fit and serve his customer when
he calls: So the quick and sharp reasoner, must gather general rules
together, and place them in order, that he may have in a readiness when need
shall be, store of reasons, for proof or disproofe of matters in doubt.

4 Therefore is witcraft well divided of the Grecians into two parts: whereof the
first is called in Greek (...), that is to say, in english, the decerning
part: the other is called (...), as much to say, as the finding part.

5 This, for that by searching it fyndeth out the proving term: The other,
not only for that it judges of the form of an argument: but also for that it
descryeth the truth and falshode of al sentences: and notes the force, and
signification of words.

6 Some men do think, that the fynding part, is first to be taught, and that
by the course of nature it ought to come before the other in order.

7 For as he that will make an house, first provides timber, stone, brick,
clay, lyme, nails, pinnes, and other things, whereof he will have his house to
be builded: and after hireth workmen, to set these things together, and to
frame them in order: which done, his devised house is finished and made: Even
so the cunning reasoner first finds out (say they) by the use of the places,
the matter whervppon he will speak: and after seeks by the rules of a
perfect reason, how to order and dispose the same.

8 This reason in my judgment serves neither for him that would practice
Witcrafte, nor for him that should teach it.

9 For how can a man either invent or teach any good reasons, to prove matters
that lie in doubt, the nature of sentences and words, being not first known?

10 Seeing each question stands of them and is not thoroughly known, before
the force of each word be deeply considered, with due consideration had, how
the words, agree or disagree in a perfect sentence.

11 Now to return this similitude, and to make it good against our
adversaries, we say:

12 No craftesman can fit himself of stuff, before he has cast in his
mind the shape and form of the thing, that he will make.

13 In like manner, no good reasoner can find out the proving term, by the use
of the places, before he have learned by the rules of a perfect reason, what
manner of proving term will serve his purpose.

14 That is to say, how ye proving term in the two foresayes, must be coupled
or uncoupled to y^ forset or backset of y^ question, that y^ same may be
directly concluded.

15 By this it is plain, that the shape of a thing that is to be made, would
first be devised in mind, before the stuff were provided:

16 Otherwise, it will commonly fall forth, that there will be either loss
in providing to much, or lack in providing to little.

17 We have therefore in our three former books, spoken of the decerning part
of Witcrafte, and have reserved the fynding part to be entreated of in this
our fourth Book.

18 But here I advise thee of one thing (gentle reader) that thou look not,
that I should set forth all the places, whereof men use to gather arguments,
and omit none.

19 For that thing I suppose no man has done heretofore: nor shall do
hereafter.

20 Neither is it one man's work to begin and end an art, in such sort, as
nothing can be said more.

21 It is well if we write that, which may profit many: neither is it fit to
leave many good things vndene, or many profitable things untaught, because we
cannot do and say, all that is good and profitable.

22 Now because the ten storehouses are fit for invention, I have thought
good to appoint them for places.

23 And where as there are diverse other places besides, which can not
conveniently be referred to any of the ten storehouses, I have added and
interlaced them in such order, as I judged was fittest, either for memory or
invention.

24 The general places which I have gathered out of sundry authors, to yield
a reasoner store of arguments, are in number twenty and two: I think good to
name and order them thus.

Of 1 Substance. 2 Quantity. 3 Quality. 4 The cause. 5 The effect. 6
Preparation. 7 Doing. 8 Suffering. 9 Time. 10 Place. 11 Order. 12 Having. 13
The forecommers. 14 The aftercommers. 15 The withcommers. 16 The lykelyer. 17
The vnlykelyer. 18 The aslyke. 19 A similitude. 20 Witnesses. 21 Oaynsettes. 22
The differing term. 23 Division. 24 Proportion.

25 These places may be reduced to a few general points, and diverse
writers use so to do.

26 Howbeit in mine opinion that hind^reth Invention, and forces further
matter upon words, then their usual sign^cation does bear.

27 Division doubtless is a necessary mean to teach by: and it furthereth
lerning very much, to pass by division from point to point: so that you take
that occasion which nature or art offers, and keep the propretie of y^
speech which ye use

28 In discoursing upon the places, I mean^o keep this order.

29 First I will define the place, and after divide it: then I will set down
certain general rules, in each particular place, that the groundeworke and
chief cause of a reason may be vewed and considered.

30 Fourthly, I will add examples y^ a beginner may lern by imitatio^ to do y^
like.

31 Finally I will tell how reasons held of each place, and how they hold not:
that the diligent reader may see, what sequel there follows in reason upon
the grounds and principles of invention.

32 If any one of these five points be (at any time) omitted, it is either for
that such things need not to be spoken of (being very plain of themselves)
or for that they are sufficiently entreated of elsewhere.

33 For that which has been taught heretofore, and may seem necessary to be
interlaced in the discourse of the places, I pass ever of purpose.

34 Poynting thee (gentle reader,) nevertheless, by two numbres, where theu
may at the first sight, find out that which else were necessary to be here
repeted.

Of the first general place called Substance. Chap. 2.
1 He that will discourse orderly, and search a matter to the bottom, must
begin with the substance of the thing he speaks of.

2 Substance is taken here more largely then it was in the first storehous^.

3 For there it was taken only for a thing that had his being by it self: but
here substance is taken for any thing that is necessarily required in the
^scentiall being of an other, and it is divided into seven parts.

4 The saywhat, the general term, the special term, the proper term, the
whole, the part, and the offspring.

5 Every one of these have sundry rules, and arguments gathered of them hold
not all alike, therefore we will entreat of them severally.

6 What a say what is, and how many sorts and kinds there are, what things
have the same order and trade of arguing that a saywhat has, and what five
special points do appertain unto it, look side 73. Chapter. 4.

Other general rules appertayning to a sayvvhat.
7 Whatsoever the saywhat does declare and set forth, the same in that respect
is a kindred, and neither a self thing, nor a kind.

8 The saywhat and the kindred (that is to say, the thing declared and set for
the by the saywhat) differ only in words and terms, and not in substance of
matter.

9 And therefore nothing (concerning sense and meaning) is contained in the one,
but the same also is comprised in the other.

10 And whatsoever is denied or said of the o^e, may in like sort, be denied or
said of the other.

Examples of arguments deduced of a sayvvhat.
11 Each man is mortal, for every wight endued with reason and sense is mortal.

12 If you will set down this reason in frame, according to the precise rules
before given, dot this.

Bar ba ra Every wight endued with reason and sense is mortal. But every man
is a wyghte endued with reason and sense, therefore, Every man is mortal.

13 Every wighte endued with reason and sense, is the saywhat of man: so that
it being mortal, forces man to be mortal too, by the general rule of the
saywhat. ^erse. 9.

14 Again thus, death makes an end of each man: therefore every man is mortal,
frame this reason in rule thus.

Bar ba ra ^ch thing ended by death is mortal Every man is ended by death,
Therefore each man is mortal.

The use of this place.
15 The first reason is taken of the saywhat of man: the second of the saywhat
of mortal.

16 For necessary reasons may be deduced as well from the sayewhat of the
endesayes backset, as from the saywhat of the endsayes fores^t, and that to
prove or disprove in differently.

Of the general term. Chap. 3.
1 In seeking out of arguments, we take that for the general term, which may
be truly answered of many specials, when demand is made what they are.

2 As when ye demand what stoutnes or manhood is, the right answer must be,
that manhod is a virtue: in like manner if ye ask what temperance is, the
fittest answer lies, that temperaunce also is a virtue.

3 Therefore virtue compared to manhood and temperance, is a general.

4 ^ere note that to these and such like demands the next general is rather
to be answered then that which is further of.

5 For when I am asked what a peach is, I shall come nearer to the matter, if I
say it is a fruit, then if I answer and say it is a creature or a substance.

6 But mine answer should be furmost off from satisfying of mine hearer, if I
should say it were a thing.

7 Because he that answers so generally, makes no distinction in matter, but
leaves the demander in as great doubt as he was in at the first.

Rules belonging to the general term by the which thou may also learn
the use of this place.
8 Al things are contained in the general that are contained in any special.

9 For if life, reason, sense, learning, will, cunning, etc. be in man, the same
things are also of force in a wighte, in a creature, and in a substance, which
three are all generals to man.

10 What thing soever may be generally affirmed of the general, the same thing
also may be generally affirmed of every one of his specials.

11 The general is generally taken, when an universal sign is joined to it,
and it not diminished of his quantity by any nayword, as when ye say, each
earthly creature is mortal.

12 Upon this general, generally granted, you may well conclude, that every man
is mortal.

13 But when a general word is joined to a particular sign, or granted in a
shewsay to be true without any sign at al, then it makes no sufficient proof
of the special.

14 As when it is alleged, that a wight or some wight is learned, these things
being granted, do not of force infer that all men or some men are learned,
more then any other earthly creature that has sese.

15 Howbeit, if the general be generally granted, it makes good proof of all
and every one of his specials: for who so grants every earthly wighte to be
mortal, grants also by good sequel in reason, that al men, and al beasts
are mortal too.

16 What thing soever is denied of the general, without restraint of any
particular sign, the same thing may seem well, to be denied of any of his
specials.

17 For if it be well said, learning is not gotten with ease: it is also well
said: witcraft is not gotten with ease, speechcrafte, starcraft, Physike, law,
or any other kind of learning.

18 But if any thing be denied of the general, by restraint of the particular
sign, y^ same is not therefore denied of any of his specials, but of certain,
such as the restraint may seem to limitte.

19 For though I grant y^ some houseduck flies not, yet am not I thereby
forced to say, ye wildduck ^ieth not, seeing y^ restraint may seem to be made
but to the tame duck.

20 No general is affirmed of any special ofspringingly.

21 For it cannot be truly affirmed, ye witness is ^lored, seeing witness is a
color, and the inholder of witness is colored, be it cloth, wool, yarne,
or any thing else that is accustomed to be dyed or colored.

Of the special term. Chap. 4.
1 The special is here taken for that whereof the general may be said, when
demand is made of the special, and question asked what it is.

Rules belonging to the special.
2 Whatsoever is said of the special in part, is said also of the general in
part.

2 For if some men be learned, some wight is learned.

2 But on the other side in the behalf of the general this rule holds not.

3 For it follows not though some wight be four footed, that therefore man
should be four footed too.

4 Whatsoever is granted to be in any special, must of force be granted to
be in all his generals.

5 If all the specials be granted, they are sufficient to prove or disprove the
general generally, one or many are not.

8 Al specials a^ partakers of their general indifferently, ^out respect of
more or less.

9 For an Egle is no rather nor no more a bird or a foul, then an Oule is,
nor an Oule more or less then a Wrenne: but they and all other fowls equally
and indifferently, are named and be in deed birds, without degree of more or
less.

Of the proper term. Chap. 5.
1 What a property is, how many kinds of properties there be, what rules may
be gathered of the property, for proof of a doubtful matter: look in the
second book, where we entreated of a property, beginning at the 75. side, the
fifth chapter, and ye shall find y^ may suffice to serve y^ turn.

The use of this place.
2 Of that which is most properly called a property, necessary reasons are
made, either to prove ye kindred, or to disprove it.

3 But of the other three kinds, the reasons are not of like force, which thing
may well be seen by examples thus.

4 Concerning that which is most properly called a property, this is a firm
and good proof.

5 Here is present that which is apt to laugh, therefore a man is here present.

6 Or to disprove, here is not present that which is apt to laugh, therefore
no man is here present.

7 Thus it appears, that of such properties as this is, necessary reasons
are gathered either to prove or disprove indifferently.

8 Because the kindred and this kind of property are necessarily annexed one
to another and are never severed asunder.

9 Now properties which appertain to the first and third kind, they serve
well to prove the kindred, but they serve not to disprove it.

10 For it follows well, one cunning in Physic is present: or one that is
gray headed, is present: Ergo a man is present.

11 But these sequels are naught, here is none that is cunning in Physic,
Ergo here is no man.

12 Or here is none gray headed for age, Ergo here is no man.

13 For there are many men being neither cunning in Physic nor graye headed.

14 But there is none either cunning in Physic or graye headed, but that he
is a man.

15 Because therefore these properties appertain to self things of one several
kindred, it must needs be good in reason, that where the property is granted
to be, there must be also the kindred.

16 For that only in it the property has his being.

17 The second kind of property serves to disprove the kindred: but it will
not always of force serve to prove it.

18 For this is a necessary reason, no two footed thing is present, therefore
man is not present.

19 But to prove a man present, it is not sufficient to say, that which has
two feet is present, for many things else besides man, have two feet.

Of the whole and of his parts. Chapter. 6.
1 The whole and the part, are like in some things to the general and the
special, in so much that it may be said (after a sort) that the general is a
whole to all his specialls: and each special is a part and portion of his
general, how be it in deed they differ much.

2 For a whole and a part are self things: and self things are said but of one.

3 A general and a special are common things: and common things are said of
many.

4 Further the general is affirmed of all his specials: each special bearing
both the name and the say what of his general.

5 The whole is not said of his parts, but stands of them: neither do the
parts admit the apt say what of the whole, though they (sometimes) have the
same name that the whole has.

6 For though every part of a bone be called a been, and every part of a
stone be named a stone, yet the sayewhat of the whole is one, and the saywhat
of each part is another.

7 Let that be taken for a whole, which is a self thing divided into sundry
parts: and that for a part, which is a piece and portion of such a whole.

8 The whole and the parts are respecting terms: for there is no whole, but in
respect of parts, nor there can be no parts but in respect of a whole.

9 Therefore in defining of the one, we must of force make mention of the other.

10 Parts are thus divided: some are necessary parts, some are parts tending
to profit, some to pleasure.

11 Necessary parts are again thus divided.

12 Some are so necessary that the whole can have no being without them: some
are very necessary parts to the well being of an whole, and yet not so
necessary but that it may have a being without them.

13 The head, the neck, and the heart, are very necessary parts of a man, and
so is the matter and the form of each whole thing, be it natural, or
artificial: without these parts the whole can have no being at all.

14 Hand, arm, foot, leg, and such like parts, are very necessary for
man, if he shall live well: yet not so necessary to any, but that he may both
be named a man, and be a man in deed without them.

15 The form is more worthy then the matter.

16 For when the form is atcheeued, the whole is finished, and the matter is
brought to his appointed end, which else without form shall lie void of use,
and come to no profit.

17 This may be learned at a fond builder, who bestowing great cost in
providing brick, timber, lime, claye, and other stuff to build an house,
lets all come to wast, before he bring them in frame and add for me to his
matter.

18 Further, some parts are chief parts and of great importance, some are
mean parts and of small value.

19 One principal part, will weigh against a multitude of mean parts, and
such as are of small weight and value.

Examples of parts, proving, or disprouing an whole.
20 To prove thus: his coat is well made for the collar is well, the body is
well, the fleues are well, and the pleates are al well.

21 Again, to disprove on this sort: this house is not well builded, for the
roufe will not well avoid water, the walls stand not right up, neither is
the foundation sure and fast.

22 But if the case so stand that ye cannot allege al, or many chief
parts, yet allege one: for one principal part will serve for disproufe or
disprayfe of the whole.

Examples of a whole proving or disprouing the parts.
23 To prove: this coat is well made, therefore the collar, body, sleeves, and
the pleates thereof are well made too.

24 To disprove: this ceate is not good, therefore of force either the stuff
or the fashion thereof is not good.

The use of these two places.
25 Arguments hold of these places diversely, some being necessary, some
prouable, some variable, and that as well when the parts are alleged to prove
or dysproue the whole: as when the whole is aledged for proof or disproofe of
his parts.

26 If all parts be recited either to prove or disprove: to praise or
dispraise the whole, the argument is necessary: if many, it is probable: if one
or a few, it is variable.

27 For though one principal part be good and of force, to disprove or
disprayse foe whole: yet one or few parts of small value are not.

28 For if the head be naught, the whole body is naught too.

29 But it follows not, though some one, or some few pynnes in an house be
rotten or ill driven, that the whole house should be said to be ill and
naught therefore.

30 One or many parts, whether they be principal or of small importance, are
not always of force to prove or to praise a whole.

31 For a song that stands of four parts, that is to say of the base, the
mean, the triple, and the contratenor, is not therefore fine and good, because
two or three parts be excellently well song.

32 For in such whole things as song and melody are, all the parts are
necessarily required to be good, otherwise there shall be a discord and a jar
in the whole.

33 Neither is it a good reason to say this image is well painted because the
hair of the head and of the beard, the nails of the fingers and of the toes
be lively expressd and set forth.

34 For if many or one principal part be omitted, a let may be in it or
them, why the sequel is not good.

Rules belonging to an whole or to a part.
35 Every whole is bigger then any one of his parts.

36 A whole is equal to all his parts.

37 One part is not equal in quantity nor comparable in worthiness with his
whole.

38 A corruptible part in time may be both before and after his whole.

39 As the timber and nails of a ship may have a being both before the
ship be made, and after it is taken asunder.

Of the ofsprings. Chap. 7.
1 An offspring is properly taken, either for a nowne adjective derived of a
nowne substantive: or for the aduerbe y^ grows (as it were) and springs
thereof.

2 As of virtue is derived a virtuous man, a virtuous thing, and virtuously: of
health, healthful, and healthfully.

3 But ofsprings here are taken as well for the nowne substantive, which is the
original: as for the nowne adjective and aduerbe which are the deriuals.

4 For arguments are gathered indifferently as well of the deriuals to prove or
disprove the original: as of the original to prove or disprove the deriuals:
both kinds properly appert^ining to this place.

How of springs are divided.
5 Some are ofsprings in meaning and not in name, as goodness and well: some in
name and not in meaning, as sleep^ and sleepingly: some in both, as virtue and
virtuously.

Rules belonging to an Offspring.
6 Ofsprings have like sequel in reasoning.

7 For as one original is affirmed or denied of another: so is one deriuall,
affirmed or denied of another.

8 And contrariwise, as one deri^ all is affirmed or denied of another: so is
one original said or not said of another.

9 For example thus: if wealth be a goodness, the^ things procuring wealth are
good things: and to live wealthely is to live well.

10 Again, if to judge erroniously, be to judge falsely, then is error
falsehood.

11 Or if erroniously, be not falsely: then is not error falsehood.

12 Erroniously to judge, and falsely to judge, differ in this, for that he y^
judges falsely, has always a purpose to deceive: when as he that judges
erroniously, swarueth from the truth, and yet not for lack of good will, which
thing when it chances, the party can not properlye be called a false judge,
nor his error falsehood.

13 This rule holds not in those ofsprings which are ofspringsonly in name:
for it follows not, though sleep be a goodness, and though those things that
procure sleep, be good things too, that therefore, that which is sleepingly
done, should be said to be well done: neither is he properly to be called a
sleeper, that sleeps: but he that sleeps to much.

14 So that sleep, a sleeper, and sleepingly, being ofsprings in term and
name, and not in sense and meaning, follow not one upon another in reasoning,
as the other two sorts of ofsprings do.

Example.
15 I am an huswife, therefore huswifenes should appertain unto me.

Of Quantity. Chap. 8.
1 After that consideration is had of so much as pertains to the substance
of a matter, it follows next inorder, to consider that, which belongs to the
quantity thereof.

2 Quantity consists in number, weight, and bigness.

3 Of quantity we have entreated in one ^rite book side. 20. chap. 3. unto
the which place the diligent reader must have recourse, if he do not well
remember what was said there.

4 It shall be sufficient for us to set down here certain examples, thereby to
teach the ignorant how reasons are gathered of this place.

Examples of reasons which consist in number.
5 If you will build with speed, hire many laborers: for many hands make
radde work.

6 And again, strive not against many: for force lies in a multitude.

7 Item, pardon me this fault: it is the first.

8 Item, forgive this second trespass: for twice is not often.

9 The force of these and such like reasons consist in number.

Examples of reasons which consist in bigness.
10 My shoes are ever ill made: for they never fit me, but are always either
to long, or to short, to wide, or to straight.

11 These arguments are framed only of bigness.

12 But sometimes bigness and number run ioyntlye together, sometimes number
and weight, as in these.

13 It is past your handreache, being three yardes high.

14 Or it is more then you can spanne, being twelve intches broad.

15 Or it is more then you can fatham, being a yard square.

16 Or it far passes your lift, being an hundredth weight.

Of Quality. Chap. 9.
1 There is greater variety of the quality of each thing, then of the
quantity.

2 What quality is, and how it is divided ye may learn in the. 4 Chap. of
our first book.

3 But here, in dividing of quality, I mind to follow that division, which
experience has taught to be most agreeable to common practice.

4 For they that do thoroughly fifth the quality of a thing, use to conu^der.

the Power thereof. Will Disposition Sensible qualities Affections Passions
Shape

Of Power.
5 No deed is achieved, except power and will concur, and meet together:
it either want, the work cease.

6 It is to be considered, whether the power lie in one, or in many: whether
it be near or far of: what it can do by it self, and what, if it beioyned and
coupled with others.

How arguments hold of power or want of power.
7 Arguments taken of the want of power, are good and necessary to disprove:
for this reason is of force. He had no strength or power to do this deed:
Ergo he did it not.

8 But arguments grounded upon power, that he could do such a fact, and
concluding thereupon y^ he did it, are not good: for many good men can do ill
deeds, which they will not do: and ill men can do good deeds, which they do
not.

9 Though power be not sufficient to prove a fact to be done: yet is power
profitable to persuade, and to exhort, that a thing may be done. And the
reasons gathered thereof, are probable.

10 For if you would persuade a man to take war, building, or any other
enterprise in hand: your purpose shall be greatly furthered, if ye prove that
the matter once begone, may be well accomplished, either with ease or with
honor.

Of Will.
11 Will is a desire of the mind, to do, to speak, or to think.

How Will is divided.
12 There is a good will, and an ill will.

13 A good will in our english tongue, is not always taken for a will to work
that which is good: but for a readiness, when the person is pressed of himself,
not needing any foreign occasion to prick him forward.

14 An evil will is a will constrained, and urged by some outward means.

15 The first is called a freewill: and the second, a forced will.

The use of this place.
16 If the will of the doer be forced, and not free, he loses the praise of
his weldoing in virtue, but not in art.

17 For no deed can be good or virtuous on the doers behalf, except it be
done upon a good intent: the intent can not be good, if the will be constrained.

18 But in deeds that are wrought by art, we praise the cunning of the
crafts man, nothing considering with what good will he wrought his work.

19 If a man be constrained to do ill against his will, there is a double
consideration to be had: one of the force, another of the harm.

20 If the harm be small, and the force great, the party is to be holden
excused: but if the fact be heinous, no con^raint can make the doer
unblameable, much less if the force were small, or such as he might have
withstand without any great peril.

21 Though will be not sufficient to prove an act to be done: yet may will
deserve praise or dispraise, even in them that want power to do good or ill.

22 For this reason is not good, he would have done wrong, therefore he did wrong
in deed.

23 But these are good, he would feign do well, therefore he deserves thanks:
or he would feign do harm, therefore he deserves blame.

Of dispositions.
24 Consider whether they be good or ill: and whether they be settled and
rooted in the party, that he cannot soon leave them: or that they be subject
to sodeyn change, and without continuance.

25 They of the first sort serve to enlarge, or to increase a matter, either
in praise of the good, or disprayse of the badde: they of the second sort, are
rather fit to extenuate, then to amplify.

26 Here we have to consider the manners of the party, his entertaynment, the
usage of himself, his virtues, his vices, his cunning, his knowledge, his
ignorance, his craft, his sleyght, his tricks, his knacks, his prankes, his
touches. etc.

Examples of disposition, or manners.
27 Place not this fellow in any office: for he is negligent, and a riotous
person.

28 B^ie not this gelding: for he is restie.

29 Commit not your life into this Physicians hands: for he is ignorant in
his book, and lacks experience.

30 Lay no wager upon the running of this greyhound: for he uses to lie off.

Of sensible qualities.
31 The use of this place is very common, and yeldeth many arguments, some
gathered of the color, which the eye sees: some of the voice, which the ear
hears: some of the favor, which the nose smells: and some of the taste,
which the tongue decerneth: some of hotnesse, coldness, moystnesse, dryness,
hardness, softness. etc. which feeling judges.

Examples.
32 Take this cloth, the color is good.

33 Choose this boy querister, for his voice is sweet and pleasant.

34 Get some green herbs and Mayfloures, for a good smell is comfortable.

35 Dippe your meat in vinegar, and it shall taste the better.

36 This ground is waterish, therefore it is not good to be sown.

Of affections.
37 There are diverse opinions concerning affections: some men hold, that all
affections are evil, and that no good man will use or nourishe any of them:
some hold, that many of them are good, and that they are given of God unto man,
for sundry good purposes.

38 Doubtless mercy, pity, love, anger, spite, disdayn, hope, affiance,
hate, distrust, contempt, envy, malice, mirth, gladness, grief, and fear,
etc. are often alleged as good matter to prove or disprove, to exhort, or
dissuade.

Examples of affections.
39 I will not be his servant, he is too testie: he will not long dwell in one
opinion, for he is fickle headed: this bitche will not hunt, for she is proud.

Of passions.
40 Some take passions for any affection, be it great or small: but in our
English speech we use this term, when we would express a vehement pang,
either of the body, or of the mind.

The use of this place.
41 If a fault be committed, through any passion or pang, either of the mind
or body, the pang shall excuse the fact, if the pacient himself were no cause
hereof at al.

42 If he were some occasion, yet not the chief occasion thereof, then it shall
extenuate the fact:

43 But if he was the only cause, or the chief cause of his own malady:
then the passion procures to the party, neither pardon nor pity: for it is
commonly and truly said: He that will kill when he is drunk, shall be hanged
when he is sobre.

Examples of Passions.
44 This man's deed of gift, is not good in the law: for he was straughte,
and besides himself, when he sealed it.

45 Take heed of that Dog, for he is mad.

Of Form.
46 Form, fashion, shape and making: are counted of some, as part of a thing,
and so they be in very deed, if the matter be narrowly considered: howebeeit,
a part (by the judgment of the common sort) is taken only for a bodyed
portion of a sole substance: and many reasons are gathered of the form of a
thing, by them which neither think form or fashion any part at all.

47 We will therefore make form a place by it self, following that in art,
which we learn to be common in practice.

48 Fairenes and favor appertain to this place, they differ in this, that
fairness ^sisteth chiefly in color, and favor in proportion.

The division of form and fashion.
49 There is a new fashion and an old fashion: a strange fashion, and an
usual fashion: a trim fashion, and a rude fashion: a commodious fashion, and
an unprofitable fashion. etc.

Examples of Form.
50 My young Lord will love my lady his wife right well: for she is both fair
and well favored.

51 This horse and this greyhounde can not choose but be good: there is such
trim making in them both.

Of the causes. Chap. 10.
1 No man is said to know any thing thoroughly, before he know the causes
thereof.

2 A cause is a mean, whereby any thing is made to have a being.

The division of causes.
3 There are four causes: the matter, the form, the workman, and the end.
The 1 Matter. 2 Form. 3 Woorkman. 4 End.



4 Matter is the stuff, whereof a thing is made.

5 Formeis the sh^e and fashion, which added to the matter, makes the thing
perfect, and yeldeth both ^ame and being thereunto.

6 Woorkmen are doers, from whence moving first comes.

7 An end is the use of a thing that is made, causing the workman to take the
enterprise in hand.

8 Of this it is plain, that matter without form is unprofitable stuff: and
that form is not added to the matter without a workman: nor that any thing
works, except it be moved by some profitable end.

9 Therefore do authors knit these four causes together, which knowledge are very
profitable: and reasons are gathered of them very orderly.

Examples of the causes.
10 As if I say: My boots are good, for they keep out wete well: Mine argument
is taken of the matter: for the cause is the goodness of the leather, whereof
my boots are made:

11 But if I say, I like my boots well, for they are fit for me, and well
shapen: my reason is taken of the form, which consists in the fashion of
the boot.

12 If I say, My boots are well made: for he that made them is a cunning
shoemaker: my reason takes his force of the workman.

13 If I say, I make my boots thus, for I mind to ride dry: my reason takes
his force of the end, which is the use, I purpose to have of my boots.

14 Though form and matter may well for breefenesse sake, be reckened as
parts, and so be referred to the first general place which we called
substance, because the cause seems to be without the thing, where as these
have their being in the thing: nay rather the thing it self is nothing else
but the form and matter joined together, and taken as one: yet in common
speech, we never seem otherwise to consider of a part, then as it is a bodied
portion of some whole.

15 Therefore have I made Matter and Form, places by themselves.

16 If any man be contentious, and say, that it is but that, to teach one
thing often: I answer, that it is no inconvenience, that one argument (upon
sundry respects) be referred to sundry places.

Rules appertaining to the Matter and the Form.
17 The matter may be good of a thing, though the form (...) ill: as the gold
in the ring may be good, and the fashion of the ring naught.

18 Again, the form may be good, and the matter naught: as the shoe may be
well made, and yet the leather keep out no water.

19 So that nothing can be ill, whose form and matter are both good: nor
nothing can be good, if either his matter or his form be ill.

How workmen are divided.
20 There are three kinds of workers: some things do work as nature teaches
them: some as reason guydeth them: and some at adventure.

21 The first works of necessity, the second of freewill, the third by
chance.

22 Workmen are also many sundry ways divided: for some do work things in
common, and some do things alone: some work more in short time, and do it ill,
and some work little in long time, and do it well: some work for pleasure, and
some for profit: some of force, and some of freewill. etc.

General rules belonging to workmen.
23 When there are natural and necessary workmen, there must needs be
necessary and natural works.

24 And again, where the work is necessary, and natural, there the workman
must be so too.

25 One workman alone can not do a common work.

26 He works fast enough, that works that well, which he does.

27 And he works ouerfasic, that does any thing ill, or amiss.

28 He works well, that works with aduisement.

29 And he often faulteth in his work, that hastes to much.

30 He is a singular workman that will rid much in short time, and do it
well withal.

General rules and principles gathered of an end.
31 If the end of a thing be good and lawful, then is the preparation, and
all things tending to that end, lawful too.

32 For if it be lawful to fight in defense of of a man's country, then is
war, and the use of a man's weapon lawful:

54 But if the end be unlawful, and ill, then are all things ill, and
unlawful, that are appointed to that end.

Of the Effect of things. Chap. 11.
1 After we have searched out the causes of things, it behooves us to
consider their effect: which is nothing else, but the workmans deed.

How works and effects are divided.
2 Some works are done only with the body: some only with the mind: some by
help of them both: some are works that tend to profit: some to pleasure:
some are vain, tending to no good use at all: there is a long work, and a
short work: a slow work, and a quick work, an ill work, and a good
work. etc.

Rules gathered of an effect, or of the work that is done.
3 If the work be well done, the cost that is made therevppon, is well
bestowed, and the workman deserves his praise.

4 If the work be not more worth, then the coast that is bestowed upon it,
there is labor lost.

5 That work is good, which commends the workman, and that a naughty work
which puts the doer to shame.

6 The work of the mind in good things is always more excellent, then the
work of the body: but in il things, it is far worse.

An example of an Effect.
7 Fuchsius was a good Physician: for he has done many notable cures.

8 If ye will set down this reason at large, do thus: Da ri i Whosoever has
done many notable cures was a good Physician, But Fuchsius has done many
notable cures, therefore Fuchsius was a notable Physician.



Of preparation. Chap. 12.
1 As the efficient cause does always respect an effect: so does the end or
final cause require a preparation.

2 By preparation I understande not only the act of providing: but the things
also y^ are prepared, as means to bring a purpose or devise to pass.

How preparation is divided.
3 Preparation is either great or small, sumptuous or mean: open, or secret:
lawful or unlawful: to much, to little, or in a mean.

Rules belonging to preparation.
4 If preparation be made, there must needs be an end purposed: but
contrariwise it follows not, that if there be an end purposed, there
should be by and by preparation made, because the end is in purpose, before
the means can be gotten, that are prepared for an end.

5 Again, if preparation be not made* nor things provided that are necessarily
required for an end: it follows that the end is not obtained.

An example of preparation.
6 There will be war, for there is a general muster taken through the whole
realm: a number of soldiers are pressed into wages, the Queens Ships furnished
with men, vitayle, and shot: and great providing of armoure.

Of doing. Chap. 13.
1 No doer, or efficiente cause, can make any work: nor no preparation will
serve to obtain any end without doing. Therefore in mine opinion, the
storehouse of doing follows right aptly in this place. For doing is the
labor that is taken in making of a work, which brings the workman by
means (as by steps and degrees) to his appointed end.

How doings and labor are divided.
2 Some dooinges leave a work which remains to be seen after the labor is
ended, as the doing that is bestowed in building an house, leaves an house to
be vewed and seen when the work is finished.

3 Some doings leave behind them no such work, as may be seen with eye, and
yet a work too, as the travail and pain that is taken in getting of learning.

4 Learning is the work that remains of the labor, which though it cannot
be vewed by the eye, yet may it not therefore be called no work, or said not
to remain.

5 For learning remains in deed in the mind of man, and differs much from
the pain that was taken in getting of it.

6 Again, there is a sharp labor, a soft labor, and a mean labor: the
first serves for speed, the second for ease, the third for continuance.

Rules of Labor.
7 That labor is well bestowed that brings forth a good work.

8 That is lost labor, and in vain, that fails of his appointed end.

9 Haste in doing makes waste in the work: as the common saying is: haste
^keth waste.

An example of Doing.
10 These are ill men: for they swear, they dice, they rauishe, they rob,
they kill.

Of Suffering, and of his division. Chapter. 14.
1 We must consider, whether the suffering be in the body, in the mind, or in
external things: as what loss the party has sustained, what damage, what
pain, what sickness, what grief. etc.

An example of Suffering.
2 He loves me entirelye: for he has ventured his life, and sustained great
dyspleasure for my sake.

Of time and place. Chap. 15.
1 What place and time are, look in our first book the. 24. side, and. 27. 28.
verses.

2 And for the division of time look. 41. ^de, beginning at the. 6. verse, and
so forth till ye come to the twelfth.

3 And to know how places are divided, look the. 43. side, and the. 22.
verse.

An example of place.
4 I had no liberty this month to be where I would: for I was all this time
in prison.

An example of time.
5 Aristotle was not king Alexanders scholemaister: for Aristotle was dead
a^ore king Alexander was borne.

Of the use of these two places.
6 Necessary arguments may be gathered of time and place to disprove: but to
prove or persuade, they are but probable.

7 For this reason holds of force: the party that is accused, to have done
this murder, was not in that place, where the fact was don, or had no being at
that time: Ergo he is not guilty of that crime.

8 Now if you reason, he was there at that time, and none seen there but he:
it argues a probability, that he should have been the doer, but it forces no
necessity.

Of Order. Chap. 16.
1 Order is a thing very necessary in all matters. For no army is of force,
except the men be in array and in order: no house can stand except the timber
and stone be laid in due order: no fire will burn, except the sticks and
the coals lie in order: no writing can be red except y^ letters be set in
order: no talk can be understood, except the words be spoken in order: to
conclude, nothing is weldon, that is not done in order: and nothing is ill
done, but that is done out of order.

The use of this place.
2 This place yeldeth many probable arguments, to persuade or dissuade, to
praise or dispraise.

3 But necessary reasons to prove a fact to be done or not done, it yeldeth
few.

4 Though placing, of it self (narowly sifted) admit no degrees of more or
less: yet when the ordering of one thing is compared to the ordering of
another, common speech uses to make degrees, and to say one thing is better
ordered, then another.

5 For we use to say: the army is in better order now, then it was before: or
the common weal is better governed now, then it has been heretofore.

An example of Order.
6 The state of the common weal must needs soon change, all things are so
farr^ out of order.

Of Having. Chap. 17.
1 Arguments are taken of Having, when the force of the reason depends of
the Having of a thing, and not of the thing that is had or possessed.

2 As when it is said: come not near this bear: for she has whelps.

3 The force of this reason lies not in the whelpe: but in having of a whelpe.

4 This place is very common, and arguments rise thereof very rifely.

5 As if I say: he has a weapon, take heed of him.

6 Item, he has good friends, much money, and an hautie stomach, therefore
meddle not with him.

7 Item, he has corn of his own, what needs he to borow, or bie in the
market.

Of Comers. Chap. 18.
1 Comers are a general place, containing forecommers, aftercommers, and
withcommers.

2 For some things coming before hand, are signs and warnings of that which is
to come: some things following after, are remembrances and monumentes of that
which has been: and diverse things using to chance at once, are witnesses and
assurances one of another.

Of the use of these places.
3 Forecommers serve to prove that a thing shall be, or shall not be: and they
appertain to the time to come.

4 Aftercommers, serve to prove, that a thing has been, or has not been: and
they appertain to the time past.

5 Withcommers serve to prove that a thing is or is not: and they pertain to
the time present.

6 If the comers chance always after one sort: then are the reasons deduced
thereof necessary.

7 If they chance often, or for the more part: then are the arguments taken
of them likely and probable.

8 If they chance but seldom, and miss as often as they hitte: then the reasons
gathered of them are coniecturall, and prognosticallike, as often false as true.

Examples.
9 Of forecommers we reason thus: when those things come to pass, then do
these and these things follow: but these forethings are come, therefore the
aftercommers will follow.

10 For example thus: if it be a ruddie evening, and a gray morning, the^ the
day following shall be fair: but yesternight was ruddie, and this morning is
graye, this days therefore will be fair.

11 Of afterco^mers we reason thus: these things cannot be, but such and such
things went before: seeing then the aftercommers are past, the forecommers are
past also, as for example: this woman gives milk, Ergo she has had a child:
for giving of milk comes after having a child.

12 Of withcommers thus: the sword was solemnly carried abroad in the court:
Ergo. the Queens majesty was there.

13 Item, if you will have war, look for cost, trouble, and danger, for
these are incident, and cleave to every person, that will live in wars.

14 He has a cough, a stitch, and an ague: Ergo, he has the pl^uresie.

Of comparison. Chap. 19.
1 When two or more are compared together in any one thing: either they are
equal, and of like force concerning the matter in which they are compared: or
unequal, and of unlike force therein.

2 If they be equal, and of like value: then they serve indifferentlye turn
for turn, one to prove, or disprove another.

3 But if one exceed another in any degree of worthiness: then the reasons
that are taken of the likelier, hold well to disprove: and the reasons taken
of the vnliklier, hold well to prove: but contrariwise, the reasons are not
good.

4 For the likelier will not prove the vnlikelier: nor the vnlikelier will not
prove the likelier.

5 For it is no good reason to say, the lord of the soil may sell the wood of
this Lordship, Ergo the tenauntes may sell it: or the tenauntes may not sell
principal timber, Ergo, the Lord may not.

6 Now the Lord is the likelyer to make such a sale: and the tenauntes the
vnlikelier.

Rules belonging to the equal.
7 Among equal things this is a general rule, look what is good or lawful in
one, the same shall be good or lawful in another: and what is ill or unlawful in
one, the same shall be ill or unlawful in another.

8 Item, look what one can or cannot: the rest in like manner can, or cannot:
otherwise they are not equal.

9 With thine equal thou shalt have equal law and portion: like labor,
like wage: like pain, like reward: like fault, like punishment: and generally
like requires like.

Rules of the likelier.
10 That the likelier cannot, the vnlikelier much less can.

11 That will please the worthier, may content the meaner.

12 Look what will not fit the lykelyer, the same will not fit the more unlike.

Rules of the vnlikelier.
13 That which the vnlikelier can compass, may be compassed of the likelier.

14 Look what will serve the vnlikelier, the same will serve the likelier.

15 That which will not please the meaner, will ill please the better.

16 They that take the likelier to be that which is more: and the vnlikelier to
be that which is less: and the aslyke to be that which is equal in
quantity, and so term these places, places of y^ more, of the less, and of
the equal, are foulye deceived.

17 For likelier, vnlikelier, and aslike, consiste in other things, as well as
in quantity: whereas more, less, and equal, (if they be properly considered)
consist only in quantity.

18 Further, often times the argument that is taken of the likelier is grounded
upon the lesser quantity, and that argument that is taken of the vnlikelier,
upon the greater quantity, which thing should never be, if their supposition
were true.

19 For if I say, two are likelier to speed then three, therefore send not
three, but two:

20 The reason is grounded upon two, the likelier to disprove three the
vnlikelier, yet are two in very deed the lesser number, and three the bigger.

21 Therefore likelier and vnlikelier, are not always more and less in
respect of quantity, but likelier is that which is of more possibility in
reason: and vnlikelier that which is of less possibility, and that in any
respect whatsoever.

Of a similitude. Chap. 20.
1 A similitude is properlye no place but a kind of reasoning, when the
liklines of one thing argues (as it were by example) the like sequel in
reason of another thing: for example sake, thus.

2 As the free postyng horse may not long together galloppe upon the spur:
so the sharp and pregnant wit, may not much without intermission, be
forced to muse upon difficulte and hard matters.

3 Learned men in arguing, make small account of any similitude.

4 For by a similitude you may as soon prove a wrong matter, as a right: yet
do men of great judgment use it, but rather to persuade and lead the simple
and the ignorant, then to force and overcome the witty adversary.

5 For a good and a shamefast nature, yeldeth in that, which he sees so
lively expressed in another thing, that by no shift of reason, he can make any
resistance.

6 It is good for making or aunswering of a similitude, to learn wherein
things agree or disagree.

7 A similitude is well answered, when an vnliklinesse is showed in that
matter, wherein diverse things were said to be like.

Of VVitnesses. Chap. 21.
1 Witness is the word, writ, or deed of a credible person, proving a
matter that lies in doubt.

How Witness is divided.
2 The witnesses upon whose authoritis proofs are grounded, are either
heavenly, earthly, or infernal.

3 Gods word, his wonders, his miracles, and his message, sent to men by
angels, and Prophets, are alleged as heavenly witnesses:

4 Law, custom, oath, bargain, writings, sayings, and so forth, are accounted
as human witnesses, and such as are taken of the credit of man:

5 Coniuring, witchcraft, appearing of ghostes, oracles and answers of devils,
are infernal and ungodly witnesses, used only of the wicked, and suffered
of God for a punishment to deceive them, that will not believe the true means
that god has appointed.

6 Witnesses are not so much found out by the art and cunning of the
spokesman: as they do arise of the matter it self, and are ministered to him
by the information of others.

7 Therefore, art teaches not so much to find out witnesses: as to urge
them forceablely for prouse of the matter that lies in question.

Of Gaynsets. Chap. 22.
1 I think it needless, here to repeat, how many kinds of gaynsettes there
be: what each kind is, wherein they differ one from another: or what else has
been spoken of them in our former Books: because it may suffice the diligent
reader, to be referred by our marginall note, to those places where these
things are entreated of at large.

Of respecting terms and yokefelovves.
2 Respecting terms may well be named yokefelowes, for that they are knit,
and coupled together with a certain band of society.

3 For the master, and the servant: the parents, and the children: the
goodman and the goodwife: the landlorde, and the tenant: the guest, and the
host: and all other respecting terms, are always coupled and joined together
in some kind of fellowship.

How reasons do hold of yokefelovves and respecting terms.
4 When reasons are gathered of yokefelowes to prove the being, or not being
the one of the other, they are necessary: but when they are taken of the duty
and affection, that is or should be between them, then are they but probable.

Examples.
5 He is a father, therefore he has a son: he is not my guest, therefore I
am not his host: these and such like are necessary reasons.

6 But if I say, the judge will take my part, for he is my friend: or if I
say, he will judge against me, because he is my foe: or else my matter shall
have good success in the law, for I pertain to the Court: these and such
like reasons, take their force upon respect, and are but probable reasons, not
necessary arguments, and such as hold of force.

Of depriving terms.
7 Natural power and want of natural power, compared together, and one proved
or disproued by another, are taken for depriving terms.

8 We use to reason upon them in this sort: he sees, therefore he is not
blind: or again, he is blind, therefore he sees not.

9 This kind of reasoning always follows of force, that where the power is,
there can not be the want: and where want is, there can not be the power.

10 We may also reason upon the depriving terms, on this sort and manner.

11 If lack of sight be a lack of some sense, then must sight it self needs
be a sense: or if sight it self be a sense, then must lack of sight, be a
lack of sense too.

12 Here is to be noted, that this place serves as well to prove the want by
the power: as contrariwise to prove the power by the want.

13 Now for contraries this is to be noted: that arguments gathered of them,
take their force, sometime of contrary terms, sometimes of contrary sayings.

14 Contrary sayings are here taken not only for two general shewsayes, which
differ in quality, and make no change at all, either of foreset or backset
(as was said in 3. verse of the. 88.. side) but also those are contrary
sayings, which stand of contrary terms, and do appertayn to contrary
manners, be the sayings particular or general.

How to decerne contrary sayings, which are contrary by reason of terms,
and not by reason of quality.
15 When the foresette and backset of a shewesay, have either of them a
contrary term, then those four contrary terms, may two several ways be
coupled together, to make contrary sayings:

16 Either when the forset is one in both the shewsayes, and the backsets be
contraries: or else when the backsette is one, and the foresets contraries.

17 But and if both the foreset and backset in two shewsayes be contrary each
to other: then those sentences stand of contrary terms, but they are not
contrary sayings: because such are of like joyce in reason, neither is there
any resistance in the sayings, but a contrariety in the terms.

18 They that think this rule obscure and strange, may by this example that
follows and such like, make it to themselves familiar and plain: as thus,

19 Virtue is worthy praise: the foreset of this shewsaye, has vice to his
contrary, and the backsette, has blame. Now these four contrary terms,
Virtue, vice, praise, and blame, are two several ways coupled together in
shewesayes, to make contrary sayings.

20 Either when the foreset remains one in both the shewsayes, the backsets
being contraries: as, Virtue is worthy praise, worthy blame. or,

Uice is worthy praise, worthy blame.



Or else when the backset is one, and the foresets are contraries: as, Virtue
is worthy praise. or, Uice Virtue is worthy blame. Uice

21 But and if the foresaid four terms be coupled any third way together, to
make two shewsayes: the shewsayes themselves shall not be contrary, though the
terms whereof they stand be contrary, as they are compared one with another:
For example thus: Virtue is worthy praise Uice blame. or, Virtue is worthy
blame Uice praise.

22 For the two first are both true and good: and the other two are both
false and ill. Now for the two first, it is reason good enough, to say, they
are both true and good, ergo, they are not contrary sayings. For one true saying
is never contrary to an other true saying: nor one good thing, is never
contrary to an other good thing.

23 But for the two second sayings, it is no sufficient argument, to say, they
are both false, or both ill, ergo, they are not contrary sayings: because an
ill thing, may be contrary to a good thing, and to an ill thing too: and a
false saying may be contrary, as well to a false saying as to a true. Therefore
it behooves to add this withal, that they are both of like choice, and may
both at once fall to be in one man.

24 For a man may both praise virtue and blame vice, and yet use therein no
contrariety of speech at al, which thing could not be, if they were contraries
in deed.

Of the use of this place.
25 Of this place we may gather both probable and necessary arguments, to
prove or to disprove.

26 For if I argue thus: Socrates is sick: Ergo he is not in health: or say,
this line is not straight, Ergo it is crooked: the reasons are necessary, and
do enforce the one a being, the other a not being.

27 But and if I reason on this wise, and say, The law allows me to praise
well doers, though I can not prove they did well, Ergo the law suffers me
likewise, to disprayse ill dooers, though I want witness to prove they did
ill: My reason may seem probable: for that it stands with reason, that
contrary manners should have contrary fame and report.

28 Yet is it not necessary, seeing it does not generally hold: neither is it
lawful in a good common wealth: for one man alone without sufficient proof
to disprayse, though to praise it be lawful, because there ryseth no such
strife about praise, as does commonly about disprayse: therefore ^or
quietness sake, the law forbids the one: and for an encouragement to well
doing, it allows the other.

Of those that are termed more then contraries.
29 Arguments gathered of those which we term more then contraries, are
always necessary, either to prove, or to disprove, taking their force,
sometimes of the word, sometimes of the saying.

30 Of the word, because the yeaword and nayeworde are of such propretie and
force, that if one of them be said of any thing, the other can not be said of
the same.

31 And again, if the one be not, the other is: he therefore that proves the
one, does consequentely disprove the other: and he that does remove the one,
inforceth the other.

32 Of the saying, because that more then contrary sayings, are ever one true,
and an other false,

33 Therefore, if this saying (All fair women are good) be false: then this
saying, (Some fair women are not good) must needs be true: and again, if
this saying (some fair women are good) be true, then is this saying (no fair
women are good) false.

24 This place shall yield necessary arguments also of the word, when we
change the terms, and argue thus: If man be a creature, then that which is no
creature is no man: and again, if no creature be no man, then is every
manne a creature.

25 This kind of arguing is always necessary, except the backset be a
chanceable inbeer to the foreset, and then the argume^te is not necessary,
because the chanceable inbeer may be said, and not said of his inholder: and
therefore this reason holds not, man is just, Ergo he that is not just, is no
man.

26 Those arguments that drive men to an impossibility in reason, are
commonly gathered of this place: and the rule whereupon they be grounded, is
most certain, in so much that some Authoures labor to prove all principles
by it, and makes it an only stay* why wranglers cannot proceed (...) to an
endless work.

Of the differing term. Chap. 23.
1 Things differ one from an other by three several degrees: the first, is by
kind: the second, by kindred: the third, by spec^all being.

2 Specials which are not comprysed under one next general, differ in kind:
as a man and an oak: for the next general (...) man, is a wight: and the next
general to an oak, is a tree: therefore a man and an Oak differ in kind,
because they are contained under diverse kinds, whereof one is not comprised of
an other.

3 Self things contained under diverse kinreds, and also the kinreds them
selves contained under one next kind, differ in kindred: As this horse and
this ass: or an horse and an ass: for notwithstanding that these agree in
their kind (by reason that each kind is indifferently said of things that
are under it) yet notwithstanding they plainly differ in kindred, an horse and
an ass being diverse kinreds themselves: and this horse and this ass being
self things contained under diverse kinreds.

4 Diverse self things contained under one lowest kindred, though they agree
both in kind and in kindred: yet do they differ in special being: as John
and William, this man and that man. For John is as well a man and a wight as
William is: and William as well as John: so that they neither dissent in kindred
nor in kind: nevertheless they dissent much in special being: for one of
them has not the same special being that the other has.

5 Look how many ways there are for things to dissent: and so many ways are
there also for them to assent: for gaynsettes have one order and trade of
learning.

6 Things that dissent in kind, dissent also in kindred, and in special being:
and things that agree in special being, agree also in kindred, and in kind:
But it follows not that those things which dissent in special being: should
also dissent in kindred, or in kind: nor that those things which agree in kind
or in kindred, should therefore agree in special being. So that they dissent
most tha differ in kind: and they agree nearest that agree in special being.

7 When things upon diverse respects are ryghtely said, either to agree, or
disagree: then use this distinction of agreeing, or dissenting, as may best
serve your present purpose.

Of the use of this place.
8 This place yeldeth necessary arguments to disprove, as when ye argue and
say: Yonder is a skarcrowe, and therefore no man: or an Horse, and then no
Ass: Or it is Wyllyam, and not John.

9 These reasons and such like, are of force, because of things which
dissent in general or specal being, it cannot be, that one of them shiould be
that thing, which an other of them is.

10 But to prove this place, yeldeth no necessary arguments, except it be upon
some granted supposition: as when it is suppos^d and judged of the
gaynesayers, that the thing whereabout they strive, is eythe^ an Horse or an
Ass: then if one of the gaynsayers prove the thing in controversy, to be no
horse: it follows by force of the supposition granted, that it is an Ass.

Of Division, the 24* Chap.
1 That Division is a place by it self severed from other particular places,
and that special Arguments are gathered thereof, it is manyfeste, in as much
as certain general Rules for proof or disprou^e of doubtful matters belong,
unto it, which can not fitly be referred to any other particular place.

2 We will therefore entreat of Division here among the places: And for that
there is great and necessary use thereof, we will speak of it at large.

3 For besides that it serves for Invention, and fyndyng out of Reasons to
prove matters, the which lie in doubt: it hemmethe in the sp^aker with
certain listes and bounds, that he can not lightly digress from his
purpose: it occasioneth the hearer to mark how every part of the Division
is prosecuted and handeled in order: it amplifyeth and serves well to dilate
and lay forth a matter at large: It sharpeneth our memory, and makes us
better able to call things too remembrance, by reason that in a Division things
are laid forth by number and order: it lyghteneth our understanding, making
an ^asie and speedy entrance into the cause: Finally, an Oration without a
division, may well be compared to a stragglyng Army: For as those men of
war, be they never so expert o^ courageous of them selves, are of no force
to give battle, whiles they wander out of battle array: even so, words and
sentences be they never so apt, picked, or trim, are of no strength to
persuade, when they are uttered without a division, cast (as it were) on
heaps, without order, and tending to no special issue.

How division is divided.
4 There is a division of matter: and a division of words.

5 Matter is divided, when a discourse is reduced and brought unto certain
special points.

6 The division of words, is three ways considered: when a word of double
understanding is divided into his several significatio^s: or when an whole is
divided into his parts: or else when a general is divided into his specials.

7 Here note, that though every one of these four ways be in common speech
named and taken for a division, yet for learning sake, and to make a diversity
amongst them, each one has his several and propr^ name. The first being
called an ordring of the cause: the second, a distinction of words: the
third, a partyng of an whole: and the fourth, a dividing of a general.

8 Division differs from partition, for that in a division, the general is
always verified of his specials: where as in a partition the whole is not
truly said of his parts. Distinction diffreth from them both: for they
divide matter, and it deuideth words or terms only. The ordering of the
cause differs from them three: for it entreats of compounded matter: and
they of things, as they are considered without composition not coupled
together in any perfect sentence.

Rules belonging to this place.
9 A division ought to be plain, perfect, and brief.

10 For playnnesse, ye ought to seek usual terms, and to avoid borrowed
speech as much as conueni^ntly ye can.

11 For perfectness, ye must see that ther^ be in the members, neither too
much, nor too little: that is to say, that nothing be reckned among the
members, which is not comprised in the whole: nor any thing contained of the
whole, which is not set forth among the members: that one membre be not
comprehended of an other membre: nor that any one thing be found to be under
diverse members.

12 And for briefness, ye must bring your Division into as small a compass
as may be: yet so, that if ye can not come to your purpose by your first
division: ye ef^soone divide the parts, and that so o^e as need shall
require: But here ye must beware, that ye do not euercharge or confound the
memory of your hearers, with many or confused deuisions.

Examples.
13 Your sugared talk wants one chief point of cunning. For in many of
your Orations, either ye make an imperfect D^uisyon: or else ye use too
make none at all.

14 The matter we strive for, is contained under the first part of the
Division: therefore ye do wrong (the Division being good) to say, that it is
contained under the second part.

15 This thing is within the compass ^f the principal: therefore of force it
must either be a membre thereof: Or at the least be contained under one of
the members.

Of Proportion. Chap. 25.
1 There are three sundry kinds of proportions, taking their names of three
several arts, Arithmeticall, Musical, and Geometrical.

2 As for the two first, they serve nothing for our purpose, because no good
reasons can be gathered of them: we will therefore entreat only of the
third:

3 Which Aristotle breefly defines thus, expressyng it to be an equality of
reason: But to make this sayewhat somewhat plain to them that are ignorant in
Geometry, It is to be noted: that Geometrical proportion stands always in
four terms at the least: whereof the first has that respect to the second,
that the third has to the fourth.

4 As. 2. 4. 8. 16. for look what respect two bears to four: and the same
respect eight bears to sixtene, either of them being an half part of that
number, where unto they are referred.

5 Now then, he that will be perfect in Geometrical proportion, must first
learn the five general respects that all numbers bear one to another, and
how by the knowledge of these five general respects, he may come to know
the name and value of all particular respects what soever: which thing ye
may do with small pain, thus:

6 Every bigger number compared to a lesser number, does either, 1, contain
it certain times exactly, and neither more nor less: 2, or else but once and
one part more: 3, or else once and many parts more: 4, or else many times and
one part more: 5, or else at the utmost it contains it many times, and many
parts m^e.

7 The first is called manyfolde: the second an whole with one part more: the
third, an whole with many parts m^: the fourth manyfolde with one part more:
and the fifth is termed, manyfold with many parts m^e.

8 Again, divide these general respects into certain of their several
kinds, and ye shall see, as it were, how to find out the proper name of any
respect whatsoever: I mean of two unequal numbers compared together.

9 Manyfold is divided into twofolde as 2 to 1 or as 4 to 2 threefold 3 1 6 2
fourefold etc. 4 1 8 2

10 Here may ye see, that four has that respect unto two, that two has to
one: and that the proper name of this respect is termed twofold.

11 Again that six do bear themselves so to two, as three do to one: and
that the special name of this respect is called threefolde.

12 And also that eight do so often times force two, as four do one: and that
their particular respect is fourefold.

13 Now then if I argue and say that six must yield three, for four do
yield two: mine argument takes his force of the rule of proportion: because
six bear that equality in reason to three, that four do to two.

14 And so of any four numbers in all these examples, which stand in rewe one
against another: ye may gather necessary reasons as well to prove as to
disprove.

15 And consequently thus may ye do, with any other four things whatsoever,
when two, to two, bear like equality of reason each to other.

16 An whole with one part more is divided into an whole with an half part as
3 to 2 or as 6 to 4 third part 4 3 8 6 fourth part etc. 5 4 10 8

17 An whole with many parts m^e, is divided into an whole with twothird pts
as 5 to 3 or as 10 to 6 threfourt pts 7 4 14 8 fourfift parts etc. 9 5 18 10

18 Manyfold with one part more, is divided into twofolde with a half part
more as 5 to 2 or as 10 to 4 third part more 7 3 14 6 fourth part more etc. 9
4 18 8 threefold with a half part more as 7 to 2 or as 14 to 4 third part
more 10 3 20 6 fourth part more etc. 13 4 26 8 fourefold with a etc. half
part more as 9 to 2 or as 18 to 4 third part more 13 3 26 6 fourth part more
etc. 17 4 34 8



19 Manyfold with many parts more, is divided into twofolde with two third
parts more as 8 to 3 or as 16 to 6 three fourth parts more 11 4 22 8 four fifth
parts more etc. 14 5 28 10 threefold with two third parts more as 11 to 3 or as
22 to 6 three fourth parts more 15 4 30 8 four fifte parts more etc. 19 5 38 10
fourefold with two third parts more as 14 to 3 or as 28 to 6 three fourth parts
more 19 4 38 8 four fifte parts more etc. 24 5 48 10



20 I have set ^oorthe these particular respects, for that by them, and such
like, ye may solute all such questions, as are wroughte in Arithmeticke by
the rule of three, or as some do term it, by the golden rul^: which in very
deed is the rule of proportion.

21 But there men are taught to work by multiplication and division, which
make the matter hard to them, that are ignorant in that art, and hide (as it
were) the ground and cause, why upon such woorkyng it should so fall forth:
but here ye shall at the first sight, d^cyde the matter, perceiving withal
the reason thereof.

22 For if it be demanded and said. ii^. s^ in one year do gain xv^. s^.
how many shillings shall. v^. s^. gain: ye may answer and say: seeing.
ii^. s^. are five times in. xv^. s^. with two third parts more, I know that
the sum demanded must contain. v^. shillings five times and two third
parts more of. v^. s^. now then. xxxv. s^. containing. v^. s^. five times, and
^ourtene groates being two third parts of. v^. s^: I see plainly that. v^.
s^. do gain in one year. xxxix. s^. vi^. (...). and that the reason thereof
is, for that. v^. s^. are just, so often in. xxxix. s^. vi^. (...). as. ii^.
s^. are in. xv^. s^.

A general lesson for Invention, teaching the use of our third and fourth
book. Chap. 26.
1 Aristotle in showing a mean how to find the proving term, makes but
three places, the place of the foreset, the place of the backset, and the place
of the biset. The place of the Foreset Backset Biset.



2 Foresets are called in Latin Anteceilentia, because they come always in a
sentence before y^ verb: backsets are termed Consequentia, because they come
after: bisets are named in Greek (...) because they are never knitte together
in a yeasay: but always sundred by a naysay.

3 Doubtless^ this division is very trim and natura^l: ^or when the proving
term is taken in the foresayes with the general or special term, it is
either coupled to them by a yeasaye, or severed from them by a naysay.

4 If it be coupled to them in a yeasaye, it is either placed before or after
the verb: if it be placed before, it bears the name of a ^oreset: if it be
set after the verb, then ^oth it take the name of a backset: but if it be
sundred from them by a naisay, then is it termed a biset, whether it be placed
before or after.

5 So that the proving term, compared eith^r to the general term, or the
special term, must needs bear one of these three general respects: that is
either to be a foreset, a backset, or a biset.

6 And because the proving term is repeted in every reason by rule, twice, it
follows that it must always bear a double respect, one to the general
term, and another to the special term, these two terms being ever extant,
and plain to be sens in the question it self.

7 This thing is set forth in our third book, both by rules and examples, and
that both plainly, and at large: because it is a thing most necessary for a
reasoner to be ^nning and expert in.

8 Thus ye must ever mark, that where a reason by rule stands but of three
terms, two of them are ever contained in the conclusion, and therefore ^uident
to be seen in the question at the first, the third term is that which we
call the proving term, and which we use as a mean, whereby to conclude the
matter that lies in question, and so bring our purpose to pass.

9 Now, how the proving term^ must lie to the other two terms, that the
question in controversy may be concluded ye must learn by the fouretene
seats set forth at large in our third book, considering with your self, what
manner of shewsay the question does contain, and in how many particular seats,
the same may b^ concluded, and so shall ye plainly learn the double respect,
that the proving term must bear to the other two terms, I mean the general
term, and the special term.

10 This done, ye must draw your qu^stion through the places, that is to say,
ye must draw the words of your question through the plac^s, and when ye find
any word in any particular place, which bears that respect to the general
and special term, that the rules of the third book require, know ye of a
certainty, that that is the proving term, and the means whereby ye may work
your feate.

11 So that ye must conne by heart, and have on your fingers ends, the
fourtene seats expressed in our third book: and the 44. particular places set
forth in this our fourth book* I think it good to name and order them thus:
1 Saywhat. Substance. 2 General term. 3 Special term. 4 Property. 5
Whole. 6 Parts. 7 Offspring. 8 Number. Quantity. 9 Weight. 10 Bigness. 11
Power. Quality. 12 Will. 13 Dispositions. 14 Qualities perceived by sense. 15
Affections. 16 Passions. 17 Form. 18 Matter, or stuff. Causes. 19 Form. 20
Workman, or doer. 21 End. 22 Effect, or work. 23 Preparation and means to
obtain an end. 24 Doing. 25 Suffering. 26 Time. 27 Place. 28 Order. 29
Having. 30 Forecommers. Comers. 31 Aftercommers. 32 Withcommers 33 Likelier.
34 Unlikelier. 35 Aslike. 36 Similitude. 37 Witnesses. 38 Respecting terms, or
yokefelowes Gainset^. 39 Depriving terms 40 Contraries 41 More then
contraries, or denying terms. 42 Differing terms. 43 Division. 44 Proportion.


How doubtful Questions and demaundes are to be handeled. Chap. 27.
1 Now that we have sufficientlye entreated of words, of sentences, of
reasons, and of the places: it remains that we also entreat of a probable
demand, showing an easy trade and way, how doubt^ll questions are to be
discussed.

What a Question or demand is.
2 A question or a demand is a shewsaye, requiring a yea, or a nay: as, do
fishes breath in the waters, or no?

3 If you answer this demand, and make your choice, saying: either that
fishes do take breath under the water: or that they do not: ye make of a
question a shewsaye.

4 But if ye proceed further, and add a reason why ye so say, in concluding
of

Faults escaped.
Fol. 60. lin. 9. for chap. 14. read chapter. 15. Fol. 82. chap. 10. here note
that the. 11. and. 12. chapters would have been placed before the. 10. Fol. 84.
1. the first, read of the first: And again in the same verse is of, strike out
of. Fol. 92. lin. 14. smlal, read small. Fol. 98. lin. 11. for where, strike
out for. Fol. 142. in place of 13 forecommers, 14 aftercommers, 15 withcommers.

they would have been set thus, 13 comers 1 forecommers 2 aftercommers, 3
withcommers. Fol. 158. lin. 25. prouable, read probable. Fol. 176. lin. 9.
which know, read which foreknow.
A note to understand the meaning of new devised Terms.
First consider the parts of each compounded term: then turn to that place
in our Book, which the two numbers do point forth, that are set upon the
word: And if thou be a Latiniste, take also that help, which the Latin term
does yield.

Altering. 62. 19. alteratio. a Bounder. 20. 3. so called, for that it poynteth
forth the utmost reach of any thing, terminus. a Backsette. 71. 1.
praedicatum, consequens, attributum. a Begetting or an ingendring, or a
creating 60. 2 generatio, o^tus. Contraries. 70. 30. and. 88. 3. contraria,
aduersa. Corrupting. 60. 3. corruption, interitus. Depriving terms. 54. 6.
priuatiua. Denying terms. 54. 7. contradictoria, negantia. Difference. 80. 1.
differentia. Diminishing. 62. 18. diminutio. the Decerning part. 138. 4.
Iudicium. an Endsay. 103. 3. Conclusio. And after this latin word, called a
Conclusion. I call it an Endsaye, because it is a saying that makes an end of
a reason. a Foreset 7. 11. Subiectum, antecedens. Foresayes. 103. 3.
praemissae. a Grounded disposition. 30. 22. habitus. Gaynsets. 53. 3. opposita,
contraria. y^ General term. 104. 9. maius extremum, mayor terminus. an
Having. 45. 5. habitus. an Inholder. 4. 19. Subiectum. an Inbeer. 4. 19.
Accidens. It may be called also an Indweller, for that it rests and dwells
(as it were) in an other. an Increasing. 62. 18. augmentatio. an Ifsaye. 93* 5.
propositio conditionalis. a Kind. 78. 1. genus. a Kindred. 77. 5. species,
forma. Lykesounding words. 2. 8. aequiuoca, so termed, because in name and
sound, they are like, though they have sundry meanyngs. More then contrary
sayings. 89. 5. propositiones contradictoriae, so called, for that there is
greatter repugnancie in them, then in contrary sayings. Moving. 60. 1. motus.
a Naysay. 84. 4. 5. negatio. Ofsprings. 161. 1. coniugata denominatiua. an
Ouershew. 22. 17. superficies. so called, because it does show the utmost
face, and view of a bodied thing. Playnmeaning words. 3. 16. vniuoca. a
Placing. 44. 1. situs. a Propretie. 75. 1. proprium. a Parting shewesaye. 94.
10. propositio disiunctiua. Preambles. 95. 1. modi. The Proving term. 104. 11.
medium. Respecting terms, which may also be called yokefelowes. 63. 3. relata,
relatiua, ad aliquid. a Reason by example. 100. 2. Inductio. a Reason by rule.
100. ratiocinatio. a Rank. 106. 8. figura. 2. a Saywhat. 73. 1. definitio.
corruptly called a definition: but for y^ it is a saying which tells what a
thing is, it may more aptly be called a saywhat. a Self thing, or a sole
thing. 5. 24. and. 72. 2. Indiuiduum. Surmountyng generals. 49. 8.
transcendentia. a Storehouse. 7. 38. praedicamentum, attributum. y^ Special
term. 104. 10. minus extremum, minor terminus. a Seat. 106. 9. modus. Want of
natural power, commonly called privation. 27. 8. priuatio. a Wavering
disposition. 31. 23. dispositio. a Wight. 146. 13. animal. Witcraf^. 1. 1.
virtus vel ratio disserendi If those names be always accounted the best, which
do most plainly teach the hearer the meaning of the thing, that they are
appointed to express: doubtelesse neither Logic, nor Dialect can be thought
so fit an English word to express and set forth the Art of reason by, as
Witcraft is, seeing that Wit in our mother tongue is often taken for reason: and
craft is the aunciente English word, whereby we have used to express an
Art: which two words knit together in Witcrafte, do^ signify the Art that
teaches wit and reason. And why should handcrafte and witchecraft be good
english names? and Starcraft and Witcrafte be none? the simples being
known, and the composition like. a Yeasaye. 84. 4. affirmatio. 5.


Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightriders streate, at
the sign of the Marmayde. ANNO. 1573.

And are to be sold at his Shop at the Northvvest door of Paul's Church.




