A SPEECH, DELIVERED AT THE VISITATION OF Down and Conner, Held in Lisnegarvy
the 26th., of September, 1638.

Wherein, for the convincing of the Nonconformists, there is a full Confutation
of the COVENANT Lately sworn and subscribed by many in Scotland.

Published by Authority.

My son, Fear the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are
Seditious. Proverb. 24.21. For Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft. 1 Samuel
15.23. LONDON, Printed by John Raworth, for George Thomason and Octavian
Pullen, and are to be sold at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

After the names of the Clergy were called, the Visitor spoke in this manner;
AND now (my brethren of the Clergy, and all you Gentlemen of the Laity) I
entreat your attention while I shall express my self in some things that
concern my Pastoral charge. Some things I have to say that concern the Clergy
only, Some things that concern the Churchwardens, And somewhat that does
concern both the Clergy and the Laity.

As for you of the Clergy, There is generally a great fault in you in the
neglect of Catechizing: You know that you are bound to it by the Canons of the
Church, bound by an act in my first Visitation, and though ye regard neither of
these, as I know many of you do not, yet consider I beseech you that ye are
bound to it in conscience; for Catechizing is the easiest and most profitable
way of instruction. The Apostle calls it the doctrine of the beginnings of
Christ, Heb. 6.1.
which must be laid before a man can be led forward unto perfection. It is
milk for babes, whereas preaching is meat for men that are of age, who have
their wits exercised to discern both good and evil. But you cannot abide to
give milk, Heb. 5.14.
and are all for strong meat, albeit there are many of you who are not well
able to chew it. This is the true cause of the ignorance of the people, for
they not having been instructed in the grounds of Religion, are not able to
understand any part of a Sermon. It is one of the great stratagems of our
adversary the devil, that when he cannot draw men wholly from the service of
God, he makes them to single out some part of it and to magnify that with a
neglect of all other parts; as namely Preaching amongst you, which is grown to
that esteem that it has shuffled out of the Church, both the public prayers
which is the immediate worship of God, and this duty of Catechizing: and is now
accounted the sole and only service of God, the very Consummat^^^e^^ of all
Christianity, as if all Religion consisted in the hearing of a Sermon. Unto
whom I may say in the words of the Apostle, What? Is all hearing? Is the whole
body an ear? 1 Cor. 12.
Or tell you in the words of a most Reverend prelate, That if you be the sheep
of Christ, you have no mark of his sheep, but the eare-mark. And therefore to
conclude this point, If you will will not hereafter make conscience of this
duty of Catechizing; Then the conscience of my duty will enforce me to proceed
against you according to the Canons of the Church.

As for the Churchwardens I have a double complaint against them; One, That
whereas by their place they are to look unto the fabric of the Church, the
greatest part of your Temples are kept no better then Hog-styes. I know that it
is one of the mysteries of iniquity in their Religion, that God is most purely
served, when he is worshipped slovenly, in a poor and homely cottage: and that
any cost is too much to be bestowed upon Gods service. They are much like unto
the officers of Julian the Apostate, who when they saw the stately vessels of
the Temple, cried out, En qualibus vasis ministratur Mariae filio? what stately
plate is this for the Carpenters son? But my second complaint is yet greater.
They are bound by their Oath to present all known disorders within their
Parish, especially them who do not repair unto the Church to hear Divine
service, and to receive the Sacrament according to the orders of this Church;
Yet they present none at all: And indeed the Churchwardens, especially in the
Ards and Claneboyes, are of all others the most disorderly men, the very
ringleaders of the separation, and it is for that cause they are chosen, that
others may not be presented. So that it seems unto me that too many of them in
Scotland have entered in a mutual bond to defend one another by Arms: So their
fellows in this Diocese have entered in a mutual bond to defend one another by
their Oaths. But, here I tell them plainly, that I will proceed against them,
First, for the neglect of the repair of their Churches, Next, for their
nonconformity, Thirdly, for not presenting notorious offenders, And lastly, for
their perjury. And if they think my authority too weak to overtake them, in
regard of the great Patronage and countenance they have; I will deliver them
over unto a Court that is able to deal with them.

My last complaint will hold me longer. It strikes both against the Clergy and
the Laity, for their general nonconformity, and disobedience unto the Orders
of this Church. You of the Clergy have all Sworn, subscribed and promised
absolute conformity; And yet when you come amongst your people, you slide back,
and for a color of obedience, read some part of the Service, it may be the
Lessons, and a few Collects, as if it were left unto your power to mince the
Service of God, cutting and carving upon it as you please. I must tell you that
those who will not be tied, neither by oaths, Subscriptions, nor promises;
There is nothing will tie them, but a coercive power.

But, they of the Laity are yet worse, they will hear no prayer at all. While
divine Service is reading, they walk in the Churchyard, and when prayer is
ended, they come rushing into the Church, as it were into a Playhouse, to hear
a Sermon. But ere it be long, I hope a course shall be taken, that they who
will hear no prayers shall hear no Sermon.

I know that the thing which does encourage you in this your disobedience, is
the present Insurrection in Scotland. You think (and some of you do not stick
for to speak it) that they will enforce the King for to yield unto all their
demands, and amongst the rest procure unto you a liberty to live here as you
list: But deceive not your selves; for howsoever in Scotland some think
themselves strong enough to resist their Prince, yet (I thank God) you are not
so many here, but the Kings Laws and authority is well able to overtake you.
And be assured that their insolent opposition against our most Pious Prince,
will make you that are of their Faction to be more narrowly looked unto here,
then otherwise you would have been: for now, that our neighbors house is on
fire, it is high time to look to our own. And surely, methinks, that if there
were in you, a spark of the sear of God, and of true loyalty unto the King,
the rebellious proceedings of these men would put you out of love with their
Religion. For I persuade my self, that when you were first leavned with their
doctrine, you did little think that their aim was Rebellion; But did conceive
(as sometimes I my self did), that they did all out of conscience, and were men
free from violence, or the least thought of disloyalty; But now behold their
proceedings, and judge them by their fruits.

You may perceive how that Sect since the first beginning of it (which is not
much above Fourscore years, in the Reign of Q. Mary of England) has proceeded
from evil to worse, by Six degrees. At first they did only manifest a dislike
of Episcopal government, and some Ceremonies used in the Church of England, as
liking better of the government of Geneva, which was devised by Master Calvin,
and that cunningly enough for the state of that Republic, which being popular,
could not brook any other government of the Church, but that which is popular
also. And yet I must tell you that Master Calvin wanted nothing of a Bishop,
but only the title. For the Church of Geneva is not a Parochial, but Diocesan
Church consisting of diverse parishes which make up one great Presbytrie, and he
all the days of his life was moderator thereof; without whose consent, no Act
neither of Ordination nor Jurisdiction was done. And so likewise Mr. Beza for
ten years after the others death, held the same place of government, until
Danaeus set him beside the cushion, and procured the Presidency to go by turns.
In the next place from dislike they proceeded to contempt of Episcopal
government, and this (if ye will believe St. Cyprian) has been the very
beginning of all heresies and Schisms, Ad Rogarionum.
Initia Haereticorum (says he) and ortus Schismaticorum haec sunt, ut
praepositum superbo tumore contemnant. And again, Vnde Schismata and ^aereses
ortae sunt nisi ^um Episcopus qui unus est and Ecclesiae praeest, Ad Pupianum.
superba quorundam presumptione contemn^tur: and homo dig^at^^ne Dei ^ororatus,
ab ind^gnis hominibus judicatur. In the third place from contempt they did
proceed unto open disobedience unto all the Orders of the Church; And (like
those of whom Nazia^zen speaks) would be pleased with nothing but what did
proceed from their own devising, esteeming him the holiest man, who could find
most faults. From disobedience they did proceed unto Schism and open
separation, accounting themselves only to be the brethren and Congregation of
Christ and all others who are not of their faction to be the children of this
world. From Schism they proceeded to heresy; For it is most true which S
Jerome did observe, that Omne Schisma gignit sibi ^aresin, Every Schism does
devise unto it self a heresy, some false doctrine or other to maintain their
separation: And these men have devised not a few, and some that have been
condemned by ancient Councels and Fathers, as namely, Epiphanius reckons among
the condemned heresies of Acrius, that he maintained there was no difference
between a Bishop and a Presbyter, and that all set Fasts are unlawful, Jewish
and Superstitious. And is not this the doctrine of these men? But, lastly their
disobedience Schism and heresy have now drawn them into open Rebellion, and
I wonder whither will they go next? For I am deceived if they have not yet a
further journey to go, and that they cannot subsist until they arrive at pure
Anabaptisme; From which they now differ but a little. And surely if any of you
will read the History of the Anabaptists, you will find that their proceedings
were a great deal more moderate, and Christian like, then these mens^re. This
is the just judgment of God, that they who run out of the Communion of the
Church, should likewise run out of their own wits.

I beseech you therefore to consider their ways, and how that if you do not
break off company, they will shortly lead you into Rebellion. For mine own part
I profess that the first thing that made me out of love with that Religion
(besides their gross hypocrisy) was their injurious dealing with Kings, who
are Gods Vicegerents here upon Earth, which I observed both by their doctrine
and by their practice, and I will now give you a brief taste of both. As for
their Doctrine, you know they take from the King all authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, and will not allow him to do these things which the good Kings
of Judah, and the godly Emperors of the Primitive Church did. Yea, they will
not allow them to present or nominate a Minister to a Benefice, nor to give a
Vote in a General Assembly, except (forsooth) the King be a Lay-elder; nor yet
to make any Law^s concerning matters of outward Order and Polity to be
observed in the Church: Nay, They have gone further, allowing Subjects to
resist their Prince by force of Arms, and in some cases to depose him, yea and
to take away his life if he be a Tyrant, and though he be the godliest Prince
in the world, he must be esteemed a Tyrant, if it please the Presbytery to
declare him for to be such. So that Kings should be in a far worse case under
the Presbytery, then ever they were under the Pope; For in stead of one Pope,
they must be subject unto a thousand.

This is their doctrine. Now I will show you their Practice, And first how they
dealt with that blessed King James, while he was in Scotland. They did
persecute him in his mothers womb, and when he came unto ripe years, they
suffered him not to enjoy one quiet day, by their Seditious practices: Of a
great many I will cull out a few of their attempts which are most notorious;
First, when as the Ringleaders of that Faction had concluded the state of
Bishops to be unlawful, they sent their Commissioners unto the King,
commanding him and his Council under pain of Excommunication, to put them
down. Again, A French Ambassador being in Scotland, when he was to go away,
the King commanded the City of Edenburrough according to the ancient custom,
to entertain him with a banquet. This charge was given on the Saturday, and
the banquet to be on the Monday, and upon Sunday morning some of the factious
ministers hearing of it, to cross his Majefties designs, proclaimed a public
Fast to be kept on that day, and because that the Nobility, the Kings Servants,
the Provost and chief Citizens of Edenburrough, did by the Kings direction
attend the Ambassador, they proceeded against them almost unto the sentence of
Excommunication. Afterward when his Majesty was taken prisoner at Reuthen, by
some of his treacherous Subjects, intendig thereby to force his Majesty to
their own ends: His Majesty being happily delivered, did with the consent of
his three Estates in Parliament, declare that to be a treasonable fact: But the
seditious ministers being assembled in Synod, and taking themselves to be the
Supreme Judicatory, did pronounce that Treasonable fact to be most just and
lawful, threatening with all the sentence of Excommunication against all who
did not subscribe unto their judgment therein. They did usually inveigh
against the King in their Sermons, and rail at him io his face, for to bring
him in hatred with his own Subjects: And when some of them were convented
before the Councellboord for so doing, they declined his Majesty's authority,
alleging that he was no Judge over them in Church Matters. They used
ordinarily to proclaim Fasts without the Kings privity, especially when some
factioners were about to attempt some great enterprise against the King: And
then the Ministers were taught all to sing one song, crying out upon the abuses
of the Court and State, whereby they set the people a madding. All this you may
read more at large in the Kings declaration printed Anno 1585. I will now add
some other of their practices that come within the compass of my own
remembrance. When the Earl of Bothwell was in the act of Rebellion against the
King, and had diverse times attempted to take away his Majesty's life, there
were great gatherings in Scotland for the relief of Geneva, then straightly
besieged by the Duke of Savoy; The Ministers who were the Collectors, gave a
great part of it to maintain the Earl in his rebellion against the King.
Afterward when the Gawries conspired against his Majesty, and he miraculously
rescued by the valor of his Servants; his Majesty desired that there might be
a public thanksgiving in all Churches within the Realm for his deliverance;
But diverse of the ministers, the ringleaders of that faction did refuse, and
did plainly insinuate that they did neither believe the King, nor his Nobles,
nor his Servants who were witnesses; that ever there was such a conspiracy; But
that it was a plot of the King to murder the Gawries. I shall not need to tell
you of the 17th day of December: There is none of you who has not heard in
what fear and danger of life the King was then, by an insurrection which was
raised by the seditious Sermons of some of these fiery preachers. One thing I
cannot omit, how that they called a National Assembly to be held in Aberdeen,
the King suspecting the event (as he had good cause) and having long before by
Act of Parliament all Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, and particularly for
calling of Assemblies, declared to belong to his Royal Person; He sent to
inhibit them by open Proclamation, but they would not desist: whereupon being
questioned, they declined the Kings authority, contrary to the Laws of that
Kingdom; for which they were indicted, found guilty and condemned of Treason.
Yet that merciful Prince did neither take life nor goods from them; But only
banished six of them: And when some of these could not live abroad, upon the
acknowledgment of their offense, he not only gave them leave for to return,
but also provided livings for them; And yet one of these who holds both his
life and his living by the Kings mercy, Dr. Sharp.
is at this day a principal Firebrand in this Rebellion. And thus they used
King JAMES, which occasioned him in that golden Treatise entitled ASIAIKON
DOPON to protest that he had found more truth and honesty in the barbarous
high-land-men, and bloody borderers, then ever he did in the men of that
Faction.

Thus have I given you a brief taste both of their Doctrine and Practice,
concerning the opposing of Princes. But here lest this should be thought a
National sin, and so Jerusalem upbraid her sister Samaria; I will show unto
you, that they of this faction in England had been as deep in this
condemnation, but that (God be praised) they had not so much power. And besides
that, some there have suffered death for their seditious practices against
authority, in seeking to bring in their new Discipline, as Hacket, Coppinger,
and others: You may judge of the intentions and desires of the rest, by their
writings. One of them who wrote a Book, entitled, A Dialogue of white Devils
(which was a most fit Title for these men's Books, for if ever there were white
Devils, or Devils transformed into Angels of light, it is in their persons, who
under the pretense of Sanctity, labor to bring in all manner of disorder into
the Church, and confusion into the Common wealth) That Author says expressly,
that If Princes do hinder the bringing in of their Discipline they are Tyrants,
and being Tyrants they maybe deposed by their Subjects. Another, who calls
himself Stephanus Junius, Miles etc.
says, It is lawfall for the people by force of Arms to resist the Prince, if
he hinder the building of the Church. A third railes at Queen Elisabeth* for
exercising that lawful Authority in causes Ecclesiastical which was united
unto her Crown; resembling her unto all the wicked Kings, and others who took
upon them unlawfully as unto Saul for his offering of sacrifice; unto Ozias for
his burning of incense; Yea, and to Nadab and Abihu for their offering of
strange fire. It is well known how that Martin in his first Book threatened
fists. And the Author of the second Admonition, says plainly, that There is
many a thousand that desire the same that he does, and that great troubles will
come of it if it be not provided for. Another of that crew, directing his
speech unto the Bishops, says, that The Presbytery must prevail: Demonst: of
discipline in the Preface.
And if it come to pass by that means that will make your hearts to ache, then
blame your selves. I could present unto you a great deal more of such stuff:
but I will only allege one passage of Master Cartwright, whom for his
learning I honor far above all that ever were of that faction, he says that
the Church is not in the Common wealth, but the Common wealth in the Church,
and therefore, as a wise man will not frame his house to his hangings, but his
hangings to his house: So the Church is not to be fitted unto the Common
wealth, but the Common wealth unto the Church: Whereupon it will evidently
follow, that as in his opinion there ought to be a parity in the Church, so
likewise a parity in the Common wealth: so that it is more then manifest that
the thing which they aim at, is to have no King at all. And therefore it is
remarkable, how that the Traitor Calderwood in his blasphemous Book, called
Altar Damascenum, does not only rail against King James, charging him with
perjury and persecution, but also does inveigh against all Kings whatsoever,
saying, Natura insitum est onnibu^ regibus in Christum odium. It seems this
mad dog did not remember Gods promise made unto his Church, That Kings should
be her Nursing-fathers, and Queens her Nursing-mothers: And God who is never
worse then his word, has made his promise good; for never were there so great
Instruments for the propagation of the Gospel, the enlargement of Christ's
kingdom, and the procuring of the peace of the Church, as Christian Kings have
been; and amongst them all, never any more then our most gracious King that now
is, and his most renowned Father, whom those men did so much oppose and traduce.

But what do I need to remember matters of old: for the Children are worse then
the fathers, and their present practice now in Scotland, does surpass all the
iniquities of their Fathers, and will make them to be forgotten. Now Bishops
and conformable Ministers, whose persons had wont to be esteemed sacred, are
stoned, beaten, wounded, and dragged out of their Pulpits: a thing which was
never used by the Heathens against their Priests, of what lewd condition, or
quality whatsoever. And yet those are they who swear to be good examples to
others of all godliness, soberness, and of every duty they owe to God and
man. Now what Godliness, Soberness, or righteousness has been in such
proceedings, the like whereof has not been heard amongst the heathen; Let all
the world judge. Before they had wont to assault us only, with their tongues
which are sharper then arrows, and with their pens which are as light as
Ce^se-quils: But now they are come (as Tertullian says) A stilo ad machaeram,
from words to blows. That we may say with Bernard Leones evasimus, sed
incidimus in Dracones. We escapd the mouths of Lions, but have fallen into a
den of Dragons; for these sure are Cerastes, Fiery flying Dragons. But would to
God their madness had stayed here: They have not only done wrong unto Gods
Prophets; but also touched his anointed, entering into a mutual league and
covenant against him, arming his Subjects, taking Oaths of them to maintain
their cause, blocking up his Castles, refusing all his Majesty's most gracious
offers for peace, and indeed proclaiming a plain defiance unto him. Good Go^!
Can they be Christians that do these things? Or have they any warrant for this
out of Gods word which commands us to be subject to Superior powers, and that
for conscience sake, even then when all Kings were enemies unto Christian
Religion? Or have they any example for those proceedings out of Pious
antiquity? The Christians in the Primitive Church when they were led as sheep
to the slaughter all the day long, and suffered the most exquisite torments
that could be devised; Yet would never take Arms for to resist the Prince; but
put on this resolution, Arma nostra preces and Lachrymae. Yea, when these
persecuting Emperors, had occasion of war against the barbarous nations, the
Christians were the Emperors best and most faithful Soldiers, so terrible
unto their enemies that they were called the thundering Legions. And S. Austin
does highly commend them for their faithful service, unto the heathen
Emperors, who did most cruelly spill their blood, only for their profession
of Christ. And let no man say, it was for want of power, that they did not
defend themselves by arms; for it is well known, that if they had thought it
lawful to resist the Emperor by Arms; they were of that number, power, and
resolution, that they had been able to have shaken the foundations of the
Empire. But now it seems that these men of whom I speak, have learned another
Divinity, and think that they are bound to stand to the defense of their dread
Sovereign, the Kings Majesty, his person and authority, in the defense and
preservation of the true religion (as they have expressed in their late Printed
confession of faith, whereunto they have sworn) so that they do plainly
insinuate, that they are no further bound to defend, the Kings person and
authority, then he does stand in the defense of the true Religion; And that
only must be accounted the true Religion, which they themselves do best like
of: If the King will not maintain that, then for all this last Oath, they are
freed from their Alleigance, wherein they have more then justified the Jesuits
in all their rebellious practices, and the Jesuits can well tell how to take
advantage thereof: for it is not long since a Jesuit wrote a Book, in the
defense of the Loyalty of their Order, alleging that Protestants had allowed
the rebellion of Subjects against Princes, as much as any of their Order had
done, and gives instance in Buchanan, Knox, and Goodman. But Andreas Rivetus a
Professor of Leiden, answering the Jesuit, does profess, that all Protestants
do condemn that doctrine, and ascribes the rashness of Buchanan and Knox;
Praeferbido Scotorum ingenio and ad audendum prompto^ And now it fears me,
that ere it be long another Jesuit shall publish a Book to prove that the
present insurrection in Scotland, is a greater rebellion, then was the Papists
Gun-powder-plot: in regard that the Gun-powder-Treason was but the act of a few
discontented Gentlemen, and the thousand Papist in England not guilty of it;
but in the present Rebellion of the Puritanes, they have engaged a great part
of that Kingdom, and many who indeed know not what the matter means, and so
that this may be called the common sin of that Sect, whereas the other cannot
be charged upon the Religion of the Papists.

But you will say, it is Religion that moves them: What? did ever the true
Religion allow of rebellion? Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum? I know they
pretend the defense of the national confession of their Church, and the Oath
received by their forefathers in the Year 1581, by the Kings example and
commandment. But if it be so I will subscribe their Covenant also, which is
the greatest curse I can lay upon my mortal enemy. Therefore to take away that
vain pretense, wherewith they blind you and many other simple people; I will
here make it evidently appear, First, that that negative Confession whereunto
they did swear in the year 81, is not the national Confession of the Church
of Scotland, and Secondly, that the Oath which they have now administered is not
the same, which the King, his Family, States, and Subjects, did swear at that
time; But Substantially different from it in many points.

And first, that Negative Confession is not the national Confession of the
Church of Scotland: But the national Confession is that, which twenty years
before, being penned by Mr. Knox, and his fellow-ministers, and containing the
positive grounds of Divinity; was approved by the Parliament held in the year
1560; and afterward was ratified by a Parliament in the year 1567, and
registered in the body of that Act of Parliament, and so confirmed by a number
of Parliaments since that time. The same is likewise received into the body of
the Confessions of all the reformed Churches, and acknowledged for the
Confession of the Church of Scotland. But as for that Negative Confession,
consisting in the abjuring of Popish errors, and penned by Mr. Craig, for the
detecting of some disguised Papists, who by Equivocation, or out of hope of
Papal dispensation, did for fear of the Laws, subscribe unto the former
confession; That negative confession (I say) was never confirmed by any
Parliament. What Confirmation it had, was only from the Kings mandate, whom
they procured not only himself to swear and subscribe; but also to command
all his Subjects to do so. But here I pray you to consider first, What age the
King was of then: not full Fifteen years, by four months. And how easy a
matter was it to abuse his tender youth? Let us therefore appeal from K. James
a minor, unto himself when he was of riper years: And we shall find that he
did utterly disallow of that fact, insomuch, that in the Parliament held the
year 84. he procured the first confession to be confirmed; but without any
mention of the latter, and so in diverse Parliaments following. And in the
Conference at Hampton Court he did fully manifest his dislike of that Negative
confession, saying that Mr. Craig with his I renounce, and I detest, did
multiply so many particulars, that simple people were not able to conceive; And
so being amazed did either fall back into Popery, or remain still in their
ignorance: And (says he) If I should hold my self to that form, the
confession of my faith must be in my Table-booke and not in my head. So that
it has no civil confirmation at all. But you will say that a Sinodicall
confirmation, by a general Assembly held at Edinburgh, another at Glasgow:
whereunto I answer, that the act of the Synod had only relation unto the Kings
mandate: For thus the words run. Forasmuch as the Kings Majesty has set
forth and proclaimed a Godly Confession of faith -- This present Assembly does
appoint that all Ministers shall conform themselves thereunto under pain of
deprivation. So that whatsoever strength is in the Synodicall confirmation
depenes upon the force and vigor of the Kings mandate; while that was in force,
the confirmation of the Synod was in force; and that being expired, the
confirmation of the Synod is likewise expired: But the Kings mandate is
expired, because upon mature judgment he did retract and disallow it in his
life time, and though he had not, yet the same being a personal act of the
Kings without the consent of the States of Parliament, is now certainly expired
with his royal breath: For Mortuo mandatore expirat mandatum. So that indeed
this Confession which they now urge so violently upon the Kings Subjects, has
no legal confirmation at all. And as it has no confirmation, So it never had
the honor to be received into the body of the Confessions of reformed
Churches, as was the former Confession; neither indeed was it worthy; for it is
not a Confession of faith at all; but a Confession of unbeleese: The author
tells us not what he does believe, but what he does not believe. And I hope you
will all confess, that faith consist in assenting to revealed truths, and not
in dissenting from err^rs. Besides is it not more fit, for a Minister to teach
his people positive truths of Christian Doctrine, then to spend his time in
telling them of unknown heresies?

And as that Negative Confession is not the national confession of that
Church, so the Oath that is now ministered, is not the same with that which was
received by the Kings Majesty and his Subjects in the year 81 as is preten^ed;
But is substantially different from it in many respects.

1 In the former Oath or Covenant, they did swear with the King and by his
commandment, and their is no doubt but it is most lawful for Subjects, (if
the matter of the Oath be true and Lawful) to swear by the commandment of the
king, to whom primarily and Originally, belongs the power to minister an Oath,
and to others only by Commission and power delegated from him: But this new
Oath, is not only without the King, but against him, and flat contrary to his
commandment; For since the time that his Majesty manifested his Royal
pleasure, requiring them to renounce their covenant, they have proceeded and
sworn many thousands of people. So that I am sure by the Laws of our Kingdom
they are in a great Praemunire.

2. In the first Oath or Covenant, there is no bond of mutual defense. But in
this new Oath there is a bond of mutual defense of one another, Against all
persons whatsoever, the King himself not excepted.

3. Although there had been such a bond of mutual defense in the former
Covenant, yet ought it not to be in this: for Subjects may lawfully make a
Covenant of mutual defense by Arms, by the consent of the King who only has
the power of the Sword within his dominions; But they who made this late
Covenant had not the Kings consent: but did it contrary to the Kings express
will and pleasure: wherein they have violated the laws of their own kingdom
which they were bound to maintain: for by an act of Parliament Anno 1585, all
leagues or bonds of mutual defense made without the privity and consent of the
King are expressly forbidden. And as in this respect their Covenant is contrary
to the Laws of their kingdom; So I am sure it is contrary unto the Law of
God; for I never knew any Divine who does not maintain that unto the
undertaking of a just war, there is required not only a good cause, but also
lawful authority. A just cause of war does not warrant every man to
undertake war, though against a stranger, (much less against the King,
against whom no cause, though never so just, can make a war undertaken by his
Subjects warrantable) But a just cause does only warrant the King, or supreme
Magistrate, in whom authority is originally and Primarily; and without whose
commission the Wars undertaken by private men, are no better then robbery and
murder. That rash and heady adventure of the Israelits against the Canaanites.
Number. cap. 14. v. 44. was without authority; for neither Moses nor the Arc went
up with them: and therefore Moses does call their attempt a presumption; and
they prospered accordingly, for they were smitten unto Hormah, a name
answerable unto the event, namely destruction.

Lastly, this Oath is not the same with the former, because it contains not
only the old Covenant, or confession; but also their own interpretation of it:
For they do plainly insinuate, that Episcopal government, and the 5. Articles
of Perth, are abjured in that Confession. Now it is reasonable, that a few
factious spirits who are the Authors of this conspiracy, should take upon them
to interpret a National confession, and obtrude their interpretation upon the
whole Church, forcing all men to swear unto it? This were too much though
their interpretation were true, because it wants public authority and
approbation. But indeed the interpretation is most notoriously false, and like
the gloss of Orleance which destroys the Text. Episcopal government is not
abjured in the Negative confession, nor so much as mentioned. If any man shall
say, That Episcopacy is included under the Popes wicked Hierarchy, which there
is denied; he will prove himself ridiculous: for it is well known unto all that
ever looked into the Ecclesiastical history, that the Church was governed by
Bishops, 600 years before the Popes wicked Hierarchy began. And as that
government was not abjured, so neither is it any innovation at all: for it is
evident that in the year 81. they had Bishops, and it is yet to be seen
registrate in the Books of Council, and subscribed by the Commissioners for
the time, how that but a little time before the publishing of that Confession,
Kings declaration.
the general Assembly did agree with his Majesty's Regents in his minority,
that the estate of Bishops (which is one of the estates of Parliament) should
be maintained and authorized: But about four or five years after, about the
year 83. the general Assembly took upon them, contrary to their own
subscriptions, to discharge the estate of Bishops, and to declare the same to
be unlawful; commanding all the Bishops in the kingdom to dimit their places
and Jurisdictions, under pain of Excommunication: and in like manner
commanding the King and his Council under the like pain, not to choose any
others in their place. But when that wise King saw their proceedings, and how
they took more upon them then ever the Bishops had done; and under the pretense
of their new discipline, trod upon his Scepter, laboring to establish an
Ecclesiastical tyranny of infinite Jurisdiction: and perceiving withal, that
their new erected government was the mother of all faction, confusion, and
rebellion; And that it tended to Anabaptisme and popularity; and to the
overthrow of his State, Crown and kingdom: 1584, he called a Parliament, and
by the consent of all his States he overthrew their Presbytries, and restored
again the Bishops to their places. But indeed at that time the Sons of
Zerviah were too strong for him that he could never invest the Bishops with
their full power and authority, until that happy time that his Majesty came
unto the Crown of England: And then not long after by a free General assembly
held at Glasgow, he did not erect, but ratify and confirm the estate of
Bishops, The acts of which Assembly were immediately after confirmed by Act of
Parliament, So that Episcopacy is no Innovation, as is pretended in this last
Oath.

And as for the 5. Acts of Perth Assembly, they were never intended to be
abjured in the Negative confession: for there is no mention of any of them;
neither can they be comprehended under popish rites. Kneeling at the Communion,
is no popish rite, for I have upon another occasion proved it to be the gesture
used in the Primitive Church at the receiving of the Sacrament; And that the
first that ever did sit after their fashion was the Pope, to express his
state; So that we may justly charge them, that the gesture which they use, is
abjured in that confession, amongst the rest of popish rits. The Five
Holy Days established by the Assembly of Perth, are not Popish rites; but such
as were observed in the Church, since the days of the Apostles, as may appear
by that bitter contention, between the Eastern and Western Churches, about
the observation of Easter. And as for the other three Articles, for private
Baptism, the Communion of the sick, and Confirmation of Children; There is no
man in his right wits who will not acknowledge that they were in use many
hundred years before Popery was hatched; and are in themselves things not
only lawful and expedient, but in some cases necessary.

But yet they will say, that these things are abjured in general terms, when
they swear to continue in the obedience of the doctrine and discipline of that
Kirk. For answer whereunto, I shall desire you to consider First, that they say
not they will continue in the present discipline of this Kirk; (as these new
men do interpret it) but indefinitely, that they will continue in the
discipline of this Kirk. Secondly, albeit they had said so; yet by the
discipline we must understand that discipline, which was established by
authority and Law; And not that which was violently brought in by some factious
Ministers and their adherents. Now I have showed that Episcopal government was
ratified and confirmed by diverse Acts of Parliament; but never dissolved by
any: and that their Presbyteriall government was put down by act of Parliament;
but never established by any. Thirdly, say that by discipline, we should yield
to understand, that discipline which then was used, though brought in by
private authority: Yet certainly it was never their intent to swear to
maintain that discipline in all particulars without alteration or addition:
for such an oath had been simply unlawful; because that thereby they should
have made a perpetual Law concerning ceremonies and rites, which are
themselves and must be changeable according to the Exigency of the times. And
so if that interpretation which is now given of the words, were true, it would
follow;

1 That their negative Confession were directly contrary unto their positive
Confession, which is the only true National confession of the Church of
Scotland; For in that confession, in the 20th Article, touching matters of
Policy and order, they say: Not that we think that one policy and one order in
Ceremonies can be appointed for all ages, times and places: For as Ceremonies
such as men have devised are but temporal, so may and ought they to be
changed, when they rather suffer Superstition, then that they edify the Church
using the same. So that by these men's Interpretation, here is Confession
against Confession: The positive Confession declares matters of Policy and
order to be alterable, and such as upon occasion both may and ought to be
changed: But these men do so interpret the negative Confession and Covenant, as
if they were bound by an oath, to preserve the same Orders that were used in
the year 81. inviolably for ever. 2 Such an Interpretation is against all right
reason; For the condition of the Church being changeable, the same Orders
cannot be convenient for her at all times: As the same policy is not fit for
the Church in all places, so neither for one and the same Church at all times.
3 Such an Interpretation shall condemn the practice of the ancient Church,
which did upon occasion often change her rites, as namely dipping in Baptism,
which she changed from once into thrice, and again from thrice into once. 4 It
is contrary to the Judgment of all Divines. Mr. Calvin tells us that In
external discipline and Ceremonies Christ would not particularly prescribe
what we sho^la fellow, Quod istud pendere a temporum varietate pravideret. And
again he says, That sometimes it profits and is expedient that there be a
difference in these things, lest men should think that Religion were tied unto
outward Ceremonies. And indeed, to make the Rites of the Church unchangeable,
were to confound matters of Doctrine, and matters of Discipline, matters of
Faith, and matters of Order. The rule therefore of Tertullian is infallible;
Regula fidei immobilis, irrefragabilis, Caetera disciplinae admittunt novitatem
correctionis. 5 If they had sworn (as these men would have it) to maintain
their discipline which they then used without alteration or addition, like the
Laws of the Medes and Persians; Then had they ascribed unto themselves an
absolute perfection, more then ever did the Pharisees in Christ's days, or the
(...) after, or the Popes of late, since they established their own
infallibility. Surely the contrivers of the first Confession, did manifest a
great deal of more modesty in their Preface. Protesting; that if any man shall
note in this our Confession, any Article or Sentence repugnant to Gods holy
Word, and do admonish of the same in Writing, we by Gods grace do promise unto
him satisfaction from the mouth of God, that is, from his holy Scriptures, or
else, reformation of that which he shall prove to be amiss. And are these men
become wiser then their Fathers, to think that nothing which they did, could be
amended? 6 That could not be the meaning of the first Oath to maintain their
discipline in all points without alteration: For they themselves during the
days of the Presbytery did change many things, and that as I believe without
violation of their Oath. Sometimes their Lay Elders had voice in the
Presbytery, af^erwards the Ministers perceiving the inconvenience, restrained
them to their Parish-sessions: Sometimes it was made altogether unlawful to
bury in Churches; afterward they did permit it. And if I had the inspection of
the Book of the Acts of the general Assembly which I have not seen these four
and twenty years; I would make it appear that every Assembly, did either alter
or add something in matters of discipline. Finally, How could they Swear to
maintain that discipline in all points, when there are many things in their new
found discipline, whereof they were not agreed, nor are to this day? as namely,
Whether Pastors and Doctors be one office, or distinct; And if distinct,
Whether Doctors have any voice in government: What is the Office of Deacons,
and whether they may give a voice in the consistory with the rest: Whether
their ruling Eldermen be Ecclesisticall persons or Laymen: Whether their
Office should be only annual, or during life: Whether those Elders should have
a voice in the election Ordination, deprivation of ministers; and in weilding
of the keys for Excommunication and Absolution.
By all which it is more then manifest, that the meaning of these words in the
former Oath, [We will continue in the obedience of the discipline of this Kirk]
is not that they would observe the same discipline then used in all
particulars, without alteration or addition: for so their Oath must be contrary
to their Confession of faith, contrary to right reason, to the practice of the
Primitive Church, to the opinion of all Divines, yea, contrary to their own
practice, and indeed such an Oath, as were both unlawful and impossible to be
observed. And unless that Interpretation be allowed them, that Oath makes
nothing either against Episcopacy, or the five Articles of Perth, we must
therefore find out some other meaning of these words of the Covenant. It is a
rule in the civil Law; Semper in dubijs benigniora sunt praeferendae, And
again, Non sunt rejiciendae leges quae interpretatione aliqua possunt
convenire. If any thing, Fact, writing or Law may in reasonable construction
admit two interpretations, the best and mildest is ever to be received. But the
words in the former Oath may admit a good interpretation, namely they did
swear to continue in the discipline of that Kirk, in regard of all
substantials, viz. for administration of the Sacraments, and weilding of the
Keys for binding and loosing of sinners; and that for the particular
determination, of person, time, place, and outward form of administration;
They would observe the discipline of that Kirk, which should be from time to
time lawfu^ly established. And therefore it is (as I observed before) that they
did not say The present discipline of this Kirk. And by this Interpretation
which is the only reasonable sense of these words that can be given; they are
all bound by their national Oath, (as they term it) to submit themselves to
Episcopal government, and the Articles of Perth, which were lawfully
established, and are now a part of the Discipline of that Church.

Thus have I showed that this late Oath is substantially different from the
former: in that now they do not swear with the King, but against him; It
contains a bond of mutual defense of one another; It inables Subjects to take
Arms without lawful Authority, and contains such an interpretation of the
Old covenant, as is manifestly false. In all which respects, the Oath is
unlawful: But yet to convince them further of perjury I will show unto you,
that they have not observed any of these conditions which God himself
requires in an Oath. In the fourth of Jeremy and second verse: Thou shall
swear the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. In
truth, and therefore not falsely; In judgment, and therefore not rashly: In
righteousness, and therefore not lewdly nor to a bad end. We must swear in
truth and not falsely; for the Lord himself says, Ye shall not swear by my
name falsely, Levit. 19.12. The only true matter of an Oath is truth, but all
the grounds of this last Oath, are notoriously false, as namely that the
Negative Confession, is the National confession of the church of Scotland: And
I have showed that to be otherwise. That this Oath is the very same that King
James and his Family did swear: And I have proved that not to be so. That
Episcopacie and the five Articles of Perth are innovations abjured in the
former Oath: and I have manifested that to be evidently false. Finally, That
what they do is to avert, The danger of the true reformed religion, of the
Kings honor, and of the public peace of the Kingdom. When as indeed they
could not have taken a course more to endanger the true Religion, wound the
Kings honor, and disturb the public peace. So that in this late Oath there
is no truth. Again, We must swear in judgment, that is, out of a certain
knowledge of the thing which we swear. We find in the fifth of Leviticus,
that when a man did swear that which was hid from him; It was a sin for which
a Trespasse-offering was to be offered. And now they have sworn unto many
things which are hid from them, and whereof they could have no certain
knowledge; for they could not know that the Negative Confession is the National
Confession of that Church; nor that this Oath is the same with that which the
King did swear; nor that Episcopacy and the five Articles of Perths Assembly
were abjured in the former Oath: For I have evidently proved all these to be
false. Besides, in the Catalogue of errors renounced, there are many things
which common people cannot understand, as namely, I would gladly know, how many
amongst that multitude who have sworn this late Covenant, do know what is Opus
operatum, abjured in the Oath. It is wisely provided in the civil Law, that
none should be admitted to swear, who are not of some reasonable
understanding, and therefore no Idiots, nor mad men, nor children are admitted
to be witnesses: But in this last Oath they have sworn many thousands who have
not so much knowledge of an Oath, of Religion, or of the confession of Faith;
as a child of seven year old. And therefore they do not swear in Iudicio.
Lastly, as we must swear in truth, and in judgment, so also in
righteousness: As the matter of our Oath must be true, and our knowledge of it
certain: So we must swear unto a good and lawful end: For to make the name
of God a bond to do evil, is a sin out of measure sinful. But the end of
this last Oath is most unlawful, even to arm Subjects against their Prince,
and pull down Orders established by Laws, whereby they make that which should
be Sacramentum pietatis, to be Vinculum iniquitatis. These Oaths we call
Juramenta latronum, such as thieves and robbers take to be true one to another:
For they do not only join hand in hand (as Solomon tells us) but do even
also by Oath bind themselves to do mischief. Prove. 11.2. Nehem. 6.18.
Tobiah the greatest hinderer of the Temple, had many in Judah his sworn men.
Further, as they have not sworn neither in truth, in judgment, nor in
righteousness: So there are many who have sworn this Oath, who before did
receive the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, and of Canonical obedience, and
conformity to the Articles of Perth: So that here is Oath against Oath. Belike
these men do challenge a Papal power to dispense with Oaths. All these
things being considered, I have discovered as much perjurie in their Oath, as
can be committed in a promissorie Oath. And then we know that the rule in
Divinity is, Paenitenda promissio, non per^icienda praesumptio. And surely
since this is a swearing age with them, they may do well to swear once more,
that they will never swear so again. When David had made a rash Oath to
destroy Nabal, in cold blood he did choose rather to break his Oath then to
keep it. And I think there is no Divine who will not say, that Herod had
better broken his rash oath, then cut off John Baptists head. And yet I must
tell you, it is not altogether so heinous a crime to take a head from a
Prophet, as to pull a Crown from a Kings head.

And now have I taken from them all pretense of Religion, (which is not sit to
make a cloak for such knavery) by showing that the Negative confession, is not
the National Confession of the Church of Scotland; and that this Oath is not
the same which was sworn An. 81. but an Oath in many respects altogether
unlawful: And finally, that Episcopal government, and the Articles of Perth
are not abjured in the Negative Confession. I will now guess what are the true
causes that set them on work, not using light conjectures, but building upon
more then probable grounds.

1. That which sets the Clergy on work is Self-love, De civit. Dei Lib. 14.
cap. 28.
which (as S. Austin says) did build the City of the devil. It is pride,
singularity, ambition, and the desire of popular applause. They cannot endure
to be subject to a Bishop, esteeming themselves men of greater gifts and
perfections, then those who are appointed to be their Bishops, and so They
perish in the gaine-saying of Core. You know that Core's sin was
disobedience: he would not be subject unto Aaron appointed his Superior by
God, nor to Moses either who swayed the Scepter: So they by their good will,
will not be subject either to Bishop or King. This pride has been the
occasion of many heresies in the Church, as will evidently appear unto those
who read the Histories of Arius coveting the Bishopric of Alexandria: of
Donatus laboring to have been Bishop of Carthage: of Novatus desiring a
Bishopric in Italy: and of Aerius contending with Eustathius for a Bishopric
in Pontus. These men affecting these honorable places, and receiving their
several foyles, when through ambition they could not get the places they
sought for in the Church, they labored to gain honor another way in their
several Synagogues. So I could tell you of a man, who is now a ringleader of
the faction in Edinburgh, and has publicly preached the King to be a Papist,
and when his Majesty desired them to renounce their Covenant, promising them
all reasonable satisfaction in other things: he in a Sermon compared his
Majesty unto an Italian who promised mercy to his vanquished enemy, upon a
condition that he would renounce Christ, which when the Caitiff had done,
presently stabbed him to the heart, saying, I hope now I have killed you both
soul and body. Yet this man within these two years was an earnest suter for
the Bishopric of Argyle, M. Henry Rollocke.
and was recommended for it by many of the Bishops of that Kingdom; but
missing thereof, the same humor which possessed Arius, Donatus, and the rest,
does now also work in him.

2 That which sets the Laymen on work, is covetousness: amongst whom not a
few would gladly prey upon the Bishoprics, as their Fathers did upon the
Abbeyes. This was observed by M. Cartwright, and the Author of the
Ecclesiastical discipline of their Lay-followers in England; And, (I must
needs think that they of Scotland, as they are of the same religion, so they
are of the same mind) Whilst they hear us speak against Bishops and
Cathedral Churches, Discip. Eccles.
(says the Author of the Ecclesiastical discipline) it tickleth their ears,
looking for the like prey they had before of Monasteries: Yea, they have in
their hearts devoured already the Churches inheritance. They care not for
Religion, so they may get the spoil. They could be content to crucify Christ,
so they might have his garments. Our age is full of spoiling Soldiers, and of
wicked Dyonisians, who will rob Christ of his golden coat, as neither fit for
him in Winter nor Summer. They are Cormorants, and seek to fill the bottomless
sacks of their greedy appetites. They do yawne after a prey, and would thereby
to their perpetual shame, purchase to themselves a field of blood.

3 I may more then probably conjecture that they have another aim, even such
as was Ieroboams aim: When he had drawn away the ten Tribes from the house of
David, he said in his heart, If the people go up to Jerusalem to worship,
their heart will return again unto their Lord Rehoboam; And therefore he
erected two golden Calves, and said unto the people, It is too far for you to
go up to Jerusalem: These are the gods that brought you up out of the land of
the land of Egypt. So those men intending to draw away the Kings Subjects from
their Obedience, and perceiving that if they should join with his Majesty's
good Subjects, in the true and orderly worship of God, that their heart would
return again unto their Lord the King: They have devised an Idol of their
own brain, like Ioroboams Calves, even their Presbyteriall discipline, and cry
that up as the only true worship of God.

And yet I hold not them all to be alike guilty; but that many of them, yea the
far greatest part, have not as yet learned the deepnesse of Satan. We may
distinguish them into three degrees. The first sort, are they who have
contrived the plot, are the ringleaders of the faction, the seducers of
others, and so dogmatizing heretics. For these I can make no excuse; but
leave them as wild Asses to be spoken within the month of their affliction.
The second sort, and the far greatest number, 2. Sam, 15.11.
are those who have been seduced by them, like those Two Hundred who followed
Absolon out of Jerusalem knowing nothing of his Treason. They have been drawn
to dance after their pipe, though they understood not the Spring; and have been
carried headlong with it, before they knew well what they did: And all under
Godly pretenses. For they were made to believe that the very state of Religion,
Church, and Kingdom; did depend upon this New Covenant, and that all men were
bound in conscience, to defend the National confession of faith, and the Oath
sworn by their forefathers. Besides it is a plausible matter with the people
to hear them depraved, that are in authority; but especially to understand of
any liberty or power, which may appertain unto themselves. Furthermore also it
is not unknown to any of Judgment, how much the profession of extraordinary
zeal, and as it were contempt of the world; does work with the multitude.
When they see men go simply in the streets, and bow down their heads like a
bull-rush, though their inward parts burn altogether with deceit, wringing
their necks awry; shaking their heads, as though they were in some present
grief: lifting up the white of their eyes sometimes, at the sight of some
vanity, as they walk, when they hear them give great groans: Cry out against
this sin and that sin, (not in them their hearers, but in their Superiors)
and finally, make long prayers, (under color whereof they devour not only
the houses of Widows but of married folks too) When, I say the multitude to
hear and see such kind of men; They are by and by carried away with a
mavelous great conceit and opinion of them, and with such shows have these
Pharisaicall teachers drawn the multitude after them, who have not their
senses exercised to discern between good and evil: but judge only by the
outward appearance. If they should judge them by their fruits; they should find
them to be very far from the true Religion. S. James has given us a most
full description of the true religion. Iam. 3.17
The wisdom that is from above, is first pure then peaceable, Gentle, and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without judging, and
without hypocrisy. Whereas Solomon describes wisdom to have built her a
house with seven pillars: So the Apostle describes this heavenly wisdom,
(which is the true Religion) by seven properties, neither of which will agree
with their religion. It is not Pure; For therefore is the true religion called
pure because it allows of nothing which is not in it self just, lawful, and
honest. And hereby Lactantius proves against the Gentiles the verity of the
Christian religion. But their Religion allows of many things, which in
themselves are neither Just, lawful, nor honest, as namely, Usury, Sacrilege,
disobedience to lawful authority, and rebellion against Princes. Again, is
not peaceable; for these men are the incendiaries of Christendom, as if they
had come to set fire upon the Earth. Not gentle, For they are more austere in
their carriage, then ever was Cato. Not Easy to be entreated; for they will
neither be persuaded by their friends, nor commanded by their superiors, to do
any thing, but what they will, squaring themselves by that old rule of the
Donatists, Quod volumus sanctum est. Not full of mercy and good fruits: For
they are all for sacrifice, nothing for mercy; All for the duties of the first
Table, neglecting the duties of the second: Their faith has drowned their
charity: For we have known them pull down many Churches, and yet build but a
few Hospitalls. Not without Judging: For of all men living they are known to be
the most rigid censurers of others. And consequently they are not without
Hypocrisy: For that is the true note of an hypocrite, when one, (as our
Savior says) can spy the mote that is in his brothers eye, and not discern
the beam that is in his own. And yet with their pretense of piety they have
deceived a number of simple people. But there is yet a third sort, who have
subscribed the Covenant against their conscience, only for fear of a Massacre,
which they had just cause to suspect, when a Catalogue was taken up of the
names, what in every Parish, of those who refused to subscribe. And now, I pray
you, what is become of their plea of Christian liberty? For when we did press
them to conform themselves unto the Orders of our Church, they alleged that
it was contrary to Christian liberty to enforce men to the doing of any thing
against their conscience, and that a man should be fully resolved in his own
mind of the lawfulness of that which he does. And yet we did urge men only
under pain of suspension and Excommunication; and that after much patience and
forbearance; using withal all fair means to persuade them. But they compel
men to subscribe with them against their Conscience, by Pike and Pistol,
threatening no less unto the refusers then loss of life, goods, and lands. By
this ye may judge of the sincerity of their actions, and what they would do in
other places, if they should once gain the power into their own hands.

All this pains have I taken, to detect these men and their proceedings, to
the end that I might draw you off from their faction: For who would be in love
with that Religion, whose bond is Perjury, whose badge is Rebellion? Therefore,
come out from amongst them and separate your selves; Be not partaker with them
in their sins, lest you receive also of their plagues. Manifest your dislike of
them and their proceedings, by conforming your selves absolutely unto the
Orders of this Church in all things, and think not to halt any longer between
God and Baal; Neither be afraid of their power; for howsoever they prosper for
a time: It is but a Summer storm, Nubecula est and cito pertransibit: You may
assure your selves that in end they will not prevail: 1 Samuel 2.10
For that God by whom Kings reign will give strength unto his King, and exalt
the horn of his anointed: He will scatter the people that delight in War,
even make the hearts of the Canaanites to melt, and their joints to tremble:
Psalm. 91.16.
But will satisfy the King with long life, and show him his salvation.

And now I have wearied both you and my self with a long Speech. I know there
are many here who think I have spoke too much; But I could not have said
less, and manifest my fidelity to God and the King. And if it be true which is
grown unto a Proverb, that Leves loquuntur curae, ingentes stupent: No man can
expect that my Speech should be eloquent: For I protest before God, that I have
spoken out of the grief of my heart, and the very anguish of my Soul. When I
consider the fearful afterclaps that are likely to ensue: It fears me, that
our sins are come unto a full Maturity, and that we are ripe for Gods Sickle
to reap us. I dare not say with St. Paul, that I could wish my self Anathema,
or separated from Christ for my Countrymen: But I can say with a sincere
heart, that I could be content, my life were given in a Sacrifice, so that
could procure the peace of the Church, redeem his Majesty's honor, which is so
deeply wounded, and preserve my native Country from destruction. And therefore
I beseech all you who bear good will unto Sion, that you would apply all your
endeavors, for quenching of this fire; especially laboring to reclaim them
who are committed to your charge: And of some have Compassion, Iud^ verse. 22.23.
making a difference: and others save with fear: Pulling them out of the Fire.
And let all of us be instant with God in Prayer, lifting up our hearts and our
hands to the heavens, and beseeching him who is the Author of peace, and lover
of Concord, that he would be pleased to open the eyes of that people, and turn
their hearts, that they may acknowledge their duty to God, and to his
Vicegerent. Amen.

FINIS.

