THE HOLY PILGRIM, Leading the way to HEAVEN. OR A Divine Direction in the way
of Life, containing a familiar exposition of such secrets in Divinity, as may
direct the simple in the way of their Christian Pilgrimage. In two Books. The
first declaring what man is in the misery of himself. The second, what man is
in the happiness of Christ.

Written by C. L. Nostrum in coelo negotium.

LONDON, Imprinted by Bar: Alsop for William Barringer, and are to be sold at
his shop at the great North door of S. Paul's Church. 1618.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, MASTER NEWTON, TVTOR to the Prince, and Deane of Durham*
Master Murrey, Tutor to the Duke of York, and Master of Sherborne house, and to
the Reverend Society of Prebends of the Church of Durham.
MAy it please you, Charity is the great office of Christianity and humanity:
for the laws of God and nature inioyne all men the works of common profit.
Therefore is action better then contemplation, because this does respect our
private only, but that does give it self into the common Treasure of men's
prosperities.

This cause has made me undertake these pains. For though I am yet vnprofest
in any particular place of charge, either in the Church or state, whereby I
might employ (my little) to more advantage, yet my very being a Christian does
challenge from me the best performance I can, for the common good.

The reasons of my dedication are these. First, there is non of you to whom I
owe not some respect of duty, but to you two Principals, principal respects;
the whole Kingdom being in debt to your labors, which God make prosperous to
his glory; and for the honor of (this our little world) great Britain.
Again, I did purpose you a book, which might have done some service to your
princely charge, and in whose argument I did profess to be much more able
then in this. That being (for a time) stayed from printing, by their authority
in the State, that may command me, I have presumed with this (such as it is)
entreating you to give it your allowance of favor, because I freely cast it
into the common Treasure.

God make all your labors respect the glory of his name, that you may live in
the honor of his service, and obtain the reward of faithfulness.

Your worships in the double bonds of duty and love, CHRISTOPHER LEVER.

The Preface to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, the visible Church is compared to a Vineyard, God is the
master of it, his Ministers are his Laborers, his people his vines. Our great
Master God, gives his entertainment to none but laborers: yet in this
Vineyard are both loyterers and lookers on. The true Laborers are they who in
that sacred profession faithfully endeavor their best diligence. And these
blessed ones shall receive from God, this happy sentence: It is well done, good
and faithful servants, Mat. 25. 21, 23.
ye have been faithful in little, I will make you rulers over much: enter ye
into your Masters joy.

The loyterers are half laborers. These are like the Scribes and Pharisees,
that sit in Moses seat, but walk not in his stepps. And their voice is
Jacobs, Genesis 27. 22
but their hands are Esaues: their words are holy, but their works are
profane, they can deliver the doctrines of the Gospel, but not live in the
duties of the law. And to these will God be terrible in the day of trial, and
tell them that though they have cast out Devils, and done wonders in his name;
yet he will deny them for his, Mat. 7. 22. 23.
and bid them depart (because) they are workers of iniquity.

The lookers on are of two sorts, they are either nolentes, or non valentes.
The first sort are such as can, but will not labor in their spiritual office;
these are they that love ^ase, and fat themselves with prosperity, and then
(like Acsops hen) they are so fat they cannot lay, and like that rich fool in
the Gospel, that said unto his soul, Soul, Luke 12. 19.
thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and
take thy pastime. But God will deride such folly, and tell them that their life
is but a days length. For at night their souls shall be taken from them, Verse
20.
and then whose shall all those things be that they have provided?

The last and least worthy in Gods vineyard, are such as neither will nor can
discharge the duties of their place. These idle Priests, are like Idol Gods
that represent those things which (indeed) they are not. And to these will
Christ say, as in the Parable of the marriage: Mat. 12. 12
Friends how came ye in hither, which have no wedding garment? And doubtless
it cannot but be a very desperate presumption to undertake this charge without
some convenient proportion of sufficiency. Now if any man ask me how came
these things thus to pass? I will answer with the Gospel. The envious man
has done this. Mat. 13. 28.
The Devil that wretch envying the prosperity of the Gospel, Verse 30.
has sown his tares among Gods wheat, which must grow up together, until
the day of the general harvest.

By this little of much, may thou understand (Christian Reader) in what
fashion the world is now suited: the greater number of men, turning their eyes
of care from God and Religion, to look to things of this world, with
affectation. But be thou persuaded, that whatsoever he be, of what estate,
degree, or condition soever, that does not respect God, and the common cause of
religion, more then his own private, he may happly have the name of a
Christian, but doubtless, he has the mark of a reprobate, and God will both
despise and judge him in the general day. For in this case are men disposed as
Jobs cattle were: His Oxen were plowing, Job. 1. 14
and his Asses feeding. So the better sort of men do ever travel the common
cause, but the worse their own particular only, and therefore worthy a worse
comparison then Jobs asses. This knowledge have I thought fit to give thee by
way of admonition, that thou may pity the common cause, and be zealously
affected in thy self with a desire of thy own reformation. God succeed thee in
all thy works of holiness, and may it be his pleasure that these poor labors
of mine may be some cause of thy reducing.

Amen.
The Contents of the Chapters contained in this Book.
The first Book.
OF God. Chap. 1 Of the creation of the World, Chap. 2 Of the Angels, their
nature, their fall. Chap. 3. Of man his first beginning, and the state of his
innocence. Chap. 4 Of the state of man's innocence before his fall. Chap. 5. Of
original sin, the fall and apostasy of man. Chap. 6. Of the moral law of
God, the ten commandments. Chap. 7 Of the accusation of conscience. Chap. 8
The second Book.
OF the Gospel, the new covenant, or the covenant of grace. Chap. 1* Of Christ
Jesus, the sum of the Gospel. Chap. 2 Of repentance, the sorrow of the soul
for sin. Chap. 3 Of Mortification. Chap. 4 Of Regeneration or now Birth.
Chap. 5. Of Justification. Chap. 6. Of the temporary death, and of the several
estates of salvation and damnation. Chap. 7 Of Gods glory. Chap. 8.
O happy life when vain affections die,
And when our hearts can holy works desire:
And when our souls with meditation fly
To God, who did them in our flesh inspire,
How base is earth to heaven that is above?
How vilde we value all, when God we love?
Potest miser dici, qui non potest esse. Seneca. THE FIRST PART OF DIVINE
DIrection, declaring the variable state of man, from the time of his Creation,
to the time of his Regeneration.
Of GOD. Chap. 1.
WHen I first began to understand of GOD, I had this imagination: that God
was a general power, The general knowledge of GOD.
with-in whose Circle all things are, without whom nothing; by whom all things
were made, and to whom all men owe their service.

This learning was taught me by the wisdom of my Natural soul, and by the
common example of Christians: for all men acknowledge a God, and all Christians
this duty. This is the common knowledge, but not the profitable; more
commendable in Philosophers then Christians: being without use, How to know
God, with use.
without application. I have therefore better endeavored my self, and studied
to know God my God: to know him in his Divine nature, in the Trinity of
persons, and in their offices; for thus to know, To know Gods nature.
and then to apprehend and apply, is salvation. To know GOD in his nature, His
attributes.
we must know his attributes; all which may be reduced to these two generals,
Justice and Mercy: in all which we must consider him to be infinite; infinite
in wisdom, infinite in favor, The Trinity.
infinite in power, infinite in time. The Trinity is the distinction of
persons without dividing the substance or nature of God: the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, though they be three distinct in Name, they are one in power,
without division, without inequality. The Son begotten as ancient as the
Father; the holy Ghost proceeding from both, equal with both; no prioritie in
their omnitencie; but all of them being alike able in all things, always
conspiring one end without discord. The foundation of Religion.
This divine mystery is the foundation of Christian religion, without which
there is no faith, no salvation.

It is further necessary to know the Trinity in their several offices; for
though the Godhead be so undivided, The several offices in the Trinity.
as that no one person in the Trinity does work without cooperation, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost conspyring in every act of every several
person; yet in the wisdom of their own Decree, they have determined to the
several persons of the Trinity, The Trinity conspire in every work.
several executions of Offices: wherein though the whole TRINITY conspire,
yet some one Person in the Trinity has the name of Principal: The Creator.
therefore we say, GOD the Father made the World, the Son redeeemed it, The
Creation ascribed to God the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost, cooperating.
the Holy Ghost does govern it. The Creation of the world is ascribed to God
the Father, yet he made the world, and the works therein by his Word. This
Word was God, the second person in the Trinity, who did cooperate and work
with God in the Creation. The holy Ghost also moved upon the Waters, to divide
the Seas and distinguish light: all of them jointly and severally executing the
Decrees of their own divine council. Redemption ascribed to God the Son.


The work of Redemption is properly ascribed to Christ, the second Person,
who descended his Majesty, and in his own person came to make a conquest, of
Sin, The Father and the holy Ghost cooperating The holy Ghost does govern
the Word.
Hell, and Death: Yet in this most gracious work, the Father and the holy
Ghost were not absent, but gave divine assistance to our Blessed Savior JESUS.
Christ when he ascended, left the holy Ghost to be a patron to the
Catholic Church, the which in all occasions does support every member of the
same; yet the Father and the Son have their hands of providence, The Father
and the Son assisting.
at all times working with the holy Ghost, in this divine government.
Therefore howsoever they have several assignements, by themselves appointed,
One labor, one honor in the Trinity.
yet they all conspire in every work of holiness, all of them participating
one labor, one honor.

Thus to know God is needful for every soul that desires happiness, or that
coueteth to have part in the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, without whom there
is no Salvation.

The Use.
GOD being then of a Nature infinitely good, The use*
infinite great, it ought to move in every soul a double affection, love, and
fear: to fear him because he can destroy: to love him, because he will not.
It ought also to provoke all men to an imitation of GOD: that such to whom God
has given greatness, Men must live in Gods imitation.
they use it with the moderation of mercy, which only is able to make the
great good, and the honorable in place, honest of condition. For as GOD is, so
good men, their souls are his Images, and their actions, his imitations.

Again, Use 2.
GOD is a power, distinguished in three persons; the power is not divided;
every Person in the Trinity, having the Deity equally, and in just
comparison; all of them but one God* and every person GOD, all of them
conspiring the same ends from Eternity to Eternity. This ought, but is not
the condition of men. Princes and the great on Earth, are called Gods; these
ought (like God) to combine themselves in holy action, Psalm, 82. 6.
and to bend their power against the enemies of God and man, sin and the
sinful; and not with implacable displeasure to destroy themselves, Such as
are merely politic, and respect greatness without goodness.
their estates with civil disagreements. For though God say, they are Gods,
he says, they shall dye like men: and if evil men, they are then no Gods,
but devils, enemies to God, enemies to the good. And as in the nature of God,
mercy does triumph and has pre-eminence: so in all the godly, there is a
gracious pity, with which they are most affected, Mercy the best proof of
goodness.
and God himself best pleased.

Special Application.
When I had thus considered the nature of God, Special application.
his omnipotency, his mercy, and other attributes, This care is every man's
duty.
it caused me to question my own life, and search the records of my own
actions; whereby I understood the truth of my misery; that I was guilty, Man's
deserrs.
and deserved death and torment, and that the Justice of God would give
sentence against me. Then was the knowledge of Gods Majesty a terror to me,
The effects of a guilty conscience.
I conceived in my fear the very forms of his indignation, and I began to
feel in my soul the very torment of condemnation; as if God had given
sentence, and my soul in the sense of execution. In this astonishment I
remembered mercy, Mercy gives hope in greatest extremities.
and that God was so delighted in the use thereof, as that he carefully
watches cause and opportunity to give it. I did therefore acknowledge and
submit my self to favor: God did descend his greatness, Acknowledgementmost
necessary.
accepted my acknowledgement, and gave me the allowance of his mercy; then I
reduced to memory what my Savior had done for the redemption of mankind,
what he had promised the Faithful, what the penitent. I believed, received
strength, and had my Hope established: The promises that belong to the
faithful, and penitent only.
and growing bold with these encouragements, I desired and obtained the Son
of God, to restore me the Spirit of God, to continue me restored, reformed.
Then could my soul receive content in Divine meditations; then I could despise
the earthly profits, and the vain pleasures of men: How to understand the
world.
call them, and esteem them as dongue, filthy, and that makes filthy. Then I
could justly value the honors off this life, weigh them with Vanity, and
esteem them lighter. Then I could discern Virtue in Poverty, How to judge of
good and evil.
and Holiness in a contemptible degree of Fortune. I could see the Patient
bear their load with alacrity, and secretly scorn at the base estimation of
Earth. The benefit of patience.


Thus a reformed judgment can teach to know and love, know and hate: let me
love, To love and hate.
and be beloved of GOD: let me hate, and be hated of the world.

Of the Creation of the World. Chap. 2.
THe creation The Creation.
of the world has been the admiration of all men that knew not GOD, The reason
why the Creation is not believed of the-infidels.
neither believed Scripture: the reason was, because their understandings
(wanting Divine light,) were not able to comprehend the knowledge of so high a
secret. Therefore the Philosophers have vainly and diversely disagreed in their
several constructions of the beginning of the World: The vain opinions of
Philosophers.
Some denying that the World ever had beginning, but that it was derived (by
the power of Nature) from all Eternity, Their fond arguments. Epicures.
and had eternal perpetuity. To maintain which absurdity, they would
demand how GOD made the World; what instruments he used in the building of so
wonderful a frame, The answer.
etc. Wherein may appear their gross misunderstanding of God his Nature, that
he (like man) could not work without the help of means and instruments:
others more learned, more true, concluded that of necessity the world must
have beginning, and that there was a power Eternal, which made, moved, and
governed all things, and that the world was not eternal: they had this
sufficient argument, that the World did suffer detriment, and decay in it
self: the Elements had lost the purity of their Nature which they had in the
beginning: the mouings of the Spheres and Celestial bodies, (which of all
worldly things are most constant) had endured some alteration; All worldly
things subject to alteration.
so that nothing in the world but did suffer and change, which could not be if
it were eternal. This grounded reason did convince the common opinion of the
Worlds eternity: and did prevail with them that could not be persuaded but by
the power of Reason. This I write, not to persuade Christians, but Insidels and
Epicures: that they, who deny the judgment of Divinity, may be judged by
Reason, and the wisdom of Nature; The judgment of Reason.
which alone is able to Convince all opposition. But to Christians I will only
write what GOD says: How to satisfy and persuade Christians.
for that may serve to inform and satisfy every one that is Faithful. Moses
the servant, the witness of Almighty God, being inspired by the Holie-Ghost,
has left recorded to all posterity, the manner of the Creation of the World:
The Scripture able, and only able to satisfy
to which authority, (not only my self) but every Faithful Christian does
confidentlie adhere, Genesis 1.
disclayming all contradiction, all diversity.

In the story of the Creation, is principally considered the Creator, GOD; and
the Creatures, the work of Gods creation. In the Creator is considered his
power, A compendious understanding of the creation.
his purpose; his power in being able by his Word to finish a work of such
admiration. His purpose (not that he needed any thing that he had made, to
supply any defect in his Divinity) but for the use of a creature which
afterward he was to make, even man: to whom he gave the Heavens, The World
was made for man, and man for GOD.
the Earth, and all the host of them for servants, reserving man for the
service of himself only. In the Creatures is considered their original or
matter of their Creation: and the order wherein they were created. The matter
of the creation, nothing.
This Original was nothing: for God created all things by the power of his
Word, without matter, there being nothing, whereof to make anything. The order
God observed.
The order observed in the Creation was, that God determining the World and the
works therein for the service of man, would (before he made man) store the
world (ma^s house) with every needful providence, The World man's house.
that man (at the very instant of his being) might know himself to be in the
fullness of Gods favor: nothing wanting which might either administer to his
pleasure or necessity. The several days work.
Again, in the Creatures themselves, 1. Light:
God observed a special order. First, he created Light, without which the
works of his greatness had not been visible. Secondly, he created Heaven, 2.
Heaven.
giving that prioritie for the excellence and dignity of the place. 3 The
separation of waters.
Next, he made a separation of the Earth and Waters, and gave the Earth a
generation of all Plants, and Trees bearing seed. Then he placed in the
Firmament, the Planets, and Fixed Stars, 4. He sto. reth the Firmament
the which serve not (...) for Light, and to distinguish seasons, but also (by
their influence) for the generation and government of living creatures. Then
God furnished the two Elements of Water and Air, 5. Fish and Birds.
with creatures of that kind. Last of all, he stored the Earth with the
Creatures which live on that Element; 6 Creatures living upon the Earth.
and when he had finished the Creation of all things, he then made Man after
his own similitude, and gave him the possession of the World, When and how man
was made.
and the creatures he had made: giving him interest in all, and power over
all, The power God gave him.
without exception. This knowledge of the Creation, is necessary in the
understanding of every Christian of careful conscience; with which knowledge,
the less Learned may satisfy themselves: The evil of curiosity.
avoiding the curious search of such nice questions, as may distract the
simple, and avail not to salvation.

The general Use.
The Knowledge of the power of God, in Creating the World does admonish and
remember all men: The Use.
that seeing GOD created all things, by the power of his Word, therefore the
maine interest, and principal claim to all things created, remains to God
only; he being the absolute owner without competitor; The maine interest of
all things is in God.
and that man has only the use and communication of Gods creatures, and that
only with condition and limitation of time. Secondly, it does persuade a
reverence to the Majesty of God, and a fear of his displeasure: for that GOD,
who is able by his Word to create of nothing any thing, is able also by his
Word to destroy any thing, and make it nothing, or worse then nothing.

The purpose of the Creation of the world by God, The purpose of Gods creating
the World.
being for the use and service of man, does remember all men, that the
measure of the love of God to mankind, is infinite, who of his own election,
did please to make a Creature of such noblenes, The infinite measure of Gods
love.
as to be called his Resemblance and Image; giving him a soul of such Divine
nature, as nothing but God can be more: for whose sake God made the world, and
stored it with the plenty of all things which might be fit either for use or
Ornament: all which God has given man, Every thing Created, is either for use
or ornament.
only requiring acknowledgement and thankful service; which condition if a man
perform, God will then a thousand fold double his favors. And whereas these
are but transitory and passable pleasures, God will make them eternal and
inexpressible, both in number and worth: For he that proves a faithful
servant, God will make him a Son, and crown him with the glory of his
Saints, God, will make his servants his Sons.
in the Kingdom of glory, where there is a perpetuity of all happiness.

Secondly, Secondly.
the purpose of Gods creating the World, for the use of man, does admonish all
men to use the Creatures of GOD with moderation and Christian judgment; How to
use Gods creatures.
not to despise them because they are Gods creatures, not to adore them,
because they are but Creatures: but so to use them, as they may supplye that
purpose for which GOD created them.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
seeing GOD created the world for mankind, it does remember us not to
appropriate the Creatures of God to our own private ends, but to communicate
their use with all such as shall need them: All men have propriety in all Gods
creatures.
for God gave not the world to Adam only, but to his posterity also:
therefore every man is lawfully interested in the enjoying of Gods creatures,
if by lawful and allowable means he can attain them. Again, if a Christian
man's necessity require relief, and favorable supportation, Note.
he has a righteous claim to some part of the superfluous possessions of
others: and he that shuts up his compassion against such necessity, is
guilty of injustice, and must answer the fault at the bar of Death. For God
he makes his Sun to shine upon all indifferently, God gave the world to
mankind and not to any particular.
and he has given the World and the Creatures therein to mankind generally,
and not to one man, one Family or one kingdom. This may reach and judge the
merciless, who can see and not relieve the extremities of men, of Christian
men.

Special application.
The meditation of this power, of this love of God, in craving a World of
creatures for the service of man, Special application.
and seeing it has pleased him to make me a reasonable soul, and a sharer of
these infinite blessings: I have advised with my soul to declare my self in
all dutiful demonstrations to my God: and to use the creatures he has given
me, with that moderation he has commanded: I have made a Covenant with my
soul, We ought not to appropriate that which God has made common.
that I will not appropriate that to my private, which God nath made common. If
God give me abundance, I will open my liberality, I will give as God does, to
all, but carefully to the wants of faithful men. I will remember that what I
have, I must use, what I use not I must bestow, least Gods talents be without
employments, and so God discharge me of trust. If God give me wisdom and
knowledge more then others, I will not be silenced, How to employ Gods talents.
I will not obscure the grace and gift of God, I will not deny God, I will not
deny the world my service, but in whatsoever God shall enable me, in that I
will be industrious. If I can do nothing of desert, or common profire, yet I
will waste my hours in holy meditation. A holy life is a continual travel.
I have vowed I will still travel in holy exercise. When I cannot profit
generally, I will pray generally. We are all the creatures of one God, the word
of God gave form to every creature: therefore every thing that presents my
eye, shall move my holy meditations. How to occasion an holy meditation.
When I behold the wonderful frame of heaven, I shall reuise on the creation,
and admire God his mercy, his majesty. I shall remember the happiness of
heaven, and refresh my adversity with hopeful confidence. When I consider the
earth, Where to repose our hope.
I shall remember the baseness of my beginning, what I was in sin, what I am
in grace. This shall teach me to deny my self, To deny our selves is to gain
our selves.
and wholly to depend on the favor of God. When I see unreasonable, noisome,
or evil creatures, I shall have cause of acknowledgement: for God might have
made me so, or worse. Lastly, when I shall see wicked men proud themselves in
their vanities, I shall both pity and glory: Pity can respect our enemies.
pity the misery of their souls, and glory the Fortune of my own. And thus
with these and such meditations my soul shall breath content.

Of the Angels, their Nature, their fall. Chap. 3.
THat the angels were created is most certain: The creation of Angels is
supposed to be the first day of the Creation.
the time of their creation is not certain, but doubtful and diversely believed:
many men spend their judgments in conjectures: all such are more curious then
Wife, because the truth thereof cannot certainly be determined: neither if it
could, were the knowledge thereof necessary, or material to salvation: for
whatsoever knowledge is necessary for the happiness of our souls, Note.
is by God himself taught in the testimony of holy Scriptures. This knowledge
of the time of the creation of Angels, being not taught by God, does make the
search thereof unprofitable, Ignorance is better then unprofitable knowledge.
Gods denying is a forbidding.
unlawful: for God does nothing at peradventure, but all things in judgment,
and with the advice of his divine wisdom. God then having denied this
knowledge, does forbid the search of this unknown, unprofitable knowledge.
That which I desire to know, which I desire to teach, is contained in the
testimony of holy Scripture; the which denying me this knowledge of the
creation of Angels, I forbear to search the knowledge of Gods secrets; All
necessary knowledge to salvation is contained in the scripture.
and be content rather to be thought ignorant, then audaciously bold with
forbidden knowledge.

That which is needful to be known of Angels, The nature, the office of
Angels. The nature of their substance, Their quality. Power. Their office.
is their nature, their office. In their nature must be considered what they
are in substance, what in quality. Their substance is of the nature of our
souls; pure and spiritual, eternal (in respect of ending) and without
corruption. In their quality is considered their power; being at all times, and
upon all occasions able for the execution of Gods service. Their office is,
that they are Gods messengers; their employment is either in judgments or
mercies. This compendium is the knowledge of them all in general before the
fall and apostasy of Angels; all of them, The good and evil Angels were all
created in one nature.
the Angels and those that now are Devils, being at their first creation, of
one quality, one power, and one excellence of nature. After the fall of Angels,
who for their unsupportable pride, were cast from the presence of God into
enternall darkness and damnation, the Angels divided themselves. The better
part keeping their first estate, How the Angels were divided from the Devils.
kept their entertainment with God, and continued his favor and service. The
worse dividing themselves, left the service of God, ^^at the Devils la^our.
and the fellowship of good Angels, bend their whole endeavor against God,
against his blessed^ Angels, and against the Saints that love and serve him.
This apostacy and division of Angels, has divided the^ in their natures, and
in their offices: The care of ^ood angels
the good angels ever laboring the good of men: the evil angels to hinder and
prevent the goodness of God, and good angels; laboring by all means to bring
mankind to their own condemnation. In their offices likewise they disagrce;
The full oposition of he good and ^ill angels.
for God does commonly employ his good Angels in his works of mercy, and
favorable protection. The Devils he employeth in his judgments and
corrections, not that he needs their service, but that he forces them
against their wills to his obedience: these several employments of the good and
evil angels, are not always of necessity though very common: for God does
often make his good angels destroy and inflict vengeance: and the Devils he can
use in his works of greatest mercy. And this the Devils do not with content,
God can apply the Devils in the work of his own glory.
but are either forced by the irresistable power of God, or else they deceive
themselves in the end of their own workings, God making that which they intend
for evil, to reach an end far beyond, In his works of mercy.
and contrary to their expectation and purpose.

There is this difference also in the executions of their several offices; The
difference in the. liberty of good and evil angels
the good Angels have both liberty and pleasure in the service of almighty
God; and they labor with content and alacrity. The devils have neither liberty
nor pleasure, but being fettered with limitations, cannot do what they would,
And as good and evil angels, so good and evil men.
but what they are only licenced. The angels are Gods servants, the devils are
his slaves: both labor in his work, but with great inequality. Now to prove
the substance of this doctrine by the testimony of Scripture, I might enlarge
my self with the number of authorities; the which because they are frequent, I
will produce only somefew, such as may satifie doubt. In the 104. Psalm, the
Prophet admiring and praising God for his wonderful creating and governing the
Word, in the fourth verse. Psalm. 104. 4.
he says: God made the spirits, (that is, the Angels) Messengers, and a
flaming fire his Ministers. This verse is again alleged by the author to the
Hebrews: who to prove the pre-eminence of the Son of God, Hebr. 1. 6.
says: that all the Angels worship him, and proves by the testimony of the
Prophet David, Hebr. 1. 7.
that Angels are but Messengers, or Ministers: and that they are of a substance
like fire or pure air. By which testimony is proved both the nature and the
office of Angels: their nature, that they are spirits like fire; their office,
that they are Ministers of Messengers. Their office is again repeated in the
14. verse: Are they not all Ministering Spirits, Verse. 14.
sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation; by
which is declared the purpose of their ministration and service: that is, for
the benefit of Gods Elect, both to prevent the enemy, and to further them in
their holy exercise. To prove the power of Angels, we may remember what God
by an Angel did for the Israelites in Egypt; Exodus 14.
what he did when he brought them out by an Angel. 2. King. 12. 35.
God destroyed of Saneheribs Host in one Night 185000. Dan. 6. 16.
An Angel preserved Daniell from the Lions: Act. 12. 7.
delivered the Apostles out of Prison: Dan. 3. 23.
the three Children from the Furnace: the Scripture is full of the
demonstrations of their powerful acts, God working his admirable effects by
the service of his Angels. Again, if we reduce to memory, the most
memorable of all Gods mercies, we shall find that in the execution, his Angels
are either Ministers, or Messengers, and often both.

To omit all other particulars, that most worthy, most meritorious and happy:
the Redemption of mankind, by the birth, and by the death of Jesus Christ;
were not the Angels continual workers in that ministration? God sent his
Angel Gabriell to bring the first news thereof, Luke 1. 26. etc.
to the most blessed Virgin Marie. Luke 29.
Secondly, Luke 2. 13.
as soon as Christ was borne of the Virgin, the holy Angel did publish and
preach it to the Shepherds; multitudes of Heavenly Soldiers praising and
magnifying God for so great a benefit. How often did the Angels visit and
comfort our Savior? The Devil could acknowledge that God had given his Angels
charge to provide, Luke 4. 10. 11.
that his Son should not hurt his foot (that is) should not perish in the least
particular. Christ being in his agony upon the mount, there appeared an Angel
to him, comforting him. At his resurrection the Angels attend, and are the
first publishers of that blessed news. Luke 22. 43. 44.
Lastly, Luke 24. 4.
at his ascension the holy Angels attend to bring him to the bosom of his
Father, Act. 1. 10. 11.
comforting the Apostles with the promise of his return. Thus we see by
testimony of Scripture, what the Angels are, what their office is, The gracious
disposition of good Angels.
and how they are affected; of so gracious a disposition, and so inclinable to
the good of men, that they have joy and consolation in Heaven among themselves
at the Conversion of a sinner. Luke 15. 7. 10.
Therefore in all respects of nobleness and excellency, they are the most
Sovereign of all creatures, whom God has ordained to be continual wayters in
his holy presence.

It is by many doubted, A question.
by some demanded, whether men may not lawfully implore the favor and
assistance of angels: for in their reasons it does seem equal, that seeing
God has given his Angels the charge of his elect, and has made them
ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 14. The angels have a charge of holy men.
for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation, that therefore they
implore their gracious protection, give some acknowledgement of thanks to the
holy Angels, by whom they have help and supportation, in the passage of their
Christian pilgrimage. The answer. First.
To answer this, there is a double doubt to be resolved. First, I doubt whether
every faithful christian man and woman, have one particular Angel assigned
them, and whether that Angel he at all times continually present. Secondly,
Secondly, These doubts cannot be satisfied.
whether the Angels of God not present, can hear the prayers of men directed
to them. The first, that every man has his Angel assigned him, was never yet
substantially proved: and that angels absent should be able to hear our
prayers present, is dangerous to acknowledge; lest thereby we take divinity from
God, We must not take from God to give his Angels.
and give it to his Angels. And whereas they reinforce this argument with some
examples in the Scripture, as in the 48. of Genesis, the 16. verse, Genesis 48. 16.
where Jacob blessing the sons of Joseph, says: The Angel which has
delivered me from all evil, An answer to an objection.
bless the children, etc. It is answered, that by Angel, Jacob here
understands God. Again, if the words will not bear that construction, but
that it must be granted to be an Angel, the messenger or Minister of
almighty God; God gives his special favor to special and choice particulars.
it is not therefore granted, that every Christian has the like degree of
favor as Jacob had; he being a special select, by whom God would declare
himself to be wonderful, giving him extraordinary degrees of favor, and
extraordinary protection. Therefore the Angel of God did oftentimes assist
him, Quaere.
both in his grief, and hopes; the Angel presenting himself to Jacob in a
visible form; and Jacob wrestling with the Angel, the which familiarity has
not been granted but to some choice particulars only. And Jacob does not direct
his prayer to the Angel, We may pray to God, for the protection of angels, but
not to the angels for Gods protection.
but to God, that the Angel might protect his grandchildre^; and in praying for
this extraordinary blessing for his children, he does not conclude that
therefore every Christian man has the like extraordinary favor. They are
therefore dangerously deceived, who for giving the holy Angels their
demonstrations of thanks, give them adoration and divine worship; and so
coveting to please, displease the holy Angels that attend them.

This is one extremity; there is another, Another extremity.
and that is a remissness: when men acknowledge no reverence, no respect to the
dignity of holy angels. The holy men of all ages at the sight of an Angel would
use extraordinary respect of humility and reverence. A reverence due to holy
angels.
Abraham he bowed himself in reverence to the ground and called the Angel
Lord: Genesis 18. 2. 3.
so likewise in the example of all the godly. Objection.
And though men object that in these times the angels do not present
themselves, (as in the old world) in visible forms; and therefore they need
no reverence, Answer.
there being no knowledge of their presence. I answer, that though they appear
not in forms, The angels often present with us in their spiritual nature.
yet they are notwithstanding, often present in their spiritual natures: which
though our corporal eyes cannot discern, yet a spiritual judgment and holy
meditation will remember us. And this is answerable to the judgment of Saint
Paul, who would have men and women use decency and respect, even because of the
angels. 1 Cor. 11. 10.
Therefore (says he) ought a woman to have power on her head (that is to be
covered) because of the Angels: for if there be a duty of reverence to men,
with whom we converse, there is doubtless a reverence also due to the holy
angels that converse with us.

The general Use.
This doctrine of the Creation, the nature, the power, and the office of
angels, does admonish and remember al men to make these and such like
profitable uses.

First, Use. 1. The angels are witnesses of Gods power.
it does remember us the mighty power of God, and that in a double respect.
First, in being able by the power of his word, to create a Creature of that
excellence and power of nature: in nature excellent, in number infinite.
Secondly* God attended by angels.
in being served and attended by this infinite number of powerful creatures,
one whereof is able (if God please to command) to destroy the world and all
the generations on earth. God then being of such infinite power in himself, in
his servants the Angels: it ought justly to move al men to a reverence of so
great a Majesty: and to a fear to provoke a power so able and infinite. The
second use.
Again, the apostasy of those angels that fell from their obedience, and
first state of happiness, does admonish all men, that seeing the Angels, of such
power, of such excellence, and so near God in his favor, The fall of angels
does dissuade security and presumption.
in his presence, were tempted to fall from so great happiness, that no man
therefore be secure or presume in the confidence of his own trust; but daily
to beg, and wholly to rely upon the mercy and providence of GOD, without whom
there is no safety, no security. The greatest power in the world being but
weakness without the strength of his supportation. Secondly, as Saint Peter
says:) If God spared not the Angels that had sinned, 2. Pet, 2. 4. 6
but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness,
to be kept unto damnation: Their damnation does conclude the damnation of
evil men.
neither will he spare the transgressions of men, that of knowledge and
purpose offend him, For the angels are greater then men, Verse. 11.
both in power and might: if God then spare not the better, he will not spare
the worse, but cast them likewise into chains of darkness, to be kept unto
damnation. The third use.
Again, though the angels were of this excellency and dignity of nature, and
although many of them did fall from their state of innocence, Christ did restore
the falling man, not the falling Angels.
as Adam afterward did: yet the Redeemer of the world Christ Jesus, did not
vouchsafe to take their nature and redeem them, but left them in the judgment
of condemnation, undertaking and finishing the work of Redemption for men and
not for Angels. Heb. 2. 16. 17. 18.
And this ought to provoke all men to a zealous affection of love toward God,
who gave his only begotten, his only beloved Son for the redemption of men,
preferring them in his love before the Angels that had offended. Lastly, The
fourth use.
in that the Angels of God are commonly present with christian men in their
spiritual natures, Heb. 1. 14.
being sent of God to minister for their sakes that shall be heirs of
salvation: It does remember us first, the wonderful love of God to mankind, in
being content that his choice servants the Angels, that wait in his presence,
near the person of his Majesty, should be employed about men, in the service
of their salvation. Secondly, Secondly*
it ought to move men to a precise reverence, A respect due to the reverence of
Holy Angels.
in the common behavior of their lives: that they forbear not only the
committing of gross and capital sins: but all unseemliness both of words
and actions, (as Saint Paul says) for the reverence of Angels. 1. Cor. 11, 10.
For as Devils are banished from the possessed by prayer, and holy exercise: so
the good Angels then leave our company, Note.
when we delight in wicked or unseemly behavior.

Special application.
This knowledge of the mercy, Special application.
of the power of God in creating the Angels, and appointing them to minister to
all the children of grace, shall bind me in the most assured bonds of duty and
thankful acknowledgement to my God. To repose in God is assurance of safety.
I will also confidently repose in the trust of Gods providence, being assured
that himself, that his holy Spirit, that his Angels are my supporters. I will
never despayringly fear the evil of men, of Devils, or what evil power
soever; because I know whose I am, and in whose company. I will reform the
errors of my life, and watch my behavior, I will endeavor to avoid both
sin and unseemliness in all my actions; that thy holy Angels may love and
not loath my fellow ship: I will so endeavor that my conscience may assure
me I am thine, appointed to salvation; Heb. 1. 14.
and therefore in the protection of Angels I shall also receive content and a
pleasure inexpressible; that thy holy Angels have joy in Heaven at the news of
my salvation. Luke 15. 7.
Holy and blessed spirits, they are so delighted with the use of mercy, as
that they rejoice and congratulate the prosperity of men. O my God, I will
acknowledge thy greatness, and thy goodness in the creation of Angels: I will
damn their infidelity that believe it not: thou have said it, who dare
question it? I will therefore believe it, acknowledge thy power, praise thy
mercy, The Saduces deny that there are Angels
and (with reverence) remember the office and ministration of thy holy Angels.

Of Man his first beginning, and the state of his Innocence. Chap 4
WHen God had created the world, and had given being and proportion to al
creatures save man; that he mightconclude his labor with a work of
extraordinary admiration, Man the most excellent of Gods work.
he then made man, giving him the possession of the world he had created: In
this work of God there are these considerations. First, First.
the advice and deliberation of the Trinity, in determining this work: Genesis 1.
26.
God said, Let us make man, etc. Secondly, Second.
God made man of a preexistent matter, not creating him of nothing as he did
the other Creatures: The Lord also made Man of the dust of the ground, Genesis 2.
7.
etc. Thirdly, Thirdly.
man was made in the image of God, and according to his likeness. Genesis 1. 26.
Let us make man in our image, and according to our likeness. Fourthly,
Fourthly.
the rule and government God gave man over all creatures; giving him liberty
over all, to use them in their kind with moderation: And let them rule over
the fish of the sea, Genesis 1. 26.
and over the soul of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth,
and over every thing that creeps and moves on the earth, verse. 26 Fifthly,
Fifthly.
is to be considered the end of man's Creation which is for the glory and honor
of God that made him. Isay. 43. 7.
Every one shall be called by my name, for I created him for my glory, formed
him and made him. These particulars are most material, and of nearest
consideration in the creation of man, and because of their importance, I will
somewhat dilate upon every particular. First of the advice and deliberation God
used when he formed man: God said, Let us make man. Genesis 1. 26.
When he created the World, and the Works therein, he said, Let there be, and
there were; but when he comes to make man, he says, Let us make by whom he
puts a difference betwixt man and every other creatur, The difference God
made between man and his other c^^^tures.
that as man should excel all other in the excellency of his nature, and in
the purpose of his end; so God would honor him above all in the manner of his
Creation. Let us, that is, the three persons in the Trinity, the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost; the which at the making of man, are personally understood: at
the creating of the world, they are not personally, but generally understood,
in the unity of their Godhead, Note.
For so I understand the words of Gods creating, Let there be, to be meant by
the Godhead indivisible; the words, Let us make, to be meant by the persons
distinguished. And though no man can be able to give a reason of the secret
will of God: yet this may be imagined, A supposed reason of Gods secret will.
that seeing the world and all the creatures therein (save man) have only a
general respect to the honor of God, and therefore were they by the general
power of Gods divinity created: but man (being determined in the counsel of
God) that he should be an occasion that the whole Trinity should have divine
exercise in the government of his life; The Trinity have divine exercise in
the government of man.
and every one in their several assignements, as should please themselves to
appoint: therefore God (in the Trinity of persons) made man, because
afterward in the Trinity of persons he was to govern him. God he gave man a
law, God the Father gave man a law.
which he being not able to keep, did condemn him. Christ the second person,
moderateth the law, and gives the Gospel, Christ moderateth the law, and
gives the Gospel. The holy Ghost moves grace.
promising salvation to all that will believe. The holy Ghost he moves in the
hearts of Gods elect, and gives grace to apprehend by faith, the means of
salvation. Thus are they personally busied in the government and preservation
of man; thus were they personally at his Creation. The matter of man's creation.
The difference God made in the creation between man and all other creatures.


The second consideration, is the matter of man's creation. And this in a double
respect is considerable, in the person of God; first, God when he formed other
creatures, he required no matter, but gave them being by his word. But when
he formed man, he first prepared his matter, then gave the form, and created
man. Wherein God does use a double care, a double diligence; not that he could
not create man of nothing as he had the rest of his creatures, but he did it in
the wisdom of his divinity, The reason why God made man of a preexistent
matter.
for respect and causefull consideration. First, to express his double, or
rather his manifold affection to that creature. Secondly, Secondly.
to prevent the proud imagination, man might have of the nobleness of his
nature, The natural pride of flesh.
it being yet in the pride of our flesh; to boast our descent, and to derive
our families from antiquity and greatness.

The third consideration is the distinguishing form of man, The form of man
his soul.
his reasonable soul, whereby God does distinguish him from all the Creatures
of earth, giving him reason and discourse to in able him for the government of
the world. This is considerable in these respects. First, the order God
observed in the creation: God first made the world, afterward he made man,
and gave him the possession. The order God used at the making of man.
So when he made man, he first framed the body, then formed the soul, He
made not the body and soul at one instant, but in their times, and in order:
for when he had made the house, he then put in the tenant, and not before.
Secondly, is considered the excellency of the nature of our souls. The nature
of our souls. Genesis 2. 7.
For God neither made nor created our soul, but inspired it by the virtue of
his divinity. Genesis 2. 7. The Lord God also made man of the dust of the ground,
there is the matter of his body. And breathed in his face the breath of life:
there was the nature and excellence of his soul; being the breath of almighty
God, divine, spiritual and eternal. And the man was (then) a living soul:
The soul is the distinguishing form of man.
for before God inspired the soul, was man only framed and not formed, his
reasonable soul being that which does distinguish him from all other
creatures, being (in respect of his soul) the nearest resemblance to Gods
divinity. Genesis 1. 26 Man is Gods image in respect of his reasonable soul.
For so God determining his creation, says: Let us make man in our own image,
according to our likeness. Man's soul, being (in respect of reason and eternity,
a resemblance of Gods divinity.

The fourth consideration, Fourthly.
is the rule and government God gave man over all creatures. Gen, 1. 26. Genesis
1. 26.
And let them rule over the fish of the seas etc. First, it is considered, that
God by giving man this authority, With what cautions God gave man government.
does not disinable himself of the government of his own creatures, but does
reserve to himself the Sovereign regality; giving man a stewardship, and
superintendance only. Psalm. 24. 1
The earth (says holy David) is the Lords, and all that is therein, the round
world, and they that dwell therein. Secondly, Secondly
in that it is said, God gave them rule, etc. there is a double consideration.
First, that God communicates his power to mankind in general, not to this or
that particular. The general descent of power derived upon all.
For God speaks in the plural number, He gave them, and not him power, etc.
So that the power is derived upon all, and not upon one, or any number of
certain particulars. Again, these words, he gave them, have relation to the
words, he created them. Genesis 1. 27. Genesis 1. 27.
God created the man in his image, in the image of God created he him, he
created them male and female. So when he gave man the government of the world,
he says, He gave them that is, The man and woman had a like authority in Gods
creatures.
the man and the woman: for as God did not divide them in their Natures, so he
would not divide them in the use and government of his creatures, but
whatsoever is lawful to the one, is lawful to the other; both of them having
equal and indifferent power in the use of Gods creatures.

Lastly, Fifthly.
is considered the end of man's creation, The end of man's creation.
which is, that God may be glorified in the service of so noble a creature. I
say, 43. 7. Isay. 43. 7.
I created him for my glory, formed him and made him. God is glorified or
honored in a double respect. Note.
First, in acknowledgement. Secondly, in personal service. In
acknowledgements, when men have a thankful remembrance of Gods mercy in the
creation, and in the Redemption of mankind. This acknowledgement is declared in
the meditations, prayers, How we should declare our thanks to God.
thankesgiuings, and reverence of holy men, to the Name, the Memory, and the
majesty of God. In the 15. of Exodus, the second verse, Moses acknowledging
Gods mercy in their deliverance says: Exodus 15. 2.
The Lord is my strength and praise, and he is become my salvation: he is my
God, and I will prepare him a tabernacle: he is my Fathers God, and I will
exalt (or honor) him. And the Prophet David has it common in his holy
meditations, that he will honor God in his acknowledgements; and condemns
the hypocrisy of evil men, that honor God with their lips, and have their
hearts far from him. And Saint Paul in the heat of his zealous affection,
calls this glory his rejoicing, and disclameth every other object of glory,
Gal. 6. 14.
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Secondly, Secondly.
God is honored in the personal services of men, and that is when they
carefully travel in the exercise of such Christian duties, as he has
commanded. How we should glorify God in personal service.
This has relation to that conditional proposition of our Savior Christ: If
you love me keep my commandments. For if we neither keep nor endeavor to
keep his commandments, we love not; and whom we love not, we cannot honor.
And as Christ says of himself. The works which I do, be are witness of me,
etc. So the endeavors of our lives, Ouractions witness our affections.
witness what we are, and whether we honor God, and love him or not. These
five particulars, are the maine considerations to be regarded in the creating
of man. In the creator is remembered his deliberation, Let us: in the Creation,
the matter and the form; the matter earth, A compendium of the chapter.
the form Gods breath. In the creature, his rule, his end: his rule, he was
Steward, and superintendent Lord over all: his end, the glory and service of
his creator God.

The general Use.
The general use of this doctrine, The Use
is a general acknowledgement of duty that all men owe to God their creator,
Man made noble out of baseness.
who (of his own accord) has been pleased to make man so noble a creature,
of so base a matter; to endow him with a soul so near the nature of his
divinity, to give him such rule, to ordain him such an end, equal to the
honor of Angels, Note.
equal to their happiness This may remember all men what God had done for
them, what God does expect from them. It may remember all, what they were, what
they are, what they shall be, what they should be. This knowledge may both
remember and admonish; it will also prevail in all their hearts that have the
least mouings of Gods holy Spirit in them. For he that knows this,
considers it, The reprobate only are careless in the state of their
salvation.
and is not moved, does declare against himself, and does judge himself to
be reprobate, who failing in the purpose of a Christian life, does not only
disinherit himself of Gods gift, which is earth, but of Heaven, which he
would give; and does by that act of disobedience, both deprive himself of Gods
favor (which is happiness) and purchase to himself a state of damnation, What
he gains that leeseth Gods favor.
infinite in time, infinite in torment. Secondly, seeing man was made ofso base
a matter, of the dust of the ground, The disgrace of ambitious and aspiring
spirits.
the basest part of the basest element, it does disgrace the pride and
ambitious spirits of men, who vaunt themselves in the nobleness of their
descent, or in the prosperity of their fortunes. For God has given one and the
same beginning to all men; the honorable and the base, the rich and the poor,
being all derived from one first matter, a matter so base, as nothing could be
more, being the refuse and of-scourings of the earth, which all of us were in
our first matter, Genesis 3. 19.
before our creation; which all of us shall be in our graves, where we shall al
be reduced and brought back to our first matter. This being considered, how
vain a folly is it for men to proud themselves in their prosperities, Pride
the vainest folly in man's nature.
and disgracefully to repute men for their difference of fortune? for the best
man is but base earth, and the basest man is created in Gods image; all of one
nature, and in one office, and all to one end ordained. Therefore in a
Christian indgement, there is no difference of men, but the difference of good
and bad. And this inequality is not in their nature, What the true difference
of men is.
but in the corruption and defect of nature. And the fasest way to esteem men,
is to compare them in their gifts of grace, and not of fortune. For (with God)
the least spirit of grace, The difference of grace and fortune.
though in the lowest degree of fortune, does out-value, and is able to
disgrace the greatest state in the world (if not gracious.)

Special application.
This knowledge of my creation, Application.
shall resolve me in my dutiful obedience to God; that seeing his hands have
fashioned me, 1. Cor. 3. 17 A reformed resolution.
and that his mercy has made my body a Temple or a Sanctuary for his holy
Spirit to dwell in, therefore I will carefully keep this body. this temple
from the filth of sin, and endeavor my self in such holy exercise, that my
soul may have the perpetual fellowshippe of the Holy Ghost, without which,
there is no happiness, no salvation: I will refrain to company with the
leprosy of sin, lest I run into their danger, and defile my body, this
temple with diseased company. I will hate the imitation of men's vices, I will
not be tempted with their Fellowship; because I know that when I profane my
body, the temple of the holy Ghost, Holy bodies Gods temple.
I shall banish that sweet society, frustrate my hope, and wound the quiet of my
conscience. (O my God) of base earth thou made me a noble Creature; I had no
life, no soul before thou inspired it, thou gave me reason and understanding
to enable me for thy divine service; thou have ordained me thy servant; God
that gave grace, can only continue it.
thou have given me entertainment: continue me (I besee^h thee) in this
service; let my soul, let my body, let every power, let every part thereof,
have their employments: I desire no change, I was thine from the beginning,
continue me for ever. Thy self (O my God) inspired my Soul, What our soul is.
it is thy breath, and therefore precious, it was thine before I had it, help
me to keep it in the time, and in the danger of my pilgrimage, and when thou
shall call it home, I will gladly breath it back, for with thee there is
only safety, with thee there is happiness without time, How and where to
repose our confidence.
without measure. In the mean time keep me from the danger of leesing: let
me walk in the directions of thy holy Spirit. I am not able to move my self
in an holy course, if thy hand lead not, I shall either faint or wander: O
keep me from both; A needful care.
that I may travel the passage of my life with alacrity and spiritual
profit, that this earth, this body of earth may pass to his grave in hope,
and that this breath, this soul may return from whence it came with
confidence. This is the happiness for which I will only endeavor, for which I
will always pray (O my God) thou have made me resolute.

Of the State of man's Innocence before his fall. Chap. 5.
THat man was created good, Man created innocent.
holy, and innocent is evident by the testimony of Scripture, neither is it
doubted of the christian world to whom I write. Therefore I shall less need to
travel in the search of authorities, neither spend time and words to prove a
general grant. For when God had ended the work of his creation, the holy Ghost
says, that ^ee viewed all that he had made, Genesis 1. 31.
and lo (...) was very good. For God being the father and fountain of
goodness, Nothing but good can be derived from God.
it was ^ot possible that any thing that was e^ill should be derived from him*
but ^ike himself, so his work was perfect^y good; no blemish, no defect. It
is ^herfore generally to be believed, that Adam at his first creation was holy
and innocent, no defect of nature, no corruption of sin: and that God gave
him the liberty of free will, and power (if so he would) to continue his estate
of happiness. Ecclus. 15. 14. 15.
From this doctrine of the free will of man before his fall, Free Will.
has risen much controversy, and strife of words, the knowledge whereof is
more dangerous the^ profitable in the understandings of the simple and
unlearned: The evil (...). of men.
all men being naturally desirous to know or seem to know those intricate and
nice questions, and few that have sufficient wisdom ey^her to deliver or
judge them. I will therefore sparingly deliver my judgment.

Adam in the state of his innocence, ADAMS condition in the state of his
innocence.
had this condition of happiness: First, he was in the full favor of God, a joy
inexpressible. Secondly he had the world and the creatures therein for his use
and pleasure, all which were then perfectly good. Th^rdly, he had power given
him of God to continue this happiness to himself and his posterity for ever.
The first, that he enjoyed the full favor of God is proved in the proof of the
^econd and third; ADAM rich in spiritual and temporal blessings.
for the gifts both ^emporall and spiritual which GOD gave him, do well
declare the infinite measure of Gods love to him: God giving him all that was
created, and ^ore then was created: a divine soul, and with that such
induments of grace, ^s made him a creature most excellent and happy: Secondly
For the second, that God gave him. the possession of the world, ^oth for his
use and pleasure, is already proved. Yet more, God for an extraordinary
demonstration of his favor, planted a Garden in Eden, Genesis 2. 8. v.
of admirable variety, Ver. 9.
both for use and ornament: For out of the ground made the Lord God ^o grow
every tree pleasant to the sight (that ^as for ornament, ADAM had all things
needful both for use and ornament.
) and good for meat (that was for use) the tree of life also in the ^iddest of
the garden, and the tree of know^edge of good and evil.

These were there both for the beau^y of the place, and for the trial of ^ans
obedience. And God gave Ada^ ^berty to eat thereof (freely) of eue^e tree in
the Garden, ADAMS liberty and restraint.
only prohibiting him to taste of the tree of knowledge. These benefits, this
bounty was large; yet does God still enlarge himself in his favor to Adam,
and deuiseth to make him an help fit for him; Genesis 2. 18
for he said, It is not good for man to be alone: As if God did labor his
invention to devise for the good, and for the help of man. Ver. 20.
Therefore he caused all the creatures to come before Adam, but among them all
he found not an help meet for him. Verse. 22.
Then God made woman, and gave her for the consolation of man. Thus did God
derive his blessings by degrees upon man, The degrees of Gods favor to ADAM.
still enlarging the measur of his bounty and goodness toward him. So as there
wanted nothing, which in the Wisdom of God was thought fit for man's
prosperity. Lastly, to all these favors, Free Will in ADAM before his fall.
GOD yet gives one, more then all; and that was a free will and power in
himself to derive these infinite blessings upon himself and his posterity for
ever; no mixture of grief to distaste them, no death to deprive them; but
themselves and these pleasures to be infinite and unspeakable. And yet more,
that all these and their continuance, The easy condition between God and ADAM.
was given upon such easy condition, as (in our imaginations) could hardly
tempt a reasonable man to a small forfeit: An apple, perhaps no better, or not
so good in taste, as many other in the garden, whereof Adam might have freely
eaten, without fear, without forfeit. Witnesses of Gods love.
All this does but witness the infinite love of God to his creature man, who
gave him so great a power, and had proposed so inestimable a reward for so
small a service. Here I might enlarge my self with the conte^tious opinions of
men in this argument, Much needless controversy in this argument.
all which of purpose I avoid, because I had rather speak to men's
understandings with profit, then be vainly curious

The general Use.
This (as does the former) does remember all men, The Use
how surpassing the love of God was to mankind, who (notwithstanding man was
made of a matter so base and unworthy, as nothing like him: yet does GOD
descend his Majesty to dignifie his baseness; and did heap such honor, such
savor upon man, as made him the most excellent, and the most happy of all the
creatures of God; giving him felicity and power to continue it; which of all
the blessings and gifts of GOD was the greatest. For that is thought to be the
greatest misery to have been happy, To have been happy is a misery.
and to be altered: and the greatest happiness is to be able to continue
happy. Which power God gave to the liberty of man, to be, or not to be happy
for ever. This extraordinary degree of favor to our first Father Adam, does
deserve thankful acknowledgement from all men, because the favor did reach
to all the generations of Adam even to us, and to them that shall succeed us
for ever. All men being then in Adam, and Adam then a compendium of all men:
the honor and the grace being conferd to every man in general without
exception of any.

Special application.
Seeing God has thus honored my father Adam, Special application.
enlarging his benevolence to him above the rest of his creatures: and seeing
this was not given to Adam only, Whatsoever was given to ADAM, was given to
every particular.
but to his posterity for ever, even to my self being a son of Adam, and
derived from his beginning: I do therefore acknowledge my self in as great a
debt of beholding to my God, as Adam my Father, to whom God gave these
blessings by name, and in special manner, my self being interested in the
benefit, as well as Adam: nor Adam being able to out-trude me from this
favor, and continue himself: but as his sin made himself and me both alike
miserable, so a constant continuing in his innocence has made us both
eternally happy, without fear, without hazard, no interruption. I will
therefore advise with my self, A Resolution.
what honor, what thanks, what service is due from Adam unto God: I will
compare the infinite greatness of God to Adams nothing; Note.
I will measure them in the infinite distance of their worths; God was only
moved to favor by himself.
I shall study to know what desert, what moving cause could provoke God to
those degrees of favor. I will search this desert in the excellence of man's
nature. I shall doubtless fail, though I search there with diligence. I will
then resort to the mercy of God, and there inquire; there I shall rightly
understand this knowledge. For thy self (O God) did move thy self to these
effects. Thy mercy did move thy majesty, Mercy does move maieiesty.
thy favor thy power. Thy goodness did persuade thy greatness, thy
greatness did effect what thy goodness caused. Thus was God tempted by
himself, to dignifie my Father Adam. Adam could be no cause of his own
honor, ADAM no cause of his own good.
because it was in Gods decree before Adam had being. Therefore had Adam the
greater cause of thankefulnes; that God did please (without cause) thus to
advance him. Adams honor was mine, Adams duty is mine. I am as strictly bound
in my obligation to God, as Adam my father was. Resolution.
I will therefore (with my best diligence) endeavor to be constant in that
duty wherein he failed, And though Adam has disinherited both me and all his
posterity, of that power which he had to perform this divine acknowledgements:
yet will I strive with my nature, to reform my error, and to come as near as
I can in the imitation of Adams innocence. We must contend against our own
nature.
Thus let me ever be resolved to contend against the corruption of my nature,
and (with an holy ambition) to covet to equal, or exceed the honor and happy
state of my Father Adam in his innocence. Again, seeing God did make me so
wonderful in my frame, so excellent in my Nature, I will therefore (with
modesty and reverence to God) esteem my self. How and for what we ought to
esteem our selves.
I will understand, and remember that God has made me a creature of note,
ordained for holy ends, and made the master of infinite other creatures. I
will remember that my soul is the divine breath of God, my body a Temple for
his holy Spirit. I will therefore bend my endeavor to fashion the government
of my life (in some proportion) to this excellence of nature. I will hate the
company and imitation of evil, because God has created me good: I will value
the prosperity of my soul, before the possession of the whole world: I will
be jealous of my self, and will carefully fear to give entertainment to any
evil cause, How Christians should be affected.
that may deprive or corrupt me: I will love my own salvation before all but
God; because God did honor me above all but himself, in my creation. Thus may
I lawfully (with religious modesty) esteem my self. God did grace me in my
creation, God will double that grace in my salvation. For this I earnestly
expect, I pray.

Of Original sin, the fall and apostasy of Man. Chap 6.
WHen man was in the height of his prosperity, having all things requisite to
make him both happy and great, and wanting nothing that might administer the
fulness of content to his desire: he is then suddenly (by himself) cast from
these pleasures into a state most miserable, Man did degrade himself.
depriving himself and posterity, not only of the pleasures, but of the
useful necessaries of this life, and that which is infinitely more worth then
the rest, the favor and presence of God, which of it self (without addition)
is able to make the enioier most absolute in his felicity. Gods favor the
highest benefit.
Thus in a trice, was Man (the glory of Gods workmanship) by sinful
disobedience spoiled of his innocence; which when he wanted, his very nature
then endured alteration; A strange alterarion.
and he that but lately was made Lord of all the World, is now made subject
to all extremities. This one touch of sin, being of that infectious nature,
that (like a leprosy) it spreades over his whole nature; his body, A general
decay.
his soul, his works, nay his very affections are infected with this venom,
his holiness, innocence, and all his divine graces abandon his nature, not
daigning to comfort in the fellowship of sin. God (also) who had made him so
wonderful, and had so wonderfully enricht him with benefits, What bitter
effects sin causes.
takes off the majesty and ornanaments he had given him, inuesting him with
poverty, and extremities of fortune. And whereas before he had made him
immortal, he now makes him subject to the stroke of death, and in this array,
thus altered, he excludes him his sacred presence: ADAM being a compendium of
all, brought destruction on all when he sinned.
this sin, branding not only Adam with this disgrace, and these deformities,
but himself and his posterity for ever, being all disgraced from their
innocence, and degraded from their excellence of Nature. Now would I challenge
the best invention in the World, to describe Adam in the grief of this
alteration. It is not in the power of any man's invention to do it, An
unutterable measure of grief.
there are not words, nay imagination has not thoughts to conceive it. For to
fail in the search of prosperity, i^ ^n admirable degree of grief; but to be
deprived is a torment, and does require extraordinary patience. Thus much in
general.

In the fall and Apostasy of man, Considerations in this argument.
is principally considered these particulars. First, from whence he fell.
Secondly, to what he fell: the infinite variety of questions depending
necessarily upon these two particulars; the which (of purpose) I contract, for
order, and for the easy understanding of the simple. First from what ADAM fell.
First, is to be considered, from what he fell; and that was from the favor
of God, considered in the excellence and innocence of man's nature: in his large
induments of grace, in his power, and in his possession of pleasure: ADAM had
an absolute measure of pleasure.
in all which respects, Adam (the first man) was so abundantly favored, as
that his soul could desire no enlargement: God having given him so many and
so great demonstrations of his love, as made him distinguished from all other
creatures. This doctrine is abundantly proved in the Chapters before of the
Creation of man, Genesis 2.
and of his innocence: I will therefore forbear to multiply arguments in so
plain a proof, Secondly. To what ADAM fell.
For the second, to what esta^e he fell, this is familiarlie known in the
experience of every man's life; the most fortunate of every man's life, being
full of the marks of this misery For to understand our selves, is rightly to
understand what Adam was in his sins; The miseries of this life.
and the miserable change he endured by the alteration of his Fortunes, does
give us particular knowledge in the misery of our own condition. Adam our
Father by generation, was the Father also of our corruptions; ADAM, the parent
of our corruption.
and we his generation, deriuing our Substance and Natures from him, have with
them derived his sin, and the punishment thereof; How we are guilty by ADAM.
the which as they were inseparable in the nature of Adam, at, and after his
fall: so are they necessarily descended down upon us his posterity: ^he
trespass being in him from whom we are all derived, makes that we are all
guilty of the sin of Adam, and all deseruers of the like punishments. This is
Saint Paul his judgment. Romans 5. 12
Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death went over all men: for as much as all men have sinned. As
Adam was, so are we: such a father, such children. To know him, we must view
our selves, and to know our selves we must view him. The ^est way to understand
our nature, is ^o consider it in Adam; but to understand his fall and the
misery thereof, ADAMS misery is palpable in our calamity.
it ^s palpably evident in the knowledge of our own particulars, the torments
of our transitory life are sufficient arguments to persuade and resolve us.
Here I might spend much time in the ^epetition of much misery, and rip up ^he
wounds and sorrows of our mortal life: The variable turnings of fortune.
the knowledge is necessary, but not in this place, being commonly taught in
the common experience of our lives, where the extremities of fortune, and her
variable turnings, remember all men the miserable condition of sinful man;
there being no man but does sometime taste the bitterness of mortal life: all
men being at all times subject to all extremities. In the book of
Ecclesiastic. 40. there is a catologue of the miseries of man's life, Ecclus. 40
from the 1. verse to the twelfth.
all which happen to us for the sin of Adam, because we are his sons, and
were with him at the committing of his sin. And this to Adam might justly be
one torment in his misery, that by his sin, he did not only deprive
himself of the inestimable worth of Gods favor: ADAMS torment.
but also brought the like condemnation upon his seed, and their seed for
over, by his one sin overthrowing the blessed estates of many millions of
people, as if at one blow he would have cut off the heads of a world of
people. And doubtless but the sorrow for leesing the favor of God, Adam could
not have a greater then this, Note.
because there is nothing does more move grief and pity in gentle minds, then
a compassion of general calamities, The nature or compassion.
especially then when they are caused by their misfortune, that have the grace
to pity them.

If I should undertake to rank the calamities of our sinful life, and
report them in order as they are inflicted on man for the sin of Adam, I
should both ouercharge my self with much business, and but write that which
is nayly taught in the fortunes of every man's life. I will therefore omit the
great number, and insist somewhat upon that which is the greatest in the
number: and that is the displeasure of God, Gods displeasure the greatest
calamity.
which is damnation, a misery infinite in time, infinite in torment; a
judgment denounced against all men for the sin of one man, because at the
committing of sin, all men were then personally present in Adam, and with him
did both combine and conspire in the trespass. 1 Cor. 2. 15. 22.
By sin men did Adam bring a general destruction on his nature, and made
himself and all men not only subject to death, but to an everlasting death,
causing an everlasting damnation to inflict eternal and inexpressible torments
on the bodies; on the souls of men. It is not in my power to describe the
torments of damnation; for as they are infinite in time, they are infinite also
in their number and greatness, No man can describe at full the torment of the
damned
there is misery without hope torments without number, without measure, without
end: they are above our strength, above our patience to bear them: they are
not vtterable for number, not sufferable for torment: the very soul though
eternal, How the soul is said to die.
is continually wasted with that affliction, neither could it last in such
extremities, but that God has made it eternal. Again, it is not only
infinite and eternally great in personal sufferings; but also in grief and
spiritual discontents and vexations, Discontent the sickness of the soul.
the soul that is damned grievously afflicting it self with rage and intestine
displeasure, when it considers from what dignity it is fallen, and the honor
and felicity it might have had, if it had continued in the favor and presence
of Almighty GOD: The nature of our envy.
it will also (enuiously) remember the prosperity of others, what glory, what
happiness they enjoy for their constancy and holy travel: and that it self,
and the damned should have had the same degrees of happiness, if (like them)
they had been constant and faithful in their duty and service to GOD. Note.
And this is a greater torment to the damned then that which they shall endure
in their personal afflictions; the remembrance whereof does so distract the
very powers of their souls, The damned souls inflict upon themselves.
as that (desperately) they inflict their own vengeance, and execute upon
themselves the punishments of their condemnation. Note.
For (in our natures) we have less patience, and more affliction, when by our
own default we leese prosperity, then when for our desert, we endure any
personal punishment. The reward of disobedience.
This is the reward of Adams disobedience, that himself and his posterity did
by sin, disinherite himself and his of the infinite treasure of Gods favor,
and did thereby purchase a life, whose days are consumed in vexations and
miserable change, and whose end does not end his misery, Death is the life of
torment to the damned
but renew and enlarge it with addition and perpetuity of torment.

This is the plain and necessary knowledge of the fall of man from the state
of innocence, in which argument the ouer-curious wits of men have traveled
in the search of many intricate questions; Unnecessary knowledge is unlawful
in divine directions.
the which because they are not necessary in the knowledge of the unlearned
Reader, I thought them necessary to be avoided: for it is often seen that in
discussing such secrets in Divinity, as are not apparently proved by direct
testimony of Scripture, but by a consequence of reason, Note.
and obscure argument, that al such travel, does rather occasion strise and
doubt, A dangerous inconvenience.
then give satisfaction to the modest and indifferent Reader. It is dangerous
(also) in them of weak and slender judgments to enter the search of such
things as are not necessary to their salvation, because it is easy to deceive
their judgment: for they groslie apprehend what is proposed them, and often
mistake themselves in their opinion of reason, and then (like him that looks
against the Sun) blind themselves with their presumption. I will therefore
forbear to report the number of men's opinions, only this may seem of
necessary importance, that whereas God did create man so excellent, and gave
him uprightness and innocence, a free will and power also to continue his
innocence and happiness, it is doubted whether Predestination and the decree of
God, Predestination.
did (necessarily) lead men to this apostacy, Object.
because all things that are and shall be, are in Gods decree, neither can any
man do any thing contrary to the pleasure of Almighty GOD. Answer.
To this I answer, it is true that nothing is done against the will of God, he
being able to command all occasions. The will of God (therefore) must be thus
understood; Gods will how it is to be understood.
his will is either secret or revealed: his revealed Will is the Scripture, his
secret will is his decree or secret council, and in this will, are all
things that ever were: are or shall be. This will is again distinguished:
for in Gods secret will, there is Gods act, Gods act.
there is also his consent: God does personally in his own Nature decree all
goodness, Gods consent.
as his own act. God does also consent, and suffer that evil be done: but
he himself is not the doer: yet can he glorify himself in the sufferance
of evil, God can receive honor from men's evil action.
and make it work the purpose of his holy will. To apply this Doctrine to our
purpose, before GOD created man, he had decreede every circumstance, both in
his Nature and Life: he also did foresee the fall of man, and was content (for
the secret work of his glory) it should be so. So that whatsoever was good in
man, was in Gods decree as his act: whatsoever was not good, How to understand
Gods decree.
was in Gods decree, as his permission. If it be demanded, why God foreseeing
the fall of man, would not prevent it, and give Adam divine grace to support
him: to such a question I would answer with Saint Paul. Romans 9. 20. 21.
Who art thou that pleadest against God? shall the thing formed, say to him
that formed it: Why have thou made me thus? verse 21. Has not the Potter power
of the clay? etc. and shall not God be as powerful as the Potter? Ier. 18. 6.
If he make us for honor, we can not boast it, if for dishonor we can not
judge him. This is the answer that the Scripture gives such questions. If God
do any thing, it should silence all question, and satisfy all doubt.
Therefore, whosoever shall hear the justice of God called in question, Genesis 18.
25.
let him confidently answer with holy Abraham: Shall not the Judge of all the
World do right?

The general Use.
This Doctrine of the fall of Man, from his first state of innocence, The use.
does remember all men, what the mise^able condition of our nature is, what
glory we have left, and into what degree of adversity we are fallen: we that
were the most excellent of Gods creatures, are now the most miserable;
provoking (not only) God to be our enemy, but the creatures of God also, to
hate and dread us, By sin, not only God, but his creatures are made enemies.
because (for our disobedience) God did curse them: and that for our annoyance,
God did suffer the goodness of their nature to be altered, insomuch as they
that before sin entered our nature, were our servants, are now become our
enemies, and we that then were their Lords, and had power to command them, are
now in the bondage of fear, A miserable alteration.
and dread their power. For that supremacy and power and government, which
Adam had over all the world, was conferred to us that are of his posterity. He
had it and lost it by sins, we should have had it, but are prevented by
sin: sin being the cause both in him and us, why we are degraded from our
dignity, and cast into this contempt and disgrace of fortune. Whenever
therefore God shall please to punish any man's prospetity, and to tempt his
patience with the burden of adversity, his care must be to search the cause of
his affliction, Sublata causa, tollitur effectus.
and when he has found the cause, to labor by all means to remove it: for
diseases are not cured before their cause be both known and removed; and as
the diseases of the body are not ingendered without their corrupt cause, no
more our spiritual afflictions are not inflicted without their evil cause,
which is sin, the original and continual cause of all our evil. Sin the
cause of evil.
Thus ought Christians to judge themselves, and to understand the miseries of
their life, to enquire at their own hearts, and to search their own actions,
and their own transgressions: for there (and but there) they shall find the
true cause of all misery. And not as do the wicked and foolish, who when as
they have extraordinary discontents, A false and foolish order.
or misfortunes, blame their Natiuities, and search the motion and conjunction
of the stars and celestial bodies, as if by their influence and
constellation, their grievous alterations were occasioned. Such fondness is
ridiculous, and to little purpose, and they are much deceived, who seek for
that far off, which is to be found (only) at home, even in their hearts; in
their sinful natures, and in their sinful actions. Again, the fall of Adam
from his innocence, because of sin, does instruct every man in the knowledge
of GODS divine nature; The nature of holiness.
for GOD is so respectively holy, that he will not entertain familiarity and
nearenesse with any Creature that has the least touch or spotte of sin
Therefore did he banish the Angels out of his presence, The Angels damned for
sinning but in thought.
though they offended (as some think) but in thought. ADAMS tempters.
Adam also though it was his first sin, and not of his own election, but
doubly tempted by his wife and the Devil; yet could not the holy presence of
God endure him, but cast him out of paradise into misery and tribulation.
Therefore ought all men to make conscience of all sin; and to fear the
committing of the least; because there is no sin, (be it never so little)
that GOD will dispense withal: All sin is in Gods hatred.
but as himself, so is his affection, he is holy without stain, without
imputation, and his favor toward them only, that with all their power endeavor
themselus in all the works of his commandments.

Lastly, Lastly.
seeing the sin of Adam did so deface the excellence and innocence of our
Nature, as that the corruption thereof did descend from him to all posterity,
this ought to abate the pride of all men, that no man dignifie or exalt
himself in the pride of his nature: for all men are of one and the same
nature; A general condemnation.
and all men in one, and the same condemnation: there being no power in any
man's Nature to raise himself to the dignity of Gods favor; God only
powerful in man's restoring.
that being only in the power of him that first created us holy and innocent,
who (again) will restore us, when we faithfully spend our endeavors in holy
action. Again, it ought to move all men to bear indifferent favor to all the
Children of God, How to value men.
and not to despise any, either for the defect of nature or fortune, but to
pity and commiserate common calamities; because there is no judgment or
punishment inflicted on any man, How to judge calamities.
but it is generally caused by all men, all men having offended God with Adam,
and all men (for that sin of Adam) being subject to all misery. For those
calamities (and greater) are due to us, Gods favor is given, and not deserved
by any man save Christ Jesus only.
though other men endure them; and those benefits which we enjoy, and others
want, we have them not of desert, but of benevolence from the favor of God,
who gives them according to the pleasure of his will, without respect of
person.

Special application.
Seeing that Adam, who had such extraordinary induments of grace, and whose
nature God had so adorned with excellence, as that he delighted his company,
and seeing that he was innocent, and his nature unstained with corruption or
infirmity; did notwithstanding run in contempt of Gods commandment, and
thereby did purchase Gods indignation: I will therefore be extraordinary
careful to withstand all prouocations that may tempt me to any sin. For my
nature is much more easy to be tempted then his, his being in innocence holy,
mi^e in corruption stained: We more easy to be tempted then ADAM
he having power in himself to withstand his tempter; I having no power in my
nature to resist, but rather an appetite and affectation to evil, (naturally)
neglecting that grace which should make me able to resist temptation. And
because my nature is thus depraved, The deprauednesse of nature.
and that my own blind directions would but lead me to condemnation; I will
therefore (with humble confidence) implore the favor of God, How to prevent
the power of temptations
that his Spirit may give me directions; and that his hands may support me
against the power of all temptations. For I know that my strength is but
weakness; and if God take his hand of favor from me, I shall fail in the
conquest of my tempters, We must first deny our selves, before we can affy in
God.
and remain their spoil: for (if Adam in his innocence) was vanquished, I (in
my sin) cannot be able to prevail. I will therefore deny my self; and
repose my confidence in the strength of thy arm, for it is thou (O God) that
sauest us from our enemies, and put them to confusion that have us. Thus I
shall practice against my spiritual tempters, thus I shall prevail.

Again, seeing God has not spared Adam nor the Angels that sinned, 2. Pet. 2.
4.
who (in their natures) were much more excellent then my self, but (for their
sin) gave them over to condemnation: how much less will he spare me, if I
continue in the committing of sin, and endeavor not my self with all
diligence in godly exercise? This (assuredly) shall make me fearful to commit
any sin with consent or knowledge, but I will fly sin, as I would death:
because the service of sin is certainly rewarded with death: sin and death
being inseparably united in fellowship: The wages of sin is Death.
for the soul that sins must dye the death; and no soul dies but the
sinful. Therefore (O my God) I will resort in my prayers to thy holy
presence, Resolution.
I will earnestly entreat that thy providence may direct me in a holy course
to an holy end; I will avoid al acquaintance with sin, I will hate it in my
self, Charity will pity misery wheresoever it be.
I will hate it in others, pity their misery, and pray for their conversion: I
will profess my self a vowed enemy, and practice in that profession: thus I
persuade, thus I am resolved. Lastly, seeing Adam and his posterity were not
cast into condemnation without hope, Man was not condemned as the Angels
without hope.
without mercy, as the Angels that sinned were; An admirable witness of Gods
love.
but had a hope given him to be again restored to the favor and blessed
presence of God, by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, the Son of God: this
admirable degree of the love of God to mankind, shall keep all my actions in
awe, and make me carefully fear to offend my God, who has so far exceeded
to me in the favors of his Love. I will now (not only) fear him because he
has power to destroy me: A filial. fear.
but I will fear him for the reverence of his love; and prefer his love
(even) before my soul, My meditations cannot present to my soul, a greater
heaven of joy, then to understand my self to be beloved of God, To meditate
God and his favors.
neither can I have more delightful action, then to meditate his love, and to
love him again. For to love him for the safety of our own souls, is
necessary: but to love him for his love (only) is more commendable, and
declares a notable degree of Christian zeal. Thus did Moses love the
Israelites; Exodus 32. 32.
thus Saint Paul the Jews: and thus will I my God, by whom I was created, by
whom I am restored.

Of the Moral Law of God, the ten Commandments. Chap. 7.
THe law of God, The moral law of God and the law of nature is all one.
though it was not given to man with solemn promulgation, before the time of
Moses, yet was there a general sense thereof given to Adam in his creation.
For when God gave him his nature, and endued him with the use of reason and
discourse, he gave him capacity to understand his duty, the which duty is
nothing else but the observation of the law of God. And therefore when Adam had
transgressed the commandment of God, and eaten the forbidden fruit;
Conscience can preach the law to them that know it not.
the reason of his natural soul could tell him his offense; and then his
conscience judging him, he was afraid, and hid himself from Gods presence. If
we compare his sin with the commandments of the Law, we shall find it to be
a direct breach of some, and a consequent breach of all. Gods first commandment
says: Exodus 20. (...)
Thou shall have none other Gods but me: Adams sin does contradict Gods
commandment, and says: nay, but my wife and I will both be Gods for with this
persuasion the Devil tempted them, Genesis 3. 1.
and they did eat. Again, Cain the second man, he committed murder, Genesis 4.
13.
and thereby directly broke the sixth commandment: which when God and his
conscience made him to understand, he made a desperate acknowledgement of his
sin. So that the law being nothing but a reasonable duty, which the Creature
owes to his Creator: there was therefore a general knowledge of this law in
the reasonable nature of man at his creation, and so in the succession of them
of the old world, unto the time that the Law was given to Moses by the
ordinance of angels. The old world (the^) from Adam to Moses, Gal. 3. 19.
were not lawless and free from the service of law; but had the law of nature
for their direction, The law of nature, the same with the law of the x.
commandments.
which being grounded upon reason. was even the very same with the law of the
x. commandments. The law then of the x. comma^dements before it was given to
Moses, was in the ages before going commonly transgressed, and that law did
both judge and condemn them: the which law God gave man when he gave him his
nature, every man having the knowledge of this law in the natural use of his
reason. This was the state of the old world before Moses, The state of the old
world.
all sinned, and all were judged by the law of nature, the moral law, even
before the promulgation thereof in mount Sina, condemning the transgressions of
men that were directly against the several commandments.

Now when iniquity began to be strong in the hearts of men, The promulgation
of the law.
and that their consciences became senseless of sin, neither would admonish,
and judge their transgressions, Reasons why.
then God thought convenient to publish to al mankind this law, binding the
consciences of men to a dutiful observation of every particular statute in
that law, Deuteronomy. 23, 10.
denouncing the judgment of condemnation to al them that transgress against
the least branch Baruch. 4. 1.
or particle of those commandments. 2. Reasons.


A second reason why God ordained the law, was that men might rightly
understand themselves, and thereby know in what degree of holiness they were,
because that men are often partial in their own judgment, and willingly blind
them selus in the view of their own calamity. Wherefore then serves the law?
Gal. 3. 19.
it was added because of the tra^sgressio^s, that by the law men may know
wherein they have transgressed.

A third reason of the ordination of the law, 3. Reason.
is to provoke men to endeavor themselves with all diligence to travel in godly
exercise, and to avoid both evil action and idleness; the laws giving every man
sufficient matter of employment, wherein he is bound to suspend his hours, his
days, nay his life in careful sernice, 2. Esd 9. 31.
2. Esd. 9, 31. For behold I sow my law in you, that it may bring forth fruit
in you, and that ye may be honored by it for ever

A fourth reason of the Law, is, that by the severity thereof, we might be
disciplined, and made fit for the mercy of the Gospel; The use of the law.
for the judgment of the law will humble us, make us understand our misery,
and provoke us to implore mercy. Therefore is the Law said to be a
Schoolmaster, by whose directions we are led to our salvation Jesus Christ.
Gal. 3. 24. Gal. 3. 24.
Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ that we might be
made righteous by faith.

Lastly, 4. Reason.
the law was given for the glory and majesty of God, that all the world might
be judge of his infinite mercy to mankind: In this respect, that
notwithstanding, all men are judged, and condemned by the law of nature, and by
the law of his commandments: yet in the greatness of his love, Gods admirable
mercy.
he is content to forgive the trespass, and the judgments; and finally to
entertain these transgressors his enemies, into the bosom of his mercy;
giving them mercy for justice, and life when they deserved death with
extremity. Romans 5. 20. Romans 5. 20.
Moreover the Law entered thereupen that the offense should abound,
nevertheless where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more, Verse the
21. That as sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by
righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And this is
an admirable degree of love in the person of God, Verse. 21.
that he will descend his Majesty to miserable, wretched, nay, sinful
creatures, and exercise his mercy, in restoring and advancing us, Note.
that have abounded in transgressions. For these causes was the Law delivered,
God commanding every man's absolute obedience upon the forfeyture of his soul
to the pains of everlasting condemnation. Deuteronomy. 27. 26


In the law of the ten commandments, is to be considered the substance which
is the matter of the law; and the circumstance, which is the manner of
delivering it. The matter is contained in ten commandments, the first four
directly instruct us in our duty to God; The matter of the commandments.
the six latter our duties to men. This learning of the commandments, how to
understand, and how to divide them. is in the knowledge of every Child of
careful education, it being commonly taught at the catechizing of Christian
children. I shall therefore spare the large travel this Argument requires, and
refer the desirous Reader to the learned expositions of other men. In the
manner of giving the Law, we may principally consider these circumstances.
Moses. Fourthly, Israel, then the people of God; and by consequence to every
people that profess themselves his servants. These are the maine particulars
in the circumstance of giving the law. First, God he was the principal author
of this work, 1 God the giver of the Law.
to give it countenance and authority: for who dare quarrel his Work, and the
operation of his hands? Therefore did God himself speak all the words of the
commandments; he also spoke in a terrible and fearful manner, Exodus 20. 1.
to gain the business reverence, Exodus 19. 19
and a fearful estimation he spoke in the hearing of the people, that they
might know it was Gods own act: Exodus 19. 9.
and to prevent the distrust they might have of his servant Moses. Secondly,
The angels attend at the giving of the law.
Secondly, the Angels they attend this holy service, to declare the most
excellent Majesty of God, who in all his occasions is served and attended by an
infinite number of that excellent Nature. Again, the Angels were there,
because they are most desirous of the good of mankind: Heb. 1. 14.
and do willingly attend the service of our salvation: Having joy amongst
themselves in heaven, Luke 15. 7. 10.
at the conversion of a sinner. They were there also to be witnesses between
God and his people, that the covenants might remain established for ever. And
therefore says Saint Paul, Gal. 3. 19.
The law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator: not that the Angels
did principally give the Law, and appoint the covenant, but that the service
was only attended by their holy Ministration. Thirdly, Thirdly, The law was
given by MOSES.
the Law was given by Moses; that is, God gave it Moses to give the Israelites,
because the spirit of God had so sanctified Moses, that he was able to stand
in the presence of God: the which the host of the Israelits could not do, but
became astonished, and exceedingly afraid at the voice of Gods thunders. And
therefore they desired Moses that he would negotiate for them, Exodus 20. 19
betwixt God and them, they being not able to endure the presence of his
Majesty. Again, it was given by Moses, because God would honor him above the
rest of his brethren: Note.
he having been most industrious and constant in the service of God. And
therefore as God had given them deliverance out of Egypt, by the hand of
Moses, so would he give them by the hand of Moses the covenants of his
everlasting love, The promises of the law are now gained by the Gospel.
and deliverance from the bondage of sin: all which grace was promised unto
them that would live within the compass of these laws, and is now given to
them that faithfully endeavor, though they fail in the maine performance: For
the Law was given by Moses, Ioh. 1. 17.
but grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. John. 1. 7. Lastly, Fourthly, The
Law was given Israel.
the Law was given (by name to the Israelites; but in the purpose of God to all
men, all men being under the bondage of the Moral law of God, and the Law
being able to judge and condemn all men. It was (by name) given to the
Israelites, because then they were the choice and select people of God; for
whom he had done his wonders, and to whom he had promised a fair
inheritance. It is also derived down upon us, The Law was derived down on us,
and not to the Jews only.
and upon all posterity, all men having entered covenant with God, to endeavor
themselves, in the faithful keeping of the commandments of the law. All these
circumstances, are necessarily considered in the manner of Gods delivering the
law. From this may be generally observed, Observations in the Law.
that God in all his actions has principal respect to holiness, and that no
profane circumstances assist him in his actions, but as himself is most holy,
so his delight is in holy actions, and hates al profanation both of matter
and circumstance. In the law may be generally observed, 1 An impossibility in
the strict performance.
first an impossibility in the precise performance thereof, no man being able
(without favor) to make an even reckoning with the Law: the Law being able to
conclude us all under sin. It is an Argument of Saint Peter, Acts. 15. 10.
Act. 15. 10.
Now therefore why tempt ye God, to lay a yoke (that is the performance of the
law) on the Disciples necks, which neither our father nor we are able to
bear? Saint Paul also to the Galath. Gal. 2. 16.
concludes an impossibility to be justified by the law: By the works of the
Law (says he) no flesh shall be justified. So that no man ought to repose his
justification in the law, yet every man ought to endeavor his utmost
performance. Secondly, Secondly.
Men are judged by the law to be guilty, Gal. 3. 22
and deseruers of eternal damnation. This general judgment of the Law
against all flesh, All men are judged by the Law.
does conclude all men in the state of damnation, no man being able to deliver
himself from this judgment, before the Law be fully satisfied: which could not
be done by other means, Gal. 4. 5.
then by the righteousness and death of Jesus Christ the son of God, and the
redeemet of the world.

The general Use.
This doctrine of the severity of the law of God, The use.
has this double general use. First, in the person of God, it declares what
wonderful desire he has for the good of his people, in that he daigneth in
the power of his Majesty to present himself with man, whom before he had
(for his sin) cast out of Paradise, and from the favor of his presence, and
to constitute such ordinances, and such laws as might direct them that were
desirous to please God, the way and means of his favor. For howsoever no man
can so observe the ordinance of the Law as thereby to be righteous, Genesis 3. 11.
and to deserve the promise; yet did God accept the faithful endeavors of men,
and supply their defects by the grace and operation of his holy Spirit. And
therefore at the delivering of the Law, when the Israelites promised Moses,
that they would do whatsoever GOD should command them: Deuteronomy. 5. 2.
God seems to express a passion of his love, and to require less then the
law; for the law commanded a precise performance upon pain of damnation, but
God promises the blessing of his favor to all them that zealously endeavor to
keep the Law: Therefore says God to Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. 29,
O that there were such an heart in them. to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments, that it might go well with them and with their children for
ever. And this does prevent and objection, which all men might make that are
dis-obedient against God and his law: for else they might thus object;
Objection.
that seeing the law of God does require a greater duty then is in any man's
performance, and that seeing the law does condemn all them that fail in the
least particular duty of the law: God is mecifull, in his seuerest justice.
therefore God might seem to be merciless in the severity of his Justice; and
their labor fruitless to attempt that which was impossible. Both which are
wickedly false 3 for though the law condemn every man, Answer. God is above
the law, because he made it.
yet God that made the law is above the law, and does often grant his
dispensation, and pardon them whom his law condemns. Secondly, though no man
can perform the law, yet all men may endeavor it, the which endeavor (being
faithful and industrious) is accepted of God, as if it were performance. And
this does take from all men, all matter of argument, whereby they would excuse
their disobedience, He that endeavors the law, has the promise.
and neglect: for (as I have said) though no man be able to do the law, yet
all men are able to endeavor it. And this does necessarily admonish the
christian people of these times, Men may not presume on the liberty of faith.
who presume ouer-boldly on the liberty of faith, that because Christ Jesus the
Savior of the world, has satisfied the Law, and wrought righteousness to all
them that shall faithfully believe, and apprehend his merits, therefore they
despise the works of the Law, (holy and charitable exercise) and repose them
selves on the bare confidence of faith only. A fruitless faith profits
nothing.
The which being altogether fruitless in the works of the law, is but
presumption and a vain confidence, and will (dangerously) deceive all them that
affy therein. For though Christ Jesus has abolished the ceremonial Law, and
satisfied the justice of the moral Law (the which is available to all them
that shall be heirs of salvation) yet his righteousness in observing the
Law, does not destroy the substance of the law, Christ has not destroyed the
law, but qualified.
and make it vse-lesse; but does rather command our imitation; that as he has
performed the law in all righteousness and sincerity, so we should endeavor a
strict imitation of his virtuous doing: Works the testimony of faith.
for such faith only has the benefit of the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
as is approved by the testimony of holy life, and has the witness of virtuous
living. Therefore it does needfully behoue all men carefully to endeavor in the
exercise of the law of God: for though no man can be justified by the works of
the Law: Note.
so no man can declare and approve himself to be justified, but by the works
of the law. Again, the knowledge of the law of God, may give every man a true
understanding in the state of his life, By the sentence of the law we may judge
our selves.
whereby to know in what condition he stands, whether in the favor or
displeasure of almighty God: for the law is Gods revealed will, to which al men
owe conformity upon grievous forfeit. And therefore whosoever shall examine the
behauior of his life, and compare his several committings and omittings with
the duties of the Law, (for so ought all do) shall be well able to understand,
and judge himself: for the law is the pattern of our lives, to which we ought
to square our actions: so that when we find a dissimilitude betwixt the Law
and our lives, The Law a pattern of a Christian life.
we can not but judge our selves disobedient, and rebellious to God and his
law, and (consequently) to forfeite our souls to the state of condemnation.
This judgment ought to cause a humiliation; and so it will in them whom God
shall make gracious. Who when they know their souls to be in the disease of
sin, and that the Law does wound them with guiltiness, How the Law does
humble us.
and that themselves have a natural pronenesse, rather to cause then to cure
their infirmities: this makes them to deny themselves, and their own power,
which is but weakness; and with humbleness to resort to the mercy and merits
of Jesus Christ the Son of God, Christ, the Physician of souls.
and the Physician of our souls, who only has been able to satisfy the
justice of the Law, and who only has been able to work the redemption of
Mankind: and to repossesse them of Gods favor, who had lost it by their
transgressions. And this our Redeemer has done by assuming our nature, bearing
our sins, satisfying our contempts, Christ has fulfilled the law for us.
and finishing our neglects: who (in our nature) has fulfilled the law for us,
that could not: who has victored sin, and made a conquest of hell, and by
his death has slain death, which (but for him) had seized our souls into
everlasting condemnation. Thus will the knowledge of the Law admonish, thus
remember us.

Special application.
This knowledge presents my soul with matter of serious Meditation: Special
application.
wherein I may have a full view of the miserable condition of my life: what
strength is in my nature, what endeavor in my actions: for when I find an
impossibility of my dutiful and strict obedience to the law, I shall the^
acknowledge my defects, and the corruption of my nature: when I examine the
particulars of my life, and compare them with my duty, I shall acknowledge the
neglects of my endeavors: and that I have failed, not only in the main
performance of the law of God; which my nature could not, but in my desires and
careful endeavors to do well, which my nature might. The effects issuing from
the meditation of the law. In the reprobate.
And from this meditation does (necessarily) follow, one of these two effects.
In the reprobate and graceless, it causes desperation and a hopeles distrust
of their salvation: for when the devil and their Consciences expose before
them the Justice of GOD, the severity of his Law, and the infinite measure of
their offense, the extreme terror and sense of their wickedness, does so
confound their understandings, that often they execute upon themselves torment
and death, despising and despayring of Jesus Christ; in whom if they had
reposed trust, and had believed and apprehended his righteousness, their sin
had not been imputed, neither had their souls perished. In the regenerate.
But in the children of grace, this meditation does produce a contrary effect:
for when they (by the law) understand the misery whereinto their sins have
brought them, it causes a wonderful degree of fear, but not desperate. For
though the devil present their sins in most ugly forms, and urge them to a
desperate apprehension: God supporteth his elect against temptations
yet the Spirit of God (in them) does withstand this temptation, and gives
them holy motions to devise the means of their salvation; presenting them (in
their spiritual sorrow) with Jesus Christ as he was crucified; then giving
them grace to understand the mystery of his death, and the promise of the
imputation of his righteousness: which when the grieved sinner understands, he
allayeth his sorrow, and affyeth in the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ
his Redeemer. The di^or effects of the Law.
Thus the law produces a contrary effect in contrary spirits it damneth the
reprobate without hope; the elect it condemns, but instructs also and
gives hope: them it judges without mercy, these it admonishes, and is their
Schoole-maister, to bring them unto CHRIST. Therefore, though the law condemn
me, it shall not condemn my hope* Resolution.
for though I cannot my self perform the righteousness of the law; yet there
is one has done it for me, my Lord and my savior Jesus, in whom I repose
hope, The work of faith.
and respire new life, because I know that his righteousness is mine by
imputation: and that my sin was nailed to his Cross, and suffered death
(with him) when he wrought my redemption. I will therefore enlarge my love
(without limits) to this my Savior, who for my salvation has been pleased
to undergo so great a travel. I will admire the admirable degree of his love,
that for my sake did descend his Majesty to take (and dignifie the baseness of
my nature. I will with unspeakable joy meditate his most holy sufferings,
Christ has freed us from the judgment of the law.
whereby I am released from the condemnation of the Law. I will despise my
self and my own unrighteousness, and apprehend him the staff of my confidence.
To whom repentant sinners should resort.
I will never despair hope, because I know that my salvation lives; but in all
the extremities of my life, and in all the sorrows of my conscience, I will
resort to Jesus the Physician of my soul, I will enquire for him at the mercy
of his Father, Where to find Christ.
I will enquire at his own righteousness, I will seek him in his holy
sufferings, I will seek him on the cross of his death; How to implore his
favors.
and when I have there found him, I will expose my grief and implore his
favor, I will show him what the law has done unto me, what wounds, (and how
dangerous) it has given my soul; I will confess my sin, and profess my
faith. I will promise also to correct the errors of my life, I will carefully
endeavor every circumstance he has commanded: and being thus rectified in
my resolution, How to apprehend him.
I shall reach my hands of faith to my salvation, apprehend him, and apply him
to my wounded soul, and by this blessed means satisfy the law, and restore
my Soul.

Of the acousation of Conscience. Chap 8.
EVery man that would prevent the dreadful danger of Gods general judgment,
must in this life while he has time, arrest his own soul, examine his
particular actions; Conscience
and by the evidence of his conscience, judge himself and his transgressions
against the law of God: for as Gods judgment does begin at his house, 1. Pet.
4, 17.
because his principal care is for his own; Prou. 11. 3.
so should men judge themselves, and have principal care to examine their own
particulars. And as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
1. Cor. 11. 32. When we are judged we are chastned of the Lord, because we
should not be condemned with the world: so likewise we must judge our selves,
lest we be condemned with the world For as the Israelites, Judge. 27. 8.
because they wanted Judges, became Idolaters: so our lives when they are not
examined and judged by our consciences, we become remiss, disobedient, and
Idolatrous, and desperately run on with lawless appetite, in the common and
curious committing of sin.

And this necessary judging of our selves, is well known to our reasonable
souls; who, when we have committed sin) provoke our consciences to
accuse and judge us, By judging our selves, we prevent Gods heavy judgment.
as if without this judging of our selves, we could not prevent the judgment
of God: which would prove much more terrible. The manner of this judgment is
thus: The manner of judging our selves.
when the spirit of God shall move in any man's heart, a desire to understand
themselves, the soul assembles the powers of his understanding, and exercises
the several faculties in several assignements, and within himself (by
meditation) can frame the order of a Court. The man, body and soul, he is
the Prisoner at the Bar: he is also the witn^sse and the judge, Conscience
our accuser.
the matter of his indictment is sin: his conscience is his accuser, his
memory does produce the witness, his judgment does denounce the sentence, and
the Devil attendes the execution. Thus are the faculties of the soul disposed
in judging of it self: the soul against the soul producing the Law, proving
the forfeit, and urging the penalty.

Now that which has most busy care in this spiritual and most serious
examination and judgment of our selus, is the conscience, by which the soul
has true understanding in what condition it is; and by whose authority the
judgment of that spiritual Court is swayed: the conscience giving testimony
of all our actions, good and evil, whereby our judging part is directed
(without error) to make a just proceeding without all partiality. And therefore
says the Wiseman. Blessed is he that is not condemned in his own conscience:
E^clus. 14. 2.
for if there be any just matter of condemnation against us, there is no favor
can bribe our conscience, but that will to our selves accuse our selves of
every sin, and reduce to memory, many of our finfull actions, which but for
our conscience we could not remember. And therefore the Scribes and Pharisees
that brought the woman taken in adultery, John. 8. 9.
to Christ, and demanded what judgment she deserved, were remembered and
accused by their consciences of their incontinence (whereof they seemed to be
innocent or ignorant) when as Christ said: Let ^im that is without sin, Ver.
7.
cast the first stone at her. So that they that were so busy in the
condemnation of another, were condemned themselves by the testimony of their
own consciences: their consciences making them apply their accusations to
themselves, which but then they had urged against another. The spiritual power
of the conscience.
And doubtless it is a wonderful degree of power the conscience has in the
spiritual trial of our souls, in these two respects. First it knows all
our sins, no man being able to hide from the knowledge of his conscience, any
sin, no not his most secret sins. Secondly, Secondly.
it spares no man, neither any sin, but without respect of any it urges all
sin, against all men, our very thoughts having no privilege, but even their
sins are both in the knowledge and in the hatred of conscience. Therefore,
says Saint Paul: Romans 2. 15.
Their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or
excusing, Romans 2. 15. And Almighty God when he shall gather together all flesh
to judgment, and expose before the Angels and Saints the several actions of
every man's life, whereby they may be judged (accordingly) either to mercy or
justice, he has devised (in his wisdom,) that every one shall have a
witness in himself, Our consciences shall reprove us in the day of judgment.
(which is his conscience,) the which in our life time does register both our
good and evil actions, and at our judgment does witness and declare them.
And therefore the Holy Ghost calls the conscience a Book, every man and
woman having one, wherein is writ a true story of every circumstance, of every
particular action, of every man's life. And these books, these consciences are
they that give evidence for, and against our souls at the bar of Gods
general judgment, Revel. 20. 12. And I saw the dead both great Reu. 20. 12.
and small stand before God, and the books were opened, that is, all men's
consciences, wherein was writ the report of al their actions. Thus we see what
the office of our conscience is, both in respect of our own spiritual
iudginges, which is our reformation; and in respect of the general judgment
of GOD, which must be to every one, either eternal salvation or damnation. The
manner of the accusation of conscience.
Now the manner that conscience uses in this ministration is worthy of our
consideration; and to understand this, we must remember first this general
doctrine; that all men generally have a conscience, the which GOD has united
inseparably to our reasonable Natures. And therefore not only they that are of
christian belief, All men endure or shall endure the grief of conscience.
and have the rules of religion to teach them; but men merely natural, and
ignorant of divine Worship, suffer the affliction of their offended conscience,
which though it be in a far inferior degree to that of understanding
Christians; yet does it (in some proportion) exercise a judgment on the soul,
and does both remember and terrify them that grossly offend against the law of
nature; which to them is the law of reason and religion. This is proved by that
place of Scripture I before alleged: Reu. 20. 12.
That the Books of all the dead were opened; the word (all) excluding none
from the accusation of conscience, All then are afflicted by conscience, but
not all alike, nor all alike effectually. The Infidels that know not God, but
only as they are taught by the wisdom of nature, The difference in the
conscience of Christians and Infidels.
have a conscience; but it remembers the offender his great sins only, and
that sparingly and with favor. A christian conscience is more severe, for it
remembers all men, all sin, without favor, without exception. There is this
difference also; that of Infidels and wicked men does often remember the
offender his sin; but afflicts him not, neither prouokes him to repentance:
but the conscience of Christians does fearfully remember sin, A Christian
conscience ever has grief.
and does wound the soul of the offender, with sorrow and spiritual grief;
making him pursue the means of his own reformation, and hate the cause for
which his conscience does so afflict him. And this is the differenee between
the conscience of a Christian and an Infidel. The difference of conscience
among Christians.
Among Christians also, there is great difference of Conscience: For as in the
common number that profess the Christian religion, the greater part is (by
much) the worse; the true worshippers of God being only a few choice
particulars, Gods number the less.
drawn out from an infinite number of people: so also, though all that have
Christian name, profess to have a Christian conscience, yet their conscience
is no better then their Christianity: only a bare name, The conscience of a
reprobate.
whereof they have no spiritual comfort nor use. Conscience in the Reprobate
is either silent or outrageous: the silent conscience of the Reprobate is, when
custom and long continuance of sinning, does dull the sense of conscience; and
this is when men give over themselves to commit sin with affectation and
appetite, and oppress their consciences with the multitude of their
committings, so that such conscience does not remember us our sin; but when
it is assisted by external demonstrations. Such a conscience had Saul the
reprobat king, who prosecuted his sinful intentes against holy David with all
his endeavor: yet when David gave him that notable demonstration of loyalty,
showing him by direct evidence, 1. Sam. 24, 12.
that God had shut him up in his power; and notwithstanding he had saved the
life of his enemy, that sought his destruction, This notable testimony of
David's good conscience, Verse 18.
did stir up the dead spirits of Saules evil conscience to acknowledge his
sin, The outrageous conscience of the reprobat
and (for a time) to forbear and repent his vninst vexations: The outrageous
conscience in the reprobate is when the conscience has (for a time) been
silenced, and has given the sinner an unchaste liberty in his ungodliness; yet
so, as that once apprehending the knowledge of his sin, and knowing the state
of condemnation wherein it is, it breaks out into a violence which wanting
moderation, Desperation caused by a violent conscience.
urges the sinner to execute upon himself some desperate vengeance. Such was
the conscience of Judas the traitor, Judas.
which slept all the time he was plotting and practicing his treason: but when
his sin was brought into act, then his conscience (though evil) did vpbraide
his sin with such violence, as made the grief unsupportable: and the Traitor
(not able to endure the torment of his conscience) thought (as Cain) Caine.
that his sin was greater then the mercy of God, and so despayring mercy,
Mat. 27. 3. 4. 5.
he desperately hanged himself. Such are the consciences of the reprobate:
their conscience is sleepie, and does reprove but seldom: yet when it does
reprove, it is then most terrible, and without all comfort. And though in this
life they never afflict for sin, but seem senseless and dead in their
appointed offices: yet at the day of judgment, Reu. 20. 12.
when the book of every man's conscience shall be opened, then will their
consciences that in this life have been most silent, be most loud and
terrible in their accusations, denouncing judgment, and inflicting a greater
torment on the soul, then the damned can have patience to bear: This is the
office and end of an evil conscience. Wisd. 17 10.


Now the conscience of the child of grace is in full opposition to the
conscience of a reprobate: A good conscience.
For when God shall please to call his servants to a knowledge of himself, and
to a detestation of sin; the grace of his holy Spirit moves in the heart of
such a one, and first awaketh the conscience, and gives it sense to understand
the calamity of the Soul; and Spirit, to reprove and admonish it in needful
directions. And this grace of God, How God moves the conscience.
giving the conscience sense to understand sin, and Spirit to reprove it; is
the first degree of our reformation, and the preparation to our spiritual
conversion: GOD himself being the prime and principal Author thereof. This
beginning of the grace of God spreads it self into very large proceedings; When
God does stir our conscience, it continues that holy motion to our
reformation.
for when our conscience is once touched with this godly desire to examine the
errors of our life, God does not there leave us, but gives us a continual
assistance, to finish that needful care, without despair; without fainting.
The manner may be thus considered. The conscience (being instructed by grace)
understands that the soul is in danger of Gods judgment: this knowledge
causes a desire in the soul to examine the particulars of our life: The
manner how a good conscience works.
then does it compare our several actions, with the several duties of the
law, and thereby is made evident the many and great defects of our life, and
that therefore our souls and bodies are guilty, and stand in the danger of
condemnation. From this knowledge does arise the grief of a wounded
conscience: The cause of the grief of conscience.
for the Statute laws of God condemning us for the trespass of our lives; the
conscience then (whose office is to accuse, or excuse) vpbraideth our sin,
and denounces the judgment of the law against us, which is eternal
damnation. And in this case we may compare our souls to fellons at the Bar,
who having pleaded guilty, and received the sentence of the Law, Note.
abandon all hope, and only prepare themselves for the stroke of execution:
yet the sovereign Judge, being pleased to descend mercy to these poor
condemned Prisoners, offers them the benefit of their Clergy, promising mercy
to all them that shall be able to read the lines proposed them. So our souls
being arrested for sin, and standing at the bar of our own judgment, The
guilty soul like a condemned fellon.
being accused by conscience, and having the Law against us, to condemn us;
we are then in a much more grievous condemnation then fellons, because they
fear but a temporal death, but we eternal. Neither can we (more then they)
free our souls from these extremities, until GOD (who is the Judge of all the
world) shall please to offer mercy, and the benefit of his Clergy; which is
nothing else but the story of the meritorious sufferings of JESUS the Lamb of
GOD, Christ the book of life.
which story is written in spiritual Characters, upon the Cross of his
death. And this book (the spiritual cross) being writ with the blood of
the most righteous, How to quiet the trouble of a grieved conscience.
God presents to all the world, all the world (in respect of themselves) being
guilty, and condemned: promising Remission of sins, (a general Pardon,) to
all them that with their eyes of Faith, shall read this book of life, and
apprehend and apply ( JESUS) the contents thereof to their salvation.

Thus (and but thus) is it possible to quiet the trouble of a grieved
conscience, the conscience being never satisfied for sin, before the Justice
of God be satisfied, by the apprehensiue righteousness of Jesus Christ.

And therefore says Saint Paul; Romans 5. 1.
( Being then justified by Faith,) we have peace toward GOD, through our
Lord JESUS CHRIST. Romans 5. 1. The conclusion of this first part.
And thus far I have proceeded in the first part of this Tract, viz. the
death of man: for the whole passage of the old Testament, from the Creation of
man, to the incarnation of the Son of God, does only humble us with the
knowledge of our own unworthiness, and thereby make us fit to apprehend and apply
the righteousness of Jesus Christ: for before we can live to God, we must
dye to our selves: neither is there a spiritual regeneration, where there is
not first a spiritual mortification, And where grace would enter, sin must
void, for he thar would follow Christ, must deny himself. And therefore let
no man presume to apprehend the mystery of the righeousnesse of the Cross of
Christ, before he has reformed his actions, No man can be able to apprehend
Christ before his conscience has thus prepared him.
quieted the clamor of his conscience, and utterly denied the strength of his
own nature. For how shall he bear the Cross of Christ, that is laden with
his own infirmities? or how shall he be benefited by the promises of the
Gospel, that does not first judge himself by the comma^ndements of the law?
For he that knows not his disease, seeks no physic; and Christ came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

The general Use.
This does admonish al men carefully to watch the behavior of their lives; The
use.
for if the conscience of every man be Reu. 20. 1. 2
a book, wherein is writ the records of all his actions, good and bad; and
that seeing this book must be read at the day of judgment in the audience of
all the world, before God, and before his holy Angels and Saints, what manner of
men ought all to be in godly conversation? This ought to move in every one a
double care. First, First.
that they avoid (carefully) all ungodliness, both in thought and action;
whereby they may suffer disgrace before GOD and all his Creatures, at the
general judgment, when the book of their Secondly*
conscience shall be opened to every ones eye. Secondly, it does persuade a a
diligence in all godly exercise; and that all men contend (with an holy
emulation) to exceed in godly action* whereby they may receive applause, and
general reputation in the general assembly of God and all Creatures. For as in
the affairs of earth, men covet most desirously to gain reputation and
general name, because it argues an extraordinary degree of desert in him that
has it: so in contending for this spiritual Garland (Heaven,) it cannot but
be an extraordinary degree of content, There is no ambition lawful, but the
covetous desire of heaven.
and spiritual pleasure, to be named in the rank of best deseruers. And as
malefactors that suffer public punishment for their offense, esteem the shame
more then the pain of their corrections: so ought all men to fear the shame
they must endure, if their conscience disgrace them before so great a presence,
as will be at the general judgment. For let al men be persuaded, The book
of co^cience cannot be defaced but only by the precious blood of Christ.
that all their faults are so writ in the book of their consciscience, that
there is no means to obscure their knowledge, and to raze them out; neither
will the conscience (though it be our own) be corrupted, to conniue and
dissemble with God, but (even to our own faces) it will produce all our sins,
whose memory is not blotted by the righteous blood of the Son of God. Again,
seeing the witness of our conscience is that evidence, whereby we are all
judged either to life, or death, Not to offend our conscience.
we all ought most carefully avoid the doing of ought that may offend our
conscience: but rather to live in fear and awe of conscience, because our
eternal state depends upon the report of our own conscience. This ought to
prevent all unconscionable actions, and to have a detestation of every sin;
because when we have committed sins, we have hired against our own souls,
so many witnesses to urge our eternal condemnation. Lastly, The silent
^onscienre will be most loud at the day of judgment.
seeing that that conscience which in this life is most silent, will
notwithstanding at the day of judgment be most terrible and clamorous; it
admonishes all men not to rebel against their conscience, and to run on
without check in the committing of sin; but rather to yield themselves to
the correction of their consciences, lest by their customary sinning, they dull
the sense of conscience, Customary sinning dulleth conscience.
and so run on in the race of all unlawfulness: for though the reproof of
conscience be very terrible to him that rightly understands it, yet ought it
to be carefully apprehended, and respected as a moving cause to repentance,
and reformation. And let no man encourage himself with common example, Evil
examples ought not to move us from the duty of conscience
that because the common sway of men's actions respect greatness more then
goodness; and craft more then conscience, that this can warrant any ones
imitation; but rather wheresoever we see unconscionable dealing, if in our
friends, we our selves ought to be their conscience and admonish them; if in
our enemies, we must hate the sin, but pity the sinner, and labor (not his
imitation,) but if it be possible, his conversion. And this direction is both
Wisdom and Charity: The office of charity.
for he that is wise, will be armed, and not harmed by ill example: and he
that is charitable, will do the good he can, and wish the good he cannot do.

Special application.
I will therefore constantly endeavor to reduce to memory the several actions
of my life past: Special application.
I will then compare them with the duty of my conscience, and thereby understand
in what degree of sin I am, what my conscience shall appro^e, I will
continue; what it condemns I will hate: Good conscience is in hatred with all
sin.
be it my pleasure, be it my profit, be it my nearest or my dearest sin,
if my conscience call it sin, I will despise it. There is nothing shall make
me alter or suspend this resolution, I am constant in the love of conscience;
what I have done I will reform by conscience: what I have to do, my conscience
shall judge it lawful before I do it. If my occasions present me profit, I
will despise it if it be not honest, if pleasure, and not lawful, I will loath
it. I will undertake no action, To consult with conscience.
entertain no ^auour, but I will consult with conscience in every judgment,
and in all actions, I will be led by the voice of conscience, If the world
commend a sin, and my conscience condemn it, I will condemn the world, and
commend my conscience: I will credit my conscience more then common example,
because my conscience must judge me, and not example. If my conscience secretly
accuse me of sin. I shall certainly know there is cause; I will therefore
then examine, and as my conscience shall direct, I will rectify. I will not
silence my conscience from all reproves. I will only avoid the cause of
reproof (sin) and that carefully; when my conscience shall urge me the law,
my sins, and the condemnation I have deserved. I will not therefore despise
my conscience, nor despair mercy; but direct my eyes of faith to Jesus the
strength of my salvation: by whose favor I shall satisfy both the law and my
conscience. The hope and comfort I have in his righteousness, will quiet the
trouble of my conscience and he that has reconciled God and Romans 5. 1.
me will also reconcile me to my conscience, Conscience that did accuse will
comfort.
and make it that was my accuser, my Comforter This direction I propose my
self, and persuade all men as I propose and purpose, that in all our actions
and consultations, we judge nothing convenient that is not lawful, and that
nothing may be thought lawful, but that which has the warrant of good
conscience.

THE SECOND PART OF THE HOly Pilgrim, leading the way to new Jerusalem. OR A
Divine direction in the Way of life, declaring the order and causes of man's
happiness, attained by the imputation of the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Imprinted by B. A. for William Barrenger. 1617.

Of the Gospel, the new Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace. Chap. 1.
THE story of the Bible, from the first beginning to the birth of our Savior
Jesus, The Gospel.
does for the most part declare the miserable condition of mankind, how he has
fallen from the innocence of his nature, which God gave him in his first
creation; and how he has continued in sin, and in the curse of God for sin:
having no power in himself to satisfy the justice of GOD, or to reconcile him
self to his favor. Therefore did God give the law of the ten commandments
(the particulars of his revealed will. How to use and apply the Scriptures.
) both to provoke men to endeavor in the exercise of all godliness, and also
that by the knowledge of the Law, men might know their own defectes, and by
their humiliation to be prepared, and made fit for the mercy of the Gospel.
For though Jesus Christ the substance of the Gospel, was (in the counsel of
GOD from all beginnings) determined to be the Redeemer of mankind, being also
promised to our first Parents, and by whom all the faithful before his
incarnation, The faithful, before the incarnation of Christ, were saved by
Christ. The difference between the Law and Gospel.
had the pardon of their sins, apprehending (by faith) the promise of his
righteousness: yet was not this grace declared them in such plain and direct
evidence, as now it is in the preaching of the Gospel: it being then delivered
only in shadows, Ceremonies, prophecies, and in the mystical sense of
Allegories, so that few had capacity and grace (rightly) to understand them.
All which difficulties are now vanished in the preaching of the Gospel, the
Gospel presenting us (in most familiar and easy demonstrations) the substance
without the shadow, and the truth without the figure, withal giving directions
and infallible rules, not only to know the means of our salvation; but how to
make it ours, to apprehend and apply it to our own particular comfort. And
this grace does the Gospel give with such favor, as that the necessary
doctrines exceed not the understandings of men of meanest capacities; but that
all that will (without respect or exception) may reach their hands of faith,
The great favor and liberty of the Gospel.
to the Cross of Christ, and freely apprehend the means of their salvation,
which is the Lord Jesus, triumphing at the Conquest of his death, over sin,
hell, and damnation.

This is a blessed alteration in the state of the world: A happy alteration.
for in the time of the law, when the grace of the Gospel was hid in the
clouds of the ceremonies, the obseruers of the ceremonial law, did seldom
understand the mystical sense of the ceremony, which did allude to some
particular grace in the Gospel.) The ceremonies of the law did allude to the
graces of the Gospel.
And therefore though God was pleased to accept their careful endeavor in
their religious observing the ceremony, which was but a figure of the truth
included in the ceremony; yet they wanted a great part of that spiritual
comfort, Tit. 2. 11.
which we have in observing the covenant of grace (the Gospel) the grace of
God appearing to them as God himself did to the Israelites their Fathers at
the delivering of the law in clouds, Exodus 19. 16.
in fire, in smoke and thunders: but to us he does appear more familiarly,
Jesus Christ his Son, and the most lively representment of himself, assuming
our nature, and conuersing with us, did wound our sin, and heal the wounds
sin had made in our souls; in whom God was (personally) present, whose
words taught salvation, and whose actions wrought it. This is the difference
betwixt the law and the Gospel. The Law commands us to do and live, What
the law commands. What the Gospel.
if not, to dye; the Gospel (all mercy) requires to believe only, and line:
and this is a wonderful degree of Gods favor, that because we are not able
to keep the covenants of his law, is therefore pleased to yield to our
infirmities, to alter our obligation, and to enter new covenants with us: The
covenant of Grace.
the covenant of Grace, whereby God does indent with man, and binds the
justice of his law in the bonds of his mercy, promising salvation to all them
that faithfully believe in the merits and mediation of his Son Christ. Thus
does God allure us by easy mean, and fair promises to inherit everlasting
life, which the law denies to all men: no man being able to satisfy the
justice of the law. If it be objected then, Objection.
that the grace of the Gospel does destroy the works of the law, because that
mercy is given of grace, and not of deserts, I answer, Answer.
that the Gospel does not destroy the substance of the Law, but does only
abate and mitigate the rigor thereof: as God when he preserved Daniel in the
Lions den, Dan. 6. 16.
did not destroy the Lions, but only shut their mouths, and bound their
power, that they might not hurt Daniel: So he has not destroyed the law, but
does only restrain the violence thereof from hurting his Daniels, that is,
the faithful.

And as when Darius took Daniell from the den, Dan. 6. 24
and cast in his accusers, the Lions then had the maistry, and devoured them;
so the reprobate shall not avoid the condemation of the Law, notwithstanding
the promise of the Gospel, and the new covenants of grace; because no man has
the benefit of mercy, but he that (first) is the child of faith. The
difference of respect GOD has to his servants, and to his slaves.
And therefore the great King of all the World shall take his faithful Daniels
from the power of the Lions (the law,) but leave the reprobate in the state of
their destruction. Thus much in general of the Gospel, and of the general
difference between that and the law, and between them that lived under the
bondage of the law, and us that live now in the Liberty of the Gospel.

The purpose of the Gospel is the salvation of men. And therefore the Angel
that was the first preacher of the Gospel, told the Sheepheards that he
brought them tidings of great joy: Luke 2. 10.
(indeed) a greater could not be then to bring them the news of their
salvation. The matter of the Gospel is the life, 1. Cor. 15. 1. 2. 3.
the death, and the doctrines of Jesus Christ; for they are the only means by
which we attain to the favor of salvation: his doctrines were directions,
his life examples, and his death was, and is life to all that apprehend him, In
the circumstance of the Gospel is principally considered; First God, who of
himself and of his own election, The circumstance of the Gospel.
without cause in man, did enter this covenant of grace, being moved only by
the pleasure of his own will, and by his own gracious love to his creatures.
For so says the holy Ghost: Ioh. 3. 16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish, The love of God, the moving cause of the
covenant of grace.
but have everlasting life. Whereby it is evident that the love of God was the
only cause that moved him to this effect: for God ca^ glorify himself as well
in the damnation, as in the salvation of men: for he needs no addition of
honor, that is infinite both in greatness and goodness; but as his mercy is
most eminent over all his attributes, so in this new Covenant of the Gospel
he does give us the greatest demonstration of his mercy that can be, in giving
his only begotten Son to dye on the cross for the redemption of mankind: in
every word whereof there is an emphasis or a passion of love (infinitely)
beyond al comparison: Secondly.
where it seems that God does (as it were,) put off his Majesty, and descend
himself in his care to pity, and redress the ruined state of sinful man his
enemy. Secondly, in the person of Christ (who is the cause both moving and
finishing the covenant of the Gospel) there is matter of most worthy and
admirable consideration. For Christ is not only to be understood, How to
understand Christ in the Gospel.
as the isntrumental cause, whereby this covenant of grace between God and
man was effected, but also as the first moving cause and deviser of it, it
being impossible to assign him offices without his own appointment, he being
equal to God the Father, and the holy Ghost: and they all having but one
divinity undivided. This the unbelieving Jews could not comprehend, and
therefore they derided Christ when he said: Ioh. 8. 5. 8.
Before Abrabam was, I am, not knowing that he was God equal and coeternall
with his Father, and was begotten before all beginnings.

It is therefore most wonderful in the person of Christ, that he being God,
and the Lord of all the World: that he would leave the bosom of his Father,
Strong witnesses of the love of Christ.
and (for a time) to put off the presence of his divine Majesty, and to take
our nature upon him in humility, and in a base estate, and to undertake (not
only) to satisfy the law, and make good our defects, but also to bear the
displeasure of his father, and to suffer the malice of wicked men to prevail,
even to his death, and that he has endured all this for the good of man, a
creature that by sin had brought himself in disgrace with God. And which is
most of all; that he has done all this by his own appointment, Christ
suffered of his own will, and not by constraint.
without either command or direction, there being no power above him, by whom
he could be commanded. This incomparable love is able to astonish a Christian
meditation, and to make it admire and say with holy David: Lord what is man
that thou have such respect unto him, or the son of man; that thou so
regardest him? Psalm. 144. v. 3. Thirdly, is considerable the officers in the
holy ministration of the Gospel, Psalm. 144. 3. Thirdly. The ministers in the
office of the Gospel.
by whose endeavor and vigilance, the spiritual graces of the Gospel are
distributed to the children of faith, for whose sakes the covenant of grace is
given. The first officers (in this kind) were the twelve Apostles, of purpose
chosen by the Lord Jesus himself, Apostles.
that they might be the faithful witnesses of the whole passage of his life,
and that (after his ascension) they might plant in man's hearts a knowledge of
this Gospel; and by their prayers, preachings, and godly exhortations, to
dispose the holy seed of grace in their hearts, whom God should make capable to
entertain it with profit. The profit of their labors.
These holy laborers being assisted by the holy Ghost, traveled in Gods
husbandry, with such profit, as that the Gospel (in their times) spread it
self into very large limits. And building upon the foundation of the rock
Christ, they have erected such a frame as shall remain to all posterity.
These holy Ministers were the conducts, whereby God did confer his spiritual
waters of life into all the parts of the world, who spreading themselus (in
their painful travel) over all the known world, spread the Gospel as they
went; and left in every place where they came, a memory of their Lord and
master Christ Jesus. After the^ succeeded others in their example, who both
taught the gospel, The state of the primitive Church
and confirmed it with the testimony of their death. These are the holy
officers in the ministration of the gospel, and all that live in the church of
God in their office, and in their example, shall with them receive the wages of
faithfulness, A question in much controversy
Here is offered a large occasion to dispute a question in controversy, who
are they that are the true Ministers of the Gospel. The Papist.
The Church of Rome challenge to be only able to derive a true ministry,
because (say they) they have continued one and the same succession from the
Apostles downewardes. The Protestants opinion.
The Protestants misproue their Ministry, and plead intrusion of ceremony,
and corruption of error, and profess to have reduced a Ministry in most
near proportion to that of the Primitive Church. The Brownist is peremptory
against them both, and fondly pleads against the names and titles of the
ministry. The Puritan and Brownist.
And therefore as these quarrels are unplacable and out of hope to be
reconciled, I will leave the^ in their strife, with this admonition to my
reader: That we despise not Christ, because upon his Cross he did hang with
thieves; neither that we honor theeus, because they hang with Christ: for
that which is but near truth, Truth between two extremities of error.
Fourthly.
is no truth, and the best virtue is placed between two extremities.

Lastly, is to be considered, to whom the benefits of the Gospel appertain;
and that is to the elect, namely such as are most industrious in the faithful
execution of the law; for as I have said God has not given the Gospel to
destroy the Law, but to preserve and revive it, that men may be allured by the
sweet promises of the Gospel to endeavor with alacrity and hope in the
exercise of the law. And therefore Christ himself says: If ye love me,
keep my commandments: that is, endeavor to keep them with all diligence: for
he that is careless in the service of God, is not to hope that God will be
careful of his salvation. This is also approved in the parable of the
Laborers in the Vineyard. Mat. 21. 1. etc.
The Master of the Vineyard is God, the Vineyard is the world, the Laborers
are the faithful and painful Christians, their wages is the benefit of the
Gospel. So that not the lookers on, but the Laborers in Gods Vineyard shall
receive the wages of everlasting salvation.

These considerations are most weighty in the general understanding of the
Gospel, to which I will add this admonition: That all men esteem worthily
and reverently of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2. Th^s. 2. 10. 11. 12.
because God does judge the contemners thereof to be guilty of deserved
damnation. And that if God present them the means to communicate with the
benefits of the Gospel, that they neglect (rather) all the profits in the
world, then the treasure of the Gospel. For that is that one thing which is
only necessary, and that pearl of price, for which we are advised to sell all
that we have, Mat. 13. 45. 46.
that we may purchase it. For he that has that jewel, has sufficient wealth;
and he that has al things but that, he has nothing, if he has not that. For
what will it advantage us to win the whole world, if we leese our souls? and
what enlargement can he desire, that has the treasure of the gospel in his
heart, whereby he has continual comfort; and is led in the path of his
salvation.

The general Use.
First, this does generally remember all men the admirable degree of Gods
favor to mankind; that notwithstanding our apostasy from the service of God,
and our continual trade of sinning which might ince^ce the justice of God to
destroy us at once, and for ever; yet does he continue himself in his own
kind, a God and a father most compassionat; Pity in God is most natural.
who inclines rather to pity then to punish our infirmities. And therefore
did almighty God take from man the burdensome condition of the law, and
promise him everlasting life, upon much more easy Couenante: the which grace
does challenge from all men a dutiful thanks to GOD, The duty of thanks due
to God.
who has taken from their necks the unsupportable burden of the Law, giving a
greater liberty and ease in the work of their salvation. Secondly, Secondly.
it does admonish all men carefully to apprehend the grace of the Gospel, and
not to neglect the present and the precious opportunity that GOD has given
them; The danger of forfeyting the covenant of grace.
because he that shall break this covenant of grace, shall doubtless forfeyte
the estate of his body and soul unto eternal damnation. For this new covenant
of the gospel, as it is the greatest of all the favors of God, so it is the
last; and tha^ being neglected, there is not another to hope for.

Thirdly, seeing the Gospel does not destroy the substance of the Law, The
gospel does not destroy the law.
but only mitigate, and sweeten the severity thereof, by a gracious
dispensation from the extremity of justice; it behooves all men be (equally)
as careful in the performance of the duties of the law, as if there were no
other covenant but the law to judge us. For there is no man fit for the grace
of the Gospel, The law does fit us for the Gospel. Gal. 3. 24.
but he that is first schooled in the law of Gods comma^dements. And therefore
is the Law said to be a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, because it does
humble us in the knowledge of our own infirmities.

Fourthly, Fourthly.
seeing the purpose of the Gospel is the salvation of men, it behooves all men
to respect the Gospel as they would their salvation; and to labor by all
means (not only to advance the prosperity thereof, Our duty of respect to the
Gospel.
but also to avoid every cause that may occasion the sla^der or disgrace to
that sacred profession,

Fifthly, Fifthly, A reverence to the story of the Gospel.
seeing the matter of the Gospel, is the story of the words and works of
Jesus Christ our Savior, while he was upon earth, it does bind every man's
conscience to have a reverend and a confident opinion of the truth thereof; and
that all men labor by all convenient means to maintain the memory and
reputation of those sacred writings, the which are only able to guide us
without error in the way of our salvation.

Sixthly, Sixthly.
seeing that God of his own favor did without desert, nay without hate, enter
this covenant of grace, binding himself in the suerty of his Word to give
salvation upon the easy condition of the Gospel: and that seeing that Christ
Jesus the Son of God, did please to appoint himself, and to descend his
majesty in great humility, to establish our salvation in the merits of his
holy works: what manner of men ought all of us to be in thanks and godly
conversation?

Seventhly, Seventhly
seeing the officers appointed and chosen by Christ, for the ministration of
the Gospel, were the holy Apostles, and after them the reverend Martyrs in the
primitive Church, by whose diligence the Gospel spread it self over all the
known World; A remembrance to the Ministers of these times.
this does admonish all them that either are Ministers of the Gospel, or that
have power to make them, what choice there is to be made of their uprightness
and godly conversation, and what diligence is required in their spiritual
travels; all which ought to fashion themselves as near as they can to the
example of the holy Apostles. Eighthly. The promises of the Gospel belong to
the faithful only.
Lastly, seeing the promises of the Gospel belong to the faithful only, that
are industrious in the service of the law; this ought to provoke all men to
contend in godly exercise to exceed one another, and to stir up their dead
desires with the hope and promise of the Gospel, and that they think not the
law burdensome, being now made easy by the grace of the Gospel, and
therefore to travel in the duties of the law with alacrity and spiritual
comfort, having their confidence and eyes of faith upon the promise of the
Gospel. The difference between Sinai* and mount Sion.
Thus if men dispose themselves and their affections, they shall find the
happy difference betwixt mount Sinai, and mount Sion, the law and the Gospel;
in both which the gracious may find comfort, but with great inequality.

Special application.
Therefore the Gospel being a covenant between God and my soul, Special
application.
my first care shall be rightly to understand this covenant, left by
misunderstanding and false construction, I break the covenant of grace, and so
run my salvation into a dangerous hazard. The most needful search of
Scripture.
I will therefore search the sense of the mysteries of the holy Gospel; if
they exceed my understanding, I will compare them with the holy writings of
the Prophets and Apostles: if these exceed my capacity, I will consult with the
learned expositions of reverend fathers of the Church. If all these satisfy
not, I will then resort to the daily servants of this ministration, How to
labor to understand them.
and by diligent observing their Sermons, expositions, and spiritual
exhortations, I shall both learn what is the Covenant I have entered with God,
and the means I must use to keep covenant; when I have attained this
forwardness, and hope of better knowledge, I will (carefully) anoyde the
dangerous enchantments of Heretics, What we must avoid.
Schismatiques, and all false Teachers. I will not taste their poison, though
they present it in cups of gold, their bait shall make me suspect their
hook, and their fair and holy pretense, their foul and wicked purpose: for
having found Truth, (the Lord Christ) who is the s^ale of Gods covenant with
me, Christ the seal of the covenant of Grace.
I will preserve that truth from all defacing, and laying that for my
foundation, I will build thereon the whole frame of my life, and fashion all my
actions as the rules of the Gospel, and as the example of my Christ shall
command me, that so I may keep covenant with my God, and obtain the promise
of the Gospel (which is the salvation of my soul.) Genesis 45. 28
And then (with holy Jacob) I will boast my fortune, and say unto my soul: I
have enough, and desire no enlargement.

Again, when I meditate the matter of the Gospel, that is, the words and
works of our Savior, The delight we ought to have in reading the story of the
Gospel.
then it shall move me to a very reverend esteeming of the story of the holy
Gospel, and make me delight to exercise my time in the often reading and
conferring thereof: for if they that have estates in temporal possessions, be
most careful to preserve such evidence and writings, as is delivered them for
their security, The worldly care.
and oftentimes spend a great part of their wealth and labor to confirm and
continue such estates, and such evidence: shall not I then (much more) spend my
best diligence and means to understand (rightly) the writings of the holy
Gospel, which are the deeds and evidence between God and me, touching the
everlasting state of my soul, and carefully to keep such Couenantes as give
me claim and interest in the possession of a Kingdom? All wealth is
beggarly, in respect of Gods favor.
Shall men give their substance to lawyers to maintain their beggarly
possessions, in respect of heaven but beggarly, though it were the possession
of the whole earth,) and shall I neglect the covenants of everlasting life, and
may have law without fee? I will never do it, I will never give such testimony
of madness: but I will seem to do good by their evil example; let them
labor their earthly possessions, I will labor the possession of heaven: let
them waste their substance on Lawyers, I can have law and lawyers much more
reasonable: Who are a Christian man's lawyers.
the Prophets and Apostles are (and shall be) my Counselors, their hands are
not corrupted, their judgments cannot err: I will therefore affi^ in their
confidence, and endeavor as they direct me.

Lastly, Lastly.
when I meditate the particulars of the story of the Gospel, I despise all
other histories, The difference between the writings of God and men.
in comparison of this and the old Testament. For the writings of men do
commonly labor vile and unworthy arguments: and those of them that travel a
good cause, yet are they defective either in matter or form; but the Gospel
and other holy Scriptures being writ by the direction of Gods sacred spirit,
they are (not only) holy in their matter, but excellent in their form, able
to give the desirous reader infinite variety of content. Therefore, when I
desire to read of majesty, The variety of delight in the story of the
Scripture.
and great action, of Empire, War, Conquest, government, policy, and
infinite of this kind that depend on greatness; I can find both stories and
examples in the Scripture, many and unmatchable. If I desire the stories of
mercy, love, peace, humanity, civil action, and the rest that depend on
goodness; every page in the holy Gospel, can furnish me, either with some
story, or some example of that kind: if I desire wonders and miracles of most
admirable credence, they are in the scripture most frequent, yet most true; in
other writings not common, yet commonly false. Therefore the holy Scripture,
and especially the holy gospel, which is the covenant of my salvation, A
Christian resolution.
shall be my continual exercise, I will exercise my pleasure in reading the
meditating the excellent variety of matter, and majesty of the phrase, (being
the thethorique and eloquence of the holy Ghost:) The best eloquence.
I will also exercise my profit in studying (rightly) to understand the
covenant of my salvation, to keep which covenant, I shall be often admonished,
by promises, threats, and by example. In all which, the knowledge and
meditation of the holy Gospel will instruct me. For these respects I will
enter covenant with my soul, to be most careful in keeping my covenant with
GOD.

Of Christ Jesus, the sum of the Gospel. Chap. 2.
Jesus Christ is the sum or compendiu^ of the gospel, Christ the sum of the
Gospel.
in whose actions and holy sufferings the main execution of the gospel, was
(only and) wholly finished: for he being the seal of the covenant of grace;
the covenant was only promised, not performed, until Christ himself came in
our nature, Christ has paid our debts for us. Why the Gospel is called the
new Testament.
who did first discharge the former debts we ought the justice of God; before
he did seal and ratify the new covenant of the gospel. Therefore is the holy
gospel called the new Testament of our Savior Jesus, because the interest and
title of salvation, could not be derived of the children of God, but by Christ
the testator his sufferings, and death in his humane nature. It is also called
the last will of Jesus Christ, Why the last Will.
because God has fully determined that this Testament, this covenant shall
remain (unalterable) to all posterity; there being no purpose in God, no power
in man to alter or repeal, or change the form of this Covenant: but being
determined by the whole Trinity, The Gospel the last refuge for me^.
from before all beginning, to be the last refuge for sinful men: and the
only and most safe means of their spiritual deliverances: it was also in the
fullness of time, perfectly finished by Christ, as was before determined in the
counsel of the trinity. And from this doctrine does issue this foundation of
Christian religion, that the Covenant of grace was purchased only by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, A foundation of Christian religion.
who in our nature satisfying our co^tempts, and in our nature working
righteousness, did in our nature, and in our behalf inde^t with God and enter
these covenants; and lastly, to ratify al, he did die in our nature; and with
the blood of his sacred hand subscribe and seal his Testament our covenant,
whereby it is made unquestionable true, and unalterable to all times. It is
evident then that the matter of the Gospel is wholly contained in the only work
of Jesus Christ, The works of Christ. The matter of the Gospel.
and that Christ is a contract compendium of all such particulars as are
contained in the covenant of man's salvation. And that therefore the Canons and
decrees of Councels, and ecclesiastical states, nay, the very writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, How to understand holy writings that interpret Scripturs.
add not any matter to the substance of the covenant of grace: but are rather
to be understood as interpretations and plain expositions of such secrets, as
the wisdom of Christ Jesus thought good to fold in allegories and dark
understanding. For Christ left not his work defective and imperfect, whereby it
might require correction, but in a most exact performance. 1. Cor. 3. 11. 12.
Therefore says Saint Paul, Other foundation ca^ no man lay, then that which is
laid, which is Jesus Christ: Verse. 12. 14. 14.
and he assures a reward to the^ that build upon this foundation, and not to
the^ that lay a new foundation, or alter this that is laid. Christ then, The
words. The works of Christ.
the foundation of christian religion, and the substance of the Gospel did
execute his divine office with a double diligence, his word, his work: by his
word I understand such spiritual doctrine, as he daily delivered to his
hearers, whether it were direction, admonition, reformation or interpretation;
in all which our Savior has so abundantly traveled, as that not only
particular men, The words of Christ give all me^ sufficient divine direction.
but the Catholic Church also may receive ample and sufficient direction,
both for divine doctrine and spiritual discipline. By his works I understand
every act, and all the passage of his temporal life, from his incarnation to
his death on the cross, in all which time he was continually working somewhat
that was available and necessary for the redemption of mankind. A general
understanding of Christ.
Thus is Christ generally to be understood, as he was the principal matter
of the Gospel, and the only working means of our salvation. To make this
doctrine familiar and profitable to Christian men of easy understanding I will
subdiuide this double care of Christ into particulars. The words of Christ,
the time of his Incarnation did instruct us the duties of our soul, and the
duties of society; the duties of the soul, The duties of the soul
are all those things that are needfully required in the state of
Christianity, whether we respect the necessary faith of the Church, the
necessary orders in the Church; or the necessary obedience to the Church. The
duty of society is civil action, The duty of society.
and humanity; that is* a loving, charitable and orderly conuersing of
Christian men. And this Christ Jesus has called the great commandment; great
indeed, and of great consequence, because without this duty of humanity, we
can not perform our duty of divinity: for he that first loves not his
neighbor whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen. And
these duties of the soul, and society, comprehend generally the substance of
such doctrines as Christ Jesus himself has delivered. The works of Christ
are also of the matter of the Gospel, and comprehend such things as were
necessary to be done by Christ, and necessary to be known and believed of us
being the price of our redemption, Necessary in respect of his own decree.
without which it was impossible we should be reconciled to Gods favors, and
by which the covenant of the gospel is both obtained, and confirmed unto us.
All which works of Christ I reduce to these three principals; to his birth, 1.
The birth. 2. The life. 3. The death of Christ.

to his life, and to his death: what he did by assuming our nature, what he did
and suffered by living in our nature, and what he did by suffering, when he
dyed in our nature. What he did in being borne.
And this (I take) to be the most orderly understanding of the Works of our
Savior Christ. When Christ did assume our nature, and was borne of the blessed
Virgin, he did an act of great love, and of great humility: of great humility,
in that he daigned to descend his Majesty, and to take our nature unto his
Divinity, whereby he became subject to a temporal death, Heb. 2. 9.
and in (that respect) A little inferior to the Angels, his own creatures.

Secondly, it was an act of wonderful goodness, because the end thereof had
not respect to any means that might enlarge the honor and felicity of Christ
himself, in whom there is (naturally) an infinite measure of all happiness,
The respect
but had respect only to poor and sinful man, that by this means he
might repossesse the favor of God, from which he had cast himself by his own
disobedience. Objection.
Now it may be demanded, that seeing the nature of man is so poisoned with
hereditary sin, as that all the descents of mankind have a natural corruption
derived on them, the which like a general leprosy deformes the ancient beauty
of our nature, and presents us in ugly forms before the majesty of God: how
the^ could Christ take such a nature, so deformed, without imputation of sin,
and without fowling the exact holiness and sincerity of his divine nature.
Answer. Christ took our nature but not the corruption of nature.
I answer that Christ took our nature, nay all our nature; yet not those
stains, nor that corruption wherewith sin had deformed our nature. For though
sin be derived naturally, yet is it not of the essence of our nature, but a
defect or an accidental deformity which happened to our nature not when God
first gave our nature, but after it was given. And all those stains and
deformities which naturally are bred in us in the womb, and at our conception,
were all voyded and absent at the Incarnation of our blessed Savior: the holy
Ghost sanctifiing and preparing the sacred Virgin, ordained for that holy
office, whereby she was only made able to derive her nature with her issue,
immaculate, without sin, without corruption (but not without infirmity.) And
this sacred deriuing of a sanctified nature from the blessed Virgin, The
blessed virgin.
is not to be considered, as the act or power of the holy Virgin, but of the
holy Ghost; who being God, coequal with the Father and the son, was able to
separate our nature from corruption, and so to sanctify the sacred virgin,
that her nature might be derived as innocent and spotless, as God had created
it. The holy Ghost the principal mo^er in sanctifying the blessed virgin.
In which business the holy virgin was merely passive, and the holy Ghost
the principal worker, It is necessarily true then, that Christ took not a
part or a piece of our nature, but our whole nature, even our infirmities, and
avoided only the sin which accidentally did happen our natures; Sin not of
our nature, but in our nature.
the which being not of our nature, but in our nature it was not necessary that
Christ should take* sin when he took our nature. And therefore says the
holy Scripture that Christ Jesus was like to us in all things, only sin
excepted.

Secondly, Secondly. What Christ did and suffered for us.
is to be considered what Christ did and suffered while he lived in our
nature: that is, the time of his personal and visible conuersing with men here
on earth: what he did, is comprehended in this, that he lived (righteously in
the duties of the Law, and in exact obedience to Gods commandments. And this
was necessary in the office of Redemption, which Christ Jesus had undertaken;
for it was not possible to make good the Covenant of grace, How Christ did
satisfy our contempt
before the contempts of the Law were satisfied, which Christ di^ by his active
and by his passive Righteousness, By his active righteousness, when he lived in
a precise conformity to the Law of God: by his passive righteousness: when he
suffered punishment for the sins that men had committed, whereby both the law
and the justice of God had satisfaction for all former contempts. The Gospel
the only true history of the life of Christ.
I shall not need to report the particulars, what our Savior Christ did, and
what he suffered, the time of his personal conuersing with men, the holy story
of the Gospel is best able to give satisfaction, wherein is registered not all
his life, but so much as the wisdom of God has thought convenient for a
Christian knowledge, where it is evident that Christ had a double continual
exercise. First, the exercise of his power. Secondly, the exercise of his
patience. The power and the patience of Christ.
His power was exercised in doing good, his patience in suffering evil: what
he did, it was for man, what he suffered it was from man: Christ both did and
suffered, that men might not suffer: men did all they might, that Christ might
suffer.

Thirdly, is to be considered what Christ did by suffering, when he dyed in
our nature. Christ when he dyed in our nature, did by death, overthrow death,
What Christ did by suffering.
and by suffering did an act of admirable power and infinite glory: his power
and glory were declared in the conquest he made of sin, hell, and death,
enemies that had wasted the sons of Adam, now themselves wasted and (for ever)
vanquished by one Son of Adam Death and hell are the servants of sin, sin
their original or first cause, The servants of sin.
whom sin marketh, death destroys his body, hell tormenteth his soul; yet
is death, hell, and sin, swallowed up in victory by one Christ, The victory
Christ had of sin and hell.
who in the form of man, offering up himself a sacrifice to God his Father,
has reconciled God and man, by the righteousness of himself, God and man:
leading into perpetual captivity the ancient enemies of our nature, sin,
hell, and death, sealing the new covenant of grace, with the Cross of his
death, whereby he has opened the gates of heaven, and removed all
difficulties, that might let us in the passage to everlasting happiness.

The general Use.
The doctrine, The Use
whereby to know the two natures of the Son of God, his divinity and his
humanity united in one Christ, is most necessary in the knowledge of every
Christian, it being in the main foundation of christian Religion, The necessity
of knowing Christ*
whereupon all piety, and all faith is grounded. For he that knows not Christ
in his natures, and in his offices, cannot apprehend and apply him for his
salvation, because his assuming our nature, and the execution of his offices,
are the only means of man's salvation; without which God would not be pleased,
neither could the Law be satisfied. And therefore this general knowledge does
geuerally belong to all men, and that upon necessity.

Secondly, Secondly.
seeing the Son of God was content for (our sakes) to undergo so great a
travel, and for our sakes, to unite our far unequal and most unworthy
nature to his divinity, we ought for his sake, to refuse no travel that may
advance his honor, or express our thanks; but rather to despise all things
in comparison of so gracious a Savior, by whose only means our souls have
deliverance from eternal captivity.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
seeing Christ Jesus is the matter of the covenant of grace between God and
man, it does also most nearely concern all men, A most needful care
to indeauor all possible means (by their eyes of faith) to apprehend Christ,
who is to be apprehended by faith only,) and so to to receive the form and
impression of his sacred image, whereby they shall be truly interested in the
possession of heaven: when those that want this shall be rejected of God, with
this answer, Away from me, for I know ye not: because ye have not the mark
and Image of my Son.

Fourthly, Fourthly.
seeing the whole matter of the covenant of Grace, is fully contained in the
words and works of Jesus Christ, and that all things necessary both to a
civil and a Christian life, are contained in the story of the holy gospel, it
behooves all men to give that sacred word pre-eminence: All directions must be
conformed to scripture.
and that no man, neither any state or fellowship of of men whatsoever, presume
to decree, or ordain canons, or statutes Eclesiasticall or civil, which may
any way prejudice the directions of Jesus Christ, delivered in the gospel; but
that as Christ, our Priest, our Prince, and our Prophet, has given us (either
by doctrine or example) such needful directions, as are of necessary and
lawful use, either in a christian church or state: so no christian Church or
State should dare to innouate or alter those directions which Christ our high
Priest and great prince has left established; but in all directions both of
church and state, there must be heedfull care, that every particular have
relation to the truth of holy scripture, How to judge the lawfulness of every
statute ecclesiastical or civil.
or be conform to the example of Christ: for whatsoever direction, whether it
concern the soul or society, if it be not necessarily grounded, and have
dependency from the word of God, is altogether unlawful in a Christian church
and state, neither can dispensation make it lawful or tolerable. Therefore by
the square of the Scriptures all men ought to measure the lawfulnes of every
action, How to square every particular action.
and of every direction: and that whatsoever shall disagree from God and the
Scripture, may be judged error and intrusion of disorder: and therefore of
necessity to be spewed out of the Church and states of Christian men.

Special application.
The meditation of this doctrine and those duties, Special application.
shall make me serious in my Christian care: I will^ not now content my self to
have (only) a general knowledge of Christ Jesus my Redeemer: but I will labor
to understand him in his double nature. For if I consider him in his divinity,
as he is God only, it is a teror to my remembrance, when I consider him in his
double nature, it gives me hope and alacrity; To consider God in his Majesty
only is terrible.
for the majesty of God is terrible to sinful man; but his mercy is
comfortable, and suporteth the falling spirits of our souls, which would faint
and dye in despair, if the grace of God did not supply to such extremities
Therefore as God does most delight himself in the use of his mercy: so will I
delight my soul most in the contemplation of his mercy. Christ the character
of Gods mercy.
And as Christ Jesus is most lively Character of his mercy; so in the
meditation of Christ shall my cares be most busy. He is the book of Gods
mercies: I have eyes of faith can both see and read the Stories of mercy:
therefore I will direct my labor, and endeavor my studies in the most happy
knowledge of my Savior Jesus. In him I shall find infinite matter infinite
variety (all good:) in him I shall search the cause of my redemption, Where to
find the cause of man's redemption*
I shall find it in his will, I shall find it in his workings; he did cause my
good, he did effect it also; in his will was the cause in his work was the
effect. This meditation may kindle a dead zeal, and provoke holiness where it
is not; a God omniscious, omnipotent, infinite in greatness, in goodness
infinite, to compel himself to such a wonderful difference of fortune. He that
had happiness in the highest degree, br^athing inutterable pleasure in the
bosom of his Father; he that made the heauons and the earth, should descend
from heaven to earth; Note.
and there assume the form of wretched man, and in that form work such
righteounes as might satisfy God, satisfy the law for the sin of man; and
in that form to be borne in poverty, to live in contempt, and to dye in
disgrace; and all this to be done by the only begotten Son of God, for the
good of man, a creature that was become an apostate, a traitor to God, a rebel
to his laws, and the very actor of his disgrace, death and tragedy! O that I
had words to express the imaginations of my soul, what forms of mercy I can
see in my Savior Jesus, what scantnes (nay what fowlenes) of desert I find in
my self; his good and my evil are both infinite. Therefore I will do as I
advise, what I cannot express in words or works, We must meditate what we
cannot express.
I will devise it in my thought: I will know and believe my Savior to be
infinite good, though I cannot express his infinite goodness: what I can do to
his glory, I will endeavor what I cannot do my self, I will persuade others:
I will do any thing that may add any thing to the honor of my Savior: for
by gaining his favor, I have al favor, and in leesing him, I have naught but
tribulation and misery. He is the seal of the Covenant between God and me;
if I want my seal, I shall want my assurance, and so forfeyte my estate in
Gods favor and heaven: I will therefore sell all that I have, to buy my
savior, A dange^ous forfeit.
I will leese all to gain him. If he subscribe not to my pardon, I am but
dead; the law has cast me, and without him there is no grace, no hope of
favor; I will therefore direct my eye of faith to him, Resolution.
and when I have found him whom my soul loves. I will resort to him in daily
prayer, win his favor by endeavor and careful observing him, and so make
him my salvation that has wrought salutation. Thus I purpose in my own
particulars: thus I wish to all in general.

Of Repentance, the sorrow of the Soul for sin. Chap. 3.
WHen Christian men have understanding by the Law of God, of their miserable
estate (in respect of sin) what they were in innocence, what they are in sin,
and what they shall be in judgment, it brings a general sadness on the
souls of men, Repentance
and dulleth the spirit and delight they have had in their prosperous
fortunes: God gives the first grace to repentance.
For when God gives grace to any one to examine his life, and to view his own
deformities, the first knowledge and apprehensio^ of his misery is most
terrible, because his conscience does forcibly check the former proceedings of
his life and violently hale him against the curre^t of his own affection: for
as rivers are not forced against their ordinary streme but by the tide which is
more forcible then the stream; so our sinful action, (being in all men, The
difficulty of repentance.
a natural and common motion) is not reformed in us, but by the Spirit of
God, a power above our nature. Yet is it done, with such contention in our
flesh, and in our nature, (as for the time) does wonderfully distract the soul
of the party repenting. The reason.
And needs it must: for he that has wasted his time in the delicacy of
fortune, glutting himself with variety of pleasures, and in the height of this
vain prosperity is admonished that he has fed on poison, and thereby run
his life into a desperate hazard, The sorrow of a repentant soul.
will (doubtless) endure the extremity of grief that sudden fear and
amazedness can lay upon him For so are sinnefull^ men, who not regarding the
danger of their souls before God and their conscience admonish them, A sudden
grief is violent.
are taken unprovided with a sudden grief, which does always inflict an
inexpressible measure of sorrow, and sometimes death and desperation. Now as
the Law teaches us to know our sin, What must cure diseased souls.
our miserable condition, and the disease of our souls: so the Gospel
teaches us the cure, both what and how to administer physic to our diseased
souls: for else were the knowledge of our sins an extreme misery without
profit, if we should not also know the means of our recovery, and know also
how to administer and apply them. For virtue has no virtue but in use, The use
of virtue.
and that physic which the sick patient receives not, cannot profit him,
be it never so excellent, or stands never so near him. But as in corporal,
so in spiritual sicknesses, The order in curing.
the disease must first be known, the physic then administered; for he that
administreth before he knows the cause, or knows only the cause, and
administreth not, can never recover his patient, be he never so industrious.
In repentance therefore and sorrow for sin,) which is a sickness of the
soul) must be (necessarily) considered these two particulars: The cause, The
cause of repentance.
the cure. The cause is either the material cause, or the moving cause, the
material cause is sin; that being the matter of our offense; for which we so
sorrow and grieve all the time of our repentance. This is proved in the
examples of all men that have had the grace of true and vnfaigened repentance;
every penitent Child of grace having sorrow and affliction in his soul,
because by his sin he has provoked his God, and his creator against him.
Thus did Job and David repent them; Job. 42. 6.
2. Sam. 12. 13.
and so do and will do all that would profit by their Repentance. And here
is necessarily to be observed that though our repentance have respect to the
benefit of our own estates, as being a most necessary service in our
salvation: Note.
yet the maine respect is had to God, whose glory we must prefer, God must
be respected before our souls.
even before the salvation of our souls, making him the principal and our
selves but secondary respects of our repentance. And herein appears the
difference between true and false repentance. The false or godless repentance
sorroweth for sin, but for this cause only, that for their sin God does
punish and afflict them. The difference between true and false repentance.
Exodus 9. 27
1. Sam. 15 24 25.
1. King. 21. 27.
Therefore their sorrow is chiefly for the punishment, and but respectiuly for
the sin. Thus did Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, and Judas repent them, and so do all
false and fained repenters, that respect God for themselves, and not themselves
for God. A true and godly repentance sorroweth for sin, Mat. 27. 3. 4
For what cause a godly repentant sorroweth.
because it is sin, and not because it deserves punishment: and here the main
respect is had to God, and to our selves only for Gods sake. For though the
dread and fear of punishment, be sufficient to move any man's repentance, yet
we must not make that the cause of our spirtiual sorrow: but much rather
because we have offended so gracious a God, who has declared himself to us in
so many, and so great demo^strations of love, this ought to be more sensible to
our wounded souls the^ the horror we have of our condemnation. Thus are holy
men moved in the grief and passion of their repentance. The main difference
then between true and false repentance is this: True repentance is caused by a
reverence we have to the love of God, false Repentance by the fear we have
of Gods justice: the one is the office of a slave, the other the office of a
son: both of them repenting one matter, God is the moving cause in every
office of grace.
but for diverse respects. Sin then is the material cause of Repentance. The
moving cause is God who moving his holy Spirit in the hearts of his Elect,
presents them the ugly forms of their sins, awakes their conscience, and stirs
them to a serious cogitation of their wretchedness; giving them still such
proportion of grace, as the degrees of their Repentance and spiritual sorrow
shall require. And that God is the first moving cause of godly repentance, is
evident by many places of Scripture; by these namely, 2. Tim. 2. 25. where S.
Paul aduising Timothy to instruct them that are contrary minded, he gives
this reason: 2. Tim. 2. 25
Because he shall thereby prove if God at any time will give them repentance,
that they may know the truth: Here repentance is called the gift of God, which
does utterly bar man from all cause of boasting his ability in this
necessatie duty. Also in the 5. of the Act. 31. the Apostles (proving Jesus to
be Christ and God coequall to his Father) uses this argument before the
council of the Jews: That God had made him a Prince and a Sautour, Act. 5. 31.
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sin, where the power of
giving repentance, is made a proof of his divinity, and interposed between
his office of Savior, and his power of forgiving sins. These places (out of
many) sufficiently prove, that God is the first and principal moving cause of
fruitful repentance. Object.
Now it may be demanded, whether God move repentance in all them that repent
for sin, or in them only that truly repent, and are his chose^ elect. I
answer, Answer.
that God moves this grace in his elect only because they only make profitable
use of repentance, and that such as Soul and Ahab that repented for private
respects, Saul and Ahab.
were not moved by the spirit of grace, but by their politic and private
regards only. For wheresoever the holy Ghost shall please to move grace, it is
not possible that labor should be fruitless: neither does God ever miss in
the purpose of his ends. Note.
And therefore that repentance which his holy Spirit causes, he continues to
maturitie and ripeness of perfection, never failing, never fainting in his
undertakings. Thus much of the cause of our spiritual sorrow (repentance.) Now
of the cure or means of deliverance from spiritual grief. The cure.
In the cure is considered, first the preparing and dressing of the wounded
soul, whereby it is made fit for curing. Secondly, the matter to be applied to
the soul. Thirdly, the manner of applyment. In the preparing of the wounded
soul, there are those 4. things necessary. First, a spiritual sorrow for sin,
that is, a sense of sorrow in the soul, caused by a cogitation of sin and
guiltiness. And this is a necessary preparatiue in a repe^ta^t soul: for that
soul cannot desire a spiritual refreshing, that has not first a sense of
sorrow, and a feeling of present calamity. This first preparatiue to
repentance, was in the Jews, that were hearers of holy Peter, when he
declared to them their sin in crucifying the Lord Jesus. For the Text says:
Act. 2. 37
When they heard it, they were pricked in their hearts, and said: What shall
we do? As if the present sorrow did so astonish them, as they knew not what
to do, nor what to advise themselves. The next preparatiue is humble
acknowledgement, that is, an acknowledgment of the soul of the misery it is
in, Humble acknowledgement.
and an exposing of such particular griefs as we find in the register of our
conscience. This also is very necessary in the preparing of our souls: for
though God (the Physician of our soul^s) understand our sins better then our
selves, and can remember them better then conscience; yet is it but reason,
that he that desires the physic of his soul, declare so much of his grief
as he can remember: not to instruct or help the knowledge of God, but to
acknowledge our selves and our dut^full desires. This acknowledgement of sin,
was common in the custom of holy David, how often does he confess his sin,
and expose his grief before God? The example of holy David.
Psalm. 32. 5.
for God is so desirous of our good, as that he then readily helps us, when
we do but (carefully) desire it. Therefore says the Prophet David: I said I
would confess my sin, and thou forgauest, etc. David did but say he would
confess, God takes his word, and forgave him his sin. And certainly,
humble and unfeigned acknowledgement in our repentance, is an undoubted
testimony that God does give us grace, and that he will give us favor. Here
is offered occasion to dispute a large controversy touching auricular
confession, the which being conten^iously disputed, Auricular confession.
has kindled fire in the faith of many, many making that of absolute
necessity in all, which is only convenient in some. Auricular con^ession
rather policy then piety.
For auricular confession (as now it is used) is rather a state policy the^
religious piety, and therefore I dare not command it, neither will commend it.
The third preparatiue consists in holy action, The third preparatiue.
that is, when we endeavor a reformation of our selves, and declare our
Repentance in a conscionable discharge. For though no man can^ satisfy the
justice of God for sin; that being possible for the Son of God only: No
man can satisfy God.
yet ought all men to endeavor so much as they have power given them to
satisfy men. As for example; he that steals or defraudeth, be it by force
or by fraud, How far every man must satisfy.
is of necessity bound to make restitution (if he be able) and this the
reformed Publican Zacheus well understood, who pro^essing before Christ his
reformation and repentance, to witness it to be true and unfeigned, he gave
this infallible token: Behold Lord (says he) the half of my goods I give to
the poor, and if I have taken from any man by forged cauillation, Luke 19. 8.
I restore him four fold. And the Text says in the next verse, that then
salvation was come into his house. And so Zacheus by indeauouring that he
could not, did at one time entertain both his Savior and his salvation.
Therefore though no man can satisfy, yet every man must endeavor, otherwise
his repentance is idle and but vain, neither can he have part in the
righteousness and redemption of Jesus Christ.

The last preparatiue is prayer, that is a lifting up of the heart to God, with
faith and hopeful confidence. Prayer.
In the exercise of prayer there is a double office. Psalm. 25. 1.
First, we must expose our grief. Secondly, we must implore favor: for as in
the ordinary cures of Surgery, the patient must first suffer his wounds to be
ripped, Note.
launst and searched before the plaster can be applied to the sore: so must we
rip, and search the wounds of our soul, empty the infectious matter; and when
we have it out, we must use it as Hezechiah did the blasphemous letter of
Rabshaketh, 2. Kin. 19. 14. 15.
spreads all before the Lord; and then with earnest humbleness, implore his
favor, point out our sins unto him, and confess that these are they that
have wounded our souls, troubled our conscience, for which we grieve, for
which we pray. When the soul is thus prepared, there is joy in our repentant
tears, pleasure in our grief, and hope in our spiritual sorrow: and then,
(and not before) are we made fit to apprehend and apply the salvation of our
souls, Christ Jesus. The second thing in the care of our souls, The matter of
the cure of our souls.
is the sovereign matter by which the soul is cured. That is the most
sovereign Balsame, the sacred blood of the Lamb of GOD, of the Son of God,
shed for the Redemption of mankind: 1. Pet. 2. 2.
for so says his holy Apostle Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his body on the tree, that ^ee being delivered from sin
should live in righteousness, by whose stripes we were healed. Our sins are
taken from us, by his bearing them: our wounds are cured by his wo^ndes: our
eternal death prevented by his temporal death: for but the Son of GOD
(Christ Jesus,) there is no Empiricke, No physic but the blood of Christ can
cure a wounded soul.
no quintessence, no Physic, can cure a wounded soul: so venomous is sin,
and so incurable are the wounds of sin: only the blood of the holy Lamb is
able to deliver and heal; and that is both so certain, and present in
virtuous operation, as that one drop (rightly applied) is sufficient to cure
the wounds of a world of souls. The last thing is the cure of our souls, is
the manner of applying this most Sovereign medicine Christ Jesus, The manner of
applying Christ.
and that is by a true and a lively faith, Heb. 11. 6.
for without faith it is impossible to please God: and without faith it is
impossible to apprehend the Son of God. Neither need this seem strange to a
Christian judgment, that we should be able by faith to apprehend Christ, and
apply him to our repentant souls: for he himself has taught us, that
whatsoever we shall ask in prayer (if we believe) we shall have it. Mat. 21.
22.
Where he makes faith to be the covenant and condition of prayer, and
promises that such prayer shall only and always prevail, that is directed by
a living faith, against which there is no resistance. No resista^ce against a
true faith.
Therefore to apprehend Christ Jesus, and to apply him to our wounded souls,
we must reach our hands of faith to the bosom of his Father, and by faith
take him from the altar of his Cross, and by faith apply his blood, (nay, his
bloody body) to our wounded souls. For he that does it faithfully, does it
effectuly, and shall doubtless find assurance in himself, that the wounds of
his soul are cured; and that sin is for ever disinabled from doing his soul
hurt, that has Jesus Christ his Redeemer faithfully applied unto it. For where
he is in his mercy, there is assurance, and the ^afety of divine protection,
And this is the order I advise all christians in their repentance and
spiritual sorrow. Note.
First, that they prepare their souls, and that then they apply Jesus Christ
their salvation, In whom there is safety, without whom, none. I might here
be large in declaring the manner and the causes of Godless sorrow, and false
repentance. Iauoide them for their number and variety: let the true judge the
false; and let this true form of Repentance I have prescribed, teach the
Christian Reader to avoid all dissimulation, Hipocritical sorrow in Gods
hatred.
and hypocritical sorrow for sin: the which he may judge by comparing with
this Doctrine I have delivered. And let him remember that Godly sorrow causes
repentance, not to be repented of; but worldly sorrow causes death. 2. Corinthians. 7. 10. 11.

2. Cor. 7. 10* 11
The general use.
This doctrine of Repentance, The Use.
and spiritual sorrow does remember all men many very needful admonishments.
First, First.
seeing that sin is the cause for which we repent us, and by whose
poysonsome means our souls are so grievously wounded, and so fowly deformed;
it ought to move al men to a loathing and detestation of sin, by which we are
both grieved in our selves, and brought in the hatred and displeasure of
almighty God. Note.
For if we carefully avoid all such annoyances as bring any little taste of
grief to our bodies, or to our temporal life, we ought much more carefully
to avoid sin, which causes such extremity of grief in our souls, and does
both deprive us of Gods favor, and bring an everlasting destruction upon us.
Secondly, Secondly.
seeing there is no repentance profitable to salvation, but that which is
caused in us, by the moving of Gods holy Spirit, it behooves all men to be
serious in their repentance, and not to content themselves with a slender
examination of their sins, and then again to return to their former
disobedience, and remissness; but to be careful to repent al sin, and to be
constant in that care, no alteration, no interruption, and that our repentance
respect rather a shame and grief to have offended a gracious God, then any
fear of temporal or eternal punishment: lest by such repentance they gain
no more then Saul and Ahab; Saules and Ahabs repentance.
the one nothing, 1. King. 21 27.
the other nothing but a short temporal blessing: both of the^ leesing their
souls by their false and fained repentance. Thirdly, seeing the soul cannot be
cured by repentance, neither can apply or apprehend Christ Jesus, unless it
be first prepared and made fit by the exercise of these duties, it therefore
behooves all men to be carefully precise in the office of these duties, and not
to satisfy themselves with the exercise of one or two of them, but to
endeavor them all, because they are al necessary in our true repentance for as
in the commandments of the law, he that fails in one, breaks al: so in
these duties of repentanc, he that neglects one, profits by none, but
annihilateth the purpose of his spiritual sorrow. Let no man therefore flatter
himself with this presumption, The danger of presumption.
that if he have been an extortioner, a thief, or a godless person, that
his repentance will suffice him, if he be sorry for his sins, and acknowledge
them to God, for those though they be necessary duties, they are not all the
duties of our souls in our preparation to repentance. Therefore if he have
extorted, or (as Zacheus did, taken by forged cauillation, L^k. 19. 8.
(that is by any indirect or dishonest means) he must repent as Zacheus did,
and make restitution (if he can) and as far as he can: otherwise salvation
can never come to his house. Therefore as they are all necessary, so they are
jointly necessary, every man being bound to all these duties, as God and grace
shall enable him.

Fourthly, seeing Christ Jesus is that Empericke, and that only salve which is
able to cure a wounded sinful soul, and that without him there is no working,
no cause, no means of spiritual deliverance from sin, and from a wounded
Conscience: therefore it most nearely concerns all men to endeavor all
means, We must purchase Christ, though we sell al things
to purchase this Christ their salvation, to sell all they have, that they may
buy the treasure of his blood, and of his righteousness, nay, and to despise
all things in respect of him their Savior, and the only Sovereign salve
for their wounded souls.

And that seeing we have Jesus Christ the Son of God proposed us to be our
salvation, who is always ready, and always willing to be apprehended, The
willingness of Christ to be apprehended.
and to be applied to our souls: by whom only we enjoy the peace of
conscience, and the hope of heaven; therefore no man ought to have confidence
and affy in pardons, dispensations, and such trash, wherewith the besotted
people of this world wonderfully delighted, for such pedling stuff must not be
thought to have equal virtue with the blood of Christ, or that they have any
power in the cure of wounded souls, Note.
but on the contrary they surfette the conscience, and poison the soul, Vile
Physic.
enlarging the wounds both in number and grief, and making the soul
incapable of cure, and most unfit to have the precious blood of Christ
applied unto it.

Lastly, Fifthly.
seeing there is no means to apprehend and apply this Christ, the physician,
and physic of our souls, but only by a true, lively and a justifying faith,
therefore it most necessarily concerns all men, Christ can not be apprehended
but by a true faith only.
to have this means of apprehending Christ; because (as I have said) the salve
though most soueraign) cannot profit the sore, unless it be applied, that
being the very maine act of our spiritual health, alll other duties and
offices being but circumstances, to assist and forward this act. Moreourr the
faith by which we apprehend Christ, must be more then a common or a general
faith. For it profits not to our health and salvation, to know only that
Jesus Christ is the present cure of our souls, unless we also by a confident
and lively faith, apprehende and apply him to the sore of our souls. Again,
seeing Christ is our only salvation, and seeing faith is the only means of
apprehending it, we ought not to appoint other matter of salvation, neither any
other manner of applying it. And therefore no man ought to ascribe righteousness
to himself, to his own works, Note.
or the supererogatiue works of his friends, but only to Jesus Christ, and
that this Christ is only apprehended by a saving faith.

Special application.
I will often meditate this Doctrine of true Repentance, Special application.
what fear, what care, what affliction is in the soul at such occasion. I
will practice it in my self, I will pity it in others: I will condemn sin to
be the great cause of such misery, I will condemn my self to be the only
cause of that sin. When I exercise this spiritual office of repentance, I
will be carefully busy in all the duties thereof: A necessary resolution.
I will search the wounds of my soul, empty the rottenness and putrefaction
thereof, search and dress my wounds; How to dress the wounds of a soul.
search them by a serious examination of my sins, and dress them by humble
and hearty acknowledgement, I will examine the actions and the particulars of
my life, I will compare them with my duties, and those that proportion not, I
will call them my errors, my sins, and the wounds of my soul. I will by the
means of prayer and faith, refer my defects to be supplied by the most
absolute satisfactory righteousness of my Savior. The righteousness of
Christ must supply all our defects.
What I find sin, I will call sin: I will not flatter my errors, nor smooth
my deformities, I will not pretend health when I am sick, nor safety when I am
mortally wounded, I will not favor any sin, whether it be a sin of
profit, or a sin of pleasure. No sin must be favored.
In this case I will despise both pleasure and profit: I will therefore be
sorry for all, acknowledge all, pray for the remission of all. If I have gained
possessions and wealths by theft, extortion, forged cauillation, or any other
indirect means, I will restore as my present estate shall enable me. I will be
ashamed that Zacheus the Publican, shall restore his extortions fourfold, and
I a Christian, not to restore the princiall. I will shun all such sin, as a
plague or leprosy, because I know that salvation will not come to him that
has such defection. All sin of necessity must be cured.
But as (of necessity) all sin must be cured, otherwise there is no cure:
so in my repentance I will hate all sin without dispensation of any;
otherwise I repent not, but flatter my self in presumption, and vain
confidence. And because nothing can apprehend and apply salvation to my Soul,
Works must try our faith.
but the hands of a saving faith only, I will therefore be sure that my
faith be such an one, I will try it by the evidence of my Works: they will
testify what it is, and of what Nature. For as my faith in Christ does
justify me in the sight of God, so the works of my faith justifies my faith
in the sight of men, and my self. If the fruits of my faith (then) be good,
my faith it self then must needs be good, and available to apprehend and
apply Jesus Christ my salvation. Plentiful in good works and why.
I will therefore be plentiful in the exercise of all good Actions, that my
conscience may testify my faith: and that my faith may be able to execute the
holy Office assigned it.

When I have the assurance of this faith, I will then with confidence look up
to Heaven. I will seek him whom my Soul loves, and when I have found him, I
will expose before him the calamity of my soul, and my present condition. I
will open my wounds, discover my sins, declare my endeavor, and report my
faith. When I have thus done, I know what my Savior will do: he will rejoice
at my recovery, and be glad of my return: he will show me his
righteousness, show me his wounds, and show me his death upon the cross: he
will also willingly yield himself unto my faith, Apprehension of Chrst.
and give me free liberty in the use of his righteousness. Then will I busily
apply my cares, I will stretch my hands of faith to the altar of his Cross, I
will (with reverend boldness) touch his wounds, and take his sacred blood; and
with a wonderful degree of comfort, I will apply it when I have it: I will open
my wounds wide, and will infuse his most precious blood, and with that blood
shall enter the Spirit of health and everlasting safety.

Thus in an instant shall I find the happy alteration of my soul: The happy
alteration of a soul
and I that (but then) was in spiritual grief, tribulation, and anguish,
shall now find joy and strength in my Soul: and my soul that was wounded,
deformed, and full of the marks of sin, shall now have the mark of the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, whereby I shall be distinguished from unrepentant
sinners, and have the seals and assurances of my salvation. Amen.

Of Mortification. Chap. 4.
HE that is resolved to endeavor his godly repentance, Mortification.
and laboreth the reformation of his sinful life, must labor two things
principally, and of necessity; the first is Mortification, the next
regeneration. He must first destroy his sinful estate, before he can obtain
the state of grace. For God and the gifts of God, Note.
are so absolute holy, as that they cannot admit any mixture or cooperation
with sin and wicked action. For as in the curing of bodies infected with
poysonnous diseases, the Physician by severity and strict diet, brings down
the body of his patient to extreme poverty, and leannes, and then in that
extremity, helps the weakness of Nature; and by restoratiues, and requisite
diet, brings a new flesh wholesome and without disease, the former diseased
flesh being first wasted, and utterly consumed with the extremity of physic.
So he that is resolved in his repentance, and has a loathing and detestation
of his sins, and a desire to free his soul from the contagion of sin, must
resolve also to endure such bitter Physic and strict diet, How to mortify
our diseased actions.
as the judgment of spiritual physic does prescribe him; whereby all the
evil, depraved and corrupt affections of his soul, may be utterly wasted,
and thereby his soul may have new and fresh indument of grace, without taint,
without disease, without grief. This was figured in the manner of Gods calling
Moses to his princely and Prophetical office. For when Moses made offer to
come near the presence of God in the bush, Ex. 3. 5.
God forbad him: Come not hither (says God,) put off thy shoes of thy feet.
That is before thou presume to approach my presence, thou must first put off thy
shoes, that is, thy sinful and corrupt affections for he that has base
and vile affections is not worthy, is not fit for the presence of GOD. It was
also in the order of the Ceremonial Law, that they who were polluted (were it
but with the touch of any unclean thing) were for a time Prohibited the
Sanctuary, and the presence of God: Leuit. 15. 2. etc.
and had a time limited to cleanse them, before they were admitted and allowed
for clean persons. All which Ceremonies do but note unto us the Nature of
holiness, how impossible it is to be reconciled with sin, that as the two
contrary Elements, Fire and Water, cannot possibly be in any one Subject
without intestine strife: so God and Beliall, grace and sin, can never
conspire in any one particular: but where grace is, No peace between God and
Belial.
sin cannot be, and where sin is, grace will not be: there being in them a
full opposition of Nature, not to be reconciled. Therefore it is necessary,
that before we entertain the graces of Gods Holy Spirit, we first discharge
our sins, which have had entertainment in us, and before we can be
regenerate, and made the sons of GOD, we must mortify our affections,
whereby we were made the servants of Sin.

Saint Paul admonishing the Colossians to an imitation of Christ, S. Paul's
direction.
and his holiness, advises first to Mortification, as if without that means,
the other were impossible. Colos. 3. 5.
Mortify therefore (says he) your Members which are on the earth, For
nication, uncleanness, etc. And he gives a reason of this direction, in the
Epistle to the Romans, Romans 8. 13.
8. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye mortify the
deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. By which place we are
taught, what mortification is, and of what necessity it is.

Mortification is a decay or perishing the deeds of our flesh, What
Mortification is.
by the grace and operation of Gods Spirit. By the deeds of our flesh, is
meant not only our evil actions, but our desires and carnal affections also;
the which Saint Paul does particularize in the Verse before alleged: where he
calls their general name members on the earth. Mortify therefore your
members which are on the earth, Colos. 3. 5
fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is idolatry. In which he comprehends (not only) our
actions, but affections; nay, the very natural concupiscence, and
deprauednesse of our Nature. Not that any man is able to perform these duties
exactly; but exactly to endeavor them, and that our defectes may be in our
power, To endeavor exactly is exactly to perform.
and not in our purpose and endeavor. And this is the meaning of that Apostle,
in naming (for the matter of mortification) sins of action, sins of
affection, and sins of natural descent.

Secondly, Secondly.
mortification is an office of the spirit, Question.
and here imports a question, whether the word spirit in this place is to be
meant of the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, or of the Spirit of man our
natural soul. I answer, Answer.
that the Spirit executing this office of mortification, is principally meant
of the holy Ghost, who gives the first motion of desire in every Godly Act.
It is respectively also meant of the care and travel of our own spirits or
souls, not that our own spirits can cause our own mortification, but being
first caused by Gods Spirit, it is entertained and continued by the exercise
of our own Spirits, our Spirits having no such strength in their own
Nature, Note.
but as they are prepared by the Grace of the Holy Ghost. For, as in the
casting of a stone or running of a Bowl, though the strength of the arm give
the first motion to the bowl or stone; yet afterward is the motion continued
a competent time, as well because of the powerful moving of the arm, as also
because of the natural fitness of the thing moved. So in the office of
mortification, and in all other divine offices of the Soul, No soul can move
it self to divine action*
though the Soul move not it self to these holy actions; yet by reason of the
spiritual nature of our souls, when it is once moved by the Holy Ghost, it
then continues such motion, even to perfection; so that the prime hour of the
holy exercise of Mortification (and so of all other spiritual offices) is
wholly to to be ascribed to the power of Gods holy Spirit, which moves in our
hearts enery act, and every purpose of well doing.

Thirdly, there is a necessary of mortification imposed upon every man, Thirdly.
upon the pain of condemnation. This is employed in the words of S. Paul in the
place before alleged, Romans 8. 13. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall
die, but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, Romans 8. 13.
ye shall live. Where the Apostle proposes life and death before the Romans,
admonishing that of a necessity they must choose one, Life and death is proposed
every man.
either to mortify the flesh and live, or else to pamper the flesh, and die;
there being no means, no cause of auoidance of this necessity. And S. Paul
has admiration at their simplicity, that cannot apprehend this mystery, who in
the Allegory of seed proving the resurrection of our bodies, proves also the
necessary mortifying of our flesh: 1. Cor. 15. 36.
O fool (says he) that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die: For
as the blade of seed corn cannot appear before the grain be first rotten
in the Earth: and as there cannot be a Resurrection to Life, before there be
first a separation and rottenness by Death: So there cannot be a Regeneration
by Grace, before there be a Mortification to sin. No regeneration before
mortification.
For New Birth is gotten by the death of Sin, and Mortification is the
Predecessor, and next Parent to Regeneration, they being necessary Relatiues:
for where one is, both are; and where both are not, neithe is.

These things are most material in the doctrine of Mortification.

First, it is generally necessary, al men being bound to that duty upon
necessity.

Secondly, All men, all sin.
it is necessarily general, all men being bound to mortify all sin, without
favor or dispensation of any. Lastly, it is moved in us by the spirit of God,
but is exercised by our own reformed Spirits, God kindling the fire of zeal
in our hearts, which when it is once kindled, burns of it self, but not
without divine assistance.

The general use.
The necessity of Mortification, The use.
does require in every one an exact diligence in that Christian office: for
seeing the hazard of eternal life depends upon the death, or not dying of
sin, and that necessarily, there is no man of that simple understanding, but
will think it expedient, nay, necessary wisdom, Either men or their sins
must die.
rather to destroy his sin, then himself, for one of the two must of
necessity be mortified, suffer death, and die. And if any man think to be able
to devise a means to save both himself and his sin, and in the reformation
of himself to ouerleape the duty of mortification, as a duty too precise and
of grievous performance; and shall think that mortification is not of necessary
substance, but rather a severe circumstance, which may be safely avoided; to
him I will say with indignation, as S. Paul says to the Corinthians with
admiration: 1. Cor. 15. 36.
O foul, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. And let him
be sure, that if he fail, or faint in his endeavor, there is no endeavor can
purchase him the favor of God, How to esteem God the soul, and sin.
and the salvation of his soul. Therefore it most nearly respects al men,
not to esteem their sin, which is their enemy, and would destroy them, more
then God that is their friend, and would save them; nay, more then their
souls, and their own salvation; but to despise their sins, Man must war
upon himself.
nay themselves in respect of God, and salvation. And therefore let every man
make war upon his own flesh, and let him be valiant to conquer himself; and
to triumph in the spoil and death of his sinful actions and affections. For
there is no War can gain our Names a greater glory, then to victor our
selves, and he is most redoubted and most valiant, that can conquer his own
affections: the which all men must do, before they can have the garland of
holy victory from the hands of God. Again, seeing that in our mortificatton
there is no respect of favor had to any sin, but that all sin must dye,
the sins that have gained us either our profit, All sin must die.
or pleasure: for all sin being in hatred with God, all sin is therefore
commanded to die, without dispensation, prouiso, or exception. It therefore
behooves all to hate as God hates, even all sin, Men must hate as God hates.
because all sin is in Gods hatred; least they provoke GOD as Saul did, and
with Saul declare themselves reprobates; God commanded Saul to destroy the
Amalekites, 1. Sam. 15. 1.
a sinful and Godless people, Saul performed his commandment but in
part: For though he destroyed many, he spared some, for the which GOD cast him
from his favor, and rent his Kingdom from him. Our sins are those
Amalekites, God has commanded us to destroy them utterly: if therefore any man
presume against Gods commandment to spare any, God will certainly cast him
with Saul, from the hope of salvation. Admonition.
This does admonish all to avoid the common custom, that men commonly hate
the sins and infirmities of others, but flatter and feed their own with
saturity; The usurer he condemns the prodigal, the prodigal him: the
drunkard condemns gluttony, the glutton drunkenness. Age and youth have
particular sins, yet they despise one another, and so every particular, so
that many can abhor those sins to which they are not naturally addicted:
but few do mortify the^ that are nearest and dearest unto them. Hypocrites.
These our Savior Christ calls hypocrites, that point at little sins in
others, but flatter mayn ones in themselves. This evil custom is far short
of the duty of mortificatio^, which requires a detestation (nay a death) not
of some sins, and other men's, but of our own sins, and of all our own
without exception of any.

Lastly, seeing the holy Ghost does move this grace in our hearts and does give
us spiritual power in the office of mortification, it behooves all men to
address their prayers to GOD, that he will give them the direction of his
grace, in so needful a performance, and that when they find in themselves a
desire to mortify their sins, and sinful affections, that they yield
their endeavor with all diligence to do as the holy Ghost does direct them,
The holy Ghost the best directer
lest by neglecting the admonishments of Gods Spirit, they bring upon
themselves a greater condemnation.

Special application.
Mortification being of such necessity Special application.
in the ordinary means of my salvation, as that not my self, or any can be
regenerate, before we carefully discharge this office of mortification; I will
therefore endeavor this duty with all diligence: I will denounce a bloody and
a general war against all my sins, I will entertain favor and
correspondency with none; but even those sins that have been my delight shall
be my hatred: Delights of sins must be in hatred
I will not love them for their profit, because transitory: I will not favor
them for their pleasure, because in their pleasure there is poison. I will not
fear them for their number, Reasons why we should favor no sin.
though infinite many, nor for their valor, though they have conquered my
self, and a world of people: because I know whose I am, and who is on my side.
When I was victored by them, I was their servant, their slave: now I have
victored them, I will make them perpetual slaves: I will bind them in
chains, cast them in prison, and for ever destroy their evil power, I will
have no pity, no favor, no compassion on sin, because (when I was victored)
sin was merciless against me. I will not (as did Saul) spare any for their
dignity or worth, Sin is most merciless.
but with David, I will mortify and destroy all; in my youth I will hate the
sins of youth, and in my age, I will be also impartial, prosperity shall
not alter me, neither shall poverty tempt me: but having undertaken to war
with sin, War is not ended but by victory.
I will be full in my opposition. I will not end my war without victory, I
will not interrupt it by truce, but I will be resolute in my purpose, and
constant in my resolution. At all occasions, and in every distress I will
resort to the Spirit of God: he is my Commander, and the General in this
spiritual war. I will consult with that Oracle, and receive direction: I
will fight with that arm, and obtain the garland. For having God on my part,
Gods policy cannot be prevented.
whom then shall I fear? His policies cannot be prevented; nor his power
(with victory) opposed. What I want of spiritual power in my self, I shall
be abundantly supplied by the infinite power of the holy Ghost: For by him,
Psalm. 18,
I shall be able to overthrow an host of sin; and by the strength of my God,
I shall avoid all extremities. He is the maine battle of my power, I am but
the rear. He is my General, I am his Soldier, his holy Cross my colors, his
holy Word my weapons. And being thus appointed, I dare confront all the enemies
of my soul, all my sins: and the Devil to help them. A christian boldness.
I dare undertake their conquest, spoil their power, discipline their errors;
and by the perpetual death of my sin, obtain a perpetual quiet of my
conscience, and a perpetual peace in my soul. Amen.

Of Regeneration, or new Birth. Chap. 5.
WHen all things were first created, Genesis 1. 31.
every thing was perfectly good; no defect, no blemish, no need of correction.
The first defection was sin: the first sin was the sin of Angels, the next
the sin of man. God punished the sin of Angels in their own particulars
only, The reason why God did punish the angels in their own particulars only,
but man, in him self and posterity.
because they were not to derive their natures to posterity by generation and
natural descent; and because they were ordained for the service of God in
certain peculiar offices in the government of his Creatures: the Creatures not
being ordained for their service. But man for whom all things, (even the
Angels themselves) were created, and from whom was to be derived a world of
people, when he sinned, God punished man himself, his posterity and the
creatures he had made and given him, For as the sin of man had infected the
whole house of man (the whole World being then his house) so the curse of God,
Genesis 3. 17.
and the mark of his displeasure was seated on that house (the world) all
things being subject to alteration, and evil change. From this cause is the
necessity of regeneration, al things being now (in their own nature) in the
state of corruption, and death. And therefore says S. Peter, when shall come to
judgment, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
the heavens shall pass away with noise, and the elements shall melt with heat,
and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up: and that there
shall be a new heaven, and a new earth according to Gods promise, Verse. 13.
wherein dwells righteousness. So that nothing shall be able to abide the glory
of Gods presence, but that which is reformed, and regenerate, not the elements,
not heaven it self, Sin deformed all, Grace reformeth all.
but as all have endured (for sin) the bad alteration, so they must also
endeavor (by grace) the good alteration: all were transformed by sin, all
must be reformed again by grace, or else remain in their deformity. And Saint
Paul is peremptory in this opinion, Gal. 6. 1^.
For in Christ Jesus (says he) neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature: that is, a regeneration by an effectual
faith, is only necessary: all ceremony being insufficient and not effectual.
And our Savior Christ to Nicodemus preached the necessity of regeneration, and
affirms his doctrine with a double asseueration. Verily, verily I say unto
thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. If not
see the kingdom of God, then not inheri^e it, And this may suffice to persuade
the necessary knowledge, No regeneration, no salvation.
and the necessary care of regeneration, being that without which it is
impossible to be saved. Now it imports to know what regeneration is.

Regeneration is an act of the holy Ghost in Gods elect, What regeneration is.
whereby they are admitted or entered into a constant and faithful exercise of
a godly life. First, it is an act of the holy Ghost: for, as I have before
said, all grace is the gift of God, and every motion to goodness is caused by
the spirit of God only; Iam. 1. 17
our selves being merely passive in all divine exercise, God himself being the
actor, and principal mouer. For as he that learneth to write, The Holy Ghost,
our spiritual teacher.
has his hand first led by the direction of his teacher, before he can merit
any little commendation: so the holy Ghost (by whose directions we learn the
use of all spiritual exercise) does move both our capacity and power, to
understand the knowledge and use of necessary Christian an performance, without
which Master, we should never be able to comprehend the rudimentes and first
elements of divine learning. Regeneration then being a Christian office of most
necessary performance, it must needs be caused in us by the holy Ghost; who
is the first mouer of ever grace. This doctrine Saint Peter concludes 1. Pet.
1. 3.
in express words: Blessed (says he) be God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead: So that
we are regenerate or new begotten by God in Jesus Christ at the motion and
instance of his abundant mercy.

Secondly, this act of Regeneration by the holy Ghost, Secondly.
is caused in the hearts of GODS elect only. This Doctrine is grounded upon
this Conclusion: That GODS labor is never fruitless; Iam. 1. 17.
but what he attempteth is finished, there being no resistance to his power,
nor any greater to countermand him. As holy David says: The Lord has done
whatsoever pleased him. And therefore this grace is moved in the Elect only,
because the elect only have the benefit of all grace. And S. Paul charge
all men that challenge any part in Christ, that they become new and regenerate.
Therefore (says he,) 2 Cor. 5. 17
If any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature, 2. Cor. 5. 17. As if to
be in Christ, and to be a new creature, were reciprocal, all that were in
Christ to be regenerate, and all that were regenerate, to be in Christ: the
elect being only in Christ, and regenerate only.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
by this act of grace they are admitted and entered into the exercise of
godliness. For howsoever before we are regenerate, and come to be made (as it
were) the very actual sons of God, Regeneration makes us the sons of God.
by spiritual regeneration, we pass many duties of holiness which may
promise us an extraordinary degree of hope that we are in Gods favor; yet have
we then our best assurance, when we are adopted his children by regeneration:
for then we bring our holy purpose of reformation into act, and faithfully
endeavor those duties which (before) we had only determined And (therefore)
S. James speaking of this spiritual generation, says: Of his own will begat
he us with the word of Iam. 1. 18.
truth, that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures, Iam. 1. 18.
That is, when we are regenerate, and made the sons of God, we are then
fruitful, and not before; we are Gods first fruits, because we are then first
fruitful.

Fourthly, Fourthly.
the exercise of good works in the regenerate, must have two special
properties: first it must be faithful, then constant. It must be faithful
because of this ground: Romans 14. 23
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Rom: 14. It must be constant because of
this: That not those that saint in the race of godliness, but those that run on
with hope and alacrity shall obtain the garland: for so says the holy Ghost
by S. John: Reu. 1. 26.
He that over comes and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give
power over nations. Not he that endeuoreth the beginning, the middle, or a part
of his life, but he that endures to the end, he shall be saved. And the
Author to the Hebrews, admoninisheth all men, that they run with patience the
race that is set before them, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of
their faith etc. Heb. 12. 1. 2
forsaluation by Jesus Christ, is that crown of glory for which all run,
which none can gain but he that runs the race of his life faithfully and
constantly. 1. Cor. 9. 24
Therefore says S. Paul: So run that ye moy obtain. That is endeavor your
strength with your time to the uttermost, for though ye begin well, it is
nothing unless ye also end well. Qualis vita finis. (...).
For as the tree falls so it lies, and as men dye, so they shall rise to
judgment, for the grave can give no holiness, no perfection; but does only
continue us in the state it found us. Now if any man object, John. 3. 4. 6.
as Nicodemus did to Christ, How can these things be? Can a man be borne
which is old? Can he enter into his mothers womb again, and be borne? The
answer that Christ made to Nicodemus, may auswere such questions. First. he
says, that except a man be borne of water and the Spiri, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. Verse 5.
That answers the necessity. Secondly, to teach him the manner of
regeneration, how the children of God be borne a new, how it is caused by the
secret working of Gods Spirit in the Children of grace, he makes a familiar
comparison or gives instance by the moving of the air. That as when we hear
the whistling of the wind, we know it blows, yet cannot we know from
whence: so in the act of regeneration, when we feel in our hearts the motion
of Gods holy Spirit, breathing salvation into our souls. And when our works,
and consciences give us undoubted testimony, No man ought to search the secret
workings of Gods Spirit.
that we are regenerate and borne of God, it is then as vain a care to search
the secret workings of Gods Spirit, and by what actions and circumstance God
has begotten us by the Spirit, as to enquirc of the wind, whence it came, or
whither it would; this thing being not necessary though regeneration it self
be most necessary, and not to be neglected without condemnation.

The general use.
Regeneration being of such absolute necessity to salvation, The use.
as that being not regenerate, Ioh. 3. 34.
and borne a new of water, and the Spirit, we cannot be the sons, nay the
servants of almighty God, though we neuer-so much endeavor in the service of
other Christian duties, this does admonish all men to have principal care,
Admonition
to labor all means possible to have faithful and sufficient witness from
their conscience, that they are the adopted children of God, established in the
assurance of their salvation, being known and sealed of GOD with the mark of
spiritual regeneration. For it must needs be sufficient to resolve a
conscience of Gods favor, when we know that we are his children, he our
father, when we know that our Father must judge us, and such a Father as
loves mercy above all things. God loves mercy above all things.
It is a grounded cause to make us hopeful, nay, confident in the trust of
Gods mercy: and safely without presumption to conclude our own joy: that if we
be truly regenerate, we shall certainly be saved; it being as impossible to
sever salvation from regeneration, as God from his Son. And therefore the
holy Scripture concludes the necessity of their salvation that are regenerate
and borne of God: Whosoever (says S. John) is borne of God sins not, for
his seed remains in him, neither can he sin because he is borne of God. 1.
John. 3* 9. 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
Saint John says he cannot sin, that is, not commit sin of purpose, but
of infirmity: and such sins God will not impute to his adopted and regenerate
children. And of this kind are those sins Saint John means, 1. Ioh. 5. 17.
when he says: Al unrighteousness is sin, but there is a sin not unto
death: and that is the sin of them that are regenerate, who though they
sin, yet they sin not unto death, their sin being only a sin in
nature, and not a sin to condemn them.

This may provoke all men to have a zealous care to be regenerate: for by
being regenerate, The regenerate cannot sin to death.
he shall have honor with security; honor in being the adopted son of God,
security in that he cannot sin to death, or fall from the favor of God: in
which respect he shall exceed both the honor and the happiness of Adam (and
the Angels) in his innocence; for Adam was but Gods servant, he shall be Gods
son. Adam had power to fall, and did fall from grace; he neither will nor can
fall from grace, the Spirit of God supporting him in a sufficient strength of
holiness.

Secondly, Secondly.
seeing regeneration is an act of the Holy Ghost, every man ought so to
rectify and reform the errors of his life, as that the Spirit of God may not
take loathing to enter our souls; but rather that by mortification and holy
exercise, we may be prepared to entertain that sacred guest into our hearts;
least when he comes, he find us as God will find the reprobate in the day of
judgment, unprovided, careless, and secure: and so not seal us for the
sons of God, but mark us the children of death, and the friends of
Antichrist. Thirdly, Thirdly.
seeing the Elect only are regenerate, and made the children of God, it ought
therefore to be the principal care of every man to be regenerate; because
regeneration is the undoubted witness of Election; and S. Peter bids us give
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 1. Pet. 1. 10.
which can no way be better assured us, then by assuring our Regeneration,
which is the certificate and testimony of our election. Fourthly, Fourthly.
seeing regeneration is an entrance into holy action, it remembers all men,
that before they be regenerate, all their actions, and all their endeavors are
but sin: and that those works which in a regenerate man are ornaments and
graces, The best actions of the vnregerate are sin.
are in them blemishes and sin; because before we be Regenerate and reconciled
to God, God has all our actions in detestation. For so did God in the time of
the ceremonial law, and in the first Age: for though Caine and Habel both
offer unto God, Hahel and Caine.
yet God accepts Habel, and rejects Cain: because Habel was in Gods
Election, and Caine was not: and so in regeneration, when we have God our
friend, our father, then all our actions, though in their nature sinful are
accepted for righteous. When God is not our friend and father, then all our
actions, Note.
(even them we account as righteousness) are but sin, and so reputed, and
accepted of God. Therefore ought al men to be most careful to be regenerate,
because before that time they cannot please God, neither do well. They must
also endeavor in all godly action, otherwise they can never be regenerate.

Lastly, Fifthly.
seeing the works of regeneration must be both constant and faithful; (by
constancy I mean perseverance; by faithfulness a choice of lawful
particulars) therefore every man must be sure to exercise his devotion and
zeal in lawful argument; and that he run in the spiritual race which God
has proposed, and not in the by-waies of error, Constancy in holiness
commanded
and false or self opinion; and that in this course he faint not his
spiritual courage, but that he hold out the race of his life, with a hopeful
confidence to win the garland of salvation, which all shall both win and wear
that constantly and faithfully endeavor themselves in godly action.

Special application.
Regeneration then being of excellent worth and of absolute necessity,
Special application.
I will take of my cares and endeavors from all worldly occasions, and apply
them to this holy purpose only: for by being regenerate, I shall both avoid
the danger of sin, and live in the favor of God, and be graced with the
honorable title of his son, I will remember them that proudly vaunt their
pedigree, and their descent from honorable parents, I will pity their error,
and despise their vain glory. No comparison between the dignity of the sons
of God, and the sons of Nobles
I will compare such honor with the honor of Gods regenerate children, I shall
find an infinite distance in their worth, that to be transitory passable, of
short continuance, vain and full of bitter mixture: this to be eternal and
infinite, of infinite worth, and infinite in time, nothing to prevent it,
nothing to alter it, I will therefore (to gain this) despise that: I will
desire no other honorable title, To gain heaven, we must despise earth.
then to be called the child of God, that will give me sufficient reputation.
For that (in the least degree) will out-glory all earthly honor in the
highest degree. I will not care how base the world repute it, nay, I will not
faint, Disgrace and persecution.
though the world persecute it. I know that my Saviors kingdom is not of this
world, neither is my glory of this world; but he that has regenerate and new
begotten me by the grace of his Spirit, he is my glory, and by him I am made
honorable. The truly honorable.
This is that honor for which I despise the world, and with which I can
disgrace all worldly honor. And for this honor I will spend my hours, spend
my actions, my endeavors; nay, I will spend all to make this purchase. I will
run my spiritual course with alacrity, seeing this honor is proposed me.
And when I have it, I will esteem it precious: I will much rather leese my
life then my honor. For this honor being once lost, is not recouerable: it was
given by grace, Grace cannot be redeemed by nature.
it cannot be redeemed by nature. I will therefore esteem it as it is: and
having once got the honor to be the child of God, I will carry that honor to
my grave, and with that honor, I will present my self in the day of judgment,
before God my honorable Father, and before the honorable company of his Angels
and Saints, The highest honor.
and then will appear by direct evidence, and before all the world, whether my
honor (in being regenerate and made the son of God) which the world despised,
or their transitory honor and prosperity of fortune, wherein they gloried and
proudly exalted themselus, be of better proof, when God shall call me his
son, and bid me enter the kingdom of my joy: and call them slaves, and
bid them enter their bonds, prison, and pain perpetual. The privilege of
the son of God.
This will be the blessed privilege my honor will then give me. And
therefore to be regenerate, and thereby to make God my father and my friend, I
will not care what neglect, what scorn, and what disgraces the world cast upon
us, for as those will vanish with time, The honor of Gods sons eternal
so my honor will be (as God my father is) infinite, and I will infinitely
esteem it. Amen.

Of ^ustification. Chap. 6.
Justification is a gracious forgiving of sins, What Justification is.
by imputation of the righteousness of Jesus Christ. S. Paul expostulateth this
doctrine with the Galatia^s, whom he calls foolish for doubting it: Gal. 3. 2.
This only (says he) would I learn of you, received ye the spirit by the
works of the law, or by the hearing of faith preached? And in the next verse.
Are ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the Spirit, Ver. 3.
ye would now be made perfect by the flesh? Where he admireth their simplicity
that seek righteousness in the flesh, or in the law, Justification is of the
spirit, not of flesh.
but rather and only by the means of faith; because our justification is
spiritual, and not of the flesh. And this doctrine he concludes by an
invincible argument in the 26. verse. That seeing we are regenerate, and made
the sons of God by faith in Christ, we are therefore also justified and made
the servants of God by faith. Gal. 3. 26,
For (says he) we are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. And if
faith be able to make us sons, it must also be able to make us servants; for
that which is able in the greater performance, The nearenes of justification
and regeneration.
is able in the less. Besides regeneration and justification have such
relation and nearenesse to one another, as that they seem to be (almost) but
one act, caused and effected at one instant of time. For when we are
regenerate, we are then justified, and when we are justified, we are then
regenerate, and not before; these two offices in our salvation being
distinguished rather by their names, then by any special mark of difference
in their several executions. Again, the same Apostle in his Sermon at Antioch,
concludes both the negative and affirmative part of this question: Act. 13. 38.
Be it known (says he) unto you men and brethren, that through this man
(that is Christ) is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, Verse. 39.
Verse 39.
And from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of
Moses, by him every one that believes is justified. So that he absolutely
denies the power of justification to the Works of the Law, and does
absolutely ascribe it to the power of faith. Gal. 2. 21:
And he gives a reason of this Doctrine, in the 2. 21. to the Galatians: For
if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ dyed without a cause: So that the
very cause why CHRIST dyed, was, that righteousness might be imputed and
apprehended by Faith; seeing by works it was impossible. Psalm: 32, 1, 2
And therefore says the Prophet David: Blessed is he whose unrighteousness
is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. And blessed is the Man, to whom the
Lord imputes no sin. So that he thinks them most righteous, that have
their unrighteousness forgiving them; and them most holy that have their
sins not imputed.

The fourth to the Romans, the whole Chapter, Romans 4,
is an earnest proof of this Doctrine, where the Apostle labors by direct
evidence to satisfy all doubt: as if he had foreknowne the stiff and
unreconcilable Oppositions of these times against his doctrine of
Justification. The controversy of justification


In which Chapter he makes Abraham his instance; in whom there was as much
righteousness, and as much cause of boasting it, as in any other particular
(save Christ Jesus only,) yet he there proves, The example of holy Abraham*
that this Abraham, (upon whom GOD had founded his peculiar people) was not
justified by the righteousness of his Works: but that his Faith was imputed
to him for righteousness: And alleges Scripture for this proof: Genesis 15. 6.
And Abraham believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for righteousness:
The word That, having a direct relation to the Word^ believed. And this
righteousness by faith, he ascribes not only to Abraham's particular: But to
us also, to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness, which believe in him,
Romans 4. 24 25.
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Verse 25. Who was delivered to
death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification. So that the
matter of our justification is the righteousness of Jesus Christ only: and
the means of apprehending it, is faith only.

This doctrine, howsoever it is made strong and irresistable by many
testimonies of holy Scripture, The religions of these times.
and though it be zealously maintained by men of learned and religious
judgment, yet has it endured violence, and suffered disgrace, both by
ignorance and envy: this age maintaining such oppositions of error, as the
ignorance of former times first occasioned. Therefore is it that the main
controversy of the world is at this day in this Argument of justification: the
one maintaining justification by faith: the other by works; that defending
truth, this opposing it. And though I am most willing to quarrel in defense
of faith: Ephesians. 6. 16.
faith being my shield of defense against sin and the Devil, yet know I not
how to give addition of strength to them that far exceed me, and whose
faithful pains have maintained this quarrel with valor and victory against
all opposition. Neither is it in the purpose of this business to dispute
questions of truth, The purpose of this labor.
but to deliver truth as it is, by admonitions and plain teachings, to men of
simple and easy understandings: for whose christian good, these pains are
principally undertaken; and whose simplicities might most easily be confounded
in the intritate search of cunning Arguments, For these respects, and because
all contention and strife of words, is in the hatred of my Nature, I will
sparingly deliver my self in a large Argument, and strike only one blow at
the enemy of Faith, that I may be known to be an enemy of that enemy: and
that by a familiar proof I may instruct the knowledge of him that is less
learned. They that deny justification by faith, and approve it by works,
would frame this argument from the testimony of Saint James, Iam. 2.
who speaking of a general faith does utterly disinable it from the office of
justification. Verse. 17.
And therefore he says that faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self,
and in the 26. verse: Verse 26.
For as the body without the Spirit is dead, even so faith without works is
dead. Therefore (say they) that Apostle concludes in the 24 verse, Verse. 24.
That of works a man is justified, and not of faith only. To this I answer,
It is most true that a fruitless faith is dead, neither can justify, and that
works are the spirit and soul of a living faith, that as the body without the
soul is not a living man, but a dead carcass, so faith without works is not
living, is not saving, Faith without works is no faith, but a bare name only.
nay is not faith, but only a general name, and with Saint James I dare
conclude against all such faith. But if there be a faith that has depending of
a necessity of good works, as necessary as the soul to the body, and the
fruit to the tree, and that this Faith declare it self to be plentiful in
godly action. the fruits of a living faith, I may then with Saint James
conclude against them; for he does not (as they do) disinable all faith in
the work of justification; Ver. 26.
but that faith only which is dead, and without works, So that both opinions
implore a necessity of works, the one as the cause of Justification, the other
as an effect in them justified. It were easy to be large in numbering
authorities, and in reporting such distinctions and shifts, as the deceived use
in supporting their opinions: they are but inventions, and therefore without
respect, I pass them over: No virtue, no truth in extremity.
but advise my Christian Reader to beware of both extremities, and modestly and
moderately to understand the means of his Justification, that his zeal carry
him to no extremity, but to the virtuous mean only; not to ascribe all to
faith and naught to Works, but to give them both their necessary respects. For
as we are not justified but by Faith, so our Faith is not justified but by
works. We are justified by faith, our faith by works.
For if our works be not faithful, and our faith working, we are not
justified, neither can be saved. And thus may the seeming difference between
S. Paul, and S. James be reconciled; S. Paul, S. James.
faith does justify us before God, but such a faith as Saint James means:
and works do justify us before men: but such works as Saint Paul means,
works derived from a true faith. For as wisdom is justified of her children,
and as by our words we shall be justified, 1. Mar. 1. 19.
and by our words we shall be condemned: Mat. 12. 37
So by our works we shall be justified, that is, they shall be our
witnesses, what we are in heart, and what in faith. But by faith only we are
justified, and made righteous in the sight of God. Romans 4. 24.


Secondly, Secondly.
Justification is proper unto Gods elect only, so that all profane and
godless people are out of possibility to be justified and made righteous in
Gods sight. This is proved by the witness of Saint Paul, Romans 8. 30. Romans 8.
30.
Whom he predestined, them also he called and whom he called, them also he
justified.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
Justification is a righteousness in the sight of God, that is, such as have a
true, a living, and a saving faith, and by that faith do apprehend the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, God is content to accept such in the
righteousness of his son, to obscure their sin, and to make them appear
and stand before him, as actually just, by this imputative righteousness,
Imputative righteousness.
as if they had wrought it personally, and in the practice of their own lives.
If any man demand, how can these things be? I answer, Romans 8. 33. 34,
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? Romans 8.

The general use.
Seeing that none can be saved, but they that are first justified; and seeing
none can be justified, The use.
but they that have a true, living, and a working faith, it behooves all men to
have principal care to have the assurance of this faith that so they may be
sure to be justified, The necessity of faith.
and may be sure that they shall be saved, and because that all men are
naturally prone to deceive themselves, The nature of men.
with flattery and favorable opinion of themselves, and their own actions,
because Saint James (and so the scripture in many places) has utterly
disinabled an idle, The Scriptures disable an idle and dead faith.
dead, and a fruitles faith from the office of justification; it therefore
nearly concerns all men, seriously and without private respect to examine
their faith, to compare their faith and works together, their works being
good, those works may justify their faith to be a living and a saving faith.
And that they content not themselves with a common historical faith, the which
the Devil and damned souls may have, The devils faith.
but that their faith may be approved good, by a sufficient testimony of good
works, without which it cannot be good. For as the Tree is known by his
fruit, Works the fruit of faith.
and as it is impossible to gather grapes of thorns; or figs of thistles: so
is our faith judged by our works, and so it is impossible that good works
should proceed from an evil faith, or that a good faith should not produce
good works, good works being a most necessary dependence upon good faith. This
ought to provoke all men to an emulation of godly exercise, and to contend to
exceed in holy actions, A provocation to godly action.
to square and fashion all their works by their faith, and to make every act
of theirs a testimony that they are truly faithful. For he that is not with
us, is against us; and those works of ours; that witness not for us, will be
witnesses against us, and will condemn us in the sight of all men, that our
faith is either not good, or not at all: and that therefore we are not
justified, Note.
neither can be saved. And this may judge all those actions of men, that
disproportion a good Faith, and a good Conscience. For though men flatter
themselves, and promise peace to their souls, and think to be justified and
saved by a bare acknowledgement of God, and their common historical faith; yet
(in a time they think not on) their ungodly works will make war upon their
souls, and bring upon them a sure and a sudden destruction.

Secondly, Secondly,
seeing such choice particulars only are justified, as were before in Gods
election preordained to salvation: this ought to move all men to a thankful
acknowledgement of Gods infinite love, A duty of thanks to God, and why,
who only is the principal and first moving cause in every circumstance of
our salvation, and that we acknowledge our selves in great humility to be
altogether defective and unable in the work of our own salvation, All men are
unable in their own salvation.
that every grace in us, is both caused and continued in us by the power of
God: our selves being merely passive, and moved to divine exercise, by the
direction of the Holy Ghost only. And that therefore we ascribe the honor of
every good action to God, God must have the honor of all our actions.
by whom it is caused; and disgrace our selves in our own estimation, because
Gods first decree does lead every man to every particular action of goodness.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
seeing by faith in Christ, God does both cancel our sins, and repute us
righteous in his presence, it does remember all men the admirable degree of
Gods favor, Gods favor.
and the powerful operation of faith. First Gods favor, he being pleased to
forgive the deserts of condemnation; and to give and impute the most absolute
rghteousnesse of his Son Christ Jesus to all men, upon this easy condition
of faith, that such, who have a true faith to apprehend him, shall be accepted
in his favor as sons; and shall appear in Gods presence equally as
righteous, as if themselves had actually performed righteousness in their own
particular persons.

Secondly, we are taught the powerful operation of true faith, The power of
faith.
that it is able to enter heaven, and to apprehend and apply Christ and his
righteousness to reconcile the favor of God; and to satisfy his displeasure,
to wash off the spots and leprosy of sin, and to put on the garment of
righteousness, even Jesus Christ the Son of God, by whom we are justified in
the sight of GOD, and by whom (also) we shall be saved, Amen.

Special application.
I will therefore carefully endeavor my self in a constant exercise of all
godly action; Special application.
not that I repose my justification in the virtue of my own works, but that
by the Testimony of good works I may approve my self to be faithful, and that
my faith is more then a general or a common faith; even a living and a saving
faith, which is (and must be) the only means of my apprehending Christ, Faith
the only means of apprending Christ
who is the sufficient and only matter of my justification. And this shall be
the glory and only pride I will have of well doing; that this witness of
Works shall gain me the reputation of Gods servant, and that Gods faithful
children here on earth shall repute me one of their fellow-brethren, then
which I shall never desire a greater cause of boasting. A true canse of
boasting.
And this judgment of good men. must needs rise from the testimony of good
works, because there is an inevitable necessity of consequence, and necessary
dependence between Faith and Works, they being as inseparable as heat from
fire, and as necessarily depending as the body and the soul. And this shall
provoke me to a zealous forwardness in all godly action, because thereby I
shall conclude the assurance of my justifying Faith, How to assure our
justification.
and thereby satisfy the desire of my own Soul, and that doubt which
otherwise might justly be had of me in the common opinion. For from this
argument must needs follow this conclusion: That seeing I have the fruits of
Faith (good Works,) therefore I have also the cause of Works, true Faith: And
that therefore this Faith thus working, A tree of Gods own planting.
is a tree of Gods own planting which adversity may well shake, but never
perish.

This is that use, that comfort, and consolation, which I will understand in
the nature of my best deserving works. Thus I will esteem them, How to esteem
our works modestly.
and but this. I will therefore avoid that dangerous opinion of meriting* by
works: because it is better to want honor then to force it from God by
violence, It is better to want honor then to steal it from God.
nay I will rather disgrace my self then disinable my Savior Jesus. For if
righteousness be from our selves, it is nor from him only, and then would
follow that absurd and blasphemous conclusion, A blasphemous conclusion.
that he is not the only Savior, neither has perfected the work of man's
salvation, I will therefore do all the good I can, but I will repute my deed
(though good) to be the effect and not the cause of goodness in me: I will
also confidently hold, that nothing is able to merit salvation, Nothing but
Christ can merit salvation.
but the righteousness of Jesus Christ only. I will therefore disclaim my
self, and my own power, which is nothing but weakness) and ascribe all
power, all virtue to my Savior. For it is safer to give him honor, then to
take it from him; and it will better become my Christian modesty to acknowledge
my infirmities, then proudly to advance my self above my deserts. If God
therefore (by the moving of his holy Spirit) me faith, All must be acknowledged
as Gods gifts:
he will also give me a desire* and a power in godly exercise: (which) when it
makes me grow plentiful in the demonstrations of holiness, I will ascribe
the glory to God, to whom it is only due, and acknowledge my self to be
that instrument only, whereby his holy hand of grace is pleased to work. Amen.

Of the temporary death, and of the several Estates of salvation, and
damnation. Chap. 7.
DEath is a separation, or absence of the Soul from the Body, What death is.
whereby the body is reduced to his first matter Earth, and the soul brought
to a sense either of justice or mercy. To understand this better, we must
consider death in these respects. 3. Respects,
First, his original or first being. Secondly, his powerful and general
continuance. Thirdly, his end, or the death of Death. The original cause that
gave Death life, was sin: 1 Sin the cause of death.
and therefore when as Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit, and thereby
committed sin, then had death his first beginning. For though Adam did not at
the instant of the act dye, yet at the very instant of the sin, was he made
mortal and subject to the power of death: When Adam was made mortal Genesis 1.
16. 17.
for so God foretold him, that whenever he did eat, he should dye; and from
this badde beginning was Death first derived. 1 King: 17. 18:
So the woman of Sarephath could acknowledge that her sin was the cause of her
childs death: and so have all the Children of GOD understood of death, and of
the cause thereof. And S. Paul calls Death the wages of sin: Romans 6. 16.
as if it were a necessary care in the justice of God, that all that have
committed sin should have the recompense and wages thereof, Death.

Now the cause of this cause of death, The cause of sin.
was the Devil, who envying the prosperity of our nature, suggested his
temptations to our first parents, by whose disobedience we are all made
mortal. So says Solomon: Wisd. 2. 24.
Through envy of the Devil came death into the world, and they that hold of
his side, prove it.

And from these two Parents, The two parents of death.
the Devil and sin, was death derived, from whom he had his being and
beginning.

Secondly, Secondly:
we must consider death in the passage of his life. or in his powerful
continuance: That is evident in this respect, that Death has a general power
over all flesh, the which he does execute upon all, without respect had either
to the greatness or goodness of any, And therefore is Death called the way of
all the World, and the way to our Fathers, Gen: 15. 15
because as our Fathers are gone the way of death, Joshua, 23* 14.
so must we after them; and our posterity after us, for ever. For though death
be but one, and his office the cutting off the lives of all the World; yet it
is but an easy performance, having the diseases of our flesh, The power of
death,
and infinite other occasions to attend him in his deadly office. His power
then is general over all, being limited by GOD and time only; who though he
bring all flesh to corruption, yet no flesh can corrupt him, or procure favor
in the strict execution of his office.

The end, Thirdly,
or the death of Death, is the living righteousness of Jesus Christ, which he
wrought by his own death, in his own person. And therefore says the Prophet
Hosea, Hos. 13. 14.
Death is swallowed up in victory. 1. Cor, 15. 25.
And S. Paul says: that Christ Jesus must reign till he has put all his
enemies under his feet, and that the last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death. Ver. 26.
Therefore that Apostle insulteth over death: O death (says he) where is thy
sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Verse. 55. Verse 55,
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. Verse. 56. Verse
56.
But thanks be unto God who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Verse 57.
Wherefore it is evident that God by his Son Christ, has given man victory
over sin and death. By whom we have victory over death.
And whereas before we were all the servants of sin, and the slaves of
death, we are now made conquerours, that were slaves; and despise them that
did command us. This happy alteration does reach benefit to all the
faithful, but not to all men: therefore is it limited and does reach to such
particulars only, as are in Gods election. The difference God uses in the
giving of his gifts
For though God cast the beams of his Sun upon every man's face alike, and
distributes* his temporal blessings (scatteringly as it were) without any
heedfull respect, where they fall; yet those favors that are eternal, and
import a perpetuity of happiness, he gives them to his beloved elect only,
barring all the reprobate from spiritual and eternal grace. In what respect
death is not destroyed, hut made immortal
And, therefore though the death of Christ has disarmed death and blunted his
weapons that have wounded holy men: yet are those weapons still sharp, and
that Death still living, and made immortal against them that have not received
the image of the Lamb of God. For though al men enter their graves alike, yet
with different condition, Mat. 9. 25.
holy and good men enter their graves, as their houses of rest, wherein they
quietly sleep, and for a time repose in rest and safety; In what case the
wicked die.
but the wicked enter their graves as felons do their prisons, to be reserved
to a day of much more terrible judgment. Therefore says the wise man: Eccle.
41. 1. 2.
The remembrance of death is very bitter to some, and acceptable to other. For
so the godly make it their day of hope, but the wicked their day of fear.
Death is the day of hope and of fear.
Death then in these diverse respects of good and badde men, has a sting, and
wants it; is dead, yet living and by opening the gate of temporary death,
Death opens the gate of life.
does admit the entrance either of eternal life, or eternal death: the one,
the happy condition of Gods chosen, the other the most miserable state of the
reprobate and damned. And as this life we breath is but a sacrament or little
resemblance of that which is to follow: This life a resembla^ce of life
eternal.
so the terror of a temporary death, has no proportion with the torments of
everlasting death, Death a resemblance of life.
wherein both body and soul shall suffer such ffliction, as is beyond the
power of imagination, infinite in measure, No man can report those joys, those
torments.
infinite in manner. To undertake to report heaven and hell, salvation and
damnation, is not in my purpose, or in the power of any man, This I know, that
both are infinite, heaven is infinite in time and happiness, hell is infinite
in time and torment. Heaven and hell are both infinite in time, infinite in
measure.
The one (as Gods resemblance) is infinite good, the other (as the devils) is
infinite evil: the one is hoped, the other feared; to which two all mankind
must take their last resort, and by the gate of death pass their temporal
life to one of those two eternities.

The general use.
First, seeing death was begotten by our sins, The use.
and from our selves had his first original, it ought to humble us in our own
estimation, and to acknowledge the great corruption of our nature, which makes
us powerful only in doing us evil, Our natural defect.
and in producing such effects, as cause our own destruction, And this may
correct their proud opinion, that vainly arrogate such power as to be their
own means in the cause of their salvation, fondly, and falsely thinking, that
their eyes of Nature are not blind in spiritual judgment, The eyes of nature
are blind in spiritual judgment.
but imagine to have that virtue and power, which they only have in
imagination. For if Adam by his sin, did produce and give life to such a
monster birth as death is, what expectation then can be had of our ability, who
are in all respects (but sin) Adams far inferior, and (by much) less able
in the performance of any spiritual duty?

Secondly, Secondly.
seeing death has universal power over all flesh, and seeing there is no
partiality in his executions, no dispensing of favor, no lengthning of time,
but comes most certainly, and not certainly when this may advise all men to
godly action, Deaths general power.
and to a constancy of such action: lest otherwise death come unexpected, and
so prevent their good determinations, Deaths uncertainty
which being determined only, and not done, avail us no other end but grief
and unprofitable repentance.

Again, seeing all must die, and be reduced to earth, Thirdly,
it does control the proud ambitious natures of men, who in this life insult
over men of inferior state, and dignifie their own estimation, Death
admonishes the insolent.
as if God had not made them of earth, or that the grave could not make them
earth again. These men that value themselves rich, by having the beggarly
gifts of fortune, The gifts of grace and fortune,
and despise the most rich treasure of grace: where it lives in the banishment
of poor fortune: these that despise Death most when they live, and fear him
most when they die, are here admonished to reform this insolent behavior, The
condition of wicked men.
and to remember that themselves, how proud soever, must be humbled in the
grave, The grave will humble all.
and that the worms and corruption will destroy their pride, and in despite of
greatness make them inferior to the meanest beggar on earth. And yet can
death heap a greater calamity, open them the passage to everlasting death, and
afflict them with the damned, in perpetual and infinite torment,

Thirdly, Thirdly.
seeing Christ has by death slain death, and has taken his sting and dart
from him, whereby he might be hurtful to Gods elect; Christ by death has
slain death.
it does admonish a zealous duty of thanks to the merit of the Lord Jesus our
Savior, by whose means Death is no Death, but rather life and advantage,
Death is advantage to Gods elect.
by whom we have the door opened to everlasting salvation. For so ought we to
understand of death, as of the common Iailor of all flesh. Death the common
Iaylor.
The world is our prison, wherein we are all shut. Death when he opens the
door, and delivers from prison, leads the parties delivered, either to
liberty or judgment: For so are all that dye, transported from earth either to
heaven which is their liberty, or to hell the place of execution. The twofold
state of all that die.
Death is that one key that opens the double passage, the one to heaven, the
other to hell: this leads to damnation, that other to salvation.

Lastly, seeing death is a repose, and rest from earthly labors, Death a rest
from labors.
it ought to sweeten the sorrows of this life, with hopeful confidence, and
with alacrity and spiritual comfort, that notwithstanding men repute the
professors of holiness but base and abject people, and deride their simplicity
in wicked worldly policies, making holiness a note of folly, and their own
audacious impudence the only mark of wisdom and deep discretion, The
insol^^^ behavior of wicked men.
yet should not this discountenance a good cause, but rather confirm a
Christian resolution, and give boldness and Christian courage, to bear off
with patience these contempts of evil men, and secretly scorn at their
estimation, The godly repose hope in death.
having their eyes still fixed on the end of all things, with a settled
confidence, that death will not only give them a rest from all adversity, but
admit the^ also into the blessed fellowship of God, the holy Angels and
Saints, where themselves shall see their proud enemies cast into disgrace and
obloquie, and with miserable desperation, acknowledge their neglects in
Christian duties. Thus the meditation of death, The use of this meditation.
may give disgraced and afflicted Christians a life of hope, in the height of
their extremities.

Special Application.
Therefore I will not (as the wicked do) fear to die; but hope to die,
Special application.
intending the spiritual passage of my life so, as that my end may give me
comfort without terror. I will reduce to memory what the holy Prophets,
Apostles and Martyrs have done in this case. How careful they have bin to
preserve their lives in the memory of honest and holy reputation, how careless
also they have esteemed their lives for the reputation of the Gospel, being
content, nay careful, The care of holy men.
not only to give up their lives, but to give them up with torment, for the
testimony of Jesus my Savior.

To these men I will frame my imitation, I will care for my life as they cared,
A Christian resolution.
I will also care to dye as they cared. In every work of my life, I will
remember my end, and at my end I will remember my hope, and in my hope, my God.
While I live I shall remember that I am a prisoner, and in the bondage of my
flesh: All that live are prisoners.
when I die, I know I shall have my freedom. Death that is cruel to others,
will be favorable to me; death that will kindle the fire of their affliction,
will extinguish mine; I shall (doubtless) find death much more favorable
then men: Death mo^^ favorable then men.
for by men I was iniuried, had my Christian profession disgraced, my opinions
doubted and opposed, my actions scanned, my endeavors misinterpreted; and my
name in odious reputation. Death takes me from all these injuries, lays me in
a peaceful grave, The mercy of death.
makes me sleep in that bed of rest, protects my body, silences my name,
and carries my spirit to his place appointed. I will not therefore be moved by
any example to fear death; The godly fear not death.
I will have a Christian resolution to abide it with courage, nay with hope.
When I see the sons of fortune fear every little sickness (the serieants of
death) I shall see the sons of grace deride such folly, for they never see
death, The wicked see death in his ugly forms.
but in his ugly form: but to these he appears most beautiful and of
delightful conversation. Death (in diverse respects) is both a Lion and a Lamb.
Death is their Lion, but my Lamb: and his action (in their Scene) is
tragical, but in mine Comicall, and full of heavenly recreations. Whence this?
It is my Savior Jesus that has thus caused it, it is his hand has done it:
he has tamed death, and taken his hurtful sting from him; What Christ has
done for his servants.
he has shut up hell, that has gaped against us, and has reconciled us with
our graves, wherein we may safely repose; Death does secure us till the day of
judgment.
he has commanded death that would perish us, to secure us, and to present
our full proportion before his judgment seat.

This has he done, that is able to do all things, he has done it also for
me, my faith so persuades me; I will therefore acknowledge my self in
dutiful thanks to my God my Savior, and in every time of distress, I will
look at Death, Hope in the mediration of death.
and (with that meditation) receive a full portion of comfort. Amen.

Of Gods glory. Chap. 8.
GOd created all things, by his power, Gods glory the purpose of Gods work.
but to his glory: for that was the holy end forwhich he created all things.
For as waters that are derived from the sea, are again directed to the sea. So
all things that are, being derived from the mighty power of God, return their
duty, service and the honor of all their actions to God, discharging every
service in the main Ocean of Gods glory. ^he which though it receive not
augmentation of honor, (being infinite) by the supply of any creature, yet all
creatures being his own it does please him to force every creature to give some
proof and testimony of Gods justice or mercy, whereby God may receive glory in
their acknowledgements. God is glorified in a double manner.
God then is glorified in all his works, but in a double manner, he is
principally glorified in the works of mercy, God is glorified in a double
manner.
he is glorified also in his judgments. For the first, that he is principally
glorified in mercy, is testified by S. Paul, where he says, that God, that he
might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has
prepared unto glory. Rom, 9. 23.
By which place apeareth that the riches of Gods glory consists principally
in the vessels of mercy, God is principally glorified in the work of mercy.
and that God does so love his Saints, that he esteems their glory, his
glory, and does dignify himself in their aduancementes. And therefore did not
God choose the Israelites, and made them his peculier people, Why God did choose
the Israelites.
that by Gods most powerful delivering them, and by their demonstrations of
duty and thankful service, God might be honored (in the memory of his
greatness) over all the world, Dut. 26. 18. 19.
and receive glory in the report of his admirable protection. God is glorified
in his judgments.
God is also glorified in his judgments. And therefore the reprobate and damned,
though in their lives they rather care to dishonor God their creator, God will
be glorified by the damned.
yet will God be honored in the punishment of their lives, and force them to
give demonstrations of his justice and holiness: or God ca^ turn their purposes
to his own end, and make that set forth his glory which was intended against
him. So says holy David; Psalm. 66. 10. 11. 12.
that the consultatio^s and determinatio^s of the wicked turn to Gods glory.
For God will be glorified in all, and those that will not give him glory for
mercy, he will co^pel them to give him glory for judgment: Note.
and though God esteem it the greater honor to be glorisied in the witnesses of
his mercy, (because in Gods nature mercy is preheminent, and does triumph:)
yet is it much to the glory of God, that the witnesses of his judgment, shall
be prompted by their lamentable experience to acknowledge that God is infinite,
How the damned set forth Gods glory.
both in power and justice. All men then are the Trumpets of Gods glory, all
give him glory though not all alike: the glory of God being the end for
which all things were created. Therefore when the holy Angels (Gods
Messengers,) brought the blessed tidings of Salvation, Luke. 2. 14.
and a Savior, the court of heavenly Assista^ts praised God with this
acclamation: Glory be to God, in the high Heavens, and peace in Earth, and
toward me^ good will. Glory proper to God,
In which place the heavenly Soldiers commended to men good will, to the world
peace; but glory to God, as a service proper and peculiar to God only. And S.
Paul admonishes that every circumstance of our life be directed to Gods
glory: 1. Cor. 10. 33.
Whether ye eat or drink (says he) or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. And God by the Prophet Jeremy forbids al men
to glory in anything save God; as if God were the only object of al glory: Ier
9. 23. 24
Let not (says he) the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man
glory in his strength, nor the rich man glory in his ricbes; but let him that
glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me, etc. Thus ought
we both to glorify God, and to glory in God: for if we glory in any thing but
God, we are condemned, and if we glorify any but God, To glory in glorifying
God.
we are likewise condemned. He is our strength, and the light of our
countenance, he has ordained us for his glory; and if we glorify him here on
earth with us, he will glorify us with himself inheauen; but if we neglect
to glorify him that is our glory, he will glorify himself in our
destruction, and make us (in the feeling torments of our condemnation) Those
that glorify God shall be graced by him.
glorify him with this acknowledgment that he is a God of most sovereign
majesty, and that he is most gracious in his mercy, God is honored in the
acknowledgement of Devils and wicked men.
but most terrible in his judgment. And with this acknowledgement will God be
honored of the Devils, and the damned whose insufferable torments in their
condemnation shall be arguments of proof to conclude Gods glory.

The general use.
The general use is this, The Use.
that seeing God has created all things for his own glory, and seeing that he
will be glorified in the several executions of his justice and mercy, in the
salvation or damnation of his creature: that therefore all men must earnestly
endeavor in this most needful performance, A most needful performance.
and that in all the actions of their life, they endeavor to fashion every
circumstance by lawfulnes and holy rule, The rule of lawfulness.
that God may receive the glory of their actions, as S. Paul does advise the
Philippians: Phil. 1. 11.
That we may (as he says) be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are
by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. For in all insensible
things there is a special nature, to which they are obedient, Insensible
things. obedient to nature.
whereby they glorify God in finishing the end of their creation. God has
commanded the motion of the heavens, the influe^ce of the stars the natures
of the elements, and the several natures of every several thing. All these
continuing their course and nature, give most notable demonstrations of Gods
glory, by whom they were created, and thus disposed in nature. If these things
which are subject to time, and must perish, do notwithstanding discharge the
duties of their nature, and so by consequence approve themselves to be
instruments of Gods glory: shall men who^ God has created for the like end of
his glory, and to whom he has given a soul of excellent understanding, and
for whom he has created the World, the most admirable work of his own hands,
shall these be careless in this high duty? and shall the Elements and
unreasonable creatures be careful? Shall me^ be exceeded by beasts, in the
execution of their most reasonable service? God has not threatened their
neglect with Hell, nor promised to reward their diligence with Heaven. Men
less careful then beasts
God does both promise and threaten men, yet are men less careful then
Beasts. This may worthily remember those men, (or rather those beasts) who
make a God of themselves, or of their unlawful pleasures: and then dedicate
themselves, their labors, To what end men* commonly dedicate their travel.
and the glory of all their actions, to a profane and licencious trade of
life.

These that will not do it of choice, must do it by force: For the time will
come when God will whip these slaves with the rods of his judgments, and make
them (in despite of their ungodliness) to glorify God, The wounds of hell and
conscience.
in suffering the torments of hell and their conscience: and (without profit)
to acknowledge God, and the terrible justice of so great a Majesty.

This may also remember the children of God, Secondly.
that in all the cares of their Christian life, Gods glory the maine of all
our cares
they have their main respect to Gods glory, and that God may have place in
their hearts, even before the desire of their own salvation: and that their
salvation be desired, rather that God may be glorified, then to desire to
glorify God for their own salvation: We must prefer it be fore our own
salvation.
that so God may be the first in all our cares, that we love him, more then
our own souls, and prefer his honor, before our own salvation. For he that
will not despise himself (in respect of Gods honor) does but disse^ble his
love, neither does willingly glorify God; for though God be in his eyes, he
has himself in his heart, We must despise our own selves for the love of God.
and though he pretend to love God, it is for his own private end, not that
God may be glorified. And thus to glorify God is to dishonor him, and so to
provoke his indignation against us.

Therefore let all men love God for his own sake; love him for his truth, love
him for his mercy, love him for his ius^^ce; We must love God for his own sake.
and let this love be so respectles of all by considerations, as that neither
heaven, hell, nor our souls, persuade us so much as the reverence and zealous
affection we have to the love of God; To love God, is to glorify him.
for he that thus loves God, does glorify him, and shall be glorified by him.

Special application.
I will therefore discharge the shame of all my actions, Special application.
into this ocean of Gods glory. I will propose, and pursue that end only, I
will not respect the vain purposes of men: The vain purposes of men.
I will remember that they are transitory, and will leave me, flatterers and
will deceive me. I will reduce to memory the mighty monarks of the world the
most admirable induments, the most fortunate in earthly prosperities, when I
examine their worth, The transitory estate of worldly states.
I shall find nothing but names, and those neglected by the power of time,
themselves, and their regards are vanished, all those things perish, and are
disgraced with the use of time; because their actions ran not this holy race of
Gods glory, but had diverse and disagreeing ends. The power of death over the
world.
Death has deprived their souls, the grave their bodies, the world their
estates, and time their names; and such destroying ends do necessarily follow
such affections. Note.
For when Gods glory is not the absolute proposed end of a man's life, there is
nothing can happen to such life but extreme misery; even the bounty of
Nature, and the treasure of Fortune, are miserable tormentors, that present
themselves with friendly faces, Resolution.
but bring in their hands dangerous and fearful destructions. Therefore in
every work I undertake, I will first propose my lawful end Gods glory. And
if the work I propose be fitting that holy business, I will then with all
possible endeavor, continue my pains and purpose: if not, I will countermand
that determination, and despise that practice, how profitable so ever. No
respect of worldly profits.
For this I know assuredly, that among all the several actions of my life,
whatsoever does not directly intend Gods glory, does then most directly intend
my own damnation: and that every particular of my life, shall be a witness,
either for me, or against me.

And therefore I will despise and pity their damnable mis-conceiuing, Our
actions witnesses.
that think to run one course two ways; to serve GOD and Beliall; that
direct their lives partly to God, partly to the world: but rather I will run
on the race of my Pilgrimage, Resolution.
with Hope and Constancy, never retiring, never staying, till with victory I
reach the staff of Gods glory; To which happy end I will direct my
spiritual course with a constant and faithful Resolution. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

