A VERY EXCELLENT AND LEARNED DISCOVRSE, touching the Tranquillity and
Contentation of the mind: CONTAINING SUNDRY NOTABLE INSTRVCTIONS, AND FIRM
Consolations, most necessary for all sorts of afflicted persons in these
latter days.

Distinguished into seven Books, 1. Against Covetousnes. 2. Against Ambition.
3. Against Anger. 4. Against Envy. 5. Against Pleasure. 6. Against Curiosity.
7. Against Fear.


WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY THE FAmous and learned M. I. DEL' ESPINE, and newly
translated into English by Ed. Smyth.

Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1592.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Church-yarde in London.

TO THE RIGHT VVORSH JPFVL SJR Francis Hynd, Knight, and M. Thomas Wendy,
Esquire; two of her Majesty's Justices of peace in her County of Cambridge,
EDWARD SMITH wishes all increase of true worship in this world, and the
full accomplishment of all necessary blessings for the world to come.
IT has been no small controversy in former ages, (Right worshipful) and that
among the greatest Clarks, as may evidently appear by their large volumes and
long discourses, what should be the readiest way and most effectual means to
bring man) who is subject to so many miserable and fearful accidents) to a
firm and stable estate, and place him in such a perfection, as that even in
this life he might attain an assured rest and a joyful contentation. The
consideration whereof, Plato in convivio.
as it was always very common among those of greatest gifts, and such as
were most plentifully endued with many and sundry excellent graces, so was it
the principal drift of the wiser sort, whom nature has garnished with the
best conceits, to employ their whole studies and endeavors in the searching
out of so invaluable a Jewel, as the joy of the heart, Ecclus. 30.16. Prou.
15.13.
which (as the Wiseman says) is accounted as the life of man, and the means
to prolong his days. Having thus resolved with them selves, and being fully
persuaded that by their own devise and industry they were able to build such
an impregnable fortress, and that with the mortar of their own inventions,
against the fierce assaults of froward fortune, that nothing should be of
sufficient force, either to incumber their minds, or disturb the peaceable
estate of their pretended happiness, every one according to his fancy have
laid his foundations, and finished the rest of the building with such matter as
was most agreeable to his own liking. The diversity of their works do
evidently declare their dissenting humors, 1. Cor. 1.20. and 3.19.
and their frivolous reasons do apparently prove, that the wisdom of the
world is mere foolishness. To let pass the simpler sort, whose writings
have been of least weight, and to come unto the Ringleaders of the rest, whose
memorial remains at this day in highest price, and is but too greatly
reverenced of such, as are somewhat too zealously addicted to heathen fancies,
we shall find that though they were as confident in their opinions as ever was
that boasting Meno, Plato in Menone. Eccles. 7.16.26. 1. Cor. 8.2.
(of whom Plato makes mention) yet a wise and Christian Socrates would easily
convince them, and make them confess with the wise King, that wisdom is far
from them, and that they know nothing as they ought to know.

And no marvel though they could not direct others unto that happy estate,
which they them selves so earnestly affected, seeing that besides the
darkness of their own understanding, which was wonderfully obscured with the
foggie mists of cloudie ignorance, they were for the most part wholly directed
by those same two noisome neighbors, Plato in the first book of his laws.
and unadvised Counselors Pleasure and Pain: whose devises were accounted as
oracles, and their suggestions sufficient to sway every action. Whereupon some,
though such indeed as had but slender judgments, being terrifyed with the
frowning countenance of tormenting sorrow, Seneca.
embraced the counsel of Electra to her brother Orestes, imagining that the
best means to compass a quiet life, was to sequester them selves from all
public affairs; and like Tymon of Athens carefully to avoid all society,
Cic. in his first book of offices.
lest peradventure they should hear or see that, which might breed their
unquietness. Which doctrine, though it were plausible enough to the slouthfuller
sort, who are wiser in their own conceits, then seven men that can render a
reason, Prove. 15.13. T. Livius. Plutarch.
yet are they too blame to forget that worthy saying of sage Cato, that in
doing of nothing they learn to do evil. Besides that they value their rest at
too high a rate, buying their ease with idleness the mother of so many
mischiefs, not remembering (like unskillful surgeons) that whilst they covet to
heal some particular member, they destroy the whole body; and laboring to
purge the mind from grief, they wholly bereave it of understanding, making it
sluggish, forgetful, and incapable of any excellent conceit.

Others of as base a judgment and of a more brutish practice, The Epicures.
do not think it sufficient for their own contentation to abstain from all
good, unless withal they be wholly given over to a sensual life, wallowing
in the filth of their own concupiscences, Arist. in the 3. book of his
Ethickes. Chap. 10.
desiring with Philoxenus to have necks as long as Cranes, the more to delight
their intemperate throtes. Thus endeavoring by a supposed felicity consisting
in the full fruition of their own licentious appetites, to become more happy
then earthly men, Cic. in Cato. mayor.
through the filthy pollution of their swinish affections they become more
miserable then the brutish beasts.

Such as supposed this inestimable pearl the enjoying of a blessed estate and
a quiet life, Zeno and the rest of the Stoickes.
to consist in the want of affections, had said somewhat, if senselessness
were a virtue, or if it were possible to become a skillful artisan, and never
take delight in an occupation, which is contrary to that common rule among
philosophers: Arisl, in his 2. book of Ethics. Chap. 2.3. Vt oportet, quando
oportet. In the 6. book of his laws.
Vnicuique operationi est propria quaedam voluptas. And therefore not without
good cause is this senseless assertion reprooved by Aristotle, and justly
condemned of all that are wise, for that without all regard of circumstance it
does wholly bereave us of all inclination, and maintains (contrary to the
opinion of Plato, who accounted joy and sorrow as the roapes, wherewith we
are drawn to the embracing or avoiding of every action) that we may attain a
perfection without affecting of any thing.

Which out of question was always accounted a paradoxe among the ambitious
sort, and the greatest wits could never away with such doctrine. For being
persuaded that the only way to purchase a peaceable estate, was to intermeddle
in worldly affairs, to employ their wits with Lycurgus to make laws, to
study with Deioces to minister justice, Herodit. in Clio. Q. Curtius. Plutarch
in his lives.
and with Alexander to bend their whole forces to conquer kingdoms, and as
though the earth were too little for one man, would needs command over sea and
land, and like Monarchs rule all: not only lamenting with Caesar, that they
have not conquered so much as Alexander: but also if they happen to hear some
foolish Anaxarchus maintaiyne that there are innumerable worlds, Plutarch.
they are ready to weep that they have not all of them under their
subjection, and every man's head under their girdle. These men, if they would
have been ruled by reason, without passing the bounds of modest ambition,
might peradventure in the sight of worldlings have been thought happy. But
such is the nature of fleshly conceits, that the more we tender them, the more
they torment us: the more we cherish them, the more they chooke us: the more we
take pleasure in them, the more they pain us. Eccles. 2.
So that we may truly confess with the wise man, that they breed nothing in
us but sorrow and vexation, and through the sensible feeling of our own
miserable estate, cry out with Croesus, Herodit.
and confess the saying of Solon to be very true: -- Vltima semper
Expectanda dies homini, dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.


Which opinion though it be highly disgraced by Aristotle, In the first book
of his Ethickes, Chap. 6.
in calling it an absurd assertion, yet it is of greater weight then he took
it, and comes nearer the truth then he imagined. But whilst he would
descent from all others, making felicity like a galli-maufrey, in compounding
it of an Omnigatherum, of the virtues of the mind, the gifts of the body,
and the favors of fortune, Chap. 6.
he quite forgate that he did repugnantialoqui, framing his Foelix like a
Camoelion, to day happy, to morrow miserable.

The devine and heavenly Philosopher Plato, though he were more excellent in
this argument then all the rest, placing his greatest happiness in a serious
contemplation of an Idea, which was notwithstanding he knew not what, yet
(whilst he seems to make man's reason a rule to attain to perfection, and
attributes too much to Philosophy, calling it (...), In Phoedone. Tertul. in
lib. de anima.
the pure gold and precious pearl, for the attaining whereof we should sell
all that we have, and account it the only means to compass a quiet life)
has gone astray as well as the rest, and left small hope of heavenly health to
be procured by his heathenish receiptes.

And yet surely a wise reader may pick out excellent preparatives, as well out
of his works, as out of other philosophical discourses, and compounde a
potion fit for the purging of our minds of much unquietness, though he
shall never be able to attain that perfection of joy and bliss, which is
here spoken of.

For it is not all one to be a moral wise man, and to be a good Christian;
to be a great proficient in human knowledge, and a profounde Clarke in
heavenly understanding; to be skillful in the writings of men, and to be
cunning in the book of God. For these differ more in deed then they do in
show; and more in substance then in appearance. And therefore in seeking to
repose our selves in humane discourses, we may seek for quietness, but we
shall never be at rest; we shall hunger, and never be satisfied; we shall
drink, John 4.3.
and yet never taste of that water which shall be sufficient to quench our
thirst: for the device of man's brain is too shallow, and his reason polluted
with too many filthy stains of his own corruption, to find out so heavenly
a blessing, and so unspeakable a benefit.

And therefore such as have been trained up in the school of Christianity,
and truly taught by the Spirit of God, have learned to avoyde those sandy
foundations, and to build upon sure rocks; the death and merits of Christ
Jesus: and to look for all happiness and tranquillity both of mind and
conscience, in the assured persuasion of the forgiveness of their sins:
Psalm. 32.1.
which strong foundation neither the stormy tempests of carnal motions,
Matthew. 7.23.
nor the blustering winds of divelish suggestions shall ever be able to shake.

Considering then that this peace and contentation of mind ought to be the
desired haven, wherein every one should harbor him self from the
tempestuous rage of his own distempered humors, and that among all the
violent passions wherewith we are tossed, as it were, too and fro, not any are
more dangerous then those that are tainted with Covetousness, Ambition, Anger,
Envy, Pleasure, Curiosity, Fear, and such like; the perilous goulfes
whereof are continually ready to swallow up the ship of every man's safety,
were it not guided by the direction of some skillful Pilot: I could not but
commend this excellent discourse of M. I. del' Espine, directly tending to the
compassing of a quiet mind, wherein he has not only laid down the reasons
that may be most effectual to draw men to moderate their vehement passions,
but also most notably discovered those imminent dangers, which do usually
accompany unruly motions, and furnished this whole discourse with such
infallible proofs, apt similitudes, fit comparisons, sage sayings, and
worthy examples, as well out of divine as humane stories, as may be sufficient
to draw on the liking of all such, as are not wholly compounded of unruly
affections. And though I feared at the first to commit any translation thereof
to the press, being most unwilling to lay open mine own insufficiency in the
tongue to the view of the skillful Reader, but to use it rather as an exercise
for mine own particular: yet being persuaded to the contrary by considering
the correspondencie that ought to be among Christians, and the good that so
necessary a work may do in these days, wherein men's minds through the
policy of Satan and the corruption of their own natures, seem to be but
too full of passionate humors, I was the rather enduced to venture near home
like a young merchant, and to make trial how these precious French wares will
be uttered among our English nation at this present, who have (I am sure
heretofore) been but too much delighted with their baser commodities.

Being grown to this resolution, I began to call to remembrance how deeply I
am indebted unto your Worships, and my want of ability in any small measure to
requite so many deserts, otherwise then by this or the like testimony of my
thankful heart and duetiful affection: as also how correspondent the title of
this book is unto the wise and peaceable carriage of your selves in your
greatest actions, so far from the least suspision of al diste^pered
affections, as that you may seem to put in continual practice those excellent
precepts, which the author of this work has most notably described in his
most serious contemplations: which moved me (I confess) to offer this
translation unto your worships, seeking herein to countenance my self under
your patronage, thereby the more readelie to stop the mouths of sundry
carpers, who either cannot or will not do any thing themselves, and yet are
froward enough to reprove other men's labors, and sharply to censure their
honest endeauours; craving withal a favorable acceptance of my good meaning,
and courteous entertainment of this new come guess, who though he be but
plainly attired, yet I trust his discreet behavior will procure him friends,
and make others, through your goods words, countenance him, though it be for
nothing, but for that he is a stranger.

The Almighty God, who has enriched your worships with so many worldly
blessings, and adorned your minds with such excellent graces, as that you may
justly be said to have attained no small portion of his heavenly benedictions,
increase in you all blessings necessary for the attaining of all contentation
in this life, and the full fruition of all happiness in the life to come.

Your Worships to command, Edward Smyth.

AD ACADEMIcam Iuventutem paraenesis.
CHrysippus and Diogenes, detracta vtilitate, ne digitum quidem virtutis causa
attollere voluerunt. Quod siornatissimus ille doctissimusque vir, qui in isto
effodiendo the sauro summos labores exantlauit, pari fuisset erga literarum
decus voluntate, ne summo (quod dicitur) digito praeclarum hoc opus attigisset.
In istis etenim tenebris and quasi parietinis bonarum artium, ea est
Scholasticorum vita omnibus non ornament is modo, sed and emolumentis etiam
spoliata, vt villici quam Philosophi, aratoris quam oratoris potior sit
conditio, and nemo fere sit, si praemiorum dulcedine rapiatur, quinon malit in
tractandis rastris, quam in conscendendis rostris, in acuendis ligonibus, quam
in euoluendis libris occupari: Adeo vt, tametsi quispiam (si fieri posset)
subtilitate Lysiam, acumine Hyperidem, inexhausta legendi auiditate Catonem
superaret, and vere queat cum Heleo Hippia gloriari, nihil esse vlla in art
rerum omnium, quod nesciret: nisi tamen cum eodem possit and pallium, quo
amictus, and soccos, quibus indutus sit, propria conficere manu, vix aut ne vix
quidem, miseram hanc vitam sustinuerit. In ore habent omnes eruditionis
elegantiam, Philosophiae splendorem admirantur, hanc in luce ac celebritate
constitutam cupiunt: quibus tamen eruditos interea negligentibus nec immerito
possumus illud Anaxagorae ad Periclem occinere (...). Huiusce igitur
literatissimi viri industria eo maiorem laudem commeretur, quo inistis
lucubracionibus non priuatam aliquam vtilitatem, sed pubicum sibi commodum
proposuerit. Ea autem est huiusce aetatis sieve segnities inertissima, sieve
fastidium delicatissimum, vt huiusmodi labores vel oscitanter praetereantur,
vel tanquam invtiles contemnantur. Excitanda itaque est nostri seculi iuventus,
and harum scientiarum ardore inflammanda. Haud exiguus est eorum numerus, qui
otio torpentes, genio indulgentes, in impurissimo voluptatis coeno volutantes,
porci verius quam studiosi, ventris animalia, quam mentis coloni appellari
queant. Hi, si relicta Epicuri hara, ad sacrosanctum Platonis, Aristotelis,
Plutarchi aram se reciperent, facile se paterentur e voluptatis quasi tyrannide
ereptos in veram ac genuinam Philosophiae libertatem vindicari. Excutite igitur
torporem (adole scentes) (...) non esse cum Remo ac Romulo iudicate, ne vos
libidinibus constringendos detis, Syracusanas mensas a Platone grauiter
reprehensas, and Sardanapali Epigramma ab Aristotele explosum cogitate. Nolite
putare hoc esse Academici, lectulo affixum adhaerescere, togatum discurrere per
plateas, pro oppidanorum foribus considere, per forum cursitare otiosum, sub
veneris vexillo militare, ipsum Falcidium bibendo and poculorum magnitudine
superare: sed antelucanas Demosthenis imitari vigilias, in Musaeum abdi cum
Acesema, Accium assidua intention animi, and ardore studij (si fieri potest)
ipsum vincere Archimedem. Cum Iulianus Imperator (vt ecclesiastica tradit
historia) Philosophos prae reliquis suo fauore complexus esset, statim ad aulam
vndique confluebant, qui (...). Et vtinam eandem hodie non liceret vsurpare
querelam, in Academiarum reperiri gremio, qui, vt ad Academiae tandem obrepant
honores, sese potius student Academicis gradibus tanquam leonina pelle induere,
quam mentem suam perpetua lectione omnium disciplinarum efficere bibliothecam.
Quod si semel ignauiae soluti vinculis e voluptatis quasi custodia euolauerint,
non Catonis instar in Musaeis sedent Stoicorum aut Peripateticorum circumfusi
libris, sed ingenuas ex sana doctrina oblectationes ignorantes, circulos
aliquos and semicirculos consectantur. Tum si potuerint vel prece vel praemio
Anglicanas quasdam legendas comparare, sieve de Arthuro Principe, Hugone de
Bordeaux, Beviso Southhamptoniensi, Valentino ac Orsono, portentosas nescio
quas confictas fabulas: haec commenta arripiuntur auide, manibus teruntur
assidue, nunquam possunt putidae istae deliciae adolescentum stomacho nauseam
commouere: Romana lingua, vtpote superstitiosa, a plaerisque contemnitur: ad
graecam quodattinet, haec vna vocula sufficient, gracum est, non potest legi:
hebraeae literae in exiguum Theologorum gyrum compinguntur. Sola restat
Anglicana lingua, quae omni labor, sudore, cura procudenda est. Euphues
igitur, Mammilla, Penelopes tela, triumphus temporis, lamentationes Amyntae,
Philautus, Angliae Palmerinus, phanaticae phantasiae, pictae chartulae, Circaea
nescio quae Metamorphosis, mulierum hyperapistes, Tharltonis e purgatorio
prorumpentis noua, Cantuariensis suitor calcearius, reliquaeque amatoriae
ineptiae, meretriciu^ prae se ferentes nitorem, insitum libidinis calorem
accendentes, palato mirifice arrident, a quibus aegre se divelli patiuntur. Cum
videret Caesar diuites quosdam peregrinos canum and simiarum catulos secum in
gremiis circumferre, lepide interrogatus est, number apud ipsos mulieres non
parerent liberos. Et nonne ab istis adolescentulis ineptos huiusmodi codices
exosculantibus aeque liceret petere, vtrum matter Academia, Platonis,
Xenophontis, Isocratis, Senecae opera tanquam germanos liberos non pariat?
Calcei Sicyonij satis adpedes apti erant: quos tamen sapiens ille respuebat,
quia viriles non erant. Et illi forsita^ ridiculi tractat us satis apti and
co^cinni pro subiecta materia videri possunt: quia tamen viros praesertim
Academicos minime decent, quoru^ pector a variaru^ reru^ salutari scientia
oneranda sunt, ad foeminas (si vllibi co^siste^di invenia^t loca^) relege^tur.
Vere profecto, vere dictu^ est; (...). In ciboru^ delectu, quia in vnum quasi
corpus nobiscum coal scunt, admodu^ curiosi esse solemus: and in animi pabulo
discernendo nullum iudicium, nullam sagacitatem, nullam curam adhibebimus? Si
vernaculi sermonis puritatem amplectimur, cuius desiderio magnopere videmur
co^flagrare, plurimi sese offerunt libelli, e quibus ta^quam ex fontibus
augustissimis vnacum sermonis elegantia praecepta etiam ad vitam informanda^
accommodata haurire licet. Haec non gustata modo, sed potata etiam delectabunt:
non aures duntaxat inani strepitu demulcebunt, sed and animos vera perfundent
voluptate. Vt Gallica^ Academia^, Academicis inprimis dignissima^,
praetermitta^ ex omni omniu^ quasi scientiaru^ narthaecio depro^pta^,
reliquosque tacea^ eius farinaelibros: praesens iste tractatus tanqua^ ex
Gallicis tenebris in Anglicana^ luce^, optimi viri sudore ac vigiliis
vindicatus, adeo laetu^ lautu^que inuenibus offert conviviu^, vt in eo
nequaqua^ pigeat ab ouo (quod aiunt) admalu^ consedisse. Hic non vt in
Clea^this tabula voluptate^ videbu^t velutiregina^ suo in solio collocatam,
virtutesque omnes quasi ancillulas ei ministrantes; sed tanqua^ in speculo
contemplabunt, and pulchram virtutis effigiem, cuius amore capiantur, and
deformem vitij imaginem, quam prae horrore vix aequis intuebuntur oculis. Neque
haec Agatharei alicuius penicillo, sed ipsius Apellis atque Polycleti
admirabili depicta artificio. Nam quae sieve ad virtutum dignitatem
illustrandam, sieve ad vitiorum naturam explicandam in quibusvis fere authoribus
sacris ac prophanis reperiuntur, ea omnia in hunc quasi cumulum congesta, vno
pene intuitu aspicere liceat. Ad hoc aduolate tanquam apes aluearium, ex
omnibus floribus mellifluum delibate succum: in hoc cursu vere Olympiaco ad
metam vsque pergite: huiusce vos curriculi nunquampoenitebit. Aureae hic
fulgent Philosophiae gemmae, quibus a tergopositis, ne cum gallo illo Esopico
in foetido ineptorum codicum sterquilinio commoremini. Incomparabiliter (vt
quidam loquitur) pulchrior est veritas Christianorum, quam Helena Graecorum.
Merito debent sacrae literae nos quasipenitus absorbere, in his die nocteque de
sudandum est. Interim cavendum tamen, ne sicut quidam imperiti philosophi, cum
a sensibus profecti maiora quaedam ac diuiniora vidissent, sensus omnino
reliquerunt: ita and nos praetextu Theologiae Philosophiam prorsus deseramus.
Quamcunque tandem artem profitebere, nunquam ad illius ascendes fastigium, nisi
gradibus quibusdam philosophiae. Placet ne tibi Galeni atque Hippocratis
officina? tritum est, sed verum est: vbi desinit philosophus, ibi incipit
medicus. Ad Theologiae statuesti confugere castra? omnium artium atque
linguarum panoplia instructus accedas oportet. Miraculum visum est Hieronymo
cunctam Graecorum bibliothecam a losepho sacris in literis enutrito euolutam
esse. In Basilio ac Nazianzeno nescias quidprimum admirere, eruditionem seculi,
ac scientiam scripturarum. Anatolius insignis Theologus in Arithmetica,
Geometria, Astronomia, Dialectica, Theoria, Physica and rhetoricis disciplinis
(...). Meletius Alexandriae Episcopus, Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 32.
(...) erat. Critici Philonem Iudaeum alterum Platonem pronunciarunt. Ipse
Porphyrius (in host enim virtus laudem habet) Originem non dubitabat quasi
Philosophiae corona insignire. Quem probatum authorem non perlegit Erasmus, qui
and Thomam Scholasticorum antesignanum propter admirabilem in Aristotele
peritiam (...) appellauit. St domesticos exspectamus stimulos, quibus ad
Philosophorum studium excitemur, Theologos in medium producere liceret omnium
artium choro stipatos. Nonne infinita prope Poetarum, Philos. Historiographorum
peragrarunt volumina Iuellus Episc. Sarisburiensis, Fulco strenuissimus in
Papistarum profligandis copiis Achilles, Whitakerus Cantabrigiensis, and
Rainoldus Oxoniensis? Ne igitur pudeat ex philosophico armamentario tela
petere, quibus ipsi etiam Philosophi (si opus sit) confossiiaceant. Id enim
veritus est capitalis Christianorum hostis Iulianus, Theodor. l. 3. c. 8.
qui ideo gentilium scholas ne a limine little liberos salutare voluit, (...).
Hic est Goliae gladius (vt pulchre Hieron.) quo ipse Goliath iugulandus est;
haec Herculis claua, qua rabidi inter ethnicos canes repercutiendi sunt.
Appollonij igitur vestigiis insistentes vbique inveniamus, quod discamus, vt
semper proficientes, semper nobismetipsis reddamur meliores.

Vestri studiosissimus G. J.

IF such as toylesome travail take to Indie far for gold,
And pass along the surging seas, amids the blustering cold,
Deserve such guerdon for their hyre, such praises for their pain,
Though they bring naught but worldly wealth, to maintain private gain,
Which with great danger gotten is, and fostered with such fear,
As clogs the mind with pensive thoughts, with griefs and carking care:
Then great is his desert by due, who with his painful toil,
Has undergone this travail great, and brought from foreign soil,
Such pearls of price, such choice receipts, as plenty here we find,
To comfort soul and body both, and purge the troubled mind
From noisome humors, which do breed such passions in the heart
Of those, who therewith poisoned are: and does the same impart
To each man freely for his good: increasing thus the wealth
Of them, who wish for quiet rest, and thirst for heavenly health.
These fruitful labors then of thine, the virtuous will commend,
And with their tongues will thankful be: and so adue my Friend.
quoth. T. W.

A COMPENDIous and short sum of this whole discourse touching the
contentation of the mind: distinguished into seven books.

Every man naturally endeavors by all means possible to live quietly, All
men desire to live happily.
and seeks continually to settle himself in that estate, which he imagines
to be most to his liking and contentation: and to this end tends all his
labor, counsels, deliberations, thoughts, actions, imaginations, and
enterprises whatsoever. Which though it be most true, yet do they not take
one, and the self same course to attain unto their wished end: for some
thinking felicity to consist in riches, do seek for nothing else as long as
they live, but to gather wealth: others hunt after honor, and promotion, and
some after pleasure, and delight: this man is best pleased with goodly and
stately buildings, and that other with traveling into far Countries: and
every one applies himself unto that, which fitteth his humor and agrees
with his liking. But there is no man so fortunate as to find that which he
seeks, neither is there any but complains of his own estate and condition:
and that in such sort, as we may evidently perceive his unquietness, and
coffeehouse. The reason whereof is this: They seek for that in this world
which cannot possibly be found: for this tranquillity and repose of the mind
is laid up in heaven, and in the kingdom of God, and is bestowed only upon
them, who hope to attain unto it by the means of Christ Jesus: for the
contentation, whereof we now speak, is nothing else, but that blessed, and
happy estate, which he has purchased unto us by his obedience, which he
reserved for us, until such time, as he appearing unto all the world in his
glory, shall make it manifest unto all men. And yet I will not say, but that
it may appear in some sort, and be attained unto eve^ in this life: and that
true and unfeigned Christians, being illuminated and regenerated, perceiving the
vanity of this world, and the corruption of all things therein, may so lift
up their hearts and minds unto God, and by a consideration of his goodness
and bounty, find such quiet and assured rest, as they could never before
attain unto. And to the end that men may the better come unto this quiet aend
peaceable estate, I have in these seven books set down the means that
brings them thereto: to the end that they, by reading and endeavoring to
follow those rules which are delivered, may in process of time by the grace of
God obtain their desire. And though the end be long and difficult, yet is it
very excellent, pleasant, and profitable, and so greatly to be desired, that we
ought to spare no travel or labonr whatsoever, to attain it. For it is so
precious a lewell, as the least part and piece thereof, is sufficient to
recompense all our travels, and pains.

Now, that we may the better understand wherein the contentation of the mind
especially consists, we must first search out those things, which do most
trouble and disquiet it. For as in corporal diseases, it is very requisite to
know the causes whereof they proceed, to the end we may the sooner cure them:
so is it convenient, the better to appease the trouble some passions of the
mind, to know what those things are that have engendered them.

Of these, some are external: as poverty, disbonour, loss, injury, enmity,
and such like: and some internal. And of these there are two sorts: for some
have relation only to the hodie, as hurts, and diseases: and some to the
mind, as passions, and affections, which are the principal, and carry the
greatest sway in the moving of our spirits. For as we see the power of the
winds in the motion and stirring of the air, the waters, and the trees
especially to prevail, for that their bodies are moveable, and subject to
every motion: so likewise the reason why every accidental, and casual
chance do trouble, and molest us, is, for that our minds are incombred with
unstable, and wavering passions: and therefore it is very expedient, that in
the beginning of this treatise we set down the means that may purge us of
these passionate humors.

But first of all it is to be understood, that that which shall be spoken against
these trouble some passions of the mind, Against the opinion of the Stoikes
which makes men insensible.
will not make any thing for the proof, and approbation of that Stoicall
opinion, which maintains a senseless and blockish nature, void of all
humanity, and understanding: for affections are as necessary for the
maintenance of humane society, and preservation of mutual concord among men,
as bread and drink are convenient for their use. And therefore as skillful
Physicians, who take upon them to heal a disease, do not purge the body of
all moisture, but only of that which is corrupt and putrified, and seek to
reduce the rest to a good and convenient temperature: so likewise we must not
labor to extinguisb all affections in our nature, but to weed (as out of a
garden) those only, which are evil: and manure and husband the rest, to the
end they may bring forth some good and wholesome fruit.

Secondly, we must note, A remedy against the passions of the mind.
that there are no remedies more fit and convenient to heal the diseases of
the mind, then words, reasons, arguments, discourses and demonstrations, which
do lively and naturally set forth both vice and virtue, in showing the
beauty of the one, to the end to make us in love with it, and contrariwise in
declaring the detestable and foul evil fauourednes of the other: thereby the
more to make us hate and loath it. We must observe then, that Physic is not
good, unless it be for such as take it, and for those whose natures are well
prepared before to receive the operation thereof: and therefore if the reader
will obtain any profit hereby, he must read diligently, and carefully lay up
in his mind those reasons which shall be alleged, and earnestly crave at the
hands of God, that these things may be effectual to his good: for it is he
alone that must give the increase to these our labors, which otherwise will be
altogether unprofitable and unfruitful. We are like unto them, who show and
teach other the way they should travel in: they tell them right, and where
they ought to turn: but if they fall lame, or wax weary by the way, they can
not give them new legs or sufficient strength to travel out their journey.
Wherefore seeing all depends upon the grace of God, both the knowledge of
them who inflruct others, and the willingness of those who are taught, to put
in practice, and to execute the counsels of them who teach them: let us commend
our selves unto him and humbly be seech him to give us grace that we may both
understand, and study earnestly to do our diligence and endeavor.

THE SVMME OF the first book, touching the contentation of the mind. AGAINST
COVETOVSNES.
IT seems that we live in that age, wherein nothing is accounted vicious, but
words: for as for the things themselves they are current, and receiueable
among us: as for example, Covetousness is not condemned, but only in regard
of the name. For as for it self, all sorts of people, and all vocations
whatsoever are miserably infected therewith. Goodmen, being wrapped up, and as
it were snared in the nets hereof, are often times beguiled with the vanishing
Sunshine of this world: and therefore the Poet Simonides being asked whether
wealth or wisdom were most to be desired, answered, that he could not tell,
for that he saw often times the wise to stand cap in hand to the wealthy:
which thing make many to pass on a resolute course to gather riches, until
they have entered into the school of heavenly truth and verity, which
presently instructs them in a better way. Now as concerning the love of
these corruptible and transitory goods, commonly called Covetousness, very
fitly in my opinion has it been called by wise men in former ages, the
Metropolitan or mother City of all mischief: and the spirit of God has
named it the root of all evil. And of this the author discourses in this
first book, and shows that it is very fitly branded with this mark, as
being the worste of all other: and therefore like a surgeon seeks to heal
that disease, wherewith he sees his patient to be most troubled. And having
laid this as a foundation, that Covetousness is the most violent passion of
all the rest, he labors to prove it by particular reasons, showing that it
debarreth us of the use of all things, and will not suffer either our selves or
any other to enjoy them. Next unto this he painteth out a covetous man in his
orient and lively colors, and makes him the vildest slave in the whole world,
the greatest Idolatour, theife, murderer, Infidel, Atheist, and damnable
creature that is: the author of all evil, the most miserable and abject
villain, the poorest, leanest, blindest, and most unhappy man that can be
imagined: and contrariwise, that a modest and a virtuous simplicity, is a most
excellent virtue: and that there is no sin that Christians ought more
carefully to avoyde, then covetousnes: and that good men, who live contended
with the grace of God, are most happy. And this is declared in the first part
of this book.

In the second part, he shows the remedies against covetousnes, the
principal where of is the knowledge and fear of God: consequently he sets
down all the rest, to the end that every one may consider of them: as for
example; first that nature is content with a little: that covetousnes can not
help them, who follow it, from the least evil that may be: and that there is
no danger so great but covetousnes and riches may bring us into it: that
Avarice was never in estimation with any, but with the enemies of knowledge,
and virtue: that it draws after it all confusion: that we have infinite
examples of such as have liberally and honestly employed their goods in such
sort as was convenient: that we must first seek the kingdom of heaven, and
commit the disposing of our affairs unto God: that Covetousnes is the more
detestable if we compare it with other vices, which are opposite unto it: and
in a word, that there is no contentation of the mind in the love and liking of
worldly riches: then follows the application of this doctrine unto particular
persons, and especially unto Kings and Princes.

In the third place, he discourses of the right use of riches, and shows the
fruits that proceed of charity and liberality toward the poor, by
arguments drawn from the nature of God: of the great profit we reap by alms
giving: of the assured promises of our heavenly father: of the folly of the
covetous man: of the nature of true charity: of the maledictions and curses
denounced against those, which are not pitiful: of the inexcusable cruelty of
avaritious men. And in conclusion answers to the vain objections of such as
are covetous, who, to excuse themselves from being liberal, allege the fear
they have least they should want, and that they have not sufficient to give so
many alms; and so concludes in the end that to repose our trust in Gods
promises, is sufficient to extinguish Covetousness, and to settle our minds
in a peaceable and quiet estate.

THE FIRST BOOK. Against Covetousness.
AMONG the manifold and sundry vexations of the mind, Covetousness the most
furious and violent passion of all others.
there is not any (in my opinion) more furious or more violent, then a greedy
and Covetous desire, which ingendereth; and, as it were, hatcheth exceeding
troubles in whomsoever it remains. For as we see some men, which naturally
are so inclined to mischief, so seditious, so contrary to peace and
tranquillity, that they are no sooner entered into a house or Common wealth, but
presently they sow discord and dissension, troubling the common-quietnes and
peaceable estate which was before: so also this cursed desire is no sooner
entered into our heart, but that forthwith we perceive a great confusion of
tumultuous and dissentious appetites to boil and rise up within us, which do
straightwaies entangle us in the nets and snares of the Devil, and at the
length bring us to miserable death and destruction. He which will diligently
consider the state of an auaritious man, shall evidently see that he has no
more rest, then has the tree that is planted on the top of a high hill,
which is continually tossed with the winds: there is no end nor measure of
his cares, fear, distrust, desire and despair all which do so prick and
disquiet him so often as he would sleep, that it seems he lies among
thorns and briars. There was never so cruel a Tyrant as Covetousness: for she
massacreth all men with care and travel, which are under her dominion: she
haileth and draws them through fields, through woods, through sea and land,
in winter and summer, day and night, wette and dry, without giving them so much
as an hour to rest and repose them: she leaves them naked, or else in their
shirtes with some few rags about them, and feeds them with course bread,
with dregs, onyons, nuttes, or skallions. And to conclude, if there be any
tormented with this passion, there is none but will abhor and detest him.
Furthermore to show this her wonderful cruelty, and that in as lively and
oryent colors as may be: if we have riches, she leaves us but the sight of
them, and takes away the use and pleasure we should have of them: she shuts
our hands, and stops our mouths, so that we may neither taste, nor touch
them: whereupon the Poets have likened a Covetous man to Tantalus, who is even
ready to die with hunger and thirst, though he have both apples and water just
at his mouth; and Lucian compares him to a dog couched in the hay, who can
eat nothing himself, neither yet will suffer any other to take thereof,
without barking and brawling at them.

Furthermore, Covetousness depriueth us of the use of Gods blessings.
she wholly depriueth us of all the blessings of God. For he has created the
world and all that is therein, for the profit, use, and benefit of man: so
that if having those his creatures, we do not use them for our necessity,
they are unprofitable, and can not be called good in respect of us, who receive
no commodity of them. Which things the ancient Grecians did very well
understand and declare, calling all temporal goods by a word, signifying the
use of things: showing thereby that we may not rightly term that our good,
whereof we make no use, or commodity: by which occasion Esop (who was a
pleasant conceited fellow, and full of witty devises) seeing a man very sore
troubled, for that one had stolen away his treasure which he had hidden in the
ground, advised him to take a stone of the like quantity and weight, and to
lay that in the same place, where before he had hid his treasour, and withal
to imagine that it was his money, and all was well enough: giving thereby to
understand, that this should serve his turn as well as the other, and that
silver and gold are not otherwise to be accounted goods, unless it be of
them, who make an use of them: as for those who use them not, they are only
profitable in opinion and conceit.

Moses also, after the description of those things which God had created in
the beginning, recites that particularly and generally they were good: that is
to say, well and wisely ordained for the commodity, pleasure, and profit of
men. There is nothing then more contrary to the ordinance of God, his bounty
and divine wisdom, then Covetousness, which makes that unprofitable and
unfruitful, which God has created for the use and benefit of man.

S. Chrysostom speaking of the hatred and envy which the Covetous man bears
against the prosperity of his neighbor, A covetous man hates himself and
others also.
and of the grief he has when he sees him use that which he has, with
thanksgiving, says, that if it were possible he would sell the sun: that
is to say, his brightness and heat, if it were in his power: and so would they
deal with the air and the water, and such like, which God has created common
for all, in such sort as no man may appropriate them to him self. It may be
further said, that if they were lords of other things, as they are of their
gold and silver, that notwithstanding they would be afraid to make any use of
that which they have, not considering (like insensible creatures) that there is
nothing that dureth for ever but only God, and that according to the law and
vnevitable necessity, whereby the continuance of all things is determined and
appointed, they must pass away and have their end, and are consumed either by
wearing, or by worms, or by rust and rottenness, or at the least by time,
which wastes and consumes whatsoever escapes or saves it self from the
other deuourers. Seeing then that of necessity they come to an end one way or
other, is it not much more reasonable that man should make use and profit of
them, seeing it is the pleasure of God, who is acknowledged, loved, and
honored by this means in the use of his creatures, rather then to leave them
to be consumed of worms without any commodity?

I demand of the Covetous man, how he would like of those servants and
hirelings, who by their negligence and carelesnes have suffered his houses to
fall into ruin, and have left his lands and vineyardes untilled, or seeing
some man or maid servant in his house, which serves him to no purpose, how he
would be pleased with them? why does he then make no use for the most part of
his riches and treasures, but keep them altogether unprofitably? why does he
not think also that he is the servant of God, holding of him whatsoever he
has, with commandment to make use of them, and that he is countable for the
dommages and loss which happens by his want of traffic, that is to say,
for that he has not used them as the Lord has commanded.

It is certain that Christ Jesus in the parable of the Talents, Mat. 25.14.
signifies no other thing, but that whosoever has received any grace or gift
of God, of what kind, quality, or price so ever it be, if that he do not so
employ it as that there may be made some profit thereof, shall be punished and
cast into utter darkness, because of his idleness: yea though he has kept
that which has been given him so well, that it be neither lost nor diminished,
while he had it in his hands.

And is not this a wonderful punishment, First, he makes himself a slave to
that which should be his slave.
that a man should be made a slave unto that, whereof he should be master? For
which has more authority, he which suffers and endures all things for his
goods, to the end he may keep and increase them; or those things which are
unprofitable and do nothing for him? if they were turned into men, and that
one should enter into an house where this order is, he could never judge who
were master. If then we do esteem that man to be in miserable estate and
condition, who having been a lord and master, is by some mischance become
subject to his vassaile and servant, though he be a man, and by his virtue and
wisdom advanced to some degree: what shall we say of him, who willingly
makes him self a slave, and that to mad and senseless creatures, yea, and
that which is worse, to sin and to the devil? For who so ever is covetous,
Secondly he is an Idolatour.
is an Idolatour: for that the love and confidence which he ought to have in
God, he reposeth all in the creature, which by this means is, as it were,
deified by placing it in his heart, which is the fairest and most excellent
place in all the Temple of God, and the very seat which he has especially
chosen and reserved to sit in, as in his throne, there to dwell continually by
his holy spirit. And if so be that one only sign which we make before an
Idol, as to lift up the hands, to bow the head, and bend the knee, be a
sufficient argument to prove that we are Idolatours: what shall it be
accounted, when we set our whole hearts and affections upon a creature,
reposing our trust therein, thinking of nothing else day nor night?

Furthermore, a man that is covetous, Thirdly he is a thief.
is a thief and a wrongful dealer, not giving to every man his own. For we
are not the lords, but the ministers of those goods which we have, as also of
all the other gifts and graces of God, for to aid and help our neighbors,
and not to keep them locked up in our chestes. The overplus then of that which
is requisite for the necessary use of us and of our families, appertains
unto them who are in poverty, and we rob and spoil them, if we retain any
thing from them, and we deserve as great rebuke as does the Princes Amner, if
he reserve part of the money which is given him to distribute to the poor:
which thing the heathen did well understand.

Elian recites the history of a certain Lacedemonian, Lib. 14. Cap. 32.
(called Timandridas) who taking a long journey, before he departed left the
charge and government of his house to one of his sons. Long after, at his
return finding his riches to be greatly increased, and that in his absence his
wealth was so augmented by the frugallitie and painfulness of his son; in
stead of commending and praising him, sharply rebuked him, saying, that it
appeared evidently that he had been a wrongful and an unjust dealer, and that
he had done injury to the immortal gods, to his neighbors, and the poor, to
whom we ought to give whatsoever we have, more then for our own necessary
use. For which cause Moses commanded the Judges, whom he had appointed to
hear and determine the controversies of the people, that they should
especially take heed of covetousnes, for that it is the ruin and utter
subversion of Justice.

He is also a murderer, He is also a murderer.
not for that he kills his neighbor by violence, though this his covetous
and griedie desire be the principal and chief cause of all wars,
oppressions, robberies, spoils and desolations which follow: but some may
excuse this matter, in saying that these desolations and miseries do not
always accompany greedy minded men: notwithstanding, it can not be denied
but that they be manquellers, though there were no other reason but this, that
they will give nothing unto their neighbors to relieve and nourish them: for
even as the fire is extinguished and quenched, not only by throwing on of
water, but also by taking away of the wood and other matter whereby it is fed
and nourished: so also may one destroy and take away the life of a man, not
only by offering him violence, but also in refusing to give that unto him,
which is necessary for his preservation. Moreover, he is very unthankful;
for who has bestowed upon him all that which he has? Is it not Christ Jesus,
for whose sake God his father has given them? and this is the very same, whose
members he suffers to perish with cold and hunger, not vouchsafing to give
them bread and water to nourish them, or any course and vile ragge to cover
them.

But this is not all: He is also an Infidel and profane person.
the most dangerous and pernicious mischief is, that he is also an infidel
and miscreant. For covetousness hinders us from hearing of the word of God,
which is the foundation of our faith, or else if we do hear it to the end to
lay it up in our heart, it profits us nothing, for that it is choked
forthwith in such sort, that it can not spring forth: even as the seed that
is so wen among the thorns. Which thing one may easily perceive in all sorts
of covetous and avaritious persons, which do not consider that the
nourishment, and preservation of all things does depend of the providence of
God. Propound unto them the promises which God has made, and they make no
account of them; nay, they do esteem more of ten crowns which they have in
their coffers, then of all the sayings and examples of the whole Scriptures.

If you think to fear them with the threatenings which God has breathed
forth against them, who repose their confidence in riches, which are not
content with their nourishment and clothing, who help not their neighbors,
showing unto them that in so doing, they shall both loose them selves and the
kingdom of heaven: you shall not see them so much moved, as if they had lost
six pence. Is there then more faithless people then those which distrust the
providence of God, which doubt of his promises, and have no fear of his
threatenings? and how should they believe in God whom they know not? It may
be they have some slight conceit of him which quickly passes away; but this
is no true and sound knowledge: for if they did know him as he does show and
make manifest him self unto us, as he is the fountain and spring of our life,
rest, and quietness, and that all things are vain, and he alone the sovereign
good, which is able to satisfy and fill our desires; would they not leave all
their great and excessive cares which they are encombred with in this world,
for to rest and repose them selves wholly in him?

By this we may also gather, He is an Atheist and irreligious. 1. John 3. and
4. chapters.
that the covetous man has no faith, and that he cares neither for God nor
his law. For it must needs be (as S. John says) that we must have charity,
if we will have God dwell with us, who is nothing else but an eternal fire,
burning and glowing with charity; without the which we are neither the members
nor the disciples of Christ Jesus: and this is that principal virtue which
does evidently declare, that we are regenerated, and that we have his spirit
dwelling in us. how can he then have God with him, who has no alliance with
Christ Jesus, without whom the Father avails nothing? by the same reason it
may appear that there is not his law in him, for that is all comprehended in
this word charity: what religion then has he, who is without faith, without
God and without law? wherein differs he then from the Atheistes, who think
and teach that there is no God, and that the world is not governed by his
providence? surely in nothing, unless it be in that he is somewhat more
fearful and more bashful, as having some superstitious opinion of God, which
the other altogether wants.

All this being considered, Matt. 19.23.
shall we marvel if Christ Jesus said, that it is a very difficult and hard
matter for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven? and no wonder is it
that S. Paul does so earnestly exhort us to fly covetousness, 1. Tim. 6.9.
in saying that it is the root of all mischief, and that they that will be
rich fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction. One says that in time past
poverty was a virtue that did instruct and teach it self, because it made man
capable of all good and laudable arts. But contrariwise we see that riches
ordinarily make men idle and sluggish to follow virtue: and if peradventure
they have learned something, they are ready to forget it, Lib. 1. cap. 8, 9,
10.
and prompt to leave the study and exercise thereof. Aristotle says in his
Politickes, that all vice proceeds from covetousnes and from ambition, as
from the original fountains, and that these as the seeds from whence spring
treason, rebellion, wrong, robberies, thefts, tyrannies, oppressions,
superfluities, subversions, wars, dissentions, and in conclusion, all
mischief what so ever.

By reason whereof Crates had some probable cause to cast his goods into the
sea, Plutarch in the life of Phocion.
desiring rather (as he said) to drown them, then to be drowned himself by
them: and Phocion also to refuse that great some of money which Alexander sent
him, being moved thereunto by the great fame that was spread abroad of his
excellent virtues, and of a princely magnanimity and heroical desire he had
to remunerate and honor a man endued with such and so many surpassing
qualities. And let us note that prudent answer he made to his Ambassadors: for
being desirous to know the cause which had enduced the King their master to
honor him with such a present, they answered, that it was the report he had
heard of his rare virtues. I beseech him then (says he) to suffer me to
remain as I am. Insinuating thereby that it was a very difficult thing, to
hold virtue and riches both together.

At such time as in Rome and Lacedemonia poverty was not despised, and that
men were contented only with necessary things, they were wise, constant,
just, temperate, doing right unto all with whom they conversed: and very
careful that in the time of peace the laws might be publicly observed among
the Citizens, their children wisely instructed, and all estates marshalled
under a severe and straight discipline: in war, they were vigilant,
laborious, patient, courageous, prudent, valiant, and invincible, not only
against their enemies, but also against all calamities and miseries: yea
against blows, stripes, and death it self. But when as those who succeeded
them (neglecting the example of their ancestors) began to contemn poverty,
and to delight in the glittering show of wealth and riches, desiring rather to
sill their cities, their temples and houses with the gold and wealth of their
enemies, then with their fathers to bewtifie them with their arms and weapons,
greedy desire having once possessed their hearts, forthwith the love and
liking of virtue was clean extinguished, and riches entering, into their
Church, expelled religion, and chased discipline out of their houses and
cities, and brought in pleasure, banketting, plays, prodigality, iuglers and
tumblers, cooks, and clawbacks, and in a word, all persons and sports which
were sit to weaken and effeminate their minds. And perceiving at length that
they had not sufficient to maintain such excessive charges, in stead of
acknowledging their faults, and returning to live as their predecessors had
done, they augmented their follies: for after they had not wherewithal to
maintain their licentious living, they began to pry into the estate of
their fellowe-citizens, forging crimes and other sinister means, thereby to
get that which they had. Whereby it happened that God who is the protector of
innocents, and the revenger of wrongs and oppressions which are done unto them,
has permitted that immediately after this their corruption in manours, they
should also fall by their ambitious desires into sects and factions; and so at
length into civil wars, which was the means that in the end their whole
estate was subverted and overthrown. Avarice the cause of the confusion in the
Church.
And who can deny but that this is also the cause of the great confusion and
disorder in the Church, which to our unspeakable grief we behlod in these
days? for in the time that the Church was poor, and that the Apostles and
Pastors thereof had neither gold nor silver, they flourished in all kind of
virtues. The Bishops were learned, modest, wise, sober, painful, vigilant,
gentle, peaceable, and shining lights in the mids among the people, Act. 2.24.
living in so great charity that they accounted that which they had not their
own, but made it common to all men.

Those which had possessions and goods sold them, and brought the price, and
laid it down at the Apostles feet, who parted it to all men as every one had
need. Furthermore, they continued with one heart in prayer and supplication,
and did eat their meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart, praising
and lauding God for all things: and as concerning their faith, it was so great,
that they could not be turned from the profession of Christ Jesus, neither by
threats, nor any torments that were offered them. For millions of them
suffered martyrdom, and satisfied with the efiusion of their blood, the
cruelty and rage of the Tyrants, which was otherwise insatiable, who waxed
sooner weary with murdering, then the Christians with suffering. But after
the inconsiderate zeal of some Princes had increased them in wealth and
possessions, presently (as says S. Jerome) they began by little and little to
deminish and to decay in godliness, until at length they have fallen into that
miserable estate wherein we now see them, which is such, that it is a difficult
matter to judge who are most vicious, the pasture or the people, striving to
exceed each other in impiety and ungodliness. Which if we consider, we must
needs approve and allow that memorable sentence of S. Ambrose, spoken in the
Council of Aquila: that poverty is no less glorious in Gods ministers, then
profitable for his Church: and that which S. Paul says, that godliness is
great gain, if a man be content with that he has.

The Covetous man when he joins house to house, and land to land, until
there be no place left, thinks he gains very much: but these senseless
creatures do not consider in the mean time, the loss they have on the
otherside of the graces of God, of the kingdom of heaven, the quiet of their
minds, and of all godliness: the least of which things cannot be recompensed
with all the goods of sea and land. They seem to fish (as Augustus Caesar
said) with a golden hook, for that which they loose far surmounteth that
which they get. They are like unto them who are swollen with the dropsy, who
afar off seem fat and to be in good liking, by reason of the abundance of
the humors in their bodies, though that for this cause they be soar and
dangerously diseased: so do we judge by the outward appearance that riches
are very pleasant, and such as love them very happy, Xenophon in his discourse
of notable sayings.
though that for the most part, there be nothing more vile and filthy in
their houses, then them selves: as Socrates said to Archelaus, who having
builded a goodly and sumptuous house, which he had furnished with costly
mooueables, and all sorts of antiquities that could be found: now as many
ran thither to see the rare things which were there, Socrates took occasion
upon a time to say unto him: Alas poor man do not thou consider that among
so great a multitude which repair daily unto thy house, there is not one of
them that desires to see thee? declaring thereby unto him, that there was
nothing in his house, but was better accounted off then him self. Diogenes
taunted another man after the same sort: for entering into his house which was
adorned with rich hangings of tapistrie, he spate in the owners face, saying
it was the filthyest place he could see. It is then the sottish, and foolish
opinion of men, or else the malice of such as flatter them, that makes them to
be esteemed so happy: for as that is not always a good horse which has his
bridle and saddle adorned with gold; so also may not that man be accounted
blessed, who has rich attire, sumptuous buildinges, and costly movables.

Hippomachus (as Plutarch writes) hearing a man commended for that he was of a
huge and mighty stature, In his treatise of covetousness.
as if so be for that cause he had been a likely man to win the honor and
the victory at gamings and masteries of price; yea marry, (says he) if the
Crown were hanged in a high place, and that one should reach it with his
hands. So likewise should rich men have a great advantage over other men, if
that felicity might be sold, or consisted in gold, silver, or revenues.

But all this can not satisfy our minds, whereas contrariwise poverty
hinders not the rest and quietness thereof, especially among wise men. The
Apostles were very poor, and forsook all they had to follow Christ Jesus;
and yet esteemed them selves as rich, as if they had possessed all the world.
Plutarch in the life of Solon.
Tellus the Athenian having but a little house in the fields, with small
substance to nourish him self and his children, was contented with that little
he had, and passed away his time in great rest and quietness. Contrariwise,
Croesus thought it not sufficient to be king of Lydia, highly honored and
obeyed of his subjects, who willingly gave unto him whatsoever he desired:
which Solon perceiving, accounted him less happy then Tellus the Athenian:
wherein he was no whit deceived, for in the end his desire to wax great, and
to enlarge his Empire, provoked and stirred him up very unwisely to enter into
war with Cyrus, who vanquished him, and bereaved him of his kingdom, his
wealth and liberty, and escaped hardly with his life, serving for an example
to all posterity, and especially to great princes, who ought to look well
about them, and to consider, how smally wealth avails to make a man happy,
to the end they may be content with their estate, and learn (as the ancient
Greeks were wont to say) that the half ordinarily is better and safer then
the whole, because that such as are not contented, but with an unbridled
desire, oftentimes by this means loose both, as experience daily shows.
Antiochus the great, who was the most puisant and mighty King in all Asia in
his time, Just. lib. 31. Plutarch in the life of Scipio.
lost all that he had, because he was not content with that which was
sufficient, but would augment and enlarge his dominions: and to this end
entered into war with the Romans, who vanquished him, and took from him
whatsoever he held on this side the mountain Taurus. Constantine the eldest
son of him that was named the great, not contenting him self with his part,
Carrion. lib. 3.
though he had Italy, and the better half of the Roman Empire, yet fell out
with his brother Constans, to the end to spoil him of that he had, and to
make him self lord thereof: but the contrary happened; for he was slain,
and lost both his kingdom and his life. And of late memory has not that
mighty house of Burgondy fallen into extreme ruin and desolation, Philip de
Commines.
through the ambition and griedie desire of Duke Charles, who was never
contented before he had procured his own overthrowe?

It fares with covetous men as it did with Aesopes dog, who having a piece
of meat in his mouth, and espying the shadow thereof in the water, thinking
it had been another piece of flesh, snatched at it, and through his griedie
desire lost that which before he had. Even so rich men, who might peaceably and
quietly enjoy the goods they have, and eat with pleasure the fruits of their
labors, by this their covetous humor they deprive them selves wholly thereof,
and setting before their eyes a fraudulent hope of things that seem to be
good, forget for the most part those things that are good indeed. Which
thing Cyneas did very excellently and wisely declare unto King Pyrrhus,
Plutarch in the life of Pirrhus.
seeing him ready to enter into war with the Romans, what mean you, says
he? to whom the King answered, I purpose to conquer Italy: and what will you
do then, said Cyneas? from thence I intend to go into France, and back
again into Spain, and so into Afric, and in my return to get Sicilia, that
in the end after these happy and fortunate conquestes, I may return home in
triumphing wise, and repose my self all the rest of my days in honor,
glory, and great prosperity; whereto Cyneas answered, what need you take so
long and so dangerous a course to come to quietness? live you not now in
tranquillity with less danger and trouble? We may see by this that (as Solomon
said) fools have nothing but vexation with their goods: and that Saint
Chrysostom had great reason to compare them with savage beasts, which cost
great labor and travel to take them, and being taken, ask as much or more
pains to keep them that they hurt us not.

It were the less harm, if after they have desired, Riches make men more
covetous, whereas modest poverty is always joined with contentation.
and with great labor attained unto wealth, their desire were quenched, as
hunger and thirst is satisfied with drinking and eating. But they serve but to
augment and increase their desire, which becomes more greedy; even as the
fire which is not quenched, but more and more kindled with the wood that is put
to it. When we see a man that drinks continually, and yet can not slake his
thirst, we conjecture forthwith that he is distempered, and that he has more
need to be purged, and his body to be cleansed from corrupt humors, then to
give him more drink: so also this great desire which always eats, which
has so monstrous a belly, and insatiable like unto the grave, does it not
evidently declare that the mind is very sick, and therefore to recover it
self, it must be first purged and cleansed of the passion that tormenteth it?
this being done, the disease would incontinently cease, and the patient should
forthwith eat, drink, and sleep at his pleasure, as well as the shepherds and
laboring me^, who are merry al day in the fields, and at night sleep most
sou^dly in their poor cabbins: they always cat their meat with a good
stomach, and after come to their labors cheerfully, for that their minds
are not troubled with this passion. A man would sometime give all that he has
to be delivered from death, or from some dangerous disease, so should a
covetous man purchase (even with all that he has) this quietness and
contentation of mind, and if he will not, let him not be overmuch offended
with the ravenous soldier, or the thief that spoyleth him of his tiches: for
by this means he is delivered of that, which was his hinderance to come to
quietness.

Stoboeus remembering the example of a certain philosopher named Anacreon, In
his 230. discourse touching wealth, poverty, and covetousnes.
(to whom the tyrant Polycrates having given five talents, which amounts to
the sum of about three thousand crowns) says, that he seeing so great a
heap, was marveilously troubled in his mind in devising how he might bestow
it, and for that he was in continual fear, thinking of nothing else but of
his money; in the night in stead of taking his quiet rest as he was wont, he
could do nothing but think of his crowns, and dream there was some thief
picking his coffers, or at his gates coming to cut his throat for his money,
which he perceiving, and seeing that his care continually increased, he took
forthwith all his money, and restored it again to Policrates, saying, that in
four or five days which he had kept his money in his house, he had put him to
more pain then ever he could do him pleasure. Plutarch in his treatise of the
quietness of the mind.
Zenon having lost all his goods upon the sea in a tempest, saving a
thredde-bare cloak which he had about him, greatly rejoiced and thanked
fortune, that she had taken away his goods, whereby she had delivered his mind
from captivity, and made it fit to receive the excellent treasures of
philosophy, whereto hereafter he meant to betake him self. Demetrius
Phalerius, who had long time been a merchant, entered upon a time into the
school where Crates read publicly; Plutarch in the same place.
and after he had heard him dispute of virtue an hour or two, with great
admiration cried out: miserable man that I am, that have been so long time in
ignorance, and have so little esteemed these goods which are so precious, and
may be so easily attained, for to purchase with great travail and hazard such
things as are most frail and transitory. We see then the exceeding sorrow
these great personages had, in having employed their time to gather such goods,
as at the first smacke they have at philosophy and the knowledge of virtue,
begin forthwith to repent them selves, and to reclaim their minds, yielding
their whole consent to purchase a confederacy and aliance with true
understanding and knoweledge.

Riches might the better be borne, if this villainous desire had not bewitched
them, and wholly bereaved men of all sense, whereof indeed they must needs be
wholly destitute, seeing they suffer them selves to be ruled by a filthy
strumpet common to all the world, both to the master and the man, poor and
rich, laborers and artificers, (for all are in love with riches) and to betake
them selves wholly to this unconstant house-wife, they forsake the love of
virtue, which is the most beautiful and noble princes of the world, descended
from the grace and goodness of the immortal god. Is there any besides the
covetous person, and such as are blinded with their own affections, so base
minded, that can abide so great a disgrace? and though they be Kings and
Emperors, can we esteem them of a gentle and noble mind, who suffer
themselves to be buried in such a stinking sepulcher? It is written that in
old time, when there was a question moved among a great company, what was
the greatest thing in the world, some said honor, some health, some riches,
and some beauty: others judged other things, as they were diversely affected.
After every one had given his verdit, and the reasons he had to defend his
assertions, one among the rest said, yet there is one thing which is greater
then all these you have spoken off, and that is the mind of him which makes
no account of these things, which you do so greatly admire and esteem. And
although this be true, yet know we not how to make the world believe thus:
which in his old age so exceedingly doteth. Some Thersytes in these days
shall be greatly honored for his riches, when as some other virtuous and wise
man shall hardly be known of his neighbors.

If there were any in these days that would refuse such a kingdom as Egypt,
as did Moses; or his burden of gold, Heb. 11.24. Valor. lib. 4. Chap. 3.
Plutarch in the life of Alexander.
as did Fabricius; or would disdain and scorn at the great pomp of some
Alexander, as did Diogenes, they should be scorned at, and made the common
by-worde of every man's mouth, which thing we see by experience in the people of
Brasilia, whom we repute rude and barbarous, for that they reckon of nothing
but of that which is necessary, esteeming more of a knife, a bill, a bow and
arrows, whereof they may make some use, then of gold and silver, and all
other superfluous things that are brought them. This was also the life of the
Patriarchs, wherein also Adam had passed his time in the garden of Eden, if he
had continued in his innocence, observing the commandment which God had
prescribed him. This was also the manner of life of the Son of God, who being
made man, and walking here upon earth, was contented with bread and water, and
sometimes some little fish for his nourishment, and a ship, or the top of
some mountain for his lodging. What absurdity is it then to glory in
seeking for those things, which all virtuous and good men have despised?

Saul, 2. Sam 10.23. and 11.5.
who was the first King that God gave unto the children of Israel, though he
had been anointed by Samuel in the presence of all the tribes, who with their
cries and acclamations approoved and liked of the ordinance of God,
notwithstanding after all these ceremonies and honors, desisted not to go
into the fields after his accustomed manner to keep his fathers cattle, not
showing any sign that his heart was any more lifted up, or that he was proud
of that dignity wherein God had placed him. Genesis 14.15, 16.
Though Abraham were a great Lord, rich in gold, in silver, and had a great
family, loved and reverenced of Kings of the country where he dwelled; and
moreover so mighty and puissant, that with his servants he had discomfited
four Kings, who were returned in victorious manner from Sodom;
notwithstanding he never in all his life had any other house, or castle for to
lodge in, then a poor tent, nor ordinarily at his table any thing saving
bread, bear, and milk for his nourishment. If he made any feast, (yea though
it were to Angels) he added but cakes in stead of other delicates, and
sometime a piece of the fattest and tenderest veale he could choose among his
whole flock; which did not proceed of a niggardliness, and a desire he had
to spare, and to increase his wealth: for he was so liberal, that it sufficed
him not to keep open house to all the world, and to send his servants
abroad to invite the poor, and such as were travelers unto his table, but
he him self would watch for them, and with great importunity entreat them
to enter into his house. And did he not show great magnificence after he had
overthrowen those four Kings, and gained all the booty and spoils they had
gotten, when as lifting up his hands to heaven, he swear to the King of
Sodom, Gene. 14.23
that he would take nothing, no not so much as a threade or shoe latchet?
The cause then why he used such frugalitie, and so slender an ordinary; was
not because he was a pinch-pennie, but because he abhorred these vain and
superfluous delicates, without the which no man is now esteemed of the vain
people of the world, by reason they consider not the excellency and
nobleness of our nature, and the end whereunto we were first created, and
after regenerated by the grace of God.

If a King, a Prince, He shows by similitudes, testimonies, and the
consideration of our creation that Christians must be free from covetousness.
Acts. 17.28.
or mean gentleman would in these days use the trade of merchandise, and
negotiate in matters of small importance, he should be accounted a man of a
base mind. So should every man, that not considering he is created after the
image of God, and that the better and more excellent part whereof he is made,
has his beginning from heaven, does so abase and obscure him self. We are
of the race and lineage of God, (as S. Paul says) and therefore it is a great
shame for us and a dishonor to God that we live so miserably, and that we have
always our hearts in our bags, or counting houses, or else in some golden
mine. The Grecians call a man (Anthropos) that is to say, looking upward; to
give him to understand by his name, that as his countenance is lifted upward,
and his eyes looking toward heaven: so also should he continually behold it,
and withal, him, who governs and rules therein. And though his body be
travailing on earth, yet must his mind be always walking in heaven, in the
palace and goodly galleries of his God, and feed him self with the sight of
those goodly pictures and surpassing excellencies which he sees there.

Of all the parts of ma^s body, is not the head, in which the mind of man has
his principal operation, the furthest from the earth? which thing god has
very wisely ordained, to give us to understand, that we ought not to defile it
with any worldly cogitations, but diligently to preserve it as the Sanctuary
of God, wherein nothing ought to enter that is filthy or polluted. The Temple
which Solomon builded, was within covered with fine gold. So likewise should
the heart of the faithful, wherein JESUS CHRIST has builte a temple unto God
his Father, be inwardly garnished with all celestial and divine meditations
and affections.

We are then very unhappy, The blindness of those which are covetous.
and we have a beggarly heart, in making the house of God a place of
merchandise: we ought so much to love sanctity and holiness, and to be so
careful herein, that even our feet, that is to say, the sensual and brutish
part of our minds be always neat and cleanly; and for that naturally it is
filthy and stinking, and furthermore it walks with the world, which is
altogether corrupt: It is almost altogether impossible, but that by these
diverse occasions it should gather much corruption and filthiness. Wherefore
Christ Jesus expressly commands us continually to wash it, John 13.10.
to keep it clean and pure. What shall we say then, if there be dust, not
only in our feet, but also in our eyes, and that our souls which are
immortal, and called to the participation of life eternal, have (even like
swine) no care of any thing, but of the body, and of that which is fit for
the clothing and feeding thereof? We are no more strangers and forrenners, but
citizens with the Saints and of the household of God. Ephesians. 2.19.
Our conversation is in the heavens, Phil. 3.20.
and we fellows with the Prophets, Apostles, and with the Angels; shall we
suffer then, (through an avaritious and mischievous desire) our estate to be so
abased, and our selves to be made like unto the serpent, eating the dust, and
creeping all days of our lives upon our bellies? we do evidently declare that
we know not what the kingdom of heaven is, neither yet life everlasting, nor
the glory of the children of God, nor their hope, in that we have our hearts
so fixed and fastened upon the earth.

The Apostles and Martyrs having tasted by the spirit of God, what this kingdom
is, have afterward bin even prodigal of their goods, liberty, ease, yea, of
their blood, and of their lives: and held nothing so dear, which they did not
forthwith leave and forsake, the sooner to attain this heavenly kingdom. So
should we do, if we would take a little pain to learn this goodly lesson,
which God gave to Abraham and his children, Genesis 15.1.
that is to say: that he was there buckler and there exceeding great reward.
Let us hear what great profit and contentment David received, after he had
studied this lesson a while, Psalm. 16.5, 6.
and what a song he made in the praise of the most highest, for that it had
pleased him to teach him this by his holy spirit: saying, The Lord my God the
portion is
of mine inheritance:
And thou art he that do maintain
my rent, my lot, my chance.
The place wherein my lot did fall,
in beawtie did excel:
Mine heritage assigned to me
does please me wondrous well.


S. Paul likewise (who knew what an excellent thing it was to enjoy the grace
of God, writing to the Corinthians) says: 2. Cor. 6.10.
We are as poor, and yet we make many rich, as having nothing, and yet
possess all things. Having learned (says he, Philip. 4.11.
in another place) in what estate so ever I am, therewith to be content.

Good husbands do highly esteem of those pastures and other lands, which are
not subject to many inconveniences, There is no contentment but in the goodness
of God, which tencheth us to avoid covetousnes.
and bear great and good store of commodities without any great charges or
expenses. And if we must have this consideration in worldly matters, is there a
more excellent good then virtue, then the knowledge and love of God, and the
alliance that by this means we have with him? for this cannot be robbed or
stolen away. He which has gathered such treasures, fears not to loose them,
neither by fire nor water, neither that the rust should consume them, nor the
moathes eat them, ortime any whit empaire them. Besides all this, he is
content, which is the most principal point in riches: for he desires no more,
he has no more need: he thinks his wealth is sufficient to serve him in all
necessities: what man is there of any judgment, that does not more esteem of
Lazarus all hungry and naked as he was, Luc. 16.19, 20.
with his patience and virtue, then he that refused to glue him his alms with all his riches? who is there likewise that will not more highly commend the
continency of Saint Peter, Act. 8.18, 20.
which refused the money that Simon Magus offered him, then all the riches,
rents, and revenewes of that sorcerer? We must then conclude, that there is no
goodlier possession then virtue, nor greater revenewes, nor more continual,
then not to be covetous. And it is great folly among men to take so much
pains, to fill their garners with corn, their sellers with wines, and their
coffers with crowns, seeing they make so small reckoning to replenish their
hearts with virtue, the atchieving whereof is so certain, and the possession
so glorious and honorable.

Stratomicus reprehending the Rhodians for their great and excessive expenses
in their banquets, and buildings, said, that they made them houses as though
they were immortal, Plutarch in his discourse of covetousness.
and banqueted, as though they should die forthwith. One may say so of covetous
men, that they gather goods, as though they should never die. For if their
lives were six times so long as they may be, by the vnevitable laws of
nature, yet the one half of that they have were sufficient to maintain them
honestly and well. Why do they then consume the day in such labor and
travel, and the night in such unreasonable care, and all their days in an
insatiable desire, which never suffers them to be in quiet? so greatly are
they in fear least they should be poor.

The ancient writers said, The first remedy against covetousness is, to
consider that nature is content with a little. Plin l. 16. cap. 38.
that a man should never be poor, if he would live according to nature. For
what is it that she desires? a little bread and water, a rayson, or two or
three figs, a pear, an apple, or an onyon. Was there ever any man, that to
suffice nature, has been constrained to sell his land, or to borrow money
upon interest? why should men then be afraid least they should have too little?
It is reported of M. Curious, that he having commission of the people of Rome,
to devide certain lands among the poor citizens: some of them complained
that they had too little: to whom he gently answered (as he was a very courteous
and fair spoken man) say not (my friend) that he which has enough, has but a
little.

Chilon the Lacedemonian, Apotheg.
whose reputation and glory was so great, that at his burial his body was
accompanied to the grave with all Greece, in his life time used many notable
and worthy sayings: among which there were three accounted off as Oracles,
consecrated in the Temple of Apollo, and written in letters of gold. The first
was: that their was no knowledge so excellent as to know ones self. The
second: that the end of all strife and dissension, was misery. The third was:
that a man should not be covetous, but content him self with sufficient, which
costeth but a little, being marshalled with the laws of nature, and not
according to our insatiable and greedy desires. For one can never give them so
much as will suffice them: but contrariwise, nature has not so little, but
that she is fully satisfied therewith.

M. Curious (of whom we spoke before) on a time was dressing of tape roots for
his supper. Plutare. Apotheg. Cic. de Senect. Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Now for that he was the Lieutenant general of the people of Rome, in the
wars which they had against the Samnites, and for that they feared him, for his
great virtues and noble conduct which he used in all his enterprises, they
devised how to corrupt him, sending Ambassadors secretly to offer him a great
sum of gold and silver. Whereat he began to smile, and showing them his
little pot, said, he which can content himself with so small a supper as is
there, has no need of great riches.

If Captains and governors in these days, The second thing is, that
covetousness is an insatiable evil, and cannot help those which are her
slaves at their need. Plutarch. Apotheg.
would acquaint themselves with such abstinence, we should not have so many
treasons and mischieses as we have. For there is no such Orator to persuade
them, as is desire, or that does more forceably draw and entise them to hazard
themselves in difficult and dangerous enterprises. Philip the father of
Alexander the great, said: That every city is in hazard to be won, if an
ass laden with gold may once get in at the gates. This is often found true
by experience, and that men, after they be once given to covetousnes, have no
regard of honor or any thing else. Timotheus (as Elian reports) talking with
one, named Aristophon, said that nothing seemed dishonest to a covetous man.

Many think not of this, but they are afraid if they should fall into danger,
they should never get out if they were notrich. O the folly and madness of
men to think (as says the Prophet) that gold and silver may deliver them from
afflictions, Psalm. 49.8, 9.
when it pleases God to send them. How many Kings have fallen into the hands
of their enemies with all their treasures? how many have been hanged for all
their riches? how many die ordinarily leaving in their coffers plenty of gold
and silver, which yet cannot prolong their lives half an hour? what, do I say
die? nay how many having but the gout in their little finger, and know not
how to attain any ease with all their wealth?

And riches are so far from preserving us from adversity, The third thing
is, that viches are so far from helping us, that often times they draw us
into extreme danger.
that ordinarily there is nothing that draws us sooner into it, then they.
And when we are in, what does make us continue so long in it, as they do?
Theifes, false witnesses, promoters, for whom do they lay their nets? is it
for the poor and beggarly sort? Among a flock of sheep, the wolf chooses
out always the best and the fattest: and does not the Eagle likewise take the
fattest goose in the field? even so do those men that live of ravine and
spoil, when as they are minded to forage for themselves, do they not search
out the best houses, and those fields wherein there is greatest store of
corn? It would be an endless story to gather all the examples of them, whose
goods have been an occasion of the loss of their lives. Princes sometimes
deal with their officers and treasurers, as we do with sponges, which we
squease with our hands to make them yield us that water, which they have before
soked up. so also after they have given them the means to wax wealthy, and
that they have taken great pain to enrich them selves by a little at once,
then before they be aware upon the sudden, they lay hold upon them, and
spoil them of that they have gathered.

Diogenes (who in virtuous life, Apotheg.
wisdom, and worthy sayings, was next unto Socrates the prince of all the
philosophers) being on a time demanded, why gold had so pale a color: with
great wisdom answered: it was because there were so many that sought after
it, to lay hands on it. We also by reason of our goods, are little assured
from dangers, but are as a poor man that is followed of ten or twelve
sargeants, every one having commission to take him. Furthermore if riches
deliver a man from danger, Daily experience shows the misery of riches.
how falls it out that rich men are always so fearful? they build their
houses with lime and stone, with bridges and ditches round about: they set
porters at their gates, and their chestes have double locks: they entertain
no servants, but such as put them in good assurance for their good behavior:
they have a thousand troubles to keep in with them, who are rulers in the
country: so many presents, so many courtesies, so many good morrowes, so many
good nights, so many fair countenances to get their favors, and withal this
to keep a little wealth which they have gotten with great pain; whereof
proceeds all this, if not offeare they have to loose, or at the lest to be
troubled for their possessions? whereof also comes it, that they mistrust all
the world, if in walking through the fields they be not well accompanied? they
meet no man with a sword, but they tremble and stand in fear of him: if they
be a sleep in the night in their chambers, the stirring of every mouse is
ready to awaken them: does not this fear and mistrustfulnesse plainly
declare, that they think they be always in danger by reason of their wealth?

There are some other, who seeing the poor despised, and to be nothing
esteemed, The fourth thing is, that for to attain the true understanding of
things, we must shun covetousnes, so greatly esteemed of the enemies of
wisdom and understanding.
desire to be wealthy because they would be reverenced. I must needs
confess, that in this miserable world, wisdom and knowledge are as little
esteemed, as they are loved and honored, and that some Clarke in an office,
with half a dozzen of gold buttons on his jacket, shall be more honored then
the most virtuous and wise man in a whole country: but it is not sufficient to
be praised; but we must also note why and wherefore. First, this is most
plain, that a man may not be commended, or dispraised for those things which
are merely casual. For fortune has no regard or choice in the distribution
of her goods, which for the most part, she bestows on such as are altogether
unworthy; as we may see in the examples of Nabal, Sobna, and the covetous rich
man. Moreover, 1. Sam. 25.3. Esaias. 22.15. Luc. 16.19.
if we should commend men for their strength, beauty, and such like, by the
same reason also we should praise the beasts, who surpass them in all these,
and yet notwithstanding they are no more capable of praise and dispraise, then
they be of vice and virtue.

Besides all this, To keep us from covetousnes and prodigality, we must
renounce riches, which make them to be evil spoken of that possess the^.
their must be also an other consideration, and that is, how he which has
riches does bestow and distribute them. If he keep them without helping of
his neighbors, he shall be no otherwise accounted and esteemed off, then as a
villain, a miser, and an usurer. And if he spend them prodigally without any
discretion or wisdom, then shall he be extolled of flatterers and clawbacks,
of fools, and bauds, which make recourse unto him, and call him Master so long
as his silver endures.

But as we see that flies will stay no longer in a kitchen, then there is
grease to nourish them: so also this goodly company, which are usually in the
houses of a prodigal man, as soon as his wealth begins to diminish, and that
he waxes poor, they will then straightway give him over: yea, if he be evil
spoken of in their companies, the same men, as well as other, will greatly
blame him, for that he has wasted his goods so foolishlie: and in a word,
they deal with him as men do with springes, which so long as they yield
water, so long they are haunted, but when they be once dry there is no further
reckoning made of them. Mark then who they be that commend these prodigal
men, brainelesse persons, whose tongues are as light as their minds: such as
for a morsel of bread, will praise or dispraise whom you will. But every
wise man, and such as have right judgments, do greatly blame them.

Crates compared them to fig trees planted on the top of a mountain, where
they bring forth no fruit, but for the crows: so the goods of prodigal men
are bestowed upon none but flatterers, and such as hunt after other men's
tables. If they give any thing to an honestman, they are afraid straight (as
Horace says of Tigelius) least they should be accounted evil husbands, Lib.
1. Sat. 2.
and because they will not be seen and accounted peniefathers, they will spend
all they have in feasting and sporting. Papinian the Civilian, (who for his
great knowledge and rare judgment, was in so high account with the Emperor
Caracala) seeing upon a time a man as he passed by him, reele and stagger to
and fro, was marvelouslie angry: Go thy way (says he) with a mischief; art
not thou ashamed to prostitute (as though they were common strumpets) the
graces of God, which are sacred virgins, and ought to be so warelie kept, to
bestow them upon some honest husbands who would honor them, and know how to use
them? Alphonsus King of Aragon, had in his retinue a soldier, who after he
had spent all in riotousnesse, was constrained to borowe money, and to take a
little for great interest. It happened not long after that his creditours
seeing he was not able to pay, desired that (according to the Laws of the
land) he might be laid in prison: by reason whereof his friends were
constrained to be humble intercessours to the King, and to desire his favor,
that in regard of his former services, it might please his highness to exempt
him from the rigor of the laws, and that his body might not be arrested:
but for all this the King refused, saying: that willingly he would have
granted their requests, if he, whom they were suitors for, had expended his
goods in the service of his Prince, or defense of his country: but seeing it
was for his pleasures, it was requisite that his body which had committed the
fault, should likewise bear the smarte. We may by this conjecture, in what
account the prodigal sort have been among all men of understanding.

As for those, who have riches, The sixth thing is, that he must frame himself
to those which have bin rich and virtuous.
and after they have laid up sufficiently to maintain their estate, do
liberally dispende their overplus; wisely giving unto those who have need,
and are worthy (as did Abraham, Lot, Job, Spiridion a Bishop in Asia, Titus
the Emperor, Moecenas, Pomponius Atticus, Cimon the Athenian, and many others)
as they be very rare, so do they merit eternal praise, and their memorial
never to perish among virtuous men. But all this must be attributed not to
their goods, but to their wisdom that has taught them to use them well, and
to their virtue, which was the cause they have so well dispensed them: without
the which Demosthenes did no otherwise esteem of a rich man, then of a sheep
with a golden fleece, or an image curiously trimmed and richly painted with
fine gold and bewtifull colors.

Esop in his fables tells a tale, That wise men must not hate such as have
not understanding.
that a fox upon a time coming into ones shop that was a carver of Images,
taking up a manshead, that was excellently wrought in Ivorie, after he had
diligently considered the workemanshippe both without and within, as though he
had purposed to have bought it, said in the end with great admiration: O
bewtifull head how excellently art thou made? and yet thou lackest the
principal thing, for thouhast no wit. The like we may say to all rich men,
that are evil brought up: they be gallantly apparelled, well lodged, rich, and
have great store of horse, and men to wait of them, and as touching the rest,
so little wit, that they would not suffer the least servant they have in their
houses, if he were like them selves. Wherein they plainly show what account
they make of them selves. It is then great folly to purchase riches, thinking
thereby to live in greater honor among men, for as we have said before, as
true felicity depends of virtue, so does also the praise and commendation of
it.

There are others, That first we must seek the kingdom of God, and leave all
things else to his providence.
who think their Covetousnes may be the better excused in saying, they gather
for their children, to the end, that after their death they may have somewhat
to live upon: as though they had less wit then the bruit beasts, who being
left at their liberty, find sufficient where with all to nourish themselves.
But if they be so careful for their children (seeing that life is miserable,
if it be not virtuous and good) why are they not as careful of their good
education, to the end they may live well, as they are painful to provide for
them that they may live easily? for if they live virtuously, their life is
devine and angelical, but if they live idelie, in liberty, and care for
nothing but their ease, Act. 20.35.
they live filthilie, and swinishly. Furthermore (if as Christ said) it be a
blessed thing to give, rather then to receive, why do they not rather teach
them to give of their goods which they leave them unto the poor, then to keep
and augment them? Genesis 18.19.
God in commending Abraham as a good father of his family, says not, that he
taught his children to increase the pence he left them into testers, nor the
testers into crowns, but to walk in the ways of the Lord, and to do justice
and judgment. Whereby he admonishes all parents that this the first thing he
would have them to look unto, and that if their children fear God, they shall
not fail but have goods enough to content them, and that he will power his
blessings plentifully down upon them, upon their labors, and upon their
grounds, without the which a man attaineth not unto any thing that may bring
him either profit or contentment. And though their children be poor and in
need all their lives, yet being thus instructed, they are more happy and more
wealthy, Eccl. 14.13.
then if they were kings. Solomon says, that better is a poor and wise child,
then an old and foolish king, which will no more be admonished. For it comes
to pass, that some come out of prison to a kingdom, and some that are borne
kings come to beggerie. Demand of the rich men, whether if they thought that
their children would spend their goods which they leave them, in sportes and
plays, and in such like prodigal manner, they would so macerate and torment
their minds and bodies to gather them as they do? It is then in hope their
children will keep them and lay them up in sparing manner, that they take such
travel, and suffer so much toil in gathering for the.

But whether is the covetous, The 9. thing is, that in co^paring covetousnes
with prodigality, covetousness is the worse.
or the prodigal man the naughtiest person? if there were choice among sins,
there are many reasons to induce us to choose the one rather then the other,
as the better and the less hurtful and wesee few prodigal men, which are not
descended of good houses and have not some sparks of virtue, which increasing
with the time, and coming to ripeness would bring forth goodly fruit, if in
the beginning they had been well husbanded and wisely handled: whereas
contrariwise, covetousness rooteth it self in such as are of base, and
servile spirit; whose minds may hardly be lift up from the earth. By this we
may gather whether fathers have so great reason so greedily to gather wealth
for their children, and to leave their heir such abundance: and whether on the
one side their children be much bound unto them, for that they received their
bodily lives of them, Laertius li. 6. Plutarch in his treatise of covetousnes.
seeing that by their wicked education and instruction, they afterward kill
their body and soul, which God has given them. Diogenes reprehending the
Megariens, for that (by reason of their covetousness) they took no care to
bring up their children well and virtuously, said in pleasant manner: that if
he were put in choice whether he would be one of their sheep or one of their
children, he had rather be one of their sheep seeing they were so careful to
keep them well; and so careless to bring up their children virtuously,
without the which man's life is miserable. See here the causes which do
particularly move men to be covetous.

But there is one thing which is common to all, The 10 thing and the principal
that there is no contentment in the goods of this world.
and that is, that they hope, (having attained that which they desire) they
shall live at their ease, and with contentment, wherein they are deceived: for
when they think they have gotten great rest, they find they have gotten as
many sorrows as they have gotten crowns: and they find by experience that
which is truly said of the Philosopher Epicurus, that nothing may suffice them.

They may well fill their coffers, their boxes, and their purses, but they
shall never satisfy their own desire which is insatiable. It never regards
that which it has, and therewith to be contented: but it always coveteth
that which it has not, that it may be the more tormented. It is like to a
fire, which if it be not quickly quenched burns on every side, increasing
continually according to the quantity of the matter wherewith it is
nourished. Or like unto a flood, which at the beginning being but a little
river, by little and little, (as it runs) increases in such sort, that in
the end it bears with it whatsoever resists. If a covetous man have once
gotten a hundred crowns, he straightwaies desires two hundred, from two
hundred he comes to a thousand, from a thousand to a million, and from
millions to an infinite sum. They are like unto them that clime up a ladder,
who use the first step as a means to come to the second, and the second to
come to the third, continually climing until they come to the top. And there
is no difference between them, but that the one finds an end of their
ladder, the other finds none at all, neither of his care and sorrows which
necessarily follow riches, neither yet of his earnest desires in the attaining
and keeping of them. O poor man (says Saint Basil lamenting the miserable
estare of the covetous) which take no pity of thy self, seeing thon endurest
so much for the goods thou have, In his sermon against covetousness.
and so much or more for those thou desire and couerest. These are not the
fruits which the earth yields, but the sorrows, griefs, and vexations which
thine own intemperate humor procures. This is nothing but the torment and
travel of thy mind, thou complainest continually, and say, what shall I
do? thy sorrows show thy mischief, and thy desire the means which brings
thereto. Thy desire promises thee joy and quietness, and in the end brings
nothing but grief and sadness. O cruel and strange passion, and little
differing from madness: for a mad man desires nothing so much as water, by
reason of his strange alteration: and there is nothing which does more torment
him: for the sight thereof is sufficient to vex and trouble him. Who is there
then that considering these things will not commend Socrates saying? that a man
shall never be so well pleased with his desire, as if he would not desire at
all. God also in his law setting down the manner of a happy life,
prohibiteth us to desire any thing that is our neighbors, that is to say,
nothing but what it shall please him to bestow upon us for our maintenance: and
whosoever after this sort seeks to satisfy himself, attaineth unto his
desire. Epicurus said, that having a little rice pottage he would dispute
with Jupiter, and maintain that he was as happy as he.

Every man may now evidently perceive whether the covetous sort have any great
reason to maintain that which they do, and to excuse themselves, In the
application of that which has bin spoken to particular persons, he shows
that every man ought to shun covetousness but especially Kings and great
states.
and to cover their immoderate desires, which all men ought to fear as a fire,
and to fly from as a plague, especially Kings, Princes, and great Lords, for
that they are more odious in them, then in the common sort, and they bring
forth greater mischiefs then any thing else whatsoever. For as they are
great, so are also their desires great, and small matters will not suffice
them. They seek not after a farm, a meddowe, or a mill, but aftercastles,
barronies, and counties, and having authority equal with their desire it is a
difficult matter to resist them, and that in contenting them, there be not many
impouerished, some by calumnious and slandeerous accusations, others by false
compacts and unjust donations, and the greater part by open violence and
tyranny. And to speak briefly, it must needs fall out, that if the treasure
of the Prince increases, the wealth of the subjects diminishes: and it
comes to pass (as Julian the Emperor said) as it does with the spleen in a
man's body, which can not increase or wax greater, but the other members must
needs decrease and become lesser. Wherefore for the enlarging and quiet estate
of the common wealth, there is nothing more expedient, then to bid desire adue,
and that allsorts, of what estate or condition soever, Matthew. 6.20. 1. Tim.
6.17, 18.
should learn to follow the exhortation of Christ Jesus, and lay up their
treasure in heaven, where goods are far more excellent and more surely kept,
then they can be in the earth. Let not rich men then puff up themselves, and
trust in things which are so uncertain, but be ready to give and distribute to
the poor, and that freely of the goods which they have, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time, that they may attain eternal
life, and make themselves friends with the riches of iniquity, Luke 16.9.
that when they shall want, they may receive them into everlasting habitations.

The gods (says Pythagoras) have given nothing more excellent unto man,
Secondly that the best means to eschew these troubles, is to be charitable
toward the poor, and thereupon he discourses of the fruits and rewards of
charity. Psalm. 104.27 and 145.15. 1 The first argument is drawn from the
incomprehensible charity of God.
nor any thing that may make him more happy, then first to make him understand
the truth of things, and next unto that, to have wherewithal, and to be
willing to help the poor: for these are the virtues which make us the more
resemble them. The true and proper nature of God is, to be ready to pardon:
for this cause also is he the refuge of all that call upon him, that he may
give them their meat in due season, and open his hand, and satisfy them; who
sends forth his spirit and creates them, and renueth the face of the earth
(as says the Prophet David.) God especially and above all other is not only
liberal, but even prodigal toward men, for having given his blessings and
his kingdom, and surmounted all creatures in bounty and liberality, he will
needs exceed himself also, and (for to take away all means hereafter to be
more liberal) has given them his holy Spirit, his only Son, and his own
self, without reserving any thing, but a sovereignty, which may not be
communicared with them. If then we desire to resemble him, who has created
us, we must likewise be liberal of that we have, and be ready to help our
poor neighbors, and that more cheerfully if it be possible, then they be
ready to receive. O what goodly and beautiful garners are the bellies of the
poor: the provision which is there laid up lasts for ever without decaying.
Psalm. 112.9.
Happy is the man (says David) that gives to the poor; his righteousness
remains for ever: that is, his degree, estate, and dignity shall be exalted
with great glory. Desire and couerousnesse itself should move us hereto: for
whosoever gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord, who has promised to
give an hundred for one, and withal life everlasting. Of the profit we reap
of giving alms.
Is there a better paymaster then he? is there any surer of his word? can
there be greater profit then this he offers? In those bargains and contracts
which men make, the principal is ever far greater then the interest: for they
of a thousand gain a hundred. But this is conrrary, for the interest is far
greater then the principal: for we receive a hundred for one, and for a pot of
water, the kingdom of heaven, and life everlasting, which is inestimable and
can not be valued. We are not afraid to cast our seed into the earth, and, as
it were, to lend it to the ground upon usury: which thing we do with a great
desire and very carefully, being the bolder for the hope of the commodity we
reap thereby, although it be doubtful, and that by reason of sundry
casualties, we may be deceived: why then should we fear to give our goods
unto our God, having his promise for our assurance, and withal life
everlasting? If he be ready and willing to give, is it possible he should be
slow to restore? and if without our industry and pains he makes us rich, by
his only goodness, is it likely that being bound unto us by his word, he will
suffer us to remain in poverty? We use to say sometime of a rich man, and one
that we think sure of his word; I would he ought me a hundredth crowns, for I
should be certain to be well paid, Of the folly of covetousness
though we have no other assurance of him then such as a mortal and variable
man may make. Shall not our desires then have a more excellent foundation if we
trust in God, who is almighty, immortal, and immutable? Shall merchants trust
one another in their fayres and markets for a thousand crowns worth of
merchandise, in hope of some small profit, and will not we give credit unto our
God, what offer soever he makes us? we had rather lock up our gold and
silver, and to keep it unprofitably in a pot, then to lay it out to our own
gain, and the commodity of others. We would be grieved to have any member of
our bodies that should serve us for no use: why then are our goods privileged
by keeping them ten or twelve years in our coffers, and never use them. If
water be long kept in a place, it stinketh and becomes unwholesome: The nature
of true charity set forth in the examples of many many notable personages.
Genesis 41.42.
so also riches carefully laid up are very dangerous. Charity (says one of the
ancient fathers) knows not what it is to keep gold and silver, neither yet
provision of corn and wine. We must imitate wise and painful husbandmen, who
often reserve rain water in their ditches, wherewith afterward, they water and
inoisten their driest grounds. So did Joseph in Egypt, who locked up the grain
that the seven plentiful years brought forth, to the end, that in the time
of dearth and scarsitie, he might have wherewithal to feed the people of the
land and the neighbor countries. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 11.
So did that good bishop Spiridion of whom mention is made in the
ecclesiastical history, who gave unto the poor the keys of his garners,
that there they might take as much corn as was sufficient to nourish them and
their families. Plutarch in the life of Cymon.
It is reported of Cimon the Athenian, that he would never enclose his grounds
either with ditch or hedge, that the poor might without any let or
impeachment, gather herbs for their nourishment. Shall not this heathen man
rise up at the latter day to condemn all those rich men, who without any pity
or remorse, see the necessities, and hear the pitiful cries of the poor, who
lie and die for hunger at their gates? shall not their riches accuse them at
the latter day before the eternal god? Go to now ye rich men (says S. James,
Chap. 5.1. 6 Of the curses pronounced against them who are not pitiful.
) weep and houle for your miseries that shall come upon you: your riches are
corrupt, and your garments are moth-eaten: your gold and silver is cankred, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire, ye have heaped up treasure for the last days: behold the hire of
the laborers which have reaped your fields (which is of you kept back by
fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the
ears of the lord of hosts. Why do we then (even against our nature) drive
from us our friends? If we have a servant, whom we suspect to be a prater, and
a busy tongued fellow, we seek means forthwith to be rid of him, especially
if we think he will utter any thing that may prejudice us: and shall we not do
so then with these riches, which willingly, not being required, do testify
against us before God, pursuing us, for that we have so long kept them in
captivity, and in prison, without suffering them to see either sun or moon,
contrary to the will of God who has created them that they might pass from
one to another, to serve men in their necessities. When as we hear the
commandment that God has given, that we should give unto him that asks, it
does move us very much: and yet we are not astonished at these his fearful
threatenings: that is to say, if we will not hear the cries of the poor, when
as they beg of us, and refuse to give unto them according to our ability, that
in the time of necessity he will also refuse to hear the prayers which we make
unto him. Shall not this last day, this countenance of Christ Jesus, so angry
and irefull, this voice and dreadful sentence greatly move us, Mat. 25.
with the which to their everlasting shame all those are cast out of his
company, and sent into hell fire, which have not in this world a care to feed
and to cloth, Of the cruel and inexcusable dissoluteness of the covetous.
to comfort and to visit their poor brethren. We garnish out hals and chambers
with rich tapestry, our beds are covered and curtaind with silk, orels with
some thing which is more costly, our houses are gallantly adorned, and in the
mean time while we are so busy and curious in these superfluous things, we
omit and let pass things of greater importance, having many of our neighbors
and brethren al naked, not bestovving so much as an ell of cloth to cover them.
And what is this but the every? if a man should take away the apparel from
him that passes by the way, he is accounted a thief, and shall not he be so
esteemed, whosoever he be, that sees him naked and has sufficient to cloth
him and will not? for in such a case, the gold, the silver, and apparel which
we have more then we need, ought to be bestowed upon them. An answer to
covetous me^ that object necessity to come.
Yea mary will the covetous man say, although at this present I can spare a
coat; yet I am uncertain whether I shall have need of it hereafter. Why do thou
not say also (my friend) that if thou do not give, thou art sure to be
punished: and that (according to the ancient proverb) thou should not leauea
thing certain for vncerte^. Moreover, thou do not consider that thy life as
well as other men's is so uncertain, that thou know not whether thou shall
live until to morrow: If thou should give it unto an earthly King, would
thou respect whether he were indebted to thee or not? what do thou then in
conclusion think of thy God? has not he power to restore it? or do thou
think him unthankful, or that he does forget thee, or that he is unwilling
to recompense thee? let us be careful for the time present and apply our
selves unto it: as the times are divided so ought also our cares and
cogitations to be severed. And it is to be accounted great rashness, to take
counsel of a thing that is not, neither yet know whether it shall be. This
great and excessive care which we have of things to come, proceeds of
nothing else, but of a distrust we have in the providence of God: secondly, of a
vain hope we propound unto our selves, and also for that we consider not the
mutabilitie and sudden alteration in this life.

Some other will say, that he knows not how to suffice so many, and that his
ability is not sufficient to give to such a number: no verily if he fail in
the giving. But it is clean contrary, for by this means he augmenteth and
increases his store. David says, I have bin young and now am old, yet never
did I see the just forsaken, Psalm. 37.
or his seed begging their bread: but he is ever merciful, and lends, and
his seed enjoys the blessing. Wehaue a notable example of this in the widow
of Zarephath, who in the great and exceeding dearth that was in Israel, having
but a handful of meal in a barrel and a little oil in a cruse, yet for all
that gave unto the Prophet of that little which she had: 1. kin. 17.16.
which was an occasion that so long as the famine endured, her provision never
diminished, though she daily made cakes there of for her self and her son.
The like has bin reported of Spiridion, of whom mention is made before, that
in a time of scarsitie, setting open his garners for all the poor which came
unto him, to take and carry away as much corn as might suffice for them and
their families: yet his heap decreased not, but was as great in the end as it
was in the beginning. God has permitted oftentimes, that such things should
fall out, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 11. 2. Cor. 8.13.
and that his providence should be sensibly perceived, thereby to show unto us
what he does inuisibly. Moreover S. Paul setting down a rule how we should
give our alms, requires not that other men should be eased and we grieved,
neither that we should fall into necessity to relieve them, but that we
should help one another, that is to say (as a little after he expounds) that
he which has much might have nothing over, and that he which had but a little
might not want. But if our liberality be so great that it draws out
whatsoever we have in our storehouses, and that in stead of all our goods, we
have nothing left but the promise of God, with a sure and certain hope to be
recompensed of him, we must not account our selves in beggarly estate.

It is reported that Alexander the great at his departure from Macedonie being
ready to take his voyage against the Persians, gave away all that ever he had
to his friends and servants: The confidence we have in God is sufficient to
choke a covetous desire.
which when Parmenio perceived, seeing he had left him self nothing, refused
the gift that Alexander offered him, saying, If I should take this, what have
you for your self: I have left my self Hope (says Alexander) which suffices
me. Now if this King was thought to have sufficient, having nothing but a bare
and uncertain hope, whose foundation and ground was in the valiant hearts and
loyal minds of his soldiers, shall we be afraid to fall into poverty having
our confidence in the immortal and omnipotent God, who never deceived, nor
ever forsook him that trusted in him? we must not then excuse our selves but
follow the commandment of Christ Jesus in giving unto him that asks, so that
we know him to be in necessity, though not, as some do, such things as neither
they norvve have need of. For some there are, which think themselves
charitable enough towords the poor members of Christ Jesus, if they make them
a dinner of their servants leauings. Which comes to pass, for that they
consider not the quality and condition of them, who offer themselves to be
relieved. If they did, it were likely they would be as careful and as
diligent as was Abraham and Lot to inuit them, to serve them, and to cheer
them with the best vvelcome, and most delicate dishes that might be.

But because it is not my purpose at this present to entreat of Alms deeds,
The conclusion of this book.
whereof hereafter God vvilling I mind to make a particular discourse, I will
pass it over, and return to our former matter and dravv toward an end. In a
word therefore we must not frame our selves like unto some man, who being
transported with some fond and foolish love, the more effectually that he is
dissuaded, the more earnestly he loves: but rather let us observe and keep in
memory, what has bin spoken against this cursed covetousness, to the end that
(as S. Paul writes) our hearts, our lives, and manners, may be clean purged,
and that we be content with the present estate, remembering what God has
promised to Joshua, and all those who trust in him: that is to say, that he
will never abandon or forsake them. Which word is sufficient to content us, if
we believe in him, and always to keep our minds in quietness in what
estate or condition soever we live. And thus much touching the first passion
that troubles and molesteth our minds.

THE SECOND book, touching the quietness and contentation of the mind. AG
AINST AMBITION. The Contents of the Book.
SOcrates on a time hearing Alcibiades make great brags of his worldly
possessions, desired him to walk with him into a gallery in the city of
Athens, wherein there was a Map containing the description of the whole earth.
Whither when they were come, Socrates requested him to find out Attica, which
when Alcibiades had done, Socrates desired him likewise to show him his lands
and possessions: whereto Alcibiades answered, that there was nomention of them:
why then (said Socrates) do thou vaunt of that, which makes so small a
show? We may say the like unto the Ambitious sort, and such as conceive a great
opinion of themselves, that they should show us where they were a hundredth
years ago, and where they shall be a hundred years hence: And to what end
these vanities serve them that make them so presumptuous? But because that in
this book following they shall find their process ready drawn, if they amend
not, it is not convenient that we should in this place make any long discourse
thereof. But let us consider the order of the author, and the principal parts
of his discourse. Having then in the beginning showed what ambition is, and the
diversity thereof, he forthwith discovers the particular effects of this
disease, which principally are in number seven, being accompanied with many
and notable examples gathered out of sundry histories: which being done, he
enters into the discourse of the knowledge of our selves, which is the first
remedy against Ambition, upon which occasion he entreats of the misery of
man since sin came into the world, which is the destruction of him without the
grace of God: In like manner of the mischiefs which spring of pride, and why
the good and virtuous men are so many ways humbled, while they line in this
world, where in the mean while they daily receive new gifts and presents:
contrariwise the proud are spoiled of such things as the sufferance of God has
permitted them to enjoy. For that in stead of giving glory to God, they rob him
of it, and with great ungratefulness and intolerable ostentation, attribute
it to themselves: not considering, that if they will be virtuous they must
never be overcome of ambition, but always be ready to acknowledge and confess
their own weakness: whereto the holy Ghost inviteth us, condemning all vain
glory, which good men have always detested and abhorred, knowing that pride
corrupts good works: which proceeds of nothing, but of want of knowledge
of our own selves, and of the grace of God. Which thing is verified by the
testimony of an excellent doctor, and a most notable instruction how to
glorify God.

This discourse being finished, he propounds a second reason, full of force
and efficacy: that is to say, the example of the Son of God, who being Lord
of men and angels, notwithstanding during his abode here upon earth, was a
perfect example of humility, and of the contempt of worldly glory. To this are
added sundry examples of the most notable and famous men that ever were. Then
ensues the third remedy, which consists in the consideration of the
manifold dangers which accompany prosperity: in which discourse true and
feyned humility are lively described. And last of all is declared how we shall
attain to the knowledge of our selves, and by consequent to true humility,
which is a mortal enemy to ambition. And this is by reading and diligent
meditation of the holy scripture, by comparing our estate with other cretures,
by a due examination of our selves, and of our actions: by a consideration of
that which we have not, in comparison of that we have, by comparing our
condition wherein we now are, with that wherein our father Adamliued before his
fall: regarding who they are that commend us or dispraise us: And in
conclusion, a lively apprehension of the judicial seat of God, to the end that
by the example of the imperfections heretofore, we may learn to seek the
quiet of the mind in the humility of the heart, remembering what the most
excellent devines have written, how that nothing is so highly exalted as true
humility, and that as the tree which we desire should increase and grow in
height, must take deep rooting in the earth, so he which has not his mind
first of all surely rooted in true humility, the higher he lifts up him
self, the nearer he approaches to his own destruction.

THE SECOND BOOK. Against Ambition.
NExt unto this avaricious and covetous desire, follows Ambition, which is an
other unquietness of the mind: and this is nothing but a desire we have to make
a show and to be exalted above other men. This desire is not in all alike,
Ambition greater in some them in other some.
but is in greater measure in one then in another, according to the diversity
of their humors and affections. For those who have excellent wits and hautie
courages, ready to enterprise and take in hand great matters, are most subject
to this passion. Such a one was Themistocles, who said, that the monuments,
that is to say, Plutarch in his lives.
the glory and great fame of Miltiades would not suffer him to take his rest,
by reason of the exceeding desire he had to imitate him in virtue, that so he
might also attain unto the like honor. Such an other was Alexander, who never
reioiced at the victories and conquests of his father, fearing there would be
nothing left for him wherein to show his valor, and to win renown, whereof
he was most desirous. The like is reported of Julius Caesar, who being
treasurer for the Romans in Spain, seeing on a time the image of Alexander in
the Temple of Hercules sighed, and being greatly discontented with himself,
blamed his slothful and cowardly life, for that he had done nothing worthy
of memory at thirty years old, at which years Alexander had conquered the
greatest part of the world. These three were the most ambitious creatures that
we read of, The first mischief in ambition is, that it can neither endure an
equal or a saperiour.
which have evidently showed both in word and deed their hautie stomach: for
they never could abide either superior or equal. Themistocles could not
endure to live with Aristides, nor Caesar with Pompey: and Alexander refused to
marry with the daughter of Darius, and to be a partner in the Oriental
Empire, saying, that there might not be two Suns in the world, wherein we
see that the most generous and noble personages, and such as have excellent
wits, are most addicted and inclined to this desire. The like appears in
the wood, which the more fine and excellent it is, the more it is subject to
the worm and to corruption. By reason whereof, this is the special vice (as
says Saint Augustine) which the most notable men ought carefully to take heed
of.

Notwithstanding, It hunteth after false honor, and is careless of true
glory.
it is not my purpose to reproove or condemn the desire which all men ought to
have to live, while they are here, in good credit and reputation, which is as
requisite toward our neighbor for his instruction, as faith is toward God
for to serve and honor him: but only the disordinate affection which we have
to be masters, and to have the highest roumes in assemblies, taking a pleasure,
as we pass in the streets, to be pointed at with the finger, that some man
may say, This is he. And we care not oftentimes, whether we be accounted offor
virtue or for vice, among wise men or fools, for good works or for bad. For
the immoderate desire of glory is always naught, and when as to satisfy this
affection we take naughty matters in hand, then is it worst of all. I know it
is a difficulte thing to beat this into those men's heads, who are persuaded
they ought to hold nothing so dear as honor. Of true honor.
If they take honor (as I have said) for a good and laudable testimony,
which we ought to purchase among men, and to take heed we fall not into
obloquie and reproach, nor into the snares of the Devil (as Saint Paul says)
speaking of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.7.
I will easily condiscende unto them. For whosoever has this regard, is not
moved or led by ambition, but of a religious fear that all true Christians
ought to have to offend their neighbors, not only by evil example, but
also by any suspicion or appearaunce of evil. I call it a holve and religious
fear, and if I had a more honorable title, I would use it. And if it were
possible to plant and establish this in our hearts, we should see in a
short time an end of all scandales among men, and that it would be of more
force to refourme the corruption and disorder of this miserable life, then ever
was any law, power, or punishment, or whatsoever has been invented since the
beginning of the world hitherto. Wherefore we cannot sufficiently praise it,
nor use too great commendations of it. Of false honor.
But the honor which they speak of and which is usually understood of them,
rather it is vaineglorie purchased by means partly unlawful, and partly
ridiculous: or else it is a temporal honor, which is attributed unto such
things as have always been, and yet are, through a false opinion accounted of
and admired among men, or some show of knowledge and goodness, which they
rather pretend outwardly and in show, then in deed and verity.

This is that which I purpose to speak against, He opposes himself against
God, derogating from his honor, and attributing it to himself.
in this discourse following. The first reason is this: there is nothing in the
world that more displeases God, or that more provokes him to anger, then
this ambition. For as he is the author of all the good gifts and graces in us,
or whatsoever else we have worthy commendation, so will he also have us give
him all the praise, without defrauding him of any iotte thereof* otherwise, he
is forthwith stirred up with the anger of jealousy, when he sees the love
which is due unto him, transported to another. We may plainly perceive, how
greatly God is displeased with this ambitious desire, if we consider how
grievously he has punished proud and arrogant persons. Examples. Adam.
This was the cause that Adam (whom he had created in singular perfection, and
had beawtified and enabled with so many excellent graces, with intention
farther to enrich him, if he had persevered) fell, and with him all his
posterity, into so great mischiefs, and was, Genesis 5.
as it were, spoiled of all those excellent gifts and graces, both of body and
mind, where with he was so abundantly enriched? was it not this cursed
ambition, which made him discontented with his estate, and to be lord, as it
were, of all creatures, and therefore being tickled with a desire to be equal
with God, was as well for his audacious enterprise, as also for his villainous
ingratitude thrown down into such base estate, and likewise his children,
that they must needs now confess them selves to be but men. Why did Cain his
eldest son, Cain. Genesis 4.
in whom both he, and Eve had conceived great hope, that he was the promised
seed that should bruise the serpents head, bear so great a hatred and
malice against his brother, that to satisfy his mind, he feared not to kill
him, without regard of the judgment of God, or consanguinitie, nor respecting
the offense of his parents, nor the dishonor he should incur of all
posterity by being a parricide, neither yet of the punishment which he might
evidently perceive to be prepared for him, having his fathers example before
his eyes, who a little before had bin driven out of the garden of Paradise, and
estanged from the presence of God, and so consequently from all true
happiness, for disobeying the commandment of his God, and committing a fault
which seemed much less, then that he intended? why also was he no more
sorrowful when God she wed him his fault? why also did he so little esteem to
be driven from the presence of his father, and to forgo the sight and loving
countenance of the Lord, was it not for that he had a proud and superbious
mind, by reason of his eldershippe, and therefore could not endure that his
brother should any ways be preferred before him? Wherefore God cursed him, and
cast him out of his presence, more detesting this his pride then his murder,
The universal flood.
though it were a most infamous, and execrable fact. The principal cause of
that great deluge, and ouerflowing of the whole world, and that caused God even
against his nature to forget his mercy, and to take away every living creature
from off the face of the earth, Genesis 6.2, 4.
was it not the pride and arrogancy of the Tyrants, which proudly oppressed
the poor, taking away by violence their goods, their daughters, and whatsoever
else they liked in their houses? Agar.
The occasion likewise why Agar with her son, was twice drawn out of
Abraham's house, God liking and approouing the rigor that Sara showed her, Genesis
16.4, 5.
was it not pride, for that not considering her self and her servile estate,
and the favor which had been showed her, in that she was made free and even
married unto Abraham? she therefore with great ungratefulness seeing her
self so highly exalted, would needs compare and be check-mate with her
mistress. Esau. Genesis 27.41.
This was the cause also that Esau conceived so great a hatred against his
brother Jacob, that he conspired his death after his fathers decease: for he
could not endure that Jacob should be preferred before him, and that he, who as
well by Gods ordinance as by the will and testament of his father was the
elder, and therefore his superior, should rule over him. The Patriarchs.
The Patriarchs likewise being stirred up with this ambition, without regard
of their own credit or the honor of God, who had chosen them to be as it
were the foundation of his people, Genesis 37.4, 19.
and without any regard of their fathers grief by bereaving him of his
principal comfort, resolved with them selves to kill their brother Joseph who
came to visit them, and after long consultation sold him to the Ismaelites,
and their cruelty was so outrageous toward him, that they would not be moved
with all the pitiful cries and lamentations that he made in entreating them; and
all was, for that he had dreamed he should be greater then they, and that they
all should honor him. Aaron and Miriam. Corah. Dathan. Abiram. Nom. 12.1.
This was that which moved Aron and Miriam to grudge against Moses. And not
long after, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram following their example, gathered them
selves against Moses, dissuading the people from their obedience, for that they
could not abide that he should be in such authority over them: and therefore
they coueted to be equal with him, though in virtue, in zeal, in
painfulness, in judgment, Saul.
and in knowledge they were far behind him. Saul persecuted his son in
law David even to the death, being stirred up by an ambitious desire and
grief he conceived, for that after the death of Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.
and the overthrowe of the Philistmes, the daughters of Israel in their songs
had given him the greatest praise, and for that God had ordained him to
succeed him in his kingdom.

There is neither law nor duty that this cursed affection makes us not to
forget. Behold Absalom, Absalom.
who was so violently carried therewith, 2. Sam. 15.16.17.18. Chapters.
that he caused the people to mutine and rebel against his father, after that
he had (without all shame) defiled his bed, and that in the face of all the
world, pursuing his father as if he had been his enemy, and fighting with his
servants to the uttermost, showing all the signs and examples of a man without
God, without law and all humanity. This makes men oftentimes also to band
against God, Solomon. 1. King. 11.40.
as did Solomon, who for that he understood that Jeroboam after his decease
should reign overten tribes, sought all the means he could to put him to
death, and by all his endeavor to impeach and hinder the counsel of the
Almighty. Rabsaces and Nebuchadnezzar proceeded further, for both of them
being lifted up, and as it were swollen with their prosperity and former
victories, 2. King. 18.20. Dan. 3.15.
presumed to open their mouths, and to blaspheme against the God of heaven,
saying that he was not able to resist them, nor to deliver his servants out of
their hands.

This has been the cause of these great wars, Examples out of profane
histories both Greek and Latin.
which have (as it were by continual succession) continued even from the
beginning of the world, and that caused Alexander to put all Asia to fire and
sword, and Cyrus to spoil Ionia; the Lacedaemonians to be in continual brawles
with the Athenians, or else with the Thebans; the Athenians with the Megarians,
or the Corinthians; the Carthaginians against the Romans, and the Romans
against all nations; and when they had overcome others, that some among them
drew out their swords against their own native country, and thrust them as
it were into the heart of their own cities, or else causing such cruel
proscriptions, that the bare narration of them which yet remains in
histories, does even astonish the readers. For there we shall find that the
children sold the lives of their fathers, the women the lives of their
husbands; brethren, the lives one of another, and the slave betrayed his lord
and master: and in a word, there was no law, truth, nor humanity, which was
not violated by this ambitious desire to rule and reign over others. This
being crept into the Church, has bred there also no less confusion, for who
is there that can remember the mischiefs that have ensued thereof, without
great and exceeding sorrow and grief? Examplesout of ecclesiastical histories.
The Archberetikes.
Has not the ambition of Arrius, Donatus, and Novatus caused them to set
abroach their heresies, which not long after through the negligence of the
Pastors and Princes, have opened the gate for the Alcoran, and the blasphemies
of Mahumet, The Archheretikes.
which, alas, have prevailed over the two princip all parts of the world, and
at this present possess Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, and Constantinople,
which heretofore have been the most beautiful houses belonging to the heritage
of Christ Jesus, who at this time is exiled from those places, where sometime
he had his Imperial seat? I pass over the turmoyles and pains which
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and other good Pastors have suffered through
the ambition of their Collegiats: as also the invectives, reproaches, injuries,
calumniations, and slanderous libels presented to princes to defame one
another: and likewise the great contention and strife, which has been between
the Bishop of Rome, and of Constantinople, touching their preheminences, the
secret suits and privy practices in their elections, the murders committed of
either part, the schisms and divisions of all Christendom; all which have
happened (as appears in the histories) by reason of the ambition of such as
should have been the principal and chief servants of Christ Jesus, and of his
Chruch. And the greatest mischief is, that this which has bin the cause of
such disorder still hinders a reformation, though even they themselves who are
the causes hereof, can not but confess that there is need thereof. But
ambition so blinds them and keeps them back, that they can not abide that
any man should speak a word thereof. This affection therefore being so
dangerous, and the cause of so many mischiefs, ought not every one carefully to
take heed thereof, and by all possible means to beware least his heart be
infected therewith?

The consideration of the manifold mischiefs befalling such as have been
ambitious, ought greatly to moove us. That men do not consider what has
happened to proud persons. Examples Satan. Adam. Gene. 5.17. Miriam. Nom. 11.10
For he that will begin with Satan, and run through out all the histories,
shall sind that God never suffered ambition unpunished, but has always debased
all such as have sought to exalt themselves. Immediately after the Devil began
to be ambitious, and to make himself equal with God, did he not fall down from
heaven with a most fearful noise, as if it had bin lightning and thu^der? Into
what misery has Adam thrown himself and his posterity, for that he would
exalt himself too hie? Was not Miriam the sister of Moses storke^ with
leprosy, for that she had proudly lift up her self against her brother? Were
not Corah, Dathan, Corah. Dathan. Abiram. Nom. 16.33. Goliath. 1. S. 17.49.
David. 2. Sam. 24.
and Abira^ with all their families, through their pride and arrogance, while
they would be equal with Moses, swallowed up of the earth alive, and that in
the sight of all the people? what was the end of that vaunting and proud
Goliath? Was not David likewise, who had overthrowen him by the only
confidence which he had in the Lord, which was the chiefest armout he used
against him, very severely punished, when as through a foolish pride against
the commandment of God, and the counsel of Ioab, seeking to divert him from
that his purpose, he made a general muster of the people of his land, thereby
to understand the greatness of his forces, was not he, I say, presently
punished with a sudden pestilence, which in the space of one day destroyed
seventie thousand men? Roboam. 1. King. 12.14, 16.
Roboam (who by gentle and mild words might have satisfied and contented his
subjects) through his audacious and braving speeches lost the better half of
his kingdom. Ozias. 2. Chron. 26.19.
Ozias king of Judah not content with his dignity, incensed with an ambitious
desire, would needs meddle with the Priests office, but as he had the
incense in his hand to burn it, the Lord sinote him with leprosy, and so he
continued to his death.

Josias, Josias. 2. Chon. 35.20.
otherwise a virtuous prince, and zealous of the Law and service of God, who
by a most commendable and glorious enterprise, had even in the beginning of his
reign restored true religion, (almost wholly corrupted and polluted)
enterprised notwithstanding very rashly the wars with Pharao Necho King of
Egypt, Sennacherib. Esaias 36.37.
where he was slain. And was not Sennacherib overthrowen by the Angel of the
Lord, with a hundred fourscore and five thousand men the night following, that
he had vomited out by the mouth of Rabsaches, his horrible blasphemies against
God, and being as it were blinded with exceeding pride, had lift up him self
againist the Almighty, defying him to his face? Aman. Ester. 7.10.
Was not that proud Aman hanged on the gallows which he had made for
Mardoche, because he would not worship him, Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 4.27.
as others had done? Nebuchadnezzar after great prosperity, and sundry
victories obtained against his enemies, seeing him self in peace, and that he
was feared of his neighbors, having his palace sumptuously adorned with the
spoils of other nations against whom he had warred, forgetting him self to
be a man, provoked God to punish his pride, taking away his understanding and
authority, and making him like to one of the beasts of the field, until by
his humility he had acknowledged his fault. Herod. Acts. 12.23.
Was not Herod smitten by an Angel, and eaten with worms, for that he had not
given the glory to God, but boasting of his eloquence before the Tyrians and
Sidonians, in accepting the honor which clawbacks and flatterers had given him
in their acclamations as unto a god? S. Peter. Matt. 26.34.
S. Peter trusting in his own strength, and preferring him self before all his
companions before all his companions, through a conceit he had of his own
constancy, did he not fall into danger of his life, and withal, of the grace
of God, and so by consequent, of the hope of all true felicity? when as Christ
Jesus foretelling the misery prepared for Capernaum, said, Thou Capernaum,
which have been lifted up to heaven, shall be thrown down to hell, did he not
show thereby, that the principal cause of the overthrow thereof, was her
pride, which engendered infidelity and the contempt of his word? when also
shall we expect the ruin and overthrow of Antichrist and of Babylon, if not
then, when they are come to the height of their pride, and the top of their
impiety? we may now plainly see by these sacred histories, what has been
the end of these proud persons. Which thing may also be observed in the
government of the mightiest common wealths, Examples of profane writers.
in the lives of Kings and Emperors, which have been at large declared in the
writings of the historiographers. But for that we should enter into too large a
field, and might seem over-tedious in reciting all the examples which they
have set down, we will pass over the greatest number, and only touch such as
are most notable.

The pride of Xerxes was such, Xerxes. Herodit.
that he threatened the mountains, the sea, and the gods them selves when he
marched with his army to subdue Greece, thinking that even the Elements ought
to give way, and to make him room: but God (who resisteh the proud, and has
showed him self evermore to be their enemy) did so bruise and crush his
puissance, that the most memorable thing of that his enterprise, was his
overthrow, his flight, and dishonor. Alexander. Plutarch in his lives.
As long as Alexander the great continued in humility, he was always
fortunate, never finding his equal in courage, in valor, in counsel, in
diligence, in liberality, nor in any other military virtue: but after that he
was partly abused by flatterers, and partly by his continual prosperity,
then be ganne he to be unclothed of his former virtues, and to put on the
Persian robe, and withal the pride and arrogancy of the country, imagining
that he was descended of the race of the gods, and therefore would needs be
worshipped; wherefore God turned away his favor from him, and so he died not
long after in the flower of his age, when as he should have enjoyed the fruit
of his labors, and left his empire, which yet was very doubtful, Caesar.
Plutarch in his lives.
to his children. There was nothing that so hastened Cesars death, nor that
more incensed the conspiracies against him, then his ambition: but after that
he so far exceeded, that he suffered a crown and the name of king to be
given him, and for that he had deposed the tribunes for this only cause that
they were against it, and that he sat in a chair of gold among the senators,
then began they to wait opportunity to kill him: which peradventure they had
not done, if using a popular government, seasoned as it were with mild and
modest behavior, he had acquainted them by little and little to endure
servitude, and to forget the name of liberty. What may we likewise think of
Pompey his enemy and of the lamentable change of his estate, Pompey. Plutarch
in his life.
was not his pride, and contempt of his enemy the principal causes thereof?
for he was not ashamed to say to some of his friends who reproved him for
his carelessness, in the preparation of the wars, that with the stamp of his
foot if need were, he could fill all Italy with armed men. Such among the
Emperors as contemning their estate, and thinking scorn to be taken for
mortal men, would needs be accounted gods, Caligula and others.
and have their subjects honor them with Images, voues, temples, and altars,
as Caligula, Domitian, and Heliogabalus, have always had most miserable ends.

The greatest losses and overthrowes which have happened to our own cuntry,
The French nation.
were especially caused by our great presumption: and nothing has aduantaged
our enemies so much as the contempt we have had of them: and contrariwise the
great opinion we have had in our own strength, though oftentimes it has
deceived us. Witness hereof, the battle of Coutray against the Flemings, the
battle of Poicters against the English, that of Inberob against the
Portugalls, and that of Nicopolis against the Turks. For there is no sin
that God does less dissemble then this pride and arroga^tnes, nor that he
less endures or more speedily punishes: which is most notably declared in
that memorable history that Paulus Emilius reports in the Annals of France,
of a certain gentleman of Florence named Gyrardes, who had lived in great
prosperity a long season. It happened on a time, that being drunken, and as
it were glutted with his prosperous estate, in a banquet he made to his
friends, asked them if they thought there was so happy a man in all Italy as
him self, and whether he wanted any thing that might make him more fortunate:
whereto one of the company wisely answered, that the principal thing was yet
wanting, that is to say, Modesty and Humility to keep him in the favor of
God, without the which there is no true happiness; and that the wrath and
judgment of God could not be far from him and his house, considering his
presumptuous and proud mind: which thing this wretched man not long after by
woeful experience prooved to be true. For such as by his means had bin banished
the city, secretly returning in a night, took him, his wife, and children,
put them in prison, and there most cruelly sterved them to death in the sight
of all the people, being wonderfully astonished and moved with compassion at so
strange an alteration.

These examples, He thinks not of his own weakness, nor of the power of God.
and a thousand such like to be found in histories, do sufficiently prove the
saying of Chilon the Lacedemouian, who being demanded what God did in heaven,
answered, that he debased the proud, and exalted the lowly. The Virgin Mary in
her song applying this unto men; God (says she) has showed the strength of
his arm, and has exalted the humble, and overthrowen the proud in the
imagination of their own hearts. Esope has declared this thing very well, and
that there is nothing better for man then Modesty, in his fable of the
Torteise, who being not contented to creep on the ground, would needs fly in
the air with the birds, and therefore desired the Egle to carry her up on hie,
which at first was refused, showing the danger which was like to ensue in
flying without wings: notwithstanding overtaken with importunity, took her up
in her feet, and carrying her alofta while, at the length the Torteise, either
for that, seeing her self so hie, she thought no more on the ground below, or
for that the Eagle was weaty, and would no longer hold her, fell down and brake
al to pieces: teaching men by her death, that it is better for the^ to co^taine
themselves within the bounds of their vocation, and to be contented with a mean
estate, having the grace and favor of God, the^ in offending him by their
immeasurable pride, to clime up to heaven, (as those who builded the tower of
Babel) seeking to purchase themselves greater advanceme^t. The Poets, who
oftentimes in their fictio^s wind up and cover, as with a cloud, the truth of
things; in that fable of Icarus, who desiring to fly with waxe^ wings, fell
into the sea: and that of Phaeton, who for that he coveted to rule the horses
and chariot of the Sun, was stricken with thunder, purposed no other thing,
but to show that the end of all ambition is evermore miserable. For God (as I
have said) can in no wise abide a proud and arrogant person.

The day of the Lord of hosts (says Esaias) is upon all the proud and haughty,
He trembles not at the threatenings of god against the proud. Esaias 2.12.
and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made low, and upon all the
cedars of Lebanon, that are high and exalted, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan,
and upon all the hie mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, and
upon every hie tower, and upon every strong wall. This is a manner of speech by
the which he gives us to understand, that all those, who glory in their
greatness, their nobleness, their strength, and their riches, shall at length
be thrown down with the wrath of God, which shall fall upon them as a
thunderclappe. God speaking to the Idumeans, and foretelling them by his
Prophet Abdias, the plagues he had provided to punish and abate their pride,
says, I will make thee contemptible to all nations: the pride of thy heart
has deceived thee, now that thou art in the strong holds which thou have
builded in the tops of the mountains, thou think thy self inexpugnable,
and that no man can come at thee, and say, Who can pull me from hence? If
thou should fly as high in the air as the Eagle, and should make thy
nest among the stars, I will pull thee from thence, says the Lord. David in
the 37. Psalm says, I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading him self
like a green bay tree, yet he passed away, and lo, he was gone, and I sought
him, but he could not be found.

There are many other threatenings of God in the Scripture against the proud,
The proud man never remembers his own estate.
but even as this cursed ambition does so blind us, that we can not perceive
the mischiefs that proceed thereof, nor the dangers wherein it plungeth us, so
also does it stop our ears against all the words and reproofs which God
uses, and that which is more, it bereaveth us of all knowledge and feeling of
our own selves. For what man is there that has well considered his own estate,
that ever gloried and bragged thereof? It is to be thought that if these hauty
and proud minded persons, which take so great pleasure and contentme^t in them
selves, would but a little consider their own estate, and the imperfections and
vices of our natures, as the ignorance, the lust, the fear, the distrust, the
sorrow and coffeehouse of our minds: and on the otherside, the poverty,
the diseases, the weakness, the age and death which we are subject to, by
reason of sin; Is it likely they would not remember, that this proceeded from
the slaverie of sin, of the devil, of the anger and displeasure of God, of
the loss of his Image whereunto we were created, of the contradiction of the
flesh to his spirit: and in a word, of that wonderful disorder, which is in
our hearts and understandings?

The ancient Philosophers exhorted men always to remember their ends, thinking
that the remembrance thereof, A discourse of the knowledge of our self, and of
true humility
was sufficient to humble them, and to make them careful to do well: and in
deed the proudest, with the consideration thereof are astonished. Alexander
the great, having opened Cyrus tomb, and finding his bones mouldie and half
consumed, considering the fragilitie and inconstancy of all humane things,
wept bitterly; so did Xerxes, beholding his army from the top of an hill, for
that within 100. years after, both he and they should be forgotten. Philip of
Macedonie being fallen into a sandepit, and considering after he was out, the
measure of his body which was there imprinted, detested the ambition and desire
of men, who coveted so much, themselves in length and breadth containing so
little.

Now if the bare consideration of our end, is of such great force to abate
our pride, how availeable is it to consider, what God has done to our first
parents, as also to remember what we are, and from whence we come? Genesis 5.19.
Thou art dust (says God) out of the earth thou wast taken, and to the earth
thou shall return. So our beginning, our being, and our end is al earthly. Is
not this a great matter to glory in, and to brag of, that we are made of the
grossest element, and of the same matter and substance, whereof all other
beasts are formed? Of the misery of man since his fall.


It may be that some, (the better to defend man's excellency, and to prove
that he may justly prefer him self before all other creatures of the
world) will say: that though our bodies be earthly, yet our souls are
heavenly, and do in some sort participate of the glory of God. This may be
easily granted, if we consider the estate wherein man first was created: and
that if he had continued in the integrity and perfection, wherewith God had
ennobled and honored him in the beginning, he might then justly have
accounted himself the most excellent, and as it were, the Prince of all other
creatures. But being so imperfect as we are, I know not how we can without
blushing, acknowledge our Creator. Which being granted, we may not boast,
that in respect of our nature, we are any ways more excellent then the brute
beasts, if without affection we will rightly wey the truth, and that, as
reason and experience teaches us.

Nay we must needs confess, The beasts are more excellent then man, as he
is left in his corruption.
that they surpass us in many things: as the Dove in simplicity, the emmate
in industry, the storke in humanity, the dog in love and fidelity, the ox
and the ass in memory, the lamb in meekness, the Lion in magnanimity, the
cock in vigilancie, the serpent in subtlety, and all in general, in
contentment and sobriety. And as the beasts are more excellent then man in
natural goodness and virtue, Man exceeds the beasts in malice and
corruption.
so does he exceed them in malice and corruption. For he is more cruel
and more treacherous, then the woolfe, more crafty then the fox, prouder then
the peacocke, more voluptuous and unthankful then the swine, and more
dangerous then the aspe. Moreover, those evils (I use this word, for fault of
a better) that are in diverse beasts, and that naturally are inherent in them,
without any deliberation or election, are wholly and fully complete in one
man, who endeavors by all means possible, to possess them in their highest
degree. And yet we brag and boast of our understanding, which is altogether
blindness, and of our liberty or rather of our licentiousness, and want of
freewill: of our eyes so loftely placed in our heads, to discern afar off,
and greedily to look after the vanities of this world: of our tongues, which
serve us to lie, to slander, and blaspheme: of our hands, which are
instruments to fight, and to filch: of our feet, which are swift to do evil,
and in a word, of all the parts of our bodies, which (as Saint Paul says)
seem to be the wages of iniquity, and to work it with greediness.

God forbid, notwithstanding that this which I have said, God is not the author
of this evil, but the devil and man.
should any ways sound to the dishonor of the Creator, who (as Aristotle most
notably declares, and likewise Galen) has with excellent skill, and singular
cunning, framed and fitted every part of this our building. But the more
excellent and sumptuous this building is, the more lamentable are the ruins,
and we the more blameable, who have so miserably ruinated them, using them
for that vile service of sin and concupiscence, which have been given us for
the honor of God, and exercise of virtue. The jews seeing the ruins of their
Temple, cursed the Gentiles, who had so profaned that holy place; the name of
Erostratus likewise was most odious to the Grecians, for that he had set
Dianaes temple in Ephesus on fire, through an execrable desire he had to
eternize his name. How greatly then ought we to be displeased with our
selves, which have polluted the Sanctuary of our God, and spoiled it of all
those precious vessels which were in it, to dedicate them to the service of the
devil, the world, and of sin.

If then, that the Image of God appeared in us by the light of our minds, and
by the sincerity of our affections, we should have some occasion to glory in
him: now that thorough our fault it is defaced, or at the least obscured, so
that we may hardly find out the traces thereof, have we not as great, yea
greater cause, to humble our selves; seeing that in the place thereof, the
image of the devil succeeds, who being a murderer, and the father of lies,
has nothing in this world more like him self then man, who naturally is
cruel, proud, and a liar?

And to speak truly, there is nothing but the grace of God, Man is damned
without the special favor of God.
that makes us differ from him. For of our selves (as says Saint Augustine)
we are very devils: and if so be that after Adam had transgressed the
commandment of GOD, God had left him without promise. If CHRIST JESUS his
Son, to raise him up again, would not have taken his nature upon him, the
poor man with all his posterity should have been without all hope, like unto
the Devils. Seeing then, that all the felicitic and excellency that we have
above the devils, is comprised in hope, and hope is founded in the promises,
and the mere favor of God; if this were taken from us, what should we have to
glory of, more then they? contrariwise they should have great advantage over
us; for they should be our lords, and should surmount us in many things, as in
quicknes of spirit, in knowledge of arts, in strength, in agilitie, and that
they are of an immortal and impassible nature.

I demand then, if man, being thus destitute of the gifts of God, has any
thing whereof he may boast: and if for this his vaineglorie, he be not worthy
great hatred, and that that angels, and other creatures should agree to
reproove him of his arrogancy? what should we say, if a beggar, which has not
a ragge to cover him, will notwithstanding brag that he is the greatest man,
and the richest of all the country, and in all assemblies wheresoever, is not
ashamed to take the hiest place? would not every man judge such a fellow
worthy to be whipped? likewise if there were a thief, who being convicted of
many great crimes, notwithstanding would be so shameless, and so stately, that
he would not humble himself before his judge, nor any other man, does not he
deserve without any pity, to be punished with all severitie? If man in like
manner, dissembling his beggarly estate, his vice and ignorance, will presume
that he is wise, rich, and virtuous, does he not by this means make himself
unworthy of Gods mercy, whereof he should participate, if by an humble
confession of his misery, he would seek for it. We have a most memorable
example of this, Luke 18.10.
in the Pharesie and the Publican: the one of them being more just and more
pleasing in the sight of God with confessing his sin, then the other boasting
of his righteousness. In his confessions and sermons.
For man (as says S. Augustine) by humility makes God to forget his sin,
and causes him by his presumption, to forget all his virtues and good deeds.
Though to speak properly where there is no humility, there is no faith, and
where there is no faith, there is no good works.

Behold the profit we have of our pride: which is, that first of all we kindle
the anger of God against us: it takes away from us the hope of forgivenes,
which we might purchase through his mercy. Secondly, it bereaveth us of faith,
with all the benefits of Christ Jesus. For the spirit of God which inspireth
our hearts, and which makes us to taste the sweetness of his Gospel, is not
given but to the humble: these are those whom God fills with good things, as
says the Virgin Marie, in her song. Luke 1.53.
Christ Jesus attributed the infidelity of the Jews to nothing so much, as to
their presumption. John 5.44.
How can you believe in me (says he) which receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor which comes of God alone? this is also the cause that
(correcting the ambition of his Disciples) he set before them a little infant
and said unto them, Math. 18.3.
that if in modesty and simplicity of heart, they would not resemble that
little infant, they should not enter into the kingdom of God. For God (the
better to declare the greatness of his wisdom) does all his works against the
opinion and judgment of men. By foolishness he confounds the counsel, and
the wisdom of the world: by weakness he breaks their force: by contempt he
obscureth their glory: by death he raises up, and turns cursing into
blessing: so also by the cross and by humility, he has lifted up Christ
Jesus into his glory, and after him by the same means exalts all his
members. The devil contrariwise, by honors, pleasures, riches, and idleness,
does throw down headelong all such as are his.

But what is the reason, that after that he has adopted us, God does leave his
children a space here upon the earth in their infirmities, to humble them and
to make them more fit for the participation of his grace in heaven.
and regenerated us for his children, he leaves us still in the world until
we die, seeing that we now are burgesses of heaven, and as it were, his
domestical servants: and therefore our minds, our hearts, and all our
cogitations and affections, should be heavenly? why will he that our bodies
should be more conversant here, then our hearts? is it not because he would
have us always contemplate, and remember the earth from whence we were taken,
that by this means we may be humbled, and he glorified, who has taken us out
of the mire, and lifted us up to the heavens, where by hope he has placed us
in honor with his Son, his angels, and the Patriarchs? Why also is it his
pleasure that we should live here always under a hard and severe discipline,
and that we should be continually exercised by poverty, diseases, wars,
imprisonments and banishments, and such like afflictions, which give us no more
liberty then severe masters do their scholars? Is this the abundance of rest
and quietness which was promised, and that we shall find in his kingdom? we
may easily see, that all this is done by the wise counsel of our God, who by
this means keeps us in humility, and brideleth us, that by the enjoying of
our goods (if peradventure he gives us any before we know how to rule them)
we should not give our selves to all filthiness. For the same purpose he
wills, that, after we be sanctified and received into his Church, we are not
wholly exempted from sin, but has left our flesh with the lusts thereof,
which cease not to trouble and molest our minds, to this end, that we
continually feeling our infirmities and imperfections, should have always
somewhat to humble us, and to abate the natural pride of our hearts. We see
then that God by all means procures our health, and provideth that we should
not by a vain confidence, and presumption of our virtues, hinder his graces
which are not given but to the final, and to such as are lowly minded.

We see (says S. Augustine) that usually the valleys are more fertile then the
hills, The graces of God fall upon the humble.
for that the fatnes of the earth is more easily carried thither by raines and
showers: so must it be with us, if we will be filled with the graces and
benedictions of our God, we must be low and plain as the valleys. And
further, that having received them, we be not more ungrateful, then is the
good earth, which multiplieth the seed which it has received, and does truly
repay the fruits thereof unto the master. If we have received one tallent, let
us so demean our selves, that we make two thereof, and that two may increase
to four, and then let us give all the glory to God, that is to say; first of
the good, then of the will and industry, whereby we have increased it.
Thirdly, for the prosperity and success, which he has given it: and lastly,
of the reward and crown which we look for. For otherwise, we may assure our
selves, he will withdraw his grace, and the prosperity which he has given
us, if we be unthankful, or careless to acknowledge him, and to give him the
glory of whatsoever is good and commendable in our selves.

Saint Augustine says, that God, Our pride makes God to take away those
graces he has given us and to bestow them upon others.
by reason of the great lone he bears us, is content as it were to traffic
with us, and to mingle his goods with our evils. But if we will afterward
challenge them, and in stead of thanks for the use of them, which he has most
liberally given us, defraud him of the property and take it to our selves as
those men did, to whom he had let out his vineyard, then will he part with us,
and take from us that which is his, the better to show us what is ours. The
slave that has stolen from his Lord and master, and will acknowledge no duty,
no rent, nor any service wherein he is bound unto him, does he not deserve to
lose all such lands as he holds of his masters? In like manner if God who
requires nothing of us but a confession and an acknowledgement of the good he
has done for us, seeing us to refuse this, does he not deal justly with us,
if he shut up his liberality from us. Though that men be naturally inclined to
vice, and therefore that which is naught, as being the likeliest and most
agreeable to their natures, is more pleasing in their sight then is the good:
yet every one abhors ingratitude, condemning it, and accounting it clean
lost, whatsoever is done to an vnthanke full person. What reckening then shall
we think that God makes of it, who being perfect and absolutely good
detesteth all kind of evil whatsoever, holding nothing so dear as his
glory, to the which all ungrateful and ambitious men are utter enemies? for
the more they exalt and lift up themselves, the more do they depresse and
tread under foot the glory of God.

If a great lord should receive some poor man into his house, giving him
nothing, A fit similitude declaring why God cannot abide the proud.
but wherewithal he might entertain himself in mean estate, and should
perceive that within two or three years after, he purchased lands, put money
to usury, kept a great port, and to be at other excessive charges, should he
not have just occasion to think he were a thief, seeing that, at is already
said, he took him into seruide having nothing? In like manet considering how
poor we are by nature, and that we came into the house of our god all naked,
laden (as it were) and covered with filth and beggerie: if being there, we
will vaunt our selves, must it not be of that glory which we have robbed God
of? good God, what riches have we gotten whereof we may brag? was not our
father (as says the Prophet) an Amorrhit, and our mother an Hethite? the
inheritance they have left us, was it not sin, male diction, misery, and
death? and what friends have they also gotten us, but our flesh with her lusts,
and the world with his pleasures? If God then would dispute with the ambitious,
and demand of him, why he does so much glory in him self: what answer would
he make, whereby it should appear he had not played the thief? if as ( S. Paul
says) all honor appertains to him, 1. Tim. 1.17
it must needs be, that so often as we glory and boast of our selves, we
necessarily infer one of these two things: either that we would make our
selves equal with him, or else rob and steal from him like thiefes, that
which may in no wise be alienated from his crown and dignity. For as
concerning his virtues, he may communicate them with others: he imparteth of
his wisdom to his Prophets, and ministers of his Church: of his might and
authority to Princes: of his justice, to Judges: and to all such as are
friendly and charitable, of his mercy and bounty. But this is with a
reservation of all the glory due unto such virtues, whereof the creature
whatsoever he be, may in no wise participate.

Let not the wise man (says he, The glory only appertains to God, and so
by consequet the proud are accursed. Ier. 9.22. Psalm. 3.109.
by his Prophet Jeremy) glory in his wisdom, nor the rich man in his goods,
nor the mighty man in his strength: but whosoever will glory, let it be of
the knowledge he has of me, and of my name. We must then if we will obey the
commandment of God, sing with the Prophet David: Lord, thou art my glory, and
my honor. For there is nothing in us, whereof we should make estimate, but
only this, that we are in the number of those, who call upon his name, and
such as by his mercy have hope and part of his kingdom. I account all glory
and honout (says S. Paul) to be dongue. Phil. 3.8.
And Solomon says: That I have diligently considered all things that men do
admire, and for the which they would be honored and esteemed in this world,
and have seen in the end they are but vanity, and that none but fools do
busy them selves about them.

This is a strange thing, that time, which is so wise, and which reveals all
things, nor experience cannot perceive this, and that our judgment is so
corrupted, that we search not for honor but in vain things, as in banquets,
buildings, in goodly moueables, apparel, horse and great trains, and such
like mockeries of fortune. If we would seek honor by virtue, our ambition
were more tolerable, but we have no reason to desire so much honor, and to
make so small account of things that deserve better.

And yet my meaning is not, that if we have any good thing in us, that we
should be proud of it. For we always ought to give the glory unto God, and to
yield him all the praise: as we see that vessels of gold and silver, receiving
the light of the beams of the sun, yield as it were part thereof back
again by reflection: so must we, if we think we have done any thing which is
good, confess (with Saint Paul) that it is not we, but the grace of God which
is in us. If a man graffe in his garden, or orchard, and atwo or three years
after his gardener bring him of the fruit, saying, this of the tree he graffed,
he rejoices therein: so God takes great pleasure, if we, having any good in
us, yield him the praise thereof. For this is no small honor unto him to have
so well husbanded us, that being fruitelesse and barren ground, and as it
were old stocks dead and rotten, now by his means we should bring forth
good fruit. And it is out of doubt, that in seeing us fructify and prosper,
he takes greater pleasure then does the husbandman, when his corn
prospers on the earth: especially if in acknowledging our fertility we
freely confess, that it proceeds not of our nature and industry. and what
can we do less? for it is as if a creditour, to whom we are indebted as
much as we have, should require nothing of us, but a bare acknowledgement of
the debt we owe him. should this grieve us? there is nothing that the people
of Israel were so reproved for, nor wherewith God was more grieved, then with
their ingratitude, and that they had forgotten, or else dissimuled the good
they had received of him? I have (says he in Esaias) enriched and exalted them,
and as soon as they saw themselves become great, Esa. 1.2.
they have forgotten and forsaken me. Contrariwise there was nothing more
commended in the virgin Marie then her humility, whereby she acknowledging
her self unworthy of those great graces that God had bestowed upon her, has
in a notable long testified unto all the world, that the only thing that
moved God to respect her humility, in choosing her to be the mother and
nource of his Son, was his grace and bounty.

Let us follow then his example, That we must eschew ingratitude and
ostentation vices common to all the ambitious sort, which are here set down by
four fit similitudes.
and not be like unto young coltes, which being become great, do as well kick
and strike their dames, who have brought them forth and nourished them, as
other horses. This was in former time objected to Aristotle by reason of his
ingratitude toward his master Plato, detracting from him whatsoever he might
both in his books and readings, not acknowledging that the most excellent part
of his knowledge was taken from him. But this is much more beseeming us, seeing
that the goods and graces which God has bestowed upon us, are innumerable, and
that we have nothing, but that we have received of him: if then we dissemble
the place from whence they come, and conceal his name, who has so liberally
dealt with us, The first similitude.
and attribute all wholly to our selves, were we not exceedingly to be blamed?
As the sun being directly over us, our bodies have the less shadow, as we
may perceive at noone, and a little before or after: so also the more virtue
and goodness is in us, the less ostentation should we have. Contrariwise, as
this is a sign of the going down of the sun and his departure from us, when
as our shadows become great: so also this is an argument to prove that virtue
diminishes in us, when pride and presumption increases. The vessels that are
fullest make least noise, and we judge them empty or else that there is little
in them, when as being touched they make any great noise or sound: so also
there is nothing that more manifests the wants of virtue, then bragging and
boasting. When as the ears of corn bend down their heads, the husbandmen
rejoice: for this shows they are laden, and that they have plenty of grain:
so also we may conjecture that those men are well furnished with virtue, and
understanding, The fourth.
when they are modest in word and countenance. The pedlars, who have nothing
but their packes, show forthwith all their wares: but contrariwise, the great
merchants keep only little bags in their shops of every particular
merchandise, the better to show what store they have in their ware houses. The
like we may see among men, that ordinarily those who make the greatest show,
have the least in deed, and that none are more ambitious and desirous of
commendation, then those who least deserve it. For wise men (as Tullie says)
repose their felicity not in the opinion and praises of men, but in doing such
things as deserve it. But contrariwise fools do little esteem of virtue in
deed and the effects thereof, so that they may be reputed virtuous: and
contrary to the counsel of Socrates, they rather desire to seem to be, then
to be indeed. Which is a strange thing, for it is as if they desired the name
rather of a king, then the authority, power, and kingdom of a prince: or to
speak more properly: It is as though they desired to be accounted healthsome,
and yet care not for health at all.

We must then, if we will be accounted virtuous in deed, If we will be
virtuous we must not be ambitious.
purge and cleanse our hearts of all ambition, even as to fill a vessel full of
good liquor, we must first stop out the wind. There is nothing (as Gregory
says) that so much shuts out virtue, and hinders the entrance thereof
into our minds, as when we are full of vain glory. And this is that which
Saint Paul teaches the Corinthians, that to be wise, they must become fools:
1. Cor. 3.18.
which is not spoken darkely as it seems to be at the first sight, but to
humble those among them, who were puffed up with a vain persuasion of their
wisdom, and to show unto them, that so long as they held this false opinion
of themselves, they were not capable of the holy ghost, neither of the true
knowledge of God: that is to say, of his secrets which have always been hidden
from the great ones, and are not revealed, but to the humble and lowly.

Socrates in ancient time, was by the Oracle of Apollo accounted the wisest
man of all Greece in that he said he knew nothing, and indeed it is no small
knowledge, to acknowledge our ignorance: so also it is not one of the smallest
virtues in us, to acknowledge our faults and imperfections. The appearance of a
thing (as says the same Gregory) takes away and cutteth off the greatest
part of the thing indeed: that is, man is so much the more foolish as he
thinks himself wise. We must then make a general rule of that which Christ
Jesus says, Mat. 6.3.
speaking of alms giving, that the left hand should not know what the right
hand does: and stretch this speech to other kinds of virtues which may be in
us, and generally to all sorts of good works, which we do, which we ought
not only to dissemble, but also to be ignorant of and to forget them when they
are done, contenting our selves with this, that God knows them, and has
written them in his book, to the end to keep them in perpetual memory, and to
recompense them at the latter day, when he shall examine the doings of men and
angels.

Why are we compared in the scriptures to sheep rather then to lions or
horses, The words of the holy ghost in the Scripture allureth us to humility
and condemns all pride.
which are proud beasts? is it not to give us to understand, that we must
behave our selves modestly, plainly, and simply in all our actions? The
similitudes of the vine and the fig tree, so often propounded unto us in the
old and new Testament, to figure the state and condition of the children of
God, tend they not to the same purpose? For the vine never grows so high as
the chesse-nut or the cedar trees, but always runs low by the ground. The
fig tree grows somewhat higher, but in this they agree, that both of them
have great and broad leaves, wherewith they cover their fruit in such sort
that it can not be seen, unless you come very near them. So likewise,
though Christians should be rich and plentiful in all good works, to glorify
God in their lives, and to edify their neighbors by their good examples: yet
must they carefully take heed, that they make no show thereof, as painters
do of their painted tables, or like unto women which love to set forth
themselves, that every one may see their beauty and goodly attire, Which
thing Christ reproved in the Pharisees in his time: Matthew. 6.2.23.28.
You do all your works (says he) to be seen of men, if you give alms you
blow a trumpet: if you pray, it is in the synagogues and the most apparent and
frequented places: if you fast, you look sower, and disfigure your
countenances, as sad and mortified persons, to the end you may beseene of all
men, thereby to win you praise: but woe be unto you, whom, men deceived by your
hypocrisy account blessed and happy. Who is there that considering these
threatenings of God, would not forthwith detest and abhor all vain glory?

Men in former time thought it a pleasant thing to hear their own praises and
commendations, Good men are rather delighted with reproof, then with praises,
and the wicked deal contrary
and pleasant it is still to such as are carnally minded. But those who have
received the spirit of God, and are regenerated, take no less shame and grief
to be praised, then they conceive pleasure and liking to be reproved and
corrected. For they know very well, considering the manifold imperfections
that are in them, and their daily transgressions, that one can never be
plentiful enough in finding fault with them: and contrariwise that the speech
used in their praises and commendations, can not be so compendious, but that it
must needs contain many untruths: and withal that among all other things
that appertain unto God, and are most dear unto him, there is nothing that he
more esteems then his glory, and that without the profanation thereof, and
showing themselves to be sacrilegious persons, they may in no wise take that
which is given them. I add this, for that it is not sufficient (as S. Augustine
says) that we be not desirous of honor, and that we take it patiently, when it
is denied us: but we must refuse it, and not take pleasure in it, when it is
offered us. To this purpose Philon the Jew applied the prohibition which God
in old time made to the children of Israel, that they should eat no leauened
bread at the feast of Easter, saying, that the leaven which has this property
to sower and to puff up the dow, was forbidden, thereby to teach them, that
they should always avoid vainglory, which swells and puffs up the heart:
and especially at that time, when as they should serve God most devoutly, for
that then it creeps into men's minds more speedily, and that it is a hard
matter for men which do well, not to conceive some great opinion of
themselves, and highly to esteem of their actions, and delight to be esteemed
of others. Which is not spoken, but to the end we should not make such
estimation of the virtues and good things which are in us.

We see that a little wormwood will quickly mar a whole vessel of wine:
Pride corrupts all our good works.
in like manner, when as our life is most perfect and godly, yea most divine and
angelical, the least pride that may be will wholly corrupt it, and make it
worse and more imperfect then ever it was good. The reason is, for that we can
do nothing of our selves, wherein we have not some confidence: and if we trust
in our selves we distrust in God, if we distrust in God, God forsakes us: and
if he does separate himself from us, seeing he is the fountain and
wellspring of our life, and of every good thing we have, shall there any thing
remain for us, but misery, sin, and malediction? It were a lamentable thing
to see a merchant after a long and prosperous navigations, A fit similitude.
suffer shippewracke in the haven, and loss of all in that place where he
hoped to repose himself, and enjoy the fruit of his former labors. In like
manner is it when a man (like unto the Pharisie) has lived well in this world,
carefully observing the commandments of God, and wisely and politikely carried
himself among men, and in the end through a presumption and pride in himself
or contempt of his neighbor, he utterly casts himself away, receiving
nothing at the hands of God, but shame, confusion, and condemnation, in stead
of recompense and rewards which were prepared for him, if he would have kept
himself within the bounds of fear and humility.

When as we are on the top of an hill or of some high place, we take good heed
to our feet, and we walk warily for fear of stumbling: in like manner must
they behave themselves, whom God has exalted above others, either in
authority, knowledge, virtue, or wealth, or any other grace whatsoever it has
pleased him to bestow upon them in particular manner, considering that the
means to be preserved and continued in that estate wherein they are, is to
trust in him, and continually to cleave unto him, to the end that they always
may live in his fear, and in humble manner retain and keep their minds in his
obedience, in remembrance and consideration of his goodness.

This would hinder and close up all the passages of pride and arrogancy, Pride
proceeds of nothing so much as of the want of the knowledge of our selves.
which proceed of nothing so much as of the want of knowledge of our miserable
estate wherein naturally we are placed, and of the forgetfulness of the graces
and good blessings of our God. The peacocke beholding his gay and goodly
feathers waxes forthwith very proud thereof, but as soon as he casts down
his eyes, and looks upon his feet, which are far different in beauty, his
pride is quickly abated: likewise, if in respect of some prerogatives and
preeminences which God has given us above other men, we find our selves to be
solicited by our flesh, The first means to repress pride
or entised by the devil to become proud, let us consider (as did Abraham,
David, Job, and Daniel) the better to repress this pride, the dust,
corruption, vanity, yea and the nothing whereof we are made, and which we can
not shake of. For the badges and tokens are so apparent in every part of our
nature, The second.
that he is worse then blind that can not see it. Let us also consider on the
other side, that all the feathers whereof we brag are borrowed, as those of
Esops crow were, and that in appropriating them unto our selves, we minister
just occasion to God to take them from us. Would we not laugh at a beggar, An
apt similitude.
who having borrowed princely apparel to play the part of some king upon a
stage, will needs afterward retain his apparel still, gloriously behauing
himself in them, as if they were his own? If in like manner a rich man would
glory in his wealth, a Philosopher in his knowledge, a strong man in his force,
a merchant in his wealth, a woman in her beauty, or an hipocrite in his
virtue, do they not all deserve to be laughed at? For this world is as it were
a Theater, and all the honors and dignities which men have therein, are as it
were several attires, which God has distributed and given to every one, as is
most requisite to play his part in, which is not to this end, to attribute them
unto himself, or to glory in them: but contrariwise to honor him who gave
them, and to help their neighbors.

Which thing S. Augustine has notably declared in the book he wrote against
the two epistles of the Pelagians, A notable testimony of S. Augustine for
confirmation of that which has bin spoken before.
which is here recited word for word, to the end that every one may fully
understand it. Let the grace of God (says he) be acknowledged, that whosoever
will glory may glory in God, from the beginning of his conversion unto the
end of his life. For as without the help of God no man can once begin to
do well: so without him can he not continue nor perfect any good thing. And
therefore is it, that all the saints, even from righteous Abel unto John
Baptist, and after him, the Apostles unto us, and from us unto the ends of the
world must be commended not for any thing in themselves, but for those graces
that have proceeded from the Lord. For this is the confession of those, who
lived under the law. In God my soul shall be praised. And those who have lived
since them in the time of the gospel have said, By the grace of God I am that
I am. So that in general, that which is written appertains to all: if any
one glory, let him glory in the Lord.

Now when as Saint Paul exhorts us to rejoice in God, he does not mean that
it is sufficient to acknowledge that all the good things we have proceed from
him, How we ought to glory in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1.31.
and therefore that we ought to yield him praise and thanks for them (for so
did the Pharisie who notwithstanding is reproved and condemned in the Gospel)
but we must proceed further, and attribute nothing unto our selves of any good
thing that is in us, as also that those gifts that are bestowed on us, be not
an occasion that we despise our brethren and neighbors, nor to think that for
those good things we have received of God, we be better, or more excellent then
they. And to conclude, that the consideration of the favors and graces that it
has pleased God to bestow upon us, be no occasion to pluck out of our minds
the remembrance, and acknowledgement of the vices, and imperfections in our
nature, which we ought continually to remember the more to humble us. For the
grace of God is so conjoined with the confession of our sins, that if we have
no feeling hereof, and are not grieved and vexed with sorrow and anguish which
the memory of them engenders in our consciences, we can not seek for this
his favor, with all our hearts, nor assuredly trust in his mercy, nor yet
praise him as we ought.

Wherefore it is not sufficient that kings and other great personages whom God
has blessed in more abundant sort, How princes ought to demean themselves in
this case.
do acknowledge that they receive these graces of God, nor that they think
that in so doing they have discharged themselves of that honor and praise due
unto him, or of that humility which is required of them: if they proceed not so
far, as to do those things above mentioned. And it is most requisite that their
counselors, especially they, who have the charge of their souls do often
exhort them thereto, as well for the good of their subjects, as for the
assurance and amplification of their authorities. And it is out of doubt that
they will do so, if as good and faithful servants they be careful of the
welfare, honor and prosperity of their masters: for there is nothing that is
so necessary for the preservation of their kingdoms as to know themselves, and
so to humble themselves as has been said before: and contrariwise nothing more
dangerous, then for want of such admonition to fall into a mistaking of
themselves and of God, without whose grace their estates can neither be durable
nor prosperous, as may easily be seen in reading of histories. For even from
the beginning has God always showed notable examples of his wrath and anger
against ambitious and proud princes, either by the commotions and rebellions of
their subjects, or by the conspiracies of their friends and servants, or by the
loss and deprivation of their dignities, or by some other greater calamities,
to the end, that by these miseries, some other considering their harms should
take the better heed

But there are few that consider this, or that wax wise by the misery of
others: and what is the reason hereof? partly their governors are content to
keep them in this ignorance, The misery of great men, who with their pride
over throw themselves and their subjects.
the better to lead them as blind men, whether it pleases them: and partly
they them selves love to be flattered, and to be persuaded that they are gods,
or demigods, until that death and the judgments of God teach them by woeful
experience, that they are but mortal men, as well as others. But it is too
late to know them, when as their knowledge does profit them nothing, and that
it brings nothing with it, but an extreme sorrow and a gnashing of the
teeth, with a long and unprofitable repentance. Wherefore it behooveth both
them and us, in time to provide to purchase that which is best for us, and so
to humble and cast down our selves, as we may be the more ready, heartily
and earnestly to desire the mercy of God, and he the more prone to condescend
unto our requests.

And to return to our former speech there is yet one special reason to move
us to humility, The example of the Son of God ought to move us to humility.
Phil. 2.6.
if we consider it, and that is the example of the Son of God, who (as Saint
Paul writes to the Philippians) being equal to God the Father in all things,
in power, in greatness, in glory and majesty, notwithstanding did so far
humble himself, as to take upon him the form of a servant, wherein after he
had tasted of all the miseries of our nature, and lived here sometime in shame
and opprobrie among most cruel and ungrateful men, who did nothing regard
him, would needs in the end be condemned to die, and that the most shameful
death of the cross, abandoning as it were both his life and his reputation for
our good. What Emperor, King, or Prince is there, carrying him self never so
high, which considering this, will not humble him self, remembering withal
from what degree of honor the Lord of heaven and earth was content to fall,
yea from the most highest estate as it were to the lowest pit and goulfe of all
ignominy and shame? If he without any occasion would debase and humble
himself voluntarily only for the love of us, what ought we to do, who have
always sufficient matter and argument in our selves to cause us to abate our
pride, and to account our selves among the basest of all creatures?

After that the French had conquered the kingdom of Jerusalem, A notable
example of modesty in a christian prince.
and gotten it from the Saracenes, the Princes there assembled, knowing the
great wisdom and valor of God frey of Bulloyne, would needs make him King
thereof: but he like a wise prince setting before his eyes the example and
humility of the Son of God, would in no wise accept the name and title of King,
but only of governor of the cuntry, saying, that it was an unseemly thing for
him to wear a crown of gold in that place where his Savior had worn a
crown of thorns. Which was not done in hypocrisy and dissimulation, as did
Tiberius, when the Senate oftered him the Empire; but of a true simplicity and
sincerity of heart, which he showed afterward in effect. For the space of a
year, in which time he had the government, he used as great moderation as any
Lieuetenants do in their Provinces. An example of a heathen prince.
Orosus reports, that Augustus Caesar about the Incarnation of Christ Jesus
forbad that any man should call him Lord, evidently declaring thereby unto all
the world, that it is no fit title for a mortal man whosoever he be, rich or
strong, mighty or puissant: as though through a secret instinct of the holy
Ghost, he was constrained (as was Caiaphas) to confess, that this word
properly might not be attributed to any, but to him that should be borne. For
he above is most mighty, most holy and puissant, and only Lord, as the
Church testifies in her Song. Now if this heathen man, who had no knowledge or
understanding of true religion, did so humble himself, and yield such homage
unto the Son of God, that he judged and esteemed him alone worthy the name
and dignity of Lord; what shall all other Princes do after him, especially
such as term themselves Christians? and likewise their subjects, and,
whosoever be in authority under them?

S. Christ was always acknowledged King and Lord of men and of angels, and yet
was a very perfect pattern of humility.
Peter having in miraculous manner healed the lame (whereof mention is made in
the Acts of the Apostles) and that all the people were astonished, and wondered
at both him and John as though they had bin the workers thereof, began to
rebuke them and say, Why do you look on us and marvel at us, as though by our
own power and holiness we had made him go? rather think that this is the God of
Abraham, of Isaac and Jacob, the God of our fathers, who by this means will
have his Son glorified, by whose name, this man whom you see is healed. It
appears by this place and by many other places of scripture, that the purpose
and will of the Father is, that his Son should not only be honored of all
men as well as himself, but also adored of all his angels, and acknowledged of
all for their King and sovereign lord: and yet notwithstanding it appears by
the whole story of his life how little he desired this honor, and that he did
no further require it, or accepted of it, but so far forth as concerned the
salvation of man, wherewith it was inseparably united and conjoined. When they
would have made him a king, Ioh. 6.15. Mat. 19.17.
he hid himself: speaking of his doctrine, he attributed all to his Father:
to him that called him good, he answered there was none good, but God: though
he were the natural and only Son of God, he chose rather to be called the
son of man. And to conclude, in the last article of the prayer, he taught his
Disciples to give all praise, glory, and dominion unto God his father. Who
dare then desire that glory, which Christ Jesus despised, or purchase it,
seeing he rejected it, or accept it, seeing he refused it?

Let us then, following this example and instruction, attribute unto him,
whatsoever is laudable in us, or in the world: that is to say, in heaven or
earth, or whatsoever is comprehended in them. Let us think in our hearts, and
confess with our mouths with David, that all honor and glory belongs not
unto us, but unto his name. A worthy admonition to Kings and Princes.
When as Cyrus the great King of Persia, had conquered the Empire of the
Babylonians, and overthrown their King Balthazar by the just judgment of God,
who had so determined long before, thereby to punish his pride and wickedness,
seeing himself peaceably and quietly to enjoy his kingdom, before all other
things, he would yield humble thanks unto God, as it is written in Esdras, and
in acknowledging that all prosperity and victories proceeds from his grace
and goodness, he commanded to write letters to deliver the children of Israel,
who were then detained captives in Caldea, and to suffer them to return to
Jerusalem, to build up the Temple of the Lord, which long before had been
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, to the end they should there assemble them
selves, and reestablish their ancient religion, praises, and sacrifices, and
all the service of God, which had been neglected, during the time of their
exile. O that all Christian Princes would imitate this example, and consider
that all their greatness, glory, and puissance comes from above from the
father of lights, and therefore would employ themselves in the building up of
his sanctuary, and defense of his Church, which is the true Temple where he
will be served and worshipped, carefully regarding that his word may be
faithfully preached, superstitions and scandals abolished, discipline and good
manours restored, and to be short, that, that order and form which he has
prescribed in his word, may be entirely observed, without swarving either to
the right hand or to the left, which is a principal piece of that duty they
owe unto God: for they are in his house and among his children as rulers, who
have the government of his house and family, and therefore must carefully
take heed, that such order as at the first he has set down by his Apostles
be kept and observed of all, as long fince among the Jews did David, Solomon,
Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechtas, Josias, Judas, Machabeus: and among the Romans,
Constantine, Iovinian, Valentinian, Theodose, Marcian: and among the French,
the great King Clonis, Charlemaine, Lewis the gentle, king Robert, and Saint
Lewis. All which did evidently declare in their lives the great zeal they had
of the glory of God in restoring those things that had been corrupted in his
Church, to their ancient dignity, and therefore they were rewarded
accordingly. For seeing that they were ready and willing to humble themselves
before him and to obey his word, he has exalted them in such sort that the
memorial, name and fame of their noble acts shall endure for ever here on
earth: and they themselves shall shine continually in heaven as pearls and
stars among the happy and blessed saints. And can their successors do
better then imitate their virtues and examples, that in the end they may
participate of their blessings? If they will not thus do, it is no more
expedient they should be kings, then it is for those of their subjects to bear
office under them, who are altogether ignorant how to govern.

Nicephorus reports, A worthy example of Theodosius, lib. 11. ca. 23.
that when Theodosius made choice of a master for his two young sons Arcadius
and Honorius, to bring them up in the fear of God, good learning, and ciuility
of manners, he used these words unto them, My sons I have chose you the most
grave and virtuous scholemaster that is this day to be found in all our
dominions, whom I command and charge here in your presence to teach and
instruct you in such things as are requisite for the education of a Prince, and
to furnish you with all kind of good and virtuous precepts: to the end, that if
hereafter I see you have endeavored to learn them, and to govetne your selves
according to those rules and precepts which have bin given you, I may leave you
inheriters of my goods and Empire. Otherwise I may not do it, nay I ought not
to do it, as well for our own honor as the good of our subjects. We may
learn by the words of this wise and godly Emperor, what we are to think of a
prince evil brought up, A sle similltude.
and in what danger his estate is, when he wants wisdom to manage his
affairs, and to bridle his affections, as occasions are offered: for it is, as
if a child should be set upon an unruly horse without a bridle: or as if a
pilot should take in hand to govern a ship without a stern. Which Solomon
wisely remembering at such time as God offered to give him whatsoever he desired,
2. King. 39.
whether it were honor, riches, might, health, or long life, rejecting all
those things as less necessary, he only desired sufficient wisdom to govern
the kingdom, which God had given him: there to administer justice indifferently
to all his subjects. Where with God was so well pleased, that he forthwith
granted his request, giving him with all so much honor and riches, that he
was the most magnificent and mightiest king that ever was before or after him.

S. The third reason to hi^eble us, is to consider that a prosperous estate is
very dangerous and slipperie. Lib. 4. in the beginning.
Basil says, that it is as difficult a matter to bridle our affections in
prosperity that they swell not, as it is to keep them that they be not thrown
down in adversity. And this is true. Nay it is more hard as Abdolonim answered
Alexander the great, when he made him king of his cuntry. Q. Curtius reports
the story, which I will recite briefly, for that it is most notable. This
Abdolonim was a poor laboring man, with whom Ephestion Alexanders great
friend had much conuersed, as taking great pleasure in the company and
communication of this good man, admiring his wisdom in the government of his
family, and all other his domestical actions. Now when Alexander had conquered
the city and all the cuntry, he demanded one day among his friends and
counselors, whom they thought meetest to make king thereof, and to govern it
in his absence: whereto Ephestion answered, that in his opinion none was more
meet then his host Abdolonim. The king in regard of his friend, and for the
good report he had heard of him, presently sent for him, putting upon him
princely robes, and giving him the government of the country. The poor man
though astonished with this sudden adventure, yet notwithstanding humbly
thanked the king, and with so an assured countenance, grave modesty, and such
wisdom, that the king had him in great admiration. After many words passed
between them, in the end Alexander demanded of him how he had maintained
himself, and in what manner he had endured his poverty. Much better (says he)
then I fear me I shall endure my prosperity. This is the point of the story
which I would apply to this my purpose, to prove that it is a more difficult
thing to contain ones self in prosperity, then in poor estate and misery:
for that the felicity of this world is, as it were, a fat and foul ground,
where the ways are more durty and slipperie then are the barren and sandy
grounds. Wherefore it is requisite that princes, and such as God has placed in
higher estate then others, should often meditate hereof, and of whatsoever
else may humble them, and that they should furnish them selves with wisdom and
discretion, the better to withstand the fine flatteries, and colorable
treasons of their flesh, and fond fortune.

Humility (as says Saint Chrysostom) is not only the foundation of
Christian religion, but also of all true felicity. Of true and false humility
And to this purpose may that be applied, which that great orator Demosthenes
sometime spoke of pronunciation, who being demanded what was the first, second,
and third especial point of rhetoric, answered always Action: so may we
likewise say of true humility, that it is the principal part of
Christianity, and as it were all in all, yea the life and soul thereof, so
that it be true, entire, and unfeigned. For there are some that are
counterfeits, who have nothing but the color and show of this virtue, and as
it were the skin, wherewith oftentimes is covered great and wonderful ambition.
Saint Gregory the divine in that funeral sermon he made at the burial of his
father, sets down certain marks whereby it may be known, for that in
his time there were many philosophers, yea and some of the ministers of the
Church, who by their hypocrisy abused many men. Market to know hypocrites by.
There are some (says he) who have a superficial and outward humility,
wherewith they are covered, thereby to appear the more holy, imitating herein
foolish women, who for that they want beauty, color their faces with
paintings, one would judge by their countenances that they are but
counterfaites: they writhe the neck, they hang down their heads, they speak
low, they look to the ground, they clippe the hair of their heads, they go
slowly and easily: but Christian humility consists not in this, but in the
spirit and mind of man, when as we presume not of our own selves, and that we
rather desire and long after the truth in deed more then the appearance, and
outward show thereof.

We may see at this day more then ever heretofore, that this, which this
learned doctor wrote, Against the feined humility of our time, and wherein
consists true humility.
is most true, and that there are none more ambitious then such as make a show
and profession of humility. I will not speak much of it, least I should seem
to teach that which every man knows, but my desire is, and I believe verily
that all such as have the fear of God do so, that every one should think
that true humility lies not in the outward show of apparel, nor in the
countenanee and visage of a man, but in the mortification of our affections:
and among other of this deadly and damnable pride, which springing and
increasing with us, so bewitcheth us, that there is no man in the world which
has not some kind of liking of himself. The Philosophers could say, that
true humility consists not in men's outward shows. Cloaked bumilitie
pleasantly tanted.
It is reported that Socrates seeing Antisthenes the Cynicke Philosopher
bragging of his old cloak which he did wear, showing with a vain
ostentation, the hole that was in it, as if thereby his humility should appear
the greater in not disdaining to wear so bad a garment, and taxing therewithal
the pride of other men, who were sumptuously apparelled: I see (says Socrates)
the pride of Antisthenes through the hole of his cloak. The like is reported
of Plato, who was as curious and neat in his apparel, as careful to have
every thing in finest manner about his chamber, into the which when as upon a
time that dogged Diogenes entered, and seeing his bed trimly and exquisitely
made, he forthwith wallowed upon it, saying, that he would stamp Platos pride
under his feet: Yea (says Plato) that you will, with an other pride far
greater. Whereby we may evidentlie see, that humility consists not in the
contempt of civility and good manners, much less in an affecting of rudeness
and clownishnesse, but rather in a dislike and displeasure we take at our
selves, proceeding of the acknowledgement, and lively feeling of our poor and
miserable estates.

Now forasmuch as there is nothing more hard and difficult then to know our
selves, Before the end of this discourse, be sets down the means how to
know our selves, and by consequent, to attain to true humility.
as some of the old writers have truly said, and that the inordinate love,
that many bear to wards them selves, does so dazell their eyes, that they do
not perceive their own imperfections and blemishes: and considering withal,
that of all other studies we are least careful to learn this; rather
delighting to hear ourselves flattered, then to be truly and syncerely
admonished: it is requisite before the end and conclusion of this discourse,
that we set down some short and compendious way how to come to the knowledge
of our selves, without the which it is impossible that ever we should attain
to true humility.

The first and the principal means (in my opinion) is diligently to read the
Scripture, The first means.
and carefully to note those places which do touch the corruption we have
naturally in us: as that in Genesis, Chap. 6. Psalm. 62.9.
that all the cogitations and thoughts of our hearts are evil. And that which
David says, that the children of men are lighter then vanity: as also that
which Jeremy says, Chap. 17.9.
the heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it. And
Job says, that man drinks iniquity like water. Chap. 15.16
And that which Christ Jesus him self says, John 3.6.
that which is bome of flesh is flesh: which is as much as if he should say,
nothing but filth and corruption. And likewise that which Saint Paul says,
Romans 3.10.
(alleging many sayings of the Prophets) There is none righteous, no not one;
there is none that understands, there is none that seeks God. They have all
gone out of the way, they have been made altogether unprofitable, there is none
that does good, no not one: but contrariwise, their throat is an open
sepulcher, they have used their tongue to deceit, the poison of aspes is under
their lips, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are
swift to shed blood. Destruction and calamity are in their ways, the way of
peace they have not known. The fear of God is not before their eyes.

Man must therefore (the better to know his own nature) observe these and the
like sentences in reading of the scriptures, and diligently to ponder them in
his mind, not for a day or two, but all his life long, and to make them serve
as as a glass to behold the face of his own soul, and that as curiously to
view him self in this glass, as women in attiring themselves do look in
their glasses; if he do thus, he will not long be in love with his own
beauty: for the more he beholds him self, the more wrinkles he shall see in
his own forhead, and shall every day see him self more foul then other.

Secondly he must compare him self with other creatures of the world, The
second means.
whom he shall perceive even to the least of them, to observe and keep that
order which God has prescribed them in their creation, and that among all the
other creatures which sing praises to God in their kind, man only is always
out of tune. Wherefore if he will boast and exalt him self above the other
creatures of God whosoever they be, he shows therein as much wisdom as did
that foolish Thersytes, who preferred him self before Achilles, and all the
other great lords of Greece. Or as if a creeple would take upon him to run
with a swift and light lackey or footeman.

Thirdly he must keep an Ephemerides, The third means.
or a daily account how he does spend his life, and following the counsel of
Cleobulus, set down in the morning how he will spend the time till night, and
in the evening take a reckening of his days work, that so keeping a true
account of his thoughts, counsels, work, deliberations, and affections, he may
the better see how far his evil deeds surmount the number of his good
works; which if he do, he shall always find him self indebted to his lord
and master ten thousand talents at the least. Chap. 9.3.
For if that just man Job after he had made his account, said, that he could
not answer one for a thousand: Esaias 64.6. Iere. 14.7. Dan. 9.5. Psalm.
6.19.32.37.
If Esaias, Jeremy, and Daniel acknowledged that their sins, and the sins of
their fathers were innumerable: If David, a man after Gods own heart said, that
his sins were infinite: what shall other think? has man therefore who is
overwhelmed and surcharged with so many and great debtes, any cause to vaunt
and brag of him self?

Fourthly, The fourth means.
if he be clothed with any graces and gifts of God, that he put the^ off and
behold him self all naked as he is by nature. For there are many that deceive
them selves in this, and that thinking that they have some smacke of wisdom,
justice, liberality, and te^perancy, do forthwith wax proud and glory
therein: as though by their own industry and labor they had achieved these
virtues, and yet indeed whatsoever any man has, it is given him from above,
and that wisdom with all the other ornaments of the mind, as strength, beauty,
and comlines of body, are movables and jewels which god has liberally lent
the^, to the end that his servants being so beautifully apparelled, might do
him the greater honor. If then man has nothing of himself which deserves
commendation, whereof will he glory? nay, if the best things he has deserve
reproof, why should he not demean him self in more humble manner?

This also is very availeable to teach us to know our selves, The fifth means.
and to discern whether there be any thing in us worthy commendation, if we
would consider what we ought to be. For as long as we make our comparison with
others who are worse then our selves, we think highly of our selves, and
commend our own virtues. For as (the proverb says) he that is pore-blinde may
go for a king among such as are stark blind. But if we will examine our estate
with our original, which is the image and semblance of God, and compare man as
he now is with the first project, and as he was, we shall quickly confess that
to be true of all men, Esaias 5.1.
which Esaias speaks of the vine (that is, of Israel and Judah the chose^ of
God) that the first plant was very good and fruitful, but now it is become
wild, and like unto the brembles and briars, nay we may say more, (and that
truly) that it is like a wood full of briars and thorns.

We ought also to consider by who^ men are praised, The sixs means.
for if such as praise them be not wise and honest, their praise is nothing but
a dispraise. Antigone (after the death of Zenon) was wo^t to say, Plutarch in
his apotheg.
that his stage was thrown down, meaning thereby, that he was the only man
whom he thought meetest to judge of his actions, and by whose sole and only
approbation they might be allowed or disliked. Phocion having made an eloquent
oration before the people of Athens, perceiving that the multitude did highly
commend him for it, demanded of such as stood next him, if he had uttered any
absurd or foolish thing: giving us thereby to understand, that we ought always
to suspect the applause of the people, not only for that they can hardly
discern between vice and virtue, but also because their affections are so
corrupt, that often times they embrace the evil rather then the good, and yet
notwithstanding these are they by whom the ambitious sort of men do so
greedily seek to be commended, which may be easily perceived by the examples
of the Grecians and Romans: for what banquets, sportes, plays, triumphs, and
other prodigal and excessive expenses made the great princes of those nations,
to win the good wills of a light and brainsicke multitude? and do not many
Devines, Physicians, Captains, and such as are accounted wise men, by whose
commendation other men's actions should either stand orfall, run in the same
path? wherein we do notably bewray our folly. For we would scorn that man,
that would bring a blind man to judge of colors; and yet we consider not,
when we endeavor in this ambitious manner to get the favor of the ignorant
sort, that we commit the censuring of our life to a witless multitude, and
such as can not discern between good and bad.

The last and principal thing which we ought to do, The 7. and principal
means to know our selves.
is to consider our selves in the judgment of God. For as the innocence of a
man is never thoroughly tried, unless it be well examined before a wise and
severe judge: so likewise do we not know who we are, if we be not tried
before God, that great Judge, who sees and knows all things, and who has
all the informations and process of our lives, and understands the very
thoughts and counsels of our hearts, according to the which we must either be
acquitted or condemned. For he being without al affection, by reason of the
pureness and synceritie of his essence, can no ways be corrupted in his
judgment, and therefore most meet to judge the whole world. Wherefore it is
convenient, that every one committing his cause unto him, should not think his
actions just and lowable, until they be so approoved by his sentence; in thus
doing, no question but it will quickly abate our pride. For if we be afraid
of mortal judges, who may be abused and corrupted, and that there is no man be
he never so innocent, seeing his process drawn, and his reputation in hazard
of their judgment, but imagines that his innocence can not be so great, if
all his doing be well examined, but that he shall be found faulty in many
points. What shall we then do considering the justice of our God, who by
reason of his infinite wisdom can not be ignorant of the secret thoughts of
our hearts, nor yet will dissemble them considering his immutable will, by
reason whereof he will in no wise decline from the truth? Shall we not
confess then (setting before our eyes such a judgment as this) that we are
but dust and ashes, as did Abraham? shall we not hide our selves before his
face as did Helias? shall we stand before him seeing Job was thrown down?
shall not we desire him, with David, not to examine our offenses, but for his
mercy sake to forget them, and to bury them in the grave with his son
Christ? Yes surely, and to moove him to be the more gracious unto us, with
these our humble petitions we would put on sackecloth and ashes, as did Daniel
in Babylon, and in so doing we would soon shake off the former opinion of our
own virtues, considering we must appear in the presence of our God, before
whom (considering our manifold imperfections) we can not stand, but we must
needs be as much ashamed, as any diseased and ragged beggar would be in the
presence of a great and mighty prince.

THE THIRD BOOK. Of the tranquillity and contentation of the mind. AGAINST
ANGER. The Contents of the Book.
AS the moral Philosophers have been very painful and industrious in
describing the other disordered and unruly affections of the mind: so have
they been exceeding plentiful in the unfolding of the manifold mischiefs and
vexations, which are inseparably annexed unto this distempered humor, as may
evidently appear by those learned discourses which Seneca and Plutarch have
left behind them, with the which (especially that of Plutarch) the Author
has notably furnished his book, and that in three especial points. In the
first he discourses of those evils and inconveniences, which Anger breeds.
In the second, of the causes which produce and bring forth these evils. In the
third, of the remedies and preservatives against so furious and raging a
torment, which not without great difficulty is assuaged, as says Heraclitus,
because it spares not (no not with the spilling of blood, and loss of life)
to attain his desired purpose. The first branch is divided into six
principal parts, wherein are evidently demonstrated the strange and monstrous
effects that Anger produces: as that it extinguisheth the light of reason,
and bereaveth us of all virtuous actions, causing such confusion and disorder
as reign in every part and corner of the world, overthrowing and disfiguring
both body and soul, and being the principal bellows that Satan uses to
blow the fire of so many monstrous and foul abuses, by transforming men into
devils, and obscuring whatsoever is good and godly, tyrannizing and oppressing
in most fearful manner by threatening and rebuking with rigorous words and
sharp punishments, the well ordered motions of a quiet mind, as may appear
by the opposition and contradiction of the nature thereof, and the government
which God has commanded. And the effects of this passion are so heinous and
execrable, that we can not but condemn them in another, though we be wholly
possessed with them our selves. The more secret and covert that it is, the
more dangerous it is. It makes our tongues to run riote, and causes us to
commit most grievous faults. It is a very hell and torment to those who are
inflamed therewith, and the plague and destruction of the whole world. It
makes man to forget him self, neither permits him to follow good
counsel, having illustrated these sever all parts with notable examples,
fit similitudes, worthy sayings, and infallible reasons drawn both from
moral and devine philosophy, (before he comes to the second part) he
shows that the great men of the world above all other, ought to take
especial regard, that they be not overcome with this chollericke passion,
annexing hereunto sound and pithie proofs out of histories, that Clemency is
a virtue most beseeming princes and great Personages, and therefore he gives
them notable receiptes against this dangerous poison of anger, showing why
Clemency and Mercy is meeter for them then Wrath and Anger: Illustrating both
by several examples, with conclusion that Mercy is the most notable virtue in
Kings and great states, if so be that it be wisely used.

Now for the second point, he prooveth by diverse examples that pride is as it
were the spring and principal cause of anger; against which he opposes
modesty as a counter-poyson, alleging to this purpose famous histories, and
answers at large to those, who deride and mock at the great patience of some
particular men among the heathen. The second cause of this unbridled affection
he notes to be self-love: and against this he opposes the frugall and
sparing conceit of many notable men, which is amplified by a deep and mature
consideration of the behavior of such men, as have been truly virtuous,
prooving (the better to adorn and beautify this his discourse) that anger is
an infallible proof of inconstancy, infidelity, impatiencie, impiety, and
of despair: then by the way he proposes and sets down a christian and
godly meditation of those sins and offenses, whereof we are culpable before
God by reason of our pride, and impatiencie, and to aggravate our condemnation
he does lively represent unto us the nature of God, which is full of mercy
and compassion; and continuing his discourse; he shows that overmuch
curiosity and suspicion is the third cause of this distempered affection:
against the which he opposes prudence, which dissimuleth and covers many
faults. The fourth cause he notes to be the inconstancy and lightness of
the mind, which is carried away with every report and flying tale: and this
is stayed and governed by a wise and discreet mildness. The fifth cause he
alleges to be our pride, which so far transporteth us, that we have no
regard in bearing with the infirmity of our brethren; and therefore sets
down the considerations that must draw us thereto, plentifully adorning them
with many notable andexcellent comparisons. Having discoursed of these v.
principal causes which produce and engender anger, in the latter end be
sets down the particular remedies of this disease, which are 4. The first,
that we must stop the beginnings of anger. The second, that being kindled,
we must forthwith seek how to quench it: and answers to those rufflers,
who account those stout and valiant men, who wreke their anger with the sword.
The third remedy is patience, which he prooveth to be most necessary for
Christians. And lastly, he exhorts and admonishes every one carefully and
diligently topray unto God, to give him his grace and assistance, that he may
follow these rules which he has set down for the avoiding of Anger.

THE THIRD BOOK. Against Anger.
THese two former unbridled affections of the mind, The original cause of
anger.
whereof we have spoken already; do engender a third disordered passion: and
that is anger and wrath: which of all other is most fierce and raging. For this
does not only vex the mind of him in whom it raineth, but it disquieteth
those who converse, and associate them selves with him: and that in such sort,
that it sets at variance even such as are dearest friends: as the father
and the son, the servant and his master, the wife and her husband: the
consideration whereof, ought to moove all such as love their own and other
men's quietness, carefully to avoid this vexation of the mind, and wisely to
consider first of all, the mischiefs that it engendereth, and the evils that
produces it: and finally, the means and remedies to correct and bridle it.

The most dangerous and perilous mischief, It extinguisheth the light of
reason.
that this chollericke and wrathful affection engendereth is, that it clean
extinguisheth the light of our natural reason, without the which we can take
no order nor counsel, for the managing of our affairs. And therefore it may
very fitly be compared to a tyrant, which murdereth the nobility and wise
counselors of that common wealth, which he has conquered, to the end there
may be no man that may oppose himself against his tyranny, or any ways
hinder him, that he may not reign as he list. For having deprived us of all
counsel and understanding, and, as it were, taken the government of our
persons into her own hands, thrusts us headlong forward in our actions, and
drives us on with great and exceeding violence: as appears by many and
sundry examples.

Simeon and Levi, being in a great rage for the ravishment of their sister
Dinah, determined (what so ever came of it) to put all the city of Shechem to
the sword, without respect or consideration in what danger they put them
selves, their children, their brethren, and the whole family of their father,
neither yet pitying the innocent people of the city. 1. Sam. 25.13, 22.
David understanding by his messengers that Nabal had refused to send him such
provision as he demanded for himself and his soldiers, determined in great
rage to sack his house, and spoil him of all he had, and to put them to the
sword, contrary to al justice, and flat against his wonted clemency: for in
the administration of his affairs, and tolleration of injuries offered by his
enemies, he was the most patient and mild Prince that ever was. But there is
no virtue so mighty, which is not vanquished by this distempered affection, if
it once enters and setleth it self in our hearts.

Theodosius the Emperor, Theodoret. 5. book of his ecclesiastical history.
17. chap. Sozom. 7. book. 24. chap.
being advertised that the Thessalonians had slain one of his servants, sent
forthwith his soldiers to put the whole city to fire and sword, and in this
his wrathful displeasure (without all kind of justice) commanded to slay as
well the innocent, as the offendour. Who, but for this only fact, was the most
prudent and wise governor of all the Roman Emperors.

These and the like examples, may teach us the nature of this passion, and the
force that it has to master our natural reason; seeing that it has caused so
many excellent personages to commit so barbarous and strange cruelties. And we
may learn hereby carefully to beware thereof, seeing that where it bears the
sway, justice and judgment are quickly driven out of the doors.

Gregory says, that a patient man, and he that is slow to anger, is most
commonly wise: which is evidently prooved in Alexander the great, Quint. Curt.
Plutarch in his lives.
who in his youth, and so long as he kept him self within the bounds of
modesty, and the limits of that virtuous education wherein he had been
trained up always, showed him self the most prudent and best advised of all
his counsel, though he were excellently furnished with many expert captains,
and sundry grave counselors for matters of estate. But when as (through his
great prosperity) he became proud, and pride engendered wrath, impaciencie,
impudency, and outrage; then began he to fall to dronkennes, and despise the
Macedonians, by whose virtue and valiancie he had conquered all Asia,
disdaining to be called the son of Philip his father, being a mortal man,
and would needs be accounted a god, proceeding on forwards to the murdering of
his friends, and committing many other outrages, which afterward (though too
late) brought repentance, which is a thing incident to all rash and hasty
persons. The Athenians enacted a law, that their Orators and counselors in
pleading for their clyents, should not labor to moove the Judge to pity or to
choler, either in the beginning or end of his speech: meaning hereby that
there is nothing that more hinders the uprightness of our judgment, then
such perturbations and troubles of the mind. Which thing Julius Caesar
likewise declared to the Senators of Rome, seeing them so passionate, at such
time as they were assembled to take counsel for repressing of Catiline, and
the rest of the rebels; as also to consult of the punishment of such
malefactors as were already in prison, attainted, and convicted of hie
treason.

The passions of the mind (says he) and especially anger of all other, so
darkeneth men's understandings, that they can neither see the equity, nor truth
of things. Seeing then, we have nothing more excellent then our reason and
understanding, which make the sole and only difference between us and bruit
beasts, and that they be so spoiled by this choleticke passion, that they will
stand us in no stead, shall we not be very careful and circumspect to avoid
it?

Of all other parts of our bodies, How careful we ought to be to preserve our
reason.
we are most careful to preserve our eyes from hurt, for that they are, as it
were, the watchmen for all the rest of our members: and shall we not likewise
be vigilant for the preservation of our reason, seeing without it we can
neither do, nor speak any thing aright, but are like unto poor travelers
wandering in a wilderness, not knowing which way to take, but going forwards at
all adventures? was not Poliphemus with his great and monstrous body, in
greater misery, after that Ulysses had put out his eye, then he was before? in
like manner all wicked men, and especially great and mighty Potentates, for
that they are in the view of the whole world, are in most woeful estate, having
lost the use of reason, either by ignorance, sloth, or any passion what so
ever. We abhor drunkards for that so long as they are drunken, they are
without sense and understanding, differing nothing from brute beasts but in
shape and portraiture only. In like manner for the same cause must we fly
from this choleric passion, which like a whote and fervent fever so troubles
our minds, that so long as we are possessed therewith, we cannot understand,
much less speak anything that savoureth of reason. If voluptuous and sensual
pleasure have always (and that most justly) been blamed, for that it
transformeth men into beasts: shall not choler likewise be condemned, seeing
there is no other difference between them but this; that the one turns men
into swine, and the other into Lions and tigers, and such like savage and
cruel beasts.

There is nothing that we ought more to esteem, How greatly we ought to fear
anger.
then the Image and similitude of God that is in us, the which consists in
the knowledge and understanding of our hearts: and contrariwise, there is
nothing that ought to fear or dismay us more, then the loss of this
knowledge, and the obscuration of this light which we have of our God, thorough
the smoke of these cloudie passions, engendered in our natures, as it were,
briers and brambles, through the malediction of sin. And as out of our hearts
springs the fountain of our life, so also from reason proceeds the spring
of honest and virtuous living, which incontinently fails and perishes, as
soon as the spring decays, and therefore it is requisite that we embrace
virtue, and seek to live honestly, and that we most carefully provide for the
preservation of the health of our reason, eschewing so near as we may, what
soever may be hurtful unto it: as all unruly motions of the mind, and choler
especially, which is an enemy to patience and all moderate actions what so
ever. Choler extinguisheth all goodness, and first of all the stare of God.


Seeing then, that anger takes away the use of reason, we infer thereof that
it breeds the ruin of all virtue, and principally of all piety and fear of
God: seeing it provokes us to blaspheme the name of the Almighty: and withal
seeing that it engendereth hatred toward our neighbors, and no man hating
them, can pray unto God as he ought, or desire his mercy for the remission of
his sins, seeing it is promised with this condition, that we should forgive
our enemies their offenses. If then the principal parts of true religion, be
faith, prayer, the fear and reverence of the name of our God, to all which,
this angry humor is a mortal enemy, it must needs be inferred, that if we
suffer it once to rest in us, it forthwith draws us to a contempt and
mistrust of God.

And as this passion is contrary to the service we owe unto God, Charity.
so does it directly oppose it self against charity, which is due to our
neighbors, and by consequent, to all the commandments comprised therein. And
if the law be a word of life, and that he which meditateth therein day and
night be blessed, are not these unhappy and dangerous passions, which make us
so boldly to transgress this law? Choler likewise is an enemy to justice,
which cannot be administered but by quiet, moderate, Justice.
and temperate men: and therefore Tullie says, that where braules are, there
laws bear no sway; and Antigonus thus answered one, who made an excellent and
eloquent oration before him, in the commendation of Justice, at his entry into
Asia with a mighty army: art thou so unwise (says he) to speak of Justice
to a King, which has his sword in his hand? Marius likewise that great
Captain of Rome, who had been seven times Consul understanding that some
blamed him for that he did many things in the wars contrary to the laws and
customs of the common wealth, said he could not hear them for the noise and
clattering of the weapons: signifying hereby, Modesty.
that where wrath and anger reigns, there is neither equity nor justice. It
likewise overthrows all modesty which is the first virtue a christian ought
to learn in the school of Christ Jesus, and the badge and token to know a
regenerate child, and him in whom the spirit of God inhabiteth.

In like manner it destroys patience, Patience and humility.
which is a virtue most necessary for all Christians to retain them in that
hope they have in God: whereto they ought likewise to lean in their assaults
and temptations, least they stumble and fall. Likewise it robs us of
humility, which should so mortify and bridle our affections, that we be not
moved at anything that may befall us.

It expels the tranquillity and peace of the mind, Peace and the joy of the
mind.
which Christ Jesus brought us at his coming into the world, and left us at
his departure as the most precious thing he had: as also that spiritual joy
and consolation, which enlighteneth that darkness which ordinalie afflicts
a CHRISTIAN man, and many other relics of sin, the pricks and stings
whereof he often feels after his regeneration.

It takes away also that magnanimity and courage, Magnanimity.
which does not only consist in the resisting of the assaults and alarmes of
foreign enemies, but also in the beating down of those rebellious motions
which would rise up within us, if they were not brideled and kept in awe by
reason.

In like manner it takes away that facility from us, Affability.
which should make us so affable unto all men, that none should fear to
converse with us, or should not be grieved to forsake us.

Moreover it bereaveth us of all compassion, Compassion
which we should use toward our neighbors to comfort them, and to be grieved
with them in their afflictions, to support them in their infirmities, to
withdraw them for their errors, and to be sorry for those sins which may
happen either to body or soul.

And it takes away gravitie, Gravitie.
which is most unpleasant, being accompanied with choler, and so makes us
fit, either to instruct or correct such as are under us, who must be taught
their duties friendly, and exhorted to well doing, rather by reason then by
rage.

And in a word, Choler is the cause of the confusions and troubles in the world.
there is nothing more contrary to that society and humanity, which should
be among men, then this passion. For it is as the root and spring of the
greatest part of the tumults, wars, partakings, brabbles, murders, and
desolations that are in the world. For how many mortal and deadly battles
have there been for small trifles? what troubles in the law? what falling out
among most dear friends? what enimitie and heart-burning has this unruly
affection bred? the gentleman to revenge him self and wreke his anger, sells
or gives away his lands, and often hazardeth his honor, his life, and
liberty. The merchant leaves his trade, the husbandeman sells plough and
cattle, the artificer his tools, and all to maintain his suite against his
enemy, and to satisfy his own angry mind. And the case is so much the more
lamentable, for that such men are accounted virtuous and of great courage; as
though Moses, David, and Christ him self, were less virtuous then these men,
or as though there were not greater commendation in bearing wrong, then in an
obstinate desire of revenge. And it is not sufficient for us to love this vice,
but we must needs give it a good and virtuous name. Is not Esaias his prophecy
verified in us, that we call evil good, and good evil? for we live in those
times when as this fault is but too common; for verity among most men is not
regarded, and lies and fables are received as infallible truths. Superstition
is adored in the greatest part of the world, and true religion accounted as a
late invention of new vpstart wits. And to come near to our purpose, mild
and gentle behavior is accounted faint-hearted cowardlinesse, and a revenging
mind is honored with the commendation of a heroical and noble spirit. And
if this were the error of the common sort, it might be more patiently borne
withal: but the better sort (which is an exceeding shame) or to speak more
fitly, a desperate impudency, do approove it by their consent. For if a man
will endure the lie to be given him, as fearing the commandment of God, which
forbids revenge, and therefore commits his cause unto him, he is straight
noted with the brande of infamy. If he be a soldier, he is straight
disgraced and thrust out as a cowardly beast, and one of no stomach or
valor, though in deed there be none more valiant, then such as can vanquish
their own affections, seeing they be the most dangerous enemies we have, and
so accustomed to overrule us, that they are almost continually our masters. I
can but wonder that among such as carry the reputation of wise men, there
should be any that would judge the revenge of every wrong, to be a noble and
an heroical action. For this is as if one should commend the diseases of our
bodies, or the brakes and thistles in our grounds. Sundry similitudes against
reve^g.
But the perturbations of the mind are so much the more dangerous, by how much
the remedies of them are more difficult. Would we not account him a mad and
furious man, that would set fire on his own house? and what shall we then
think of him, that sets his own heart on fire, and burns him self? S.
Augustine says, that as vinegar spoyleth the vessel wherein it is kept, so
does choler mar him in whom it abounds.

First of all it troubles his mind, Choler disfigureth body and soul.
and confounds all his thoughts: next to this, it makes him stammer in his
speech, sometime speaking aloud, sometime low, with such hacking and chopping
of words, as his furious rage will not suffer him to be understood: likewise it
alters and changes his countenance, it makes him frown, and his eyes flame
in his head, rolling up and down without ceasing, he biteth his lips, he
blusheth, he waxes pale, he strikes with his hand, he pulls his garments,
and turns his hatte sometime on this side, sometime on that side, he goes
apace and forthwith stands still, and stampeth against the ground,
everything displeases, every thing offends; he goes and comes, and makes
as many countenances, as does the parasite on the stage: but there is
difference, for the one is pleasant and gamesome; the other as froward and
troublesome: Matthew. 2.16. Nom. 22.27, 29. Plutarch in his treatise of anger.
Sophocles in his tragedy of Ajax.
these men chafe at all they meet, without why or wherefore. Herod in his
anger murdered the young infants; Balaam smote his ass, and wished a sword to
kill her. Xerxes threatened sea and land. Ajax took his sword to fight with a
flock of sheep.

And whom will they spare, when as they will not stick to fret and fume
against God, the time, and them selves, pulling themselves by the beards, who
have not hurt them, like unto dogs which bite at the stone that is thrown at
them, having no power to hurt any thing else? They smite every one they meet,
and spare none, and there is no man which is not utterly spoiled by this
passion. Every one abhors a wrangling and contentious person; every one
looks carefully to fire, for fear of harm: and shall we not take heed of
this choleric passion, which is as dangerous as a flaming fire, wasting and
consuming what so so ever it touches, and can not be quenched but with great
difficulty, being once but a little kindled.

And if so be the ruins and desolations of beautiful and wealthy cities,
the destroying of countries, Choler is as it were the bellows wherewith
Satan blows up so many mischiefs
the death of good men, the breach of law and justice, the disorder and
confusion of all things be most pitiful and lamentable mischiefs: what shall
we think of the cause of all these? All our concupiscences and lusts are as
snares for the devil to catch us, and there is none of them more fit then
Choler for to accomplish divelish devises, that is, to sow discord,
murders, and slanders of the truth, and it is evident that tyrants and
heretics which have been the pillars of the synagogue of Satan, and his
viceroyes in his empire, have always been very chollericke persons, peevish,
froward, selfe-willed, and sworn enemies to all peace and quietness.
Wherefore, Iam. 3.13.
if (following the counsel of Saint James) we will not suffer this humor to
dwell in us, we must walk in meekness and gentleness. For as the Devil is
contrary to light being the prince of Darkness, and opposes him self unto
the truth being the father of lies: so is patience and meekness contrario
unto him, being the spirit of dissension and revenge.

We abhor savage and cruel beasts being afraid of their horns, hoofes,
and teeth: It makes us worse then wild beasts and turns men into devils.
and there is nothing more fearful to behold then a furious chollericke man,
when he has his harness on his back, his sword in his hand, his dagger by
his side, his harquebuze on his shoulder, who if he were borne so, as he
afterward makes him self, he were the straungest and most terrible monster
of all the world. Ought we not then to eschew this monstrous passion, which
does not only transform us into beasts, as Circes did Ulysses companions,
but also turns us into devils? The Spirit of GOD which has regenerated us,
has likewise tamed us, and of wolves has made us sheep: contrariwise Anger
reduces us to our old estate, and of sheep makes us wolves. Our principal
scope, and the end of all our actions and counsels should tend to the
profit and benefit of our neighbors: but Choler and immoderate anger
tends wholly to their destruction.

If then our actions be measured by their end, it is impossible but that
whatsoever we speak or do in choler, should be out of order; seeing it
makes us decline and wander from a good end. A Christian therefore ought not
to be yrkesome or troublesome, but pleasant and acceptable; so applying him
self to the humors of such as he converseth with, that his words and actions
may not give any just cause of offense; otherwise he shall never know how to
instruct the ignorant, correct the offender, comfort the comfortless, or
profit his brother in any small measure. For whatsoever proceeds from a
froward man is very bitter and unpleasant, and as it were sweet meat mingled
with bitter gall. Wherefore if we desire to show effectually that we are not
borne for our selves only, but likewise for the benefit of our neighbors,
we must strive to be modest and humble minded, using all courteous and mild
behavior, which is more forcible to persuade, then all the rigorous proceeding
that may be invented. In a word, we must imitate our good God, with whom (as
David says) is both mercy and forgiveness.

It is reported that the Sun and the wind standing at variance which of
their forces were greatest, A pretty fable showing that meekness is more
availeable then churlishnes.
were in conclusion both contented to try their might upon a poor wayfairing
man, and having agreed, that he should be accounted most puissant, which could
first take away this travelers cloak; the wind began to puff and blow in
most raging manner, bearing down trees, houses, and Churches, but the poor
man holding his cloak with his hands, turning his back to the wind, kept his
garment in spite of these raging blasts: which when the Sun perceived,
assayed an other way to win the victory, and heating the man by little and
little with his hot beams, so warmed this traveller, that by reason of his
great sweating he was content to lay aside his cloak. This is a fained tale.
And yet under this, the old writers would teach us thus much; that the best
means to persuade men is to be mild, Plutarch in his treatise of anger.
gentle, and courteous. Plato seeing the great austeritie of Xenocrates, did
often exhort him in the presence of his other scholars to do sacrifice to the
Graces, to the end they would grant him a more mild and cheerful
countenance, fearing that his knowledge should be altogether unprofitable,
unless his severitie were mixed with some moderate mildesse.

If then too much austeritie does so hinder us from bettering and profiting
other men by any knowledge that we have: what shall we say of this waywarde
and froward affection which wholly disgraceth all our actions, and as it
were, quite spoyleth the complexion of all those goodly and laudable virtues
that are in us? for neither wisdom in counselling, eloquence in persuading,
nor zeal in reprooving, can please the humor of the hearer, when as they are
served with such angry sauce. If therefore we will have them pleasant, and fit
for the edification of our neighbors, we must feason them with sweet and
pleasant behavior? and how should wrath be acceptable in any man, seeing in
God him self it is most fearful? Is not David greatly afraid thereof when
as he thus prays: O Lord, Psalm. 6.1.38.1.
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath. And yet the
anger and wrath of God is always just, and there are no affections in him,
that may turn him either to the right hand or to the left, as are in men, who
are never angry for the most part, but are violently carried by affection,
without reason or regard. If then the anger of God be so fearful, though it
be most just and reasonable, how much more is ours to be avoided, which is
always corrupted and soured with the leavin of some corrupt affection?

We hate and abhor tyranny, Choler is a most cruel tyrant.
as the most mischievous and dangerous evil that may be; and contrariwise,
we so exceedingly love and esteem liberty, that infinite thousands of men
have hazarded their lives, goods, wives and children, to attain and preserve
it. Which if it be true, why do we not as carefully fly all these immoderate
passions, and especially this, which tormenteth and crucifieth us more then all
the rest? for we have neither counsel, affection, word, power, or part about
us, which it does not imprison, and all to make us wholly subject to her
inordinate desires. There are many tyrants which use cunning reasons and
coulerable persuasions, to gain that they would have of their subjects, before
they deal violently with them; but this tyrant never uses other argument to
persuade, but force and violence.

This choler is as a mighty tempest, breaking the mast and stearne of our
lives, It is the greatest mischief of all other. For that there is a
contrariety between the works of god and it.
leaving nothing to guide us aright, and as it were a violent flood that
bears away all that withstandeth it. It is as a mighty thunder, a flaming
fire, a double cannon, and in a word, as fit a thing as the Devil could
invent since the creation of man, to bring all things to confusion. If there
were two beginnings of things, as Manes the chief of the Manechites have
affirmed, the one good, the other evil, this might well be the second. For
this is the principal cause of all disorder and confusion in the world, and a
very Antithesis or repugnauncie to everye good thing, as may easily appear
by a comparison of the effects.

The property and nature of GOD is to create and preserve: the nature of wrath
is to spoil and destroy. The one gathers together, the other scatters
abroad: the one comfort, the other threatens: the one heals, the other
hurts: the one saves, the other slays: and to be short, there is as much
difference between them, as is between a cruel wolf and a careful
shepherd. Whereof it must needs follow, that if we love God entirely as
the Autour of our lives, and of all whatsoever is requisite for the
preservation of them, we must needs detest Choler, as the greatest enemy
and principal cause of most of these mischiefs that may shorten our days,
and make them yrkesome unto us.

All these passions and perturbations of the mind, as ambition, Covetousness,
pleasure, and choler, are very unpleasant unto us in another man, and we care
not how little we converse with such as we know are infected with them. Why
do they not then displease us as much in our selves? For as for Poverty and
corporal diseases, we fear them more in our selves then in our neighbors:
but contrariwise the imperfections and perturbations of the spirit, are more
odious in them then in our selves. If we have but one child, we are loath he
should be governed by a fool, nor willingly would we commit our carts to be
driven by an asse-head, for fear he should overthrow them; and shall we not
consider that when we suffer our selves to be transported by choler, we commit
our selves as it were to be ruled by a furious person. And (as Saint Basil
says) we seem as though we were troubled with a breese, and delight to be
galloping up and down we know not whither. Hippocrates says, that the
disease is dangerous which changes the countenance. What shall we then say of
that which makes such a Metamorphosis of the whole body?

Some may say that all Choler is not alike, The more secret that anger is, the
more dangerous it is.
and that wise men canso cunningly dissemble their anger, that it is a
difficult matter to perceive it; this is true. But though it be covered, it is
not quenched, no more then the fire that is raked up in the ashes; but
contrariwise, it is so much the more dangerous, and like unto a disease that
is secret in the body; for if it be retained there a while, it hatcheth
hatred, which by little and little so converteth it self into his substance,
as in short time it becomes inseperable from his nature. Ephesians. 4.26.
And therefore Saint Paul exhorts us not to let the Sun set upon our anger.
When as our enemy invadeth us we seek to repulse him by all means possible,
least he should set footing in our territories and nestle too near us; and if
he be entered, we are careful so to impeach him, that he fortify not him
self. In like manner we must make such bulwarks about our hearts, that
Choler may no way enter: Because the tongue is a dangerous instrument in
anger, be sets this down as a principle, that we being bound to glorify
god both in heart and word ought so much the more carefully to consider those
faults that anger canseth us to commit by our words.
but if it happen that it once enters, and lies secretly in the corners of
our breasts, and that it surprise us on the sudden, or makes way by force, we
must forthwith devise all the ways we can to expel it as soon as we may. If
we have eaten poison, we seek forthwith to vomit it up again with all
speed, and if we be fallen into any disease, we use all the means we can to
provide a remedy: shall we not likewise if we feel any unruly motions of
choler, and the fiery flames thereof to be once kindled in our hearts, be as
careful to cool them, as we would be to quench the fire on our houses?

The Christian man after his regeneration ought to betake him self wholly to
the service of God, to glorify him both in body and mind, so much as is
possible. Our soul must continually praise him with all the power it has, and
our body with all the parts thereof, especially our tongues and mouths ought
to be principal instruments particularly, as it were consecrated and
dedicated to the honor of God, whose goodness we ought to commend without
ceasing, and extol his Name aloude, as it were, with a trumpet: nothing ought
to proceed out of them but that which is holy and precious. For they are, as
it were, the gates of Christian men's hearts, which are the Temples and
treasures of GOD. And therefore David shows us what is the duty and office
of a regenerate man in these words. Let the words of my mouth, Psalm. 19.14.
and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight. By this and many
other places we may gather, that the principal use of our tongues consists
in prayer and thankesgiving to GOD: and next to this, in instructing, in
comforting, in confirming, and reprooving our neighbors in all good manner
that we may. Plutarch reports, that Themistocles did cut off the head of a
certain Grecian, who was sent of Embassage from the great King of Persia, for
that he had taught the Barbarians his native tongue, which might be perverted
to the harm of his country.

What punishment then does he deserve, who being regenerated by the grace of
God and made a new creature, (and therefore ought to honor him, and live
according to his word, showing all obedience both with heart and body) gives
his tongue (which the Holy Ghost should have, to make him sing out the praises
of God his Father) to serve the Devil, in blaspheming, lying, slaundering,
reviling, scoffing, and such like things, whereto our anger provokes us? This
only reason ought to remoove all the gall and bitterness out of our
stomachs. For what is there that we ought to be so careful of, as of the
most noble and excellent part that is in us, and that which GOD principally
requires of us? whereby shall men better know that we are Christians, then
if we be zealous of Christ's truth? Are not these the very true badges and
tokens of Christianity, to speak of heaven and heavenly things? and as
Christ says, to bless those who curse us, and always to speak of the
praises of our God? to meditate of him, and of his law, and to set such a
watch before our mouths, that no vile or filthy thing proceed out of them,
but such things as may tend to the glory of God, and edification of others
as time and occasion serves.

David setting out in his own person the duty of a good man in this point,
Examples of godly men, and such as have been sober in words. Psalm. 39.
says, I thought I will take heed to my ways that I sin not with my
tongue, I will keep my mouth brideled while the wicked is in my sight. It is
certain that nothing so evidently discovers the thoughts of the heart, as the
words of the mouth. And therefore by them we are either justified or
condemned. Plutarch in his life.
Themistocles in his banishment being with the King of Persia, would never
speak his opinion in the privy counsel, (whereto he was often admitted by
reason of his great wisdom and long experience, both in matters of war and
peace) before he had perfectly learned the language of the country, saying
that the thoughts and cogitations of a man's heart are like unto arrace clothes
folded up together, whose pictures we can not discern, but as we are told
by word of mouth. Socrates therefore thus answered a woman who brought her
child unto him to know his opinion of her sons towardnes: let me hear
(says he) the child speak: giving us thereby to understand, that the word
is the very picture and representation of our thought, and that there is no
better means then this to know the very nature of the heart, and the
conditions of men, which hereby are tried as metal is tried in the furnace.

What shall we then say or judge of a chollericke man, Choler makes us to
be condemned before God and man. Matthew. 5.22
under whose tongue lurketh the poison of aspes, and from whose mouth as out of
a grave proceeds continually a most filthy and stinking savor. If he who
in anger calls his brother fool, deserves condemnation (as Christ him self
teaches) what then deserve these froward sort of men, whose mouths are full
of bitterness and cursed speaking? The tongue (says S. James) is but a little
member, but it has a great power. Chap. 3.5, 6.
It is a fire and a world of wickedness: It defiles the whole body, and sets
on fire the course of nature: it can not be tamed: It is an unruly evil and
full of deadly poison. All which we must understand to be true, when as the
tongue is evil governed; for if it once pleases God to rule and direct it by
his spirit, there is no member more apt to serve him. But it is a very
difficulte matter for all men, and whollye impossible for such as are enraged
with fury and choler, so to bridle it, as it passes not his bounds. It is
reported in the Tripartite history, that one confessed at his death, that with
37. years study he could never learn the first verse of the 39 Psalm, where
David says, that he will take heed that he offend not with his tongue, giving
us hereby to understand, what a difficult matter it is to attain to this
virtue. Plutarch in his treatise of too much speaking.
Zenon likewise thinking nothing more excellent or more commendable then
silence, thus answered the Ambassadors of Persia, who demanded what report
they would make of him at their return into their own country, for that they
had not heard him speak all supper while, nothing (says he) but this, that
you have seen an old Athenian keep silence at a great feast, teaching us
hereby that it is no less difficulty wisely to keep silence, then to speak
advisedly, and to attain the one, we must at chieve the other.

Choler knows not how to be silent, Chollericke men run headlong into all
kind of mischief. Judge. 9.
but is very rash and headie in every thing, whereby it happens that these
hasty headded persons run often into such danger as they never get out.
Abimelech being Captain of the Israelites, having overcome the Sichemites
laid siege unto Tebez which he took; and seeing a great part of his enemies
had saved them selves in a castle within the city, in a great rage ran
thither to besiege it, and coming very unadvisedly too near the gate to set
it on fire, was most dishonourably wounded by a woman, who cast a piece of a
millstone upon his head, and fearing it should be reported that a woman had
slain him, caused his page to thrust him through with his sword, who might
have saved him self and vanquished his enemies, if (with moderating his wrath)
he had stayed a while, and left them to necessity, which would soon have
compelled them to render them selves to his mercy. 1. Mac. 6.43.
Eleazar the brother of Judas Macchabeus, in the battle which was fought
between the Jews and Antiochus Eupator, perceiving that one of the Elephantes
was armed with royal harness, and more excellent then all the other beasts,
supposing that the King should be upon him, in which conceit of his, and
being violently carried forward with a desire of an immortal name, ran
bouldly unto him through the midst of the host, slaying on both sides till he
came to the Elephants feet, and then getting under him killed him with his
dagger, but the Elephant fell down upon him, and there he dyed, which was the
loss of a most goodly and glorious victory they might have attained, if their
general in a rage had not wilfully cast away him self. 2. Sam. 16.5.
Shimei perceiving in what great danger David was, when Absalom and the people
conspired against him, seeing him flee away in great fear and disorder,
thinking him to be utterly cast down, discovered his mortal hatred long before
concealed in his heart, and to increase the anguish of his mind, pursued him
all along the mountain of Bahurim with cursed speeches, throwing stones and
dust at him, as being not able otherwise to vex him. But when as news came
that God had given David a great victory against his enemies, and that he was
returned with the lords and great men of his court; then Shimei remembering his
great offense, and the punishment due for the same, imagined how to purchase
his pardon, and thinking this to be the best means, went and humbled himself
before the King, confessing his fault, and craving pardon: which the King
granted until the day of his death, and then charged his son Solomon that
he should not suffer the gray head of Shimei to go down to the grave in
peace: not to the intent he would be revenged, but to show the judgment of
God to be ready to fall upon all those, who in a rage do offer injury and
violence unto other men.

Plentiful are the examples in profane histories, Sundry examples out of
profane histories. Plutarch in the life of Alexander.
to prove the manifold dangers that men have thrown them selves into, by
reason of their headines. Clitus and Calisthenes were the occasion of their
own destruction, for that they had been overbold in reprooving Alexander:
whereas by modest and humble admonition they might have reclaimed him, saved
them selves, and gotten the grace and favor of their lord and master. Plutarch
in the life of Fab. Max.
C. Flaminius and M. Marcellus, two Consuls of Rome, both valiant and hardy
soldiers, were notwithstanding in the end both surprised and overthrown by
Hannibal, by reason of their overmuch forwardnes and making too hasty trial of
their fortune. Whereas contrariwise Fabius Maximus, being a more sober and
temperate captain, never enterprised any thing but with great advisednesse,
and with such deliberation considered of the circumstances of each thing, that
Hannibal could never entrappe him in his ambushes, though he placed them never
so cunningly. Plutarch in his treatise of the difference of a flatterer and a
friend.
When Hieron King of Sicilie had murdered certain of his friends, and the
report thereof ran thorough the country, Epicharmus who understood the
matter, within a while after was bidden to supper with the King, and by reason
of his abundance of choler he could not dissemble, but cried out as soon as he
saw the King, and reprooved him for his infidelity and horrible murder which
he had committed, saying: Why did thou not call me to the sacrifice thou
made of thy friends? Which was the cause that he lost his own life also, and
by this means made the tyrant more fierce and cruel then he was before.

Plutarch also reports, that when Dionysius the tyrant asked the wise men of
his court, which copper was the best, Antiphon answered very readily, that in
his opinion that was the most excellent, whereof the Athenians had made the
pictures of the two tyrants, Harmodius and Aristogiton. This was a quick
answer and spoken in anger, which notwithstanding so stuck in the mind of
the tyrant, that he could never be appeased but with the life of him that
uttered it. Which verefieth the saying of Quintillian, concerning these bitter
and choleric natures, that they had rather loose their lives, then a bitter
gird.

The Philosopher Zenon being desired by the same man, to give him in marriage
his two fair daughters; answered, that he had rather see them both dead, then
matched with a tyrant: whereupon it ensued within a while after, he being
moved with the refusal, and thinking himself injured in no small measure,
commanded to kill them both, and to carry their bodies into their father
house, to teach him to be more temperate in his words, considering what
mischief may happen to a choleric man, and the danger that ensues of a
word spoken at all adventures.

Tullie himself, Plutarch in his life.
who by his wisdom and prudent government had saved Rome from the greatest
danger that ever it was in, was notwithstanding his own destruction, for that
he could not dissemble his anger, but would needs make trial of his
eloquence, in assaying how rhetorically he could handle his tongue, in making
of invectives against his enemies, and especially against Antonie; who in
revenge, cut off his tongue and hands, wherewith he had written his railing
Orations.

Enguerrand de Marigny, who had ruled Philip the fair, Examples out of French
histories.
King of France, and governed all the whole realm as he listed, so long as the
said King lived; after his decease, being demanded what was become of a
certain sum of money, which was missed, answered he had delivered it to
Philip of Valoys, the late Kings brother, which the young Prince denying, told
him he lied: Enguerrand being a proud and choleric man, not respecting the
greatness of the person to whom he spoke, told him that it was he that lied:
which word so stuck in the stomach of this great Prince, that from that time
forward he conspired his death, and never left him till he caused him to be
hanged at Mountfanconn. A most notable example to make us remember into what
danger anger draws us, when as we will needs discharge our stomachs against
great states, who cannot abide to be braved with words.

The Earl of S. Paul, The Earl of S. Paul.
Constable of France under Jews the xj. (as Philip de Comins reports) was
the sooner brought to his end, being apprehended by the King who beheaded him
at Paris, for that in his anger he had given the lie to a gentleman of the Duke
of Burgundies house, for the which cause the said gentleman never left him,
till he had delivered him into the Kings hands.

The Duke of Nemours (whose memory deserves to be sounded with the trumpe of
eternity, The Duke of Nemours.
after he had gained the notable victories, and beaten down the pride of the
Spanyardes at the battle of Ravenna, who were thought to be invincible) was
miserably slain to the great and irreparable damage of the French, who by his
death lost the fruit of so goodly a victory, for that he followed too whotly
such as fled from the battle, leaving behind him an immortal fame of his
valiancie, and withal an excellent admonition to all Generals, to carry them
selves wisely and moderately, as well in prosperity as adversity.

Likewise Asahel (as is mentioned in the second book of Samuel) was slain
after the victory, Asahel.
for that he followed the enemy too whotly: which thing Lycurgus did
expressly forbid the Lacedaemonians. Showing thereby that not only in other
matters, but also in warrelike affairs, the surest and safest way was, to be
ruled rather by reason, which is cool and moderate, then by a flaming and
furious passion: which has been the occasion of the overthrow of mighty
armies, as those of the Romans, which the Consul Terentius had the leading of
against Hannibal at Cannas. Terentius.
Which thing has in like manner destroyed most noble and ancient houses in
Italy, as appears by those factious dissentions of the Guelphes and
Gibelins, Guelphes and Gibelins.
who massacred one an other by hundreds and by thousands, without any other
occasion then being moved thereto by this furious and obstinate rage, which the
devil had filled them with, by the permission of God, who had given them over
unto him, to the end to punish those vile and horrible sins, wherewith their
country was polluted.

Who can remember all the great and bewtifull houses, Choler the destruction of
all things. Examples. 1. Abimelech Judge. 9.45.
the fair and stately cities, the rich and fertile countries which have been
overthrown and turned topseturve, with this cursed and abominable affection?
Abimelech in his wrath having rased the city Sichem, was not content
therewith, but would sow salt in all the territories thereof, to the end to
make it unfruitful for ever. Those of Socoth, and Phanuel. Iud. 8.16, 17.3.
The city of Millayne destroyed by the Emperor Frederick.
Gedeon handled the inhabitants of Socoth and Phanuel, almost after the same
manner: for that they refused to give him and his army bread, when he pursued
Zeba and Zalmunna. In the time of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa the city
of Millayn was wholly destroyed, and pitifully consumed by fire, for that some
of the citizens in despite of the Imperial majesty, had caused the Empress
to ride upon an old moyle, with her face toward the tail, which she held in
her hand in stead of a bridle, carrying her through the streets with great
scorn of the beholders, using withal many insolent and outrageous words.
Which they paid for afterward with the destruction of their whole City.

The inhabitants of the town of Dinan (which is a village situated upon the
river of Meuse, Dinan destroyed by the Duke of Burgundy.
and under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Liege, transported with a deadly
and mortal hatred they bare toward the Duke, made a picture as like him as
was possible, dressed and adorned with his arms, and carried it to Bovines
which was not far off, where in derision of the foresaid Prince, they drew
it through a most filthy and stinking ditch: and then laying it upon a bank,
said to those of Bovines with great bitterness of heart; Behold the throne of
your drunken Duke. Some of the wiser and more temperate sort, being greatly
displeased herewith, foreseeing the great mischief that might ensue, if they
were not reconciled to the Duke, wrote unto them in most loving manner, to
exhort them thereto. But they being overcome with choler and extreme hatred,
contrary to all equity and reason, killed the messenger, a thing not heard of
among the most barbarous nations of the earth. Nay they proceeded farther, for
the citizens of Bovines considering that by reason of their neighborhood, the
mischiefs and calamities of war might fortune likewise to reach to their
city, persisted still in soliciting of them: and to this end, sent a little
child unto them with letters full of amiable and friendly persuasions, to
induce them to reconcile them selves to the Duke; but they took the infant and
like Lions and woolfes enraged with fury, tare him in pieces. Whereby we may
evidently see, that the nature of this passion is to make men void of all
humanity, and to make them mount, as it were, by degrees, from cruelty to
cruelty, till they come to the height of all impiety, and that God seeing the
fullness of their sin, might make the blood they have shed to be powered on
their heads. Which thing happened to those poor men of Dinan, for the Duke
caused them to be thrown by couples into the river, then rased and spoiled
their city, The inhabitants of Arras destroyed by the King of France.
that within three days after it was so defaced, that a man could hardly say,
that this was Dinan.

The condition and estate of those of Arras, was not much better, who were
besieged by King Jews, for that during the siege some choleric and hasty
persons among them, in despite and mockage of the French men, hanged their
arms upon a pair of gallows over the walls, where at the King, the Princes,
and the whole army took such indignation, that after the taking of the city
and the execution of the principal rebels, they rased the walls thereof,
drove out the inhabitants, who were hanged in every corner of the land as
rogues and runnagates.

And has not the like happened to the city of Burdeux in ourage, Burdeux.
for murdering the Kings Lieutenant? was it not sacked by the garrisons that
were sent thither, their privileges and charters cancelled, their goods
confiscate, their liberties spoiled, and their fidelity always after greatly
suspected? And it was a happy turn for them, that the King was more moderate
in punishing, then they were in offending. For there have been great and
mighty cities sacked and spoiled for lesser offenses then this, Alexandria.
as Alexandria, where the Emperor Caracalla caused the youth of the city to
be cut in pieces, for that some of them had spoken evil of his complexion and
portraiture of body.

How often has the city of Gaunt been destroyed, Gaunt.
by reason of the hasty and froward conditions of some (by whom the rest of
the common sort who do not consider things to come, and little or nothing that
which is present, and therefore are easily drawn after) under pretext and
color of a kind of zeal they have to the common wealth, and a desire to
defend the liberties and privileges of their country, opposing themselves
against the disordinate and unbridled affections of their Princes, though in
deed the authors of these rebellious tumults were stirred thereunto, through
an ambitious desire of rule, and by this means would have brought in a far
more insupportable tyranny, then that they before rejected? One James and
Philip de Arteville two artificers, were the cause of the destruction of above
200000, as Frossart reports, which thing as also many other of like sort
ought diligently to be observed, to the end we may learn thereby to eschew this
dangerous and dreadful passion: and may labor to possess quiet and peaceable
minds, considering the mischiefs that ensue of these tumultuous and
troublesome motions.

The second meditations of a man's heart, Choler will not suffer a man wisely to
consider of that he has to do, nor will not suffer him to follow any good
counsel.
(according to the old greek proverb) are always the best and the soundest.
For time does not ripen the fruits of the earth alone, but likewise our
counsels and cogitations: and therefore as the fruit is long on the tree before
it can be gathered, so must our deliberations and counsels be in our minds,
before they be uttered. Otherwise we must think of them, as of the youngling
that is borne before the time: and such are the counsels usually of a hasty
headed man, and therefore David says, Psalm 7.
that such an one travelleth with wickedness, conceives mischief, and brings
forth a lie. And that which is worst of all, they can neither take good
counsel of them selves during the heat of this fiery passion, nor yet receive
any at other men's hands, for choler is like a wind in the body. It puffs up
a man and makes him so proud and arrogant, that he thinks no devise so good
as his own. He is like unto those who seeing their houses on fire, understand
not what is said unto them, by reason of the noise about them, and the
troublesome cogitations of their own minds. Wherefore S. Basil compares these
angry and peevish persons to sottish drunkardes, for that both of them being
void of reason, are not capable of any good instruction. Speak unto them
gently, they do not regard it: reproove them roughly, they are the more
exasperated and become more wilful. Which wise men in former ages wisely
observed, and therefore willed to let them alone, until their fury was
overpassed. For as many medicines do little profit, if they be not applied after
the fit be ended, so can we not comprehend any reason, if with these
tumultuous and troublesome motions our minds be molested and vexed.

Now let us consider what a fearful thing it is, The intolerable mischief of
anger.
that we cannot take good counsel when it is given us. For it is as if a man
were ready to die for meat, and yet could not eat. And we may evidently see
that this abundance of choler does not only bereave us of our own
understanding and counsel, but it will not suffer us to take that which is
offered us by others; and so closes our eyes and stops our ears, that we
can neither see nor hear that which is profitable for us. These things being
well considered, every man ought carefully to take heed and study diligently
to be sober and quietly minded, and especially princes and al other great
lords, whose wrath and anger is so much the more dangerous, by how much it is
more mighty and more powerful, then the fury of other men.

It is a dangerous mischief, Who those are that ought to be most careful to
avoid this passion.
says an ancient Grecian, when as a man that may do what he will, will needs
do that which is naught. For the will and desire of man is like a sovereign
queen, which will be served and obeyed of all the parts of a man's body, and
will omit nothing that can be invented, to satisfy her lusts and likings. What
lamentable mischief then will it breed, if a Prince, who with the word of his
mouth, rules his subjects as pleases him, disposes of their goods,
liberties, honors, and lives as he lists, without let or contradiction, what
lamentable mischief (say I) will it breed, if such an one be passionate and
distempered with choler. Plutarch.
The Planets, says Plutarch, have their motions so much the slower, by how
much the more they are elevated in their spheeres. In like manner, the greater
and more eminent the authority and dignity of the Prince is, the more sober
and temperate should be his affections. And in deed there is nothing that so
bewtifieth and adorneth authority, as mercy and clemency.

Tytus the Roman Emperor, being admonished by his friends that it was a
dishonor unto him, to promise to every man so lightly that demanded any thing
of him, without considering first of the demand, and afterward of the means he
had to accomplish his promise, made an answer worthy of everlasting
commendation; and that was this: That no man ought to be admitted to the
presence of the Prince, and sent away unsatisfied, no more then from the
presence of God, in the contemplation of whose goodness consists all joy and
comfort. For there is nothing wherein he ought more to resemble God. For God is
full of mercy, patience, and long suffering, and ready to hear all that call
upon him faithfully; yea and that, when as we have most grievously offended
him. And if he chastise us at any time, it is done with great mercy and
clemency. For though he be angry yet he never forgets his mercy: Mercy a
most notable virtue in a prince.
so likewise ought Princes to do, who represent Gods person upon earth, and
are here as visible gods, to be gracious and pitiful.

He must neither have gall nor sting, but be like herein to the master Be,
considering that (as the wise man says) there is no stronger bulwark to
defend his throne, and to maintain his authority, then justice and clemency.
For it was never seen, that subjects were so long kept in awe by rigorous and
cruel handling, as by mild and gentle dealing, which have always gotten the
hearts of the people. And by this means wise and prudent princes have made all
their subjects a most strong guard to keep their bodies. Yea, the very Tyranous
themselves have thought this to be the only safe and sure way to live in peace
and security. book of piety.
For Seneea reports that Nero refused to sign the sentence of death, which
the Senate had given against a notorious offender, and that thrice together,
and at last seeing him self so instantly urged thereto, to the end he would be
thought a merciful and pitiful prince, wished he had never learned to write:
knowing full well, that clemency is the principal virtue which makes a king
to be loved and honored: and if they have any vices and imperfections, by this
means they are in a manner hidden and nothing at all perceived, or at the
least more easily borne withal, book of Sam. Plutarch in his lives.
as we may easily see in the examples of David and Caesar: for under this
cloak, the murder of the one, and the ambitious desire of the other was so
covered, that notwithstanding both these faults, they were accounted the most
merciful and gracious princes that ever were. Julian the Apostata played the
same part: Zozom. lib. 5. cap. 14, 15, 16.
for to the intenthee would not be counted a persecuting tyrant, he dealt more
cunningly then his predecessors, who had no more pity of Christians, then
butchers have of their beasts. Ammian. Marcelline. Zosymus, and others.
But though he had as deuilish a stomach as the rest, yet he went closely and
craftily to work, showing a kind of mercy and clemency: by which means he so
disguised his cruelty, that among many writers he is placed in the rank of
mild and moderate princes.

When as Athenodorus that great Philosopher and master to Augustus Caesar would
needs take his leave of the Court, Notable instructions to princes against
choler
and bid the Emperor adieu, to the end he might spend the rest of his days in
quietness (for that by reason of his extreme age he could no longer endure
the labors and travels of the Court) the Emperor desired him that before his
departure, he would sot him down some short and compendious rules, such as hoe
thought might be profitable for him in the government of his Empire. To which
request Athenodorus answered in this manner, Doc nothing when you are angry,
and if it happen at any time that you be moved, determine of nothing before
you have said the Greek Alphabet on your fingers ends, and by that time
reason shall be able to teach you what to do. Whereby we are admonished, that
temperance is the most excellent virtue of all others. Pericles in like manner
being ready to die, hearing his friends that were about him, speak of his
worthy and memorable acts, some remembering his notable victories and great
spoils gotten of his enemies, others his prudence and dexterity in managing
the affairs of the common wealth, some his eloquence in persuading or
dissuading whatsoever he liked, others his magnifical and sumptuous buildings,
the wise and discrete government of his house, others also commending
otherthings: What? (says he) and say you nothing of this, that Ineuer caused
any man to wear any mourning garment by my means? giving us thereby to
understand, that he never was an occasion of any man's sorowing all his
government, and withal that cleme^cie is the most excellent virtue of all
other in a prince.

S. Paul says, that they be the ministers of God for the comfort and good of
his people: and if they cause any to fear them, they should be such as are
evil and not the good: Romans 13.4.
and in no wise must they resemble the barbarous and heathen Emperors, who
will not suffer their subjects so much as to see them, as though they were
Basilisks, which kill as many as behold them. It is most true that Solomon
says, that a wise king winketh at the offenses of his subjects, and by that
means drives away all disloyalty that is lodged in their breasts. Which speech
is not contrary to that before spoken. For I speak only of them who are so
proud and hasty headed, that they think to turn all topsie turvie with the
blast of their mouths, and take a pleasure (as did king Demetrius) to be
called destroyers rather then builders of towns and cities: and in a word,
these men are sure to be hated, so long as they are thus redoubted and feared.
And yet there is no better way to keep me^ in a we, then when we unite a modest
and temperate life, with a dece^t and seemly gravity. For this ingendreth
shamefastnes in the hearts of the subjects, and shamefastness makes them
fearful to offend. Wherefore, as they seek for nothing but to be honored,
served, and obeyed of their subjects, so there is no better nor readier way to
attain this their desire, then to show themselves mild, gentle, and merciful,
even in those punishments, which are due to offenders: wherein they must be
like to skillful surgeons, who when they will sear or cut off any putrified or
rotten member, use to deal tenderly, gently, and in as mild manner as possibly
may be: thereby to comfort their patient, and to diminish his pain. So
likewise a prince to mitigate the sharpnes of the pain, which is often due by
rigor of Law, must mixed equity and moderation therewith: showing both in his
words and countenance a commisseration toward the offender, who
notwithstanding by reason of his evil deserts by force of his Laws must needs
be condemned.

And among other things he must be very careful, Examples of cruel natures in
tyrants.
that he follow not these tyrannical and cruel spirits, who love nothing wors
then to be moved to pity and compassion, as Phalaris and Alexander Phereus, who
understanding that there should be tragedies played before them, departed
forthwith from the Theater, fearing they should take compassion of those
miseries which should be represented by the actors: nor those also, who take a
pleasure to inue^t new and exquisite punishments, as did C. Caligula, who put
to death his senators and such as displeased him, by pricking the^ with sharp
penkniues, to the end (said he) they mayfeele death. As also Nero, who rejoiced
to see Rome on fire, and all things else in the world to be spoiled. And
likewise Vitellius, who not long after the battle that he had with Otho,
smelling the stinking savor of the dead bodies which were slain in that fight,
said to his friends that were about him, that the death of those citizens was as
a sweet smell in his nostrels. Wherein he showed himself rather to have a
wolvish nature, who take pleasure in the sight of dead carkases then of a man
which is borne to be merciful and sul of humanity. Contrary examples.
Scipio the great (the paragon of al nobility in his time) carried an other
mind: for answering one of his captains who told him that with the loss of 2
or 300 of his men he might win the city which he then besieged, said, he had
rather save one citizen, the^ destroy a thousand enemies. In like manner, it is
the duty of a good prince to defend, cherish, preserve, keep, support and
comfort al pore and desolate persons, and to be as it were a sanctuary to such
as are pursued, whereto they may retire without danger. One being desirous to
commend Philip king of Macedon, said, that he haddestroied the goodly city
Olinthia. What said a Lacedemonian that stood by: And has he builded such an
other? giving us thereby to understand, that it was more honorable for a Prince
to build up, then to destroy. For who is there that can not deface the most
beautiful palace of the world, and set fire in every town in a whole
kingdom? but there are but a few that can build them up again. A tree that
has been growing an hundredth years may be cut down in two hours. Which thing
ought to move princes and great potentates, to get honor and immortality by
their well doings, rather then by the ruin and destruction of common wealths.

It is surely a glorious thing to be accounted pitiful, as was the Emperor
Antonin, and Lewis the son of Charlemaine: Or father of the people, as was
Augustus and Lewis the 12 king of France: Ora preserver of the country, as was
Hercules and T. Flaminius: Or good, as was Traian: or just, as was Ariflides:
or a peacemaker, as was Solomon. These are the true titles, names and
commendations given to God, which he likes, and such as are as great as may
be. Plutarch in his lives.
Silla being Dictatour thought himself happy, that he had preserved the city
of Athens, although it had resisted him, and would in no wise be revenged of
the rebellion it had made against him. Pompey after the death of Sertorius
having the letters and aduertisements of his friends in a chest, which was sent
unto him during the war, threw them all into the fire and would not suffer
any man to read them, fearing they would be an occasion still to nourish
discension in the city. The like did Julius Caesar after the victory had at
Pharsalia, when as his enemies letters were brought unto him. The like is
reported of Lewis the 12. who understanding of the death of Charles the 8. by
reason whereof (for that he was nearest of blood) he was to succeed in the
kingdom, forthwith kneeled down and humbly thanked God for so great mercy
bestowed upon him, and withal desired three things of God, the one of them was
this, that he might never remember the injuries offered him by his enemies.
Wherein both he and the princes before named deserve greater commendation, then
for any victory or conquest obtained of their enemies. For there is not a more
noble or heroical mind, then that which valiantly overcomes his own
passions and affections, nor more beautiful monuments, then such as we erect
of our selves, nor more magnificall and sumptuous triumphs, then when we cause
our flesh and concupiscences to be led before in chains, as it were, slaves
and captives.

Let us conclude then, Clemency the most excelle^e virtue in kings and princes
so that it be wisely dispensed.
that there is no virtue that more magnifieth and exalts the majesty of
princes, then clemency, being wisely dispensed. For it must not be wasted and
prodigally spent, no more then our riches, but prudently and carefully
foreseen to whom it be distributed. For if magistrates, to the end to seem
pitiful, will tolerate the eues, murderers, and seditious persons in the
common wealth, they shall be (indeed) most cruel: seeing that (as S. Augustine
says) there is no greater or more dangerous cruelty then such kind of pity
and clemency. It is a miserable thing (as said the senator Frontus) to live
under such a prince, which will not sometime remit the rigor of his laws: so
is it a more wretched life to live in that cuntry where all things are lawful,
and where through a pusillanimitie and carelessness of mind, things both
against law and reason are easily remitted.

Charillus a Lacedemonian hearing one praise a king for his compassion and pity
toward all men: how (says he) is it possible he should be good, seeing he is
merciful to all? Princes ought to follow the example of God himself, and to
govern their subjects as he rules his people: whose government David has
notably described in the 18 Psalm: and thus speaks unto God, With the godly
thou will show thy self godly: with the upright man thou will show thy self
upright: with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self froward: thou will save the poorepeople, and wilt cast down
the proud looks. Being notwithstanding always more inclined to pity then to
severity and entising as it were men to reform their lives by his long
suffering, rather then to constrain them by violence or by threatenings. For
incision and searing are always the last and extreme remedies which are used,
A notable custom of the ancient Jews whereof great potentates may make good use.
and never practiced but upon necessary and urgent occasions.

The ancient Jews used a most laudable and commendable custom in their
judgments. For if there were controversies of inherita^ces, moueables, or any
other temporal goods, they made an end of the matter forthwith as soon as they
had heard them: so did they likewise in criminal causes, when as it appeared
by evidence that the party accused was not guilty: but if he were guilty, then
would they delay the time 3 or 4 days before they would give sentence, though
the fault were apparent. Declaring thereby how dear men's lives ought to be unto
us, and how sorrowful we ought to be, when as by reason of their wickedness, they
constrain us to cut them off, the better to preserve the state and quietness of
the common wealth. I am not ignorant, that some delight to show themselves
marvelous hot in reproving other men's faults, and will not only excuse this
their heat, but also commend it as a great and noble virtue, attributing
thereto the name efzeale, and blaming al such as will not proceed with like
bitterness. For that (say they) through their dissimulation, they do as it were,
flatter the wicked in their naughtines. Which saying seems to carry a good
show. Notwithstanding it is certain, that under this color many cover sundry
disordinate and lawless affections: and the greatest number are more severe
censurours of vice in others, the^ in themselves. We have now plentifully
discoursed of the effects of choler, let us now speak of the principal causes
whereof it is engendered: for these being well understood, it shall be more easy
to avoid it.

Pride is the principal cause and that which makes us most often to fall into
this peevish and froward humor. The second part discourses of the principal
causes of anger, the first whereof is pride. Dan. 3.13.
For we never see an angry man, but he is proud, disdainful, and very prone to
frowardnes, as soon as we offend him and the reason is, for that he thinks he
is contemned, or not so honored as he desires. What was the cause that so
incensed Nabuchadnezzar, as that in his rage he commanded to cast the 3 young
me^ into the furnace, for that they refused to worship his image? was it not
his proud and cruel heart, which desired excessive honor, and a reverence due
unto God himself, and could not endure to be denied thereof with any reason
whatsoever? Sophocl. in Ajax.
In like manner the ambitious and aspiring mind of Ajax was the only cause (as
appears in his tragedy) that he fell into an extreme rage and deadly envy,
Senec. lib. 2. cap. 36.
considering that the Greeks had preferred Ulysses before him, and that they
had given him the armor of Achilles, as a reward of his valor and notable
wisdom. And that which soincensed Alexander against his best friends,
proceeded of nothing else, but of a presumptuous and arrogant mind, against
which they opposed themselves. Lib. 5. cap. 9.
Philip Commins remembering the causes that bred the overthrow of Charles Duke
of Burgundy says, that the principal desire he had, was to be equal in glory
with the potentates of old time: which made him ready to fall out with his
neighbors, and to pick quarrels for light causes, and that with those, who knew
better to manage their actions then he did.

If then it be so, that anger is engendered of pride, The remedy against pride
is to be lowly.
there is no better way for to avoid it and to live quietly with all men, then
to be meek and humble minded. Moses hearing his brother, sister, and all the
people reprove him without cause, was not angry, for that he had a mild and
temperate spirit: whereas many having so great authority as he had, and withal
a proud and hautie heart, would forthwith have bin incensed and sought means
to be reue^ged. 2. Sam. 16.5 etc.
David was no whit moved with those great wrongs that Shimei offered him, for
that in great humility he acknowledged that it was so ordained of God to try
his patience, though that his men were angry therewith, and that Abishai among
others, was so incensed, seeing so great outrage offered to the king, that he
desired license to go and take away the head from that cursed traitor.
Whereby we may clearly see, the difference between the humble and hauty minded,
and how soon the one is more ready to vex and disquiet then the other. Chap.
1.2, 3.
Job was so patient in all his troubles, that (having lost his goods, his
children, the health of his body, the company and consolation of his friends,
yea, and that which is more, mocked and scorned by them) was no whit vexed with
all this, but reasons with them, and answers all their calumnious and
slanderous speech without any choler, and as quietly as he was wont to do in
his greatest prosperity. and there was nothing that persuaded him to this
mildnes, but a lowly and humble mind, which made him confess and acknowledge,
that he was nothing but dust and ashes. Whereof it proceeds also, that Christ
Jesus himself and his Apostles so lightly regarded the injuries and wrongs
offered them of their enemies: and that living in so great contempt in this
world, being nothing but a byword to the wicked, Notable examplesof modesty
among the heathen, to the shame and consusion of many christians.
they were never moved with all this dishonor, but accounted themselves more
happy and more rejoiced in this, then did al their enemies in their greatest
glory.

And to the end that we should not think that these were especial and
singular graces given alone of God unto those elect and choice persons, we may
find many among the Philosophers, who being humble and modest minded, had
almost as great patience. Laertius in the life of Socrates.
Socrates never changed countenance for any wrong whatsoever was offered him:
in such sort that by seeing him, it could not be discerned whether he had
occasion to be merry or sad; in so much as at home and abroad, in health and
in sickness, in liberty and in prison, he was always the same man without
alteration. Plutarch in his discourse of anger.
Diogenes being scoffed at for his rusticall and uncivil behavior: Say what
you will (says he) it mooveth me not at all: thereby showing with great
gravitie, the virtue and constancy of his mind, and that it is a difficult
matter to make a true Philosopher angry, who feels no more the injuries
offered him, then a dead man feels the prickings of a lance or sword. For
the presumptuous and hauty spirit is dead in him, which makes men feel, and
that so quickly, every little wrong that is offered them. book. chap. 26. of
his history.
Elian reports that a certain man being outragiously misvsed with
contemptuous and reproachful speeches, and that in the presence of a great
many, carried notwithstanding such a joyful and assured countenance, that he
was no more moved therewith the^ a rock against which the waves of the sea beat
continually

Plato endured many wrongs in the court of Dionysius the tyrant, Plutarch in
the life of Dionysius.
as well of himself (who having a barbarous spirit, used often to insult over
him with proud and arrogant speeches) as also of his other Courtiers and
flattering parasites, who could not endure the excellent knowledge and
wonderful graces that were in this Philosopher, and yet we cannot read that
ever he was once moved one iotte at all with them for it, nor yet was weary
of his house, so long as he had any hope to profit them in his wisdom.
Laertius in his 2. book in the life of Aristip.
Aristippus put up greater wrong at this tyrants hand. For he contrarying and
opposing him self sometimes against his unbridled affections, seeking to
repress them by sundry good and philosophical persuasions, did the more
incense this barbarous tyrant, who like a young colt at the first handling
refusing both bit and bridle, or any means that may tame him, began to use him
more extremely then before; which did notwithstanding in no whit stir the
philosopher, but with great modesty mildly answered him in this manner: That
if fishers were contented almost to drown themselves, to catch little fishes;
he ought not to stick to wette him self to catch great salmons.

I would to God, that we (who are Christians, and do brag to our great
shame, of our knowledge of good and evil, and vaunt of a better hope of the
life to come, the^ had these poor paynims) would imitate them in their
virtues, in the love, in the study and practice of these glorious actions
which we so greatly commend in them, and so often repeat to their great glory,
and no small infamy to our selves. How many shall we find informer ages who
did most notably resist the injuries offered them? But we are so froward, that
is to say, so base of heart, and yet so proudly conceited and puffed up with a
vain opinion of our selves, often times without cause, and for the most part
for indifferent things, as riches, strength, beauty, gentry, and reputation;
we presume, I say, so far beyond measure, for these and the like transitory
things, that we are not so soon stirred, but we will stir against King and
Council, high and low, and minister sufficient matter to Poets to make new
Tragedies.

But peradventure some man will say, that the reason why these Philosophers did
so patiently bear these wrongs which were offered them, was, for that they
wanted ability to revenge them selves. Whereto I will not answer, that by
reason of their great knowledge and eloquence, they might have left the
memorial of their friends by their writings eternised forever, and have
defamed their enemies to all posterities, which in my conceit is the greatest
revenge that may be. But I say that not only these pore paynims were lowly and
patient, but even mighty Princes have imitated or rather surpassed them, as
Antigonus who being in his tent and hearing his soldiers speak evil of him,
Plutarch in his Apoth.
went forth and bade them go further off, that he might not hear the^. We
need not demand here what he might justly have done, nor what they deserved,
nor yet what many of our Captains would have done in the like case; but rather
let us consider the example of this mild Prince, and study to follow him, and
to reproove our selves as often as we are prone to anger, and ready to revenge
every wrong that is offered us, seeing we are slow enough to recompense any
pleasure that is done unto us. The same Antigonus while he was besieging a
city, hard some of the besieged mock him, for that he had a deformed
countenance: while for the present he answered nothing but this: that in his
own conceit he was fair enough. But not long after, having gotten the city,
he took also the scoffers, and to chastise them for their faults he sold
them as slaves, and advised them not to scorn him any more, if they did, he
would tell their masters. Wherein he showed a marveilous moderation as well at
the present laughing at their pride, Plutarch.
as also not long after in punishing their fault. There was also an ancient
Grecian named Arcadion, who spoke evil of Philip of Macedonie wheresoever he
became, which when the Kings friends understood, they counseled the King to
punish him severely, to the example of all others. But this good Prince
(contrary to the fashion and custom of many in these days) was more mild in
punishing these indignities offered him. For meeting on a time this common
backbiter, first spoke very gently unto him, after conferred with him
privately, being departed from him, sent him home great and rich gifts. A
two or three months after he enquired of his friends, what Arcadion said of
him, who answered that they thought no man in the world spoke more honorably
of the King, then he did. Whereto the King answered, that he well perceived he
was a better physician then they all, and that a discreet and moderate
mildnes, is often times more forceable to correct men's corrupt manners, then
hasty and froward dealings. The same King being advertised (as there are some
always about Princes that are more prone to incense them to choler, then to
pacify their anger) that there were some at the Olympian games, that in their
sports did often touch his roy all majesty, and that very tauntingly,
contrary to their allegiance and duty, in respect of the great benefits he
had don unto them, and therefore they deserved severe punishment. What (said
the King) if the Grecians having received so great aid and comfort of me, yet
will speak evil of me; what would they do, if I should do as you counsel
me? He that will well consider the power and might that so great a King had to
revenge himself, and withal the occasion that was offered by the
importunity, ingratitude, and weakens of his enemies, as also the counsel and
persuasion of his friends, which incensed him to be revenged: finally in
respect of his honor and dignity, which seemed to be diminished in
dissembling such an injury, must needs confess that his constancy and
mildnes was wonderful, and worthy to be remembered for ever of all great
states. Plutarch.
It is reported that the comicall Poet Philemon, having disgraced Magus upon
the stage, as it is an usual thing for players to do, who are ruled more by
affection then by reason; this honorable personage (to the end that such rash
and headie dealings should not go unpunished, and on the otherside to show the
mildnes and gentleness of his mind) first sent one of his soldiers to the
party, willing him that he should touch the edge of his sword: giving him
thereby to understand into what danger he had cast himself, by his lewd
tongue: and presently after him sent another of his servants to carry him a
top and a scourge, showing him the folly and childishnes of his mind.

Ptolome one of the successors of Alexander, Plutarch in his treatise of anger.
being disposed to scoff at a schoolmaster, whom he supposed to be very
unlearned, asked him in jest who was father to Peleus, as we use oftentimes to
ask, who was the father of the four sons of Aymon. This schoolmaster (who
was not such a dolt as he was taken for) answered, that he would tell him, if
it might please him first to tell who was father to Lagus, covertly touching
the baseness of the house whereof the King was descended. Whereat many
gentlemen which stood by were sore offended, crying out that such
audaciousnesse was not tolerable. But the King (who was mild, and knew
himself in fault, for that he had given the first occasion of jesting)
answered: that if it were an unseemly thing for a King to bear an injury, it
was as evil a thing for him to offer a wrong. Tiberius Caesar being advertised
that many things were spoken in Rome, to the dishonor of the Emperor Augustus
his father in law, told it to his said father, and stirred him all that
might be to give commandment to search out those backbiters, to the end they
might be punished as they deserved. But the good Emperor (who was nothing
moved with such reports) answered very mildely, that he would suffer them so
long as they did but speak evil: for in such a free city as Rome was, men's
tongues should be at liberty.

We may see by these examples above mentioned, and such like, that a temperate
and humble spirit was a very familiar thing in old time, as well to the great
Monarchs, as to the poor Philosophers, but it was far more admirable in the
one then in the other; for that in the fury and heat of war they were so
mild, and always ruled by reason, though the sword were in their hands,
which surely proceeded of a marvelous modesty which was in them over there is
in us. For though they surpassed us in wisdom, and in all kind of virtue,
notwithstanding we exceed them in an opinion of our selves, which is so
exceeding, that we imagine there is no honor, dignity or reward, which in our
conceit we have not well deserved. Whereof it proceeds, that when we are not
so honored as we desire, or when any discommend that in us which we esteem
highly of, we fret and fume like a pedlar that hears his wares dispraised.
And that this pride is the principal cause, that makes us so froward, it
evidently appears in that we are soon appeased, if he who has offended us,
will once submit himself unto us, and excuse himself, showing us that he did
it not of any vnreverent regard he had of us, or of contempt: but for want of
discretion, good counsel, through frailenesse, or otherwise. And therefore I
advise those, who are so prone to anger, (the better to repress their rage) to
have always such imaginations in their heads, and to force themselves to
excuse the faults which are committed against them, attributing them (if they
be enemies) to their want of discretion, if they be friends to their
familiarity, if servants to their rudeness, and so likewise of others. For
there is nothing (as I have said before) that does more vex us, then when we
imagine we are contemned and despised of others.

The second cause is self-love, The second occasion is self-love.
which is always united and tied to a vain and delicate curiosity. Which is
evidently perceived in all those who are over curious in their attire, in their
meat, diet, and such like. For you shall see such men oftentimes fall out with
their wives, their friends and servants, and be contiuually chiding with one or
other, either for that his meat is not well seasoned, or that some stick is
smoking in the chimney, or for that there is no salt upon the table, or that
his bread is not well baked, or that the candle is not well put out, or the
napkins not well washed, his cloak not clean brushed, his horse not well
curried, his glasses broken, or for some such light and slender occasion. For
these delicate fellows are as tender and as easy to hurt as he that is trobled
with the gout, which makes them oftentimes to cry out before they be touched.
Whereby it falls out that they get such an angry habit, that through an often
stirring and concussion of the lungs, they engender such a froward ulcer, as
proves incurable. And (God knows) they in the end become so unsociable and
so unfit for any acquaintance or familiarity, that the most pacient man alive
will think them intolerable.

To remedy this mischief, A remedy for this foresaid mischief, proved by
examples.
it is very expedient to learn to be content with those things we have, and
not to seek (as many do) after many superfluous and unnecessary things. Adam
was never angry for that his meat was evil baked, seeing he was fed with
herbs, roots, nuts, pears, and apples, and such other like fruits.
Likewise, Abraham was not angry that his house was not stately builded, neatly
contrived, fit and handsome for his turn: for he was pleased with atent, which
might be easily carried from one place to another, as occasion served. Jacob
likewise was not displeased that his bed was not easily made, or the pillowes
not well laid, or the bedsted not clean wiped: for he was accustomed to lie
often in the fields upon the cold earth without any other pillow, then a hard
stone to lay under his head. The Patriarchs.
None of the Patriarchs ever found fault with their wine, that it was not
sweet enough: for they were content with a little water to quench their thirst.
Elias.
Elias never complained that his horse went not easily: for he used always to
travel on foot. Neither yet S. John, that he was not clothed in silks and
veluets richly trimmed with gold lace: for though he were of a good house, yet
was he content to go meanly apparelled, and to cloth himself with a coat made
of camels hair. The Apostles.
The Apostles being sent to preach the gospel through out all the world, never
dispraised the diet they found in any man's house that received them: for they
had been used to coorse bread and broiled fish, and were well acquainted with
hunger and thirst. Christ Jesus
Christ Jesus himself the only Son of God, and Lord of all creatures,
living here in this world, was never angry for that he was not curiously
served, or that his Apostles did not run till they sweat to fetch him
forthwith that he demanded, but with great humility debased himself so low, as
to serve them and to wash their feet, as the most inferior person among them.

The best means, then to correct the greatest number of our choleric
passions, is to give our selves to a frugall and sparing life, A confirmation
of that which went before by the example of the heathen, especially Socrates.
Look the book. fol. 219.
and to desire nothing but that which is wholesome for the health of our bodies,
as did the Lacedaemonians, and those excellent Philosophers among the Grecians.
It is reported of Socrates, that he going into the market at Athens, and seeing
the people buying some one thing and some an other, began to thank God, not
for that he had enough of whatsoever was to be sold there, but for that he
could well spare that which others so egerly bought. If we had as contented
minds as had this Philosopher, out of doubt humility would be far greater
then it is, and we would be no more moved with the scouldings of some ftoward
Xantippes, then with the noise of cackling hens.

If we had once bidden the world adue, A notable example and remedy against
anger, and worthy to be considered of all Christians.
and that it were crucified unto us, with all the glory and lusts thereof, if
our flesh with all the desires thereof, with the which we so furiously fight
against the spirit were once mortified, if (following the exhortation of S.
Paul) having all temporal blessings we would as little regard them, as if we
had them not: if also following his example, we would count althings as dung
that our flesh wishes and desires: if as he and the rest of the Apostles, we
would indifferently learn to bear travel and rest, poverty and plenty: if
all our conversation were in the heavens until we be raised up with Christ
Jesus, we would not seek or wish after any thing, but that which is heavenly.
If Christ living in us, and we in him, we be clothed with innocence and lowly
affections, making no account of our fleshly and carnal desires, if we have
the bowels of compassion, patience and pity, if we earnestly renounce al
impiety and foolish affections of this world, if by our baptism we have bin
truly washed, and died with Christ Jesus, if we have no other delight but in his
cross, and that in reioicing we consider that his virtue has healed our
infirmities, and that tribulatio^s breed patience, and patience the means to
make us try the goodness of our god, and the great care he has of us, and this
proof a most strong pillar to rest upon, and to sustain the hope we always
have in him, if we be truly regenerated and governed by the spirit of God, who
is as it were a fountain of all meeknes and clemency: if being the disciples
and true scholars of Christ Jesus, we have learned this lesson of him to be
mild and humble hearted, if God who is charity it self dwells in us, and we
in him: if as his true and natural sons, we be peacemakers; if we be as
gentle as lambs, and as ready to imitate the dove in simplicity, as the
serpent in subtlety: if we understand what it is to ask pardon of our sins
and offenses committed against God, who will not forgive us unless we forgive
them, who have offended us, out of all question we would not be half so
froward as we are.

We are like to a bowl, that is fit to be rouled every way, Anger is a note of
inconstancy, infidelity, impatience, impiety, and distrust.
according as our affections lead us, whereas in deed we should (as Aristotle
says) be like to a four square body, which by reason of his firm and solid
foundation, is not lightly turned up and down. And who will ever believe that
we can have a sure faith to vanquish the world, death, and the devil, with
all the powers of hell, if we be so easily stirred to anger, and that a word
peradventure mistaken, is sufficient to make us forget all reason? can we
think we shall be able to endure so great assaults, and such violent
temptations, as often times Christians are assailed with, seeing we will be
moved for so small matters? Who will believe that God dwells in us by his
spirit, seeing the properties and effects thereof are (as S. Paul says) to
make a man patient, mild, gentle, courteous, lowly, meek, believing and
bearing all things so far as is possible, to the which there is nothing more
contrary then anger? And to conclude, who will think that we have an assured
confidence in God, and hope in his promises? seeing they are unseparably joined
with patience, and that naturally they arm men against all adversity, and
fortifieth them not only against scoffers and mockers, but against all the
engines and subtle sleits of the devil and the world.

O Lord, A christian meditation and true confession of such faults as most men
are culpable of in these days before God and men, by reason of their
impatience.
how far are we from the perfection that thou requirest, being thy children
and created after thy image and likeness, we ought to resemble thee in some
things; but between us and thee there is so great difference, and we are so
degenerated from the state wherein we were created, that we can not be
discerned that thou were our father, for thou art merciful without end, and
thy goodness endures for ever to so many as fear thee, as says the Prophet:
and we are cruel, fierce, unmerciful, and more raging the^ the wolfes in the
wilderness. Thy patience is so great that it cannot be vanquished by the
multitude of our tra^sgressio^s, and ours so little, that the smalest trifle
that is, makes us to lose all mildnes. Thou art so bountiful, that thou art
content to forgive ten thousand tallents to him that desires thee but to have
patience, and to bear with him a little: and we are so miserable, that we will
rather make a man die in prison, that owes us but a hundredth pence, do he
never so humbly entreat us, then abate any thing, or give any respite for
payment. Thou art slow to anger, and easy to be pacified, and thy wrath is
soon at end: but we contrariwise are quickly angry, and so hard to be
pacified, that no satisfaction will suffice us. If thy children, friends, or
enemies have offended thee ten thousand times, and will return unto thee, thou
art ready to receive them, to embrace them, and to forget all that is past,
and that with so greatioy, as thou do any of them, who have served thee
faithfully all days of their lives* but we will not look at a man that has
once offended us, nor meet him any more that has hurt us never so little, but
if we see him a far of in the street, we turn an other way forfeare we should
meet with him. Thou desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may
repent and live: but we wish all the mischief that may be to such as have
offended us. Thou forgettest our faults when we confess them, and castest
them behind thy back that they never come forth to appear before thee: but
we so imprint the wrongs and injuries in our hearts that are offered us, that
we never forget them. We need but once ask mercy and forgiveness at thy hands,
and we shall obtain it: for as the Prophet says, Those who feel the burden
of their sins, and are worn away by reason of their transgressions, those
do thou behold with the eyes of pity and compassion, and put all their
wickedness far out of thy sight. Behold the great readiness which thou
use in hearing the requests of all those that are afflicted, and thy mercy
toward those who have offended thee, if they will humble themselves before
thee! Thou make them not to wait long upon thee: thou art not deaf or
asleep: we do no sooner knock, but thou openest; nor so soon seek thee,
but thou art found; nor so soon desire thy help, but we obtain it: but we
(even the most courteous and pitiful men among us) show a sour countenance
two or three years to him that offends us, and keep him in suspense and in
doubt of our favor, till at the length by gifts, entreaties, repentance,
kneelings, and such servile adorations, with great instance and importunity
he obtains of us a good morrow, or a friendly word, which oftentimes too we
speak rather for courtesies sake then for any true affection we bear him.
Thou make thy sun to shine, and the rain to fall upon the ground of the
just and unjust, to make their lands fructify and bring forth plenty. But we
are so perverse and froward, that having once conceived evil of a man, we will
not so much as suffer him to light his candle at our fire. And the principal
cause of all this, is a fleshly and carnal love most cursed and wicked, which
we bear toward our selves. For that which S. Paul writes in the first Epistle
to the Corinthians is most true, that when as anger, malice, and hatred
dwells in us, they are infallible notes and marks, to prove us carnal and
fleshly minded.

There is also a third cause of anger, Curiosity and superstition, the third
cause of anger.
which is a curious observation of every thing, and a desire to know
whatsoever either our wives, children, or servants do: whereby it comes to
pass, that we knowing or suspecting any small trifles, such as either might be
concealed from us, or dissembled by them without any great harm, we both vex
our selves and others very often and sundry times about them. Now that which
the Emperor Frederick was wont to say, A remedy against this mischief.
and after him Jews the xj. is very availeable against this mischief, and
must be remembered. And that is, that he that knows not how to dissemble,
knows not how to live. For this is not expedient for Kings only, but for
all that are in authority, and have any charge whatsoever. For if a master of
a family will rule his children and servants well, and be both beloved and
feared of them, he must both shut his eyes and stop his ears, so that he
neither hear nor see many youthful parts which they play. But some man will
say; If you will have fathers so careless, and masters to give their servants
so great liberty to servants, many great inconveniences will ensue thereof.
Which thing I would easily grant, if they should wink at matters of
importance, for then dissimulation were very dangerous: What faults may in no
wise be dissembled.
as if they should live disorderly and dissolutely, polluting their bodies, and
corrupting their manners; then parents cannot be too careful, or masters too
watchful. But there are many other things which may be concealed well enough.
But let it be granted that it is a fault to dissemble them, yet it will never
prejudice us so much, as the griefs, sorrows, and vexations which will
proceed of this narrow sifting of things will disquiet and torment us. For
sometimes small trifles do offend us more then great matters, as in reading of
a small print we rather hurt our sight, then in beholding the great and
Capital: letters the reason is, for that we vewe the one more near and more
earnestly then the other. There are some things which a man must look unto
him self, some things he may commit to his wife, and other things to his
children and servaunts; as did Moses, who committed the deciding of small
matters to such as he had chosen out among the people for that purpose, by the
counsel and advice of his father in Law Iethro, reserving matters of greatest
consequence for him self, which thing brought no small rest and quiet to his
mind.

There is another thing also that makes us very Chollericke and froward, The
4. cause of anger, is a light belief of every tale that is brought us. Psalm.
120.
and that is, that we are ready to hear and believe every report that is
brought us. For it is impossible (as the Emperor Traian was wont to say) but
that he which has long ears should also have bloody hands; for that (as
David says) slanderous and deceitful tongues are as the sharp arrows of a
mighty man, and as the coals of Juniper, giving us thereby to understand what
sorrow and vexation they bring unto as many as are content to hear them. And
therefore if we will live peaceably, we must in any wise avoyde all slaunderers
and backebiters, imitating herein the example of this good King, who writing of
this matter, shows what order and government he used in his house, Psalm.
101.
saying, He that privily slaundereth his neighbor, will I destroy: him that
has a proud look and high heart, I can not suffer. And a little after in the
same Psalm, There shall no deceitful person dwell within my house, he that
tells lies shall not remain in my sight. For there was never yet any Prince,
but if he would give ear unto liars, he was straight a Tyrant, being induced
to injury the wisest and gravest Counselors about him, by means of their
flattery and deceitful practices, whereof we have sufficient testimony in
the examples of Dyonisius, Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Domitian, Commodus and
many others, whose monstrous cruelties are most memorable.

There is also another reason that makes us very prone to choler, and that
is, The 5. cause of choler is that we regard not the infirmities of our weak
brethren, for that we will not bear with them, and the sleightes and cunning
of Satan. Plutarch in his treatise of anger.
that we consider not how subject men are to sliding, as well through the
corruption of their natures, as also by reason of many lewd and badde examples
which we see: and likewise for that Satan is very painful and laborious to
draw men thereto: all which we should remember, when as they commit any
fault whereby we are vexed and disquieted. And we ought to do herein as the
Philosopher Panetius, using the example of Anaxagoras, who understanding of the
sudden death of his son, answered him who brought the news without any great
unquietness, that even from his beginning he always thought he should dye.
In like manner, we seeing our wives, children, friends, or servantes fail in
their duties, we should forthwith consider, (to the end the better to
repress this our Chollericke humor) that they are frail by nature, weak,
unwise, The first remedy against this mischief. The 2. remedy.
and without understanding, and that there is nothing perfect but GOD alone.

Moreover it were expedient that their faults should instruct us, and cause us
to remember and consider our whole lives, as did Plato, who seeing a man
dissolutely and lewdly disposed, Plutarch in his treatise of anger.
would forthwith examine him self whether he were culpable in the like or
not. For we shall see, if we examine our selves well, that we are faulty in
as great or greater matters, as he with whom we are angry. And thus we shall
moderate and temper our passionate minds some what the better, and it will
make us much more friendly and familiar with them, with whom we live, and
nothing so rough and churlish as are those men, who never respect the
infirmity of their neighbors, when as we see any of our friends or
neighbors fallen into any malladie or disease, though the disease wherein they
are, happens through their own folly, and by means of some disorder they
have used, yet we are moved with compassion and pity toward them: what shall
we then do, when as through the occasion of their faults and transgressions
we are moved to consider and behold that great and horrible corruption of
our own nature, which having begun in our first parents, have since that
time spread it self as a most filthy and contagious botch, over all their
posterity, and which even like a running scabbe has perced into the marow and
sinews of our souls, and that in such sort, that we are become lame and
unable to do any good thing whatsoever? The latter part of the discourse,
wherein the Author shows some particular remedies against choler, whereof
the first is, that it is good to stop it in the beginning, and not to suffer it
till it be begun. An example of Socrates. Plutarch in his treatise of anger.


It is good also (the better to repress our anger) that we deal with it, as
we use to deal with fire, which with great and earnest endeavor we seek to
quench, when as it first begins to kindle, not expecting till it has taken
the beams and rafters of the house, or any other solid matter whereby it may
be strengthened, for then it is too late to prevent it. In like manner we must
not stay till we burn and flame with anger, but as soon as ever we feel our
selves disposed thereunto, and that the pulse of our hearts begins to beat
more quick then is convenient, for a right and wholesome temperature.
Whenever Socrates in talking with his friends, perceived him self moved
with this passionate affection overmuch, forthwith (as though he would strive
against the stream) he forced and endeavored himself to show a smiling
countenance in his talk, and generally a singular mildenes in all his actions:
and if it happened at any time, that he were much moved, he would draw a
bucket of water and set it by the wells side a good while without drinking of
it, and by this means bridled his desires, and acquainted them by this manner
of dealing (even as a good father does his children) patiently to endure, when
as these things are denied them that they require. In like manner when as we
perceive that this chollericke humor within, and many occasions without, do
prick and spur us forward to anger, we must then, as it were, muster all our
forces together, the better to defend our selves, Another example of Plato.
Plutarch in his discourse, why God deferreth the punishment of the malefactors.
and courageously resist the violence that is offered us. Plato having taken
his man in a great fault, was of a sudden exceedingly moved, and having gotten
a cudgel as though he would have beaten him, notwithstanding desisted, and
used no further punishment. One of his friends standing by and seeing this
thing, demanded of him, why he had gotten such a cudgel? to whom he
answered that he had provided it to correct and chastise his own anger,
which seemed to rebel against him, and would no longet be ruled by reason. In
like manner should we do, when as we are troubled with this passion, and get
either a knife or a sword to cut the throat of it, when it begins and is
as it were in his infancy: for we may easily at the first oppose our selves
against it, as against a tyrant, and not permit it to have rule over us, but if
we suffer it to increase and to fortify it self, it will by little and little
overruled us, and at length become invincible.

Augustus Caesar having made a law against adultery, The second remedy is,
to quench anger as soon as it is begun. Plutarch in his Apotheg.
understood that after the publication thereof, a certain gentleman of Rome
was over familiar with his daughter Iulia, which he took very grievously (as
it is likely that a father and such an Emperor as he was, would do) who for
the hatred he bare unto that siune, had very lately made a sharp and rigorous
law against it: and therefore on a day he meeting this gentleman by chance,
stroke him with his dagger until he cried out, that there was a law made
whereby he ought to be punished: wherewith the Emperor was so ashamed and so
moved with him self, that he was so far transported with Choler, that he
would neither eat nor drink all the day after. If we would thus correct
anger, and as soon as we perceive it with draw our selves from all company, as
those do who have the falling sickness, to the end that others should not
see them fall grovelling and lie foming at the mouth, showing a most strange and
gastfull countenance, we should not often do thus, but we should easily tame
this furious passion, and at length attain such a moderation and constancy of
mind, that it could not be altered with any occasion whatsoever. The Thebanes
thought at the first that the Laoedemonians were invincible, and therefore durst
notmeddle with them, but after that they had overcome them once or twice, then
they thought they were able to conquer them: and to speak truly, it was very
easy for them ever after to overcome them, and that in set battles. In like
manner if we once take heart, and think that we are able (being well armed
with reason) to meet anger in the field, and overcome it, we shall not need
to encounter this enemy twice, for he will not be so hardy as appear the
second time, or if he do, it will be to his utter overthrow and confusion.

But some there are who hold a contrary opinion, An objection.
and think it better and more manlike, to vomit out (as it were) and
discharge our angry stomachs. And some also there are who vaunt them selves,
and think they are worthy great commendation, for that they will not keep
any of that filthy and stinking water in the rivers of their hearts, and in
so doing (say they) we show a generous and noble nature. An answer.
But let me ask them this question. Will they, after they be once well
chafed, and that through injurious and outrageous words they have vngorged
themselves, and (as it were) spitte out all their poison, will they, I say,
then be quiet and peaceable all the rest of their lives? it is clean
contrary: for they do nothing but as it were bring oil to increase the
flame, and fit matter to augment the fire, which is increased with light
trifles, dry and withered stuff, such as choler is.

And therefore as we see that cold and heavy matter thrown upon the fire
does quickelie slake it and put it out: so likewise there is nothing that
does sooner abate and assuage an angry and furious man, then to be as cold
as he is hot, as heavy as he is light, as silent as he is busie-tongued. The
Physicians of the body prescribe bitter and sharp medicines to purge a
chollericke humor, The diseases of the mind are otherwise bealed then those
of the body.
but there must be another kind of purgation for the diseases of the mind.
For their choler which is bitter and hasty, is healed by a pleasant and
patient receipte; and pleasure which is sweet, is healed by sharp and sour
afflictions. Let us conclude then against the common opinion, that it is much
better not to be so chollericke and hasty, and that this deadly poison of
anger profits us nothing, which forthwith we vomit out with great peril
and danger. For it is not like unto sorrow, which is somewhat mitigated by
weeping and wayling, but rather it is augmented and increased, if by
opprobrious and reprochefull speeches, threatenings, invectives, revenges, and
such like means we seek to manifest it. It seems unto us at the first,
that if we have once uttered our anger, our minds are satisfied: so does the
covetous man think, that if he once obtain that he desires, he will then
rest contented. But as the desire of the one is nothing assuaged by the
possession and increase of riches which he desires, but rather augmented more
then it was before: so likewise the poisoned stomach of the other is nothing
eased by outrageous and furious speeches, but rather they become more froward
and perverse. For that rotten humor, that is to say, the passion which
ingendreth these diseases, remains always in the secret corners of the
heart, though the venemencie thereof be somewhat assuaged, so that the old
disease is easelie renewed, as we see it often happen in tertian or quarterne
agues.

Besides the remedies above mentioned, Patience a most excellent remedy
against anger
there is another excellent preservative against this froward inclination, and
that is Patience. For the cause why we are so soon angry, is, that we are
very impatient, and the skin of our minds is so tender and thin, that
every little jerke with a twigge, that is to say, every triffling word that
displeases us, will fetch blood. But if we were as we should be, we would
be like the fine gold, and suffer our selves to be six or seven times tried
in the furnace, and yet the heat of the fire should never change our nature,
no nor yet our color; Apt and fit similitudes to this purpose.
and we would resemble good corn, first to be thrashed with the flayle, and
then winnowed in the wind, and yet be neither broken with the one, nor
carried away with the other.

We would endure both winter and summer like unto trees planted by running
brooks, whom the first hurts not by his frostes and cold, nor the second
by his heat and drought, and as sheep that be shorn every year, and in the
end be led to the slaughter, and suffer our throats to be cut without
saying one word: we would be like incense, and permit our selves to be
thrown into the fire, the more evidently to manifest the faith which God has
given us: and to be ground as the mustarde seed, the better to she we our
goodness, and suffer the plowers to plowe upon our backs, and to make long
furrows, as the Propher David speaks. Psalm. 129.
We would be like unto a ship that is well made and sufficiently trimmed,
neither the mighty winds, raging waves, or stormy tempests should make us
leake, and like unto the Palm tree, which though it be mightily laden, never
bends. And to conclude, we would endure (following the example of the
ancient writers) to have our skins beaten, and strerched as drums, without
breaking: and as our Savior Christ Jesus, to be whipped, mocked, and crowned
with thorns, yea and crucified too, and yet pray for our enemies who have done
us all these harms. If we wore once armed with this corslet of proof, (I
mean patience) not only words and injuries, which are but as the points of
little thorns, should not pearce us: but also the sharp arrows of Satan, his
lances and pilies should never be able to touch us to the quick. What is the^
the cause that we are so prone to anger? is it not because we are disarmed and
spoiled, as it were, of this excellent anchor of patience? which
notwithstanding is most fit and seemly forall Christians. For what faith,
hope, or charity can we have without it? how shall we otherwise endure
temptations, and be able to mortify the lusts of the flesh? What coherence
shall we have with Christ Jesus and the rest of his Saints? what marks and
badges of a Christian? what testimony of the Gospel? how shall we be known
to be members of Jesus Christ and children of his Church, or that his word has
been received by us, and laid up in our hearts, there to take such deep
root, that it need neither fear the Sun by day nor the Moon by night, as
David speaks? How shall we (if we be so impatient) be known to be
regenerated creatures, or that we will renounce our selves to follow Christ
Jesus, and to take up his cross upon our shoulders, and, as it were, to be
tied to it so long as it pleases him to suffer it for the confession of the
truth and the glory of his holy name? who will think that we have been
conversant in the reading and meditation of the holy Scriptures, if we be not
patient? seeing that the end why they were given unto us and revealed by the
holy Ghost, and gathered so diligently by the Prophets and Apostles is to
instruct us, and to set before our eyes the example of virtuous men in former
ages, at such time as God tried them with great temptations which he sent them,
and by so many fair promises which he has made, to take us into his
protection, and to assist us whenever we call upon his holy name, to
strengthen us, to comfort us, and to accustom us to endure all things.

It is reported, A confirmation of those things which go before, by examples of
such men as have only been brought up in philosophy. Plutarch in the life of
Tymotion. In the 9. book of his history.
that after Dionysius the tyrant had lost his kingdom, and had withdrawn
himself to Corinth, where he lived in base and servile manner, Diogenes meeting
him on a time and according to his old scoffing manner, demanded what profit he
had now gotten by all his philosophy he had learned of Plato? Think thou
(says Dionysius) that it has not done me great pleasure, in that it bath
taught me patiently to endure this sudden change, of a great and mighty king,
to become a poor and simple schoolmaster? and surely this was a wise and
prudent answer. Elian also reports, that one of Zenos scholars having been
long at school, and at length returning home to his friends, his father
disliking him for that he had not so profited as he desired, and reproouing him
both for the loss of his money, and his own time: and not contented with
words, at last fell to blows, ever demanding him what he had learned, at
length after the young man had been well beaten, and had endured all the
reproachful and bitter words of his father, answered, that he might well see he
had learned somewhat, and that he had not altogether lost his time, in that he
had learned patiently to endure so many blows. Now shall not we be ashamed and
hang down our heads to see these poor infidels, having been trained up only
in the school of Philosophy, so meek and patient, and our selves with all
our divinity and Christianity, so froward and chollericke?

Besides the means remembered, The fourth remedy against anger is, to
recommend our selves humbly and earnestly unto God.
there is also an other remedy, and that is heartily to be seech the Lord to
aid us with his holy spirit, and to change our hard and stony hearts, into soft
and fleshie hearts: for without his assistance we can do nothing of all that
has been before spoken, for that he is not only the author of our faith, but
also of our charity, patience, and of all other virtues whatsoever. It is not
sufficient to make fruitful fields, to sow good seed, but it is also
requisite, that the soil be hearty, and the husbandman expert and cunning in
his manuring of them. In like manner it is not sufficient that we be persuaded
by reasons drawn out of Gods word and other places, to a mildness and
meekness of spirit: but it must also be imprinted and written in our hearts,
which cannot be unless the hardness thereof be taken away. And there is
nothing that can effect this but the working of the holy Ghost, who knows
best how to husband us, and to change and alter us. Wherefore to end this
discourse, we will refer the reader unto him, to the end that by humble and
earnest prayer, he may attain that at the hands of the Almighty, which has
been before delivered.

THE FOVRTH book of the contentation and tranquillity of the mind. AGAINST
ENVY. The Contents of the whole Book.
ANacharsis a Scythian borne, though otherwise a very wise and prudent man,
being on a time demanded what the reason was, why so many men are always
malcontents, answered very fitly that the cause was this: they often vex and
disquiet them selves with supposed injuries, and envy the prosperity of their
neighbors. This excellent Philosopher wisely declared, that choler is the
tormentour of our lives, and always accompanied with envy: and that in such
sort, as the one cannot well be without the fellowship of the other. And as in
eschewing evil, we follow that which is good: and contrariwise in running
aftervice, we flee from virtue: so likewise in estranging our selves from pity
and clemency, we by and by shake hands with anger, which is always attended
on by spite and envy: and that which one does with the hand, the other does
with the heart, as appears by infinite examples out of sundry histories.
Which being considered by the Author of this discourse, he does very aptly in
the next place, show the coherence and difference of these two perturbations
of the mind, and evidently shows wherein this passion exceeds all the rest
going before: this being done, he painteth it out in his colors; first in
general, in that envious men are enemies both to God and man, as appears in
the examples of Cain, Saul, Joseph's brethren, and others of the Jews. In
particular he describes the hypocrisy, malice, filthiness and beastlines, into
which an envious man plungeth himself: against which he opposes the examples
of many men, who have been void of all envy, and among other, the example of
our Savior Christ, with a brief declaration of the profit and commodity,
which redoundeth of this consideration: then he enlarges it with the examples
of Alexander the great, and of Alexander Severus: afterward (as some painters
use to cover and shadow their pictures, the better to make them appear with
lively colors) he sets down the examples of some malicious and envious
Princes, and among other, Commodus the Roman Emperor: and continuing his
discourse, he deciphereth the horriblenes of this passion in that, that he
which is poisoned with this humor hates eve^ those of his own kind: and
that which is worse, he grieveth at the prosperity of the^, whom for their
virtues he ought the more to reverence, which is notably prooved: as also that
the bruit beasts are not sa cruel and savage as is the envious man. And this
is that which is contained in the first part, being plentifully enriched with
sit comparisons and grave sentences.

In the second, he sets down two remedies against Envy: the first is, the
contemplation of this life: in the other, that we ought to understand, that the
graces and blessings of our neighbors are in such sort, by the blessing of God
made proper unto them, that others also reap singular commodity by them:
consequently he comfort those who are spighted and envied, and draws them
into two singular considerations, which may breed in them a marvelous
contentment: and in the end by a most fit comparison, taken from a law
sometime in force among the Athenians, he shows what an excellent
counterpoyson and preservative God draws out of this venomous humor, for the
preservation of such as fear him and live under his obedience.

THE FOVRTH BOOK. Against Envy.
THE fourth passion and vexation of the mind, whereof we have purposed to
speak, is Envy: which we will briefly and summarily handle, for that it is a
kind of angry and froward humor, and therefore has a great affinity and
coherence with the passion going before, as generally there is among all vices;
which (as Plutarch says) are like unto a great number of hooks so tied and
hampered together, In his treatise of envy.
that it is impossible to part them. Whereby it comes to pass, that such as
are prodigal, are also covetous; such as are rash and headie, are likewise
fearful and cowardly, and that, when they should be valiant and hardy.
Wherein anger and envy differs.
Notwithstanding though anger and envy do agree in many points, yet do they
also differ in many other things; and the one is far worse then the other.
For he that is angry may have some color and show, and some just occasion to
moove him thereto: Just occasions of anger.
as when we see God dishonored, his word despised, Christ Jesus blasphemed and
persecuted, charity neglected, Innocents oppressed, youth lewdly instructed,
all estates corrupted, all Discipline and good order suppressed and abolished,
ignorance exalted, knowledge discountenanced, flatterers, covetous, and
ambitious men honored, and the virtuous and well disposed disgraced, and (as
fools and idiors) sent home and discharged of their offices, laws subject to
force and violence, and reason wholly captivated by affection, the fire in Gods
house, the woolfes in his fold, the bore in his vineyard, his spouse in the
stews, and they who ought to look to these things, either so dumme that they
cannot, or so careless that they will not look for the redress of such
inconveniences. When as we see everything thus confounded and disordered, and
that vice has exalted her self in such triumphant manner, placing her self,
as it were, in a throne of majesty, and with great pride treads virtue under
her feet, tugging and haling her by the hair as a poor captive slave: shall
we not then have just cause to be angry, and (as the Poet says) to be mad
with reason?

But it is not so with envy, for that can not pretend any coulerable show,
but if we be envious, it is at the happy and prosperous estate of an other,
for which we should rather rejoice and praise God. And this is the reason that
Bion the Philosopher, meeting on a time with an envious man, demanded of him,
whether he was vexed and tormented with the prosperity or adversity of his
neighbor: giving us thereby to understand, that the nature of this cursed and
diabolical passion is, to repine at the happy success of an other, and to
sorrow at his joys, and (as the Poet says) to pine away, when we see our
neighbors children prosper, his beasts fat, and his fields fruitful and
laden with plenty of corn. Whereby we may easily perceive, how much more
detestable it is, then the other passions, which may pretend some show, though
not altogether to excuse them, yet in some sort to cloak and color them.

Covetousnes alleges the hardness and misery of poverty, The pretext of the
passions of the mind.
the multitude of children, the small charity and relief among men, the
diseases and afflictions which ordinarily happen among them, without the hope
and expectation to be succored by any other friend then by money.

Ambition pleades that men are in no account at this day, if they be not in
honor and credit, as also being able to pleasure and profit our friends, we
purchase unto our selves love and good liking of them, or in hurting our
enemies, we make our selves redoubted of them, by overthrowing their practices
and endomaging them selves.

Choler shows the greatness and indignity of injury, the ingratitude and
infidelity of him that offered it, the suspicion, dishonor, and disgrace that
may ensue by dissembling it, the example of justice, and the severitie which is
requisite to repress injuries, and to bridle the outrageous offenders.

Pleasure alleges his sweetness, and that we must pass our youth merrily, as
also the season of the year, the time, the opportunity and the company,
which draws us on to recreate our selves, and that it is a very civil and
gentlemanlike thing, to spend lustily at great meetings: and contrariwise that
it is a clownish and mechanical manner to be niggardly, and never to come in
company.

Fear and cravinlinesse shows what danger there is in hasty and rash
proceeding, and that it is far better to go on slowly, thereby, as it were,
to ripen our business, then by thinking to make have, and by taking of it to
soon, to make it naught, and shrink afterward.

And to be short, Every vice has some excuse save envy, which should make them
the more ashamed which are infected with it.
as our flesh is very subtle and ingenious in that which appertains unto it,
so we have no passions but we have some sophistical and slender reasons to
maintain and justify them in some sort, except it be envy, which being
accused, has nothing to say for it self. And we see that many men that are
fearful, given to pleasure, covetous, or ambitious, will confess so much;
but he that is envious dare not discover him self, for that this passion is
so loathsome and vnsaverie, that it offends who so ever smells it.

And there is great reason, why it should be so: Acomparison between envy and
the other vices.
for all the other proceed of the corruption and disease of our nature; but
this proceeds of a malicious and perverse disposition of our wills. The
others are oftentimes so greatly tempted, that though they yield, yet they
deserve some pity and commiseration. But this envy is not tempted, but with
the blessings and benefits of God. For as Christ Jesus speaks in the parable,
Math. 20.15
the eye of the envious is evil, because God is good: and therefore he
deserves greater condemnation, then he that is impatient, when he is in
affliction, for that oftentimes he is scourged by the heavy hand of God, and
that in very rigorous manner, in such sort that it is hard, nay impossible by
reason of the vehemency, or rather fury and rage of his afflictions, to keep
his heart and bridle his tongue, that the one do not conceive, and the other
pronounce great blasphemies.

But what can an envious man allege for him self but this, The cursed and
horrible object of the envious.
that God is to good, to merciful, to liberal and to bountiful toward his
creatures, in giving to one so great strength, to an other such riches, an
other such health, to an other such friends, to an other such knowledge, to
another such honor, to an other such favor and credit, and generally to all
sufficient to be contented there with? for he respects nothing else to
torment him self withal: as also on the contrary when he rejoices, it is
for some lamentable and heavy matter, as when he sees discord among friends,
jealousy between man and wife, his neighbors house on fire, his children
licentiously given, his servants steal and run away, his time lost, his
goods wasted in such sort that al is spent, and he brought to beggars state: in
these and the like miseries, the envious man rejoices: he never laugheth
heartily but when he sees others weep, nor ever weepeth but when he seeeth
others laugh: he is healed by the diseases of his neighbors, and raised up by
the death and destruction of other men.

As we see among beasts some feed upon venim, Fit comparisons for this purpose.
and others upon carrion; so does the envious man fat himself in the loss,
poverty, misery, death, and destruction of his brother. S. Basil in one of
his Homelies, does very fitly compare them unto flies; for as they leave the
sound parts of the body, and light upon the corrupted and putrified parts
thereof, and take such delight in the matter and filth, that it is hard to
keep them from it: so likewise an envious man takes no pleasure in all the
other parts of a man's life, but only in that which is diseased and corrupted.

They are like unto Timon of Athens, The envious man is enemy to God and man.
enemies to men, and unto whatsoever appertains unto their own prosperous
estate, and also haters of God and of his glory. For whatsoever he has made
in this world to manifest his goodness, and by this means to allure and draw
his creatures to honor him, is most odious and displeasing in their sight.
Wherein they show themselves to be the children of the devil, and make
manifest that they are his heirs and successors, in the hatred which he has
born from the beginning, as well to the honor of God, as to the health, wealth,
and prosperity of men, which are the very notes and tokens whereby they are
known that are of his race and family. And who can sufficiently express how
far they are from all charitable affection, in that nothing grieveth them so
much as to see God honored, and men profited, as to see God rain down the
Manna of his heavenly benedictions, and men to gather it up and enjoy it.
Proofs of that which has been spoken by examples. 1. Cain. Genes. 4.5.


And to the end, that this may the more lively appear, let us consider a
little what was the cause of the hatred that Cain bare toward his brother
Abel. God (says Moses, was pleased with Abels offering: which his brother
perceiving, was by and by pale, sorrowful, and sad: as if by his
countenance, he would discover his malice and hatred, which he had inwardly
conceived in his heart, which was so great, that he could not be satisfied,
but with his brothers life, as he had even from the beginning resolved with
him self. Behold what occasion this poor innocent man had given unto the
other to do him so great harm? whereof was he culpable? surely of nothing,
but only this; that God loved and favored him, and to declare unto all men
the favor he bare unto him, he had accepted of his prayers and sacrifices.
What was the reason that the hie Priests, Scribes, Of the Scribes and Pharisees.
and Pharisees bare such deadly hatred unto Christ Jesus, which they showed
during his life, by opprobrious words, injurious deeds, and many outrageous
dealings: continuing them so fiercely, and that after his death, that they
endeavored by all means to extinguish the memory of his name, and to banish
such as should but mention it, or that would in any manner or sort whatsoever
favor and defend his honor? What had he done that did so offend them, or
might justly provoke them to such anger? He made their blind to see, their
deaf to hear, their lame to go, he healed such as were sick of the palsy
among them, he cured such as were possessed with wicked spirits, he raised
up their dead, he found out that which was lost, that which was weak he
comforted, he healed the broken, he instructed the ignorant, and called
sinners to repentance, to the end that they, acknowledging their faults,
might obtain pardon: he comforted the afflicted, and in a word, he was the
haven and refuge of all such as were tossed with the waves of misery, and as
it were, the store house of all the graces, favors, and blessings of God,
which are exposed indifferently unto all men. Behold now the faults he
committed, and the causes whereby they were so eagerly bent against him.
Wherein we may evidently see, that there is nothing that more offends the
envious, then to be good, and that the greatest fault among them is to be
virtuous, to be in favor with God, and to have a good opinion among men.
Whereupon Themistocles was wont to say, that the reason why no man envied him,
was, for that he had done nothing worthy commendation. Diogenes in like manner,
hearing one complain that he was hated and spited of others, counseled him,
that (to revenge himself) he should still continue to be virtuous, as the best
means one can have to punish such enemies, whom he tormenteth, and, as it
were, racketh more by his good conversation, then by all other injuries
whatsoever he can offer them.

It is a very strange thing to consider the hatred and malice that the
envious man bears to virtue, and how he is grieved when he sees it shine,
as it were, in his neighbors. For albeit that it be profitable and commodious
for himself, and that he reap great fruit thereby: notwithstanding he is
not contented therewith, but had rather lose the profit he enjoys by this
means, then to see the other enjoy the praises and commendations which he
deserves. Which we may see by the Pharisees, who continually spoke maliciously
of the doctrine and miracles of our Savior Christ Jesus, not for that they
were hurtful or unprofitable to them, but only to deprive him of the good
opinion that the people had of him, by reason of his works, and to defraud him
of the honor that was due unto him.

Who reaped all the commodity and profit of the wisdom and prudent government
of David, In the example of Saul.
of his valiantness, diligence, and dexterity, of his victories, and generally
of all the happy success and prosperous events in all his enterprises? was it
not Saul? and yet for all that, he was so displeased herewith, that he had
rather be overcome himself, then vanquish others by his means: and that in
such sort, that he was not so much grieved with the damage and hurt that Goliath
and his other enemies had done in his country, nor with the reproachful words
they used to wards him self: as he was tormented when he saw the daughters
of Israel sing songs in his praise seeing him return with Goliahs head upon
his spear. Of Joseph's brethren.
What an exceeding commodity and profit was it for Jacob, his children, and
whole family, that God had purposed to advance Joseph to such honor and
dignity? for otherwise they had been in danger (as in process of time it
evidently appeared) miserably to have died with hunger and famine.
Notwithstanding they setting behind them all the pleasure and commodity which
they might participate of, by their brothers advancement, desired rather,
(through an envious and malicious stomach) to see their brother die, yea, and
themselves to kill him, and thereby endaunger them selves, their children, and
their good father, then that (through the goodness and bounty of God) he
should attain unto so high preferrement.

By this, one may perceive, The nature of the envious and their hypocrisy.
that the envious man is no less grieved at the sight of virtuous and well
disposed men, then is the Panther when he sees the face of a man, which (as
Saint Basil says) is so displeasing in his sight, that he no sooner sees the
picture thereof, but incontinently he rages and indeuoureth by all means to
spoil and tear it. It is true, that the envious man does never in such sort
discover himself. But indeauouring to obscure the honor of other men, he
uses some pretext and color, and by all means seeks to hide his malicious
stomach: as appears by the Jews, who to cloak the spite and malice they
bare unto Christ Jesus, conuenting him before the judge, sometime accused him
that he was a blasphemer, sometime that he was a seditious fellow, and a
moouer of tumults among the people, and such like accusations, by this means
the better to hide their own cankred stomach, to make him odious among the
common sort, and to provoke the magistrate against him. Notwithstanding though
that the hatred and rancour, which the envious bare toward the virtuous, be
so colored and disfigured, if it were greater then the enmity which is
between Egles and Dragons, or that between the Crows and the Owls, the
Cock and the Lion, the Boar and the Elephant, between whom (it is reported)
there is such discord and hatred, that even when they are dead their bloods
will in no wise be mingled together: so likewise envy and virtue can in no
wise agree. He that will be in favor with the envious man must needs be
vicious. For so long as God is good, (which is and shall be for ever and ever)
and that through his great and exceeding mercy, he shall bestow many and great
graces among his children, Envy continues always.
to enrich and beautify them: and as long also as there shall be any in this
world, who desire to live virtuously and honestly, this passion will always
remain in the devil, and in the heart of all such, as are in slavish estate
and condition under him, gnawing them continually, and feeding upon them as an
impostume or filthy ulcer. By reason whereof the ancient Philosophers have
likened virtue to the sun. For as the heat thereof softeneth wax, and
hardens the mire: so likewise virtue rejoices and comfort the good, and
grieueth the wicked, consuming and wasting them by little and little, and so at
length pineth them away with sorrow and grief, in seeing good men flourish in
wealth and prosperity.

It is like unto the moth in the garment, the worm in the tree, Fit
comparisons to prove that envy consumes it self.
the rust on the iron, which first consume those things that have engendered it.
And this is the reason, why that Agis, understanding that in Sparta there were
many great and envious personages, answered, that he was sorry to see them so
unhappy, as that they could not rest contented with their own sorrows and
afflictions, but the more to vex and torment themselves, they must be grieved
at the prosperous and fortunate estate of other men.

Envious men (as the old saying is) are not only like unto vipers, in that
they be always full of poison, but also for that neither the one nor the other
can bring forth their young ones without killing them selves: and they differ
in nothing but in this, that when as the young vipers are hatched, the old
presently die, whereas malicious men consume by little and little, as men pyned
in prison, or wasted with a long sickness.

Seeing then, that this is so dangerous and pernicious a vice, Examples of many
excellent me^, who have been void of all envy. Nom. 11.27.
we ought most carefully to take heed of it, and to abandon it, by all
possible means: imitating herein the examples of magnanimious and heroical
minds, who have by all means honored and countenanced virtue and honesty in
whomsoever they found it. When as Eldad and Medad began to prophecy in the
host of Israel, a certain young man being jealous of his masters credit,
Moses.
and fearing that his name should be greatly obscured, came and told Moses:
and Joshua counseled Moses to put them to silence: but in stead of following
Ioshuas counsel, he praised and magnified God, and brake forth into these
speeches, O that all the people did so: giving thereby to understand, that we
can not conceive in our minds, much less express in words, how happy that
land should be, whose inhabitants are replenished with the knowledge of God,
and study continually to set forth his praises. Of John Baptist.
When as the disciples of John Baptist understood that Christ also baptized,
being moved with a like affection, came unto their master, and told him of
it, and further, that many went after him to hear his doctrine, was he angry
or malicious against him for it? no: but thereupon took an occasion to give
him those ample and great testimonies which are written in the Evangelistes,
Matt. 3.11. Mark. 1.7. Luke 3.16. Ioh. 1.16.
that he was the lamb of God, which should take away the sins of the
world, that he was the spouse, that he should baptize with fire, and with
the holy Ghost: that he was not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoe,
that him self must decrease, but he must increase, to the end, that by this
means his Disciples might understand his authority, and learn wholly to
depend upon him. the Apostles.
Were the Apostles envious, when they understood that Paul was called unto the
same dignity that they were? Was there any contention among them when they met,
for their place, for the chair, and such like preheminences, where with some
Clergy men are so busied in their assemblies, and that often times with such
earnestness and bitterness, that it hinders their consultations, and that in
such sort, that they never meddle with that for which they assembled? though
he were the lest among them, and as one borne out of season, yet did they not
thrust him down to the lowest place, as we use to do ordinarily those, who
come last, but acknowledging the graces and gifts of God in him, they friendly
and courteously received him into their company coming to Jerusalem, and gave
him the right hands of fellowshippe, as it is in the Epistle to the Galatians.
S. Paul the Apostle
Was he himself also envious, for that God had given unto others so great
faith, such knowledge, compassion, and many other singular virtues? we may see
as well by the history that Saint Luke has written of his life, as by the
Epistles which he wrote unto many Churches, the great zeal and desire he had,
that all other should be equal in gifts and graces unto him: Romans 9.3.
and that he was, as it were, so ravished with this affection which he bare
toward his brethren, that to save them, he wished himself accursed. But
where shall we find a more notable example, then that which is propounded
unto us in the person of the son of God, who has communicated unto men all
the gifts and graces, which he has received of his Father, and has divided
with his brethren, his obedience, his justice, his innocence, his life, his
inheritance, and whatsoever he had besides, without reserving ought to him
self, saving only the glory thereof and the pain to distribute them? and
further, to make us partakers of his honor, he has made us the children of
God, Kings, Priests, and Prophets as well as himself: he has placed us at
the right hand of God his Father, he has set us at the table in his kingdom,
he has made us judges of the world, he has made us flesh of his flesh, bone
of his bones, one body and one mind with him: and the better to show how
greatly he desires to be equal with us, and how far he is from all envy and
malice, he has not only conformed himself like unto us in those things
above mentioned, but also the better to resemble us, he has participated of
all our infirmities, except sin: for he suffered hunger and thirst, cold and
heat, yea and death it self as well as we.

What man is there, who considering the great humility, charity, and purity
of heart in our Lord and Savior, The consideration of the unspeakable mercy
of Christ Jesus, and the duty we owe unto our neighbors is the very
counterpoyson of envy.
and that toward all the world, dividing as it were, and that so liberally,
so great graces with other men, that can be justly offended, if his neighbors
and friends be comparable unto himself in many commendable virtues? Where is
the conformity we should have with the members of a man's body, among which
there is such concord and agreement that it is wholly without any emulation or
envy? for though that the figure, place, disposition, usage, and dignity, be
very different, considering the parts, yet do we never see them disagree,
and spite one at another, either for the health, quietness, comeliness, or
perfection of the other, or that one rejoices in the others imperfection.
Where is that unity of mind and heart, which has been so recommended unto
us by the writings and books of our ancestors? or where is that readiness
and promptitude one toward another, according to the ability that God has
given us, for the employing of such gifts as we have, to the common vtility
of the Church, if we grieve at the graces that God has bestowed on us? Where
is that blessing we ought to give unto our neighbors, when they are at their
harvest, in saying, the Lord prosper you, we wish you good luck in the name
of the Lord? Where is that Christian charity, that should be without malice
and envy? Where is that faith that should appear and be made manifest by our
tender affection, and the love we owe unto our enemies, seeing it is so little
toward our friends, and yet that little is corrupted and stained, as it
were, by a secret kind of envy, that we bear toward them, when we see
them prosper, and that God has advanced them in honor and dignity above our
selves? Where is that community, (I do not mean that confused and
Platonicall participation of all things) but that holy and Evangelical
society which ought to be in Gods common wealth, which should be united and
linked together with a most holy, a most perfect, and a most firm and absolute
band of friendship? and to conclude in a word, how should we have any
participation with God, or with Christ Jesus his son, if they have taken so
great pains, and have been so careful to instill virtuous motions into men's
minds, and we spite and grieve to see them godly and virtuously inclined?

Lycurgus beholding tha sheafes of corn after harvest euenly divided, Examples
of the heathen, to show how farremany of them were from envy.
took great delight to behold so great equality among neighbors. What a
pleasure is it my friends (says he) to see the commodities of our country so
euenly distributed, as though we were all brethren, dividing our fathers goods
by equal portions? What a shame ought it to be unto us at this present, and
what a condemnation will it be at the day of judgment, to see such amity and
brotherly affection among heathen men, and in us, who carry the names of
Christians, such hatred and uncharitable dealing, which shows that we are
wholly possessed with spite and envy.

Paedaretus one of the most honorable and worthy men of Sparta, Paedaretus.
laboring on a time to be chosen one of the number of three hundred, who were
elected for the government and rule of the city, and being rejected, returned
home to his house very merry: which the Ephores (who were the censours of the
city, and the reformers of vices in their common wealth) understanding, sent
for him, supposing indeed that he had derided and mocked their partialities in
elections: and demanding of him why he laughed and sported himself in such
manner, seeing that he should rather be sad, considering the disgrace that was
offered him: he answered, that he could not but exceedingly rejoice, to
consider that there were three hundred men in the city better then himself,
and more meet to govern, and be employed in the common wealth: giving us
thereby to understand not only that he was not envious, but also that he was
exceeding joyful, that there were somany men better and more honorable then
himself. Alexander the great. Plutarch in his treatise of flattery and
frie^dship.


Alexander the great, understanding that there was a certain Grecian, who was
an excellent runner, for that he himself was very nimble and active, greatly
desired to see him, and to run with him: but perceiving that in the course,
the other did not streine himself, but as it were voluntarily suffered
himself to be outrunne, by reason he ran with so great a personage: he was
marveilous angry, and reproouing him for it, told him, that he was none of that
envious and malicious brood, who are always discontented if they may not
overcome in every thing, knowing very well, that the immortal gods, who did
liberally bestow their gifts and blessings at their pleasure, do not confer
all upon one man, but diversely enrich diverse men, using therein a wonderful
wisdom and counsel, by this means to bridle men, who naturally are fierce
and proud, that they should not contemneaed despise other men, but that rather
through a mutual necessity and want the one has of the other, that they
should one seek for another, conseruing a society among themselves: the great
ones to be served by the small ones, and those that are in poverty to be
relieuedby such as are in wealth and prosperity. The same prince being at
another time present, and sitting among many other great Lords to determine a
controversy between Thessalus and Athenodorus, twotragicall poets, touching
their excellency in the art of poetry, and to give the honor and price unto
him to whom of right it did appertain, gave his voice with Thessalus: but
perceiving that the other judges were not of his opinion, but contrariwise
determined with Athenodorus, said, that he would willingly have given half
his kingdom, so that the party with whom he had given his voice might have
had the victory, for that he would not have received such a disgrace, as to be
thought he had judged of a matter he had no skill in. Notwithstanding it was
meet that the honor should remain unto him to whom it was adjudged, and that
it ought not to seem strange unto Thessalus, that he was not accounted the
best poet, nor to himself that he was not the wisest among the Judges, for
that every one can not have the first place, and exceed in all virtues.
Consider the magnanimity and heroical mind of this great prince, and the
malicious hatred, not only of some great personages, but also of mean
gentlemen at this day, if their servants or inferiors reprove their judgment
and opinion publicly in any matter whatsoever, and we shall see a wonderful
difference.

If (to proceed further) we would know the causes of this diversity, Whereof
it proceeds that there are so many envious men in the world at this day, and
why Alexander was so magnanimious. Plutarch in his discourse of Alexander
we shall find, that vice and imperfection is the cause of envy in the one,
and that the great virtue of the other is the principal reason which makes
them to embrace, commend and recompense, whatsoever they found worthy of
commendation in their times. In Alexanders time there was neither Philosopher,
Poet, Orator, Mathematician, Carpenter, Painter, Carver, or any artisan
whatsoever that was excellent in his art, whom he would not see and talk
withal, whom he had not enriched and honored: yea he made some of them in
great and goodly pictures of brass, the better to manifest in what reputation
he had their virtue, and to encourage others to imitate them in their
excellency. It were a hard matter to judge whether he were more prodigal
toward them of his heart in loving them, or of his tongue in praising them, or
of his purse in recompensing them. For he spared none of all three: to one he
gave ten talents, to an other he gave fifty, to an other an hundredth, to
another a thousand: in so much, that he had sooner emptied Darius coffers,
which were full to the top, then satisfied his own desires in giving and
rewarding. In like manner, to the captains and valiant men of war, of whom
he might rather be suspicious, and conceive some secret envy against them (for
such is the nature of all men for the most part, who profess arms) he was so
liberal, that none of them (all the time he was in the wars) ever did any
memorable and famous act, but he was worthily recompensed. For he gave them
castles, cities, and kingdoms, and in a word, so highly honored them, that
some of them were ashamed to receive so great rewards for very small peecees
of services, as they thought. And this great liberality and munificense
toward all men of quality whomsoever that he could hear of, was the cause,
why that soon after his decease, a certain man (seeing wise men despised and
die beggars, without any relief) said to a Poet named Archestratus
(lamenting the time passed, and seeing so worthy a man in such great distress
and want,) O (says he) that you had been in the time of Alexander: for he
would have given you for every verse you make, some such kingdom as Cyprus,
or the kingdom of Phoenicia. This was the reason also why some compared his
reign to the springtime: for that then the earth being moderately warmed by
the sweetness of the air, which is then clear and temperate, brings
forth herbs and flowers, and hatcheth the seeds which it has received long
before: so likewise Alexander drawing forth the spirits by his liberality,
which had been kept in, and as it were hindered with the cold of the former
ages, made his own time so fertile, that since his reign, there has been no
age that has been so fruitful.

Alexander Severus sometime Emperor of Rome, of Alexander Severus.
imitating this worthy king, would be acquainted with all the excellent
Orators and Poets of his time, and hear them very often, and he took such
delight herein, that one day in the presence of many great Ambassadors,
Lampridius in the life of Severus.
he boasted (as of a thing which he gloried most in) that there was never a
famous learned man in the world, who either had not talked with him, or wrote
unto him. Which surely is a worthy commendation for kings, and ought to be
hereditarie, and as it were, the proper and true patrimony of all great
states, who can not have a more goodly ornament to beautify themselves, and
ennoble their houses, nor a more notable blason in their arms, to verefie
their nobility, nor (to conclude) a more shrill trumpet to sound out their
praises over the face of the whole earth, and to continue them unto the ends of
the world, then to be such lovers of virtue and knowledge, and to honor these
gifts in whomsoever they find them. Contrary examples of Princes, who have
hated virtue.


On the contrary, there is nothing that so obscureth and defaceth their glory,
nor that so soon extinguisheth their memory, or that makes them more
abominable and detestable to all posterity, whenever they are mentioned,
then when as they have been enemies to learning, and men of understanding. For
who is there, that at this day abhors not the memory of the Emperor
Licyntus for the contempt he had of all good learning, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 13.
and the hatred and malice which he bare thereto, in that he banished all the
learned men out of Rome in his time, terming them in derision the rattes and
vermin of his Court. Whereat we need not to marvel, considering he was so
ignorant and so foolish, that he could not so much as write his own name: and
Ignorance as we daily see is a deadly enemy to virtue. Of Ateas. Plutarch in
Apotheg.
And what shall we say of Ateas the king of Scythia, who hearing one of his
prisoners named Ismenias, which was taken in the wars, play most excellently
upon a flute, and so delightfully, that every man had great pleasure to hear
him, admiring and wondering at him as at ademy god, said, that he for his
part had as lieue here a horse neigh: showing thereby, the scorn and malice
he bare to wards the player, and the spite he had toward such as heard
him, and that the barbarousnesse of his mind and of his ears was such, that
it seemed the one was shut up within his stable, and the other fitter to hear
an Ass bray, then the Muses sing. One need not to marvel (as I have said)
though that such a prince, nourished in the deserts and woods, like unto a
brute beast, had so sauadge a mind, and that he so little esteemed knowledge
and virtue, which were wholly unknown unto him. But it would make a man
wonder, that among the Greeks and Romans, who would needs be accounted
civil, and reputed of all other nations barbarous in respect of them selves,
there should be any such rudeness. of Dionysius of Syracuse.
Dionysius the tyrant of Syracusa, through a spiteful and malicious hatred,
set that famous Poet Philoxenes to work in the mines, for that he being
commanded to correct a certain tragedy, which the tyrant had made, finding
every thing amiss in it, wholly defaced it from the one end to the other:
wherewith the tyrant was so spited, that he condemned him to as grievous a
punishment, as to be a slave in the Galleys.

Adrian had many goodly and commendable parts in him, of the Emper our Adrian.
and was one of the best furnished with knowledge and understanding of all the
Emperors of Rome: but this was all obscured with the hatred that he bare unto
all them, who who were renowned for their skill in any art whatsoever. Which
indeed was so extreme, that he could not endure that any man should read any
books in Rome, but those of his making: or that any artificers, especially
painters and grauers, should be accounted better then him self: so that to
satisfy this his malignant and envious passion, he expelled Favorinus and
Dionysius Melisius, who had offended in nothing but in this, that for their
excellent knowledge in all humanity, in painting and grauing they were
accounted the most notable of all other. Nay he did worse, for when as the
Emperor Trajan was about to build a certain house for the exercise of
music, and that there was some difference between him and Adrian for the
placing of the stayres: the master workman seeing the opinion of Adrian to be
without all reason, and that notwithstanding he would needs maintain it
against the Emperor and all other the chief workmen which were there, was
compelled to say, the better to repress his presumption, that if he had no
better skill in painting then in making of stayres, he was not very skillfull,
or (as Dion reports it) that he might go paint hoppes. He dissembled this
thing for the time, as though he had not heard it: notwithstanding, he was
inwardly so offended and so vexed, that his opinion was rejected as well of the
masters of the art as also of the Emperor, that afterward he (coming to
the Empire) put the poor man to death, for no other cause but this, that he
would not yield unto him, in that which was most unreasonable and contrary to
knowledge.

Although these former examples be most execrable, The greatest example of
envy in Commodus, written by Dion, Lampridius, and others.
yet are they nothing in comparison of that of the Emperor Commodus, who
notvvithstanding his education and bringing up by the most famous and wise men,
which were in all the world, and the diligent care of his father Marcus
Aurelius, the wisest and most virtuous prince that ever was, and the goodly
pattern of honor and virtue, which were set before his eyes in the examples
of five Emperors his predecessors: and finally the grave and wise
admonitions, which he had daily of the trusty and faithful counselors of
his late father, was notwithstanding so vicious, and so unruly in all his
actions, that he exceeded all his predecessors and successors in mischief,
and especially in envy, which was in him in most abundant manner, which may
evidently appear if we consider two or three of his acts. When it was told
him that Mamertus Antonianus was very like him in proportion of body and
magnanimity of mind, he caused the party that told him this, forthwith to
be slain, and likewise within a little after, he murdered his cousin
Antonianus, alleging, that it beseemed not any man in the world to compare
him to another, much less to resemble him. And it is further reported of him
that he poisoned Sulpicius Crassus the Proconsul, Julius Proculus, and Claudius
Lucanus, who were the governors of Asia, for that he understood they were
honest men, governing the countries under their charge prudently and justly.
But the most infamous and wicked part of all other reported of him, is, that of
the fourteen or fifteen Roman gentlemen, who were sporting themselves upon
the bridge of Tyber (for he passing that way and meeting with them, demanded
of them what they were talking of: whereto they answered, that they had been
discoursing of that worthy Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who after his death had
left an everlasting sorrow to all posterity, for the loss of so good and
virtuous a prince) for which, without any further process of Law, he caused
them to be thrown into the river, saying, that no man could speak well of his
father, but he must needs speak evil of him.

Who is there, No envy in any other creature but in man who hate one another.
that abhors not such men, and that hearing such mortal hatred, is not
astonished to consider that ever their should be any such creatures, though
indeed their nature is so wicked and so corrupt, that there is no impiety
whatsoever, which is not sometime inherent in them: for the corruption of them
is so exceeding, that there is no kind of mischief, but they are subject unto
it. There is no imperfection or vice whatsoever in other creatures, which man
participateth not of, and which is not common to him with them: and if there be
any vice that man has proper and peculiar to himself, surely it is envy,
which is never found in beasts, for that they have not the reason and
understanding to discern the happy and prosperous estate of others. Which is
the cause that ingendreth hatred and envy among men. And as there is no envy
but among men, so do they always use it one toward another. We do not
envy an Ox for his strength, nor a Peacocke for that he is more gay then we
are, nor Apes for their nimblenesse, nor serpents for subtilty, nor doves for
their simplicity, nor any other creatures for those qualities that are in
them. There is nothing but the prosperity of other men that vexes us: and
especially of our friends, neighbors, kindred, equals and familiars. For we
never envy strangers and such as we know not, nor the poor man ever enuieth
the Prince: but the potter the potter (as the Proverb says) the fisher the
fisher, the huckster the huckster, the merchant the merchant, the gentleman the
gentleman, the scholar the scholar, the servant the servant, the young man
the young man, the old man the old man, the soldier the soldier, the Lawer
the Lawer, the Doctor the Doctor: and to make short, we see that such as
should uphold and maintain one another, either for their state and condition,
their years, their neighborhood, their kindred and acquaintance, are usually
set together by the ears through this cursed passion: and it breeds commonly
much debate between great personages if they be neighbors, and dissolueth
the knotte of unity between brethren, if they converse long together.

And this appears notably in the examples of Cain and Abel, Isaac and Ismael,
Lot and Abraham, Iaakob and Esau, Joseph and his brethren, the Apostles of
Christ Jesus, the kingdom of Judah and Israel, the Turks and the Persians, and
in old time the Parthians and the Romans, among whom, there was never firm
friendship, nor sure unity by reason of this cursed envy, which ever brake
the bands that should have tied them together. And it seems that this was
the principal cause, Why God has recommended unto us the love of our
neighbors.
why God in making a Law that one man should love another, there is a special
remembrance made of our neighbors, and such as inhabit near together. For
though that of our selves without any commandment, we ought to love them, by
reason of the proximitie and acquaintance we have with them, and that
therefore one would think, he had more need to have commended, yea and
commanded the love of strangers: yet notwithstanding considering that which
we have spoken touching the perverseness of our nature, which for the most
part makes us to hate our neighbors, more then any thing else, he has
especially mentioned them in his Law, therein expressing the malicious and
cankred cogitations of our hearts, seeing that we are more sauadge and cruel
herein, then the brute beasts. Beasts not so sauadge as man is.
For they being but a little acquainted and used together, do live quietly
without molesting one another: as we may see by cattes and dogs, who live
quietly together and seldom or never fight, unless it be, when as the one
know not the other. But the first that we will be scratching and clawing, if we
may catch them, are either our neighbors, or our next kinsfolks.

Envy then, A brief sum of this first discourse against envy.
as we may see, among all other creatures makes choice of man, and among men,
of neighbors, and of them the most virtuous, against whom it opposes it
self without all discretion. For it spiteth all virtue and prosperity
whatsoever. And as we see all brightness offensive unto those, who have sore
and diseased eyes, so likewise there is no light of the mind or understanding,
which does not grievously vex, and as it were gnaw the heart of the envious,
when as he considers his neighbors honor and glory, thinking that his own
is wholly obscured, as are the moon and the stars by the sun shining. By
reason whereof, even as when we see our neighbors house which, by reason of
his greatness and stateliness, bereaueth us of the air and prospect, we wish
that either it were clean pulled down, or at the least abated: so likewise,
the envious men would willingly, that the advantage that their neighbors or
familiars have of them, were taken away, and their sails lessened, for that
by their greatness they think them selves diminished.

We have hitherto declared what manner of passion this Envy is, The second
part which discourses of the remedies against envy, and of the comfort those
ought to have who are envied. 1 The first remedy.
and how far it estrangeth us from God, (whose image should always lively
appear in us) and how near it coupleth us with the devil. Now it remains
briefly to set down such remedies as are convenient to avoid it, and withal
the comfort and consolation that God and virtuous men ought to have, when they
are spited and hated. As concerning the remedies, Saint Basil has set down
two; the first is, that we diligently consider the frailty and uncertainty
of riches, honor, pleasure, and other delights of the world, which are
ordinarily the causes of the hatred we bare toward our neighbors. For if we
repute them (as in deed they are) vain and transitory, and consider with our
selves the care, pain, danger, and displeasure they draw with them, we would
rather pitle them who possess them, for that they bring so much misery, then
spite and malice them, for so short and troublesome a felicity. After that
Dyonisius the tyrant was driven out of his kingdom, Plutarch in the life of
Timoleon.
Diogenes meeting him on a time at Corinth, whither he was retired after his
fall, in the presence of many philosophers, among whom he was sporting after
his accustomed manner, told him that now he began to spite and envy his
estate, to see him live so quietly: meaning, that poverty, by reason of the
rest and quietness we have thereby, is more to be envied and spited then all
the riches of fortune, which as lightning in vanishing suddenly, does nothing
but dazell the eyes of the beholders.

The second remedy is, The second remedy.
that we consider that the graces and gifts of our neighbors are common to
the whole Church, and that it is given them not to the intent they should be
lords over them, (for from God alone does every good gift proceed, and he
ought to be reverenced for them) but as good and faithhfull stewardes to
distribute and devide them among such as have need of them. If we would think
of this, we should have no great occasion to malice them but contrariwise we
would think we were greatly bound to love them and their wisdom, for that
they take great pain to keepevs, and to bestow upon us those good things,
which God gives unto us by their means, and if it happen that (as unfaithful
masters of an hospitals, who but too often rob the poor men over whom they
are placed) they will retain any thing unjustly, of that which God has given
them to dispense unto such as have need: yet in such a case we should be so
far from Envy, that on the contrary we should exceedingly pity such poor
thieves, which expect every day when the Judge should send them to hanging, by
reason of their theft and robberies, and for that they have been so unfaithful
in their dealings.

Now as concerning the comfort that a man should have that is spited: A
comfort unto him that is spited. The first comfort.
He must first hope, that if he persist constantly in the study of virtue, it
will daily so increase, that at the length it will weaken envy, and so
diminish it by little and little, that in the end it will quite exstinguish
it. For as we see the fire in the beginning cast forth a great smoke, which
quickly vanishes away as soon as it is well kindled: so likewise virtue
causes great malice and spite in the beginning, but if a man be constant and
will not be discouraged, but burns more and more in virtue and goodness, in
the end he shall disperse them, as the Sun beams drives away the clouds,
in such sort, that at length we shall not know what is become of them. The
second consolation.
He must also comfort him self in that which Saint Gregory has spoken, that
as God by a wonderful and an unsearchable counsel has accompanied our
malladies, diseases, losses, poverty, and all other afflictions whatsoever
with a kind of compassion and natural pity, to the end that our neighbors
taking compassion of our infirmities, should somewhat assuage the bitterness
of them, and by this means, as it were in some sort, help us to bear and
sustain the burden of them, so also that in those particular blessings he
bestows upon us, he uses envious men as a means to bridle us, that we
should not exalt our selves too high, and that this presumption, if it be not
brideled, should not be the occasion of our ruin and destruction. For the two
extremities (as Aristotle says) do prejudice as well the body as the mind.
If one drink or eat, sleep or labor too much, it hurts the corporal
health which can not be preserved, but by a mediocritie in all things: so
likewise may we say of the mind, which surely is not in health, if it be
either too hautie, proud, or presumptuous, or too base, low, and submisse. To
the end then that it may be well disposed, it must be kept in a mediocritie,
and, as it were, in a mean between both, to the end that it may be strong
enough to bear adversity, and so heavy, that it be not blown away with a
puff of prosperity, which is a very difficult thing as we may daily see by
experience, for we do no sooner think of adversity, but we are by and by
thrown down and discouraged: and a little prosperity will make us carry all
our sails. And therefore God has set envy on the one side, and pity on the
other, as it were two places to rest on, in the high way, to the end that if
we will exalt our selves in prosperity, Envy should be ready to pull us
down, and if we be too much discouraged with adversity, pity and compassion
should be ready to help us up.

We may gather hereby that God uses envy, What profit God draws out of
envy for the good of his children.
as those of Athens used their Ostrocisme, for by their Law and ancient
custom of the country they banished the richest, and most renowned men of
their Common wealth, and such as had borne greatest offices, and by their
prudent and wise mannaging of their affairs had gotten greatest authority:
not of a rash or headie conceit, or through ingratitude, and a misconstruing
of their good services and famous acts, and much less for any crime or fault
committed by them: but only by this means to moderate their greatness, and
to hinder them, that their ambition should not grow to the height of
tyranny, and by this means to resist it in the beginning, least otherwise
growing too great, the course thereof would not be stopped without great
trouble and effusion of blood. In like manner God suffers good and virtuous
men to be envied and vexed, not for any harm he bears unto them, nor for
any desire he has to punish them for their sins committed, but only by this
means to keep them from presumption and pride, whereto we are very much
inclined, when as we conceive in our minds, that we are better and more
fortunate then other men.

And thus much have I thought good to speak touching the remedies against
Envy, after which, and that passionate humor of Anger, whereof we have
discoursed in the third book, it shall be requisite to speak of pleasure, and
of that unbridled affection, which we have in the disordinate lusts of the
flesh: to the end we may rightly know what is vicious therein. For these two
passions being placed the one after the other, thereby we may the better
understand each other, and in like manner the misery of our miserable nature,
which in diverse things is so equally troubled and tormented.

THE FJFTH BOOK of the tranquillity and contentation of the mind. AGAINST
PLEASVRE. A brief sum of the whole Book.
SEeing that we have learned by evident demonstrations and sound proofs out
of the word of God, that this earthly life is but a pilgrimage, and (as it
were) a way wherein we walk unto a better life, that is to say, unto the
kingdom of heaven: it follows then that we must so use our bodies and our
goods, be it either for necessity or for pleasure, that both may further us
for the attaining of that heavenly place, wherein our true rest and repose
dwells and consists. Which we can not well do, unless we understand the
hindrances that vanity casts in our way, to the end that they being taken
away, we may the more easily pass to the place whither we would. To help us
forward as much as may be, the Author discourses in this fifth book of
Pleasure, and especially of that kind of Pleasure which we ought especially to
eschew: and the better to make us understand his meaning, he devideth Pleasure
into four parts. The first sort of Pleasure is honest, good, and laudable,
which in few words he passes over, as having a purpose to stand longer upon
the other. Then he comes unto those which are natural, wherein he refuteth
those, who through too great austerenesse condemn them as unlawful:
consequently he confuteth the Stoics, and enters into a discourse of
affections, and especially of Joy and Sorrow: of which having showed the right
use, he condemns in the third place the Epicures and sundry other
hypocrites, enemies unto natural pleasures. This being done, he enters into
the examination of those pleasures which are vicious. He places in the first
rank the gluttons and the drunkardes, whose wickedness he plentifully
discovers, and opposes against them the frugalitie of our forefathers,
whereof he sets down many notable patterns, and brings in many tragical
examples caused by these venomous pleasures. Then he makes an invective
against the excessive cheer used at tables, showing the discommodities that
these delicates bring both to body and soul; prooving withal that sobriety
both in eating and drinking is most necessary for the preservation of this
life, and the attaining of a better life: and that the diet of heathen men
shall be a condemnation unto Christians, whose faults he likewise describes.
Next unto this, he answers such as prefer their taste before their health,
and those who allege they may do with their own what they list: and other,
who reprehend custom, and such as blame the reformation of excess, tearming
it a curious and excess noveltie; and this causes him to paint out and set
forth in their colors, the vanity and dissoluteness of these times: and
because it is but labor lost to preach unto full bellies, who are not so
quick of hearing being full, as they are when they are empty, he exhorts
Princes and magistrates carefully to look to their offices: and to encourage
them, he sets down many notable examples, as those of Moses, Joshua,
Ezechias, Josias, Esdras, Constantine the great, many of his successors, and
sundry Kings of France.

Now for that Bacchus and Venus are nourished by company, and that when the
belly is full, the body would be at rest, (as the proverb says, and as
experience teaches) he entreats of the second troop of wicked pleasures,
that is to say, whoredoms, whose mischief he discovers, in that they
bereave us of our understanding, kill the body and waste our goods, which is
prooved by sound reasons, worthy examples, sit similitudes, and choice
sentences, annexing hereto an excellent treatise of the goodness of God
toward his children, when as he exercises them with crosses and afflictions,
and to make these damnable pleasures more odious, he shows also what
particular mischiefs ensue of them: as the brutishness and sottishness of
such as are in slaverie under them, the separation with Christ Jesus,
arenouncing of the love of God, to plunge them selves into a filthy puddle
which makes them mad, enemies of virtue and goodness, which is amplified at
large: whereby we may see that it is not without cause, that God has declared
that he will judge whoremongers, and that such as wallow in that sin have
noparte in his grace and favor.

Having thus lively painted out the discommodities of this kind of pleasure,
thereby to withdraw some men, and to bring them unto a better understanding,
he sets down certain remedies. The first whereof is, as it were a table
and a picture of pleasure, thereby to make it the more odious. The second
contains an enumeration of Gods judgments against pleasure, and such as have
been voluptuosly given. The third shows the miserable end of sundry
particular men. In the fourth he sets down what punishments God has laid
upon Princes and Magistrates, who have favored or supported such lewdness,
not forgetting among other memorable stories, the daughters of Scedasus, and
the destruction of the Lacedaemonians. This being done, he sets down other
testimonies, and bewaileth the miserable estate of many cities which are yet in
flourishing estate, and exhorts Princes to reform such disorders, setting
down the means how to do it, that is, that first they should reform them
selves, that they banish idleness out of their courts, and abolish Tavernes
out of their countries, and such other schools of riot, as also all other
baits of lightness and dissoluteness. Finally, that they carefully take
heed, that they keep the truth which teaches men to know their sins, and
imprinteth in their hearts a desire to live according unto Gods laws.

The last sort of pleasures are such as are unprofitable and superfluous,
whereof he sets down some, and consequently applies four remedies to
heal them, who are overmuch infected with such vain pastimes, as in the end
displease and hurt those which follow them. In conclusion he teaches with
what affection all virtuous men ought to use the affairs of this world, and
how they should employ their riches, and govern them selves.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
AMong the pleasures and delights which men have in this world, A distinction
of the pleasures which men enjoy in this world.
some are holy and honest, as those which we receive in the reading and
meditation of the Law of God, in our obedience toward him, and of the faith
and hope we have in his promises, Some pleasures are holy.
all which (as David says) are more to be desired then gold, yea then fine
gold, and sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. It is also a singular
pleasure to behold the providence, wisdom and goodness of God toward his
creatures, and to consider how every one of them, and every part of them are
appointed to some good purpose, and ordained for the use, pleasure, and profit
of man: and likewise how their beginning, continuance, estate, and end is
conducted by a wise and wonderful order, and a most skillful Oeconomie in
everything. In these pleasures there is neither shame, sorrow, nor repentance,
for every thing is holy, and there is no evil, unless it be that we are not
greatly desirous to fall into those considerations, or else for that we be soon
weary of them. Some are natural.
There are other pleasures also that are natural: as to eat when we are
hungry; to drink when we are dry; torest when we are weary, and such like:
by the sweetness whereof, Super fluous and unnecessary pleasures.
our good God, who is a singular lover of our welfare, would stir us up to
be careful of our selves. There are also some which are superfluous and
unprofitable: as that which Artaxerxes took in riding in his litter through the
fields, to grave and cut in wood triffling toys, loosing his time about
nothing, which every man ought to hold so precious, and especially Princes,
who may if they will, always employ them selves in matters of great
consequence, and whereof the charge is such, that if so be they will discharge
their duties, they shall not have so much leisure as to eat their meat, or
take their rest, unless they borrowe some of that time which should be
employed in public affairs.

There are also other pleasures, which are wicked and vicious, Wicked and
naughty pleasures.
which are termed by the name of carnal and worldly pleasures, and these are
they, whereof we purpose to discourse at this present.

As concerning the first, they are good and commendable, How we may use lawful
pleasures.
and we ought to desire God to bestow them upon us, and to account our selves
very happy, if we may enjoy them. As concerning such pleasures as are
natural, they are indifferent, and they are good or evil according as they
are used. For when they are used moderately, with prayer and thanksgiving,
which are the two things that sanctify al things, and direct the^ unto their
end, which is the health and good disposition of the body, with an
acknowledgement of the bounty and liberality of God, in the participation of
his riches and mercies: in this respect they are most comme^dable: so far
ought we to be from contemning or despising of them. Against such as are to
austere in the use of natural pleasures.
Some there have been who have been too extreme in this: as he of whom
Eusebius speaks, who seeing a poor traveller in Egypt desire water, for that
by reason of his great thirst and extreme heat, he was able to travel no
further, told him that he might be content with the shadow of a tree, which he
showed him a far off, by that means a little to refresh him. As also he, who
always cate his meat standing, and being demanded, why he would not sit,
answered for fear his body should take any pleasure. In these rigorous
kinds of abstinence, there is always excess, The example of Christ Jesus
condemns such austerity
and oftentimes it is mingled with superstition. When as Christ Jesus would
miraculously feed the people, he commanded that they should sit down before
they were served, to the end that every one might take his repast with the
more ease. His Disciples also took their meat sitting, as appears in many
places of the Scriptures. We must not think we displease God, when as we
take our meat sitting at our ease, without any great curiosity. The
diversity of Gods creatures may teach us that we may use the^ with moderate
pleasure.
For he has not made his creatures barely to profit us, but also to delight
us: which may be very well prooved by the diversity of colors, which the
earth affords, and by the sweetness and savor which it gives to every
particular, respecting therein rather the pleasure and contentment of our
senses, then the nourishing of our bodies. Whereof we may infer, that there
whereas the superfluity which is vain and vicious in any thing, is eschewed,
we ought not to reject the honest pleasure which we may reap of the creatures
without any dishonor unto the Creator: seeing that in every one of them he
has not placed both, without great reason and just cause, but by this means
making an ample and large demonstration of his goodness, he would give us
occasion continually to praise and honor him. Against Stoikes and Epicures.
Wherefore Aristotle justly blamed them, who placed felicity and virtue in
this, to be without affection: showing in deed that it lies in the moderation
of affections. Whereby he condemns as well those who through their blockishnes
and stupititie, are without al affection: as those also who through an
unbridled and dissolute life, let loose the reyne, and follow their appetites
whether so ever they will lead them. And out of doubt it is impossible, if we
be not moved with pleasure, that ever we should be stirred with grief and
sorrow: and who so ever they be that will have such flintie and brazen hearts,
it is not likely that they are very merciful, though not withstanding this is
the principal virtue which men ought to have, if they will be perfect and
follow the example of our heavenly father, who would have us (in the
adversities which he sends either to us or to our neighbors) have some
feeling of their sorrows, to the end we may be patient in our own griefs,
and pitiful in those of our brethren and acquaintance: on the contrary, when
as by his grace we or they prosper, that we rejoice, to the end to declare by
our joy, that we envy not the prosperity of other men, nor be proud of our
own good hap.

And what should become of us, if we were without all affection? Would there be
a man that would apply himself to any thing? for pleasure and grief do rule
all our actions, and there is no man, but either affects or escheweth things,
for the one or the other, which God in creating and framing our natures has
ordained, and that such affections should serve our minds, as coches do our
bodies, to carry them whether our deliberation, conducted by reason, does
carry us. For as we see in the sea, that if the winds blow not, the ships
are constrained to lie still, and cannot stir from the place where they are:
so likewise our nature, if all affections cease, can not, nor shall not be able
to turn either to the right hand or to the left, no more then if we were in a
palsy, which takes away the use of our whole body. And this is the reason,
Plato in Philebo.
why Plato called them the sinews and strings of our minds, giving us to
understand thereby, that they serve for the opening or shutting, lifting up or
pressing down: and generally for the mooving of every part thereof, even as
the body is moved and guided by the sense: and further, that they are the
occasions of feeling, and almost of all the knowledge we have, in such sort,
Plutarch in his treatise of moralvertue.
that we may justly name them (as Plutarch does) the handles of Philosophy,
by the which children take hold, who would never love it, nor the instructions
it gives, if they had not some sparks, as it were, of some shame, desire,
reputation, ambition, pleasure, or sorrow, which stir them up thereto: and
they being conducted by reason, as it were, by a good schoolmaster, are very
vvilling to go to school, and learn with all diligence.

But some man may say, A stoicall objection.
that these affections are also the causes, that we fall into many vices, and
that if there were no love, there would be no lovers, no more then there
would be covetous men, if there were no desire of riches; which may be
confessed: and further, that by reason of the corruption which is in our
hearts and understanding, they rather provoke us to vice, then to virtue. But
what? must we cut off the leg, An answer.
because it halteth, or the nose because it is oftentimes full of filthy
matter? they who will take away all affections of nature, because they do
allure us unto vice, do as he did, who maintained, that we never ought to
ride post, for that some oftentimes catch shrevvd falls; or that we should not
shoot in a gunne or a bovv, for that both gunners and archers often miss the
mark; or that we must not sing, for that sometime we fall into discord. If
a man be afraid least he should be drunk, and that the fume of the wine
should ascend up into his head, and so disquiet him, let him mingle his wine
with water, and thereby mitigate the strength and heat thereof, and by this
means he shall provide, not only that it do not hurt him, but also that it
profits him much, in that it quickens and cherishes him. So must we do
likewise if we feel our affections over-strong and forceable, to keep them
that they trouble us not, and to temper them with reason, and not clearly to
extinguish them. Sundry fit comparisons taken out of Plutarch in his
disputations against the Stoikes.


We must herein follow the examples of quirries in the stable, who to rule
and manage their horses aright, do not correct them for their agilitie,
courage, and stomach, but take special regard that all be so well ordered,
that they carry well, that they stop well, curvet, or gallop the field, not as
the horses would them selves, but as their riders shall think good: or as wise
and skillful husbands, who having store of wild plants or stocks, do not
pluck them up by the roots, and throw them into the fire, but rather
transplant and graffe them, whereby that tartness they have naturally, is
sweetened, and they so use the matter with a little husbandry and skill that
they use about them, that in the end, of unfruitful plants they make very
fertile trees, and not only profitable, but also very pleasant and delectable.
So likewise, by the grace of God, there need but little labor be bestowed for
the taming and ruling of our affections, and the taking away of this great
unruliness, which naturally we are possessed withal, and which show it self so
masterfull in the beginning, and to make it in short time as a young colt to be
easily bridled, and orderly governed by the rules of reason. And let not men
say, that because of our idleness we will not husband them well, and therefore
we shall not reap so great profit of them, as good husbands do of their
nurseries: for who shall hinder us to husband them, to dig them, to bind
them, to water them, and to cut off that which is superfluous from them, and so
to use them, that we may gather store of good fruit for our selves and for our
neighbors?

To conclude then this discourse, A conclusion of this treatise of natural
affections, with a brief declaration of the right usage of them.
we must not so reproove our natural affections, as though they were evil or
superfluous, neither yet condemn desire, or refuse mirth, so we will keep
that measure which is commendable in all things If God will vouchsafe us that
grace and favor, that we may use them soberly, with praise and thankesgiving:
if he will not vouchsafe us them let us notwithstanding be content, and never
murmr against his will, always persuading our selves, that he does nothing
but that which is good and wholesome for us. Let us be always prepared (as was
S. Paul) to use abundance well, Phil. 4.12.
if he will give it us: and in like manner to endure poverty, when so ever he
will punish us either by that or any other affliction. Let us also think (to
avoid all superstition) of that which the same Apostle speaks, that bodily
exercise profits little, 1. Tim. 4.8.
but that godliness is profitable for all things. Let us not take so much ease,
that we should prejudice the health of our souls, neither yet so little
pleasure, that we hurt the state of our bodies, following herein the examples
of the ancient Churches. An example of the ancient Christians.
In which (as Saint Augustine says) the Pastors did brotherly admonish those,
who used too great austeritie, that they would imitate the counsel that S.
Paul gave unto Timothy, which was to drink a little wine, 1. Tim. 5.23.
because his stomach was weak, and to take heed that overmuch abstinence,
did not rather hurt then profit them.

I think this exhortation is not greatly necessary for these times, wherein
fasting is better preached then practiced, The strange corruption of these
latter times, wherein we turn natural affections into vices.
and men are more skilful in judging of the difference of wines, then of
waters. For such as profess them selves to live more straightly then other,
are notwithstanding so fat and lusty, that they are a byword among other me^.
And to be short, dainty dishes are so multiplied, and men's tongues and tastes
become so exquisite and delicate, that it requires as much time to make a
master cook, as to become a Doctor in the Law. An other dangerous extremity of
hypocrites.
Notwithstanding it is good to know how we ought to use every thing, and how
far abstinence ought to extend. For as some men naturally are continually
out of measure, and inclined to one extremity or other, which are both naught,
and many there have been which have always continued but too licentious: so
also some there have been at all times so superstitious, that they have made
conscience to use such things as GOD has left free, and at their liberty.

And there have been but too many, who would make things that are common,
particular to some men, and herein have placed the greatest part of their
holiness: though that indeed (as we have said already) natural pleasures are
indifferent of themselves, and especially being well used: and contrariwise
that the abstinence from them, is far more commendable, when as as GOD him
self commands it, and that herein we conform our selves joyfully unto his
will, and not unto our own fantasies, which are often deceived, and do
easily delude us, if we suffer our selves to be guided by them, or by any
other thing then by the word of God. Against such as think by absteining from
natural pleasures, to become not only more bealthsome, but also more holy.
And if it were so that all corporal pleasures were evil, we must condemn
them which continually are offered unto our eyes, by the light of the sun: as
are the variety of flowers, and infinite sorts of colors, wherein we take
great pleasure and delectation: or those likewise which we receive by the
benefit of our ears, as in the spring time the sweet singing of the
nightingale, and infinite sorts of other little birds, which are most
delightsome and melodious: as also those which we receive by our smelling, as
the sweetness of roses, violets, and many pleasants fruits, which are so sweet
and and odoriferous, that the very delightsomnes thereof do stir up our
hearts and minds toward God, to consider his goodness, and to make us to
love him the more. We must also by the like reason, condemn all such pleasures
(if we condemn and eschew those that we enjoy by the taste and use of Gods
creatures) wherewith we are nourished. For we have as great pleasure and
comfort in the^ as in these, or rather more. In like manner in winter we must
not seek for heat, nor in summer for shade, for that in either our bodies
find great pleasure. Which being once received and approoved, it will be so
dangerous (considering that superstition is very fruitful, and never cease
without great pain, until it has plunged the conscience into some filthy
puddle of impiety) that in the end we shall think it unlawful to scratch or
rub our selves, as some have done heretofore to lie in beds, or drink in
glasses.

But least I should be to long, The conclusion of all this discourse of natural
pleasures.
I will conclude in a word. Let us resolve with our selves, that it is not
sufficient to do our endeavor, that according to the example of S. Paul, and
following his advise and counsel, we do apply ourselves to the persons with
whom we live, and that we transform our selves in to them, though that
their natures be oftentimes different and disagreeing from us: Omnis Aristippum
decuit color and status, and res.
but also we must apply our selves to the sudden chances and sundry
accidents of this life, and keep our minds always in one estate and
condition, whether we be poor or rich: and as it is reported of Aristippus,
that into what house so ever he came, were it into the Kings palace, or the
beggars cottage, were he in silks, velvets, friefe, or russet, he always
kept a decorum, and a comelines in his behavior, beseeming such a Philosopher
as he was. So likewise must we apply our selves, and learn to use all
alterations and chaunges as they should be: as well ease as labor, honor as
dishonor, poverty and riches, friends and enemies, favor and disfavour,
health and sickness, imprisonment and liberty, rest and pains, sorrow and
gladness, without doing any thing that is unfit for a Christian, or not
beseeming our estate and condition. And in thus doing, a man that shall
moderately and wisely enjoy any honest pleasure, as God shall give him
occasion, giving thanks unto him and acknowledging his goodness, ought much
more to be commended, then he that refuses this grace and favor, depriving
him self of those gifts, which God has given and offered him. For he does it
either through contempt, superstition, or a detestable pride, thinking him
self to be more wise in rejecting, then accepting the goodness which GOD has
offered.

We have now spoken sufficiently of natural pleasures, Here he enters into
the discourse of wicked pleasures.
and now we will handle other delights, and begin with such as are naught and
vicious: whereof some are touching the mouth and belly, and some others not
far unlike unto these.

As concerning gluttony and drunkenness, Of drunkenness and gluttony, the
filthiness of which is discovered.
which are placed in the first rank, they do not only make men like unto
beasts, but surely they place them in a far worse estate and condition; for
we do not see them eat or drink too much. And though that some times they
exceed herein, yet it is not so exceeding that they stagger and reele, or be
so swelled that their skins will not hold the^: as we see some men, who are
no sooner drunk, but they loose the use of reason, and of al their other
senses, and do not only forget their friends and servants, but also their
houses and their own selves. They are (as S. Basil says) like unto images:
they have mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and hear not, noses
and smell not, hands that handle not, and feet that cannot go. Luke 21.34.
And this is the reason why Christ Jesus does so earnestly exhort his Disciples
to keep them selves from drunkenness and gluttony, wherewith the heart is
more charged then the stomach. Plutarch in his discourse of eating of flesh.
Whereupon Heraclitus a Philosopher being demanded, which of the senses was
the wisest; answered, that which was least washed or wetted with wine. Not that
the wine is in fault, for that being moderately taken and with discretion, The
spoil both of the body and the mind.
is very nourishing and wholesome, and does not only cherish the body, but
also quickneth the mind, as says the Proverb. All the matter then lies in
the usage, which being done with moderation, is so profitable, that it serves
in stead of a medicine or a preservative. But if it be immoderate, it is a
very poison, Xenophon in the first book of the institution of Cyrus.
as Cyrus said unto Astiages, who demanding of him, why he would not drink
any wine, which was offered him in a glass: for that (says he) I think it is
poison, having seen not long since, at those bankets you made your friends,
that there was no man which drunk wine, but within a little after, he became
so weak and feeble, that he could not go, and so blockish and dull sprited,
that he was unfit for any counsel: which agrees very well with that, Plutarch
in his Apoth.
which a certain Lacedemonian answered to an other that demanded, why they
lived so barely and niggardly in their City, and that among other things, they
drunk so little wine. It is for that (says he) we may consult the better of
our affairs, and least if we should buie too much wine, we should be
constrained to beg our counsel of other men. And it is a very rare thing to
see drunken men so well advised, as of them selves to ask counsel of other men
For they cannot be entreated to hear but with much ado, They take away our
reason and judgment.
though it be offered them: and when as any friend they have do tell them of
any thing, they do contrary to their reputation and credit, they are either
angry with them, or else laugh at them. And this was the reason, why Cato the
Censor was wont to say, that it was lost labor to talk of virtue to the
belly, or go about to persuade it: for that it has no ears to understand
that which one says, especially if you go about to bridle his desires, or to
rule his expenses. These are swine (as Christ said) which desire nothing so
much as to fat them selves, Math. 7.6.
and then to wallow in their filth at their ease and pleasure. Psalm. 17.14.
They overthrowe the health of the bodies.
For that (as David says) they care for nothing in this world, but to fill
their bellies. Behold now the state wherein the so drunkards minds are, whose
bodies surely are not much better in the end, if they proceed on as they begin.
For by reason they surcharge and overlade their stomachs, and for that without
any consideration either of the quantity or quality of their meats, they
devour whatsoever comes next to hand as their appetite desires, it is
impossible but that there should follow many raw and cold humors, and that
their bodies being filled with corrupt and putrified matter, some of the^
become diseased with the gout, other have the falling sickness, others palsies,
others Apoplexies, some red eyes, others rotten teeth, and some a stinking
breath, and to conclude, their members and parts of their bodies become weak,
and trembling in their joints, and that in such sort, that one would judge
them to be the sons of Cain, (as Saint Basil says) for that they are the
inheritours of his pains and torments. In his sermon against drunkenness.
And it is a wonder (as the same holy Doctor says) that their bodies which
are made of earth and clay being thus distempered, be not wholly resolved, and
that falling by pieces they become mire and dirt. For there is nothing that
sooner extinguisheth the natural heat, nor that consumes the radical
humiditie wherewith it is nourished, nor to be short, that sooner withers the
beauty, vigor, and strength of youth, then excess and gluttony. And what is
the cause that the diseases and the medicines are so multiplied in these latter
days, that beside all the remedies and means which have been taught in former
times, and the modern inventions for the preservation of men's lives,
notwithstanding they are shorter and more frail then ever they were? It is
evident that the world fades apace, and that being now in his old age, can
not beget such strong and lusty children as it did in his lusty years, and
that the earth, which is weary of bringing forth, can not now yield such
savourie and wholesome fruit, as it did in the beginning for the nourishment
of them. Notwithstanding, the principal and chiefest reason that we are so
weak and so full of diseases, and that in forty or fifty years we are so
feeble and so broken, is our intemperance and riote, both in eating and
drinking.

In former ages our fathers were in show but young striplings at such years
as we seem now to be old and decrepite, which may in part proceed of the
causes before mentioned. But especially for that they were temperate, Of the
vigore and strength of our fo^efathers, and of the feebleness of such as live
in these days, and especially of such as live at their ease.
and observed a good diet. And for proof hereof, we see that artisans in
Cities, and laborers in the fields, though they lie abroad night and day, be
poorly clad and sparingly fed, notwithstanding they are very healthsome,
strong, lusty, and in good liking. Contrariwise, great Lords, Idle monks,
and many other slothful friars, who are full fed, complain, some of the
gout, others of the chollicke, this of the stone, and that other of the
rheum, and every one so subject to death, and to be stopped up with Apoplexies
in so much that a certain old father among them, understanding that one of
his familiars, who supped with him the night before, was suddenly dead after
his coming home, answered those who told him the news, that it was no
wonder, for it was the ordinary end of Religious men. Whereof then does it
proceed, The original of this weakness and feebleness.
that such as are so daintily fed, and eat of nothing but of delicate and
fine dishes, are so blockish, and so unfit for any good thing, so unlusty
and lumpish: and that others, who are nourished with wheaten bread, with water,
cabbages, rapes, and turnops are so lusty, and in so good plight? There is no
man but may easily see, that the sparing and frugall life of the one sort with
their painful and laborious industry, and the idleness of the other with
their sumptuous and costly bellicheare are the causes of this diversity among
them. Whereof proceeds it in like manner that beasts, The reason why wild
b^astes are so sound and swift.
especially such as live in woods at their liberty are so sound, so swift and
nimble, and that the flesh of such among them as are fit to eat, is so
sweet and delicate? if not of the great and wonderful care they have, to
choose such food as is most agreeable to their nature, and to eat so much
thereof as may be sufficient for their nourishment? By this we may see, that
there is nothing that more weakeneth our bodies, nor that sooner corrupts the
good and wholesome disposition of them, then our excessive eating and drinking
with all kind of bellicheare and superfluity. Gluttony and drunkenness
makes a man unfit for any honest action.


Seeing then that both the bodies and minds of drunkardes, are in such state
and condition as we have before mentioned, it is not unfitly said of some of
the ancient wise men, that their souls and minds serve them for nothing, but
for salt to keep their bodies in season, and to preserve them from stinking
and rottenness. And Cato seeing the monstrous and huge belly of a Citizen of
Rome, marvailed how such a man should do any thing to the honor of the Common
wealth, whose strength and vigor of spirit was so diminished by riot and ex
cesse; which makes men so unfit to deliberate and advise of any honest and
profitable thing of them selves, or to put in execution that which shall be
maturely determined by others; that they are fitter to sleep then to watch,
and more meet to sit in their halles with tables replenished with dainty
dishes, then to take pains abroad in broils and skirmishes. A worthy example
of the Ephori, whereby Christian magistrates may learn more severely to punish
glutions and belligods.
For this cause the Ephori (whose office in Sparta was like the Censors of
Rome) being ordained to control all sorts, and to reform whatsoever they saw
amiss or disordered in any; espying on a time one of their citizens in a
common assembly, more fat then the discipline of their City would allow
of, commanded him presently to avoid the company, saying that it was a
dishonor to their common wealth, a discredit to their laws, and a shame for
them selves, who were deputed to see them observed, that there should be found
such a monster in a common assembly: and not content to do him this disgrace,
banished him their country as an unprofitable member. O Lord, when shall we
go before these poor infidels and heathenish creatures, seeing we are yet so
far behind them, and so unwilling to imitate them in this their abstinence,
wherein they have showed them selves to have far surmounted those whom in
these days among us, would be thought to make great profession of sobriety?
their public banquets in their common halles were so well ordered, that they
were usually termed thorowout all Greece, The abstinence of those of Sparta
set down, to condemn the intemperance of Christians in these days. Plutarch
in the life of Lycurgus.
the schools of Abstinence. And some called them by the name of scarcity, for
that there was no more meat, then was necessarily required for the nourishment
of such as came thither. In stead of all other dainties they had their black
brothes, whose taste may easily be judged by that which is reported by
Dyonisius the Tyrant, who being desirous to taste of such a dish, whereof he
had heard so great report, sent for a Lacedemonian cook, and commanded him to
dress him one of those delicatie toothsome dishes, and charged him that he
should spare for no colt whatsoever; which thing the Cook performed. But when
it was presented unto him at dinner, and that he found it fitted not his
taste, he began to spit it forth of his mouth and to cast it away, and
demanded of his Cook if this was the delicate meat of the Lacedemonian
Kings, of whom there was such great and famous report: yea verily (said he)
and the reason why you find it not so savourie in your mouth, is for that you
eat not the sauce with it, which is to exercise your self after the
Lacedemonian manner before you taste it. By this we may easily guess what this
lickerous and dainty dish was: as also of that which Agesilaus one of their
Kings did among the Tharsians. Plutarch in the life of Agesilaus.
For as he passed through the country with his army, the Magistrates and
principal officers among them, in token of their gratefulness for the
benefits they had received by him, and his favor toward their Common
wealth, sent him great store of all sorts of fruits, plenty of venison,
meal and cakes, and many other rare dainties that they had in store, and great
abundance of strong and delicate wines which were made in their country:
which after he had very thankefully accepted, he only reserved still the
meal for the food of his soldiers, and returned the rest to such as had sent
it, saying that such things would not pleasure him any thing at all, but when
as they would needs press him to take all, he commanded in their presence to
give the overplus to the slaves and varlets of his army, saying (to the end
they should not think he disdained their gifts) that such delicate dishes,
as were fit for nothing but to provoke new appetites, The contrariety of
great estates in these days and those of former times.
were meeter for slaves then for men of a free estate and condition. Where is
there among Princes at this day such abstinence, seeing they think they can
never sufficiently show their royalty and magnificence, if at their tables,
yea in their Camps and sieges of Towns, they have beside the abundance of
meat, their junkets, banketting dishes, and other such like knackes to whet
their stomachs? It can not be but that either them selves or their forefathers
should be deceived, seeing that the one have reputed that dishonorable to them
selves, wherewith others have thought to eternize their names.

But we may say (in bewayling and lamenting this disorder) as Alexander the
great said after he had vanquished Darius, This history written by Plutarch
and others, declares evidently that the great abund ance of meat and drink
make men unfit to discharge their duties.
and that entering into his tent he found so great abundance of all sorts of
delicasies. What? Is this to be a King? In like manner may we marveile and say,
Is it nothing else to be a Prince or great Lord, but to live delicately, and to
be sumptuously apparelled? That which I say of Princes, is by reason of the
occasion ministered by the story of Agesilaus, and not for that I think that
dainty fare is proper and peculiar unto Princes. For we can not pick out in
these days so poor a mechanical person, if he once have but two crowns in
his house, but he will spend part thereof at the best ale, and at some dainty
dish; for (as he says) he must sometime needs have a good morsel. And how
is it possible that those Realms and Common wealths should long prosper,
where there is such great and excessive cheer? Cato wondered how that city
could long continue, The reason of that before alleged.
where a fish was sold for more then an Ox: for that (as Pythagoras said) men
being crammed with delicate meats, presently wax proud and slothful, by
which means they hasten their own destruction. For Idleness breeds discord
and dissension, and procures them to offer violence unto their neighbors: and
by reason they have weakened their spirits, and so become sluggish, effeminate,
meycockes, and idle bellies, they can not well govern those enterprises they
have unwisely taken in hand, but by reason of their want of discretion in
martialing their affairs, An example of Darius.
are casely vanquished of their enemies. And this was the cause that Darius did
so easily get the city of Babylon (as Daniel and Heroditus report) while that
Balthazar was busy in making offeastes and banquets for the Lords and Ladies
of his Court. An example out of Titue Livi us.
And this was also the cause that the Carthaginians did so often vanquish the
Romans, who never knew how to overcome them, or take their city, until
that Scipio being sent as Lievtenaunt and general over their armies, had
reformed the disordered and licentious life which he found in the
soldiers; and that cleansing the Camp of whores, bawdes, Cooks, and such
like companions, he had reduced them unto their ancient discipline. This was
also the cause that the Goths and Vandales did so easily conquer Italy,
Example.
and sacked Rome in the time of the Emperor Honorious, Look the Chr^nicles of
Carton.
and that not long after the reign of Theodosius the Roman Empire was so
miserably dismembered, every man getting a piece as a spoil divided, and yet
neither prince nor lieutenant once endeavored to make head against the enemy,
for that their hearts were so daunted, and them selves so effeminated with
pleasures and delights that they durst not enterprise any thing. And this was
the policy of Fabius Maximus, Example.
who suffered Hanniball to enter into Campania, and to sojourne six or seven
months without any molestation, imagining that his soldiers, after so long
and tedious travailes, tasting the pleasantness of the country, and the
sweetness of the fruits which grew there in great abundance, would by and
by become likerous and intemperate, and by means thereof would forthwith
prove idle, sluggish, and inconsiderate, and then it would be no great matter
to overthrowe them.

Paulus Aemilius the French historiographer, Example of the Kings of France
and especially of the line of Merovnigens.
reports in his Annals of France, that the reason why some of our French
Kings have been dispossessed of their crowns, and that by their servaunts and
vassailes, was for that, they loving their ease and pleasures too well,
committed the charge of all public affairs unto others, and would not meddle
with any thing, least they should deprive them selves of any of their
delights. For if it happened that either their subjects rebelled, or their
own domestical servants conspired any thing against them, or their enemies
invaded them with open hostility, or any other thing fell out of like
importance, they were presently so astonished and unprovided of Counsel, that
they would easily agree unto any thing that was offered: partly, for that they
would not leave their delights and their wonted pastimes, and partly also for
that they were so unacquainted with state matters, that when need required,
they knew neither how to begin, nor how to end.

But what need we run so far to fetch examples to prove how dangerous it is
to all sorts of men, Example of a story of this age.
but especially to such as have any charge, to let loose the reins to all
pastimes and pleasures? It is not 2 years since that Casal one of the principal
towns of Montferrate, was surprised upon the Spantards by the prudent policy
of the Lord of Salvoison, who understanding of a great banquet to be made at
the marriage of a principal person in the town, and that the gentlemen of the
garrison purposed to run at Tilte and Turnie, and to make other disportes for
the Ladies and gentlewomen there assembled, supposing that this occasion was
offered as he wished, to further his purposes and to gain the city, first
imparted his device to the Kings livetenant, and resolved with him upon the
order to be observed, and so expected the day of banquet: in the mean time so
wisely and closely concealed his purpose, that he approached the City with all
his troops in the dead of the night, without being discovered, when as both
soldiers and captains being laden with wine and weary with the days
travel, were in their dead sleeps: and God knows they were but rudely
wakened with drums and fluites. For surely the French bestirred them selves as
lustily with their music in the night, as the Spaniards did the day before
with their daunsing. And though that this nation be greatly commended for their
providence in the mannaging of all their actions, yet at that time did they not
remember whathappened unto Troy, which was taken and burned by a like
stratageme, although they had long valia^tly defended the^ selves from the
assaults and enterprises of the Greeks

And because that delicate fare and superfluity, Diverse histories and examples
to prove that Sobriety is the mother of alhappie success in all military
affairs. Scipio. The Turk. Julius Caesar and his soldiers.
is a thing so dangerous among soldiers: Scipio during the siege before
Carthage cassered a Roman gentleman out of his ordinary bands, for that it
was proved against him, that during the battery he had feasted some of his
familiars in his tent, more costly and sumptuously then the Roman laws and
discipline would permit. And is there any thing at this day that make the
Turks to be more redoubted and feared in their wars, then the sobriety
which they use, and the wonderful travels they are accustomed even from their
infancy? And there was nothing that so daunted Pompey, or that made him more
to despair of the victory, then to understand that his enemies soldiers were
so temperate, and so well acquainted with pains, and travail, and all
hardness, that wanting victuals, they would like (beasts) eat such herbs
and roots as they found in the fields, which so astonished this great
captain, that from that time forth his heart fainted, and he remained wholly
in despair to have any good issue in his enterprises. For as drunkardes, what
wealth, authority, or friends soever they have, are notwithstanding
contemptible, and esteemed of all men unfit for any counsel, much less for
any execution: so likewise sober men are never so poor or unprovided, but that
they are always suspected and redoubted of their enemies, to be stayed and
resolute men both in body and mind: and therefore he that will endomage them,
must think thrice of the matter before he dare enterprise ought against them.
And if they be to be assaulted by them, they think them selves little assured,
unless they be both wisely and strongly defended.

There was nothing that Cato did so much mark in Julius Caesar, or that gave
him so great occasion to suspect, that he would one day alter their state and
Common wealth, as his sobriety, and that he perceived in him a kind of
Ambition so strongly supported with patience, pains, and vigilancie, which
were virtues that did attend upon him: knowing very well that there is nothing
that makes men more moderate in prosperity, or constant in adversity, or
provident and circumspect in all their affairs whatsoever. These are the
shortest, and most compendious ways in a small time to gain many friends,
and to make ones self invincible against his enemies. These were the special
weapons wherewith Alexander conquered Asia, Alexander.
(as Plutarch reports) and the preparations wherein he reposed greatest
confidence to attain unto that height of honor, whereunto he aspired, and of
which he had long before conceived an assured hope. These were the bulwarks
and rampires wherewith the Lacedaemonians defended themselves, The Lacedaemonians.
and maintained their liberty for the space of feven hundred years, in
despite of all their enemies, As the sormer examples do show the fruit which
is gathered by sobriety: so these that follow declare the mischiefs caused by
drunkenness and intemperancie.
who endeavored by all means possible to overthrowe them. And this was that
which Agesilaus answered unto one that marveiled, that he being a King, and the
other Princes of Sparta, lived so sparingly: why do thou marvel (says he)
seeing that of this frugalitie we gather our liberty, which is the most
excellent fruit and plentifullest harvest, that can be desired in this world?

We may gather by these, and many other examples which are registered to this
purpose, and which we may hourly observe, how necessary a thing temperancie
and sobriety is, to manage our affairs wisely, and to govern them warily,
whether it be at home in our houses, or among our friends and familiars, or
abroad in the commonwealth in the time of war against our enemies, or in the
Church among the people. For it is impossible, if we be not supported by these
divine virtues, that we should long walk without stumbling, and that being
given to wine and delicasies, we should find any way so large and spacious,
that should be sufficient for us to travel in. Sundry notable examples.
Holophernes.
We shall be endangered on every side, yea of our servants and familiar
friends, who will either rob us or kill us, as it fell out by Holophernes,
whose head was cut off by a poor woman by the like occasion; and unto the
Emperor Commodus, Commodus.
whom his concubine Marcia strangled after she had poisoned him; and unto
Alboin the King of the Lumbards, Alboin.
who being found drunken in his bed, was killed by one of his wives
paramours. And who is able to remember the manifold inconveniences and
calamities, which most men fall into through their riot and excess? for we
may say of this, as S. Paul said of covetousness, 1. Tim. 6.9.
that this is one of the pleasantest baits that the Devil has to entrappe and
snare us in his nets. 1. Pet. 5.8.
And this is the reason why S. Peter exhorts us, not only to be firm and
constant in faith, but also sober and vigilant to resist strongly, least we be
entangled in his snares. Which is very casie for the devil to accomplish, if
we give our selves unto drunkenness, and betake us unto the pleasures and
delights of the flesh. Lot being drunken, Lot. Genesis 19.53.
committed incest with his own daughters, both against the laws of nature, the
customs and manners of the most barbarous nations that ever were, yea and
against common sense, which so abhors and lotheth this sin, that the
memory thereof is most detestable at this day: and it is not to be doubted,
but that this poor man knowing and considering the horriblenes of his fault
committed in his drunkenness, did so bewail his sin, that all the rest of his
days seemed too little to lament and sorrow for his transgression. Noah. Genesis
9.21.
Noah who was (as it were) the repairer and second father of all mankind, and
such an one, as in the general corruption of his age, had always most
constantly retained the faith, the law, and obedience unto God, being drunk
after the flood, and so forgetting the gravitie and duty of a father, began
to be despised and mocked of one of his children, and thereby became so
displeased with him, that he denounced a most horrible curse and malediction
against him and his posterity, which in the end was wholly rooted out. And
what was the cause of those monstrous and horrible sins of the Sodomites,
Sodom. Genesis 18.20.
which mounted up even to the throne of God, and pulled down his vengeance and
judgment, in such sort, that he has made them a memorable example to all
posterity? was it not (as says Ezechiel) their abundance and fulness of bread,
Ezec. 16.49
and all sorts of delicasies, which their land brought forth in abundant
manner?

If it be so then, Against the excess of bankets and feasts, and of the
mischiefs that do ensue of them, to the hindra^ce of christian charity.
that our intemperance do hasten the judgments of God upon us, and that
thereby we give as great an occasion both to the Devil and unto wicked men to
destroy us, as they can desire: ought we not carefully to give our selves to
sobriety, and to abandon these great and sumptuous feasts, which at this day
are so exceeding, that, that which is superfluous, is more costly then that
which is requisite and necessary? for there are some such, as the very
scrappes are sufficient for a great multitude: and in the mean season, we may
see store of poere and beggarlie creatures at our gates and doors, so lean
and hunger-starued, that it is a marvel to behold them: who might very well
be sustained and sufficiently fed with that, which serves for nothing, but to
kill and destroy us. And what a madness is this, that a Christian man (who
according to his promise and protestation made at his Baptism, ought to
mortify and tame his flesh by abstinence and fasting, had rather even burst
himself and choke himself, his children, friends, and servants with wine
and delicate dainties, then by his charitable alms to nourish so many poor
and needy brethren, whom he sees languishing, and miserably to pine away with
hunger and thirst, cold, and other infinite mischiefs, which continually vex
and torment them? Diogenes seeing a man to take great pains to nourish and fat
his body; began forthwith to laugh, saying unto those who were with him: Is it
not great pity, that this pore sot should take such great labor and care to
repair and strengthen the walls of that house, wherein his mind is
imprisoned? And to say truly, it is a strange case that (against the nature
and condition of other prisoners) we seek all means possible, to prolong our
captivity: and that we are so careful to nourish and cherish our flesh in
such idleness, which is so ungrateful, so rebellious, so treacherous, and such a
mortal enemy unto us, and so careless to give a little bread and water unto
the members of Christ Jesus, who are so trusty and assured friends. He
prooveth by similituds, the hurt that men do unto their bodies and souls by
pampering them.
We do not imitate herein the example of politic Captains, who study by all
means they may, to cut off all victuals from their enemies, and to starve them
if it be possible, that they may the more easily vanquish them: for we pamper
our bodies, and furnish them with all kind of necessaries, to the end they may
the better and more strongly wage war with us at their pleasure. I suppose we
are afraid that our sensual delights should not fructify and increase
sufficiently, but that they should bring forth briers and brambles too
sparingly, seeing we are so industrious to mucke the soil, yea and take more
pains herein, then men usually do to compass their gardens and grounds. We
strengthen that, to weaken our selves, and had rather (contratie to the example
of that ancient father, of who^ the tripartite history makes mention) that
our flesh should murder us, then we kill that. It seems that we live to no
other end but to fat up ourselves. For we do not cate, that we may live (as
did Socrates, and as we ought to do, being Christians) but we live, that we
may eat: as though ourflesh were not continually too lumpishand heavy, and
therefore less able to contemplate the wonderful works of God, and to walk
in his ways. We still pamper it up, that we may make it more unwieldy and more
burdensome to the spirit, and, as it were, load it with such a mass of earth,
that it may be better able by the weight there of to press down our minds,
then they shall be availeable to lift up them selves by their quickenesse and
agilitie. Other fit and proper similituds, to prove that frugality and
sobriety in our meats and drinks, are most necessary for the preservation
of our health.


If we will tame a young steire, and make him fit for the yoke, he must be
coupled with an ox that is stronger then him felfe, least he should draw more
backward then the other is able to pull forward. In like manner if we will
tame our flesh, and make it obedient unto the spirit, we must diminish the
strength of the one, and increase the force of the other. If it be not
consonant unto reason, that the wife should have greater authority in the
house, then the husband, especially if she be a fool, careless, dissolute,
voluptuous, given to drunkenness, arrogant, and a spend-thrift, yea though she
be wise and virtuous: what coulerable pretense can there be alleged, that we
should so debase and throw down the noblenes and dignity of our minds, as to
make them slaves and servants unto that, of whom by right they ought to be
lords and masters? which must needs follow, if we will suffer our bodies to
live so easily and slouthfullie as they desire. For it falls not out with
them, as it does with the ground, which the more it is compassed, the better it
fructifieth: for they in deed know not how to bring forth any good fruit,
unless they be lean, out of heart, and almost abandoned and untilled.

Esop (the better to make us understand this) recites a pleasant fable of a
certain poor woman, A pleasant sable fitly applied.
who had a hen that laid her every day an egg: now she seeing that her
hen was very lean, and yet laid still after her accustomed manner,
supposed that if she were fat and lusty, she would lay twice a day; and with
this conceit of mind, she fed and crammed her thoroughly, so that in a
short space she became so fat, that clean contrary to the expectation and
opinion of the woman, she left laying altogether. In like manner (says the
same Esop, in moralizing his fable) many there are, who in their base and poor
estate, are very virtuous: but if they be once mounted to any degree of
felicity and abundance, and may live easily and wealthily, they give over
their former studies, and become careless, sensual, and void of all good
works. Now imagine with your selves, if the Devil, who is as a ravening
woolfe, seeing them so well fed, and in so good case, do not seek to gorge
him self with them. And how shall they escape him, seeing they are so fat,
that they can neither run nor go in the way of virtue? If then the danger
be so great, in the feeding of our carkases and nourishing them in idleness and
delights, shall not we amend this in our selves, and be content with what so
ever GOD sends us, The frugality of the beathe^ condemnethe superfluity of
the Christians.
whether it be bread or any thing else that may suffice for the health and
good constitution of our bodies?

The ancient Greeks called their bankets Syssitia, a word that signifies
the frugalitie which was there observed; which I here set down, to the end
that if (according to their example) we would invite our friends, we should
make them such moderate and sober cheer, that there should be no superfluity
in any wise: and we should feed them so sparingly, that they should not surfeit
after their coming home; Plutarch in his discourse of table talk.
imitating herein the example of Plato, who when he invited any guess to his
Academy, used to set small store of meat before them, but furnished up his
table with sweet music, pleasant stories, and philosophical discourses, and
so delighted his guess with this courteous and excellent entertainment, that
they would stay at his house two days after. But we deal far otherwise at
this day: for we think now that we have not made sufficient cheer, unless
our guess complain the next day, that they have either the headeach, or raw
stomachs, heavy and sleepie heads, dull and blockish wits. You would think
that in stead of wine, they had drunk poison: and it is a lamentable thing to
consider, that such as are invited and come unto us upon our words, taking us
for their friends and familiars, are oftentimes carried home to their houses by
two or three servants, as though they were our enemies, and such as we had
wounded to death. O what treason and cruelty is this, that a man, who in
friendship and good will is come to make merry and rejoice with us in our
houses, at our table, in our presence, and at our entreaty, should be by us so
daungerously wounded, that he shall not be able to help him self, neither
with hand nor foot!

We abhor the Turks and other barbarous nations, Of the barbarousnes and
cruelty of those, who glut themselves with abundance.
and that for good cause: esteeming them (as in deed they are) a savage and
cruel people: and yet they are not so bad, as we are. For that which they
commit in time of war against their enemies, we execute at home in our houses
against our friends. And further, they in their fury quickly dispatch such as
resist them; but we make our brethren and kinsfolk languish and pine away, and
murder them at leisure, who come with an imagination to be courteously
entertained of us: and that, by giving of some too much meat, to others too
much drink, which we cramme and thrust into their mouths violently, even as
nources which give their children pappe against their wills, ouerlading them
with drink, and surcharging their stomachs with meat, and continually
striving to thrust (as in to a ball) a little more, either marmolad, and
sucket, preserved delicasies, venison, sweet meats, and sundry sorts of
drugges, still to increase our appetites. If there be any that dare avouch that
the belly is nothing ingenious: it is an easy matter to prove the contrary,
considering what sundry sorts of sauces it has invented, and what skill in
dressing of meats, which if they were not so handled, they were of no value or
estimation. For most men's appetites are like itching soars, they must ever be
rubbed: and we must if we will have that which we eat delightsome and pleasant,
trim it up and dress it as curiously, as fond and foolish women do
themselves, to the end they may seem the more bewtifull unto those who behold
the^.

But who is there that is afraid he should eat too little? There is no man that
repents himself that he has eaten too little: but too many that they have
eaten too much.
and if that be true which Simonides said of speech, that many repent the^ that
they have spoken too much, but few that they have been too silent: So
likewise it is true that many repent them selves that they have eaten too much,
but no man sorroweth for his temperance and sobriety. It is strange to behold
the inconstancy and mutabilitie of our minds. If we be dry we seek by all
means possible to quench our thirst: have we quenched our thirst? we presently
long for salt meats, supposing we shall find the wine the better, and more
pleasing our tastes. But we are deceived: for as too bright a light dazeleth
our sight, Excess takes away the pleasure of eating and drinking.
and too great a noise hinders our hearing: so likewise too great curiosity
in devising our pleasures, takes away a great part of the fruition of our
delights, neither is there any thing that makes our meat more sauerie, then
hunger and health. For there is nothing so coorse, but a sound body will well
digest, Plutarch in his Apoth.
and drink water with great pleasure. Who has not heard of that which is
reported of Socrates, who (being asked by one of his friends, why he ran up
and down and fetched such gambols before dinner) said: that he provided sauce
for his supper? As also of the queen of Caria, who in presenting her cooks
unto Alexander, told him they were the finest, and could make the most delicate
meats of any in all Asia, and that it were not possible to find any better. To
whom he answered; that he had no need of them: seeing he used no other cooks to
dress his meat, but such as Leonidas left him, and they were exercise and
travel in the morning, to dress his dinner, and a spare and sober diet, to
make ready his supper. Which thing the Lacedaemonians considering, allowed
nothing unto their cooks, but salt and vinegar: saying, that the rest
consisted in the meat and in the pains taking. For there is no reason that
the tables should bring our appetites to us, but that we should bring our
stomachs to them: and it should be sufficient for the bourd, to offer that
which may suffice us: for as Socrates said, there is no meat more dangerous,
nor from which we ought more charily to keep our selves, then that which
brings hunger with it, when as in deed we are not hungry, and drink that
makes us thirsty, when as in truth, we are not dry.

But peradventure some man will say; It is a great pleasure to the taste, to
have a table furnished with variety of dainties, An answer unto such as
prefer the pleasure of the taste, before the health of their bodies.
and every dish his several sauce. Let us grant them so much: but can there
be any good pleasure, which does prejudice thy health? and I would gladly know
of these, who allege this for themselves, what kind of pleasure that is, and
how long it endures. For it is most certain (as Saint Basil says) that the
throat of such liquorous and drunken fellows, is like unto a swift current,
where the water continues not long, and as soon as it is passed, the channel
is forthwith as dry, as though there never had been any water in it. And as
concerning the quality of the pleasure, it is very lean, and (as the Poets
speak of their love) it is sweet and sour. And if those who have made trial
thereof, would confess the truth, they would resemble it to those, who
scratch too hard where it itcheth: and in a word, that it is rather in
imagination, then in essence and in deed: for it always draws with it a
marveilous unquietness both of body and mind, and encombreth the natural
disposition and inclination. Whereupon depends the ease, strength, and
alacrity of man. Plutarch (the more lively to decipher this) propounds a
most proper and apt comparison. Even as (says he) there is a kind of tickling
in the flesh, which causes laughter, that is both uncomely and unseemly, and
like unto a convulsion and shrinking of the sinews; so likewise all those
pleasures of the body, which are provoked only by fantasy and conceit of
mind, are sottish, feeble, troublesome, and far differing from nature: and
it is a clear case, that the greatest number of those, who search for nothing
so much as delicasies in their sauces, are such; and they rather eat and
drink of custom, then of any necessity: and glutting them selves after this
manner, they deprive them selves both of the pleasure and profit which they
should enjoy, if they would use the creatures of God aright. And this is the
reason that the bread, which of it self is so saverie, tastes not in their
mouths, unless it be sophistically used, and that the cooks by some sorcerie
have metamorphised the natural taste, and given it some other savor, either
stark naught or at the least nothing so good, as it was before. For nature
surmounteth art in euerything, and God is more expert in seasoning those things
which he has created, then the cunningest man who so ever. And here that may
fitly be applied which Lysimachus said, Plutarch in his treatise, why God
oftentimes deferreth his judgments.
who seeing him self by hunger and thirst to be constrained to yield to his
enemies: and afterward being permitted to drink a little water, crying out on
the sudden, and saying: O God, how much to blame am I, that for a little
delight, have lost a long and an exceeding great felicity? So likewise all
drunkards and liquorous persons, should think them selves that for a small
pleasure, they would take out of season, which also is full of gall and
bitterness, they loose their natural delights; as quiet and sweet sleeps, a
quicknes in their senses, a merinesse of heart, a good disposition and an
ability of all the parts of their bodies, al which they enjoy by abstinence and
sobriety.

There are some, An answer unto such as think that their goods were given them
to no other end, but to spend the^ prodigally.
who think sufficiently to excuse their prodigality, for that they are rich
and wealthy. How should we spend our revenues (say they) if we should not
liberally entertain our friends? as though God had given them their wealth
only to this end: and as though there were no poor men in the world, and that
there were no other means to try their charity: as though they could not
possible be charitable toward the needy, but were constrained to be dissolute
and prodigal: as though the table were the foundation of friendship, and the
tavern the strongest and surest place to shut up friends together. As though
(to apply that unto them, which Themistocles said of himself and of his
children, after they were banished from Athens) all their goods were lost, if
they them selves were not lost with them. These men make me remember them, who
ask how they should spend their times, if it were not at tennys, or at
courting and making of love: as though there were not many other exercises more
honest, and more profitable, wherein so precious a thing as time is, may be
better spent.

We know all the means that may be to gather riches, The extreme misery of
prodigal men.
and yet we can not learn one way how to spend them. Let every man judge if it
be not true which I say: that is, that these men of whom I have spoken, do
more willingly and joyfully spend a hundred, yea two hundred crowns yearly, if
they have them, in banqueting and chearing, then they do a hundred shillings
in comforting the poor and needy, who crave it at their hands for Gods sake.
And that it may be so, they inuit one another to their houses, yea, and they
are very angry, if being bidden they refuse to come. But if they be never so
earnestly entreated by the other, to relieve them in their extreme need and
necessity, to give them but the hundredth part of that which they spend
riotously they will in no wise agree to it, until they be even compelled
thereto by their long and earnest petitions. Which does notably bewray their
affections, and what desire they have to help one another. But I wonder they
are not ashamed so to profane the holy and sacred name of friendship, which if
it be sure and firm, can have no other foundation, nor be by any other means
retained, then only by virtue: or that they are not afraid to offer such great
injury to their friends, as to account of them, as of flatterers and
clawbackes, who can not otherwise be retained, but with traynes and baits.

And yet I will not condemn the laudable custom that Christians use often
times in visiting one another: What banquets Christians should use.
but my desire is only, that the great preparations which are commonly used at
our feasts and banquets, may be reformed: for that (in my opinion) they are
very scandalous among Christians, and are a principal occasion, why that
discipline, which ought to be among them, is so corrupted. And it is certain,
that if our friends be virtuous and well given, they will be content with
Pythagoricall banquets: and if they be otherwise, we may say with Socrates,
that a little is to much for them. That great king Cyrus being demanded what
should be prepared for his supper, answered, nothing but bread, for that he
would suppe by the rivers side. Epaminondas being come to one of his friends
houses, purposing in friendly manner to dine with him: and seeing such great
preparation was made to entertain him, made a very short return, saying, that
he evidently perceived that all which was provided, was not for his dinner:
but rather that he had intended to offer some great sacrifice to the gods,
seeing he had provided so great cheer. Augustus Caesar being entertained with
small cheer, and a frugall dinner, told him that had provided it, secretly in
his ear, that before that time he never knew him to be so familiar a friend.
If we had honest friends, and we our selves were such virtuous guests, we
would never find fault with sober and frugall diet: but with Augustus
acknowledge we love them so much the more, for their familiar and friendly
entertainment.

But some will say, Whether it be a thing unbeseeming rich men to live sparingly
it were an uncivil and an vngentlemanlike thing, that a man, who has great
revenues, should be so exactly governed at his table. For answer whereof, I
will allege nothing, but that which one of the ancient Philosophers said upon
the like occasion: that is to say, As a cook greatly fails in his art, who
having plenty of salt by him, would needs therefore put more in his pottage
then is sufficient to season them: so likewise, does he err grossly, who
respecting nothing but his abundance, will needs have more meat at his table
then is sufficient, either for himself, or for others who sit with him. And
surely let us be as sparing as we may, yet do we oftentimes pass the bounds
of sobriety: and ten to one there is something superfluous. Moreover, there is
no greater civility then that which proceeds of virtue, and within the
limits hereof all honesty is bounded. And to conclude, if we affect glory and
commendation, we should rather seek it in moderate abstinence, then in
superfluous riot. But our perverseness is so great, and our affection so
disordered, that we are not barely contented to be vicious, and to glory in our
naughtiness, but we will needs disgrace and blame virtue which contrarieth
our defires, and so make it more contemptible, hindering others from going
forward in goodness, who are backewarde enough already. And this makes us
call honest sobriety by the name of niggardliness, and a godly reformation of
life, we account hypocrisy and dissimulation: and in a word, we term
wisdom, cowardlinesse; zeal, rashness; constancy, obstinacy; justice,
cruelty; magnanimity, boldness and presumption. There is no virtue, but that
which concurreth with our affections, neither yet any vice, but that which is
contrary and repugnant to our desires.

There are others, Against such men who to excuse their excess allege custom.
who think to defend themselves against reason, with alleging custom: who
never consider, that by this means they seek to establish the most cruel and
execrable tyranny, that ever was. For if it be tyrannical to make laws
contrary to reason, only upon a self will, what shall we say, when as we
execute them and continue them clean repugnant to the laws of God, and all
good order? I would demand of them, if it were sufficient for a thief to
defend his robberies to allege custom? Or to murderers, and whoremongers, to
say, that they have been given and addicted thereto even from their cradles? If
we must allow of things by custom, nothing were more allowable then vice.
For this is one of the most auncientest things that is. It began by and by
after the creation of the world, and has continned and multiplied ever since
until this day: at which time, it is more strong and forceable then ever
heretofore. But notwithstanding, we are so far from being able to prove the
goodness thereof by custom, that as good and honest things, the more ancient
and the more allowed and practiced that they have been in former times, the
more commendable they are at this day: so likewise those things, which in their
natures are naught and dishonest, by how much the more ancient they are, and
authorized by time and continuance, and so may claim, as it were,
prescription: by so much the more damnable and wicked are they to be deemed and
accounted.

The last and final reply, Against such as condemn all reformation under
pretext of noveltie.
which is usually made when as this matter is debated, is a demand or question
in saying who would leave the old fashion for the new? and thus every one
watches other, and expect who shall begin first. But I would gladly know this:
whether we be as long in committing faults, as we are in consulting how to
amend them. And whether that which God has commanded, and which is conson ant
to reason, which is pleasurable and profitable should be disputed and consulted
of. And is it not great pity, that if the question be moved of any folly or
lewdness, there should be so many to advance and set forward themselves, and
every one striving to gain the victory of that, whereof there is no other
guerdon but shame and confusion, and which is continually accompanied with
woeful repentance: and that there should be so few, and those so backward and
wayward to follow virtue, of which we may be sure to reap great gain, and
most ample recompense?

We are like unto those harebraines, and desperate adventurers, A description
of the most sort of men, who at this day glory in the name of Christians.
who are as valiant and hardy as Sampson or Perceforest, to beat and break
open a poor country man's door, to steal his hens, to ravish his daughters,
and to filtch and pilfer whatsoever he has in his house: and in other things
so fearful and cowardly, that being in the wars, they tremble at the sound
of every trumpet. Good God, how long will it be before we pass over this large
field of Christian virtues, seeing we are so idle and slothful, that we can
not or we will not travel to the end of one furlong! When shall we embrace
these noble and beautiful ladies, if we be afraid so much as once to salute
them? they should rule and be the mistresses of our hearts, and yet we will
hardly allow them any place in our mouths: but these are old complaints, and
(as I think) very unprofitable. For as though men were stark dead, there are
no ears that will hear these or any other remonstrances, tending to the
reformation of disorder and abuse. And how is it possible we should hear, when
as we will not so much as listen to the laws of nature, which is the common
mother of us all? For the better to teach us, and as it were, to compel us to
sobriety, she offers such things as tend to pleasure, with a very niggardly
and sparing hand: as we may see in all delicate sorts, either of fish,
fowls, or beasts, whose flesh is esteemed and accounted dainty and pleasant:
whereas otherwise, she seems almost prodigal, in providing us all things
fit for our necessity: as bread, wine, and such ordinary meats: to the end,
that on the one side there should be no man so poor, but might be able to
relieve him self by his labors: and that on the other side there should be
no man so rich, which should not be somewhat restrained from his pleasures by
reason of the difficulty and scarsitie of such things, as may serve him
thereto, or else for the great expenses which must ensue, if he will needs
enjoy them.

Behold the counsel of wise and provident Nature: The dissoluteness and riot
in these days is insatiable.
but what of that? we will contrary nature all that we may: and we will have
wine from Candy, raisons from Damasco and Corinth, dates out of Egypt, spices
from the Indies, millions from Naples, cheese from Millaine, comfites from
Spain: and we are never contented with those things our own country will
afford us, although they be more profitable and wholesome for us, then those of
foreign Regions. Nay we proceed further, and we sttiue, as it were, with
necessity. For neither war, famine, imposts, loss, and such like miseries,
are sufficient to compel us to give over our pleasures. And albeit these great
afflictions are sent of God, who by his punishments would make us acknowledge
our faults, to the end we should turn unto him in all humility and reverence,
that so he might be appeased toward us, and forgive us our sins. Yet
notwithstanding there are few that think of this, and none that (to avoid his
judgments) will do otherwise then they have been accustomed. For there are
now as many feasts as ever were: singing, daunsing, piping, masking, sporting,
and playing were never in greater use: every botcher will have his minstrelsie,
and spend his penny to fetch a friske with the maids in the country. Yea, and
those places where there is greatest trouble, abound most with dissoluteness
and intemperancie.

And yet for all this, Against such as complain of the scarsitie of delicate
wines.
they complain of the scarsitie and dearness of wine, and never consider
that themselves are the principal occasion thereof. For how is it possible that
this merchandise should not be dear, seeing it is so well sold in all places,
and at all times? In Lacedemonia cooks gained very little, for that the people
were contented with simple cheer, and gave not themselves to riot and
spending. If we in like manner would be content with such wine as our country
affoordeth, or if there be none, to take such drink as God has there
provided; the Vintners should not be so rich as now they are: nor the merchant
should need to fetch Malmesey from Venice, or Sackes from Spain, nor any
wines out of Gosconie: neither should they gain so much by our licorousnesse
as now they do. We may answer such complaynants, as Augustus Caesar answered
those, who told him that the people of Rome grudged exceedingly, for that wine
was so dear. My son in law Agrippa (says he) has wisely provided for
this inconvenience, and that they shall not hereafter complain of thirst: for
that having the charge of the conduites, he has so wisely ordered the matter,
that there will be plenty of water in every corner of the city: and God be
thanked, we have plenty of this moisture in every part of the land: and if
it chance, that some places be less provided for then others, yet it is an
easy matter to dig pittes and wells, so that it happens through our own
negligence, if we want where with all to quench our thirsts.

I fear me, An answer unto such as nodde their heads, and knit their brows,
when they hear any man speak of reformation.
that among those, who will spare so much time as to read this discourse,
there will be some carpers and cavillers. But I would desire them to consider,
whether that which they say be consonant to reason, and whether such girding
and scoffing may be more available for them to prove and confirm their
intemperancie, or forceable for me to convince them, and confirm that which I
have spoken touching the corruption of this miserable world, wherein virtue is
not only unknown and neglected, but it is despised and scorned, as well of
those, who would follow it, as of others, who do nothing but in show commend
and maintain it. And the reason hereof is this, for that our lusts have had
in times past, and yet retain at this day such liberty and license, that
there is no man in the world worse welcome then he, that indeauoureth to bring
them to obedience, or seeks to reduce them to any good order. But the scoffs
of these mockers, ought not to discourage us, who are zealous in reproouing of
vice where we find it, neither yet may hinder us from commending of virtue
both by word and writing, wheresoever we find any love thereof to appear and
manifest it self.

The difficulty which may seem to be propounded in enterprising a
reformation of such disorder as is almost in every thing, An exhortation to
princes and magistrates to reform the disorder which is almost in all things.
ought not to withhold magistrates from assaying and taking of this matter in
hand. For the more difficult and hard the enterprise is, the more commendable
is it for them, if they effect it, and bring it to pass. For in hard matters
the desire only is very laudable, and they need not doubt of the furtherance
and assistance of Gods grace and holy spirit in giving of them wisdom and
fit means to accomplish their desires, and to bring all their counsels to a
happy end. For if he be ready to hear all those who call upon him
faithfully, how shall he abandon his chief and principal servants,
especially in that service, Examples of encouragement. 1. Of Joshua.
which tends to his honor and glory? they ought to consider that notable
promise which he made to his servant Joshua, to be always with him and to
guide him in all his enterprises: for that his heart was upright and sincere
toward him, and that he followed his statutes and ordinances without
declining either to the right hand or to the left: assuring themselves, that
if, as he was guided by the light of this lamp, so they would likewise be
illuminated thereby, they must in seeking for help at Gods hand to further
their actions, refer them wholly to his glory, and so he will never fail
them: but they shall sensibly feel the care and remembrance he has of them:
not only to support them against their enemies, but also to aid them in all
extremities whatsoever, and whenever they are objected, even as he did Joshua
in the conquest of the land of Canaan. For it was no more mastery for him to
discomfit 30 kings, who proudly rose up against him, then it is for a mower to
cut down the grass or corn in the fields. And did not Moses, Of Moses.
having no other strength but only the power of God, and the rod which he
gave him to carry in his hand, deliver the children of Israel out of the
captivity of Egypt, mauger Pharao and all his army? and having brought them
thorough the red sea dryshod, he led them also thorough the deserts of Arabia
by the space of forty years, notwithstanding, the winds, sands, serpents,
want of water, bread, wine, and other vittailes: yea without any provision or
knowledge of the way, besides many other difficulties, which encou^tred them in
all places whersoeuer they came. Nay he did more: for although he had to do
with an obstinate people, and such as would not here any wholesome instructions:
whose minds were greatly estranged, by reason of their errors, idolatries,
and superstitions wherein they had bin nourished and trained up in Egypt, yet
notwithstanding did he not fear to alter their laws and customs, and to give
them a new religion and form of government. In the execution whereof, he
found much murmuring and great rebellion in the beginning: but all fell out so
well in the end, that he saw before his death, piety regarded and justice
established, according to the ordinance and appointment of God.

Ezechias and Josias kings of Judah, Ezechias and Josias kings of Judah.
one of them being 25 years ole, and the other but 8 years of age, when as they
began to reign, did they not (as soon as they had any authority) restore and
repair whatsoever had bin wasted, spoiled, or profaned, as well in the
service of God, as in their policy and government? without any consideration
either of their youth, or of the danger whereto they opposed themselves, or of
the resistance that might be made against them; all which could not terrify
them, or divert their purposes.

Esdras, Nehemias, Zorobabel, and the other princes, who by the permission of
king Cyrus, Esdras and the other governors of the people after the captivity
of Babylon.
were returned from Babylon, had a thousand and a thousand vexations before
they could peaceably enjoy the grant that was made them, and before (as it was
granted unto them by the letters patents of the king of Persia) they could be
suffered to repair the temple, and to plant their commonwealth. Yet
notwithstanding, for all their little company, and the small furtherance they
had: and on the contrary part, the great encumbrances, and the manifold
complaints that were made against them at Court, they continued firm and
stable in their determinate purposes. And nothing was sufficient to hinder them
from their work, or make them wax cold in the action, but that trusting in
the mercies and graces of God, they valiantly perseuered to encounter with all
dangers that were objected, as stumbling blocks, to hinder their course. And
they were not deceived in this their expectation, for through the help and
favor of God, they overcame all these difficulties and dangers in the end.

When as Constantine the great determined in the beginning of his Empire,
openly to favor, Notable examples of Constantine the great in the restoration
of the Christian Church.
and also (if it were possible) to plant the religion of Christ Jesus
throughout all the world. His friends and counselors, to the end to divert
him, would devise no means to effect his desires, nor he himself could
imagine how to compass so great an enterprise, considering the contrariety
and resistance that Lucinius and Maxentius would make, who were his consorts in
the Empire, and both mortal and deadly enemies to Christian religion: and such
also were almost all the subjects of the Empire, who did exceedingly detest it,
for that it condemned all the religion of their forefathers. Notwithstanding
all this, contemning all danger whatsoever, and respecting neither war nor
any rebellion of his subjects, having commended his estate, himself, and
government, and direction of his affairs into the hands of almighty God, he
fell to put in execution, that which he had purposed, and that so happily, that
his enemies being overthrown and vanquished, and that in a short space, he
rased and pulled down all the holds of Satan, that is to say, his Temples
and Chapels of Idolatry, abolished their ceremonies, dissipated their
conuenticles and synagogues, disprooued and discovered their errors, and did
so blason the abuses and abominations of their Priests, that in short time
every man began to abhor them, and presently he called the poor Christians,
out of woods, out of deserts, out of holes, and caves, wherein they were hid
during the fury and persecution of the tyrannical Emperors, who were before
him; giving them commission to build Churches in all the towns and cities of
the Empire, which should be dedicated to the honor of God, to the preaching of
his word, and the administration of his sacraments, which he has ordained for
the confirmation of the faith of his chosen and elected children. And for that
they were poor and had all their goods confiscate, he caused them to be
restored by an edict and decree of the Senate: and furthermore commanded, that
in those places where there were great assemblies, there should be certain
sums of money delivered unto them, out of the common treasury, to the end
they might be the better able to defray their ordinary charges and expenses,
about their daily affairs; the which went so prosperously forward by the
means of this good prince, the diligence of his servants, and the blessing of
God, that in less then ten or twelve years, in stead of thirty thousand gods,
who were received, allowed, and worshipped by the Romans (as Tertullian
reports) there was but one God, who was acknowledged and publicly adored in
all the Empire: and in stead of a million of patrons and gods of protection,
whom every man invented as his fancy served, there was no more left then one
only Christ Jesus, to whom every one yielded his obedience, confessing and
acknowledging, that he was the only pathway to righteousness, grace,
salvation, life everlasting, and all kind of happiness and felicity: and
that there was no other, under whose protection they might safely and securely
rest and repose themselves.

Who is there that will not acknowledge, that, in all then enterprises of this
worthy Emperor, The example of Constantine does evidently declare, that
nothing is impossible unto those, who resolve with them selves to serve God.
their appeared a manifest assistance and blessing of God, which made every
thing so easy: quite against the opinion of those, who in the beginning would
have examined this action with worldly wisdom? For there was no likelihood that
six Emperors, such as he was when he began this enterprise, successively
coming to the Empire, and enjoying the scepter and sway thereof thirty years,
as he did, should have finished that which he began. And yet notwithstanding
God, in whom he reposed his whole confidence, showed him so great mercy, and
so favored his zeal, that he was not long before he builded him a temple,
whose foundation and compass contained almost 3 parts of the earth, which was
habitable. Imitating herein, the example of king Solomon, who builded the
temple of Jerusalem. This gained him the name of GREAT among his subjects, and
did assure him of the love and favor of God, and purchased him an inestimable
treasure in heaven, and in earth an immortal renown among men: who will
declare to all posterity, the love he bare toward God and his religion, and
his noble courage against his enemies, to establish and plant his fear in
despite of whosoever should oppose themselves against it. And finally, the
pity which he had of the whole Church, which was so great, that to deliver it
from that miserable and woeful oppression wherein it was, by the rigor of
cruel tyrants, he doubted not, after the example of Judas Maccabeus, to abandon
him self and all that he had, to most imminent dangers and extremities.

Do we not likewise see, Many other examples.
that the remembrance of the justice, godliness, and zeal, which all the good
Emperors (as Theodosius, Martian, Iovinian, and Valentinian) had, to reform
disorders and abuses in the commonwealth, is at this time well known among
many, and most pleasant and delectable to those that read their histories? And
to come unto our kings, Who is there that does not highly extol Clovis and
Charlemaine, Many kings of France. Clovis and Charlemaine.
for that they had among their greatest affairs, such respect unto the well
ordering of all their towns and cities, and for that they would oftentimes
summon their bishops and the other wise men of their kingdom, to consult what
were the best way for the reformation of abuses, which did begin to spring up
at that present, or rather had begun to bud long before their times; and
following that resolution which they had taken, would adventure their persons
and their goods, to correct and amend the government of the Church. Lewis the
gentle.
Also the great constancy of Lewis the gentle, who showed him self so
virtuous and valiant in bridling the Clergy of his time; that neither could
their rebellion with his children conspiring against him, committing him to
perpetual prison and captivity, astonish or divert him from his purposes. As
also the wisdom of Charles the fifth, who considering the ignorance of the
people, Charles the 5 of France.
and that their want of knowledge was the root of all vice, blasphemy,
infidelity, cruelty, and other corruptions, wherewith all estates were
generally attainted, (in some sort to take away this miste, which so darkened
and hindered the sight of so many in his time) caused the Bible to be translated
into our mother tongue, besides many other good books, as those of Augustine
of the city of God, and such like, which he judged most fit and convenient to
instruct the ignorant? And shall we not also commend the piety of Lewis the 9.
Lewis the 9.
who made so noble a decree against swearers and blasphemers of Gods holy name,
which by no means he would afterward revoke, no not in favor of one of his
nerest friends, who had oftended: neither yet would pardon him for any entreaty
whatsoever? who likewise (as Paulus Emilius reports) would not be induced by
any persuasion to bestow a poor prebend upon one, whom he judged not capable
thereof by reason of his ignorance. I pass over the commendable virtues of
many other our kings, who by diverse memorable acts have plentifully declared
the hatred they always bare to injustice, and inte^perancie. Whose remembrance
is consecrated to all posterity in most notable histories: and whose examples
ought to encourage their successors, and all other kings and princes to do
their duties, that they be not ashamed and confounded when they shall appear
before the king of kings.

And to return to our former speech, from whence (by occasion) we have
somewhat digressed, The best remedy against drunkenness and gluttony, is
chastity: by occasion whereof, he enters into a discourse of unlawful
pleasure, as whordom and such like: and discovers the mischiefs that ensue
of them.
we must understand, that besides those conditions whereof we have spoken
before, which may be reaped by sobriety, there is also another most excellent
one, and that is, that she teaches us the way to chastity. For that which S.
Paul speaks is most true, that whoredom and dissolutenes are hatched by
drunkenness: and therefore in the end of the Epistle to the Romans, he first
exhorts the^ to reform their tables, before he gives any order for their
bodies: teaching us thereby, that all uncleanness of life, do proceed of excess
and gluttony. The Prophet likewise searching out the cause of the iniquity of
Sodom, does attribute it especially, unto the abundance of the cuntry, and the
plenty of all delicacies in their cities, by reason of the fertility of the
soil where they were planted. But before we go any further in discoursing of
the causes and occasions of this kind of pleasure, it is convenient to set
down some of the mischiefs and miseries wherein it wrappeth all those, who
follow and hunt after it. I say some of them, for that it were an infinite
labor to repeat them all, and in my opinion nothing necessary: for that if we
have but a small spark of reason and sound judgment, It takes away our
understanding, and transformeth us into bruit beasts.
those which shall be alleged, will be sufficient to withdraw us from the love
and liking of it. First of all therefore, it takes away our hearts (as Hosea
says) that is to say, it does so dull our spirits, that we become senseless,
and so cools the heat of our wills, that we grow careless and negligent,
and as dull to follow any virtuous endeavor, as if we were dead, and without
life. And besides the taking away of every good motion in us, it depriueth us
also of all reason and understanding, and so wholly transformeth us into bruit
beasts. And upon this occasion began the fable of Circes, whom, the poets (in
declaring the operation of her sorceries and enchantments) said to have changed
men into swine, and to have bereaved them of all knowledge and love of virtue,
if they did but once kiss or behold her.

There is a certain fish, which the Latins call Torpedo, An excellent
comparison and fit for the proof of this first mischief caused by whordome.
which we term slothfulness, not for that it is slow in motion, but by
reason of a secret virtue and hidden power that it has: for being chased by
the fishermen or by any other fish, she casts forth a certain venomous
poison, wherewith nature has armed for her own defense, which has force to
stay every thing that is infected therewith: benumming all the joints and
sinews in such sort, that they stir no more then if they had bin smitten with
the palsy: and it proceeds further: for being cast and spread abroad in the
water, where the nets are laid to take her, if the fishers chance to come and
put their hands into the water before the force be past, forthwith they become
numme and stiff, and they can not stir them. Wherein surely the nature of
pleasure is very lively represented: for if we will hunt after it, for that
there seems to be some delight and happiness in it, or for some supposed
sweetness which we hope for by the fruition thereof, forthwith it benummeth both
body and mind in such sort, that the one can not devise or imagine any good
thing, neither can the other put it in practice or execution. Which may be very
easily proved by the histories and examples of all times.

But there is one among all the rest, The example of Solomon a most notable
proof.
that (in my opinion) is most memorable, and worthy to be considered of every
one, the better to drive them from this whorish and filthy affection. And that
is the example of Solomon, who had received so many special favors and
singular graces of God, that he was, as it were, the wonder of wisdom,
knowledge, industry, piety, faith, te^perance, justice, magnanimity, mildness
and sobriety: besides, he had such worldly happiness and felicity, that in glory
and magnificence he was like unto another Sun: notwithstanding he was so
bewitched and enchanted with this pleasure, that forgetting both God, himself,
and his duty, he was not ashamed to abandon himself, and publicly to worship
Idols, and to build temples for them hard by that, which he before had erected
to the honor of God, and to sacrifice to some of those gods whom his concubines
honored and adored. Who would ever have thought that such a man, who
(excepting Christ Jesus) was the best furnished of any that ever was in the
world, and knew most perfitly the craft, cunning dissimulation, flattering
words, tears, and counterfaite dealings of all dissembling women, should
ever have been so deceived and abused, that for to please his strumpets, would
displease God, destroy his own house, and so villanously stain his glory,
unless he had been out of his vvittes, and drowned, as it were, in most
extreme and bottomless follies? In what danger then are we like to fall
into, who have not the tenth part of his vvisdome, nor of his other rare and
excellent virtues, which did shine in him as bright as great Carbuncles, if
we once suffer our selves to be entised, and as it were, lulled asleep by
the svveet songs of this wicked and filthy pleasure?

Behold Samson, who had conquered all his enemies, and who sometime had
discomfited a thousand with the javv bone of an Ass, The example of Samson.
Judge. 15.15.
who brake great cords of hemp as easily as we can break little threeds, who
carried away and pulled down the pillars with the houses of great cities,
tare and rent lions in pieces with his hands, and did many other vvonderfull
and admirable works: behold (I say) this invincible Samson was vanquished,
taken and bound by one woman, who delivered him into the hands of the
Philistims to be drawn and haled like a beast, and to dispose of him at their
pleasures. The example of Hercules.
And did not Hercules, who had killed Hydra, vanquished Cerberus, strangled
Giants, and overthrown so many monsters and tyrants to set men at liberty
wheresoever he came, did he not, I say, at length submit himself to Omphale to
serve her as a slave all the rest of his life? which he performed with such
readiness and devotion, that (without any regard to his person or his virtuous
life led before, either to the dishonor and evil report which he was like to
incur, nor respecting honesty and a commendable decorum, either the bad
example and scandal he gave to his subjects, nor the blot of his honor and
fame before gotten) he feared not, so he might please her, to put off and
disgarnish himself of his lions skin, wherewith he had bin always attired, and
cloth himself in woman's apparel, with the distaff in his hand in stead of his
club, which he used before, indeuouring by all means he could to make it
apparent, that of a man he was become a woman? Whereby it is most manifest what
force pleasure has, which in so short a time wrought so great an alteration.
For though that in respect of the sex or kind, he was always the same:
notwithstanding, in regard of his idleness, delicasie and ease, whereto he was
wholly addicted in his latter end, he might well be termed a woman. Seeing that
princes, who suffer themselves to be so corrupted and effeminated by the
pleasures of the flesh, are so named by the spirit of God in the Prophet Esaias.
According to which saying, an ancient Philosopher returning from Sparta a city
of Lacedemonia to Athens, and being asked from whence he came and whether he
would, answered, that he came from a city of men, and was going to a town of
women, taxing thereby the pleasure of the Athenians, wherewith they were so
effeminated and weakened, that they had no more valor and force then women and
Eunuchs.

Plutarch reports in his book (entitled of the fortune of the Romans) that
the goddess Venus purposing to go visit the Lacedaemonians left her glass,
her girdle, The lively picture of whoredom making men beasts.
and other womanish attire upon the bank of the river Eurotas, which ran by
their city, and took a sword and a buckler in her hand, and with such
furniture and equipage presented her self before Lycurgus and the other
citizens, knowing full well that otherwise she should never have been welcome
among painful and industrious people. But if they would have her go from
them, and dwell at Cyprus, Paphos, and in other places where she was honored,
and adored, she must (if she looked to be welcome) leave off her armor and
labor, and take to her again her persumes, her musk and sweet odours, and
in stead of a valiant and stout warrior, she must become a fine, tender, and
delicate woman. And this disordinate and carnal pleasure does not only turn
us into women, but also it transformeth us into beasts, as we have said
before. Which the poets did covertly signify by their Metamorphosis, and
changes of many men, some into cowes, others into dogs, some into hogs, and
some into trees and herbs. All which fables tend only to this end, to give
us to understand, that this voluptuous humor does forthwith bereave us of all
sense and reason whatsoever.

After that Marcus Antonius was taken with the love of Cleopatra, The example
of M. Antonius, and of other lascivious princes.
he never effected anything worthy commendation, or beseeming himself or any
other worthy Roman Captain: but began from that day forward to grow worse and
worse, and became slothful, careless, light headed, and negligent in all his
actions. The vigor of his spirit (as Plutarch says) died in him and departed
to go live in the body of his love. Though he had the half of the Empire
under his government, and therefore by all likelihood an infinite number of
matters to dispatch, yet would he not regard them: neither yet hear the
Ambassadors that came to the Court, neither provide against the secret
practices of his enemies, neither yet any preparation for his wars, nor seek
to prevent the dangers he was like to fall into, no nor yet would he spare so
much time as to entertain his friends and allies. He studied for nothing day
nor night, but to please his mistress: and so captiuated his mind, and
brought himself into such slavery, that he could not bestow one hour of his
liberty to ponder of his affairs. And this did not appear only in him, but
also in all other voluptuous kings and princes, as in Sardanapalus, Balsasar,
Ptolomie, Phiscon, Caligula, Nero, Commodus, Heliogabalus, Galienus, and the
greatest part of the Emperors of Constantinople, who having opportunity to
follow their pleasures, proved men of no reputation, without any great spirit
or counsel, and of no execution whatsoever.

Let us conclude then, Secondly, whoredom weakneth and makes our bodies
feeble, and inge^dreth many incurable diseases.
that as it wholly extinguisheth and puts out the light of our
understanding, so does it also exhaust and draw out all strength and vigor out
of our bodies. I will leave unto the Physicians report how mightily it
exhausteth our spirits, our natural heat and original humiditie: as also how
it hinders the concoction, whereby there are infinite crudities engendered,
and an universal corruption of the blood thoroughout all the body. And finally,
the dissolution of the sinews, with griefs both of head and stomach, and
other innumerable accidents which it brings to all intemperate and
incontinent persons: leaving this discourse (I say) for physicians to prove
with arguments and reasons, I will only say of this, as the ancient philosophers
said of all pleasures, that they ended in sorrows: which appears in this most
manifestly. For whom shall you see of all that great number that give them
selves unto pleasure, who complain not in the end, one of the gout; another of
the sciatick; this man goes with crutches, and that other is not able to
stir from the fire side: and few there are, who after they have been
tormented with a thousand and a thousand miseries, have not bin constrained (to
rid themselves from all their sorrows) to desire very often and sundry times to
die? But this is the greatest mischief, that some among them being fallen into
such rottennes and putrefaction of their members, that neither them selves, nor
any that come unto them can abide their filthiness, so that they lie still
without any compassion of other men, neither can they devise how to comfort
themselves in this their languishing and extreme torment; yea, the very
remembrance of their former pleasures, and the sorrow they conceive for their
faults committed, the shame and confusion they have, that their sins are so
manifested and made known to all the world, with an opinion conceived, that in
stead of pity and compassion which men are wont to show unto their afflicted
neighbors, they do nothing but laugh at them. All which out of doubt causes a
heavy repentance, and we see that accomplished in the^, which Esaias speaks of,
Chap. 3.
and foretells of the delicate dames of Israel, that in stead of their
perfumes and sweet smells, which they spend prodigally upon their bodies and
about their clothes, there shall in the end be a most filthy savor and smell,
and in stead of their girdle, a rent, and that in stead of their tresses and
goodly perriwigs upon their heads, there should be baldnes, and for their fine
linen wrought with gold and silk, they should wear sackcloth and course
canvasse, and for their great beauty in their faces, there should be
sun-burnings, wrinkles and filthiness, and in stead of their sweet songs, there
should be nothing but cries and lamentations. Behold the estate whereto our
body is brought by pleasure and delights? they first suck out the moistnes,
and then devide it by pieces, and make it ready for the worms: Diogenes.
whereupon Diogenes was wont to fay, that as great plenty of victuals
ingendreth and multiplied vermin in a house, so this voluptuous pleasure
hatcheth all kind of diseases in our bodies.

Is it more favorable to our wealth and substance then it is to our bodies and
minds? Thirdly it consumes our goods.
there is not any patrimony so great, but it quickly consumes it; the greatest
treasure that ever was in the world, was that of the Romans; for beside the
gold and silver which they had taken from all the richest cities in the world
to fill their own cofers, they had their yearly tributes of every province
under their subjection to maintain them, lest they should diminish; and yet
not withstanding the pleasures of one Heliogabalus, of one Caligula, or of one
Nero consumed and wasted all in 1 or 2 years. There was not long since, a
famous Courtesan in Greece named Gnathena, who seeing on a time two gentlemen
fighting for her, and that he who was vanquished, was exceeding sorry for that
he had lost her, and his fellow wan her by force in her presence, said unto
him to comfort him withal, that he had not so great cause to be sorry for his
loss, seeing that the reward of such victories was not Coronarie, The answer
of a famous whore to her sorrowful lover.
but Pecuntarie: that is to say, that the co^querers were not crowned with
laurel, with the joys and acclamations of the people, as was usual in all
other combats of Greece; but they must in such conquests be constrained to
spend their goods with great shame, and must adorn the heads of their whores
with habillime^ts, their fingers with rings, and their purses with crowns and
ducats. For the good Lady Venus is not content with bread and drink, but she
must have gold and silver, as Phryne another famous Courtesan said to certain
youths, who were assembled in armor to break open a young maidens door, she
would sooner have opened the door unto you, (says she) if you had brought
silver, then she will for all your swords and pollaxes: giving thereby to
understand that this is the most compendious way to gain those whom we desire,
and the very same means that Jupiter used to accomplish his desires, (as the
Poets feign) desce^ding in drops of gold into the laps of young women, and by
that means tried and assayed their chastities. And this is but one ordinance
of those which they are sworn to keep, who wilneeds follow and delight in
their pleasures. For what a mass must they spend besides all this, among
baudes and chamber-maides, to be a means for the obtaining of the good will of
their mistresses; in banquets to show them selves sumptuous and magnificall,
and in apparel to make them trim and brave? O Lord God, is it possible that
men (if they were not blind and senseless) should buy not only repentance so
dear, (as Demosthenes said) but withal such poverty, shame, mookery, cozenage
(with some few kind looks, a little sigh, and a glance with the eye) what should
I say more? such monstrous diseases, the wrath of God, and so many mischiefs?

It seems unto me, that these things being considered, The great misery of
whoremasters and voluptuous persons prooved by many sentences and notable
examplet.
the ancient Greeks had great reason to call such as took this course, (lost
men.) For how is it possible that they should be saved, who do so lewdly waste
their wisdom, their reason, and all the vigor of their minds, the health of
their bodies, their gold, silver, and revenues, and oftentimes the country
that has brought them forth. Diogenes meeting Speusippus, who was going to the
Academie in his coach like a minionly gentleman, and by his delicate and
effeminate countenance declared his disordinate affection to his pleasures,
passed by him without seeming to know him; which when Speusippus perceived, he
discovered him self by speaking aloud, and saying, all health to thee
Diogenes; and none to thee, (said he:) for it is apparent by thy doings that
thou do not desire it. We need not wish health, peace, and prosperity unto
such as care not for it: and such are these voluptuous persons; for the way
which they take, and which seems so beautiful, pleasant, broad, large and
spacious, leads them to destruction, as Christ says. Terence in his Comedies
being desirous to show unto young men the nature and the end of pleasures, to
the intent they should take heed lest they be deceived by them, called them by
the name of Calamities, that is to say, wasters and destroyers: to give us to
understand that, which we dany find to be most true by experience, that
wheresoever they fall, there is nothing but spoil and destruction: and that
they are like unto that hayle, which God sent to beat down the pride, and
lofty stomachs of the Egyptians, or rather worse: for that destroyed nothing
but that which was abroad in the fields, whereas pleasures destroy as well
those things which are within, as those things that are without, that is to
say, both soul and body, and leaves nothing unconsumed.

And therefore it is that Antisthenes hearing one commend a voluptuous and
pleasant life, A continuation of the former discourse.
desired him that he would go and tell that sweet tale to the enemies of
their Country* for there was no better means or more co^pendious way to
vanquish them, then to persuade them to pleasure: and said futher, that he
would wish them riches, ease, plenty, pleasure, and all kind of delights
whatsoever, so they were void of virtue, for that by this means the goods which
they have, are not only reserved for the^ selves, but like wise for others, who
are superiors vntothe^ in virtue, in valor, and martial prowess. And yet to
make more manifest how dangerous a thing pleasure is, Xerxes after the
reducing of the Babylonians who had rebelled against him, unto their former
obedience, condemned them to no other pain but to lay aside arms and the
travels of war, and to regard nothing but give them selves wholly to music,
to play upon instruments, to make great banquers, to court their ladies, to
entertain the time with pleasant discourses, and to apparel themselves
gallantly that they might please their mistresses. Whereby we may consider,
that the King and his Counsel being greatly moved with the rebellion of the
said Babylonians, yet knew no better means to reduce them to their obedience,
to punish them for their faults, to keep them under afterward, and to bind
them with the chains of perpetual slaverie and servitude, then to lay the
rain in their necks, and suffer them to abandon them selves to all pleasures
whatsoever.

And shall we think that if it were not a very dangerous thing, Seeing that
pleasure is so dangerous, God exercises his children under the cross, and
affliction of the world, least they should perish with the world.
that God would be so careful to keep it from his children, who eve^ from the
beginning of the world until this day (as we may easily see by histories of
former times, and examples of this present age) have evermore bin kept under
the yoke of most rigorous discipline, and continually exercised with pains,
poverty, abstinence, sickness, malladies, captivity, and other kinds of
afflictions, in such sort, that if we will diligently consider the manner how God
has always governed his Church, we shall easily see, that he was not more
careful for any thing, the^ that pleasure should not enter therein, and therefore
he has suffered it to be so miserably afflicted in all ages: that by this means
he might stop, as with bushes and thorns, every gap and passage, to keep out
this furious and mad beast, which differs nothing from a mad dog but only in
this, that the one does shed his venime by biting, and the other by kissing,
and therefore is so much the worse, and more to be feared. For this as though
she were of our acquaintance, and came in friendly manner to salute and
embrace us: and yet carries a dagger secretly under her cloak to stabbe us,
before we be able to spy out her treachery: and like the Ivy kills us with
embracing and clasping us.

If flatterers (according unto the old opinion) among domestical enemies, be
the most cruel and dangerous, To make us hate pleasure the more, he set teth
down in the fourth place, other miseries which ensue of that which do so snarle
us, that we we can by no means rid our selves out of them.
what shall we say of pleasure, who is so skilful and expert in trade and
occupation, that she seldom tries her cunning with any, but by and by she
gains her desire, and finds favor at their hands, and so enchanteth them,
that ever afterward they do nothing but seek to please and serve her. There
is no lion, tiger, serpent, dragon, nor any other mischievous beast whatsoever,
that we ought more carefully to shun then this. One may fitly compare it
unto that horrible monster which Daniel saw in his dream, which with his
nails, and teeth of iron tare, rent, and brake down whatsoever was in his
way, trampling all things under his feet. And it was very fitly said of
Diogenes, seeing a Courtesan riding into the fields in a coach all covered with
velvet, with chains and pearls about her neck, to solace and recreate her
self, that such a cage was not fit for so cruel a beast, neither yet that the
chains, which she had, were strong enough to keep her from doing of mischief.

Among diseases, Pleasure an incurable disease, and containing all mischiese in
it self.
we are most careful to avoid those which are most dangerous; as the plague,
the falling sickness, madness, and other poisoned sores are most of all abhorred,
for that there are so few remedies for them, and those so hard to come by.
Whereof then does it proceed, that we are not only not afraid of pleasure, but
that we seek and hunt after it, and use all the means that we can possible to
enjoy it? Archit as Tarentinus was wont to say, that there was not a more
deadly poison then it, nor any thing that did so suddenly dispatch men, as it
did. Another says, that it is a most forcible poison mingled with milk and
ypocras. Another says, that he will in no wise suffer her to come nere him,
for fear least by her enchantments she should make him mad. Another also
says, that there is no difference between Venery and the falling sickness, or
Epilepsy. If then each one of these diseases severally by reason of their force
and violence, make men exceedingly afraid of them, how mightily should
pleasure skare us, which contains all of them jointly?

But these are not all the mischiefs that it brings with it; Pleasure
separateth us from Christ Jesus.
for the greatest of al are, that it separateth us from Christ Jesus, with whom
we can not be united unless we forsake the world and the delights thereof: and
that we do crucify the flesh with all her pleasures and co^cupiscences; if we
do not take up our cross upon our shoulders to follow and go after him, to the
strait way that leads to the kingdom of his Father, if we do not chastise our
bodies, and keep the^ imprisoned in strait and hard servitude, if we do not
hate our selves, and to be short, if we be not conformable unto him in his
passions and sufferings, all which things can in no wise agree with pleasure. So
that whosoever will love a voluptuous life, must needs forsake his savior Christ
Jesus, and by co^sequent the allia^ce he has with God the father, in whose
grace and favor we can not remain, but by the union which we have with his
son. The Scripture also evidently declares, that we can not be friends with
the world, but we must needs be enemies with God: and seeing it is so, ought it
not to be sufficient to make us detest and loathe it? For if whe^soever our eye,
our hand, or our foot do offend us, and draw us from the love of god forthwith
we ought to cut the^ off: what shall we do to this filthy sin? We do justly
hate and abhor those men who would set dissension and discord between us and
our old friends, and shall we suffer this unhappy and cursed bawd to come nere
us, who seeks by all means possible to provoke us to make a divorcement
between us and our husband, who has loved us so dearly.

If (as Horace says) it fares with friendship as it does with wine, It
turns us from charity, and estrangeth us from the love of God.
that the older it is the better it is: shall we not be ashamed so far to
forget our selves, as to prefer the love of a common stru^pet, an vnco^stant
and disloyal naughtipack (which loves us to day and to morrow hates us) before
the most perfect, entire, cordial and eternal love of our God, who has loved
and elected us before the beginning of the world, and ever since, having most
sole^nly espoused us by his word and promises which he has made us, and the
faith which we have give^ thereto, has not omitted one jot of goodwil, but in
all things has showed most singular kindness toward us, and has always used
us as lovingly as any husband does his wife? let us prove if we can, that he
is indebted unto us in anything? wherein is he bound to us? and yet he has
nothing in his power, whereof he has not give^ a greater portion the^ we
desire, and offered us more the^ we will take. We can not complain of anything
past, considering the infinite blessings he has bestowed upon us most unworthy
men, and why should we fear anything to come, seeing he has promised never to
forsake us? For seeing he is immortal, he can not die; and being truth it
self, he can not lie; and being always the same, he can not change: we need
not fear then, that death will separate us, or that during life he will be
weary of us. We ought rather to blush and be ashamed of our selves and of our
folly, who leaving so sure and certain friendship, so honorable, pleasant, and
profitable love, will choose another, wherein there is nothing but dishonor,
loss, displeasure, sorrow, complaint, coffeehouse, fear and distrust.

Here is yet another point to be considered, and that is, that in a shorttime
we must either leave pleasures, or they will leave us; and shall we not herein
acknowledge the judgeme^t of God? for even as the light appearing unto us, and
the means whereby we may know the truth, if we either refuse it or disdain
it, we provoke God to punish this our ingratitude, and to give us over into a
reprobate sense, whereby not only the means of attaining further knowledge in
Gods mysteries, is quite taken from us, but also our blindness is strengthened,
and drives us forward to seek after lies. In like manner, after God has
offered unto us his love, and has taught us the way how we should love him, if
we violate and offer injury unto the most amiable thing in the world, making no
account thereof, he the^ withdraws his grace from us, and abandoneth us to
our desires, in following of which, we begin presently to love our pleasures,
which is the most filthy strumpet that can be imagined, and so would she seem
even unto her lovers, Pleasure makes men mad and furious.
if they could see her as in deed she is. But the greatest mischief of all is,
that such as are in pleasure think them selves happy, and fortunate; for as
the height and perfection of folly is, in that we please our selves therewith,
and think that we are wo^derous wise: so indeed cannot we be more unfortunate,
then when as we account our felicity to consist in those things wherein
rests our greatest misery: and though we be in most wretched estate, yet we
will never believe it, nor give any credit unto those who tell us so. S. August.
(who in many places has notably expounded what true happiness is) says in his
discourse touching the manners of the catholic church that he can not be
accounted happy, who can not enjoy that which he loves, neither yet he who
has that which he loves, if it be hurtful unto him, neither yet that man
which has the most sovereign and profitable good thing that is, if he love it
not, nor care not for it. The reason is this, for that those who desire that
which they can not obtain, are tormented: those, who possess those things
which ought not to be desired, are deceived and abused: and such as care not
for those things that are to be desired, and such as they must needs have if
they will be happy, are sick and diseased: which can not come to pass, but
that he to whomsoever they happen, must needs be miserable. Whereupon it
necessarily ensues, that such as desire to be happy, must both love and enjoy
those things that are absolutely good. And there is nothing so, but God: he is
the fountain, the spring, and the original of every good thing which we can
desire: our hope for to satisfy our desire; and therefore we shall never be
happy before we come unto him. We must not come short, nor we must not go too
far; for the one is dangerous, and the other is superfluous and ridiculous.
For that on this side of our God, there is nothing firm and stable; and
beyond, there is not any thing at all. So if we will be virtuous, we must
follow the mean, as our Captain and leader: so likewise must we repose our
selves wholly in him, if we will be absolutely happy and blessed.

Those then who seek for their felicity in pleasure, Such as seek their
felicity in pleasure, are enemies to virtue, reason and verity.
and think to find it if they may rest in joy and delight, are they not far
from their account? yes certainly, and so much the rather, for that their minds
being possessed with this false opinion, they are hindered (as Aristotle says)
and made unfit to receive any persuasion which is offered them, to drive this
conceit out of their heads, and to make them know wherein true felicity
consists. For there is nothing more arrogant and intractable then man, if he
be once persuaded that he is happy, and then there is a certain kind of
morositie and disdainful arrogancy, which makes him unfit to understand any
demonstration, be it never so plain and forcible to correct his manners. And
this was the reason why Plato, Plutarch.
being required by the Cyrenians (who were a dissolute people, and wonderfully
addicted to their pleasures) to make and devise them some good laws, where
with the government of their commonwealth might be amended; refused to grant
unto their requests, though it seemed to be a very civil and commendable
demand, saying; it was a hard matter to bring such a nation under, and govern
them by laws, who by reason of their wealth and abundance, accounted them
selves so happy. And therefore Christ Jesus teaches his Disciples, Math. 7.
that they should not cast pearls before swine, who have no other God but
their bellies, nor any other felicity and paradise, but to wallow and tumble
in their own filthiness.

But I pray you, if it were not very bad, The first proof of the mischief
before named.
needed there so many examples and reasons to make men hate a thing, that is of
it self so odious, and to induce them to embrace that which is so amiable? is
there any thing so full of unspeakable pleasure, as is our God, who is love it
self, and the causer of that which makes us love his creatures? Let us a
little consider how pleasing and agreeable it would be unto him, who is the
author of all beawtie, comeliness, order, excellency, and dignity of things
what so ever is in the world? If in a moment by his word alone, he has
created the heavens, the elements, and all things elfe what so ever, and that
in so singular and excellent a form and fashion, that in regard of their
admirable comelines, the Grecians termed them by this name Beawtifull: what
shall we think of him that sees the affections of our hearts, and what so
ever is in us, that makes us to admire them? if the use and profit which we
have of his creatures, do teach us the greatness of his bounty: if the
continuance of all things do in lively manner declare his power and his
eternity: if the excellent and exquisite manner of building of so wonderful a
frame, does sufficiently declare his wisdom and skill: I would know if this
rare beauty which appears in all his works, will not make us think and
consider, how far he him self surpasses all in glory and beautifulnes? for
these are but small beams coming from that wonderful and surpassing light
that is in him.

The beauty of virtue is so great (says Plato) that if men might see it with
their eyes, The second proof.
they would be ravished with the love thereof. Then that of God must needs (by
reason) be far more excellent. For he is the father and patron of all, and
yet notwithstanding both the one and the other have so few lovers in this
world, that neither he can get a wife, nor his daughter a husband to marry
her. The Sun which compasses the earth every day, inlightning and heating
the creatures thereof, has seemed to be so beautiful in the eyes of some,
that they have made an Apollo and a Phoebus of it, erecting temples, and
offering sacrifices thereunto, and honored and adored it as a God. And yet the
great Son of justice and righteousness, who is the fountain of all
brightness, can not find so much favor as to be acknowledged of his own
subjects, for their Lord, or reverenced as a father, or heard as a master, or
adored as a Creator, refuge, and protector: and yet for all this, that he may
draw them unto him and procure them to do their duties, he shows them his
power, and imparteth to them of his grace, wisdom, happiness, beauty, and
greatness, so much as is expedient and sufficient to make them believe that he
is perfect, and replenished with all virtue.

Was not this a strange misery and perverseness in our nature, An
amplification of the former proof, by a fit comparison.
that seeing the beautiful and goodly color which appeared in the fruit of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, though it were subject to rottenness,
yet we had such a desire to eat thereof, against the express commandment
of God, without being afraid of his anger, or to loose his favor, from which
we are estranged by this means, neither of the shame and confusion which we
purchased unto our selves, loosing his most precious and excellent graces,
which he had so abundantly imparted unto us in our creation, neither of death
nor everlasting malediction, unto the which we have made our selves subject,
could divert and turn us from this unruly and disorderly appetite? and that on
the contrary, by the incomparable and eternal excellency of our God, we can
not be moved nor persuaded by any means what assurance so ever we have of
peace, of life, joy, tranquillity, blessing, happiness, and felicity; to the
which by this means we may attain. For there is nothing but the brightness of
his countenance that can make us happy, and satisfy us in our desires. This
is that which contenteth the Angels in heaven, The excellent contentation which
Gods children have in him.
which so ravished S. Peter in the mountain, and that which the Apostle Philip
desired to see. This is the end of our hope, and the fruit of our faith: this
is the consolation which our poor parents had in their griefs, and the proppe
that sustained them in their temptations: this is the rest and end of all our
labors, and this is the sum of all the promises of our God: this is that
which Christ Jesus has purchased for us by his death: this is the consummation
of his mercies: this is that which the eye has not seen, nor the ear has
not heard, nor the heart of man can conceive, which notwithstanding is laid up
for the faithful: this is the river of his pleasures, whereof he has called
us to drink: this is the spring of our life: this is the banquet and the
marriage he has called us unto: this is the table where we must sit: this is
the bosom of Abraham whether Lazarus was carried: these were the heavens that
were opened to Saint Steven, to comfort and strengthen him, when as he was
stoned of his enemies for the truth: this is the glory whereinto CHRIST JESUS
is entered by his death: this is the land of the living: these are the riches
and inestimable treasures of the kingdom of GOD: this is the tree of life:
this is the day without night, and the continual springtime: this is a great
Ocean sea of peace, of joy, of glory, and of what good thing so ever we can
wish, desire, hope for, or receive, and the greatest gift he can bestow of us:
this is more then I can speak of, and far surmounting the capacity of men
and Angels: this is that whereof we can not preach, and whereof others cannot
think sufficiently to make them love it. There is no want of beauty in this
face: there is no such thing as makes other faces very displeasant, and that
is vice and imperfection: there can be no exception: all things that are
therein are most perfect and exquisite, both in the judgment of heaven and
earth.

How falls it out then, An other comparison of the excellency of the
servant, comparedwith the excellency of the master.
that there are so few in love with God? If any man be commended for his
wisdom, his eloquence, his strength, his pains, or any other virtue, every man
desires to see him, and we love him oftentimes before we see him. As for
example: who is there at this day, that does not love Abraham for his faith,
Joseph for his chastity, and Moses for his wisdom, vigilancie, and
fidelity; Samson for his strength, and David for his clemency and courtesy,
Solomon for his wisdom and magnificence, Elias, Ezechias, Josias, and
Mattathias, for their great zeal, and likewise S. Paul for the innumerable
virtues that were in him? and if we adore their memories with so great
reverence, and such singular affection; what would we do if they were alive
again, and in our presence? and yet notwithstanding these were several
virtues in each of them, one in this man, and an other in that: and to speak
truly, their was in every of them but the seeds of these graces. If then as
imperfect as they were, the very remembrance of them is most delectable and
amiable; how reverent and beloved shall the remembrance of our God be unto us,
in whom they are all united and conjoined in all perfection?

But this is not all our ingratitude. The third amplification which makes men
altogether inexcusable.
For seeing that when we have seen a goodly tablelet, or beawtifull
tapistrie, we presently are desirous of them, and we will give, we care not
what, so we may have them, yea more a great deal then they are worth, though
they be but dead pictures, and that the sight of them will serve us for
nothing, but to please our eyes: shall our God, who does daily discover his
face unto us, and offers us continually most perfect pleasure, shall he (I
say) be left unlooked at, or not contemplated of any man? in thus doing, we
evidently declare, that either we know not how to make choice of good things,
or else that we do not choose them for love and affection. For if it were
possible to take all the beawtie that is particularly placed and bestowed upon
every several creature, to the end to place them all in one body: no
question but there must needs follow a singular excellency, and it would be
accounted of in this world, as a miracle. Let us imagine now with our selves,
that there is such a thing, and that unto the beawtie hereof, all wisdom,
honor, virtue, and perfection, both in heaven and earth, is annexed and
conjoined, as in truth all this is most apparent in Christ Jesus, as he is man,
and we can not conceive any excellent thing, but it is in God in most abundant
manner. Whereof then proceeds it, that such a perfection, or a less
excellency by many degrees, is so highly honored in the creature, and yet it
is not admired nor regarded in the Creator, who of all other is most perfect?
We are like unto maids which usually love the servants better then their
masters: and there is some more difference, neither is the case all one. For
the reason why they love not their masters is, for that they are ashamed to
offer any kindness unto them, or for fear that if they did, they should
notwithstanding be rejected, or for that if they might attain it, they think
it will quickly be talked of and carried abroad. But there is no such danger in
loving of our God. For he does offer his friendship unto us, and there rests
no further trouble or danger, then to accept of it: there is no shame belonging
to it: for it is an honor and credit for us that we love him, and he us: there
is no fear: for he can not deny us, if we once seek his favor and
friendeship; and having once attained that, we shall be most happy and
blessed. For as soon as he has adopted us for his children, and that he
dwells in us and we in him, according to the old and usual rules of
friendship, he does participate unto us of all his goods and treasures: he is
willing to do good to his enemies. And if he cause the rain to fall upon
their ground, and the sun to shine upon them also, what will he do unto his
friends? If the riches and plenteousnes of the mercies of our God be so great,
and the abundance of his goodness such, that the very least and worst of his
creatures participate thereof, is it likely that those of his own family and
household, shall want? It may then evidently appear, by that which have been
already spoken, how profitable, pleasant, and honorable the love of God is
unto all those that attain unto it, and that is, as many as desire it: for we
may, if he give us the grace to will and desire it.

But some man will say; That this is lost labor, The fourth amplification,
declaring the strange blindness of voluptuons persons.
and a very absurd thing, to go about to prove that God is beautiful and
amiable; seeing it is as clear as may be, and so certain that it needs no
proof. Which I confess to be true, and that there needs no more words and
arguments to prove his beauty, then there does to prove his power, his
wisdom, his eternity, or any other excellency that is in him, which are as
clear and evident as is the light and heat of the sun. But to what other
purpose serves this reply, then to increase our shame? for if he be so
amiable, that we think it a ridiculous thing, to endeavor to prove it, for
that it was never doubted of, why then do not we love and embrace him? Wherein
we imitate sick and diseased men, who will confess that the meat which you
offer them is very good, yet they will eat none of it: and being asked why,
they answer, that their disease has taken away their taste: so likewise we must
acknowledge, that that, which hinders us from the love of God, is the
perverseness of our nature, which does not only show it self to be exceeding
great, by reason of the fervent desire we have to that which is naught, but
much more by the small affection we have unto so excellent and precious a
thing, as this is. How should we love virtue and honest things, seeing we can
not love God, who is the rule and the square to guide us thereunto? and
therefore we must not say that this is spoken to no purpose. For it is certain,
that we do not love God, and we declare as much by our works, in that we
follow our pleasures: and it is most true, that we can not love him and our
selves both together, or that we lay up treasure in earth and in heaven, or
that we should live to Christ Jesus and to our selves, or that we be of the
world and of the Church, or that we be of righteousness and of sin, or that
both the flesh and the spirit should rule in us, or that we should be the
children of light, in doing the works of darkness, or that we should repent
us of our wicked actions, in following our corrupt affections, or that we
mortify the works of the flesh, in following the filthiness thereof: and in a
word, that we should love God, and be loved of the devil, wearing the liuerie
and badges of his servants and slaves, by continuing in our pleasures and
delights, obtaining at length the reward fit for such a master to give,
which is fearful destruction and horrible confusion.

We are so shameless and impudent at this present, Their shameless impudency
set down for the fifth amplificatio^.
that we think it not sufficient for us to be voluptuous, but we must declare
it, and make it manifest in our words, in our talk, in our countenances, in
our gate, and in our apparel and attire: not so much but our purses, our
garters, our girdles, and every thing about us, do evidently declare our
affections. We make it manifest by the badge that we carry, whose we are,
and to whom we belong: and to speak truly, we are not so afraid of any
thing, as that we should be naught, and no man should know it. He that does
evil, usually hates the light: but this is so common a thing in our time, so
usual and practiced of all men, that he that will not do it, must avoid the
light, and shun conversation and company of men: so that the shame and fear,
which were as two raynes to pull back our cursed desires, and to keep us in
our duties, are at this day broken and plucked in sunder.

And as there is no man, which blusheth at that which is evil; so also there
are very few, which are ashamed when they are told thereof, or show any
dislike, when as wickedness is committed before their faces. And that it is so;
how many shall you find in ordinary assemblies, which will not laugh at
folly and naughtiness, and who are not as dissolute in laughing, as the other
in speaking and doing? We are far from resembling those young gentlemen, who
being in a place, whereto a certain bawd had secretly brought diverse of the
most beautiful and fine courtesants that could be found, to try their
chastities; as soon as they espied the ambush and deceit, they began to hang
down their heads for shame, and to look one upon another, turning both their
eyes and their ears from the courtesants, fearing least otherwise they should
be surprised by their beauties, comeliness, and entising words. Whereas we
contrariwise, if the like occasion be offered, do very curiously and seriously
behold their faces and beauties, their comelines, their gesture and behavior,
and we are content to spend whole nights to hear them babble and prate,
without being once ashamed that we are familiar with them, neither yet
considering what offense we give by this means, to our servants and children.
Notable examples of honest shamefastnes of our ancestors, compared with the
impudent and shameless boldness of Christians of this age: and serves for the
sixth amplification


Cato the elder, being Censor, caused a Senator to depart out of the
Senate House, for that he had kissed his wife before one of his daughters: and
Hieron, having heard the Poet Epicharmus (who as he was very pleasant by
nature, had spoken something in the presence of his wife, which was some what
lascivious) condemned him in a great some of money: either of them showing by
this their fact, in what discipline those in former times lived, wherewith if
we compare the manners of this age, we shall plainly see and behold how far
the children have degenerated from their forefathers. There is greater
experience at this present, then ever there was, of that which Esop speaks in
one of his fables; that all affections and passions accompany love, except
bashfulnes and shamefastnes: there is pity, anger, envy, fear, jealousy,
distrust, and suspicion, mingled together: but this is wanting. And if there
were any, though it were never so little, should whores be so brave as now
they are? should they iet with their heads aloft, as now they do? should they
have such credit among men, to rule and lead them which way they list, The
extreme impudency of these last times.
as now they have? should the stews and houses of all filthiness be so
haunted, as they are at this day? Crates perceiving the image of Phrine, which
was erected in the temple of Apollo, in remembrance of the most famous strumpet
that ever was in all Greece, began to cry out aloud, and to say in the
presence of all those that were about him, that it was the trophe and monument
of the dissolutenes and infamy of the Grecians, which was publicly erected to
witness unto the immortal gods, and to testify their own shame to the
Sun, to the sacred virgins, and to all posterity. And how come these
strumpets by their jewels, pearls, precious stones, and other ornaments,
wherewith they are soadorned and beautified? wherewithal do they build their
costly and sumptuous houses? and how come they by their rich and antike tables
of Venus, Cupid, and Adonis, which hang in their halles: their goodly walks
and gardens of pleasure, which are planted and made in every place, to our
manifest shame and reproach, and to the evident declaration of our filthy and
stinking pleasures to all the world? By means whereof, that which the Prophet
spoke of the Synagogue, may at this present be very fitly applied unto us, and
that is; that we have the forehead of an harlot, and we make our sins as
manifest, as did the Sodomites, by word, by countenance, and by all other
means, being no more ashamed thereof, then we are to drink or eat: nay, we
glory in it, as in our goodliest ornaments and gaments of greatest honor.

We should at the least, Other examples, serving for the seventh amplification
of the horrible fury of this last age.
follow the examples of our first father, who being ashamed of the ingratitude
and disobedience showed toward God, hid him self among the trees in the
garden: and that of the Ninivites, who for the same cause covered them selves
with sack cloth, and poured ashes upon their heads, after the manner and
custom of our ancestors, in token of their humility and great sorrow: or
that of Daniel, who falling to the ground bewailed his own sins and the
sins of the people, saying, O Lord, we have sinned, and our fathers have
done unrighteously, we have committed iniquity, we have been rebellious, and
have declined from thy precepts and commandments; we would not hear thy
servaunts the Prophets, who spoke in thy name to our Kings, to our Princes,
and to our fathers, and to all the people of the land. Righteousness
belongs unto thee, but unto us shame and confusion. Or of that poor sinner,
who being grieved with the remembrance of her sins, cast down her self at
the feet of Christ Jesus, which she kissed, washed, and wiped with the hair
of her head, thinking her self unworthy to come before his face as others
did. Or of the prodigal son, who with great humility confessing his faults
before his father, besought him to take him as a servaunt into his house,
seeing he was no more worthy to be called a son. Or of the poor
Publicane, who praying in the Temple, durst not lift up his eyes to heaven by
reason of his guilty conscience, and the great number of his sins, but
saying unto God with a sorrowful countenance, Lord be merciful unto me a
sinner; by which, and by many other examples it may appear, that Gods children
(though that naturally they be sinners and transgressors) yet they are not so
hardy and so shameless in their sins, but that with shame and sorrow they
humble them selves before God, confessing their faults unto him, to the end
they may obtain mercy and forgiveness.

This is then a wicked mark, The supreme and last degree of the impiety of
voluptuous men.
and I know not whether it be a sign and token of Reprobation, to commit
wickedness with such boldness and assurance as we do; and to take so much
the more pleasure in it, as we know it to be filthy and dishonest; and to
delight in it for the noveltie, as lightly all lascivious and voluptuous
persons do: who are best pleased with new pleasures, either in deeds,
words, songs, pictures, and such delicafies. And they never consider, that
among all pleasures there are none permanent: either all are passed away, or
else to come, and therefore of one side there is always grief, and of the
other side torment. They do not consider that all are fantastical and
apparent, and that all the pleasures of the world are as the Emperor Adrian
said, like unto golden pills, which are sweet without, but so bitter within,
that no man can abide to taste them. These are dreams, whereof all the
pleasure is lost as soon as we awake. This is like unto the apple which was so
good and beautiful in the eyes of our first parents, and so badde in
disgestion. This is a white sepulcher, which without is fair and goodly, but
within is full of filthy rottenness and stincke. This is a sweet bait,
which makes us to devour the deadly hook that is hid within. They do not
regard, that the end and conclusion of their laughing (as Solomon said) shall be
sorrow and weeping. And therefore Christ Jesus said, (speaking to the
voluptuous sort) Woe be to you that laugh, for you shall weep. And Saint Paul
says, If you live after the flesh, you shall die.

Pleasures (as they are reported by our ancestors) are like unto the Syrenes,
The picture of pleasure, to the end to make it more detestable, which is set
down for the first remedy.
which (as Dion said) had all whatsoever appeared in sight, most excellent;
their long golden hair, their gray eyes, their round pappes, their little
mouths, their red cheeks, their breasts, their necks, their hands, and
every part about them passing white, and beautiful as Allabaster: but the
tail which was hid within the water, was long like a serpent, sharp,
crooked, and venomous. And this was the reason why Aristotle counseled such
men as would avoyde pleasure, to look on her behind, and not before: and that
herein we should have such consideration, as had the governors of Troy, when
it was debated in public Parliament, whether Helen should be delivered to
the Grecians or not. For when as they beheld her beauty, her nobleness, her
gesture and comeliness, and other excellent things which did highly commend
her, they thought it not good by any means to deliver her: but when as on the
other side they considered the great misery, loss, ruin, and desolation
which was like to ensue, they forthwith agreed she should be sent back
again to her husband. If in like manner casting behind us whatsoever pleasure
may seem to promise us at the first sight, we would diligently consider and
weigh with our selves what mischiefs, troubles, sorrows, torments, diseases,
obloquie, dishonor, and evil report they leave in the latter end: and also
of the sudden death whereto they bring all those which follow them: I verily
think that the consideration of these things would somewhat cool and assuage
the excessive desire we have toward them.

It were also very material, The second consideration which is to be used as a
remedy, is to note the judgments of god against voluptuous men.
if in reading old and ancient stories both sacred and profane, we would
mark and observe the fearful judgments of God upon fleshly and voluptuous
men. For this was the special occasion why God sent the universal flood, and
destroyed every living thing that was upon the face of the earth: and also of
that lamentable destruction of Sodom, and of the other cities near adjoining:
and of the 24000. men who were overthrowen by the children of Israel, for that
they had committed sin with the Moabites: the deluge.
and likewise of that great discomfiture of the Beniamites, The destruction of
Sodom.
who were almost wholly destroyed by the other Tribes, that is, by their own
brethren, The overthrowe of the Beniamites
for that they had been negligent in punishing the outrage, which was offered
unto a wife of one of the Levites: as also the incest that was committed
between the brother and the sister in David's house; The confusions in David's
house.
of the murder that after ensued between the brothers: of the conspiracy
made against the King by his sons and his principal Counselors: of the
rebellion of his subjects: of the reproach to his wives, who were violated by
his son in the presence of all the people: and in a word, of all the troubles
and great disorders, which happpened in his kingdom for the adultery
committed with Barsabe. We may gather by these histories, how great the anger
of God is toward those, who are guilty of this sin, and that it is no
sport, no trick of youth, no trifling sin, as it is usually termed, Remedy
against this sin, is the consideration of the miseries which have happened to
heathen men, proved by profane histories.
to the end to extenuate it, and to take away all conscience and feeling
thereof, that the bars being taken away, men might run at randon, as in a
broad field, after al their lusts and concupiscences.

This is to be wondered at, that the judgments of God are so rigorous and
terrible, and yet it seems they are not perceived: or else that the
grievousnesse of our faults are so cloaked and dissimuled. For he has not
only declared by the holy Scriptures in the examples of those of his Church,
how greatly they displease him, but also in the histories and registers of all
times by the alterations and strange miseries which the dissoluteness and
licentiousness of life have brought unto sundry countries and kingdoms. Troy.
The City of Troy which was so great and so rich, was quite raced, the Princes
slain, the Ladies made slaves, the people scattered, and all the Country
wasted and destroyed for the ravishment of Helen. Ionia in the time of King
Cyrus was sacked and dispeopled, Ionia.
for the whoredoms and filthiness that there abounded. John the twelfth of
that name Pope of Rome being taken in adultery, Pope John.
was stabbed with daggers without any respect, either of his dignity or Triple
Crown. The Sarrazines (who possessed Spain a long time, Spain.
and held the hingdome of Granado until the reign of Ferdinando. King of
Arragon, who chased and drove them out by the prudent and wise conduct of the
valiant Consalvo) were called out of Afric where they were, and came with a
mighty army by the practices and intelligences of a Spanish gentleman, in
revenge of the wrong done unto him by King Roderich who kept his wife, whereof
it ensued that the said King being overthrowen in the great battles, and
all his race wholly rooted out, the people fell into the slaverie of these
Mahumetistes, who being not content to rob them of their goods and liberty,
assayed by all means possible to extinguish their religion, their faith, and
the memory of Christ Jesus in Spain, and to plant Antechristian religion
among them. Let every one imagine with him self the disorder, the
lamentations, the tyrannies, and miserable oppressions which were seen and
heard at that day in that Country, by occasion of this adultery: and of the
other side, the terrible fury of our GOD, which did evidently appear herein;
and then let him judge, whether such sins are so light, as they are commonly
accounted. Of the Frenchmen.
In the time of Charles King of France, and brother to Jews the ninth, all the
Frenchmen that were in Sicilie were miserably slain on Easter even; their
little children taken violently from their mothers breasts and dashed against the
stones, the mothers which were great with child had their bellies ripped, and
the infa^ts taken out, and thrown to the savage and wild beasts, with many
other cruelties never heard of before, all which was done to punish the
insolences and outrages which they had committed against the women of the
country. G. the Duke of Milan.
A certain Duke of Millane of the house of the Sforces, was miserably slain
in Saint Stephens Church by a gentleman named Lamponian, for that he was over
familiar with his wife, though he had been oftentimes admonished to abstain
from her company. And of late days, Alexander Medices the first Duke of
Florence (after he had eschewed many dangers, whereto he had often been
subject by reason of his whoredoms) was in the end taken in the snare, which
his own cousen germane had set for him, and pitifully slain in his bed, at
such time as he expected the coming of a young gentle woman of Florence, with
whom he was in love.

The wrath and anger of God, The fourth remedy is by way of comparison. If God
have not spared such as have favored voluptuous me^, what shall the fleshly
men them selves expect. and therefore we ought to fly this monstrous sin.
is not only powered out against such men as commit these sins, but also
against such Magistrates and rulers as dissemble these offenses, and are
negligent in punishing of them. Hely had two sons very evil disposed, and
such as among other their sins, assayed and tried the chastity of young
women, when as they went to pray in Silo: whereof he being advertised, and
required to take order therein, he reprooved them: but because it was coldely
done, and not with such rigor and severitie as was requisite to reclaim them
from their sins: God was so angry with him, that both him self, his two
sons, and the wife of one of his sons dyed so straungely, that the wrath
and judgment of God did easily appear in these so wonderful judgementes.
Phillippe King of Macedonie and father of Alexander, after great prosperity
and sundry victories obtained, was at the length most unworthily slain by a
young gentleman of his own Court called Pausanias, for that (being
oftentimes desired to do justice upon a certain nobleman, for some injury
and dishonor offered unto him) he would not regard his suite, but passed it
over in silence, thinking by that means to suppress the quarrel. But the
young gentleman thinking that so great an indignity ought not to be
unpunished, neither yet that that King was worthy to live, who would suffer
and bear with it; determined with him self to kill his Prince, and finding
fit and convenient opportunity, stabbed him with a dagger, whereby he dyed
forthwith. If in reading or rehearsing these histories one would consider how
it was possible, that one man alone of so base condition, durst be so bold to
enterprise such a thing, or have the constance to prosecute it, or the wisdom
to conceal it, or the dexterity to execute it; there is no man but will
confess, that it fell out by the permission and providence of God, who by this
means would show forth a great example of his justice, not only against
malefactors them selves, but also against all such Magistrates and Judges as
will suffer and bear with them in their naughtiness.

There is one most memorable history of all other, written by Plutarch in the
life of Pelopidas, of a poor man named Scedasus, who dwelt in Leuctres, and
had two very beautiful and virtuous daughters; he himself was very courteous
and friendly toward strangers, though he had no great store of wealth. It fell
out so, that two Lacedaemonians having often times lodged in his house, and
being very well used became enamored of his daughters: notwithstanding they
durst not attempt any thing, being held back both by the presence of the
father, and by the reverence they bare unto them in regard of their virtue and
honesty: by reason whereof they passed forth on their journey without
demonstration or show of any love or affection. At their return Scedasus being
not at home, they found no body but his two daughters, who received them with
like entertainment as before. Which courtesy of theirs, with their excellent
behavior and good grace in every thing, so increased their furious passions,
that seeing them alone, without counsel, without aid or guard of any man, and
forgetting the honor, favor and courteous intertainment which they had
received at the hands of the father and of his children, the holy and
invinlable rightes of friendship and hospitality, the great virtue of their
ancestors, the severe laws of Lycurgus against adulterers, the strait
discipline of the country, the great fame which was spread over all the world
of the virtue and equity of the Lacedaemonians, and many other considerations
which might have brideled them, if their lust had not wholly blinded them,
forgetting all this, they violently ravished these two virgins, and spoiled
them of their virginity: yea and they did worse. For when as they had
accomplished their wicked desires, seeing them weep and cry out unto the gods
for revenge, upon that horrible injury offered to them, they killed them both,
and threw them into a well, and afterward went home into their own country.
Not long after the father returning home, and finding every thing saving his
two daughters, was long in doubt what was become of them, until at length by
the miraculous and wonderful working of God, a little dog which was in the
house with continual barking, sometime running to Scedasus, and sometime to the
well, which was in the garden, caused him to conjecture as indeed it was: and
so following this little beast, went to the well to seek for his two daughters,
and found them both in the pit, to his unspeakable and exceeding grief:
having pulled them out and buried them, began to sorrow and to be grieved in
such wonderful manner, that all that knew him had compassion on him: and as he
complained to his neighbors which came to comfort him, one among the rest
told him that the two Lacedaemonians, which a little before had lodged in his
house, had been there in his absence, which made him presently suspect that
they had committed the murder, for that they had so often commended his
daughters, saying, they should be happy men that should marry them.
Wherefore he determined presently to go into Lacedemonia, and to make humble
supplication to the Ephores, to do such justice, as the indignity and
horriblenesse of the fact required. Which when he had done, and finding the
said Ephores to give him no great hearing, he went from them unto the Kings:
and for that they gave him as cold entertainment as the other, he was
constrained to return to the people, and to recounte unto them the great and
intolerable wrong that was offered unto him: but he found no man that either
would or durst favor him in so good a cause, by reason whereof he sell in
despair, and continually running up and down in the streets like a mad
man, stamped on the ground, and holding up his hands to the gods, called for
the furies and infernal spirits to aid him, and so continued until his dying
day. Behold here a brief narration of the fact, it remains that we
understand the sequel, and that which happened afterward. When as this
monstrous fact was committed, the Lacedaemonians commanded over all Greece,
and the better to keep their provinces in awe, had placed Garrisons in everye
principal City: by means whereof the Grecians did evidently perceive, that
they were spoiled of their liberty, and tied to a perpetual slaverie: which
thing did so wonderfully grieve them, that the Thebanes (desiring rather to dye
once, then to live in continual servitude) marched under the conduct of
Epaminundas, and furiously assailed the Citadel, wherein the Garrison was, and
so valiantly maintained the fight, that they overcame them, and slew them
every mothers son. This being done, they understood that the Lacedaemonians,
being greatly moved with their rebellion, came with all their force to sack
and spoil their country: whereupon they made all preparation that might be;
mustered their men, marched forward, and met the enemy at the same place,
where the daughters of Scedasus had been buried, and entering the fight did
valiantly maintain the skirmish, and in the end whollye overthrewe their
enemies in such forte, that they were never afterward able to recover them
selves. Which made every man to wonder. For it was a very new and strange
thing, and not heard off before, that they should be vanquished with a less
power, seeing there was no nation that durst meet them with equal forces.
Here God showed evidently, that he did well remember the violence which was
offered unto the virgins above mentioned, and also the negligence of the Judges
in punishing so great a fault. For to make it more manifest, when as they were
at the greatest height of honor, and in the top of all their prosperity,
when as they supposed that no evil could happen unto them; after that they had
been Lords of all Greece by the space of six or seven hundred years, they
were by a handful of people wholly discomfited and overthrowen, just by the
grave of the said maids, and by one battle brought to such necessity, and
want both of men and of all other necessaries for war, that afterward they
were never able to defend them selves against any that would assail them.
And that which is further to be noted, to make the justice of God more manifest
and apparent, is, that Pelopidas one of the Captains of the army of the
Thebaines, being (a little before the meeting of the two armies) terrified by
some signs which he saw in the air, which as he thought, did prognosticate
some evil luck; Scedasus appeared unto him in the night in a dream, and
encouraged him to pursue his enterprise, assuring him that it ere were long,
the Lacedaemonians should recompense him and his daughters for the wrong they
had done them at Leuctres. Who will not confess, that in this whole discourse
the eye of God is always open, and ready to behold such wickedness, and his
hand prepared ready to punish it in due season, not only in them who commit
it, but also in such Judges and Magistrates, and likewise in those
commonwealths which tolerate it? And as he will not always dissemble our
wickedness, if we persist in it: so will he not forget our virtues, when as to
serve and honor him, we will endeavor to possess our vessels in purity and
holiness, as S. Paul says: and if he has given us any authority over others,
to employ it to the reformation of their good manners: as sundry good Kings
and Princes have done in times past.

Among other the praises and commendations, Contrary examples to the former.
Josias.
which the Scriptures give unto that good King Josias, one of the principal
(next unto his piety and zeal, which he had to establish true religion) was
that he banished those brothel-houses, which contrary to the express
commandment of God, had been erected among the Israelites in the time of his
predecessors. Constantine.
Constantine and Theodosius did the same, Theodosiue.
throughout all the Roman Empire. Domitian also, though otherwise he was very
cruel and vicious, made notwithstanding very sharp and rigorous laws against
adulterers. Adrian made a law, Adrian.
that no man should sell any women slaves unto ruffians and bawdes, for that
such idle varlets are unworthy of any servants. Alexander Severus.
Alexander Severus went further, for he drove thein all out of Rome: giving
authority to whom so ever should find them like vagabonds, and not occupied
in some trade to gain their living honestly (within one year after the
publication of his Edict) should take and keep them for their slaves: and if
they would not willingly obey, they should kill them presently, without
incurring any danger for so doing: he commanded further that there should be a
search made thoroughout all Rome, to see what number of common and wicked women
there were, and they should declare to the commissioners appointed, whether
they intended to amend their lives, or not: and if they purposed no amendment,
where so ever they were found committing such sin, they should be punished
with the law of Adulteresses that is, with death. All such Kings and Princes as
these were, have most evidently felt the favor of God, and had great
experience of his goodness in all their affairs. In peace, he inspired them
with wise and prudent counsel, for the government of their subjects: in war,
he gave them valiancie and courage, to conquer their enemies: and out of doubt,
in giving of them so great prosperity, he plainly declared, how greatly their
zeal and love for the maintenance of public honesty and virtue, did please
and delight him to the end, that if their successors did hope to attain the
like graces, they should be stirred up to follow and imitate their examples.
Which is the true and only means to become equal in honor and reputation with
those famous Kings of old time; and to take away so many miseries and
calamities, which do at this day torment and trouble the world in most
grievous manner: which proceed of nothing else but of impiety, injustice,
riot, and dissolutenes, which are so great and so apparent, that it is a wonder
that the Sun does nothide it it self, to the end it might not see the^.

EVD AMIDES hearing one commend the City of Athens, The miserable estate of
many Cities at this day.
demanded of him, whether that city deserved any great commendation, wherein
never any man dwelled that was the better for it. One may say as much as this
day, of all the great Cities of Europe, which are in any estimation. For it is
a hard matter for any man to dwell long in them, though he were an Angel, but
he shall quickly be defiled and corrupted, there is so much leavin and lewdnes
among them. Yea it is most commonly said of that most holy one, Rome.
that there was never any man the better for going thither. Stratonicus on a
time coming forth of Heraclea, looked about him whether any man saw him, or
not: and being asked the reason thereof by one of his friends: for that (said
he) I should be ashamed that any man should see me come forth of such a stews:
showing by this his answer, how wickedness and whoredom abounded in that
city. How many cities (I pray you) are there at this day, to whom this may not
very fitly be applied? and I would to God there were not worse sins then
whoredom. But there are other abominations, and those so horrible, that those
who have any fear of God, are afraid to name them, though others be not
afraid to commit them. And we must not hope for any amendment of this disorder,
but only by the help of Kings and Princes, who ought to be no more negligent
in punishing these sins, then they are in punishing murders, thefts, and
common pilferings. For though it should be granted, that dissolutenes is not
the cause of the greatest part hereof, yet it cannot be denied, but there
springs as much mischief from this root, as from any other thing
Furthermore, shall we say, that they are less displeasing in the sight of God?
if they be, why has he punished them so grievously and severely in all ages?
is it so small a matter, to pollute the Temple of God? or to make the members
of Christ Jesus the members of a whore? or to profane our bodies, which we
ought to keep so carefully, to offer them a holy and an acceptable sacrifice
unto God? or to abuse his urercies so long, and with such obstinacy to try
his patience, which are things of such value and price? or to crucify again
the Son of Christ Jesus our only Souiour, and to disdain him as much, or
more then the Jews? or to give an offense unto all the world, and to minister
an occasion to the infidels to blaspheme the name of our God, and to make the
death and resurrection of Christ Jesus of no account: the one of which should
mortify the concupiscences of our flesh, and the other should raise us up to a
hewnes of life? or to deny the effect of out baptism, and to revoke the
promises which we have made unto God, by the mouth of our parents in the face
of his Church? or to eat the flesh, and drink the blood of our Savior un
worthily, when we come to his supper? all which is done by them, who give
themselves unto all dissolutenes and sensuality of life. If then the wrath of
God be so greatly provoked, An exhortation unto Princes, to reform the
mischiefs before named.
and the miseries that ensue thereof, so intolerable; those who have the
government in their hands, and who ought to have nothing more dear unto them,
then the quiemes, rest, health, yea and if it were, possible, the immortality
of such as are under them, can they do better then to avoid, or else to
correct the scandals and public ryots, which offend all the creatures of the
world, yea and often are odious unto such as commit them? It may be, the
difficulty (as we have said before) is a means to withdraw them from so great
an enterprise: for that the cause of such disorders have so long continued in
the commonwealths, and therefore are like unto old soars, which are so
festered and corrupted, that the surgeons are out of all hope to amend them.
This cannot well be denied; and yet it is not sufficient to say (according to
the old proverb) that it is not good meddling with an old soar. For Princes who
have noble and generous minds, should consider, what a glory and honor it
would be unto them, to do such a thing as seems impossible unto others.
Moreover is it so small a matter to restore so diseased a body unto health? so
imperfect and disordered into a tolerable estate? I doubt not, if some one
would begin to set his hand to so holy a work, but the great and happy
advancement which God would give in short time, with the praises and
commendations, which all honest men would yield thereto in all places of the
world, would stir them up courageously to prosecute the rest, and that some
Christian emulation would move and provoke others to imitate their examples,
in such sort, that we might be in some hope to see the golden world again.
And as I think, the means to attain thereto, would not be very difficult: I
will set down some of the particular remedies, and leave the rest to the godly
consideration of such as be wiser then my self.

The first and the best means (in my opinion) is this, The first remedy.
that such Princes and Potentates as intend any such reformation, should first
of all reform them selves, and to the end, they should keep them selves, as
far as possible may be, from all evil, they must abstain from all show
thereof: considering that as they are superiors to all other in dignity and
authority, so should they be the leaders and guides in virtue and honesty.
For otherwise they cannot correct offenders, no more then a crooked rule can
make straight such things as are measured by it. Plutarch in the life of
Alexander.
Alexander demanded of King Porus, who^ he kept prisoner, how he would be used:
Like a King, says he: and asking him the second time, if he would anything
else? he answered, No; for in this all other things are comprised: declaring
thereby, that Princes ought to surpass and excel their subjects in every
virtue, as far as the Sun surmounteth all the rest of the stars in light
and in brightness: and on the otherside, that their authority and their
greatness should be sufficient, when so ever they consider of it, to alienate
and estrange their minds from vice. Antigonus son to Demetrius, being
desired to go to a banquet, where there were many light women; asked the
opinion of Menedemus the Philosopher, who was with him at that present, whether
he should go, or not: who answered nothing else but this; that he should
remember he was a Kings son: as though thereby he would advertise him, that
this was sufficient to withdraw him from doing of evil, and from all
occasions that might move him thereto. Now if Princes would show them selves
virtuous and well ordered in such places where they live, and be unto their
people in stead of living laws, there were no doubt but they should be
followed of most of their subjects. It is reported, that if in a heard of
goats, there be any one that has eaten of the herb called Eringion,
presently she slandeth still and staieth the whole heard with her, by a secret
virtue that is in this herb, until such time as the heardman come and take it
away out of her mouth. There is almost the like power in Princes, to spread
either vice or virtue over all such as come here them, and frequent their
Courts; and they lay hold of them, as the fire does of such matter as is next
it, and oftentimes transformeth them into their own natures, as the leaven
does the dowe, with which it is mingled. So that it is evident, that the best
means for Princes to reform these horrible and monstrous voluptuous desires,
which at this day carry such great sway, is, (as I have said) to reform them
selves and their Courts.

The next remedy unto this, is, to devise some way, The second remedy is, to
banish idleness, and to acquaint their subjects with labor and painfulness
how their subjects may be employed in some honest labor and exercise, and to
set down grievous and sharp punishments for such as live idely in their
kingdoms and countries. For it is most certain, that nothing does so soon
engender whoredom, as idleness, and men (as that old and ancient Cato was
wont to say) in doing nothing, do learn to do evil. And therefore Diogenes
was wont to say; that love was the trade and occupation of loyterers, and Ovid
says; that Egistus had not been an adulterer, but that he was idle. Which
thing the Scripture also reports of David, who having committed the managing
of his affairs to Ioab, betoke him self to his rest and quietness: but he had
not been long at ease, but presently he began (contrary to the commandment
of God) to covet his neighbors wife: by occasion whereof there ensued
afterward infinite mischiefs in his own house. The ancient painters did use
to picture Venus sitting upon a snailes shell, not only (as Plutarch does
interpret it) to give us to understand, that women (according unto Saint Paul's
rule) should keep at home, and not be gadding up and down the streets to
show them selves, and be prattling like busy bodies: but also to show that
there is none so much given to voluptuousness, as idle and sluggish persons. I
would to God, that these our times did not prove the truth hereof
sufficiently: but I think every man knows, how dissolutely these men live,
who spend their days in sloth and idleness. For the greatest number of
them, do nothing else but invent and devise new pleasures, to entise women
and young maids to lewdness, to buie and sell them, as hackney-men do their
iades, and to exchange them, as old vessels for new. Which does evidently
show, that there are no greater enemies to chastity and continency, which
they assail by all means possible, seeking to conquer them by force, or by
great and rich gifts to attain their abominable purposes. And to this end
they are very liberal, nay prodigal, and care not what they spend, to
overthrow chastity, which they detest exceedingly. It is very necessary
then, that the Prince (to take away this mischief, and to reduce his people to
an honest and laudable form of life,) should compel his subjects to take
labor and pains, every man according to his estate and calling.

It is also very requisite and necessary, The third remedy is, to banish
taverns and alehouses.
that the laws made against ale-hhuses, should be put in practice, and
straightly observed, and that the Judges and Magistrates in every Conntie,
should look diligently unto them. For if they be always written in books,
and never executed, they serve to no more purpose, then a sword that is
alwales in the sheath, and never handled. And for that they were not made but
only to correct public and common drunkardes, it were now very convenient
and needful, that every master should make a particular law for his
household, and that all these excessive expenses, and superfluous charges, which
are accustomed to be made at great feasts, should be reformed: otherwise these
voluptuous sins will never cease. For as Euripides says, Venus always
keeps company with those that are full, and not with the hungry. And for
this cause, in old time voluptuous men were likened unto sowes, which (as
Cicero says) are the most fruitful beasts of all other, by reason of their
gluttony, whereto they are naturally given and addicted. The Egiptians had an
ancient custom, that when as any of them died, they would rippe his belly,
and take out his maw and his guts, and reveal them openly, either by this
means, as by a sacrifice, to cleanse the dead body, or else to show by this
ceremony, that they would punish the author of those mischiefs, which he had
committed in his life time. Which gives us to understand, that this has been
the opinion at all times, that nothing has ingendered more lasciviousnes, then
abundance of bread, drink, and other dainty dishes.

It is necessary also (the better to frame men to an honest and chaste
conversation) to banish and abolish al lascivious poemes and wanton songs, The
fourth remedy is, to banish all entisements to lewdness.
pictures, painting of faces, mummeries, maskes, periwickes, giltings, pearls,
and in a word, all the exceeding and curious sumptuousnes in apparel, and
mooueable: for that all these are nothing else (as Iuvenal says) but as
torches, to lighten and stir up our concupiscences; The fifth and the
principal remedy is, to provide preachers thoroughout all the kingdoms and
territories, to teach and instruct the people in the ways of God.
and means to effeminate and mollefie our minds, and by consequent to weaken
the joints and sinews of virtue. All which things Lycurgus did expressly
forbid by his laws (as Plutarch reports in his life.) By means whereof, the
commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians was the best governed, for the space of six
or seven hundred years, and had the greatest number of honest and virtuous
men, of any place of all Greece.

Furthermore, there is nothing more effectual to purge and cleanse the world
of this filthiness, then the pure and sincere preaching of the word of God.
For there is nothing (as S. Augustine says) that does so mortify all our
wicked and carnal affections, as the word of God, when as the operation and
working of his holy spirit, is joined therewith. And therefore it is compared
unto a fire, which tries and purifieth gold and silver from the dross; and to
a fan that purges the good grayn from the chafe; and to salt which
seasoneth our meats, and keeps them from putrefying. And therefore the
shortest way, that can be taken (in my opinion) to establish a godly
reformation, and to renew (as it were) the face of this disfigured world, is
to choose a sufficient number of faithful, wise, zealous, and well experienced
men, who should have authority continually to denounce the Law and the
threatenings thereof, for the extirpation of vice, and especially of that which
is so manifest and apparent at this day. Behold now some of the remedies which
we mustvse, for the rooting out of the vices and corrupt diseases, above
specified.

Now it remains, Of unnecessary pleasures and such as are unprofitable.
that according unto our former division, we should briefly declare the other
kinds of pleasures, which we call unnecessary and superfluous: and those are
innumerable. For some delight wholly in hunting, and spend all their revenue
upon their dogs, as Actaeon did. Others do nothing but play at tennys, at
dice, or upon some musical instruments: others are wholly given to dancing:
and others take all their pleasure in their buildings, as Lucullus: others
spend whole days in catching of flies, and such a one was Domitian. And an
infinite sort trifle out their days, with doing of nothing. And to be short,
it were an infinite labor to rehearse every particular, considering that
according unto the diversity of men's humors, they find out different
pastimes and delights. Now in a word therefore, to make an end of all this
discourse, we must diligently consider these four things. Four remedies
against the pleasures before named.
The first is that (according to the old proverb) we seek to avoid the excess
in every thing. The second is, that (as Cato said) such as follow those
ridiculous and foolish pastimes, are very unfit to be employed in matters of
any consequence. The third thing is, that seeing (according to the saying of
Exnophon) there is nothing so precious, as time, nor which is more impossible
to be recovered, when it is evil spent: therefore we should be most sparing
hereof, and spend it with as great discretion as may be. The last thing is,
that as we shall give an account of every wicked and idle word we speak, so
likewise shall we be accountant for all those works we do, which serve not to
any edification: and likewise of all the graces which God has bestowed upon
us, as our wit and understanding, our strength and nimblenesse of body, our
leisure, and of whatsoever else we have, if it be not employed as he has
commanded. For seeing they are his goods, and that he is the master of them,
and that we are but his stewards, is it not reason they should be used
according as he has commanded?

We must then (whenever we apply our selves to any thing) first look
whether it tends to the glory of God; In conclusion he shows how we ought
to employ our selves in the offaires of this lise, and how we ought to use
those goods which God has given us in keeping.
Next unto this, whether our neighbor shall reap any fruit and commodity
thereby, and be instructed to walk in his fear by our example: and finally
whether that which we do, appertain and belong unto our vocation or not: and
then, after humble and hearty prayer unto God, who has made heaven and earth,
we may boldly under his favor and protection enterprise whatsoever we take in
hand, and assure our selves, that he will bless our endeavors, being
undertaken by the warrantise and direction of his word. But if we be not only
content to hide that tallent in the ground, which God has given us, but also
willing either utterly to lose it, or else to spend and consume it foolishly
and naughtily: shall we look for any reward for such ungodly and sinful
prodigality, seeing that our very negligence is so severely and grievously
punished? It may be we think, as some young gentlemen do, who for that they
are descended of some noble house never care for any good husbandry, but spend
lustily, for that their fathers are rich, and therefore they are persuaded they
shall never want. In like manner, whenever we consider, that we are the
children of God, and that we are persuaded, that the treasures and riches of
his bounty can never be consumed, then we begin to be prodigal of his
goods, and spend those graces riotously which it has pleased him to bestow
upon us. But indeed we ought to think withal that we are not his natural
sons and inheritours, but his children by grace and adoption: and that if the
father may justly disinherite his natural son, for his disobedience,
rebellion, whoredom, lewd parts, and wicked conversation: with greater reason
may God disinherit those, who are his sons only by grace and mercy, if he
once perceive they commit the like sins. And there is no doubt, but he will
quite disinherit us in the end, and take away all his graces from us, as he
has done from the Jews, whom he had chosen and loved as his eldest sons, if
we be unthankful, and if that in stead of serving him and acknowledging those
blessings he has bestowed upon us, we wholly employ them, to the satisfying
of our own wicked desires and carnal concupisce^ces. It behooves every man
then to consider diligently with himself, how he may most profitably use those
blessings, which God has bestowed upon him: which surely ought to be referred
wholly unto the honor and glory of him that gave them, as to their principal
and chiefest end: and next unto that, to the help and comfort of our brethren,
whom we ought to cherish and relieve, whenever occasion is offered. Which if
we perform, we shall neuerspend our time in fruitles and superfluous things.
And thus much suffices to have spoken of these three sorts of pleasures, and
for the fifth passion of the mind, whereof we purposed to speak in the
beginning.

THE SIXTH BOOK. Of the tranquillity and contentation of the mind. AGAINST
CVRIOSITIE. THE CONTENTS.
IT is reported that the Philosopher Euclide, being required of a very
importunate fellow to speak his opinion of many things touching the gods,
answered, that he knew nothing of all that was demanded, but only this, that
the gods hated and abhorred such as were curious and busy medlers. Whereby
he evidently declared, that curiosity is a dangerous disease, and a sore
that must be healed, if we desire to live quietly and inpeace. To effect and
accomplish this peaceable estate and condition of life, this present book may
serve in stead of many others: being very excellently and substantially
penned, and furnished with all such sound reasons, as either the ancient or
modern writers have alleged against this passion. After that he has declared
what this curiosity is, he shows that there are three chief heads or
fountains from whence it springs. The first is, the care that every one
ought to have in his vocation, which is commendable and often commended unto
us: as contrariwise, carelessness is condemned by six several arguments,
which are garnished with sundry similitudes, notable sayings, and worthy
examples: and then he shows how every one ought to use himself in his
vocation. The second is, our great and exceeding care concerning the events of
our counsels and ontorprises: against the which, as proceeding ordinarily of
distrust and unquietness, he opposes the consideration of the providence of
God, whereupon he exhorts every one to rest, and stay himself. The third is,
the carefullnesse we have to provide unnecessary and hurifull things, and
this is properly thit curiosity, which is a sworn enemy to the quiet rest
and tranquilitte of our minds. The mischiefs whereof, he sets down in
particular, and addresseth himself in especial to our nation, The French
nation very curious.
which is infected and stained with this vice: setting down sundry notable
examples, both sacred and profane, ancient and modern, which do evidently
prove, what mischiefs this cursed humor has hatched and brought forth,
both in Church and common wealth: and unto those, annexeth diverse others, by
which it appears, how unseemly a thing it is for a man, be he never so
mighty, to intermeddle him self in other men's matters, adding hereto
apleasant discourse, and sundry emblemes very delightful, with very fit
comparisons to this purpose. And for the more full and ample manifestation
hereof, he produces sundry other histories of such troubles and tumults, as
many light headed fellows have stirred up in diverse cuntries and
commonwealths. Next unto this, he discovers the causes of this wicked
curiousnes: the first whereof, is the lightness of our wits: the second is, our
slouthfulnes: the third is, the disdain and contempt of that estate, whereto
we are called: the fourth is, our ambitious desire to surpass others. Against
every one of these diseases, he opposes seuerallremedies. In the latter end of
this book, he disputes against that profane curiosity of diverse men, who are
desirous to know hidden and secret things, and such as are unlawful and
dangerous, both in respect of God, of nature, and of our neighbors: setting
down contrary reasons: and then names the whole rabble of curious persons. In
the first rank are Alcumists and searchers for gold, such as measure the whole
world, and never measure themselves: The Judicial Astrologers, who gasing
continually upon the circles of the heavens and motions of the stars, do
never look what is done in their own houses. In the second rank are placed
petifoggers in the law, and unlearned physicians, who forsaking the reading of
good books, do busy themselves in nothing but in setting me^ together by the
ears, and putting to sale counterfeit drugs, whereof insueth the destruction
both of body and goods. In the last rank he places Sophisters, Southsayers,
Cabalists, spiritual Libertines, and profane Atheists. Against whose
detestable vanities, he opposes that principal doctrine and instruction,
which all men ought to learn, answering in few words so much to their
curiosity as is requisite for the instruction of Christians. Finally, he
answers unto the vain curiosity of such as are busy to know the secrets of
their neighbors, and describes their filthy and wicked practices, very
excellently: and shows, that curiosity is a passion, not fit to be in any
virtuous and good man: concluding his discourse with a notable exhortation,
that we should not desire to know more of God, of nature, or of our
neighbors, then may serve for our edification and instruction.

THE SIXTH BOOK. AGAINST CVRIOSITIE.
WE are come now to the handling of the sixth passion and perturbation of the
mind, What this curiosity is.
which we term Curiosity, as not having a more fit and proper word, to
express this infectious and diseased humor: by which we are continually
entised and pricked forward to be importunate to know but unprofitable and
unnecessary matters, and to interpose our selves in many things either clean
contrary, or quite besides our vocation and calling: which thing troubles and
tormenteth us, as much as any other passionate humor whatsoever. And this
unquiet affection of the mind, is engendered partly of Ambition, and partly of
Covetousness, and partly of Envy: and therefore we have determined to speak of
this, after that we have entreated of the two former. Now for that all cares
and sollicitudes are not forbidden, There are 3. sorts of cares, which are the
fountains of that curiosity which is good and of that which is evil.
but only those which are vain, vicious, and excessive, it is very requisite
that we distinguish them by a brief and compendious division, to the end we
may know such as are commendable, and such as are damnable and reprooueable.
There are then three sorts of ears. The first is of such things as appertain
unto our vocation: the second is, of the consequents and events of our counsels
and enterprises: the third is, of such things as neither concern our selves,
neither yet our estate and conditions.

As concerning the first, The care of every one in his vocation is very
commendable.
God has commanded every man to be careful and vigilant in matters
appertaining to his charge and vocation. And it is requisite, that the king
should be provident, and industrious in foreseeing and providing such things,
as tend to the benefit of his subjects: For a judge to administer justice, to
maintain good and honest men, and to punish the wicked and ungodly persons, to
give every man his due, and deal indifferently with all: for a merchant to
gain honestly by his wares, to be just in his dealings, and to buy and sell
his merchandise, without deceit or covetousness: for a master of a family to
provide for his wife, his children and servants, and to teach and instruct them
in every good work: for a servant to obey his master, and to deal truly in
whatsoever he is commanded: for a schoolmaster to instruct his scholars, as
well in good learning, as in the fear and obedience due unto God: for a
sheppard to watch over his flock, and carefully to instruct them in the word
of God, and to edify them by all means possible that he may: for artificers
and laborers to gain their livings by the sweat of their brows: for a woman
to be a good huswife and to dispend those things thristily, that are brought
into the house by her husband. For he which does not labor, ought not to eat,
(as the wise man says) and he that puts his hands into his bosom, is
likely to fall into poverty: seeing (as the old saying is) God sells his
goods unto such men as are painful and laborious. Which was spoken, not for
that they do deny, Why care and diligence is so highly commended unto us in
our vocations.
that whatsoever we receive from above, is freely and of Gods mere goodness
given unto us, without any merit of ours: or for that we can deserve any thing,
by our worthiness and deferts: (for we are so far from meriting of any of these
great and innumerable blessings and benefits, that it has pleased God to
bestow upon us, that besides, that we make our selves unworthy by our
ungratefulness, we also continually deserve to be wholly banished, and thrust
out from the presence of our God:) but by the saying before rehearsed, the wise
men of former ages would give us to understand, that God does not promise,
neither yet will communicate any of his blessings unto men, but with this
condition, that they should take pains for them: to the end, that thereby they
should acknowledge his liberality, and their own unworthiness: and also that
they may learn by this means, the better to esteem and account of them.
Which they would not do, if they were thrust into their mouths, without any
labor, so as they might enjoy them at their wills and pleasures. And this was
the reason, why the Lacedaemonians were wont to say, that we must pray unto
fortune with our hands lift up: giving us thereby to understand, that we
call upon God in vain to help us in our need, if we will not take pains to
help our selves. For if so be that be true, that God will never here those
prayers, which proceed not of faith, and that all faith is founded and built
upon his promises, we need not look for any aid from him, if we be not
painful: seeing he promises us nothing, unless we be watchful and
industrious.

Democritus being asked, The difference between the sluggish and the painful
man, and of the blessing of God upon the one, and his curse upon the other.
wherein idle men differed from those, that were painful and laborious,
answered, in that, wherein good and honest men, differ from naughty and wicked
persons. That is to say, in hope: For he which serves God, and walks in his
ways, and will be painful, he need never doubt but he shall have always
sufficient to maintain himself well and honestly. But those, who will be
careless, and exempt them selves from that common vocation whereto all are
called, wherein every one in general (even from the beginning of the world)
have been enjoined to take pains, may assure themselves, that God will curse
both them and their riches, so that in the end all will come to nothing, as we
have daily experience of many slow backs, whose revenues, though they be very
great, are consumed, and in short time (like unto smoke) are vanished quite
away. And there can be no other reason given thereof, but only, that God does
not bless them. For we see many others prosper, and maintain themselves very
honorably, with half, yea with less then the sixth part of the others wealth:
and yet keep great houses, are very liberal to the poor, they build and
gather riches, and (that which is a special thing) they pay every man so well
with whom they deal, that in stead of evil words, and bad reports, which the
other have in every place and at every man's hand, all men do commend and speak
well of them.

It is necessary then (if we will retain the favor of God) that we be
painful and diligent, An exhortation for every man to take pains in his
calling.
as he has commanded us, and according to the occasions that are ministered
unto us, and that like good children we imitate his example. For if (as S. John
says) he watches and labors still, for the preservation, nourishment, and
defense of his creatures: and yet we will be careless, and give our selves to
nothing, but to eating and drinking, playing, sporting, and ruffling, do we
not evidently declare that we are bastards, and that we have not only
degenerated from him that was our father, but also from the state and condition
of all other creatures? Among whom, there is not one but keeps himself
within the bounds of his vocation, and carefully fulfilleth the will of his
Creator, without transgressing one jotte of his laws and ordinances; which
may be a great shame unto us. For what a discredit is it, that in an usual and
common travel both of heaven and earth, we, who should be first at work, are
all the whole day idle, and look after nothing, but sit still very carelessly,
and gaze upon them? It is reported that Diogenes being at Corinth, at such time
as Alexander the great proclaimed wars against them, and seeing the
Corinthians so greatly troubled and astonished, and raking such pains in the
fortifying of their city, some carrying baskets, others digging and making
bastilions and platformes, mounting their ordinance and such artillery as they
had necessary for the defense of their city: others scouring their harness,
and whetting their swords: others running and trotting up and down the
streets, as though they had been ashamed, to be seen among those which
labored, he began to roll his tun up and down, sometime higher, and
sometime lower, on this side and that side: to the end, he would not be said
to be idle, when others were so hot at their work. It is convenient then,
that we should not be more shameless, then this poor Cynick was: but that
seeing (as we have said) that all the world marches (as it were) daily to
labor, we should likewise be painful and not lie down in the shade, for
fear of burning our beauties with the heat of the sun: or in winter to sit
by the fire side, doubting least if we go abroad, we were like sometime to
blow our nails.

But I would gladly know to what end we are borne and brought forth into
this world, Anotable argument against idleness drawn from the consideration of
our own bodies and from the order of the time.
if it be not to travel as well as the bird is to fly. As then the wings of
the one were unprofitable, if they were not put to that use, which God has
given them for: so were it to no purpose, that God has given us a mind, a
will, a memory, an understanding, hands, legs and feet, if all these be
not applied unto their proper ends, unto which they are made and ordained.
Moreover, why has he created the light, and distinguished the day from the
night, and in every week to divide the six days from the seventh, if it were
not to give us to understand, that all the days of our lives ought to be so
parted and divided, that the greatest number of them should be spent in travel
and pains taking, to the end, that by such a vicissitude and interchangeable
course, we might the longer preserve our selves to do him service, and
succor our neighbors in such things, as we are bound to do for them He
which will not celebrate and solemnize the festival days of the Lord, in
sanctifying and exalting his name, shall be reproved and condemned, for that the
commandment binds us thereto: and therefore by the same commandment shall
we be convinced, Another argument drawn from the 4 commandment
if we will do nothing on the working days: seeing that the same law, which
commands us to rest sometime, commands us to travel at other times. And if
it were not a naughty thing to do nothing, why did the master of the house find
fault with those, The 3 argument.
whom he found idle in his vineyard? why did Solomon, to dissuade us from
idleness, propound unto us the example of the emmet or pismire? why did S. Paul
exhort us to labor while we had time? and Christ Jesus, that we should walk
while it was day?

Cleanthes though he were a poor man, yet thought himself more happy, The 4
argument.
then all the rich men of his cuntry, for that he labored when they played.
Which is contrary to the common opinion. For usually we do not account any men
happy, but such as may live at their ease without any labor, though indeed
there be nothing more miserable, then idleness, if men could be brought by any
means to believe it. And therefore Themistocles was wont by an illusion to term
Idleness, the grave and tomb of such men as were alive, for that there is little
or no difference, but only in breathing, between an idle man and one that is
dead. For neither the one nor the other does any good. And therefore Seneca
(taxing a certain rich man of Rome named Servilius Vacia, Seneca in his
epistle to Lucilius. 55.
who, to the end he might live the more at his ease and pleasure, had left the
city and given over all public affairs, and was withdrawn into a goodly
house which he had builded in the cuntry) said on a time, as he passed by, here
lies Vacia: as though writing his Epitaph, and setting it upon his door, he
would signify, that his house was his grave, and monument of his burial. Let
us conclude then, that there is nothing more unseemly or further from the law
and obedience due unto God, more contrary unto the duty of a Christian, or more
prejudicial unto the common wealth, then Idleness. And the Athenians had great
reason to punish it severely in their subjects, seeing that it was very
necessary for their wealth and preservation of their estates. Plutarch in the
life of M. Cato.
Scipio Nasica could not endure that Carthage should be destroyed: though some
alleged, that then Rome should be in great security, having ruinated so
mighty an enemy: surely, said he, it should be then in greater danger, then
ever heretofore Meaning hereby, that if they had no enemies, they should not
have wherewithal to occupy themselves abroad, whereupon they would fall into
idleness, and so into partialities and civil wars, and in the end into a
pitiful and lamentable desolation, which afterward happened, as he had
foretold them.

If we yet desire some notable examples of those mischiefs, An other pitiful
example sufficient to condemn the carelesnes of such as despise their vocation.
which proceed of idleness: let us consider into what miserable estate the poor
church of God is fallen by the carelesnes and slothfulnes of the sheppards:
Whereof has it proceeded, that there are so many bra^bles and thorns sprung up
in the vineyard of the lord, that now there is nothing to be found but wild
grapes? Is it not hereof, that it is no more pruined, dug, and dressed, but
bitten, thrown down and laid wast? and in a word, that all those curses, and
maledictions which were foretold by the Prophets, are powered down upon it? if
not of the infidelity and carelesnes of the laborers, to whom the owner here
of has committed it to be dressed and husbanded. Whereof also does it happen,
that the flock is in so piteous case, and that among the sheep, some are
scabby, some sick, some lean and feeble, others straying up and down, and
almost quite lost? If not of this, that they are fallen into the hands of
hirelings, who look more after the fleece then the flock, and respect more the
milk thereof, then their duties and offices, and not after the example of Jacob
endure the heat of the Sun by day, and the cold of the moon by night, that
they may the better discharge their calling, and look more carefully to their
folds. Chap. 10.
S. Matthew says, that Christ Jesus seeing the people scattered abroad, and
wandering up and down like sheep without a sheppard, had compassion on them and
said to his disciples, that the harvest was great, but the laborers were few,
and therefore that they should pray unto the Lord of the harvest, that he
would vouchsafe to send forth faithful and diligent laborers, to help to
gather in his harvest. Wherein we may see, how all the disorder of Gods house
is imputed to the negligence of the stewards and officers. And we know, that
if a master finds his horse lean, and in evil liking, he blames no man but
the keeper. And so likewise such pastors must needs be condemned, when as they
must give an account of those woeful miseries, and ruins, where with they have
so defaced the house of God. It is then a most pernicious and hurtful thing
both in the Church and common wealth to tolerate idle and slothful bellies.

The heathen themselves were not ignorant hereof: as (among otherthings)
Plutarch in his Apothegs reports of Dionysius, The sixth argument taken from
the judgment of the beathen.
the father of him that was the tyrant at Syracuse, who being asked whether he
were at leisure, and without any business, God forbid (says he) that ever I
should have so much ease. And of the same opinion was that poor woman, who
having some suits in the Court of king Philip the father of Alexander the
great, after many delays, was at length answered by the king that she should
be heard, as soon as he had any leisure: whereto she replied presently, that
she had rather lose all and never have justice, then that he should be one
hour without business. For that if ease be prejudicial to a private man, it is
much more hurtful unto such as have public functions and offices, who must
always be vigilant and exercise their places with great care and diligence:
otherwise there will be quickly great confusion and disorder in the state and
common wealth. It is then very pregnant and a clear case, that in every well
ordered kingdom, every man must be painful and laborious. It remains now to
know how, and in what sort.

As concerning the vocation vvherin we ought to employ our selves, Now be
shows what kind of vocation it must be wherein we exercise our selves.
it is necessary first, that it be honest, and pleasing in the sight of God,
and referred unto such an end, as may be profitable to those with whom we
live. The ancient Grecians have so defined it, as may appear by Lucian and
Eustratius Comments upon the Ethics. And so likewise Aristotle says, that
not only all arts and sciences, but also all actions and deliberations of men
ought to be referred unto some profitable end. For who is there of any sound
judgment, which will say, that the cunning, and craft which is used secretly
and craftily to rob other men privily, as the Lacedaemonians were wont to do,
or to cogge a dye, or to keep treason secret, or to play the pyrate and rob
at sea, as did Barbarossa and Dragule Raiz, or to entice youth to lewdness, as
Ruffians and bawdes doer or to cosen, as many courtisans do: who is there, I
say, that will affirm, that these crafty dealings and cousenages should be
termedby the name of exercises, which are so much the more hurtful and
pernicious, by how much he is the craftier and cunninger that does use and
practice them? The like may be said of those exercises, which (though they be
not hurtful to any man) are notwithstanding unprofitable and superfluous. For
what is it worth to dance upon a line, or to make dangerous or perilous
leapes or iumpes, as diverse tumblers do? or to throw millet seed through the
eye of a needle six foot off, as he did which was brought before Alexander
the great, Plutarch in his Apoth.
or to make harmony and music of swine, as the Abbote did before Lewis the
eleventh: or to counterfeit the nightingale as he did before Agesilaus: or to
stand long upon one leg like a crane: or to grave a carte, a carter, and his
horse in so small a room, that a little fly may cover them with her wings?
and a thousand such like toys and vanities, whereto diverse light headed
fellows do apply themselves, being encouraged thereto by the applause and
commendation of the greater number of men, and the admiration of their
beholders: whose folly appears far more evidently in this, then otherwise
it would, if they used and exercised any good profession and laudable science,
which might bring any profit or commodity: with it. For to speak truly, these
men's profession is nothing else (as Diogenes said) but an exceeding weariness
of the mind and body, with loss of labor and time. It appears then, that
whenever we make choice of any vocation, wherein we purpose to spend our
time, and that we intend according to the ordinance of God, Genesis 3.19.
to eat our meat with the sweat of our brows, we must look that it be
agreeable to the will of God, and profitable to our neighbors.

Now as concerning the manner how we must use our vocation, Here he show eth
how a lawful vocation should be used, that is without either to much esteeming
or too much despising the goods of the world, but keeping a mean between
both. Matthew. 22.2. Mark. 2.27.
it is likewise requisite that we do it with such moderation, that with being
too hot and too eager therein, we forget not the principal, which is first
and fonnost to search the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. We
must not be so seriously addicted to our labor, or policy, or any other
business whatsoever, that it should be a hinderance for us, and to withdraw
us from the marriage of the kings son, when as we are invited thereto, as it
is said in the parable of the Gospel. For it will be small advantage for us,
if for a yoke of oxen, or for a farm, or for to please a wise, we loose the
good will and favor of so great a Lord, and the pleasure and delight we
should have in his company. Let us think, that if the Sabbath were made for
man (as Christ says) that then out of doubt all other external things
whatsoever. What a thing would it be then, if that in stead of pleasuring and
profiting us, they should be harmefull and noxious, not only to our bodies and
goods, which can never prosper without the blessing of God, but also to our
souls: the health whereof is often times slowed and quite hindered by these
worldly cares, which are too excessive and surmounting? Plutarch.
The Philosopher Aristippus being reproved by one, because his houses and
lands in the country were greatly decayed, for that he had so small care of
them, answered, that he had rather they should come to naught, then that he
himself should perish with taking too much care over them: which would ensue
if he should dwell in them. By this reproof, and the answer which was made,
we may easily gather, what is to be observed herein: that is to say that
extremities in all things are to be avoided. It is a point of evil husbandry
to be so careless, as to let our goods go to naught by our negligence. And it
is much worse, when as we are so greedy and covetous, that our desire draws
us to death and destruction. We can not then take a better course, or govern
our selves more wisely, then if we return to Gods first institution, and
follow that order, which God has set down: that is, to make our goods serve
for our bodies; our bodies for our souls; and they both for the glory of God,
and the attaining of life everlasting, which we hope for by his promises. The
which that we may the better obtain, we must endeavor and assay by all
means possible to deliver our hearts and minds from covetousness, which is
the root of all evil, and the principal cause, which does make us so much
to forget those things that appertain to the glory of God, and give our selves
wholly to gain and getting, and never think of any thing, but of our
corruptible and earthly treasures.

And seeing that the original and the continuance of every good work has
his beginning from God, We must needs call upon God in our vocation and
callings.
and that without his blessing we need not look for any good success in any
our labors and travels: it is requisite that we invoke and call upon the
name of the Lord at the beginning of our exercises, and that whenever we
take any thing in hand, we say that verse of David. Psalm. 124.8.
Our help is in the name of the Lord, which has made both heaven and earth.
Which thing the Jews have held by an old custom taken from their
ancestors, which they observe at this day, and that so strictly, that neither
themselves, nor their children do speak or write any thing, but they begin
with this invocation upon the name of God: acknowledging hereby, that if in
hearing those petitions which they make, he will not vouchsafe to bless and
further them in their counsels and endeavors, it is impossible that ever they
should fall out prosperously. Psalm. 127.1.
For if (as David says) God does not build the house, those labor in vain
that build it. If the Lord do not keep the city, In the beginning of his
Apologet.
the watchmen watch but in vain. Gregory Nazianzene has a notable saying to
this purpose: which is, that euory man ought (the better to direct his actions)
to begin with calling upon the name of God, and to end his works with his
praises. Saint Basil for confirmation hereof propounds (in my opinion) a very
excellent and fit similitude, which is this, that as Mariners sailing upon the
sea, the better to direct their course, do in the day time behold the Sun,
and in the night season the pole star: so likewise we (the better to govern
our actions, and to dispose of our affairs) must always look up to heaven,
and recommend our selves unto God, from whom comes all our delight and
direction in all our business.

After that we come thus prepared to our labor, we must also in all our
actions have a charitable regard of our neighbors: The two consideratio^s
before named must be conjoined with a charitable affection toward our
neighbors. 1. Cor. 13.4.
and charity (as S. Paul says) is such a thing, as seeks not her own, nor
deals not dishonestly, nor is not moved to anger, nor is not suspicious, nor
rejoices not in that which is evil, it is not envious, neither is it puffed
up, neither is it proud, but it is patient and meek, it endures, it
believes, it hops, and suffers all things. We walking after this sort in
our vocation, and cheerfully going forward in the fear of God, seeking
nothing, but that which is necessary for us, and employing and bestowing the
rest, where need requires (in which things the duty of a Christian especially
consists) no doubt but God will bless our labors, and prosper our
endeavors.

The second sorts of cares which we take, (as I have set down in the beginning)
are touching the issue and event of our affairs and actions. Now he entreats
of the second sort of cares, such as concern the events of our counsels.
For as all our desires are usually very extreme and vehement, so we covet
nothing, but with great and marvelous hope. Now there is no hope, (as the old
saying is, and as daily experience do teach us) without anguish and
perplexity of mind, which is greatly augmented, nay twice doubled, with a kind
of fear and distrust, which is mingled therewith: when as (considering the
uncertainty, change, and mutabilitie of all things) we begin to reckon up all
such means as may frustrate our desires. Shall not our minds when as they are
environed with these strong and violent passions (as with mighty and strong
walls) be wonderfully unquiet? and there is no better preservative against this
poison, then to think that we can not add a cubite unto our height or stature,
Iere. 10.23.
by taking thought: and that, as Jeremy says, the way of man is not in him
self, neither is it in man to walk and to direct his steps. For if we
consider that all things are of him, by him, and in him, and that of two
sparrovves that are sold for a penny, not one of them fall to the ground
without his will: and that all the hears of our heads are nu^bred: that al
things fall out by his providence: shall it not be a great comfort unto us and
cheer us wonderfully? in taking away from us those dangers and discommodities,
which may happen unto us, if all things (as the Epicures have said) were
governed without rule or order, and wholly directed by chance, and by the
rashness of (I know not what) fortune; and moderate our hope, which on the
other side would either be too great or too little, too hasty or too slow, if
it were grounded upon our own counsels, and that the effect thereof did depend
upon our own cogitations, and not upon the will and pleasure of God.

Whereby it appears, Testimonies of the providence of god.
that there is nothing more profitable unto men, then that all their affairs
are under the government and rule of God, and wholly ordered by his devine
providence: for they are sure that if they love him, and be of the number of
his Elect, that all things shall fall out well with them: Romans 8.27.
and seeing that he has not spared his only Son, but has given him for us,
he will also give all other things with him. 1. Cor. 3.21, 22.
That all things are ours, be it the world, be it life or death, Paul, Cephas,
or Apollo, things present and things to come, that whatsoever we take in hand
if we be just, shall always prosper and be blessed; that God will power down
his benefits plentifully upon us; that he will be bountiful in rewarding of
us, Psalm. 1.3. and 5.91.
and cover us with his favor as with a shield. He shall be our defender, our
tower and our strong foundation; he will cover us with his wings, and we shall
be sure under his feathers: so that we shall not be afraid of the fear of the
night, nor of the arrow that flies by day: the pestilence that walks in the
darkness shall not hurt us, nor the plague that destroieth at noone day.
Psalm. 123.1, 2, etc.
And further it is said that those which trust in the Lord, are like unto the
mount Sion, which can not be moved, but stands fast for ever. As the
mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his people from this time
forth for evermore. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of
the righteous, left the righteous put forth his hand unto wickedness. And
likewise in another place; Al those which hate Sion shall be confounded and
driven backewarde: they shall be like the grass upon the house top, which
withers before it be gathered. And he says also, Psalm. 128.1, 2
blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways: for
thou shall eat the labors of thine hands, thou shall be blessed, and it shall
be well with thee. Esaias. 4.5.
The Lord shall create upon every place of mount Sion and upon the assemblies
thereof, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night:
for upon all the glory shall be a defense: and a covering shall be for the shadow
in the day for the heat, and a place of refuge and a covering for the storm,
and for the rain. There are an infinite number more of such promises in the
Scripture for to assure us, that if we will trust in God, his grace and favor
shall never be wanting unto us, both to provide for us those things that are
necessary, as also to keep and preserve us from all harm and inconvenience
what soever. A conclusion of the second point with an exhortation to every one
to trust in God.


Why then should we be so tormented and vexed with the care and cogitation of
things to come? Why do we not trust in the word and promise of so good a
Father? Can we have any one wiser to govern our actions, or a more valiant
Captain to defend us? and in a word, Is there any creature either in heaven
or earth more mighty, more prudent, more faithful, more vigilant, or more
affectionate then he is? Can we be more speedily succored then by him in all
our affairs? Can there any evil happen unto us, if he have once taken us into
his protection? Psalm. 3.
David having considered this, and being assuredly persuaded that God was his
buckler and defense, his glory, and the lifter up of his head, adds with
great assuredness and constancy, that he would lay him down and rest, and
would not be afraid though ten thousand should set them selves against him.
So likewise it is most certain, that if we be well settled in an assured hope of
Gods mercies, we shall easily withstand these cares and vexations, which do
so exceedingly disquiet our minds. Plutarch.
Phillippe the father of Alexander the great, being reprooved for that he slept
too long in the morning, considering the multitude of those affairs which he
had daily to dispatch, answered, that he might safely sleep, so long as his
livetenaunt Antipater was awake. In like manner may we rest at our ease, so
long as this great eye of the providence of God which sees all things, is
open and careful to guide us and our affairs, when so ever we commit them
into his hands. And we have greater reason to do so, then Phillippe had, for
that our confidence in God is far more excellent and certain, then any that is
reposed in his creatures. Wherefore to conclude, every one of us must
painefully and diligently labor in that vocation whereto we are called, and
we must recommende our labors unto God, to give them what success it pleases
him: never doubting but God will bless them, though for the time the means
be secret and unknown unto us.

It remains no we that we speak of the last sort of cares and vexations, Of
the third sort of cares concerning superfluous and hurtful things.
which a great number of men take of superfluous and impertinent matters. A
thing that wonderfully vexes and tormenteth men's minds at this day. For there
are few men, which can contain them selves within the bounds of their
vocations, and who have not a secret itching humor, which must be skratched
continually: and as though they were bitten with fleas, they are ever stirring
and desirous to know many things, which are neither profitable nor
necessary, but rather very hurtful diverse ways, He discovers the
mischiefs condemned by the word of God.
as we shall see hereafter. First of all, I say, it is a very naughty thing,
and expressly forbidden by the word of God, to leave those things that
appertain unto our estate and vocation, and intermeddle our selves in other
men's matters. For it is meet that every one (according to the saying of Saint
Paul) should endeavor to be quiet, and to meddle with his own business. By
similitudes.
And even as we see in a man's body distinct members to have their several
offices, the one not meddling with the others office and duty, so that the
inferiors do not envy the superiors; or that through discord and
dissension one of them should refuse to pleasure the other: so likewise in
Commonwealths, and especially in the Church, all Christians ought so to live
one with another, that though their places and charges be different, By the
reprehension of Christ Jesus. Luke. 10.41, 42.
yet they should always remain united in their minds, and should be like
diverse travelers, which by sundry ways go to one and the self same place.
As Christ Jesus passed by a certain village near unto Jerusalem, he was
desired by Martha to come near and lodge in her house: where when he espied
her busy about many things, and that her sister Marie sat down at his
feet, to hear and understand his words, said unto her, (answering unto a
complaint that she made, for that her sister left her to serve all alone)
Martha thou art careful, and art troubled about many things: but one thing is
necessary: Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from
her. Wherein he reprooved her of two things, which ought to be kept and
observed; First, for that she preferred her worldly cares before the hearing of
the word of God. Secondly, for that she took so many things in hand at once.

And to speak truly, By the weakness of our minds which is illustrated by a
sit comparison.
it is not possible for a man to do many things well: or that his mind should
be such, but that in devising of sundry things, he shall find him self
scarcely sufficient to do any one of them as they ought to be done. For as we
see in running rivers, that the force of the water is greatly diminished, when
as the current there of is turned into several little streams, and that both
the heat and the light do lose very much of their virtue, when as they are
dispersed abroad into large and open places: So likewise it happens to our
minds, when as they are applied unto several studies which sometimes are
contrary one to the other, so that we thinking (through an ambitious desire)
to do many things, in the end effect and bring to pass nothing, as we
should do And therefore Aesop, being disposed to deride this foolish and
ambitious cutiositie, at such time as he should be sold among 2 or 3 other
slaves, and that all of them being asked by the merchant, which should buy
them, what they knew, had answered, they knew all things, said (being asked
what he knew) that he knew nothing, seeing they knew all. Whereupon the
merchant perceiving the subtlety and finesse of his wit, thought him more
worth then all the other: and imagined that he had good occasion to mock the
others presumptuous minds, who did brag they knew al things whatsoever, seeing
it is a very hard matter to find any man perfect, and sufficiently instructed
in any one science, though he has diligently employed him self thereto all the
days of his life: according to the example of wise and skilful husbandmen, who
cut and prune the superfluous branches from their vines, to the end that the
sap and blood should not be dispersed among unnecessary boughs, but be
conveyed to the good branches, thereby to make them the more fruitful: So
also must we gather, and muster as it were together, all the vigor and
strength of our spirits to one sole thing, if we desire to be excellent and
surpassing therein. And for this cause Ambition it self, which (for that we
would be esteemed and renowned among men) does make us enterprise so many
and so diverse things, should withdraw us and pluck us back from that
course. For we never heard of any man that prooved excellent in any thing, if
he did not wholly addict and consecrate him self thereto. And I think there
is nothing that has so much hindered our nation from attayning unto that
height of perfection and glory in many arts, whereto sundry of the Grecians
and Latins aspired, as that vain and foolish Curiosity which we have, to
give and addict our selves unto many things. For (God be thanked) there are as
many excellent wits in France, The curious desire of many Frenchmen to know
a little in every thing, makes them ignorant in all things.
as in any other country wheresoever, and such as have a great good will
thereto, and very able bodies to endure any travail: but we see few that
have the constancy to persist and go forward in any one art or study: and
there are not many, who have so much discretion as to choose that which is most
meet and agreeable for them. We have scarcely so soon tasted the rudiments
of any one art, but forthwith we think we may proceed masters in the
faculty, and suppose we are familiarly acquainted with every precept. And this
is the reason why we run from one thing to another, and in a very short time
we think we have attained to all perfection, and may proceed. Doctors in
every profession: and by this means there arise many confusions in the Church
and Commonwealth. For after that we are once possessed with a persuasion of
our capacity and sufficiency, we forthwith wax proud and presumptuous, we
will give place to no man, we grow very opinionate and strong headed, we
will stourly maintain our own imaginations, we never regard, unless it be
too late, the counsel and advice of other men: and if peradventure it be
offered, we are ashamed to follow it; we will needs be believed both in
matters of war and peace, both in policy and divinity, and generally in
whatsoever we say or do, we will be Orators and Poets, Captains, musicians,
and all in conceit: like the fool of Syracuse, who being overruled with a
melancholicke humor, was persuaded that he was the richest man that was in all
the world, and that all the ships which arrived in the haven were laden with his
merchandise. And we think that we are excellently seen in all things: so
that in this point we dister little or nothing; for we are wise as he was rich,
that is, only in conceit and opinion. And with this foolish cogitation we
enterprise great matters, when as indeed we are as fit to compass them, (as
the old saying is) as an ass is to sing, or an ox to dance. And hereof
insueth infinite discommodities, and oftentimes the overthrowe of our selves,
the ruin of our friends, and the destruction of our country, as it may easily
appear in diverse histories.

Corah, Diverse notable histories which do evidently declare what great
mischiefs ambitious curiosity has caused. Nom. 16.1.
Dathan, and Abiram, though they had a very honorable office about the
tabernacle of the Lord, and ministered there before the whole Congregation of
Gods people, yet notwithstanding they were not content herewith, but being
moved partly with Ambition, and partly with Envy, and Curiosity, would needs
(as it were by force) thrust Moses out of his chair, thinking them selves as
fit for the room as he was. Wherewith God was so highly displeased, that in
the presence of all the people he caused the earth to open, and to swallowe up
both them selves, their wives and children with their whole families. As long
as Saul walked in the ways of his God, and enterprised nothing but that which
was commanded him, 1 and 2 book of Samuel.
he prospered mightily in all his actions; but as soon as he went further, all
things went back ward with him so long, that both him self and his children
were wholly destroyed. Absalom and Adonias, both of them ambitiously seeking
(contrary to the will of God) to reign over Israel, were miserably destroyed
in the flower of their age, 2. Sam. 15.16. 1. King. 1.1, 2.
and that in such sort as was far un worthy the nobleness of their birth
and their former felicity: whereas if they would have been contented with
their estates, they might have lived most happily like Kings sons, and have
enjoyed both honor and pleasure, 2, Sam. 20.2.
as much as they might have well desired. Sheba the son of Bichri, perceiving
after the overthrow of Absalom, that the ten tribes were something displeased
with David, thought to take the occasion while it was offered, and used all the
means he could to draw the people after him to make him self King: but
because it was against the ordinance of God, in stead of being crowned, he had
his head cut off. Vziah, 2. Chron. 26.16.
though otherwise a very good King, a good man, and fearing God (as we have
said before) after many great victories gotten against his enemies, yet in the
end dyed a Leper, being separated from the Congregation, for that through a
presumptuous curiosity, not content with his Royal dignity whereto he was
called, and which he might safely and honorably have used, would needs
(contrary to his vocation) burn incense in the Temple, and usurp the office
which only appertained to the children and successors of Aron, as Azarias the
high Priest declared unto him. Simon the sorcerer, Acts. 8.18.
seeing the Apostles to give the holy Ghost by laying on of hands, offered
them money, and thought to have purchased the like authority; but because he
sought to get that by wicked means, which God does freely give to whomsoever
it pleases him, S. Peter (to whom he made his suite) sent him away with this
answer; Thou and thy money perish together. Theudas, Judas the Galilean,
Josephus.
and many others raised up great tumults among the Jews, faining that they
were sent of God to deliver them from the servitude of the Romans, and to
reduce them again to their former free dome: but because their counsels and
endeavors proceeded from men, they and all such as followed them were quickly
overthrown. Acts. 19.14.
Certain of the Jews that were exorcists (as Luke writes) seeing the
wonderful works that Paul wrought, assayed to invocate (as well as he) upon the
name of the Lord Jesus, over such as had wicked spirits, saying, we conjure you
by Jesus whom Paul preaches: but the evil spirit knowing that they had taken
this in hand by their own authority, answered: Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I
know, but who are ye? and forthwith the man, who had the evil spirit, ran on
them, and overcame them, and prevailed against the^, so that they fied a way
naked, and wounded; thereby declaring what a dangerous thing it is, to
enterprise any thing without a lawful vocation.

Among other things that the false prophets are blamed for this was one of the
principal; that they would prophecy and preach every where without any
vocation. For it is impossible that we should be fit for any thing, if we be
not called thereto by the secret counsel and especial favor of God, as it
does most evidently appear in sundry Bishops, who would needs prevent
the election, by the which (according to Gods institution and the
Ecelesiasticall order) they ought to be called and appointed to their charges;
but they have gotten them by bribes and by favor, and have governed them after
as every man knows: some have maintained wars with the revenues of the
Church; others have courted it; others have purchased their pleasures, and
builded them goodly palaces and beautiful gardens; and the wiser sort among
them have enriched their houses: and not one of them has declared by effect,
that he was worthy of that place whereto he has so greedily climed and
aspired. What do I say? there are many of them far more fit to cry mustard
about the streets, then for any such office and function: and those who set the
fairest countenance upon the matter, think they have sufficiently discharged
their duties toward God and man, if they come to church once in a year with
their miter on their heads, their Cross in their hands and their rocher about
their necks, giving their Episcopal been diction to so many as come to behold
them, and if peradventure they chance to read service upon any great festival
day, say mass, or give any orders, they think presently they have done more
then other men, and that if God should call them to a reckening, he must needs
pay them some thing back again. But to preach the word, which is the fundatio^
of the church, and the meat wherewith it is nourished, and the lamp which should
lighten it, to guide and conduct it in the darkness of this world, and the
weapons wherewith it is furnished either to defend her self, or offend her
enemies, the medicine to heal her wounds and sores: to preach (as I say) this
wholesome word soundly and publikly to the people, who live in great ignorance
and blindness; to administer the sacraments according to the institution of
Christ Jesus, the more fully to confirm us; to visit and comfort the sick and
diseased, to harbor the poor and needy, to reprove, to threate^, to admonish
with all patience and long suffering, to watch over the flock, and (to be short)
faithfully to husband and manure the vineyarde, that it may bear and bring
forth fruit unto the Lord thereof, there is not a word, nor any news of all
this: yeathose who carry a show, as though they could do it, pass it over
very slightly, thinking it a disgrace unto them, to take any such thing in
hand, as nothing beseeming their callings. And we need not look for any
other of such as are not called of God, but will needs thrust them selves into
such charges and offices. For where he has not called, there he bestows no
grace nor any blessing, without the which it is a clear case, we can do
nothing. We bring many reasons to cloak our ambition, and to cover our
disordered curiousnes, but time does easily discover our hypocrisy, and the
effect does evidently declare, that it is exceedingly prejudicial and
hurtful.

There was of late time, John Leyden, Muncer, The history of the Anabaptists,
and pesants of Germany of late times, written by Sleidan in the 4. and 5.
book of his Commentaries.
and Cniperdolinge, and many other, who enterprised great matters, and made the
ignorant sort belecue in the beginning, that they were Angels and Prophers: and
that God had sent them to reform the disorders and abuses, that were in the
world. But they were quickly overthrown, and as many as took their parts,
and themselves in the end were executed: for that they had enterprised so great
a matter, without any commission. The pesants also, which assembled together in
Germany, in the year 1525. to withstand (as they said) the violence and
injuries offered unto them by the gentlemen, were likewise wholly defeated and
discomfited: not because there was nothing to be found in the nobility worthy
of reprehension; but because they had rashly taken in hand so weighty a cause,
rather to satisfy their own desire, and to lay open a passage to all
liberty, then for any zeal they had to justice and equity. For there have
been many other, who have prospered in their enterprises, though in the
beginning they were private men, and very much unprovided for the execution of
so great deseignes. I will pass over Moses and the Macchabees, who with an
heroical and singular courage, have accomplished wonderful things, without
any other means but only their callings from God; and speak only of
Tamberlain, Paulus Iovius, Carrion, Guichardin.
who called him self the scourge of God, of Castruce Cachacane, of Francis
Sforce, of Heruce, of Cherif; who in spite of all their enemies, have
exceedingly advanced them selves, some to be Dukes, other Monarchs and
Emperous, because that God had appointed them to that end and purpose, against
whose will and determination, no creature is able to resist.

And for that we have made mention of the wicked enterprises, An excellent
history contrary to the former, which proves how greatly God has blessed
those, who have resisted tyranny by pawful means
which the pesants of Germany took in hand against their lords of late
years, it shall not be amiss to allege some other, who in the like case had
a contrary issue: and that is of the Switzers, who in the days of our
forefathers, not able to endure the unsupportable injuries offered by their
nobles, assembled them selves together, and drove them out of the country, and
altering the government of their state, cantioned them selves, and have made a
league to defend their liberties: which they have ever since so well observed,
that their nobility were never able to recover their former authority.
Whereby we may gather (considering the small time they had to effect so great
a matter) and that all their counsels fell out so prosperously, yea and far
better then in the beginning they looked for, that they were secretly called
thereto by God him self, and afterward directed by his spirit, for the
execution of their purposes and intents. In which it is evident, that Gods
providence governs all things, and that for the humiliation of his creatures,
he uses such means as seems best unto him self. But it is a very hard
matter, yea and almost impossible, to know this divine vocation, otherwise
then by the sequel and event: and it is very dangerous to judge thereof, by
any presumption what so ever: wherein many heretofore, and diverse at this day,
do greatly deceive them selves.

Antigonus, Examples of the over throw of such men, as with an ambitious
curiousness have sought to advance them selves, more then was convenient for
their estate. Plutarch.
Demetrius, and Pyrrhus the King of Epirus, ambitiouslie coveted the Monarchy
of the whole world, and promised themselves (through a foolish opinion
conceived of their own worthiness, and of their great wisdom) that they might
come unto the height of that glory and honor that Alexander the great attained
unto: but it was in vain, as the issue did evidently declare. For whereas
they might (if they had had peaceable minds) have safely enioied their own
Kingdoms, which were very great and exceeding rich: thinking to advance them
selves, they were quite overthrown; and hoping to get much, they lost all,
through an ambitious curiousnes, which embarked them in to dangerous actions
and counsels, out of which (being once entered) they could by no means wind
them selves. Marcus Antonius after the same sort, lost half the Roman Empire,
and withal his honor and reputation, yea and in the end his life to. It
seems sometime that our actions are very reasonable, and grounded upon good
cause, notwithstanding the issue is very evil, for that they are begun without
asking counsel of God, who in his secret wisdom has determined the contrary
to that which man imagines. An example which shows how the greatest men
ought to carry them selves sincerely eue^ to the end of their calling.
When as Brutus and Cassius took upon them to recover their ancient liberty,
whereof they were unjustly deprived by the ambition of Julius Caesar: who would
not have thought that such an enterprise should have had a prosperous end?
notwithstanding this action of theirs, did breed more mischief in their
country, then all the former wars. This is then a thing to be diligently
considered, what warrantise we have, when as we enterprise any thing, and not
to follow the swinge of our own affections. All men are not capable of all
things: and therefore it is necessary for the tranquillity of every one in
particular, and of the commonwealth in general, for every man to betake him
self unto that which is fittest for him. Let the gentleman play the soldier,
and the Judge administer justice, the treasurers and auditors look to the
receipts and finances, and let the Bishops instruct the people in the ways of
the Lord.

Hannibal upon a time he aring Phormio, Histories showing that it is a very
unfit thing for any man, how able so ever he be, to meddle in any vocation but
his own.
who with great delight to him self, and applause of the people, discoursed of
military affairs; as; how to form a battle, to incampe, to assault, to
lead an army, and such like: being in the end desired to show his opinion,
and to speak what he thought of the man; answered that he had seen in his
time many fools, but he never saw a more fool then Phormio: for that
forsaking the vocation wherein he had been brought up, which was to plead,
and to be an advocate, would needs dispute of martial affairs, and that in
the prefende of one of the greatest Captains of the world. There was like wise
a certain musition, Plutarch in his treatise of the difference between a
flatterer and a friend.
very skilful and cunning in his art, who playing before Philip King of
Macedonie, was (through a vain ostentation of the King, and to make the people
believe he had more skill then the masters in the faculty) reproved of the
said Philip twice or thrice: which the musition did patiently endure, for the
reverence he bare to his majesty, but when as the King would needs reprove
him the third time, he said: GOD defend (most noble King) that your
majesty should lose so much time as I have done in learning of so contemptible
an art, as this is: deliliuering in few words, two excellent instructions: the
one, that such base exercises beseemed not a King, and that it were sufficient
for so great a personage, if at any time his leisure would permit, to recreate
him self after his other weighty affairs, to vouchsafe to hear such as were
cunning and skillful: and the other was, that it is a very unseemly thing, for
any man to judge of another man's knowledge, and to meddle with such things as
surpass his understanding. Plin. 1.35. c. 16. Ne suitor vltra crepida^.
Apelles could not endure, that the shoemaker after he had found fault with the
latchet, should proceed further and meddle with the leg. For it is
impossible, that we should do any thing well, so long as we attempt ought
beyond our knowledge.

Gregory Nessene says, that when we will needs enterprise such things, as
are to deep for us, and above our reach, we oftentimes slip in very small
matters, and such as would have been very easy for us, if we would have
applied our selves wholly thereto. But there are some which have such wandering
wits and fickle heads, that they are never contented until they have assaied
all means, and never find their own insufficiency, until their follies be
made manifest to all the world, to their own shame, and the destruction of
kingdoms and commonwealths, who payfull dearly for their foolishnes.

Plutarch rehearses a pleasant apology of the tail, which sell at strife with
the head, for that it would needs have the leading of the body in his course,
and prevailed so much by his importunity, that to have peace, the head was
constrained to grant his request; but because it had no eyes to make choice of
his way, it began to lead the body at all adventure, through bushes and
briers, hills and dales, mire and dirt, so that it had almost killed and torn
in pieces the rest of the poor members: who perceiving them selves in such
miserable case, assembled together against their captain, and made him leave
his government; who being ashamed of his folly, entreated the head to take
the rule again into his hands. This is a very lively description of the se
Polypragmous and busy fellows, who have such short arms, and yet will needs
claspe so many things; supposing that to enterprise, is sufficient to execute:
and that which does so greatly deceive them, is, that they propound unto them
selves the examples of great personages, who being furnished with excellent
graces of God, and stirred up especially by him, have by his favor and
protection, accomplished wonderful and admirable things; and think that in
time they may be equal unto them, both in honor and dignity, though they be
never so far inferior unto them, in virtue, wisdom, noblenes, and
magnanimity; which are means to attain unto all kind of happiness and
prosperity: and that they imitate nothing in their lives (as Polybius says)
but that which is superfluous and vicious, leaving their honorable actions,
whereby they have achieved so great glory, and think to gain as great
reputation by their pride and arrogancy.

And herein they are very like unto apes, Anembleam fit for a curious man.
who will needs counterfeit the gestures of men; but in nothing but their
countenances, as in mocking and mowing, in biting and scratching. As for those
excellent qualities where with man is endued, as to reason, to talk, to count,
to discern between good and bad; they can no skill, they are wholly ignorant,
neither is it possible to make them fit thereto by any means what so ever. For
as the Physicians do speak of the members of a man's body, that they are made
and composed of form, substance, strength, and greatness; and placed and
disposed very conveniently, to show their effects and operations: so likewise
in every commonwealth God has raised up some men, either Civilians or Divines,
and furnished them with such graces and gifts, as are necessary to effect
such things, as he has before determined. Now if the foot will take upon
him to execute the office of the hand, or that the hand will needs walk as
the foot: if the care will strive to see, and the eye to hear: would it not
be a very vain and foolish thing, for them to enterprise such things, seeing
they have not been made and framed thereto? In like manner we strive in vain,
when as we endeavor to effect such things, whereto by nature we are not
appointed and ordained. We may then conclude, that every man is not fit for
every thing: and that (as Aristotle says) it were a very profitable and a good
thing, In his Polit.
if every man would betake him self to that, whereto he is most apt and
pliable: and withal that considering the great infirmity of all these earthly
things, and that nothing can be brought unto his full perfection, we would be
contented and pacified when as we see our selves in some reasonable state and
condition.

Pericles and Demosthenes in Athens, Sundry histories of diverse troubles
stirred up by turbulent spirits in the Church and commonwealth.
and after them Tiberius Gracchus, and Caius at Rome, did exceedingly trouble
and disquiet the common peace of their Cities, and mightily hinder the
peaceable government, which might otherwise have been established in their
common wealths. For though that in the one their was great disorder among the
citizens, and that the enemy had impaired the liberties and franchises of the
other: notwithstanding for that they would not remedy this disorder, without
increasing the disease, it had been much better for them, to have left things
in the same estate they found them, and to have born with the time, making
such advantage thereof, as conveniently they might, referring the full
reformation of every disorder, to a better opportunity.

In like manner there was no just cause, Curious schismatikes.
why Donatus should forsake the Church, and break the unity and concord
thereof, which ought to be so carefully and charilie observed among brethren:
neither to be the cause of such a tragical and lamentable event, as afterward
fell out, not only in Afric, but also in many other parts of the world, to
the great rejoicing of the enemies of our religion, and to the unspeakable
grief of all such as favor the increase and advancement thereof. Math. 13.9.
Having discoursed at large of the mischiefs that are inge^dred by curiosity,
he now shows the causes of this curious humor: the first whereof is, the
lightness and unstableness of man's wit.
For suppose there were many things in the Church of Carthage, which might
justly be reproved, yet it had been much better to have tolerated them for
a season, then in redressing them, to hazard the plucking up of the good grain
with the darnell, against that express commandment, which the master of the
house gave unto his servants.

But it is not sufficient, to show the nature, the effects, the miseries, and
domages, arising and springing from this passion, but we must also understand
whereof they proceed, to the end that we may the better eschew them. There is
no question, but the lightness and unstableness of our minds, are the principal
causes thereof. For we do not commonly see stayed and constant men, who have
good and sound judgments, and such as have (as Aristophanes said of Cleon) one
foot in the court, and another in the country, tormented with this humor:
but such as are possessed with wandering and straying cogitations, who will
needs occupy every trade, and be of all occupations, and change their opinions
as often as they do their garments. They do no sooner undertake any thing,
but they are presently weary of it, and they have not so soon given it over,
but forthwith they would take it in hand again. They resemble those men, who
having heard a report of the fertility, pleasure, and abundance, of any
strange country, are never quiet until they have seen it: but they have not
been there a year, but they are in as great dislike with it, as ever they
were with their own native soil: so that (as Horace notes, Epist. 11. l. 1.
and that most excellently) though they change the air, they never alter their
nature; their minds are as full of fancies, and their heads of toys, as ever
they were. And as we see the diseases of man's body, do bring such an
unquietness and irkesomenes with them, that the poor patient disliketh every
thing what so ever, yea such oftentimes, as in his health and prosperity, were
most pleasing unto him; as, his wife and children, his bed, his meat and
drink, and such like: so likewise it is apparent in the affections of the
mind, which being once distempered, we can not long live contentedlie in any
condition of life what so ever. Aremedie against the unstableness before
mentioned.
The first means then, to avoid this curious humor, is, to settle our minds
in a more grave and stayed estate: for thereby we shall not lightly give
ourselves to any thing, whereof we have not before maturely and advisedly
considered. And having with good advise and great consideration, taken the
matter in hand, it will be no small difficulty to pull us from it.

The second cause that ingendereth this disordered humor, Idleness and sloth,
the second cause of curiosity. Epist. 14. of the first book.
is, a kind of idleness and slothful disease. When (as Horace says) the
ox desires the saddle, and the horse the yoke. For all of us do naturally
desire to be at rest, and seek for our case as much as may be, and would
not willingly do any thing, but follow our pleasures and delights: and for
that we imagine that other men do live better then our selves, and have a more
short and co^pendious way to attain that, which we so earnestly hunt after:
therefore it is, that we do so wish to enjoy their places and callings. And this
is the reason, why (as Horace says in his first Satyr) that the merchant
being upon the sea in storms and tempests, and seeing in what danger both
he and his goods are, begins to lament his own misfortune, and to
complain of his estate and condition, thinking that every man is more happy
then him self, and that his neighbor lives a far merier life, then he
does. So likewise does the laweyer, when as his clyents are knocking at his
door, and breaks him from his sleep too timely in the morning. As also the
husbandman, who labors all day with little cheer, and abides hunger and
cold, with many other sorrows all his life long. God knows every one of
these, is wondrous plentiful, in recounting his own mischiefs, and the
sorrows whereto he is subject: as also in remembering his neighbors quiet life
and great felicity. But as in commending the one, they regard nothing but the
ease and quietness thereof: so in dispraising the other, they respect nothing
but the sorrow and vexation where with it is accompanied. Whereby it evidently
appears, that the greatest cause of our inconstancy and mutable curiosity,
is our idleness, and hatred we bear to travel and pains taking.

This is also a great cause of our curiosity, The disdain of our vocation,
the third cause of curiosity. Suetonius. Plutarch.
when as we disdain and contemn our callings, as esteeming them too base and
too vile for us: though that in deed, there is no trade so bad, which will not
maintain him that uses it (as Nero the Emperor was wont to say) and which
will not enrich a man, if he be sufficiently painful and industrious therein.

Epaminondas one of the most famous Captains that ever was in Greece, was once
chosen by the Thebanes, to look to the making clean of the streets and
clensing of their sinkes: and albeit in the opinion of diverse of his friends,
it was a very dishonorable office for so worthy a personage: yet he accepted
of it very willingly, saying, that he would make it apparent, that men were not
honored by their offices, but that the offices were honored by the men: and
afterward he so wisely and discreetely behaved him self in his charge, that
he purchased great honor and commendacion throughout the city. Wear not all
the great lords of Rome made Ediles, Titus Live. Plutarch.
before they were Senators? which office was ordained in their commonwealths
for to have the oversight of of repayring their public halles, the clensing
of their streets, and the mending of their conduites. And although such
offices seemed very unworthy such men, who seemed rather to be Kings then
Senators, notwithstanding they were exceeding curious in the discharge
thereof, and were no more ashamed, then of a better office.

There were some among the most famous men of their City, who were taken from
the plough, The consideration of notable examples to the contrary, is a great
remedy against the disdain of our calling Look Genesis and Exodus. The 1.
and 2. book of Samuel.
and honored with the greatest dignities of their Common wealth; and having
executed their charges worthily, and held their places the time the Law
prescribed, returned again to play the good husbands at their farms in the
Country. And the Patriarchs, who were so rich and so mighty, that their
neighbor Kings came in person unto them, and were glad of their allyaunce and
friendship: Moses, who had been brought up in the Court of Pharao, and
adopted by his daughter to succeed in the kingdom of Egypt: Saul and David,
whereof the one was King already, and the other heir apparent to the Crown,
were they not all wont to keep their beasts in the fields, and to watch them
like shepheardes? A most excellent example of all others to teach us that we
ought not despise our callings.
But this is an example of all other, that may suffice to teach us, that we may
not disdain our calling, how vile and abject soever it be: and that is of the
Son of God, who being Creator and sovereign Lord of all things whatsoever,
did notwithstanding so abase and humble him self, that he took upon him the
shape of a servaunt, and made him self like unto men; for whom in the end he
was crucified, after that with wonderful humility and lowliness he had
washed many of their feet and legs. What man is there at this day so proud
and haughty hearted, that is not abashed and ashamed to show himself
disdainefull of any estate and condition, how poor and penurious soever? 1.
Cor. 12.
Saint Paul speaking to this purpose, sets down a very fit comparison of
the members of a man's body, saying that those members which seem to be more
feeble are necessary, and upon those members of the body which we think most
dishonest, put we more honesty on: and our uncomely parts have more comeliness
on. Wherein he laboreth to prove nothing else but thus much, that though our
estates, and we also who exercise them, be base and contemptible, yet
notwithstanding we must not despise them, for that oftentimes they are as
necessary and as profitable for the common wealth as any other. And therefore
it becomes not us to be weary of our vocations, and to desire other
callings we know not what.

Ambition likewise is another great cause of this curiosity whereof we speak
at this present. Ambition, and an aspiring mind to be above others, the fourth
cause of curiosity.
For as we see covetous and griedy minded men, which do skratch and scrape
together they care not what, and without any shame do pluck and wring from
their neighbors they care not how, nor by what means. (as may well appear by
the impost and tax which the Emperor Vespasian laid upon vrines) So likewise
there are some so proud and ambitious, that they would be accounted the chief
and principal men wheresoever they become. If they see any man that is an
excellent Musician, a good Tennis-player, a swift Runner, a cunning fencer, a
learned poet, a skilful minstrel, or a fair gamester, they assay presently if
they can counterfeit him, to the end they may be spoken of, and that they may
be placed in the rank of good fellows. Now if those things we use, be naught;
we can not imagine a greater dispraise then to be commended for them: and if
they be indifferent, all the commendation that we can reap by the knowledge of
them, is like unto that, which is often given unto the prodigal man, that he
makes small account of money, and purchases things of no value at a high rate.
For there is nothing so precious as time. If then we spend much thereof to
learn some unprofitable art, will not all wise men say, that we are evil
husbands? and if they be good and commendable things, we must also consider,
that it is no more shame to beignorant of such of them, as do nothing
appertain unto our vocation, then it is for the eye to be dumb, or the tongue
to be blind; and in those things which appertain unto our vocation and
calling, we must yield unto God the whole praise and commendation. And
therefore we may safely conclude, that Ambition must not make us fall into this
foolish and curious passion.

Now the last and special occasion of this curious humor is, Self-love the
fist cause of curiosity.
for that, by reason of our self-love, we never sufficiently know ourselves,
neither yet our own imperfections. For if we would measure our strength, and
consider the weakness of our minds, and the shortness of our lives, we
would think it a very difficult thing, perfectly to attain any one art,
though all the days of our lives were employed therein. For albeit that Tullie
had bestowed his whole time in Rhetoric, yet was not his cunning so
excellent, but that there is something wanting; and he him self conceived a
more surpassing Idea and form thereof, then ever he was able to express in
any one of his Orations whatsoever. Who is there then, who seeing such a man,
who was endued with so divine understanding, and had bestowed such wonderful
and exceeding travayle and pains, and yet could not attain unto the
perfection of one only Art, that dare hope to come to an absolute knowledge
in two orthree? Theophrastus complayneth that man's life in his opinion is too
short to lay so much as the foundation of any of the liberal sciences. And,
to speak truly, it is a very difficult thing, what pains soever we bestow,
considering the weakness of our capacities, and the obscurity of those
things wherein we bestow our endeavors: yea such as for their rare
knowledge in mechanical arts, have been accounted famous throughout all the
world, being better able to judge of their practice, then the other of their
speculation, have not withstanding accounted them selves very ignorant and
vnskilsul, when they have done all they could. Among other Apelles the most
excellent and perfectest Painter that ever was, whenever he made any picture,
was wont to write over it, Apelles would make it; and not Apelles has made it;
for fear least if he should use the perfect tense, he should be judged of
some to challenge a perfection in the art. How is it possible then, that we
in so small a time and with so mean wits should attain many sciences, if
they, who have been so ingenious and so painful, The better to beat down
this pride and self-love, be shows that God alone and no other is able
perfectly to accomplish many things.
applying them selves only and wholly to one particular Art, could
notwithstanding never attain any entire and absolute perfection therein? It is
a divine work, and that which exceeds ma^s capacity, to be skillful in diverse
things. Our minds and spirits which have a heavenly beginning, are diversely
occupied in the several parts of our bodies For they teach our eyes to see,
our ears to he are, our tongues to speak, or feet to go; they understand,
they learn, they discourse, they remember, they reason and conclude all at
once. In like mannerour God, who is, as it were, the mind and spirit of all
the world, does quicken, strengthen, sustain, moove, and conducte every
thing, doing all this in an instant. But this is miraculous, supernatural, and
an impossible thing for men to bring to pass by any travayle or diligence
whatsoever. Christ Jesus him self) by whom all the world is governed and
sustained) as he was mann, ever enterprised any more offices then one at once.
For before that by his Baptism he was established and confirmed in his
ministry, he was content to live like a Carpenter; and after he was called,
as it were, to preach, he did not meddle with any other calling. When as they
would have made him a King and a Judge, he would in no wise accept thereof:
not that he was not furnished with sufficient gifts to discharge such offices,
and all other whatsoever, if it had pleased him, but because he was not called
to that end, and for that he would teach us by his example, how we ought to
contain our selves within the limits and bounds of our vocation. There is
nothing better then (to correct this curiosity and nice humor, A remedy
against this evil.
which makes us enterprise so many vain and frivolous matters) to know our
own weakness and unableness, as also the dullness of our understanding, and
withal to consider the shortness of our lives and unstable estate, wherein we
are placed.

Having discoursed hitherto of that foolish curiosity and fond desire, In the
lattrr end of this book he reasons against the profane curiosity of such
men as search after secret and bidden things which are both unlawful and
dangerous. Reasons to the contrary.
wherewith many have bin provoked to put in practice such things, as nothing
appertain unto their places and callings: it is expedient now, before we end
this treatise, that we touch also briefly and in a word that wicked and profane
curiosity, whereby diverse me^ are wonderfully stirred up to know such things
either of God, of nature, or of their neighbors, as are most secret, difficult,
dangerous, and wholly impertine^t unto the^. And this kind of humor death
oftentimes exceedingly torment such as have reaching and aspiring minds, who
conte^ning the study of mean things, as an exercise too base and conte^ptible
for them, will needs sore aloft and apply themselves to that which is very rare
and far from the knowledge of every common personage: as though it were an
easy matter to fly up to heaven without wings, or to clime up to the top of a
ladder without beginning at the first and second staff, which thing Christ
(considering in the Gospel, John 3.10.
and therein purposing to reprehend our folly) said, (in reprooving Nicodemus
one of the principal Doctors among the Jews, for that he could not understand
his speech, touching the regeneration of water, and of the spitite) Art thou a
master in Israel, and know not these things? If I tell you earthly things,
and you believe not, how should you believe, if I tell you of heavenly
things? by earthly things he understands such mysteries in the kingdom of
heaven, as are most easy to be understood: and by heavenly things, those
mysteries which are most obscure and difficult; declaring thereby, that we can
not attain unto the knowledge of the one, unless we be taught by the
understanding of the other. And therefore it was, that a certain poor old
man seeing Thales Milesius as he walked in the fields in the evening, gazing
up to the stars, and so buzie in his speculation that he fell into a ditch,
said in mocking, that it was a great madness for men to look so high, that
they never see what is before them. Whcih may also be a very profitable
admonition for us: seeing it is but too usual a custom among men in these
days, to contemn those things that are necessary, and such as we may easily
attain unto, and to weary our minds about obscure matters, wherein it is
better to be utterly ignorant then to understand or know them perfectly.

Some there are that do nothing all the days of their lives, In the first
rank of this curious company are placed, Alchymists, Cosmographers, Judicial
Astrologers, Southsayers, sorcerers, and Inchanters.
but search after the philosophers stone, and in the end by a secret skill in
Arithmaticke, do multiply all into nothing. Others will needs measure the
whole world, and know both the length and breadth thereof, as exactly as of an
acre of land. Others go to school to learn to prognosticate: others are
wholly busied in nativities, and will needs take upon them to foretell great
men's fortunes and destinies: others write whole books of Magic and
Nigromancie, others of Palmestrie and Phisiognomie, and such like: and in a
word, many take great pleasure in the interpretation of dreams. And who is
there that is able in few words to express the foolish curiosity of sundry
men, who are never contented, what experience soever they have as well of the
vanity of these studies, as of the masters and teachers? And this kind of
curiosity has not only been apparent in that which every wise man has
always accounted naught and unprofitable, but also in those things, which all
men of understanding do acknowledge for the singular gifts of God, and
whereof we need not doubt, but the knowledge is exceeding profitable and
commodious. For some there are which have such lame and ctooked wits, that
they never walk rightly in any study whatsoever.

If they study the Law, In the second rank are placed Lawyers, Physicians,
and philosophers, which leaving the study of excellent authors do betake them
selves to pettifogging and drug-selling, whereof ensue loss of goods, and
destruction of body.
they lay aside morale philosophy, and the excellent writings of the best
Civilians, and betake them selves to I know not what Doctors, so unfit and
unable to speak of law, so doubtful in their answers, so long and tedious
in their discourses, that there is no man, be he never so patient, that is able
to read over their writings. Not long since in the days of our forefathers,
Plato and Aristotle were thrust out of the schools, and men betook them to
Peter of Spain, and to Tartaret, and such like Dunses, who have lost much time
in writing their books, and (as one says) in seeking a fame to be accounted
ancient writers, and have quite spoiled such as by their example have been
drawn to follow them. In like manner, among Physicians there was no mention
of Galen and Hyppocrates, but they were laid up in studies to be consumed with
worms; and men gave them selves to the reading of Avicenne, Averroes and other
Arabians, who never use any method in their writings, nor any plainness to
resolve obscure questions, neither any demonstrations to confirm trueths, and
to refute falsehood: but (God be thanked) few there are, that delight in these
muddy waters at this day, but had rather drink of the purest and clearest
fountains.

There were nothing more excellent, The third rank is of Sophisters,
Cabalists, and other profane fellows, which mingle their sottish dreams with
known trueths.
or more sufficient to accomplish our felicity, then the study of Divinity,
if it were reformed as it should be. But there have always been some so
opinionate and selse willed, who partly through folly and a corrupt imitation of
their elders, and partly through an ambitious contradiction, will needs (though
never so frantickely) retain their sophistry, compelling their scholars to
sweat, as they them selves have done, and to hunt after such questions, as are
either unprofitable, superfluous, or inexplicable: whereas indeed they should
employ their youth, and flower of their age to learn the tongues, there by to
make them selves more fit for the study of Theology, and to read the old
Authors both Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, who have most soundly and
learnedly interpreted the holy Scriptures. There are some also, who in stead
of reading and meditating in the Law of God and his holy word, which has
been inspired by his holy Spirit, and delivered to teach, instruct, reproove,
and to make men perfect in all righteousness, and to frame them fit for
every good work, have wholly addicted them selves to some Cabalisticall dream
and Jewish fable, whereof there arises no other profit, but some strange
opinion; and that oftentimes which is very blasphemous, and most dangerous to
our religion. There are some also, which are ignorant and proud boasters, and
(as S. Paul speaks to Timothy) which contend about words, whereof ensue
strife, grief, wrongs, evil surmises, and vain contentions among men, who
being corrupted in judgment, and void of truth, think that gain is
godliness. They demand what God did before he made the world? how the Father
in one and the self same instant engendered the Son: how many orders and
degrees there are among the Angels, what difference in their offices: who those
are that God has written in or blotted out of his book, and whom he will
save, or condemn? what is the substance of the fire wherein the souls of the
wicked shall be continually tormented? how original sin proceeds from the
father and the son? by what means it passes from the seed that comes from
man, unto the soul that comes from God? and many such like obscure
questions, which never have any end, no more then the fable of Orestes, whereof
Iuvenal speaks in the first of his Satyrs. Which appears plainly to be so;
for that many having taken exceeding pains to find out some certe^ty herein,
have notwithstanding found the matter to be so intricate, that they could not
rest in any assured persuasion or settled co^tentation? Experience likewise
teaches us, that this curious humor is like unto the cutting of Hydras head:
that is, as fast as one doubt is resolved, there arises seven others in the
room thereof; and resembles the wicked spirit, whereof there is mention made
in the Gospel, which when one would have thought to have been quite expelled,
returns again oftentimes, if we take not great heed, with seven others worse
then him self, and tormenteth the person much more then ever he did before.

Is it not then the best way, A remedy against the former Curiosity.
if we will needs search and enquire after the works of our God, to understand
and learn of those things, by which he does daily and hourly show his
exceeding bounty and liberality unto us, pardoning our faults, adopting us
for his children, ruling us by his holy spirit, and directing us by his word,
preserving us from our enemies, comforting us in our forrowes, sustaining us in
our afflictions and imperfections, nourishing us, saving us, and calling us
unto the participation of all his goods, declaring thereby what care and
compassion he has of us; shall not the curious searching out of these things
be far more profitable for us, then the busy enquiring, what he did before
the creation of the world? The saying of S. Augustine.
And here I can not but repeat the saying of Saint Augustine, as serving very
fitly to this purpose, who being demanded what God did before he made the
heavens, answered very excellently, that he builded hell for those that
demanded such vain and curious questions.

If in like manner there be any question of the Son of God, How far we
ought to be desirous to understand touching the Son of God.
is it not much better to learn the reasons that induced him to take upon him
our nature, by what means he has redeemed us from death, whereto we were
subject by reason of our sins? how he has fulfilled the Law, and was
subject unto the curse thereof for us? how he has incorporated and united
him self unto us, that thereby we may participate of his righteousness, by
which means, by offering him self once upon the cross, he has sanctified
and consecrated his elect unto God his Father for ever? how he is our King to
govern and defend us, our Prophet to instruct us, our high Priest to pacify
the anger of God, how by our baptism we are regenerated, and by his
resurrection called to a certain and assured hope of life everlasting, by his
ascension placed at the right hand of God, and by his absolute authority which
he has over all creatures, he has fortified us against all temptations that
might assail us? is there not enough in this and in a thousand such like,
which he has done for our safety and preservatio^, the knowledge whereof may
minister exceeding comfort unto us, and such as is sufficient to occupy our
selves in, without laboring to no purpose, to understand how the father has
ingendered him from all eternity of his own substance, which is an
incomprehensible mystery, and cannot be understood of any but of him self
alone.

And as concerning the Angels, is it not much better, What it is, that we ought
to know touching the Angels.
to know that they are ministering spirits, sent to keep and guard those, who
are ordained unto life everlasting, and to save them with their hands, least
they should dash their foot against a stone; then to busy our selves invaine
speculations, then to dispute to no purpose of their places and degrees? which
we can not know but by our own imaginations: seeing the word of God has roue
aled no such thing unto us. And therefore Moses (not without great reason)
having most exactly taught us the order, the form and fashion of all visible
creatures, never makes mention of the creation of Angels. Which surely was to
bridle the vain curiosity of us, which do desire to know those things that
are above us, and to teach us to occupy our selves in the contemplation of
these inseriour things, which do not exceed our capacity, that we may the
better fully learn to understand such things, as are most necessary for us.
To know then the dignities and degrees of Angels, we must know that we are
like unto them, and so rest in an assured persuasion of their daily
ministry, for our health and preservation.

And likewise we may say of Predestination, What it is, that is requisite to
be known in the doctrine of predestination.
that if we will edify our selves and quiet our consciences, we need not be
so inquisitive in the word of God, thinking to know the riches of his wisdom,
or the depth of his judgments, which are incomprehensible: but we must be
contented to know, that he is no accepter of persons, and that among all
nations, he which fears him and walks uprightly, is most acceptable in his
sight: that he is willing that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of his truth: that he which believes shall not be condemned, and
such like sayings; Of hell fire, and what we are to think and know thereof.
which may assure us of his good will and desire he has to save us, and take
away all such doubts as may any way torment and vex us.

To what purpose should we be inquisitiue, concerning the quality of hell
sire, and whether it be material or spiritual, and as much or more violent,
then that which is elementarie? Is it not sufficient for us to know most
certainly by the Scriptures, that how so ever it is, it must needs be most
terrible and fearful: and therefore it behooves us to avoid it, and to take
heed, least through our incredulity, and disobedience to the commandments
of our GOD, we in the end find by woeful experience, how forceable and
extreme hot this fire is.

And as touching original sin, Of original sin.
to what end is it, to be inquisitiue how it comes from the father to the
son, and from the body to the soul, if in the mean time we have no care
to find out fit remedies to heal so dangerous a disease? It is all one, as
if we having a continual fever, or some other infectious malady, had no
further care, but to know the causes thereof, and so for want of taking
physic in time, be overtaken with an untimely death. Saint Augustine (the
better to reprove this importunate curiosity) recites the history of a
certain poor man, who being by a mischaunce fallen into a ditch, and that
some one of his neighbors came to him to help him out, who demanded of him
very earnestly how he fell in; answered, that if he would make haste to
help him out, they might reason of his falling in all at leisure. In like
manner (to apply this story to our purpose) it shall be much more expedient
for us, that we consider how, and in what manner this perverseness of our
nature may be corrected and amended, and endeavor to deliver our selves from
that danger wherinto we are fallen, and which makes us guilty in the sight of
God, then to loose our time in reasoning and disputing, by what means we are
become so corrupt and vicious. An excellent remedy against all curiousnes. 1.
Tim. 2.4. and 4.7. and 6.20. and the 2. Tim. 2.13. and Titus 3.9.


We can not then do better, then in rejecting all foolish, vain, and
uncertain questions, rest and stay our selves (according to the counsel of
S. Paul) in that, which may serve us to edification. For if so be we will
(contrary to the counsel and commandment of God) search after things, that
are to high for us, we shall both mispende our time, and loose our labor: and
it is to be feared, and that greatly, that GOD will very severely punish us
for our presumption: and that it fares not with us, as it does with them, who
being not content to behold the Sun beams shine round about them, will
needs behold the body thereof, which presently dazeleth their sight, and
makes them blind. For we can not (as the wise man says) be inquisitiue in
the secrets of our God, but that we shall be soon overwhelmed with his
glory and majesty: and therefore as it is a great reproach for us, to be
careless of such things, as appertain unto us: so is it very commendable, to
be ignorant of such things, as are concealed from us. Plutarch.
For as the Egiptian (who carried somewhat wound up in his napkin) answered
(unto him that demanded what it was) that he had covered it, to the end,
that no man should see it: so likewise must we learn, that if there be any
thing hidden, and laid up in the works of GOD, that it is of purpose kept
from us, to the end that we should not inquire after it: and that it is far
better to be utterly ignorant herein, then to have all the knowledge thereof
that may be. It becomes us then, if we be desirous to know things, that we
apply our selves unto such things, as are fit for our capacities: and that
herein we should be like unto the coursers, who leading their dogs into the
fields, do not let them slip at all adventures, at what so ever comes
next to hand: but hold them until their game be found, to the end they may
be the more fresh and lusty to maintain their course: so likewise must we
hold and keep in our curiosity, and not suffer it to follow after what so
ever it lusts, but only that, which being once attained unto, brings
with it both pleasure and profit.

Plutarch reports, and experience teaches it to be so, How to make a benefit
of curiosity.
that lions, tygars, cattes, and such like ravening beasts, that have sharp
claws, do use to pull in their nails when they go, to the end that when
they have need of them, they may be the sharper, and surer to take hold. If
we would deal thus with this curious humor and itching affection, reserving
it to further us in that which is necessary and profitable for us, it would
surely serve us in great stead, and there would be nothing so hard and
difficult, which we might not attain, if we would apply our selves thereto.
For as it does quicken our spirits, so would it increase our diligence, and
that in such sort, In the conclusion of this book, he entreats of the
curiosity of such as are inquisitiue after their neighbors matters, and
painteth the^ out in their colors.
that we would not refuse any labor to attain unto those things we desire to
know.

It were high time to end this discourse, were it not that some do vex and
torment them selves, more then any other, through a most wicked and cursed
curiosity they have in searching out their neighbors secrets: all their
study is to know their neighbors pedigrees, what they may spend by the year,
how much they owe, what houses they keep, whether they love their wives,
whether there be any discord or jealousy between them, whether they be not
too familiar with their maids, how they use their servants, when they go to
bed and when they rise, whether they carry the butterie door key at their
girdles, or not; and a thousand such like matters, where with they do
wonderfully encomber them selves. And this is one thing to be marked, that they
do ever more sooner inquire after the vice, then after the virtue of their
neighbors. Men usually are curious to know the worst things of their
neighbors.
Let one speak of the wisdom. justice, liberality, modesty, and temperancie
of another, and they will scarcely give any ear thereto. But let one tell
them that some young wench has lived incontinently, or some woman is taken in
adultery, or that there is strife and contention among brethren, or some
discord among friends, they are waking enough, and but too too ready to hear.
Wherein they resemble those, who in reading over a book, do note nothing but
the faults and errors therein contained: or else such, which take much more
pleasure in beholding a monster, then a body which is perfectly made: or to
view an antike picture, or some old counterfeit, wherein there are some
strange devises; as, the Pigmeis fighting with the cranes, or men with dogs
heads, or such as have but one cie and that in the midst of their
foreheades, or such as have their feet so broad, as they are sufficient to
defend them from the heat of the Sun. For this curious company delight in
nothing, but to hear pitiful and lamentable things. And as we see serpents
nourished by venim, and live in filthy, stinking and darkesome caves: so these
men do nourish them selves with woeful and sorrowful discourses, and never
take pleasure in any thing, but in that which deserves pity and
commiseration. They search for nothing but botches and soars, and herein they
are like surgeons; A curious man seeks to know men's faults to no other end,
but to publish them and to make them worse by false reports.
and yet they are much differing: for the one seeks the disease, with
intention to heal it; and if it be a soar that should be kept secret, they
are both wise and faithful enough to conceal it: but this other curious
companion is desirous to know every malladie, to the end he may make it
known and publish it where so ever he comes. They are also backbiters; for
as they take pleasure to hear evil of their neighbors, so do they delight
to report the worst to the next company they meet with: so that they are
exceeding envious, and rejoice in nothing, but in others men's mischiefs. In a
word, they are very brainesicke fellows, and blockheaded asses. For what a
foolish and intemperate humor is this, for a man that has a fair,
beautiful, amiable, and virtuous wife, with whom he may very lawfully enioie
his pleasure and delights, to reject her and cast her off: and to buie at a
very great rate, with pain, sorrow, and shame, the love of an other most foul
and filthy slut. In like manner it is a most foolish and sottish thing, to
despise so many goodly histories, and beautiful discourses of this life, so
many learned books, so many excellent treatises and worthy examples, whereby
we may reap such exceeding profit and pleasure: to busy our selves in
enquiring after our neighbors matters; to open sealed letters, to harken under
men's windows, or to whisper in women's ears, and such like absurdities: whereto
these curious men are most commonly addicted. After the example of Plato (of
whom Plutarch makes mention, in the life of Dion) he exborteth honest men to
fly curiosity, and to learn to know them selves.


After that Plato had remained some time in Sicilia, in the court of Dionysius
the tyrant, and by reason of the great disorder he saw there, and for sundry
discontentments, determined to return to his Academie: the King demanded of
him, if when he was gone, he would not often remember him, and speak of the
evil entertainment he had received in his house: whereto the Philosopher
replied; that he had far better, and more profitable matters to think upon.
In like manner if we were virtuously disposed, and desirous to emploie our
times thriftelie, we should have little leisure, and less pleasure, to loose
so many precious hours in tracing out our neighbors vices. It is a wonderful
thing, that we are so careless and negligent in the consideration of our own
faults, the knowledge and understanding whereof, is so profitable for us: and
seeing that nothing can be more necessary, whether it be to humble us, or to
make us have our whole recourse unto God: and that on the contrary, we are so
busy in searching out our neighbors imperfections, not to the end in friendly
manner to reprove them, or to take compassion upon them, and pray unto God for
their amendment, or by the knowledge of their sins, to acknowledge the
general corruption of our nature, to the end that thereby we might humbly
crave at Gods hands, to keep us in all our ways, and heartely to thank him
for all such graces, as he vouchsafes to bestow upon us: which is the best
means to make us reap profit and commodity, by knowing other men's
imperfections.

But we, The misery of those curious company, who never think upon their own
faults, but are always prying after other men's misdemeanour.
rejecting and casting behind our backs, all these considerations, seek to
understand nothing, but that which may defame them and blemish their
reputation. Wherein we resemble cocks and hens, which though they have meat
enough at home in their masters yards, yet will needs be scraping in their
neighbors dunghils, and feed them selves by other men's harms. In like manner
though there be in us, a plentiful harvest of all sorts of miseries; in the
contemplation whereof, we may sufficiently occupy our selves, and by the
remembrance of them, be driven to make our complaints before our God, thereby to
move him to take pity and compassion upon us: yet notwithstanding we had
rather conceal our own sins, and b^ stirring the filth of other men's
rottenness, not to the end to purge them of their corrupt humors, but to
blot their credits, and (contrary to the commandment of God) to make them
odious unto such, who are any thing well conceited of them. And herein we
resemble that old Lamia so much talked of in ancient stories, who had eyes like
unto spectacles, which she might take out and put in at her pleasure; as soon
as she came home into her lodging, she used to lock them up in to her cofer,
and sether down to spinning, as blind as a beetle, and never saw what she did
in her own house: but she went no sooner abroad, but she put them in her head
again, and would very curiously behold what other men did. In like manner we
through a foolish and sottish self-love, do never view our own imperfections,
although they be as clear as the Sun, and as big as a millstone: but on the
contrary, we can quickly epsy other men's vices, though it be at midnight, and
that peradventure they be not so big as a pebble stone.

Surely if it were possible to look in to these men's heads, An inventorie of
that which is in a curious ma^s head.
to see what they have laid up in their memories; no question, but we should
find a register of goodly matters: and all those like unto these; such an one
owes more then he is worth, this man loves his neighbors wife, and that
other is enamoured of his maid; he lives by polling or pilling, and the other
by shifting and coosening, such an one is an heretic, such an other an
hypocrite, this man is bankrout, and that other past grace: she is a light
huswife, a good fellow, a painted dame, a filthy queen, and a foul beast.
Behold what goodly wares are in these men's shoppes, and with what stuff they
have bolstered out their brains; far differing from that, which the great
Philosopher Socrates taught his scholars, which was nothing else, but to know
them selves, and to see their own faults. Wise men of former time, hanged
bells at their doors, not only to know when any knocked at their gates, but
also that by hearing the noise, they might be admonished to make all things
well, least such as come in should find any thing, whereat they might be
offended. Whereby they admonish us, that we should be careless to epsy the
common faults and infirmities of our brethren, but rather be ignorant of them,
or at least seem so to be: for that it is a very offensive thing, and passes
good manners (as Xenocrates said) without leave, to thrust our feet over other
men's thresholds. As then it is reported of Democritus, that walking abroad, he
was wont to shut his eyes, least by wandering regards, his mind should be
turned from the contemplation of honest things: so likewise must we with all
our endeavors, bar and shut up this curious humor, to the end to keep it
in, that thereby we may search after nothing, whether it be touching God,
nature, or our neighbors, but that which may profit us, and tends to our
edification, rejecting all unprofitable, impossible, and superfluous things,
about the knowledge whereof, we consume our bodies, mispende our time, and
loose our labors, all which should be carefully and diligently employed in the
study and apprechension of more commodious and more necessary matters. GOD
for his mercies sake, give us grace to make good and sound choice of them, and
when we have chosen, that we may apply ourselves thereto so constantly, that
nothing be able to turn and divert us from them.

THE SEVENTH BOOK. Of the tranquillity and contentation of the mind. AGAINST
FEAR. THE CONTENTS.
THough all the former passions and assections of the mind be very violent,
yet surely they would be nothing so forceable, were they separated from Fear,
which like a mighty tempest shakes and tosseth them most wonderfully: and
therefore the remedies which are already prescribed against Covetousness,
Ambition, Pleasure, and the other passions before mentioned, should be to small
purpose, and work little effect, if this disease likewise be not well looked
unto. Mark then what the author has discoursed of in this last book, which
is as it were a commentary of the former, and the very key to open the full
understanding of all the other: which being diligently considered, will
prevail very mightily to the pulling of our minds from these wordly
cogitations, and lift them up to heaven: that is to say, will make us feel the
fruition of desired rest, and assuredcontentation.

1 Now therefore to set down the principal points of this last book, which
(in my opinion) is the most excellent of all the other, and best worthy the
reading, especially in these latter days, wherein (which way soever we turn
our eyes, we may behold so many fearful and horrible pictures of death:) we
have in the first place a true and lively description of that which we call
Fear.

2 In the second place are described sundry sorts of fears, arising of the
consideration of wordly things, and of this present life, with the remedies
meet and convenient for them. And in this rank are those which follow.

1 The fear of poverty. The remedies whereof, are the promises of God, his
unchangeable truth, his power and providence, his exceeding bounty, his free
election, and the hope of our faluation.

2 The fear we have to lose the honors and promotions of this world: with the
remedies thereof.

3 The fear we have to lose our bodily pleasures: with the remedies thereof.

4 The fear we have least we should lose our friends: with the remedies
thereof.

5 The fear of the labors and pains of our bodies in our vocations and
callings: with the remedies thereof.

6 The fear of afflictions: with the remedies thereof.

7 The fear of some natural deformity: with the remedies thereof.

8 The fear of some accident all and casual deformity: with the remedies
thereof.

9 The fear of captivity: with the remedies thereof.

10 The fear of diseases: with the remedies thereof.

11 The fear of old age: with the remedies thereof.

12 Having set down most excellent and wholesome preservatiues against these
eleven former fears, and valiantly repulsed the first onset of these
Vauntcurriours: he enters into the consideration of the dreadful fear of
death, setting down most notableremedies against it. Whereupon he discourses
of violent deaths, and shows the remedies against the fear of them:
especially by the examples of former Christians, who have endured any pains to
maintain the truth. Which is handled and furnished with sound reasons, and
enriched with goodly examples, and many authentical testimonies. As also in
general disputing against this fear of death, he sets forth this earthly
life in her colors, and that so lively, that there is noman so earthly, but
must needs be greatly moved with the consideration and reading thereof.

3 In the third place, he enters into the examination of the fear and dread
we have of spiritual things: that is to say,

1 Of the judgment of God.

2 Of eternal death.

3 Of the devils.

4 Of sin.

Then follows the remedies against the apprehension of the wrath and anger of
God, of the fear of death, of the devils, of sin, and the pricks and
stinges of the conscience.

4 Fourthly, he answers unto certain temptations, grounded upon the
consideration of our sins.

1 Against the temptation proceeding of the great number of our sins.

2 Against the temptation proceeding of the enormitie of our sins.

3 Against the temptation proceeding of the continuance of our sins.

4 Against the temptation proceeding of the distrust of the mercy and favor
of God, and of the opinion that some have, that he will require of his children
a perfect inherent righteousness. Whereupon very fitly he teaches us, what we
must do to please God: wherein consists the righteousness and perfection of
Christians: of the obedience we owe unto God: why after our regeneration, we
feel somany infirmities and rebellious motions against God.

5 Against the temptation proceeding of the horror of the latter day of
judgment.

6 Against the temptation proceeding of the consideration of unlooked for and
extraordinarte miseries: whereby we imagine the irreconciliable wrath of God
toward us.

7 Against the temptation proceeding of the comparison we make between us and
the holy men of former times.

8 Against the temptation proceeding of the consideration of the great wants,
which are in us.

5 In the end, he makes a short summary of that which is contained in these
seven books, and shows us how to make profit of these discourses, and ends
the whole work with a godly and zealous prayer.

THE SEVENTH BOOK. AGAINST FEAR.
Covetousness makes us fear poverty, Ambition causes us to dislike
disgraces and indignities, and Pleasure indeauoureth to persuade us to avoid
all pains and labor whatsoever. Whereby we may easily gather, that the former
passions are engendered by fear, whichis the last noisome humor whereof we
purpose to speak in this book. And for that I first made it for mine own
particular use, and for the benefit of some others, who are well affectioned to
the true service and worship of God, I purpose to handle it far differing
from the manner of the Philosophers writings, and heathenish discourses: for
they have disputed of nothing in their treatises, but of the fear, which we
may have of external and accidental chances: never mentioning those dreadful
and horrible torments of the conscience, which is astonished and dismayed with
the consideration of the wrath and judgments of God, for that it sees it
self clothed with so many grievous and monstrous sins. And for that it is a
thing very material and worth the handling, it requires somewhat a long
discourse, and to be carefully and pithily penned.

Now the better to understand what this fear is, whereof we purpose to
entreat, it is convenient that we begin with the definition thereof. This
fear, therefore, is a kind of passionate humor, The definition of fear.
and hearty sorrow, caused and engendered by reason of some imminent danger,
from which we know not how to be delivered, whenever it happens. And for
that there are diverse kinds of evils, some external and some internal, some
corporal and some spiritual; therefore a lso it follows that there are
diverse kinds of fears: which by the grace of God we purpose to handle in
order: I mean the most apparent of them. For it were an infinite labor to
entreat of them all in particular manner.

To enter then into the consideration of such evils as are external, and may
casually happen unto us, Remedies against the fe are of poverty.
the principal and the most usual among them, are the loss of riches, of
honor, of our friends, and of our pleasures and delights. As touching the
fear of the loss of our wealth and riches, we must first consider the
promises of God: that is to say, that in hearing his word, and in obeying his
will, our fields, our vineyards, our fruit, our trees, our garners, our
storehouses, The promises of God.
all our cattle and whatsoever we have shall be blessed: that he will give us
sufficient store of food in time of famine, that we shall be always able to
live of that which we have; and that in seeking his kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, all other things shall be plentifully provided. And in
propounding thus unto our selves his promises, we must also consider (the
better to assure us) the immutable and unchangeable verity of him that has
made them: His immutable truth.
and withal the wonderful and exceeding power of his word, not only in the
creation of all things of nothing, His power and providence.
but also in the conservation and maintaining of them afterward, and we may
see apparently by daily experience, in the heavens and other elements, which
even from the first creation have been always preserved in their estate by the
power and might of his divine word, without any amending or reparations. Who
then is there then that may justly fear poverty, though he has no other help
but this? Is it possible that he should abandon his children, that provides so
sufficiently for the fowls of the air, and for the smallest creatures of the
earth: seeing he has given us bodies, shall he not also give us clothes and
competent food for their nourishment? His exceeding bounty.
and furthermore, if he has (even then when we were his enemies) set open the
gates of his king dom for us, and the better to guide us the way, has given us
his Gospel, his Son, his holy spirit, and his grace, which are such
precious and immortal gifts, will he (now that we are reconciled unto him, and
made his friends) deny us food that is corruptible, and such other temporal
and transitory things which are quickly consumed and wasted? If we believe
that he will raise up our bodies from death, and bring them from dust and
corruption, whereto they are subject by sin, to make them incorruptible and
immortal, shall we think that he will pull in his arm, or shut his hand, and
not give us sufficient sustenance for the preservation of this miserable life?
Is this the assurance we have that he will be our father, and shall we think that
he will be so careless toward his children, that having so great store and
abundance of all things, he will suffer us to die for hunger? and though we were
but his servants, yet should we do him too great injury to have this opinion of
him, that he would have us (being in his service) to complain for our food
and sustenance. In a word, if we would diligently consider with our selves, we
shall find, that among a thousand sundry benefits and blessings which he is
daily ready to bestow upon us, these are the smallest and the lest. And if (as
the scripture says) we be not faithful to trust in him for these small
matters, hardly shall we hope in him for such as are of greater importance. I
would dilate of this more at large, but that I have alleged sufficient reasons
before, which may serve to pull all doubtings out of our hearts, which are the
roots of this fear whereof we now speak. Secondly, the remedies against fear
of the loss of worldly honors.
As concerning worldly honor, we would never fear to lose it, if we were not
desirous of it: and we would never desire it, if we were not ambitious: neither
would we be ambitious if we did know our selves: and we should know our selves
if we did know God. Whereupon it en sueth, that all this great and exceeding
fear we have lest we should lose our worldly honors and promotions, The
knowledge of God and of our selves.
proceeds of nothing, but of the want of the knowledge of God, and of our
selves. And I pray you what is it that we are thus afraid of? surely it is
this, lest we should be too base and co^temptible. But God has chosen the weak
and conte^ptible things of this world, and takes greatest pleasure and delight
in them: True humility.
and all the glory of our flesh is as the flower of the field: all which (after
the example of S. Paul) we must account as dung, The deteslation of ambition.
so that we may gain Christ. Shall we not remember that our first father did
overthrow himself, and his whole house after him, for that he did ambitiously
covet that honor, which did only belong unto God? The consideration of the
first and second Adam, for to follow the one and eschew the other.
will we needs beingratefull, thieues, children, and followers of the devil,
and send as it were, a defiance unto God, and denounce war against him in
robbing him of that honor which is only due unto him? which then of the twain
will we follow: either Adam, who by his pride and ambition has undone and
destroyed us, or Christ Jesus who with his humility and patience, saves all
those, who put their confidence in him? I would to God we could remember the
saying of S. Augustine, who in speaking of Job and commending his humility and
patience unto us, says, Job sitting upon the dunghill full of botches and
sores, was notwithstanding more wise and wary then was Adam in paradise in the
midst of his so great pleasures and delights, that there seemed nothing to be
wanting, but only to be God. The one was seduced by the woman, and by her means
banished out of paradise: and the other to the end he might attain so great a
blessing (sitting upon the dunghill) vanquished both the woman and the devil.
We must continually pray unto God, that it would please him not to lead us into
temptation, but that he would deliver us from evil, and in the mean while we
scorn humility, and ambitiously seek for honor and promotion, which are the
readiest means the devil can use, and the fittest baits to catch us in his
snares. If then we will avoid his nets, we must not seek after the glory of
this life, but wholly contemn it, and rejoice when soeuerit shall please God
to humblews, and make us contemptible in the sight of the world. The
detestation of pride.
For as pride was the first vice that entered into our nature, for the
corruption and defacing of that image which was in us: so likewise is it the
last that comes out of us: and before we be wholly cleared thereof, we can not
attain unto our former perfection and integrity. Whereby we may evidently see
how necessary a thing it is to banish it far from us, and to cleanse our hearts
from so filthy a pollution: for although that we take this work in hand the
first day that we are borne, and continue therein all the days of our life,
yet will our work be very imperfect: for that it is so strong a poison, that
having once swallowed it, there will be no means so to rid us from the
infection thereof, what preservatives soever we take, but that there will be some
part of the disease remaining behind. The consideration of our vain glory.
But why do we not consider that faith debarreth us of al worldly glory: and
that therefore we must either lose the one or the other: either our glory, which
is altogether vain: or else if we will needs retain that still, we must renounce
our faith, and so consequently all the blessings that depend thereof: as the
justice of our God, life eternal and his inheritance, and generally all the
felicity and happiness that we hope to attain by his grace and adoption? we
fear and flee the cross as a very shameful and ignominious thing: and yet
there is nothing so glorious, as the Apostle says: so that that, which makes
us seek all means to avoid it, should indeed make us diligently to seek
after it, for that thereby we should find matter sufficient to satisfy our
ambitious humors and desires.

There is no greater reason why we should fear the loss of the pleasures and
ease of our bodies, Remedies against the fearewe have lest we should lose our
bodily pleasures.
then of our honors and promotions. For if we do steadfastly believe, that he
that hates this life, shall have life everlasting in the world to come, and
that we ought to bear in our bodies the mortification of our Lord Jesus, to
the end that his vivification may appear the more manifestly in us, Our
mortification.
if we do believe that the desires of our flesh brings death, and that the
love thereof is enmity against God, that it is not obedient unto his law, that
whosoever is ruled thereby, can not please God, that if we live after the lusts
thereof we shall surely die, and that if we will gain eternal life, we must
mortify the deeds of the flesh: our conformity with Christ Jesus.
if we do believe that to be the disciples of Christ Jesus, we must take up our
cross and lay it upon our shoulders: that we are dead and crucified unto the
world: that our conversation is in heaven: that our delight should be in the
law of the Lord, to meditate therein day and night: Our vocation, instification
and sanctification.
that we are the temples of the holy ghost, which by no means must be
polluted: that his holy spitit which is in us may not in any wise be grieved:
that we are the members of Christ Jesus, which must be kept clean and
unspotted: if (in a word) we believe, that the works of the flesh are
adulteries, whordoms, uncleanness, licentiousnes, idolatry, strife, envy,
murder, gluttony, and such like, and that whosoever commit such things shall
not inherit the kingdom of God: The deliverance from wicked pleasures, which
keep us in bondage and slavery.
we would not be so sore afraid, nor macerate our selves so much, when as we
shall be deprived of such hurtful pleasures, either by reason of our poverty,
imprisonment, sickness, old age, or any other means whatsoever. And if we
would diligently consider these and the like reasons, we would not be greatly
terrified, at the loss of these fleshly and worldly pleasures, seeing we
should easily perceive that this fear is builded upon a very weak foundation.
For what is it that we are so sore afraid of? Is it to be delivered from that
miferable servitude of pleasures and delights, which are the most furious,
cruel, and inexorable tyrants that are in all the world? or that the chains
and linkes (wherewith they have tied and bound us, as straightly as ever Dalila
did Samson, when as she would have delivered him into the hands of his
enemies) should be broken, The true freedom of the mind.
and both our bodies and minds set at liberty to go where they list? are we
afraid lest the eyes of our minds should be too bright, and therefore we must
needs encumber them with the obscurity of worldly thoughts, with care,
perplexity, sorrow, ielousy, distrust, sighs and sobbes the ordinary attendants
upon pleasure, to trouble the peace and quietness of our souls? are we
unwilling to open a passage for all good and honest cogitations to all holy
studies, to all wholesome instructions, all which the voluptuous sort do as
greatly loath and detest, as they abhor to live honestly and virtuously? It
seemerh if our doings be well considered, The strange misery of the voluptuous
sors.
that we are afraid lest we should be too wise, and lest with our pleasures we
should lose both folly and madness, and therefore had rather enjoy our brutish
delights, then the heavenly joys. Moreover I may truly say, that it seems we
do not love our own ease, seeing that we seek for it in pleasures, which are
indeed nothing else but a sweet and sugared poison. And commonly these carnal
and fleshly worldlings are very sad and melancholic persons, The joy and
exceeding contentation of such as have renounced the vanities of the world.
whereas contrariwise those that have relinquished such wicked delights, are
for the most part very merry and joyful: as may appear by the example of S.
Paul who speaking of himself, and of his other brethren and companions, says,
that though it may seem unto many that they were sad by reason they had
forsaken the pleasures of the world, and that either by their own accord, or
else by reason of persecution, they were deprived of those earthly delights,
which are so pleasing and acceptable to the flesh: yet notwithstanding they
were more joyful and much better contented then such as had the full fruition
of them. The corruption and blindness of man's understanding.
It is a strange thing and well worth the consideration, that we may know our
own misery and the great corruption of our judgment, to mark that as we
account of nothing, but that which the earth brings forth, nor of any honor
but that which is given unto us by flatterers and clawbacks, nor of any other
favor but such as may be procured from mortal men, neither yet of any other
life but this, which is most vvretched and miserable: so likewise are we
persuaded that there is no other pleasure but that which arises of the
satisfying of our lusts and desires. And hereof it comes to pass, that we
are afraid to lose things, which in the end will wholy destroy us: and
therefore the more earnestly we couetto enjoy the^, the further do we run and
flee from those things which we ought to follow and embrace: The love of God
can not be in our hearts, so long as we are delighted with worldly pleasures.
the fruition whereof brings assured joy and contentation. For even as the
affection which a wicked person bears to a stru^pet, does exceedingly
diminish the love which he should bear unto his lawful wife: so likewise the
love we bear to these vain and transitory things and especially unto pleasure
which is like unto an old and common whore, who draws us exceedingly from our
duties, and diminishes that zeal and affection we should bear toward our
spouse, and to those things which he commands us. Hereby we may easily
conjecture what great cause there is why men should seek for such pleasures as
are absent, or love such as are present, or to be sorrowful for the loss of
these worldly delights. I would prosecute this matter more at large but the
reader may easily gather the remainder out of that discourse which we have
written against pleasure.

As touching the loss of our friends, The remedies for the fearewe have lest
we should lose our friends. 1. If they be good we can not lose them
which is the last, and that which we are most afraid of: that we may the
better comfort our selves whensoever they die, and be delivered from the fear
we have of the^ while they are alive; we must consider that they are either
good or evil. If they be evil it is not possible they should be good friends.
If they be good, they cannot be lost: so that then we shall have no just
occasion to fear or to complain. For as there can not happen a greater
mischief then to trust a deceitful and disloyal friend: so likewise there is
no greater profit and commodity, then the loss of such an untrusty companion,
as all the world will confess. But if we have had great familiarity with any
one a long time, If we love any man for our own particular or any other worldly
respect, the fear that we conceive lest we should lose such a one is naught
and wicked.
and have made trial of his fidelity and sincerity toward us: have we not
just cause (will some say) to fear least he should die, or being dead to
mourn and lament for him? My friend, whosoever thou art that makes this
answer, I would demand of thee, whether it be in regard of thy self, or of
him, that thou art afraid to lose him while he lives, and lamentest so greatly
when he is dead. If in this, thou respectest no man but thy self, that is to
say, the pleasure and delight thou did take in his company, and the profit
thou did reap by him: I say, that thy fear and forow do not proceed of any
love thou did bear unto him, but of the affection and love toward thy
self, which for the most part is naught and full of corruption, and especially
when it propounds unto us nothing but worldly promotions, transitory honors,
and temporal pleasures and delights, all which if we be dead unto the world,
we would neither desire nor wish for for. We are persuaded peradventure, that
if we should not make such show of fear and sorrow, it would be thought we did
not love our friends: and shall we not consider on the other side, that some
peradventure will think we make but a counterfeit show, It is better to follow
our friends then to be desirous to bring the^ back to us.
and that others will think it is but a carnal and worldly affection we bear
toward our selves? wherein surely they are not greatly deceived: for it is
most certain, that if we loved our friends as well as we love our selves, we
would rather desire to follow them then to be desirous to bring them back unto
us: and when as they are gone, to make all the have that may be to follow
after. This exceeding fear we have of the loss of our friends, is an evident
sign not only of the great affection we bear toward our selves, but also of
the small love we bear toward God. For if we did love him as we ought to do,
The will of God according to whose pleasure we must conform our selves, ought
to take away this grief from us. A very apt and fit similitude.
with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our strength. This love
would raze out the other, and make us wholly forget it, and it would so rule
all our affections, that we should love nothing but that which likes him. We
see that the love of the husband toward his wife, and of the wife toward
her husband increases more and more, and that in such sort, that after they be
once married, they forget all other things, and study by all means to augment
their affection, and are content to leave both father and mother, to the end
they may dwell the one with the other. And if peradventure they fall into any
adversity, the exceeding great affection they bear the one toward the other,
does make them to bear and tolerate it most patiently: as Moses reports in
the example of Isaac, who after that he once began to love Rebecca, presently
began to be comforted, and to leave sorovving for his mother Sara. In a word,
when as a vvoma^ does once perfectly love her husband, though she see all her
friends die before her face, yet she vvil be soon reco^forted when as she
co^sidereth her husband is remaining and in health. If then we did bear the
like affection tovvard our God, no doubt but we should be fully tra^sformed
into a liking of him, and our hearts so wholly bent toward him, that we would
think of nothing else. And seeing that contrary unto the nature of all other
mortal creatures, he is always immutable and unchangeable, The immutable will
of God in the love be bears toward us.
and therefore if we persevere in his fear, we shall never be deprived of his
comfortable presence: shall we not think that this, with the consideration of
our love above mentioned, shall be sufficient to make us rest contented not
only in the loss of our fathers, our mothers, our children, and other our
friends and acquaintance, whenever they die, His bounty and promises.
but also in all other afflictions whatsoever? besides that the fear (whereof
we nowspeake) is an evident token of the small affection we bear toward God,
it is a very manifest argument also of the distrust we have in his promises,
which if they were well imprinted in our hearts, would make us quiely rely upon
him, and would wholly deliver us from all those vanities, which do so
wonderfully disquiet us. For if we would commit unto him the custody of our
bodies, our souls, our lives, and whatsoever we have else, and rest assured
that nothing perishes that is committed into his hands: why should we not
trust him with the keeping of our friends? is it not sufficient for us, that he
has given us his word, wherewith he has assured us to take us into his
protection, and has bound himself so to bless us, that nothing shall happen
unto us, but that which shall be for our profit? If this be true, as indeed it is
most certain, what should we fear either in regard of our selves, or our
children, or friends or wealth and riches which are as well taken into his
custody, as we our selves, and for our sakes comprised and comprehended
within his favor and protection? seeing that in the beginning it has pleased
him to give us the knowledge of our friends, and by his grace and favor has
inclined them unto that friendship and amity, vvherof we have had trial and
experience by conuersing with them, which is the special occasion that we do
so greatly lament them after their death, I would know if that herein he has
not shevved us special grace and favor? or what reason is there, why we
should think that he will diminish his love toward us, when as he has
taken them away? seeing that he is alvvaies our god, whether he does
impouerish or enrich us, exalt or debase us, wound us or heal us, threaten us
or smile upon us. If any will say that we have offended him, and that by reason
of our sins, we have deserved that our friends should be taken away from us,
I likewise demand, The loss of our friends ought not to make us think that
God has rejected us.
if at such time as he gave them us, we were more holy and more worthy then now
we are: and that in respect hereof he were bound to do us so great a
pleasure, and if that his anger (which is most fatherly and mild, tending only
to this end, to make us remember and acknowledge our faults, and favorably to
correct those imperfections that are in us) be not as much or more necessary
sometime, as his love and favor, whereby (as indeed we are wonderfully
corrupt) we are imboldened rather to work wickedness and to forget his loving
kindness, then to amend our lives, and to serve him in truth and sincerity? If
then, Whatsoever God does it is for our good.
he does always show himself a most loving and kind father toward us,
giving us friends and taking them away from us, according unto his good
pleasure; why do we rather complain of the one then of the other? why do we
not with David always praise his holy name? and say with Job, God sometime
gives me great comfort by my friends, and now it pleases him to take it away
from me, that which he does is very just and righteous, his name therefore be
praised in all things. For although he often changes and alters our estate
and condition, yet is he always the same, and like unto himself, that is to
say, both in prosperity and adversity, what countenance soever he seems to
show outwardly, yet inwardly he carries the same affection toward us. We
loose nothing so long as God remains with us.
Though that he take away our goods, our parents, our children, our friends,
our servants, our health, our quietness, our lives, fire and water, yea and
the earth to, yet there will be some thing remaining, seeing he is the
inalienable possession of his Church, and of all such as repose their
confidence in him: and so long as he remains with us, we shall never want
either friends, riches, favor, pleasure or power: for all these are
comprehended in him alone. We can not be unhappy, Psalm. 33.12. and 144.15. 1.
Sam. 1.8, 10.
for blessed is that nation whose God is the Lord, as the Prophet says, we
have then no just cause to complain: for misery is the occasion of complaints.
Elcana seeing Hanna his wife mourn, and lament, for that she had no children,
said to comfort her withal, Hanna why weepest thou? God is sufficient for us:
and nothing suffices without him.
and wherefore is thy heart sorrowful? am not I better unto thee then ten
sons? In like manner, when we loose all, and that we have nothing left but God
alone, we ought to consider (the better to comfort us withal) that he is
better unto us, then all other things whatsoever, and that in enjoying of him
we have as many friends, kinsfolks and acquaintance, as much riches, glory
and honor, It is against reason that we should prefer that which is mortal
and transitory, before the company of God and his angels.
and all other good things whatsoever as we can desire. If there were such a
gentleman in this land, as would not be content to live in the favor and
presence of his prince, and in the friendship and amity of the great and noble
lords of his court, would not every one judge him a very proud and arrogant
fellow? In like manner do we show our selves too hauty and high minded, when as
being not content to live in the company of God and his angels, we seek to
associate our selves with base and beggarly companions. And such are all our
mortal and mutable friends, of whom we make such great reckning and account.
With the consideration whereof we may comfort our selves as did Abraham, when
he should have sacrificed his son Isaac according to the commandment of God.
God may restore our friends unto us again, or else may give us new which
shall be better then the old.
And we may be well quieted, considering he may raise and restore them again,
as well as he did Lazarus, the widows son, and the daughter of the ruler of
the synagogue: or else give us new, which shall be as faithful and as
affectionate as the old. For the hand of the Lord is not shortened (as Esaias
says) that he should not be able to save us, neither is his ear so stopped,
that he can not hear our cries and complaints. Let us not think then that we
shall be without friends. For (as one of the old writers says, and that very
wisely) God has so desposed of us in this world, that as one the one side we
have friends for our comfort, so on the other side we have enemies for to
exercise us and to bridle our affections: and contrariwise that as we have
enemies who study continually to pick quarrels against us, The great number of
our enemies, bewraieth our imperfections, and teaches also rightly to use our
friends.
so we are never destitute of friends, who seek by all means to support and
uphold us. It is very true, that the one sort is more common then the other: by
reason that the nature of carnal men is more inclined to hatred and harm,
then to love and the seeking of one another benefit and commodity: and often
times through our ingratitude, we either lose or alienate our friends from us,
and procure us many enemies by reason of our offenses: and many times likewise,
God takes them from us, lest through the continual company of them, we should
be so affectionate toward them, that we forget the love and zeal we ought to
bear toward him. And we should consider, that as friends are precious
treasures, so are they very scarce and thin sown. Moreover one sincere and
entire friend, such an one as it pleases God to give unto those, who trust in
him, is more forceable and available to comfort us, then ten enemies to grieve
and vex us. Let us never be afraid least we shall want friends so long as we
trust in God: seeing that if men will not pleasure us, the brute beasts will
seek to aid us: as may appear by many examples. Luke 16.21.
And this is the reason (will some say) that makes us so greatly to fear the
loss of them, seeing that among men, who naturally are treacherous, malicious,
and deceitful, it is so hard and difficult a matter to find a true and
^rustie friend. Whereto I answer, that if our brethren will refuse to help
us, strangers and alians will be our friends: as appears by the example of
Joseph, David, and Daniell, who being hated and persecuted of their own
friends, found great favor and comfort at the hands of strangers and
infidels. If all men would band together against us, yet the beasts would join
with us, and seek to support and sustain us: As it is recorded of the rich
man's dogs, who being more full of pity and compassion then their master,
licked poor Lazarus sores, seeking thereby to ease his griefs, and to assuage
his sorrows: And likewise the Ravens, who nourished, and fed the Prophet
Elias, 1. Kin. 17.6.
when he was persecuted and hated of all men: And also of the bears, who
devoured forty and two children of Bethel to revenge the wrong, which they
offered unto Elizeus: as also the Lions, Look the ecclesiastical histories.
who spared Daniel in the cave: and those fierce and sauadge beasts, who being
brought forth to devour the martyrs, would not hurt them or come near them.
And of the swine, who so reverenced them, that they would in no wise touch
their bodies, though the cruel tyrants, to the end to procure them to eat
their bodies, had caused their bellies to be stopped full of corn: And
likewise of the Hearts and Goats, who did voluntarily offer themselves unto
Saint Basils parents, to be taken and killed at such time as they, fleeing the
persecution, were constrained to retire themselves into the forests of
Cappadocia, and there to remain in great misery and distress the space of 7
years: And of the Whale, who put Jonas into his belly, as into a place of
liberty, to preserve him from the violence of the waters, and to save him from
drowning: And the fish, which brought Peter money to pay tribute for him self
and his master. If men and beasts should forsake us, The sensles creatures will
endeavor to help such as trust in God. Exodus 14.21.
the senseless creatures would aid us, as experience has taught us. The sea
parted in sunder to make a passage for the children of Israel and overwhelmed
their enemies who pursued them to bring them back into slavery and bondage.
The heavens rained down great hailestones upon the Amorites, who were
assembled against his people, Josh. 10.11. Josh. 10.12.
and their leader and captain Joshua. The Sun and the Moon stood still in
Gibeon and Aialon, for to favor and further their victory, and to take away
all hope from there enemies, 2 Kin. 2.11.
to escape and save themselves by flight. The fire served Elias to destroy his
eneinies, and to carry him into heaven: and likewise to the three young men that
were in captivity in Babylon for their deliverance, and freedom. The winds
seemed as it were, to go to the wars in the favor of Theodosius, and like
valiant bands of courageous soldiers assailed his enemies, and by their
violence brake their array, If we have no friends in the world, we shall have
the angels in heaven and Christ Jesus for our comforters.
and gained him the victory. If neither men, nor yet these earthly and
terrestrial things, will be our friends, the angels in heaven will be ready
to wait on us for our good, as they did upon Abraham, Jacob, Joshua, Ezechias,
Tobit, and S, Peter: and if they will not, Christ Jesus our head (between
whom and us there is a perpetual alliance, and an inviolable amity) can not
possibly deceive us, seeing he has been so loving and affectionate toward us
already that he has been content to die for us. And if so be then, we repose
our confidence in him, we shall easily pass over all other dangers and perils
whatsoever. We shall not need then to fear, Besides the former remedies he
shows, that to torment our selves over much for the death of our friends,
argues ignorance, which is also joined with infidelity and despair.
that so long as we are in the favor of God, we shall want friends: seeing
that all his creatures shall be ready to vvait and attend upon us, for our
pleasure and commodity. I do not mean, that they shall seek to make us laugh,
and to fill us with sport and pastime, but that they shall be continually
attendant upon us for our vvelfare, and be ready to succor us whensoever we
stand in need.

Hitherto we have proved, that this greatfeare which we have of the loss
of our friends, is a manifest argument of our infidelity and distrust in Gods
promises, and argues very manifestly the vain and foolish conceits of our
minds. For if it be a natural and an inevitable thing, that our friends being
mortal men, must needs dye and depart from us, why do we conceive of it as
though it were casual, and might by some means be eschewed, seeing that
there is no more reason, why we should fear those things that may in no wise
be avoided, then to hope for such things as may not possibly be obtained: and
hereby also we make our selves altogether unfit to present our petitions unto
the Almighty for them. Chap. 1.7.
For as Saint James says, where there are such doubts and staggerings there
can be no faith: without the which, neither we our selves, nor our prayers can
be acceptable in his sight. And I can not tell whether our distrust and
infidelity be an occasion to moove him to take away our friends, and thereby
to punish and afflict us. Let us conclude then, that we ought not to fear the
loss of our friends, neither in respect of them, nor of our selves. For if
our fear proceed of the consideration of some dangers like to ensue
afterward, what harm can there be in death? shall not their bodies return
to the earth, and there rest in assured hope to be raised up at the latter day,
and their souls into heaven, unto him who first gave them? If it be so, and
that by this means the one be delivered from labor, from sickness, from
poverty and old age, and the other from a thousand sorrows, griefs, cares,
and vexations whereto it was subject, to rest in peace and quietness for ever,
and to enjoy an everlasting happiness and felicity, why should we be afraid
least they should dye? or lament so greatly when as they are dead?

Let us suppose that our friends were in Abraham's bosom with Lazarus, We
ought also to consider the happy exchange that they make, which will be a great
means to assuage our sorrows.
rejoicing and making merry in the midst among all the godly old Fathers:
or in Salomons Court hearing his great and excellent wisdom, beholding his
glory, and the magnificence of his house: or in that terrestrial Paradise
with Adam and Eve, and in full fruition of all the pleasures and profits that
were there; participating of the pleasant fruits, sweet savours, and
beautiful walks; receiving, as it were, the hommage and allegiance of the
wild beasts, who come in all humility to acknowledge them for their
sovereign lords: or at the table of the King with their marriage garments,
drinking of the cup of immortality, and hearing of the melodious harmony of
Angels: or in the Temple of Sion glittering with gold and precious stones, and
resounding with the praises and acclamations of the people, in telling and
showing forth the wonderful goodness of God: or in the mountain with Peter,
and to be ravished with the exceeding pleasure in viewing the glittering
brightness both of the face and garments of Christ Jesus: or in a most
glorious and beautiful palace, beholding all the rare and exquisite things,
which appear in every part and corner thereof, fully enjoying all those
pleasures, which have been most excelle^tly painted out and described by
others. I would know if our friends were in such estate and condition, as is
before mentioned, whether we should have any occasion to lament and bewail
their deaths? If then after their departure they be better then we can
imagine, and yet we will needs be sorry for them, it can not be in regard of
any love we bare toward them, or for any fear we have, least they should not
be at their rest and quietness.

Who has heard at any time, that those who have dyed in the faith of Christ
Jesus, Those that dye well, and be once in heaven, never desire to return to
the earth aagaine.
ever complained, or were not content with their estate and condition? or were
sorry that they had left the pleasures, riches, and friends, which they had in
this world? or that they preferred them before the joys of heaven, and
therefore sought to return again into the earth? We have read of many, who
are departed out of this world full of days (as the Scripture says) and who,
notwithstanding the ease and pleasure which they enjoyed here, did
nevertheless fervently desire to be gone, and to be delivered from hence:
but on the contrary, we never heard of any that were desirous to shun the
life to come: or that with any continuance of time could be satisfied, or
ever set his mind upon any better thing, or desired to change his joy and
pleasure? And there is one principal mark, whereby we may know the
difference which is in the pleasures of either life: For that there is no
comparison between terrestrial and celestial pleasures.
and that is, that though in this life there be an innumerable sort of
pleasures, yet there is none so agreeable to our humors, but that at length
we are weary of them, and find a kind of bitterness in them, which wholly
displeases our taste: but in the other there is an everlasting and continual
delight. Seeing then that we can pleasure them with no better thing, nor wish
for any joy but such as they have the full fruition of, after their deaths, I
may well conclude, that it is a very vain thing for us, either in respect of
them, or in regard of our selves to fear, least they should die: and that
among all the external and outward accidents which may happen unto a faithful
man, there is not one which should fear or discourage him.

For the better understanding here of, remedy; against the fear of the
travail and labor of our bodies in our vocations and callings.
it is requisite that we discourse in like manner of other fears and terrors,
which may happen unto us. That which we are most afraid of in our bodies, is
either labor, deformity, imprisonment, diseases, old age, or death. Under
labor I comprehend the travel, pains, and afflictions which men through zeal,
or malice do either justly or injustly procure us. As touching travel, we
ought neither to fly it, nor to fear it. For this is a thing ordained of God,
and decreed by him, It is ordained of God.
that every man should participate thereof: and is no less profitable for the
health of our bodies and souls, then idleness is hurtful and incommodious
both for the one and the other. Were not this a goodly fear, to be afraid to
walk in the general vocation of all creatures? and that which is more, to
follow the example of our heavenly Father, and of his Son Christ Jesus our
Savior: God and all his creatures may serve us for an example
both which have been continually occupied even from the beginning until this
day? Or what makes us so griedily to hunt after riches? is it not that we are
persuaded that by this means we shall live at our pleasure and ease, without
doing of any thing? though that indeed this should be the principal reason,
Jdlenes is the worst vice of all others.
that should make us be afraid of them. Contrariwise we do not abhor
poverty, but only because we are afraid, least we should be compelled
thereby to travail and take pains: though that for this cause it should
seem the more tolerable. Thus we may see how disordered and unruly our
nature is in every thing. For if we did rightly consider the matter, we ought
not so greatly to fear beggerie as Idleness, nor to affect riches more then
labor and pains taking. I purpose not to speak further hereof at this
present: for that I have discoursed of it already in another place. Remedies
against afflictions.


As concerning afflictions, it is not possible to avoid them: and therefore we
ought not to fear them more then we do the labor and travail of the body:
They can not be avoy ded.
for it were a vain thing to fear that which we can not avoyde, and to
study to eschew that way wherein we are compelled to walk. Now it is most
certain, and a thing long since resolved upon, that we must enter into the
kingdom of heaven by a very narrow and straight passage: that is, Acts. 14.
2. Tim 2.
(as Saint Paul says) by many tribulations: why do we not rather seek then
valiantly and constantly to bear and endure them, then foolishly and cowardly
to avoyde them? Do we think that the devil, between whom and the seed of
the woman there shall be continual hatred, may be reconciled and be in peace
and amity with us? Shall we be persuaded, that God will permit his Church to
live as it lists, They are necessary.
and give liberty to his children to live at their pleasure? or that he will
at any time cease his corrections, whereby he makes us to understand his
wrathful displeasure against sin, and to feel our own wantes and
imperfections? what repentance, faith, and humility should we have? what
confession of our sins, or prayers for forgiveness would there be in the
Church, if we were not exercised with crosses and afflictions? Examples.
Would David, Manasses, Nebuchadnezzar, and the people in the captivity of
Babylon, ever have so earnestly besought the Lord to turn unto them, and in
pity and compassion to look upon them, if they had not bin compelled thereto,
by the miseries and calamities whereinto they were fallen by reason of their
sins? and what would become of our rebellious flesh, if the concupiscences
thereof were not continually mortified with torments and vexations? Moreover,
They are profitable.
is it not convenient, that (according unto the eternal purpose of God) all
such (whom he has elected) should be conformable unto the image of his Son,
to the end that before they have part of his glory, they should also be
partakers of his death and passion? and seeing that all our sufferinges in this
world serve to no other end, but to the manifestation of Gods glory, and to
make his bounty and mighty power more manifest or evident: or to confirm the
truth of that doctrine which we believe, and to sow, as it were, the field of
the Gospel of our Lord and Savior: They are honorable.
or else to discover the malice of the devil and the world, and the great
hatred that both of them bear unto Christ Jesus and to his Church: or to fight
against the power kingdom of darkness: or to make us meditate of those
things that are above, and to lift up our minds from the earth toward heaven,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God the father: or to withdraw us
from the love of this miserable life, and to make us altogether seek after
God: Seeing (I say) that all adversities and miseries whatsoever, tend to one
of these ends, shall not this be sufficient to cleanse us from this fear and
dread, and make us ready joyfully to suffer whatsoever it shall please God to
lay upon us? and that which is more, we are assured by his word, They are
pleasant, and accompanied with unspeakable joys.
that he will be with us in the midst of our tribulations, to aid and
strengthen us, and by comforting us inwardly by his spirit, to assuage the
bitterness and grievous vexations which might happen to our souls: and that
what rigor and severitie soever he shows, yet he always retains a
fatherly affection toward us: and although our sufferings be very short and of
small continuance, yet notwithstanding they bring us an everlasting glory: and
though our temptations do not exceed the power he has given us to resist
them, yet they purge and cleanse us, They are testimonies of our salvation.
as fire purifieth and tries the gold in the furnace. If we would further
consider, that afflictions are evident tokens of the favor of God toward us,
that they are common to us with all the true children of God, and that they are
the means to bring us to the kingdom of heaven, which is the end and
uttermost bounds of our hope: we must then of necessity infer one of these
two; that either in believing we shall not be afraid of afflictions; or if we
do fear them, it is by reason of our unbelief and incredulity. And who is
there, that is not persuaded that it proceeds of this, (as one says) that we
are counterfaite gold, and therefore that we fear the touch stone: and that if
we had builded upon the foundation which is Christ, gold, silver, and precious
stones, we should never be afraid least our works should be manifested in
the day of the Lord? A good conscience never fears afflictions.
but being persuaded in conscience that we build with straw and stubble, we
can not choose but be timorous and wonderfully afraid to come near the fire,
least there should be any trial made of our works, or that our faith should
melt away in temptation as wax against the Sun, and thereby make it
manifest, that it was a false and a counterfaite belief. And therefore it is a
very clear case, that all this great and exceeding fear, whether it be of
any danger like to fall upon us, or of any torment or vexation like to happen
to us, proceeds of nothing, but of the sting of a guilty conscience, and the
weakness of a feeble faith. Sundry comparisons sit for this purpose.
Does the house that is builded upon a rock, fear least the rain or hayle
should fall upon it, or that the winds should blow, or the waves beat
against it? Does the medowe or the field which has sufficient moisture,
fear the drought and heat of summer? Shall the tree that is planted by the
water side, fear least his leaves should wither? Or the pot which is well and
workemanlike made, least it should be put into the furnace, seeing that this
is most requisite and necessary to harden and strengthen it, and thereby to
make it more lasting and of greater continuance? Tribulations likewise are
very necessary for the exercise of the godly: Romans 5.3.
and when as we consider with Saint Paul, that they bring forth patience; and
patience experience; and experience hope, which is not ashamed, because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given
unto us: we ought not only to be free from fear, but to rejoice and to be
exceeding glad. We do very willingly take that physic, They choke and
strangle our sins.
which we suppose will take away corporal diseases from us, though that the
operation be very uncertain, and that we be deceived oftentimes by reason it
works so small effect. How then can we excuse our selves, when as we are
afraid of those afflictions, Without them we are in danger to rotle in our
iuiquities.
which it pleases God (the most excellent and skillful Physician that ever
was) to lay upon us; though that we be uncertain when they shall be taken from
us; seeing they can not be but very wholesome for so many, as will undergo
them willingly and of their own accord. We oftentimes seek for surgeons at
home in their houses to launch, sear, yea and to cut off the putrifyed members
of our bodies: we are content they should bind and tie us, to the end they
may dress us at their pleasure: we suffer all things patiently, and besides
our hartiest thanks, we are content to recompense them for their pains.
Wherefore then are we afraid to commit our selves into the hands of our God?
Is it, because he is more rigorous, or of less experience and skill, less
careful, or that he asks more for his pains, or for that the diseases of
the soul are less dangerous then those of the body? what shall we answer
hereto? If we will speak the truth, we must frankely and freely confess,
that the principal occasion hereof is this, that on the one side we do not
fully know the frowardness and rebellious nature of our flesh, They are
doubted of, but of infidels and miscreants.
neither the necessity we have to mortify and subdue it: and on the other
side, that we put not such affiance and trust in Gods promises, as we do in
other his creatures: neither do we believe that the afflictions and
adversities which he sends, are for to correct, admonish, and scourge us: as
well as his blessings are to comfort, to strengthen, and encourage us. For if
we were well persuaded of this, that God, what countenance soever he shows
toward us, yet notwithstanding always bears the like love and affection to
his children, and that all his counsels and actions tend to our profit and
commodity, as well when he wounds us, as when he heals us, we would as
willingly receive his blows as his blessings: or at the least this persuasion
would half diminish the fear we have of his rods and corrections: He which
abhors them shall perish with the world.
or if we did know the value of the joys and pleasures of this world, and on
the contrary the austeritie and rigor of God toward his children, we would
seek diligently to embrace the one, and study carefully to avoid the other.
But as we see by experience that it is a very difficult thing among men, to
know a true friend from a feigned flatterer: so likewise without the spirit of
understanding, and that God by his especial grace and favor vouchsafe to open
our eyes, it is impossible that ever we should know the loyalty and
synceritie of his love, and that we be not abused by the deceitful show of
the world, and being once seduced, that we desire not rather to be drawn by
the smyling countenance and entising show thereof, Those which seek to
eschew them, think scorn to be the scholars of Christ Jesus, and so they
perish in impiety and ignorance
then to be rebuked thereby for our affection and zeal toward our God. We
see that among scholars such as are idle and dull of understanding, are
continually afraid least their masters should hear them their lessons, and
thereby find and try out their sluggishnesse and doultish ignorance; whereas
on the contrary, such as are paynefull and ingenious, desire nothing more,
then to be often examined: and there is neither sear nor dread that will make
them give over their books. In like manner, that which makes us fear the
afflictions and crosses of this world, which are the schools and discipline
of the Lord, is, for that we are very unwilling to take any pains. For if we
were desirous to know how greatly God detesteth sin, what that repentance
and confession is, which we ought to make in the Church; and generally, what
mortification the frailety of this life, and the vanity of all things in this
world are, and how for this cause we ought to withdraw our hearts from such
transitory things, and apply our selves thoroughly to the searching and finding
out of that which is stable and permanent; to turn wholly unto God; to trust
in him; to offer our prayers unto him, with many other principal points of
our religion, which will never be thoroughly imprinted in our memories, until
by the motion of the holy Ghost they be often remembered in afflictions, we
would not so abhor and detest them as we do: but by reason that we have
guilty consciences, and are privy to our small and weak faith, and for that
we have wickedly bestowed our times heretofore, and mind not to amend
hereafter, this makes us become trewantes and runners away from the school,
and to come to our trial as seldom as may be, fearing least that should be
discovered, which we would gladly keep secret, and that our vizarde being
once taken away, our hypocrisy should be laid open to all the world:
whereby it may easily be conjectured, whether it be the wisdom or the folly
of our hearts, which makes us so carefully to avoyde afflictions. If we were
well persuaded of that which is already spoken, as well of the assistance of
our God to enable us to bear all adversities; as of his promises, whereby he
has bound him self to deliver us from all perils and dangers whatsoever,
this vain and foolish fear would soon cease and come to an end. Whether
then we consider the necessity of them, or the cause whereof they proceed, or
the profit and commodity which does ensue of them, or the end whereto they
are referred, there is no reason why we should abhor them, or seek any
means to avoid and eschew them. And thus much concerning the travail of the
body.

Let us now come to deformity, which is either natural or casual. If it be
natural, we can not possibly avoyde it, and then by consequent we ought not
to fear it, neither should we be sorry for it, if we would consider these
four things. First, It lies not in our power to amend it.
that it lies not in our power to amend it. For who is there that being borne
with one eye, crooked, lame, or stark blind, that is able to amend his
imperfection? Secondly, that God has the the same power and authority over
us, that the potter has over the clay, to frame and fashion us, some to
honor, and some to dishonor, as shall seem best unto him, and yet there is
no reason why we should complain or be grieved thereat: We must be content
with those gracei it pleases God to bestow upon us.
and according to the example of the foot, which is not discontented though it
be not framed in such dignity as the hand, the eye, and the other members: so
likewise must we be contented with such graces and gifts, as it has pleased
God to impart unto us. Finally, we have deserved, by reason of our manifold
sins, to be as deformed in all parts of our bodies, We have deserved worse,
by reason of our sins. A certain mo^ster which had 3. heads, one like a
lion, an other like a goat, and the third like a dragon.
as we are corrupt in the several faculties of our minds. And if therefore we
were made like unto an other Chimera, or any other prodigious monster; whom
should we blame therefore, but our selves, who have deserved thorough our
ungratefulness toward God, to bear the marks and skarres thereof in our
bodies, all the days of our life? What had the serpent done, more then we;
that he should be so suddenly transformed from a beautiful shape, into the
most hideous and ougly monster of all other? Who has not offended as
grievously, as Lots wife, which was turned in to a pillar of salt? or
Nebuchadnezzar, who was driven from the company of men, to dwell with the
beasts in the fields, to feed as an ox, and to be wet with the dew of
heaven, until that his hair was like unto Eagles feathers, and his nails
unto birds claws, being wholly altered from the fashion of a man; knowing no
man, nor being known of any? and if God should make us like unto the most
deformed monsters that ever were, yet were the shape of sin, wherewith we are
clothed, more horrible and fearful, then they; if he would not vouchsafe in
mercy to amend it. We should have then no just cause to complain of our God,
He shows that our natural deformity is the most fearful of all other.
if we were borne such, as we are conceived, that is to say, most filthy and
most imperfect creatures. And if so be we will make a virtue, as it were, and
reap any benefit by these natural imperfections, we must understand, that
they are the moniters and aduertisers of sin and corruption. They teach daily
more and more to reform the inward man.
For first of all, sin is the mass or heap out of which they are framed, to
the end that thereby we may the rather take an occasion to condemn it, and in
great humility to confess so much all the days of our lives. Secondly, they
should be as spurs to prick us forward to the study of virtue and
godliness, to the end that if so be we can not wholly deface this our
natural deformity, yet at the least we may cover it in some sort, imagining
how odious we shall be in the sight of God and man, if as Homers Thersites, we
be blind, crooked, and lame both in body and mind, and for to increase the
deformity of the one, we add also the other, either by our careless
negligence, or deliberate malice. Finally they ought to raise us up, not only
in the consideration of the peace and tranquillity of the mind; but also in
the meditation of the glory which we hope for in the kingdom of God: They
should make us the more earnestly to affect the kingdom of God, and that
blessed immortality.
when as through his mercy it shall please him to deliver us from this
natural corruption and stinking rottenness, wherewith we are now clothed;
and put upon us the rich robes of immortality and incorruption, and make us
like unto the glorious body of his Son, whose death and resurrection we
ought continually to remember, as the very foundation of all our hope. If we
would make this use of our natural imperfections, we would not be so greatly
afraid of them as we are, and we would be much better contented, when as we
see other men better made and fashioned then our selves.

If our bodily imperfections and deformities be casual, Remedies against
casual deformities.
they proceed either of vice or of virtue. If of virtue, we may boast and
glory of them, as well as did Saint Paul, and rejoice that we bear in our
bodies the marks and tokens of our Lord Jesus: If they proceed of virtue, we
may glory in the^. Examples.
and so did the Apostles, who were very joyful, when as they were brought to
the Judges, accounting it an honor to suffer for his Name, and the advancement
of his glory. And does not Christ Jesus, Jesus Christ and his disciples.
through a wonderful manner, as yet, retain the wounds which he received
upon the cross for our redemption, in his side and hands? to the end they
may serve for an everlasting testimony of the love which he bears unto
them, for whose sake he was content to receive them, and to show his great
valor and courage, which he used in the battle against his enemies, and of his
obedience toward his Father, which was even to the death of the cross, and
of his patience in forbearing those wrongs which were offered him, as well for
the confession and defense of the truth, as for the redemption and deliverance
of his children. Spiridion.
It is reported that Spiridion (who had one of his eyes pulled out, and one of
his legs broken in that great persecution under Dioclesian) being delivered
from those cruel tyrants, and coming before the Emperor Constantine, who
suceeded in the Monarchy, was embraced of this great and noble Prince, who
with marvelous reverence kissed that place, out of which the eye was pulled,
esteeming that part worthy of singular honor, and the most excellent of all
the other, which had bin wounded for the Name of Christ Jesus, and tormented
for the confession of the true God. The judgment of the heathen agreeable
hereto. Alexander.
The very heathen themselves were not ignorant hereof. For Alexander the great,
seeing his father lament, for that he had received a wound of a dart in the
wars, that made him halt, which thing he thought, did greatly disgrace him:
said to comfort him withal; that it could be no dishonor or shame unto him,
to carry the visible marks of his valor and prowess. We need not then be
afraid of the brusing of the flesh, or breaking of the bones, nor any other
skarres or wounds what soever, whereby our virtue and wisdom may be
justified. But what shall we think of those, If they proceed of vice, we have
just cause to be ashamed of them.
which proceed of our vice and wicked co^versatio^? as, when a man has his
ears cut from his head, or that he be branded in the hand for some the
every, or hurt with some halbert, for runnning about in the night, whereby he
becomes lame all the days of his life, or his face disfigured with the pox:
or in a word, when as the spots of his sin are apparent upon his body: shall
he not be exceedingly afraid of these mischiefs? Yes verily; seeing they are
the punishments of our sins, and the apparent signs of Gods wrath, the which
we ought the more earnestly to consider of, to the end we may the more
carefully eschew all the occasions which may irritate and provoke his irefull
displeasure against us. Notwithstanding, he which is deformed, They serve to
bridle us, and to make us virtuous hereafter.
may turn it to his commodity. For seeing that all of us are as ready to
forget our faults, when they are committed, as we were prone to commit them:
and that it is very dangerous, least by being forgetful, we should become
obstinate, and being obstinate, should procure our selves a speedy overthrow:
it is very expedient, to the end they may be the better remembered, that they
be engraven upon our bodies, that being continually in our sight, they may be
a means to humble us, and to make them as unpleasant as may be, that so being
thrown down in the sight of God, we may be the more apt and fit to be at
atonement with him, and he the sooner brought to be reconciled unto us: and
to be a warning for us to live more holily and virtuously afterward. And this
was the reason, 2. King. 5.27.
why the leprosy of Naaman was laid upon Gehazi, and upon his posterity for
ever, to testify his greedy covetousness and desire: and that Vzziah, offering
contrary to the commandment of God, incense upon the altar, and ambitiously
usurping the high Priests office, was forthwith stricken with leprosy; and
therefore was constrained to dwell in a house alone by him self all the rest
of his life: and that Zachary, not believing the words of the Angel, became
dombe, until those things which had been forespoken were accomplished: to the
end that every one of them, bearing his mark upon his body, and his
condemnation written (as it were, in capital letters) upon his forehead, might
have occasion to read and remember it oftentimes, and be moved thereby to
seek for his grace, and to amend their lives. And therefore to finish this
discourse, touching corporal imperfections, whether they proceed of nature,
or by chance, either of virtue, or vice which is in us, we shall have always
the means (if we consider that which is already said) either wholly to purge
us of this fear, or at the least to moderate and assuage it.

The third affliction which we are afraid of, Remedies against the fear of
captivity.
is, least our bodies should be captived and deprived of their liberty, which
is the most precious and excellent treasure that we can attain unto in this
world, and that we esteem most of all other things whatso ever. Which I would
easily agree unto if we did use it well. But the abuse thereof is so common and
usual, We must use our liberty better the for the most part we do.
that we shall not find one of a thousand, which is at liberty, but he does
straightwaies turn it to a licentiousnes of life, and like a wild beast newly
escaped out of the snare, rangeth up and down whether soever his fancy leads
him. As often as I consider this, I cannot but wonder at the horrible disorder
and corruption of our nature, which does so monstrously abuse all the graces
and blessings of God: and I stand in doubt, whether I shall defend this paradox,
Servitude sometime better then liberty.
or not, that servitude is better then liberty. At the least I dare say, that
oftentimes it is more expedient for a man to be poor, then to be rich, seeing
that riches puffs up our hearts, and fills us full of pride and foolishnes,
depriving us of the grace of God, who abhors and detesteth all lofty
minds: whereas on the contrary, poverty humbles us, and brings us to
distrust in our selves, and by that means draws us the nearer unto him, by
making us the more capable of his grace: so also is it requisite to restrain
the concupiscences of our flesh, that we be rather in bondage, then at such
liberty as we desire, which is the spring and fountain from whence there
flows such horrible sins and corruptions, as now reign in every corner of
the world. Eccles. 4.14.
It falls out oftentimes (as Solomon says) that one comes out of prison
for to reign; when as he that is borne in his kingdom is made poor. Joseph.
Charles Martel.
Which is plentifully proved by many examples. Joseph was taken out of prison,
and made ruler over all the land of Egypt. Charles Martel being long detained
in prison by his enemies, shortly after ouerthrewe and discomfited them, and in
recompense of his noble valor, was created Major of the Frenchmen, which was
the second place of honor and dignity in the Realm. King Mathias.
King Mathias, who was one of the most mighty, fortunate, and magnificall
Princes, that ever was in Hungary, was taken forth of prison, where he had
long before been kept by his predecessor, and with great pomp led to Buda
the principal city in the realm, and there crowned and installed in the
kingdom. And it is not long since that the Earl of Richmont, The Earl of
Richmont.
who had been detained in Bretaine, living in great want and necessity, for
the space of ten years or more, with the small aid that was given unto him by
one of the French Kings, returning into his country, Examples of such as have
fallen from high places into miserable servitude
and vanquishing King Richard in a bloody battle, was crowned in the field,
and acknowledged of the English nation for their sovereign lord. As concerning
Kings and great Princes, who have been deprived of their estates and
dignities, and have fallen from great honors and riches, into a most wretched
and miserable estate: who is there that can remember them all, or make a
catalogue of their calamities? Valerian.
Valerian, one of the Emperors of Rome, falling into the hands of Sapores king
of the Persians, ended his life in wonderful misery, serving as a footestoole
to this barbarous tyrant, Henry iiij.
so often as he was disposed to take his horse. As touching the Emperors of
Constantinople, the greatest number of them died in prison. And among the
Germans, Henry the fourth, who had been so victorious a Prince, and had
fought in threescore pitched fields, to his great glory, which was more then
ever any did before, or since; was notwithstanding at the length imprisoned by
his son, where he ended his days most miserably. Dionysius the tyrant.
Among the Grecians, Dionysius the tyrant, and son to him, who had been so
great and mighty a lord in Sicilie, was constrained in his old age, to get
his living by playing on the taber and the pipe, as our blind men do in
France. Among the Jews, Ioachin and Zedekiah died in captivity in Babylon;
the one, after he had been in prison by the space of thirty years: and the
other, after that his children and principal friends were slain before his
face, and that to aggravate his misery, they had pulled out both his eyes. And
generally the whole race of David in continuance of time, fell into such
misery and poverty, Joseph.
that Joseph, who was descended of him, was constrained to get his living by
being a carpenter; and the Virgin Marie his wife, to offer two turtle doves at
her purification, Herod.
which was ordained by the law to be an oblation for the poor. And were not
all the successors of Herod, who had been so careful to enrich the kingdom
of Judea, and to leave it to his heirs for ever, wholly destroyed within the
compass of one hundred years, Baiazeth.
yea and some of them ended their days in perpetual prison? Among the Turks,
Bajazeth the first of that name, after many great conquests, was taken prisoner
by Tamberlain, who in derision of his former estate, kept him in a cage,
delighting at dinner time to tie him under his table like a monkie, and
incensed with a proud and tyrannical humor, to cast him sometime a piece of
bread, and sometime a bone to gnawe on. Richard.
Among the Englishmen, Richard the second, son to the Prince of Wales, after
he had long continued in as great prosperity, as ever did any King of England,
in his old age, when as he had most need of ease and quietness, fell into the
hands of his enemies, and ended the rest of his days in sorrow and misery.
And Philip Comins reports, that in his time so me of the blood royal of
England, were brought to such extreme poverty, that one of the house of
Lancaster, was compelled to serve as a page in the court of Duke Charles of
Burgondy. And was not Barnabe, one of the Vicounts of Milan, Barnabe.
taken by his uncle John Galeas, and most cruelly kept in prison until his
dying day? And since that, in the time of Lewis the twelfth, was Lodowictz
Sforce, an usurper of the Dukedom of Milan, taken at Navarre, and brought as a
prisoner to the castle of Loches in Touraine, and there detained a long time,
dying at the last most miserably in a cage of iron. Chilpericke. Lewis the
simple.
Chilpericke and Lewis the simple, two of the French Kings, were quite
dispossessed of their crowns and kingdoms by their own subjects, and the one
put into a prison, and the other shut up in a cloister, to read his Mattens
with monks and friars. And among the Spainyards, was not the only daughter of
Henry King of Castile, thrust from the succession by the wily devises and
subtle policies of queen Isabel, and by her compelled to retire into
Portugal, where she remained ever after, as a poor slave? And in our time,
who has not heard, what misery has happened to the Duke of Savoy, to the
King of Hungary, to the Duke of Germany, and to Muleasset the King of Tunis,
and many others? For God has permitted at all times, and almost in every
country, great Princes to come to decaie, and mighty Monarchs to die in
poverty; to give us to understand, that this liberty and freedom, whereof
we make such great account, esteeming it above gold and silver, yea and our
own lives, is never so strongly built, but that if we begin once to abuse it,
he can easily overthrow it, and pull it from us. Seeing then, that without
his grace and favor, we are but too ready to abuse it, Let us desire God to
send us his grace, which is the true liberty.
and thereby commit very heinous offenses, giving him just occasion thereby to
deprive us of it; I may well conclude, that we have no such cause to brag of
it, and to run after it as we do: and that on the contrary, that servitude
and bondage is not so intolerable an evil, that we should so wonderfully
grudge and grieve at it. This worldly liberty is servitude. 1. Cor. 7.
I say moreover, that it is no less requisite to the managing of our
rebellious and untamed nature, then is the bridle to govern an unruly colt.
What need we care (as S. Paul says) whether we be lords or servants, bond or
free? Why do we not rather study to walk uprightly in our vocation, and
rest contented with that spiritual freedom, which Christ Jesus has purchased
for us by his death? we desire liberty for our flesh, and we never consider in
to what danger it will bring us, being once let loose. Which of the two should
we rather desire, either so dangerous and mortal an enemy to be at liberty,
or in prison: seeing we can never devise to keep him so straightly, or watch
him so narrowly, but he will find a thousand ways to hurt us? It were
expedient that we should desire to kill and crucify him, with all his noisome
lusts and concupiscences. And are we afraid least he should be too hardly used?
we confess that the eues and murderers ought to be put in prison, and there
is no man that will speak against it. And shall we then pity our flesh if it
be imprisoned, The bitter fruits of worldly liberty should make us abhor
it. Gal. 5.19.
seeing that the works and ordinary pastimes thereof, are (as the Apostle
says) adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like? If a father had such a son, a mother
such a daughter, or a husband such a wife, what should they do with them? We
may easily judge then, what reason we have to avoid the imprisonment of our
flesh, which is sovntamed a beast, so obstinate, and so froward a companion,
that he will not be taught by any demonstration or reason what soever. I speak
only of our flesh: The minds of virtuous me^ are always at liberty though
their bodies be in bondage.
for our minds if they be well and wisely informed, cannot be in thraldom or
captivity: the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs of Christ Jesus; Socrates,
Calisthenes, and many other Philosophers, might have their bodies sometimes
shut up in filthy and stinking prisons; the tyrants by Gods sufferance might
apprehend them, bind, torment, flea them, strain and stretch their skins;
but yet their minds were always at liberty, taking their pleasure in the
delightsome and fruitful fields of the sacred Scriptures, and walking in the
beautiful arbors, and goodly galleries of contemplative philosophy, gathering
the sweet flowers which grow continually in her pleasant gardens, to comfort
the heart and strengthen the soul against the noysom smelles of all corporal
complaints and bodily diseases. If then our minds can not be in slaverie, it
is no matter though our bodies be always in captivity: and therefore let us
conclude, that we need not fear to live in bondage and servitude.

The fourth thing which we are so greatly afraid of, Remedies against the
fear of diseases.
(though indeed altogether in vain) is sickness and such like diseases. For
seeing that our bodies are mortal, it is very convenient that we should feel
and understand the means that will in the end bring us to death, Seeing our
bodies are mortal, why should we fear such things, as will bring us to death.
otherwise we would be altogether unmindful thereof, and seldom or never
think of our end. Let us also consider how necessary a thing it is to humble
us, and to pluck down our proud looks, to be always put in mind thereof.
And if there be nothing that causes us sooner to forget our frail and brittle
estate, then the health and sound constitution of our bodies, (for if we were
never afflicted with sickness nor any other malladie or disease, we would be
persuaded we were immortal) we may evidently see how requisite it is to
abate our pride, that we should be sickely sometime, to the end that whether
we will or no, we may learn the mortality of our bodies by the corruption of
our flesh, The meditation of death a great means to preserve us from sin.
which has made us subject to death and destruction. And without this
meditation, it is a wonder to see how far man's insolency will strain and
stretch it self. For seeing it falls out oftentimes that mortal men, and
such as understand their own imbecillitie and weakness, will notwithstanding
wage war against God, and bid battle as it were unto the heavens, what
would they do (I pray you) if they thought them selves immortal, and
notsubiect to corruption? whereas a little consideration and remembrance of
their ends, Seeing we must needs die, it is requisite that we be put in mind
of death.
whereunto they are brought by reason of diverse diseases, and sundry malladies
daily falling out before their eyes, does make them remember them selves, and
represseth that hautinesse and pride which would otherwise be intolerable. If
we were free from sin and not subject to mortality, we might have some
reason to desire to be free from all malladies and diseases: but being subject
to both, and besides so blind through a vain conceit of our own worthiness,
that either we would not acknowledge that vice and mortality which is in us,
or else dissemble it: it is neither profitable nor possible for us to be
without diseases. They are means to make us know our selves.
Antigonus one of the successors of Alexander in the kingdom of Macedony, being
exceedingly sick, after he began to be somewhat recovered, said unto some of
his familiar friends, that his sickness had taught him that he was mortal:
giving us thereby to understand, that men which are in health and prosperity,
and especially great princes, who with their health enjoy great honors,
pleasures, and abundance, do seldom or never think of their duties, much
less of their mortality and frailty: yea (as the Prophet says) they are at
their ease, Esaias. 28.15.
and sleep as securely, as though they had made a covenant with death, and were
at agreement with hell. Is it not then very requisite that we should fall into
diseases, which should be, as it were, vaunt curriers and foreriders, to give
us warning of the approach of so dangerous an enemy, lest we be surprised on the
sudden? Esaias reproving the vain confidence, that the people in his time
reposed in the princes, prophets, and other persons of account, Esaias 2.22.
said, Cease from the man, whose breath is in his nostrels: for wherein is he to
be esteemed? which saying we ought wisely to consider, They make us also know
the weakness of all other men.
seeing that therein the Prophet teaches us 2 things. First, that we are too
ready to trust in the arm of flesh, and to presume more of our selves and
others a great deal then is co^venient. Secondly, that there is no better
means to amend this error, the^ to consider how frail and brittle our estate
is, which hangs, as it were, by a twine thread, and consists (as he says)
in a little wind, which we draw at our nostrels: or (as Anaxarchus said to
Alexander, to reprove his ambitious mind) in a goblet, wherein there is a little
Rubarb, or some such like receipt prescribed by the physician to preserve or
recover us from sickness. They make us weary of the world, and desirous of a
better life. Eccles. 41.1.
And these diseases serve not only to humble us, and to put us in mind of our
mortality: but they bring also a fulness, a contempt, and lothing of this life,
thereby making us the less to fear death: the remembrance whereof is not
bitter, (as the wiseman says) but unto him that lives at rest in his great
possessions, and has prosperity and abundance of all things: when as we live
in a country, wherein is plenty of all whatsoever we can desire: and that we
have riches, friends, honor, and ease so much as we can wish: we would be very
sorry to leave so commodious a dwelling. So likewise would we be loath to forsake
and give over this life, if it were altogether pleasant and delightsome. But
God, to the end we may depart with the more willing and ready minds, has
thought it good to give us sour sauce to our sweet meat, and to mingle most of
our receipts with plenty of vinegar. And as nources, when they would weane
their children, are wont to lay some bitter thing upon their teats, to the end
that thereby they may be brought to hate and refuse the sweet milk, which they
were wont to suck from thence: In like manner it pleases him to sower this
whole life of ours with poverty, sickness, and many other diseases and
discommodities, that thereby we may the more easily be brought to loath it.
Notwithstanding, we are so addicted to the love and liking thereof, that no
disgrace, sorrow, grief, or discommodity whatsoever, is sufficient to bring us
in dislike with it, and to make us wish rather to die happily, then to live
miserably. What would we do then, if all things were to our liking and
contentation? A certain soldier in the army of Antigonus, A history out of
Plutarch, for the confirmation of that which is before spoken.
being troubled with a very painful disease, was exceeding courageous and
desperately valiant, not fearing any danger whatsoever: the King seeing this
brave and forward man, and understanding that he was vexed with a grievous
mallady, being desirous to honor him, and recompense him in some sort for his
good service, sent for his physicians, and commanded the^ to seek all means
possible to recover him of his disease: which in short time they accomplished.
Now when as afterward he began to be some what fearful, and more cowardly then
he was wont to be, and went nothing so resolutely forward in service as he did
before: the king marveiling at such strange alteration, demanded of him the
reason thereof: whereto he answered, that it was the favor he had showed him in
the recovering of his health, and for that his life, which before was very
grievous and bitter unto him by reason of his disease, was now become very
sweet and pleasant. Whereby he gives us to understand, that there is nothing
that makes us so to be in love with this life, and to abhor death, as the
health and sound disposition of our bodies. And therefore one hearing the
Lacedaemonians commended for their incomparable valor and courageous stomachs,
and that they went desperately to the wars, never fearing death, said, that
it was no marvel thereof, An apotheg proving that griefs and sorrows are a
means to make us cheerfully to forsake this life.
seeing they lived in such a hard and austere life at home in their country:
and that commonly men care not to leave that place, where they have little or
no hearts case. We see then that there is nothing so forcible to encourage us
against the assaults of death, and to make us long after the enjoying of the
heavenly kingdom, as to be molested with poverty, labor, old age, wars,
suites, frost and cold, heat and drought, and many other discommodities:
which (though surely with great difficulty) may be a means to pull our
hearts and minds from those worldly cogitations. For (as though we were
bewitched therewith) we can hardly be brought to feel those manifold
mischiefs, wherewith the world encumbreth us, or to be enduced to forsake so
foul and filthy a strumpet, to marry the most beautiful and goodly Lady
that can be imagined. They stir up in us repentance, faith, and hope
Examples. Naaman.
Diseases also serve to make us remember our sins, and with all humility of
heart to confess them, and to be sorry for them: and they bring us into the
meditation of a better life, and stir us up to seek for the grace of God.
The occasion which brought Naaman the Syrian to the Prophet Eliseus, and
afterward to the knowledge of God, was his leprosy and uncleanness. The
greatest number of those which believed in Jesus Christ, were provoked
thereunto by their corporal diseases, whereof we have greater sense and
feeling then of any spiritual mallady. And we are for the most part more
diligent in providing for the health of the body, then the mind: yea and
Christians themselves do never pray so heartily unto God, when as they are in
health, as when they are sick. David.
Behold with what zeal and affection David prays in his 6 and 38 Psalms,
and with what sighings and gronings he prostrateth himself before the face of
the Lord, what trust and confidence he reposeth in his mercy: and in the end
perceiving that his prayers were heard, with what alacrity and cherefulnes of
heart he praises and extolleth his loving kindness: all which things do most
lively appear in that excellent song, which Ezechias made in his sickness.
Ezechias.
Behold also what complaints, sorrowings, and bewailings of the miseries of
this life were uttered by that holy man Job, Job.
sitting upon the dunghill, all covered even from the crown of the head unto
the sole of the foot with filthy botches and sores. did he ever in the midst
of his prosperity utter forth more heavenly voices? They increase our
humility and devotion.
It is out of doubt, that we are never so humble and lowly minded in
prosperity, as we are in adversity. For if we be well and at our ease, we
think of nothing but of sporting and playing: we spend the time in dancing
and making merry: we study in the morning, what new pastime we shall have
all the day following: and we are never so much afraid of any thing, as that
we should want time and health: never thinking upon the shortness of our
days, and the small time we have to live here, so long as we are in health and
jollitie. We are like unto mariners, To whom we are resembled in our
prosperity.
who if they be once in the haven, are the greatest drunkardes, blasphemers,
whoremasters, and licentious persons that may be: but if they be upon the sea
in any peril and danger of their lives, there was never Heremite, no not Paul
nor Hylarion, whose holiness is so commended in old stories, so holy in
words, so austere in life, and devoute in prayers as they are. And to this
purpose there is a worthy story recorded, of a certain Archbishop of
Colaine named Theodoricke, a man for his wisdom, The story of Theodoricke
showing that we are readier to think upon good things in adversity then in
prosperity
virtue and godly life highly esteemed of all the great Princes and noble Dukes
of Germany: who being asked by the Emperor Sigismonde, by what means a man
might attain unto happiness: answered, that felicity was not to be looked
for in this life, whereas the greatest princes are in as miserable estate, and
subject to as great or greater vexations of the mind, as their meanest
subjects; and that there is no happiness, but that which God has promised to
his elect children, and which he will perform when as they come into his
kingdom. Being further demanded, by what means one might come into that
kingdom? answered, that he must follow the Law, which Moses and Joshua had
given to the children of Israel, and only trust in the mercies of God, and
promises, which he has made unto us, and will accomplish by the merits of
Christ Jesus, and simply to follow his commandments, without declining either
to the right hand or to the left: and being enquired the third time, whether it
were necessary to acquit and clear our selves in Gods sight, and to purchase
his favor, strictly to observe all the Law of God without transgressing of
any jotte or title thereof: answered, that it was impossible to do so as long
as we are in this life, which is so frail and slipperie, and which does daily
minister so many new occasions of sin: and that especially unto such men, as
are so corrupt and frail by nature, and that in regard of this common
infirmity, God would be pleased with him, if in his health he would confess
his faults and seek for his mercy, and remain all the rest of his days in
as holy and godly conversation, as he did when he was troubled with the gout,
and tormented with the stone. By which he gives us to understand, that we are
far more ready to confess our sins and amend our lives, when as we are in
want and misery; then when we are in wealth and prosperity. All these things
being well considered, we need not fear so greatly to fall into any dangerous
sickness or grievous mallady.

Next unto diseases, Remedies against the sear of old age. 1. It is the
blessing of God to live long.
we are most afraid of old age, though it be against reason and sense that we
should so be. For the days of our lives being so uncertain as they are, who
can say he shall live until to morrow? And if we be certain we shall be old,
have we not time enough to provide us, and to fortify us against all the
miserable accidents and discommodities of old age? But let us observe a little
that foolish and strange contrariety that is in our minds. All of us desire
to live long, and yet we are afraid of old age: It is folly to sear old
age, seeing we are not asraid to live long.
as though old age were any thing else, then a long life, and many years tied
and added one to another. Which being considered, we should either not desire
the one, or not fear the other: or else confess with Iuvenal, that without
wit or reason we fly and follow every thing. But if the matter were well
expounded, I pray you, what cause is there why we should abhor old age? we
will say peradventure that it is full of great misery, and accompanied with
infinite sorrows and afflictions. Whereupon I would demand and feign know,
There is not so much misery in our old age, as there is in the other parts of
our lives.
what part of our life is exempted from them. During our infancy we have
nothing but ignorance, feebleness, misery, weeping, and crying: we can not
make ready our selves; we can not feed our selves; we can not rise; we can
not go; we can not help our selves up, being fallen down; we know not fire
from water, neither are we able to do so much, as keep a fly from hurting
us. In a word, we can do nothing but cry, weep, and waken our nources to
give us suck and make us clean. In infuncie. In youth.
Are we in our youth? Then we are like unto wild coltes without saddle or
bridle; we run here and there, whither our desires draw us, and we care for
nothing, but how to have a full fruition of all our delights. Whoremasters,
blasphemours, bawdes, jugglers, ruffians, and such like rascals, are the
company we seek for. And who is able to repeat all the dangers, whereto this
youthful company is subject by their excess, rashness, strifes, and
quarellings? their prodigal and excessive expenses; their inconstancy; the
grief and sorro we they bring to their frien des; and the dishonor and
reproach, which by their abominable lives and shameful deaths, they leave unto
their posterity for ever? In a word, in terming of it foolish youth, we do
sufficiently declare in what estimation we have it. From youth we pass unto
man's estate, which is, as it were, In man's estate.
overwhelmed with infinite sorrows and a huge multitude of cares. If we be
private men, we must have a care of our household and family; how to maintain
our wives, bring up our children, to provide we may give them something when
they are in age, to increase our wealth, and to see good order in our houses,
to govern and rule our servants, and to keep all things well that are under
our charges: all which are no trifling matters, but of very great weight, and
far more troublesome unto such as have any public charges, as Kings and
their livetenants. For they must first have regard, that God be rightly served
in their dominions and territories: next unto this, that Justice be
indifferently administered unto al men under their subjection: that their
frontier towns be well guarded, and their soldiers well paid: that they
maintain amity with their confederates: that the good be supported, and the
wicked suppressed. Al which is sufficient to trouble and disquiet one man's
mind, and to pose the wisest head that ever was. These things being considered,
Old age is better able to bear afflictions then the rest of the ages of our
lives.
we may well perceive that the other parts of our life are as fully fraught
with misery as old age: which has this advantage over them, that the
calamities and miseries thereof are far more tolerable, for that the vigor
and strength of the mind being impaired and weakened, they are nothing so
sensible as the others. And withal, old men by reason of their experience are
more wise, more temperate, and better exercised in these afflictions, and for
that they see their end approaches, they are assured they can not be of any
long continuance. We may not then allege the miseries of old age, to prove
that it is worse then other ages. For in comparing them together, we shall
find that they are far worse and more discommodious. Though old age be not
so strong, yet it is far more provident then youth.
M. Cicero in his book of old age alleges four especial causes, why
these graye hayres seem so odious in the eyes of many men. The first is, for
that we are not so able to take pains, and therefore we are constrained to
give over all intermeddling with things, and to sit all day in a chair in
winter by the fire side, and in summer to go no further then the porch, being
wholly unfit for any company. Whereto we may answer as Tullie did, that in
respect of bodily labor, old men (indeed) are nothing so fit as young men
are. For they have not the strength and agillitie to ride a great horse, nor to
ride post, nor to run at tilte, and many such like things, whereto young
men are most apt and best able. But there are many other things without doubt
of greater importance, which they can perform well enough, if they would
apply themselves thereto. They know how to govern the whole Common wealth
by their wisdom: and sometime to save the Country and Kingdom where they
live from destruction: as may appear by the example of Agesilaus, Examples.
Agesilaus.
who was the only means to hinder the Thebanes from conquering the
Lacedaemonians after the battle of Leuctres. They may counsel and direct
Princes in their affairs, Nestor.
as Nestor did Agamemnon at the siege of Troy, whose wisdom alone was more
esteemed of the King, then the valor and courage of all his Captains. And not
without good cause. For it is an easy matter to find arms and hands to
execute, then wise and provident heads to devife: and withal considering that
the one is far more necessary then the other, for the preservation of a
kingdom. If age were not as a bridle for youth, great kingdoms would soon be
overthrowen. Examples. Rehoboam.
For if the boiling desires of greatlordes were not often cooled: if the
enterprises and designs of sundry young gentlemen, which follow them, were not
wisely weighed and well considered, by such as of long time have had the
mannaging of their affairs, and know in what terms they stand, they would
oftentimes upon a small occasion hazard their estates and kingdoms: As it
happened unto Rehoboam, who lost the greatest part of his kingdom, for
refusing the advice which was given him by the ancient and wise counselors
of his house. And it is not yet one hundred years, since that Lewis the
twelfth, Lewis the twelfth, King of France.
by a like occasion, had almost lost his crown and possession of his realm,
as he confessed unto his son, not long before his death; admonishing him to
entertain his old counselors, and not to follow his example: for that in
the beginning of his reign, he had almost been quite overthrown, for that
he had very unwisely rejected his fathers old servants. In our days, Lewis
King of Hungary.
Lewis the King of Hungary, suffering him self to be ruled by a young Bishop
of his realm, in his wars against the Turks, though he had not sufficient
strength to encounter his enemies, and that all his old and experienced
captains, showing him the danger that was likely to ensue, sought by all means
possible, to turn him from his intented voyage: yet the Bishop, being a
harebraine and choleric person, and of great credit with his master,
persuaded him to go on forward: which was the occasion of the kings death, and
miserable destruction of that country, which had of long time flourished in
prosperous estate, and had bin the bulwark and rampiere to defend all
Christendom. These and many other examples, which might be alleged, are
sufficient to prove, that old men being wise and well experienced, are not
unprofitable members of a common wealth: and that as it is meet to cool the
hot fire with cold water; so is it convenient for the conservation of
kingdoms, that the rashness of youth should be moderated and stayed, by the
wisdom of the aged.

And therefore all well ordered commonwealths, The councils of well ordered
states, have evermore been furnished with ancient men.
have evermore framed and composed their counsels of estate, of ancient and
well experienced men, as may easily appear by the names which were given them.
For both the Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, called their public councils by
such names, as signified in their own tongue; the assembly of the ancient.
We may not then (as I have already said) for the disabling and discrediting
of old age, say, that it is unprofitable, and good for nothing. Foreuen as in a
ship, the Pilot which sits at the stern, and never toyleth as the rest,
either at the casting of the anchor, the pulling at the ropes, or hoysing of the
sails, performs notwithstanding more then all the other, for the safe
ariuing in the haven: Example.
so likewise in well ordered states (such as Venice may be accounted at this
present) the aged Senator in his chair with his staff, does more for the
preservation of his country, then the courageous soldier in the field with
his lance. I will pass over the worthy stories of Appius Claudius, of
Masinissa, Cato, Phocion, Sophocles, and that also of Laelius, which Tullie and
Plutarch reports in the commendacion of old age. I would know then, whether
Moses being fourscore year old, or Joshua being a hundredth and more, 1.
King. 1.2.
or David when as by reason of his years he was so cold, that his servants
were compelled to seek him out a young virgin, which might lie in his bosom to
keep him warm, gave over their former care in the government of the
commonwealth, by reason of their white hairs and aged years? and whether with
their wise and provident heads, they did as much profit their countries, as the
other did by their lusty and able bodies. The Athenians being resolved to make
choice of Iphicrates, a very ancient and well experienced gentleman for their
governor and captain general of their armies, were reproved by their Orators,
Chares.
who would very gladly have preferred Chares a very lusty and strong personage
to that honorable charge. The strength of the body not comparable to the
wisdom of the mind, wherewith old age is especially adorned. Though some aged
me^ have bin glad to live at ease, yet notwithstanding their wisdom and
discretion is always to be preserred before the rashness of youth.
To whom Timotheus one of the wise and great lords of the city answered; that
he would willingly have assented unto them, if they had been assembled to make
choice of a common porter, or burden bearer: giving us thereby to understand,
that strong backs and lusty bodies, are not so sufficient to goueme
commonwealths and mighty matters, as wise heads and aged minds. And therefore
we may more safely commit the managing of great causes to aged persons, who
for the most part are better furnished with wisdom and discretion, then the
younger sort. We may safely conclude then, that old age makes not men
unprofitable members of a common wealth. And albeit that some men, as Lucullus,
Silla, Dioclesian, and Charles the fifth, have in their old age given over the
world, as it were, and left all affairs, betaking them selves to a quiet and
solitary life, yet notwithstanding this is no common thing, neither yet
greatly material for the disproofe of that, which has been said, as
Plutarch proves by many excellent and substantial reasons. For as we do
greatly blame those bees, which having been always painful and laborious,
do at the last become drones and good for nothing: so likewise is it a very
unseemly thing, for such as have all their lives had the ordering of weighty
matters, and been continually conversant in great things, to give over all in
their age, and dedicate themselves to their delights; for that then they are
most apt for negotiation, and meetest to meddle in matters of greatest
importance, by reason of their experience, wherein they far surmount those of
younger years: having their affections better stayed, and being freed from
all passions which do so often trouble us in all our counsels and
consultations. If then, they will needs be idle at such time, as their labor
may be most profitable, they are worthy to be blamed, though the fault ought
to be imputed to the person and to his pleasures, and not unto his age and
years. As virtuous old age is most to be esteemed of other: so on the
contrary, vicious men deserve most blame of all other.
The second reason which makes us afraid of old age, is, the small account
that is made ordinarily of such men as are in great years. For by reason the
younger sort are persuaded that they are froward, waywarde, pecuish, and hard
to be pleased, therefore do they avoid their company, as much as may be. And
such is the corruption of these days, especially of youth, who hate and
contemn no man more, then those at whose hands they may best learn wisdom
and understanding. If then there be any thing in old age, which deserves
reproof; it must partly be imputed to the malice of the time, wherein all
things being turned topse-turvie, that is most esteemed, which should be most
despised: and on the contrary, that most debased, which should be most
honored: and partly to the evil and naughty life of such, as are old men,
who (contrary to the counsel of Cato) do add many gross vices unto their
natural imperfections. For most of them are covetous, some voluptuous and
given to pleasure: others are jealous, envious, pratlers, drunkards, very
idiots and senseless creatures. Now if at such time as they should be most
holy and temperate of all others, they become more profane and loose of life,
no marvel though they become odious and co^te^ptible. For such me^ do not
only deserve to be hated, but to be banished out of al honest men's companies,
that they being once co^fou^ded with shame, may be terrified from offe^ding. It
is very requisite then, if we will be honored in old age, that we be
virtuously disposed, avoiding the company of the wicked, whose society
tends exceedingly to our shame: and embracing the familiarity of the good,
Famous examples of such old age, as has been exceedingly honored in the
Church of God. Patriarchs, Kings, and Prophets.
whose wise and well ordered actions, may bring us both pleasure and
commodity. Was Adam and the Patriarchs the less esteemed, for their white
hairs? The chronicles do make a very honorable mention of Melchisedech,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, David, Elias, Elyseus, Esaias,
Jeremy, Matathias, and many others; giving an ample testimony of their great
reputation, among all the godly which lived in their days: yea, at such time
as some of them, by reason of their great age, were become stark blind, lame,
and impotent. And to the end we shall not think, that this is a particular
glory, given only to the children of God, to be so highly esteemed and
accounted of in their latter days, we may read in profane stories, that many
of the Paynims and the heathen sort, for their excellent knowledge and most
noble virtues, have been highly reverenced, and, as it were, adored in their
old age. For that this age more then all the other, has a certain majesty,
which makes the virtues thereof more illustrious and conspicuous, then they are
in youth; at which time (notwithstanding all the wholesome admonitions and wise
instructions, that possibly may be given) there are but too many, and too
notorious faults, which do exceedingly obscure and darken that, which
otherwise would be very excellent, and most commendable. Philosophers
Did Solon, Socrates, Isocrates, Plato, or Pericles, want either reputation in
their countries, abroad, or friends and companions at home in their houses, to
pass the time in familiar discourses; or auditors in their Academies, to hear
their profound learning and surpassing wisdom? When as the Frenchmen under
the conduct of Brennus, The Roman Senators.
entered Rome, and found the Senators set in their places apparelled in their
robes, with great majesty and magnificence, they were wonderfully astonished
at the first, with so reverend and honorable a presence; and there was nothing
that so much terrified them, Plutarch in the lives of Camillus and Pyrrhus.
as the majesty and dignity, which seemed to appear in the countenances and
white beards of these aged fathers. Cyneas, Ambassador to Pyrrhus the king of
the Epirotes, beholding the assembly of the Senators, reported to the King
his master at his return, that he had seen a common wealth of Kings, in
regard of the majesty, honor, and wisdom, which he saw among them. The
Lacedaemonians.
In Lacedemonia, the young men accounted the aged for their fathers, honored
them as Kings, and reverenced them as scholars do their masters. And it is
reported, Plutarch in the life os Lycurgus.
that some of their Ambassadors, being in Athens, and sitting in the Theator
among diverse of the nobility and great lords of the city, to behold the
plays, seeing an ancient father come in, arose up to do him reverence, and
placed him in the midst among them selves. When as the Grecians besieged Troy,
The Grecia^s.
there was no man of greater estimation, then was Nestor. And at this day,
Venice.
there is not a more honorable council, then that of Venice: who with their
long robes and white heads, are more feared and reverenced, then the Turks
with their long mustaches and grimme countenances. All which examples do
manifestly prove, that old age accompanied with wisdom and understanding,
is in no wise to be contemned or despised. The folly of youth does not
obscure the glory of old age. Excellent co^parisons.
And although it happens oftentimes, that by reason of the pride and folly
of youth, aged men be mocked and scorned, as was Elias by the children of
Bethel; yet notwithstanding, such as are wise, and virtuously given, do highly
esteem and account of them. The fruit which lasts longest, being well and
charily kept, is of greatest reckoning and account; and that wine best
esteemed, which with continuance of time is best refined; for that having lost
his tartness, and with his force trodden, as it were, his dregs under his
feet, appears in the cup with a very fresh and lively color. In like
manner ancient men, who have clarified themselves, and with the time have
sweetened the sour passions of disordered youth, and with their longnes of
days, have ripened their judgments, do more discreetly govern themselves
and their actions, and so become more sociable and fitter for all good
companies, then unstable younglings, who are continually tormented with their
distempered affections. And if we do so highly account of all antiquities, as
old pictures, and ancient books: shall we not much more esteem of aged
men? my meaning is, that with their age they should be virtuous, otherwise both
old and young, are worthy of small estimation. But some will say, that it is a
very odious thing, and marvelous unpleasing in the sight of the world, to have
hoarie hairs, trembling and shaking hands, stinking and rotten teeth, dim,
dark, yea and blind eyes, to be spitting, scratching, and wiping of ones nose
continually: An answer unto such as object the discommodities of old age Genesis
25.1.
to which objections we may readily afford many answers. First of all, every
old man is not subject to such inconveniences. For we read of many, who have
had very lusty and able bodies in their extremest age; as of Abraham, who
after the death of Sara, being six or seven score years old, married
Cethura, by whom he had six children: and likewise of Caleb, Ios. 14.10, 11.
who said unto Joshua, when as he was eighty five years old, at such time as
he demanded Hebron for his inheritance: I am as strong as I was, when Moses
sent me to epsy out the land: as strong as I was then, so strong am I now,
either for war or for government. Masinissa the King of the Numidians, Tullie
in his book of old age.
being four score years old, went notwithstanding to the wars, lay upon
the cold ground, ate hard biscuit, marched on foot bare headed in the
greatest heat, and gained a very glorious victory of the Carthaginians.
Xenophon reports of King Agesilaus, in this manner: His old age far
surmounteth the youth of all other men of his time, and that even in the
extremity thereof, when as he was ready to give up the ghost. What young man
was there at any time in his most flourishing estate, so redoubted of his
enemies, as was Agesilaus in his old days? what youth was there so much
lamented and sorrowed for, as was this old King and worthy father of his
country? what Captain or General ever gave a greater testimony of his
courage and valor, or more hope of assured victory to his soldiers, yea, and
that when as he was almost worn away with many years? Whereby it does
manifestly appear, that those accidents before remembered, are not always
inseparable companions of old age, and that men, who have lived soberly in
their youth, shall be strong and healthsome in their aged days. Furthermore,
we may likewise say that which has been spoken before, Old age has
fewerdiscommodities then the other ages
that every age has his several discommodities: and if we would take the
pains to compare them together, we shall plainly perceive more inconveniences
in the former, then in the latter. And to conclude, that though the comelines,
strength, and force of the body does decaie, yet the beauty and vigor of the
mind increases and flourishes more and more. Now if one would compare the
provident and wise mind of a grave and aged father, whose actions are
continually tempered with discretion, and seasoned, as it were, with the salt
of understanding, with the comely shape and portraiture of some goodly youth,
whose head is as full of toys, as his tongue full of words, whose thoughts
are very green, and his actions gross; I would gladly know, which of the two
should be by reason, of greatest estimation and account? There is a pretty
fable of the fox and the leopard, who contending about their own
excellencies, the leopard, to prove him self the better, showed his skin,
which was so trimly spotted, so slieke and so smooth, that there could not be a
more beautiful thing among beasts: the fox confessed in deed, that his
skin was very glorious and goodly without, but (says he) my own skin is
far more excellent and precious within: covertly understanding thereby, the
wise and wily sleights of his crafty head. In like manner if in beholding the
external beauty of lusty youth, we would on the contrary oppose the
internal graces of aged minds, we should soon perceive which of the two is
most lovely and amiable. We may then safely conclude against the common
opinion, that old age being garnished and adorned with wisdom, gravity,
modesty, temperance, and many other excellent virtues, can not in any wise be
contemned or despised, Old age is very venerable in the sight of the wicked. 7
The seventh remedy against the fear of old age is, that is exe^pteth us from
carnal delights, making us fit to enjoy heavenly pleasures.
no not of the most wicked and licentious rabble: who stand in as much fear
and awe of such discreet persons, as ever did the lose-liuers of the
Philosopher Polemon. And if it happen at any time, that they speak any girding
word for their own disport, it is done closely in a corner, and secretly
among their companions. Wherein they show the force of their own consciences,
which compels them, maugre their beards, to confess that virtuous and
discreet old age, is worthy of great honor and reverence.

The third reason that makes us so exceedingly to fear, is, for that it
depriueth us of our pleasures, and debarreth us from our wonted sportes and
delights. This is no fault of old age, but the blame rests in ourselves, and
does justly procure our own condemnation. For we do sufficiently declare
hereby, how fleshly and carnal minded we are, desiring not only to live, but
also to wax old, to die, yea, and to be buried in our pleasures. To whom
carnal men may fitly be compared.
And herein we resemble the Popish Bishops and Abbots, who having found the
revenues of the crucifix to be so great, and the bread of Christ Jesus (as one
says) so toothsome, that they will in no wise, give over their benefices so
long as they live, nor forsake their crosses and mytres, until they be both
beaten out of their hands, and stricken off their heads. In like manner, we
find the taste and savor of these pleasures, so fit and agreeable to our
humors, that we desire to be entombed in them, and are flat of opinion with
Dyonisius the tyrant, that there is not a more beautiful burial, or more
glorious monument, then the lap of this foul and deformed strumpet. Who will
not judge then, that we are married together, and that we entirely love each
other, seeing there can be no separation between us, but by death? and who
will not easily be induced to think, that we bear small affection to virtue,
considering we are in such love with her mortal enemy: and the wonderful
fear we are in, least we should wax old, and be compelled at the length to
become honest men? Good Lord, when shall we ariue at the haven of that
perfection, which thou requirest in thy law, seeing we are so slow to hoist up
our sails and stand to our tacklings, scarcely setting foot into the ship, at
such time, as it were more meet, we were arrived in our wished port? so much
unnecessary business have we, spending our time in sleeping and snorting, all
the whole day together. But I would gladly know, what hours we would spare
for the service of our God, and to become virtuous, seeing we are loath to
consecrate our old age thereto. Excellent similitudes and notable sayings,
against the pleasure of youth. Virtus laudatur and alget.
We are unwilling to part with any iotte of our infancy, for that (say we) it
is a time of innocence: and in the mean while, we are afraid of old age, for
no other cause, out of doubt, but that we are very loath to become innocents.
And do we not herein verefie the saying of Horace, that wisdom though she
be praised and commended of every man, yet is she glad to blow her nails, for
that no man will take so much pity of her, as to let her come in and warm her by
the fire side. It is commonly said, that there are no pleasant and delightsome
prisons, which we find to be true by daily experience. For though a man were
imprisoned in the goodliest palace of the world, yet would he quickly be
weary of his lodging; and yet notwithstanding we find the prison (wherein
pleasure keeps us so straightly enclosed, though it be the most filthy and
stinking dungeon that can be imagined) to be so pleasant in our eyes, that we
will in no wise come out of it all the days of our lives: there we will needs
die and be buried, abandoning the stately palaces of virtue and godliness,
where we might live in so great ease, liberty and tranquillity. I would
prosecute this matter more at large, were it not that I have discoursed of it
already in an other place, and plainly proved by sundry reasons how dangerous
a thing pleasure is both to old and young, and therefore how careful every one
should be to avoid it: not only old men, but likewise all others, of what age,
quality, and condition soever. For which cause, it is not amiss to travel in
the plain way of our virtuous elders, and to lay hold, as it were, with both
the hands on many years, or any other occasion whatsoever, which may divert and
turn us from the paths of ungodliness. The fourth reason, which breeds in
us such a horrible dread and terror of mind, The last remedy against the fear
of old age, isto consider that it brings us unto death, which is a passage
unto life everlasting.
is this, that it is very nere unto death. To refute which reason, we shall not
need to stand long, or use many words: which notwithstanding I would do to
such as are afraid thereof, not only to diminish the fear, but also to
withdraw their affections from the love and liking of all such things as are
in these young years, and to repose a great contentation and quietness in a
longnesse of days, which will teach them so many good lessons. For if, after a
long and tedious journey wherein we have escaped infinite dangers, and endured
all the injuries and checkes, which either the time, place, or persons could
any way offer us, in approaching our houses, where we hope to rest and repose
our selves, we presently by reason of our exceeding joy forget all our
forepassed dangers: what thanks shall we give unto old age, which like a
prosperous wind does blow us so directly to the haven of desired happiness,
where God has provided for us, most incomparable joys and pleasures for ever
and ever? When as the children of Israel had wandered in the wilderness by the
space of forty years through many great and perilous adventures, and arrived
at the length at the river of Jordan, from whence they might behold that land
of peace and rest which God so long before had promised: had they not exceeding
cause to rejoice and praise his holy name for so great a mercy? In like
manner, I say, that we have great reason to be merry, yea and to make bone
fires of mirth and gladness if it were possible, when as we see our selves
old, and that we have but a little way to travel, before we enter into the
kingdom of everlasting rest and quietness. Proper and fit similitud^s.
When as the Mariners arrive in their wished port, they presently shoot off
all their ordinance in token of great joy, and gladness of heart, though
peradventure they purpose not to make any long stay in that place: How joyful
then ought we to be, when as we see our selves ready to enter into that most
beautiful and delightsome habitation, where we are assured, we shall dwell for
ever with God and his angels in all joy and perfect rest. Whereby was the wicked
servant known? was it not by this, as Christ himself teaches us, when as he
said in his heart, My master deferreth his coming, and therefore he would
needs eat and drink with the drunkards? If then we are afraid to become old,
least our filthy and abominable pleasures should have an end, and that then our
lord and master will not long defer his coming: shall it not be a manifest
sign of our naughtines and disloyalty? and if we be once of the number of
these wicked and ungodly servants, of whom he makes mention, what shall we
look for in the end but this, that he will come in a day we know not of, and
in an hour when we look not for him, and will cut us off, and give us our
portions with the hypocrites, A fit comparison.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. A woman that does entirely love
her husband, and has wanted his company along time, and the day approaches
when as he promised to return, no question but she is exceeding merry and
joyful, and she is not weary with going to the door or window a hundred times
in a day, to see if she can espy him coming a far off And on the contrary,
if she care not for his return, it is an assured argument of her small love
and affection toward him. In like manner, it is an infallible note of our
infidelity and disloyalty toward our spouse, when as we fear his coming,
and wish with all our hearts he would still keep him far off. The
husbandman reioiceth when as he sees his harvest to approach, and that his come
is ready to be cut down and brought into his barnes: and why then should we be
afraid of old age, which hasteneth the end of all our labors and sorrows,
and procures the means to enjoy the fruit of that hope, which we have
always reposed in our God? we may then conclude, that there are no sufficient
reasons, which may persuade us, that this old age deserves of it self to be
blamed, much less to be condemned.

Let us come to the last of these bodily mischiefs, He enters now into the
consideration of the remedies against the fere of death. 1. This fear
proceeds of ignorance, which must be amended. Judge. 7.16.
and that which we fear most of all other, which is death. Wherein we show the
greatest incredulity and ignorance that may be: yea, far more then in any
other thing whatsoever we have spoken of heretofore. And first for our
ignorance: for what colorable reason can we allege for this our fear? there
is a certain kind of dread and terror of mind, wherewith we are suddenly
skared and terrified, but we know not wherefore: and such was the fear of the
Madianites when as Gideon assailed them with three hundred men, who had nothing
in their hands but trumpets and empty pitchers. And likewise that of the
Philistims, 1. Sa^. 14.13.
when as Jonathan and his sword bearer set upon them in their Camp. As also
that of the Assyrians in the time of Elizeus, and in the reign of king Ioram,
2. King. 7.6.
who being stricken with sudden fear, ran away, leaving behind them their
horses, their charets, their tents, and whatsoever they had in their camp. And
the Burgonians in the beginning of the reign of Lewis the eleventh, Philip
Comins in his 1. book. c. 19
being sent to discover the kings troops lying hard by Paris, returned very
speedily, supposing the high thistles which they saw, to be men at arms. The
fear which we have of death, is very like unto this: for we tremble, but we
know not wherefore. If any man should ask us the question, we could make no
answer: and if others should take upon them to teach us how to avoid this
fear, we cannot conceive it, let him speak never so plainly. We are very
like herein to little children, A fit comparison to discover this ignorance.
who are skared with a bugge beggar, that is, with a fancy: and yet
notwithstanding, they are oftentimes so exceedingly terrified herewith, that
when we would we can not still them: for that they are not capable of such
reasons as we allege to bring them to quietness, and to remove these foolish
fancies out of their minds. But if they once come to years and discretion,
this fond and foolish conceit will quickly vanish of it self. In like manner,
Incredulity and unbelief makes us to fear death.
the terror and dread we have of death, proceeds of nothing, but of our
ignorance and want of sound judgment. For if we did once know what death is,
and if for the understanding hereof, we would search the scriptures, which is
the school of the holy ghost, and then steadfastly believe whatsoever we find
there, which is proved unto us by so many sound reasons, then should we
easily perceive what a weak foundation this great fear has, which does so
astonish our minds, whenever we think of it, or hear it talked of by other
men.

Whenever death presents it self unto us, The better to drive away this
fear from us, we must compare this life with death.
it has a mask or visour on the face thereof, and we are wonderfully daunted
in the beholding so grimme and terrible a countenance, and run from it, as
from some infernal and hellish monster: but if we would pluck up good hearts,
and come near unto it, and pluck of the visour, we shall evidently perceive,
that it is a very friend and well willer toward us. For the better
manifestation hereof, I will make a brief comparison between that, and this
present life, which we love so exceedingly, and are so greatly enamoured of: to
the end, that the benefits we receive of each, First our co^ception, and what
we are from the beginning thereof.
being compared together, we may the more evidently perceive which is most
friendly, and best affectionate to us. Let us begin with our conception, and
that time when as we first take life within the bellies of our mothers. We are
conceived in sin, that is to say, we are infected, accursed, abominable,
wicked, disloyal, ungrateful, treacherous, rebellious, envious, proud,
boasters, disobedient to parents, murmurers, impatient, without natural
affection, unmerciful, blasphemers, haters, and contemners of God and all
goodness. In a word, there is nothing more like to the devil then we are
at our first conception, and he is called our father by reason of the great
similitude and likeness that is betvveene us. Behold now, our beginning and
the life we lead before we are borne. Whereas on the contrary, when we
die, we are delivered from this filth and corruption, and washed from all our
blackness, and mades as white as snow. We are no longer carnal, but
spiritual: Our happy estate and condition in heaven opposed against our
misery in earth.
there is no more contradiction between God and us, nor any thing that may
withdraw our love and affection from him: we feel no more the stings of death
and pricks of sin: we are no longer mistrustfull of his promises, or
disobedient to his laws: we presume no more of our own strength and
abilities, nor put any confidence in the help of any creature. And to
conclude, there will be no more any occasion of repentance, nor cause, why we
should put on sackecloth, and sprinkle our heads with ashes, in token of our
humiliation, and hearty sorrow for our sins, but we shall be replenished with
joy and gladness, and be continually praising our good God, who has
vouchsafed us such mercy, as to place us again in our former innocence, and
make us like unto his blessed angels. Though there were no other reason but
this, were it not sufficient to remove all fear of death from us? but we do
so little account of our integrity, righteousness, and perfection in heaven,
that we had rather remain in our dregs, then to the end we may please and
serve God the better, to come out of that stinking puddle, Secondly from our
birth in continual misery.
wherein we have taken such pleasure and delight. Next unto our conception,
ensues our birth, which is never a jotte more commodious for us. For being
once come into the world, we are borne to misery, which so attends on us,
that it never leaves us, until we be brought to our graves. Which we
foreseeing as it were, by a natural instinct, makes us to weep and cry
presently as soon as we are come into the world. But death is far more
gracious and beneficial unto us: for being not content to end our sorrows, it
regenerateth us, if we may so speak, and brings us to a perpetual and
everlasting happiness. Thirdly our actual life.
After our birth, follows the rest of our days, and the whole course and
continuance of our lives, which I pray you, Our ignorance
let us a little consider. We live in such ignorance, that we neither know God
nor his works, and yet his wisdom, his bounty, his power, his justice, his
mercy, is very apparent and continually before our eyes. There is no creature
be it never so little, but declares and shows them forth daily and
hourly: yea the very emmate and fly, and the teates of the nources which give
us suck. Notwithstanding we neither have eyes to see, ears to hear, nor
hearts to perceive, much less any tongues to declare such wonderful things.
He has created us, he has nourished us, he has defended, he has clothed, he
has taught and instructed us: he leads us in the day by the light of the
sun, and in the night by the brightness of the moon, and continually guides
us by his holy spirit: if we fall, he helps us up: if we stagger, he holds
us: if we be sick, he visits us, and being recovered, preserves us: if we
wander or go astray, he brings us home and keeps us afterward in our right
way: he saves us at home and abroad, going and coming, and whethersoeuer we
turn he is ready to meet us, and to accompany us whethersoeuer we go: and we
can not have either servant, kinsman or friend, that can be so necessary about
us, Our ingratitude.
or so willing to help us. We drive him away and yet he returns again: we
offer him wrong, and he endures it: we do not regard him, and he is content
to wink at it, and in recompense of all his great favors and mercies, we
still commit sin and wickedness, and will not acknowledge his great love and
affection toward us: We neither know God nor our selves
and as we know not God nor his benefits, so will we needs be ignorant of those
imperfections and vices which are in us. We think we are something, and indeed
we are nothing: we think we are wise, and yet we are fools: we think we are
virtuous, and we are vicious: we are worth nothing, and yet we will compare
with God. Behold here, in what marvelous ignorance we live while we are in
this world: but when as by death we are entered into the kingdom of heaven, we
shall then see God face to face: we shall know the great secrets and mysteries
of his divine power: the riches of his graces shall be made manifest unto us,
and we shall have liberty to behold them at our pleasure and ease: nothing
shall be kept from us that may increase our happiness, or bring contentment to
our minds. We shall know likewise, that we are nothing but by his grace, which
is all in all, and that by his mercy he has elected us, and by his goodness
called, justified, and glorified us. Of the continual travel both of body and
mind.
We shall no more rob him of his glory, nor be ambitious and seek for his
honor: for we shall know our selves and him likewise. Furthermore, we live
here always with great travel of body and torment of mind: we must build
houses to lodge our selves, and to lay in our cattle which til our grounds:
and we must gather the fruit thereof in summer to nourish us in winter. We
must walk to keep us in health, eat and drink to make us strong, heat us
in winter, and cool us in summer, brush our garments, wipe our shoes, go to
the markets and buy our meats, dress them, sees them, and make our fires,
and all this is not the hundredth part of all those mischiefs, toys, and
trifles that we are compelled to endure, to provide for the common necessities
of this miserable life, The difficultiee in our several vocations.
which we so highly esteem of: besides the particular pains that every man is
constrained to take in his vocation and state whereto he is called. For some go
to the wars, and some to the Court, some travel to fayres and markets, and
others to the sea about their merchandise: one is a husbandman, an other a
taylour or a shoemaker, another a fourbusher and a scourer of harness and old
swords: some are ioyners, turners, pointmakers, glouers, painters,
apple-mongers and cryers of oysters about the streets. And who is able to
rehearse all the shifts and devises that men have found out to gain a penny
for the maintenance of their lives: and yet do they invent daily more and more
to help themselves, and to satisfy their own curious humors. What pains, I
pray you, take they about their garments, and making of their apparel after
the newest fashion? Os curious and foolish trades
What diversities of laces in silkemens shoppes, and outlandish devices in
marchantes ships? What new knackes in attiring of women's heads? what
curiousness in their skreene ruffes, with their rebaters and supporters: what
finenesse in their cutworkes, networkes, cross clothes, and a thousand such
toys. What sundry sauces have cooks devised to please men's tastes: what
pictures, images, forms and fashions upon their baked meats? there is nothing
but the folly of man will counterfeit: and it seems, that as though God had
not appointed them sufficient necessary labor to put them in mind of their
sins, they will needs consume their bodies in fruitless travel, which they
take in hand to satisfy their own foolish humors. And although the labor
of the body in this life be exceeding great, and divided, as it were, into
diverse kinds as we have already declared, Of the infinite cares of the mind.
yet is it nothing if it be compared with those infinite sorrows, vexations,
and torments, whereto the mind is continually subject. For besides that the
body betaketh it self unto nothing, whereto the mind consents and agrees
not, communicating hereby of all the several pains and labors thereof: there
are over and besides infinite cares and sollicitudes of the mind, which are
proper and peculiar unto it self: as the study of the liberal arts:
distrust, fear, Jealousy, love, hatred, desire, ambition, revenge, pity,
envy, compassion and sorrow: and that which is worst of all, the sting and
prick of a guilty conscience: and this is one part of that pain and misery
that every man, of what estate and condition soever he be, must needs endure
in this poor and miserable life: from which not one can be exempted but by
death, which releaseth both body and soul of this torment, and brings them
to a blessed and a peaceable rest. For the one of them is laid in the ground,
there to sleep until the resurrection, and the other is ascended up to
heaven: where it neither thinks, hears, sees, or feels any thing, but
that which ministers comfort and consolaton, and loses in a moment
whatsoever before vexed or tormented it. Of sundry diseases.
The other evil and discommoditie that accompanies this life, is the
multitude and diversity of diseases, whereto we are subject. We are troubled
with fevers, chollickes, goutes, pluresies, ruins, fluxes of the body,
apoplexies, the small pox, scurfes and scalles. And in a word, there is
neither country, estate, city or town, age nor part of man's body, which has
not his particular malladies, and several diseases. God knows what a number
of Rheubarbs, glisters, purgings, lettings of blood, sweates, and sundry other
remedies we must take to prevent these forenamed diseases, and the torment the
poor body endures in taking of so many receites: and the pains that the
physician and servants take about sick persons: the one in prescribing of
potions and preservatives against their malladies, the other in watching and
attending in the time of their sickness, daily and hourly, at all times and
seasons. The fears, the cries, the sorrows and sobbes wherewith their friends
are in wonderful manner vexed, if they be in any danger: and the great
mischiefs that often fall out in noble houses by sudden death. For the
avoiding of all which miseries, there is no way but death, which makes an end
of all, by laying our bodies in the earth, and preparing them in a readiness to
put on incorruption, and immortallitie, where neither the air, nor meats, nor
drinks, time, nor any thing whatsoever shall make them subject to any more
inconveniences.

Furthermore, we live here continually in broils, Of war.
in contentions and wars. There is no country nor kingdom, which is not
tossed and troubled with outrageous storms and tempests: kings against
kings, and nations against nations, cities against cities, and one against
another, the Guelph against the Gibelin, and the Swisser against the Almaine,
Strife.
the French against the English, and the Breton against the Portugal. If there
be but two servants in a house, two maids, a catt and a dog, there is ever
some braules and brabblinges, strifes and dissentions. And if we would consider
withal the contentions among men about matters of profit, Sects.
or the diversities of religions, and the continual heart-burning, which
Satan, that old murthere of mankind, causes to arise among men to make all
the world in an vproare, and to make a general confusion of all things, the
ambition, pride, and immoderate desires of our flesh, which do continually
blow the coals and kindle the fire, that it can not go out, we would say it
were impossible that there should be any peace here upon the earth: neither in
kingdoms by reason of the ambition of Princes: neither among cities because of
their strife and emulation, nor among citizens by reason of their covetous
minds and greedy desires: nor among servants, by reason of their envy, nor
yet among the parts of a man's own body, by reason the one half is flesh and
the other spirit. Is it not much better then, that men should quickly die,
then live long in this world, considering that our lives are nothing but
wars, strifes, dissentions, and debates, as we have already proved: and
that on the contrary, death brings with it so great rest, peace, and
quietness? besides all these, we are subject to a thousand temptations. The
devil is on the one side forging and devising of sundry wyles to beguile us,
Of the manifold temptations of Satan, of the world and our flesh, of
prosperity and adversity.
and framing of many engines and snares to entrap us: and being very subtle
and his craftes-master, he turns his coat and transformeth himself into an
angel of light, to the end we should not mistrust him, and that thereby he
might catch us the more easily. On the other side is the world, wherein we are
compelled to dwell, which sometime speaks us fair, and sometime threateneth
us, to try and assay if either by fear or hope it may catch us at advantage;
and therewithal is united and conjoined our flesh, which never leaves us, and
which by flattering words, pleasant devices, and manifold allurements does so
charm and bewitch us, that we have no power to deny any thing that it
demands of us. And if it fortune that we be so hard hearted at any time as
to deny her requests, she weepeth presently, and makes such a pitiful
complaint, that we are forced forthwith to alter our purpose. Furthermore, we
have friends, honors, riches, pleasure and prosperity on the one side, and
enemies, dishonor, contempt, poverty, and adversity on the other side, that
devise and practice all means possible to turn us from the fear and
obedience we owe unto our God. And there is no difference between them, but
that the one uses mildness and gentleness, and the other rigor and
severity. Seeing then that our lives are subject to so many dangers, and, as
it were, assailed on every side, either by furious and cruel enemies, or else
by dissembling and flattering friends, who are worst of all, we may and that
with great reason conclude that death is far better, which freeth us from all
danger, not only of ouercomming, but also of attempting and assailing. He
shows that the pleasures of this life are vain, and therefore the fear we
have to loose them is mere vanity.


Furthermore, we live here continually in marvelous coffeehouse: and (as
Solomon says) when we have diligently considered whatsoever is under the
Sun, we shall find that all is vanity and vexation of mind. I will pass
over infinite occasions, which minister nothing but grief and sorrow speaking
only of that, which we account as a pleasure and delight in this world. I
would know of the ambitious, covetous, and voluptuous sort, if honors,
riches, and pleasures which they esteem so highly of, can be attained and
possessed without great and excessive care? Our friends.
we take exceeding comfort of ourfriends, but such as have had great
experience, confess that there is much sorrow mingled therewith. Our children.
Children likewise do minister occasions of much joy to their parents: but it
falls out oftentimes herein as it does in offices: that which is purchased
with great care and costs us very dear, is all lost in a moment, before we
have enjoyed it a year: yea perhaps before we have them. And how should it
be possible, but that we should be vexed with other things, seeing that even
in those that are very natural and most agreeable unto us, we are oftentimes
so highly dispeased and discontented? Nourishment
For who is there that is not glutted in time with the best meat that can be
provided, or not wearied with the purest wine that is, with lying soft, with
sleeping long, Pastime.
with hearing of music, with courting, with playing and sporting, with
hunting and hauking, Exercise both of body and mind.
or in whatsoever else we take pleasure or delight: the liberal arts which
do so wonderfully delight us, have their fullness and saciety with them, and
are continually accompanied with some sorrows. For (as Solomon says) where
there is much wisdom, there is also much care: and he which gets knowledge,
gains grief. Virtue it self.
Virtue is not exempted, for he which will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution. Behold here the pleasures of this life: there is not one of
them but is mingled with bitterness, which quickly takes a way all the
sweetness we find, when we first taste them.

But the pleasures of death are far otherwise, On the contrary the pleasures
which ensue of death, do bring us a perfect quietness. Apoc. 21.4, 5.
for they bring us a perfect delight, and an assured contentation, with a
marvelous joy, and comfort to all our senses. God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes, says Saint John, and there shall be no more death: neither
sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the first
things are passed. And he that sat upon the throne said: Behold, I will
make all things new. This may easily be understood of such, as will
diligently consider the state of our first parents in their innocence. For if
so be that before their fall, they perceived and felt a marvelous quietness
and tranquillity of mind, and were free from all fear, distrust, envy, pride,
and all other passions whatfoeuer that might disquiet them: what shall we hope
for in heaven, being clothed with the righteousness and purity of Christ
Jesus, and seeing God face to face even as he is; hearing the sweet and
melodious songs of men and angels: tasting, or to speak more truly, filling
our selves with that most pleasant fruit of life everlasting, and smelling the
sweet savors, which proceed from the garments of our spouse: and that which
is the very height and perfection of all our joy, to lie continually in his lap
and embrace him for ever and ever? shall not all this be sufficient to persuade
us, that not only our sorrows, but also the remembrance of them are dead and
buried with our bodies?

Moreover, As Soon as we begin to love God, the world presently hates us: from
which hatred death delivers us and brings us to everlasting joy and
selicitie.
so long as we live in this world, we are always as strangers and aliens. For
after that the grace of God has once regenerated us, and that by the working
of his holy spirit, we have put off all old fashions, or (rather to use the
phrase of the Scripture) the old man, to be clothed and apparelled with the
new, then presently do we begin to be hated and persecuted of the world: our
kinsfolks and friends being not only contented to forsake us, but do also
conspire and complot with our enemies how to destroy us. The brother, says
Christ, shall deliver the brother to death, and the father the son, and the
children shall, rise against their fathers and mothers, and shall cause them to
be put to death: and ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Asimilitude
Behold the courtesy and entertainment that the faithful are to look for in
this life. But if they be once dead, they are received and lodged in heaven,
not as strangers, but as citizens with the saints and servants of God. They are
like unto young scholars, who having spent their time diligently at their
books, return from the universities to their friends, and are welcomed home
both of father and mother, brother and sister, every one preasing forward with
great desire to kiss them, and to make the greatest demonstration of joy and
gladness that may be, for their happy return. In like manner, when true
Christians depart out of this world, where they are, as it were, at
school, to return to their fathers house, God himself is the first that
bids them vvelcome, and wills them to enter into the joy of their Lord
and father. Jesus Christ is the next which takes and leads them into the
palace of the King, and says, Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. The come the Angels,
who carry them like Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, to rejoice for ever with
them, and with the other holy fathers. And in a word, we may easily
conjecture what great joy there is in heaven, at their entrance into such
blessedness, seeing they rejoice at the conversion of every sinner here in
earth: and both heaven and whatsoever is under the cope thereof, do honor
and reverence them as the children and sons of God.

The Church may very fitly becompared unto some great and noble princess, The
unspeakable joy which the children of God have after they be once dead, should
abolish all fear of death.
who leaving her cuntry and acquaintance where she has long inhabited, and
been very much conversant, goes to seek the King her husband, who keeps his
Court in his own kingdom a far off, as soon as she enters within the
territories and dominions of her lord, all the towns wheresoever she pass,
receive her with eloquent orations, honorable and rich presents, great and
sumptuous feasts, and very joyful acclamations: and there is not so little or
poor a village, but is very forward in making of some external shevve of in
ward joy and gladness for her coming. In like manner, when as the children of
God are after their death lifted up into heaven, and that they have laid away
their mourning attire, which made them to be unknown and reputed as poor
strangers and pilgrims so long as they lived here, then every creature
begins to honor them, and to bend and bow before them, by reason of that
great alliance which they have, and that honorable place vvhereto they have
attained: and in lue of that, that in this world they were made the vvonder
and gazing stock of every one, both of men and angels, and accounted fools,
vveake and vile, yea, and the very ofscouring of all things, they being once
exalted and lifted up above the heavens, with their head Christ Jesus, shall be
acknowledged of all creatures, for kings, lords, and judges of the whole
world. Those who have despised and disgraced them in this life, shall be troubled
with an horrible and dreadful fear, Wisd. 5.3.
when as they shall see them, contrary to their expectation, to be saved and
delivered: then shall they change their opinions, and sigh for grief of mind,
and say within themselves, these are they whom we sometime had in derision, and
in a parable of reproach. We fools thought their lives madness, and their ends
without honor. How are they counted among the children of God, and their
portions are among the saints?

We live also here under the tyranie of the devil, sin, death, and the world:
Death delivers us from most horrible tyranny and places us under the most
happy government that may be, and therefore we need not fear it.
for though we be franchised, and delivered by the death of Jesus Christ, yet
not withstanding we do not fully enjoy this liberty, neither are we so
absolutely delivered from the power of those tirants before named, but that they
will be still troubling and disquieting us, so long as we live here below,
within their kingdoms and dominions. But after that we be once departed from
hence, then we have no more cause to fear or to care for any thing, being
assured, that we shall live under the most merciful, mild, gentle, pitiful,
just, and reasonable government that may be. All which being considered, I
would feign know what reason we can allege, why we should fear death, or
desire to live any longer in this world. And which of these I pray you are the
wisest in their wishes and desires, either S. Paul, David, and Elias, who
desired to die: or we who are so desirous to live? for if that which one of
them says be true, that it is best of all to be losed, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ Jesus: it must follow of necessity, that it is loss
and detriment to the faithful, and such as are Gods children still to live in
this world: and so it is out of doubt. For so the promises of God, which are
so ample and exceeding great, could not be accomplished; we could not attain
the end of our hope, nor enjoy the benefits of Christ Jesus, and the
inheritance which he has purchased for us by his death and passion, Death
delivers us from infinite evils, and pusteth us in possession of inspeakable
pleasures.
which is the effectual means to bring us to the full fruition and possession
of all joy and comfort whatsoever.

While we live here, we are absent from God, as Saint Paul speaks, for we
walk by faith and not by sight: and as soon as we are dead, we are absent from
the body, and present with God himself: we are grieved, and we sorrow under the
burden of our sins, temptations and miseries, which so long as we are here,
do as it were, ouerwhelm us, and press us down: and as soon as we are dead,
we are delivered and freed from this so unspeakable a weight, and we become
light and merry hearted. We live here in weeping and mourning all the days of
our lives: and as soon as we are dead, we rejoice and sing praises with a
cherefull countenance unto our God for ever and ever. We live here to perish in
the wilderness, and to converse among sauadge and wild beasts, in the midst of a
thousand dangers, which do inuiron us of all sides: and we depart from hence to
live in paradise with our friends in all security and abundance: this life
puts us into prison, and death delivers us from thence. While we live
here, we endure frost and cold, storms and tempests: and as soon as we are
dead we presently perceive the pleasant spring time, which brings us more joy
and comfort, then all the other hard seasons brought us sorrow and vexation.
We live here like subjects, and by death we are made kings. We live here with
barbarous, cruel, malicious, proud, covetous, and contentious infidels, which
do exceedingly offend us, and we are wonderfully offensive unto them: and
whenever we die, we are assured to be in the company of holy, just,
pitiful, mild, merciful, and peaceable souls, which are clean and pure in
heart, to whom we do great pleasure, and of whom we receive infinite joy,
comfort, and commodity. We are mortal so long as we are in the world, and we
live in continual dread and fear of death: but we are no sooner out of this
world, but we are immortal, and assured of everlasting life.

If all this be true, is it not a very strange thing, The fear of death
proceeds of infidelity, and therefore it ought to be rejected.
that we can not be brought to believe it: or if we do believe it, we are so
slenderly persuaded of the truth, that it is not sufficient to take from us the
fear of this death, which is so happy and blessed a thing, nor the sorrow for
this life, which breeds in us such immeasurable sorrow and torment? And it
is marvelous to consider, that we desire so earnestly to live at ease, and
without care: and yet we seek by all means possible to avoid death, which
is the only way to accomplish our desires. Such as are merrily disposed and
pleasant companions, will often say, that God favors a man when as he takes
away his wife, especially if she be evil and of bad condition. Which if it be
true, I may safely say, that God bestows a marvelous grace upon us, and does
us the greatest pleasure that is, when as by death he delivers us from our
flesh, which is the most treacherous and disloyal wife that can be: and which
does so torment the poor mind, with whom she is married, that she vexes and
disquieteth her silly hushand with the greatest and most intolerable grief
that may be.

But some man may answer and say, though for the reasons already alleged the
natural death may seem to be tolerable, Me enters into the consideration of
violent deaths and shows the remedies against the fear of the^. 1. Against
punishments ordained by common laws. Romans 13.3.
yet such deaths as are violent and sudden, as those are which the martyrs,
and malefactors endure, are most horrible and fearful. As concerning those
punishments which are inflicted by the magistrate for the maintenance of peace
and quietness in the commonwealth, and the preservation of a well, and it is
state and government, we may avoid them if we will, and it is our fault if we
have any cause to fear them. For as Saint Paul says, Princes are not to be
feared for good works, but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of the
power? do well, so shall thou have praise of the same. For he is the minister
of God for thy wealth: but if thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the
sword for naught. For he is the minister of God to take vengeance on him that
does evil. It is very apparent then, that if we will live orderly and
obediently under our kings and princes, and be contented to be ruled by their
laws, we may easily be freed from that fear which thieues, pirates,
murderers, and such like malefactors have of justice and good orders.
Remedies against the fear of martyrdom. 1. First it is honorable. Chap. 1.29.
As concerning martyrdom, we ought not only not to be afraid of it, but also
earnestly to desire it, whenever it shall please God to bestow upon us such
great grace and favor, as to appoint us so honorable a death, as to suffer
for the testimony and confession of the truth. Saint Paul writing to the
Philippians says, that unto them it was given for Christ, that not only they
should believe in him, but also that they should suffer for his sake: To
declare unto them, and likewise to us, that the greatest grace and favor that
we can receive in this world, is, that after we have once believed in him for
our salvation, we should die for his glory. Act. 5.41.
The Apostles (as Saint Luke reports) when as they had been beaten and
scourged, departed from the Council, and rejoiced, Gal. 6.14.
that they had been accounted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ
Jesus. And S. Paul says, Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. The
Ecclesiastical story makes mention of a certain woman, Socrat. book 4.
chap. 14.
who understanding that the Emperors livetenant had made proclamation in the
city of Edessa, that all the Christians should meet at a place appointed;
resolved with her self to be there among them also: though that she was
certainly informed that they should be all killed and spoiled. The day prefixed
for this bloody execution being come, as she hastened to the place of the
assembly with her little child in her arms, meeting with the Livetenant by
the way, who demanded of her whither she went so fast, and whether she knew
that all those that were there should be slain or no? yes truly that I do,
(quoth she) and that makes me make such haste, to the end that I may be one
of the first that shall die.

Eusebius reports that Origin being a little child, In his sixth book of his
histories, chap. 2.
and understanding that his father, who was in prison for the profession of
Christ Jesus, was somewhat hindered from going on cherefully in that course he
had begun, for the love he bare him and his mother, wrote a letter unto him,
wherein he did humbly beseech him, that he would not fear to go on forward in
his profession, and not desist for any affection he bare unto him or his
mother, but that he should continue unto the end. For as touching themselves,
they were persuaded there could be no greater happiness, then to die for the
honor of him, who had suffered for their salvation. Yea, and Origin him self
the same day that his father dyed, would needs have been at the place of
execution, to have been martyred with him; had not his mother hid away his
clothes in the night, that thereby she might the better keep him within
doors all the day following. And he further reports, that all the Christians
of his time were as desirous of Martyrdom, as the worldlings were of their
pleasures and delights. And whenever they were required to give an account
of their faith, or to dye for their profession, they strived and contended as
much or more, who should be in the first ranks, as it were, as our soldiers
do, when as there is any battle or set fight appointed. In his
Ecclesiastical history.
Nicephorus makes mention of a good old father named Macarius, who being in
prison for the truth, and laden with strong boltes upon his legs, and
manacles about his hands, (as it is always the manner to handle thieves and
murderers more mildely then the members of Christ Jesus) and by reason of his
long imprisonment and unmerciful usage, being almost quite consumed and ready
to give over the Ghost, some of his friends that came to visit him, demanded
of him if he would have his boultes taken off after he was dead: to whom he
answered, that he would in no wise they should do so; for that those were
the ornaments he desired to be buried in. In his homily of the 40. Martyrs.
Saint Basil also has written a very memorable and worthy story, which I
will briefly recite. A certain tyrant, who was at that present governor of
Cappadocia, to prove whether he could make the Christians abjure their
religion or not, commanded that they should be set starke-naked in a very
extreme cold night, in the midst of the market place of Cesarea, and a
great fire to be made within some hundred paces of them, whereat it should
be lawful for such to warm them, as would renounce their faith and forsake
Christ Jesus: notwithstanding every one of them did valiantly and constantly
endure all the torments of this new devised punishment, except one, who
being more delicate and thender then his fellows, went to warm him at the
fire thereby to save his life: which when the executioner perceived, being in a
marveilous rage, and admiring the constancy of the others, ran incontinently
and took the place of this naked and poor Apostata, crying out that he was
become a Christian, and humbly thanked God that he had vouchsafed to allow him
a place among his witnesses. By these and sundry other examples we may easily
guess, in what estimation Martyrdom was among those of old time. It is not
then to be feared but to be desired, and we may account our selves most
happy, if it please God to call us unto it.

But some will say, will not Christ Jesus have us take heed of men? Do not
the Scripture reach us to this end, that they are Wolves, Loyons, Bulls,
Serpents, and mad dogs? Tyrants have no power of themselves, confidering
their infirmities declared by many places of Scripture.
that their throat is an open sepulcher? that deciete is in their tongues?
that the poison of Aspes is under their lips? that their mouths are full of
cursing? that their feet are swift to shed blood? that they have not known
the way of peace? that thefeare ofGod is not before their eyes? and many such
like speeches uttered by the Spirit of God, to forewarne us of their malice
and cruelty, to the end we should avoid them. Whereto I agree and I must
needs confess, that there is nothing in this world (the devil excepted)
that is more treacherous, malicious or dangerous, then men. But the better to
comfort us against their malice, we must consider on the other side their
infirmities and weakness, and that they have no such power to execute their
wicked purposes, Esaias 2.22.
as they have will and desire to devise and effect them. The Prophet Esaias, Esaias
2.22.
the better to show their frailetie, and that we have no cause (all things
being considered) either to fear or trust them: says, Cease you from the
man, whose breath is in his nostrels: for wherein is he to be esteemed? There
is nothing more certain, then that which the Prophet speaks in this place,
touching the lives of the bravest and gallantest men in the earth, who are so
frail, that if their breath be stopped but a quarter of an hour, they are
stifeled and strangled forthwith: and notwithstanding, like superbious and
proud tyrants, they never enter into the consideration hereof, that thereby
they may abate their pride and pluck down their stomachs: neither do we
consider of it as we should do; if we did, it would be a very effectual means
to moderate thatfeare, which we have by reason of their threats and menacing
speeches. If a Captain or soldier that marches in the field, should be
afraid of every crack, or of the smoke of every chimney, or of the pricks of
every bush, or of the bees that are gathering honey among the sweet and pleasant
flowers, the clattering of the armor or weapons, the shaking of the swords and
neighing of horses, should he be accounted courageous and valiant? no surely,
neither yet shall we be reputed hardy, if we tremble so exceedingly at the grim
cou^tenances and braving speeches of cruel tyrants? For what are they, Psalm.
1.2.37.118.129.
but as we have before described them? David compares the^ to dust, to powder,
to stubble, to smoke, to thorns, and an earthen pot. What shall we say then
of all the counsels, enterprises, complots, and conspiracies, which tyrants and
their accomplices devise against Christ Jesus, his truth, his Church, and all
his members: all are follyes and vanities, as David shows in the beginning of
the 2. Psalm. We may then well perceive hereby, that there is no such reason
why we should fear their persecutions, or any thing else that man, which is a
worm of the earth, can devise for the extirpation of Gods truth and religion.

Now as all their fury and madness ought not to astonish us, The
consideration of the power of God, ought to abolish the fear of persecutions.
considering the small power and ability they have to hurt us, if it be not
given them from above: So likewise this is a very strong and forceable argument
to comfort us, that we are protected and environed on all sides with the
favor and power of the Almighty God, who is able to defend and keep us from
all peril and danger whatsoever. And this was all the reason that he
alleged unto the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 1.8.
when as he sent him unto the Kings of Judah, and unto the Princes and high
Priests, to denounce unto them the judgementes of God, and the miseries that
were prepared for them. Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to
deliver thee, says the Lord. And in another place, Girde up thy loins and
stand up, to the end thou may tell them all the things that I command
thee. Be not afraid of them, lest peradventure I cast thee down before them.
Behold, I have made thee this day as a defensed City, as a pillar of iron,
and a wall of brass upon the earth against the Kings of Judah, and the Princes
thereof, against the high Priests, and all the people of the earth. They shall
fight against thee, but they shall not overcome thee: for I will be with thee
to deliver thee, says the Lord. He was also the buckler and the fortress of
David in all his trouble. And he that will know in what security he accounted
him self, being in the protection of the Almighty, let him read the
3.23.46.91.121.125. Psalms. and likewise the 18. Psalm, wherein after he had
magnified and extolled the power and puissance of God, that had defended him
from all his enemies: In the end he concludes in this manner. Let the Lord
live, and blessed be my strength, and the God of my salvation be exalted. It is
God that gives me power to avenge me, and subdueth the people under me. O my
deliverer from mine enemies: even thou have set me up from them that rose
against me: thou have delivered me from the cruel man. Therefore will I praise
thee, O Lord, among the nations, and will sing unto thy name. Great deliverance
gives he unto his King, and shows mercy unto his anointed, even to David
and to his seed for ever. Is it possible to make a more goodly description then
this, as well of the power and might, wherewith God preserves his children from
temptation, and the care he has to keep them in all their perils and
dangers; as also of his favor and love, which makes him to destroy and
overthrowe all their enemies? Having then the word and promises of our God,
having faith and an assured confidence in his grace and favor, having his holy
Spirit, his presence, his might, his power, and in a word, the Angels to
attend on us, yea and all the powers of heaven, as the children of Israel had,
to guard us, and to fight for us against the Canaanites, and as Theodosius had
in that cruel and bloody war against the Tyrant Maximus: Shall we be
afraid of any earthly creature, being thus armed at all points, and being
covered all over with such complete harness?

Furthermore if we be armed with patience which is the best defense, and (as it
were) the peculiar weapon of Christians, Patience and constancy surmounteth
the fear of persecutions.
we need not doubt but we shall be invincible, if we will pluck up good
hearts and seek to defend our selves: and we shall be sure to conquer our
enemies, if we will endeavor once to assail them. The weapons of our war,
as Saint Paul says, are not carnal, 2. Cor. 10.4.
but mighty through God to cast down every strong hold: wherewith we
overthrowe imaginations, and every thing that is exalted against the knowledge
of God, and bringing every thought into captivity under the obedience of
Christ. Dan. 2.44.
And this is that which Daniel foretold, speaking unto Nebuchadnezzar of the
kingdom of the Son of God, which should succeed the four Monarchies,
whereof he had made mention before. In the days of these Kings (says he)
shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and
this kingdom shall not be given to another people: but it shall break and
destroy all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Christ Jesus seeing
the Scribes and Pharisees so maliciously bent against him and against his
disciples, Matt. 25.42.
and that they had conspired and sworn his death; said unto them, Have you not
read, that the stone which the builders refused, is become the head of the
corner? This is the Lords doing, and it is marveilous in our eyes. Therefore I
say unto you, that the kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
people that shall bring forth the fruits thereof. And whosoever shall fall on
this stone, he shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him
to powder. In which words he does admonish them, that all their enterprises
were in vain, and that in the end they should turn to their own shame and
confusion: as it has always happened unto Tyrants, who have persecuted Christ
Jesus and his Church. What gained Pharao in opposing him self against Moses,
and endeavoring to keep the children of Israel still in captivity and
slaverie, contrary to the will and ordinance of God who purposed to deliver
them: Or the Canaanites and the other seven nations against Joshua and the whole
army of Israel: Or Saul against David, though he omitted nothing that could
any ways be devised to take him and kill him, and that this poor man had
nothing to defend him, nor any place to hide him in, neither in woods nor
mountains, or any other place to fly unto; notwithstanding because God was
his aid, and that he was shielded by his favor and protection; his enemy, who
continually hated him and persecuted him from place to place with extreme fury
and rage, could never hurt or endammage him by any manner of ways? The first
and second book of the Kings. The Acts of the Apostles.
Wherein did Achab and Iezabel prevail against Elias: or the Kings of Israel
and of Syria against Elisha: or Herod and the high Priests against the
Apostles: or Constance the Emperor against Athanasius? all which were as
little flies or gnattes in comparison of Elephantes, and yet notwithstanding
they ever had the victory. And it has always been found very true, that in
all the Church-warres and conflictes, the faith of th righteous has always
been of more force, then the sword of the ungodly: and with their patience
they have continually overthrowen the fury and rage of their enemies. It was
commonly said sometime, that the Lacedaemonians ruled all Greece with a white
wande: which may be more fittely said of the Church of God. For although even
from the beginning of the world, it has not only wrestled against flesh and
blood; Ephesians. 6.12.
but also (as Saint Paul says) against principalities, against powers, and
against the worldly governors, the Princes of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places: and for the
defense of themselves, and the avoiding of all their malicious attemptes, they
had nothing but their trust and confidence in God, which their enemies scorned
and contemned. And yet have they continually so valiantly behaved them selves,
that they could never be overthrown, but have in the end remained conquerers:
1. Cor. 1.25.
verifying that which the same Apostle says, that the foolishnes of God is
wiser then men; and the weakness of God is stronger then men.

But what can there be imagined, Neither the number nor the power of
persecuters should make us afraid of their persecutions. Chap. 6.
that should so terrify and scare us in the time of persecution? Is it the
number or power of our enemies that does so daunt and astonish us? There is a
most excellent story for this purpose in the second book of the Kings,
whereas it is said, that Elesha being in Dothan with his servant, the King of
Syria sent thither horses and charets, and a mighty host to compass the
City and to take him; and when the servant of the man of God arose early in
the morning to go out, he espied a great army which compassed the City, and
he was wonderfully afraid, and said unto the Prophet, Alas, my master, how
shall we do? And he answered, Fear not, for they that be with us are more
then they that be with them. Then Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I beseech
thee, open his eyes that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the
servant, and he looked, and behold, the mountain was full of horses and
charets of fire round about Elisha. It is not then the multitude of enemies
that should make us afraid, seeing as it appears by this history, we have
many more friends to succor and defend us, then enemies to hurt us? neither
need we to fear their power and might, unless we will confess that the
devil and men are stronger to hurt us, then God and his Angels are to deliver
us.

We are afraid lest they should hurt us, and yet we know they can not do any
harm to our sheep, or oxen, or any thing else that we have, The want of
ability and power in our enemies to do harm, ought to diminish our fear.
unless it pleases God to suffer them and to give them license. We are
afraid least they should take away our lives, and yet we know, that they can
not so much as pluck one hair from our heads, but by the permission and
sufferance of him, who has taken a just reckoning of them. We fear least they
should cast us down headlong, and clean destroy us: and yet they can not do
so much as touch us, which is a very small matter, nor make us so much as
trippe against a stone to stumble or fall. O how slenderly we consider the
estate and condition of those, with whom we have to do. For if we would
advisedly ponder how feeble and weak they are, yea and so frail, that God is
able to overthrow them with a fillippe of his finger: or seeing that they are
mortal, they are not the lords, but the servants and slaves of death, over
which they have no more power then they have over their own lives, we would
never be afraid least they should hurt us, for that we would be assuredly
persuaded, that if they went about to do us any harm, the mischief they
intend, would light upon their own pates. For if at such time as we are so
timorous, we would remember that we are the children of God, and under his
protection, that we are of the sheepefold of Christ Jesus, and that we can not
be taken out of his hands, being defended and guarded with infinite legions of
Angels, which are ready to fight for us, and keep us wheresoever we are, or
whithersoever we go: that we are Kings and Priests, and as holy and sanctified
things unto God, which other creatures can not touch without sacrilege and
incurring his wrathful displeasure: as also that we have his word, that we
shall never perish, and that our reins (as S. Paul speaks) are girded with
verity, Ephesians. 6.14.
and armed with the brestplate of righteousness: that we have the shield of
faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which are
armours of far better proof then ever were those of Achilles; If I say we
would remember all these, as often as our enemies do threaten to hurt us,
were it not a shame for us, and shall we not condemn our selves for stark
cowardes, if being thus provided, and having such advantage over them, we will
notwithstanding run away, and that in the sight of our Captain, who is
continually in the forefront, and in the hottest of the skirmish, encouraging
us to strike valiantly, both by his words and example; and is the beholder not
only of his faithful servants, which fight courageously, to remunerate and
reward them for their noble valor, but also of such as are faint-hearted and
white liuered soldiers, for to casse them and put them forth of his bands.

Though we have no other aid, but the word of God, The word of God is our
strength, why are we then afraid?
is it not sufficient to defend us against all violence and invasion what so
ever? I would feign know, if the devil, man, and all other creatures what so
ever, had conspired to overthrow the heavens, and to pluck up, as it were,
the earth by the roots; whether they were able to bring it to pass, or no? The
time which wears and consumes all things, neither yet the continual use,
nor the motion which is the most quick and violent, that can be imagined,
could ever hurt or impair them, for the space of 5590. years: ever since
which time they have been created. Neither are they any one iotte altered from
their first form and fashion, which God has given them. And yet
notwithstanding there is nothing that does preserve and keep them, but only
his word, by virtue of which, they were created in the beginning. Having then
this sacred and divine word, which is more durable then the heavens, and having
it not only with us, 1. Epist. chap. 5.4.
but also in us, and in our hearts (as S. John says) by faith and trust which
we repose in him: what cause have we to fear any danger, though men rage and
storm never so much against Christ Jesus and his members?

But this is not all. For besides the word of God, Faith and prayer sufficient
to resist this fear. Notable examples alleged for proofs. See Exodus Ios.
Judge. King. and especially the 11. Chap. to the Hebr.
as we have all ready said, we have also faith and prayers, which are of no
small force against the malicious deseignes of our enemies. The Amalekites were
overcome of Moses by this means: and so likewise Goliath of David: the
Midianites of Godeon: the Philistims of Jonathan: and the Assyrians of
Ezechias. And what force is there that is able to resist faith and prayer? By
faith the children of Israel passed through the red sea, and the river of
Jorden, and the waters fled back, as though they had been afraid, and the
mountains shaked and trembled at their coming. By faith the walls of Ierico
fell down, after that they had been compassed seven days; and in a moment
were quite rased at the blowing of the trumpets, which had as great force at
that present, as all the double cannons in the world can have. By faith the
children of God have subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the
promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle,
turned to flight the armies of the aliants, the women received their dead
raised to life: other also were racked, and would not be delivered, that they
might receive a better resurrection. We may see by these examples, the great
force of faith, and of the prayers of the children of God, when so ever they
are in any necessity. For being armed with such weapons, they are not only
able to fight against men, but even against death it self. Why then are we
afraid of every blast that comes from their mouths, and so astonished, as
though the thunder it self were ready to fall upon our heads?

And why do we not remember, Our lives are in the hands of God, who will
preserve them in despite of al tyrants, and that oftentimes with their own
destruction.
that not only the hairs of our heads are nombred, but also our days and
years, yea, and the minits of our lives are counted: and that so exactly, that
as we can not add one iotte to the prolonging of our time, so can not the
cruellest tyrant that is, cut off any thing to make it any whit the shorter?
And even as we see in the seasons of the year, that from the beginning unto
the ending, they are appointed of God; and that in such sort, that all the men
in the world, though they should employ all their whole force, counsels, and
endeavors to the contrary, were not able to alter them: In like manner may we
be assured, that our lives are so limited and bounded by God, that neither King
nor Prince, power, nor potentate, can any manner of ways shorten or prolong
them: yea and that which may wonderfully comfort us, so often as we remember
it, that GOD does oftentimes prolong our days by the means of wicked
tyrants, which would cut them off. And this may notably appear in the example
of Moses, Moses.
who, being cast out among the men children of Israel, by the commandment of
Pharaoh; was saved by his daughter, and brought up by her to succeed him in
the kingdom of Egypt. What plainer and more evident demonstration can we have
of the providence of God; and that the hearts of Princes are in his hands, and
that he can mollefie or harden them, turn them and bend them which way so
ever it pleases him? Nebuchadnezzar, The three young men.
who in the beginning was so furious and so raging against the three young men,
of whom Daniel makes mention, that all his tormentours and executioners could
not make a fire hoate enough, and to his liking for to burn them: neither yet
were quick and ready enough to east them into the hoate burning furnace, was
the first that spoke of their deliverance, and that hurnbled him self before
the LORD to praise him, and to acknowledge his power and might, which a little
before he had so arrogantly disdained and blasphemed. And this was the
occasion that these young men became more famous, and were brought unto the
knowledge and acquaintance of the King, who afterward advanced them in the
kingdom of Babylon, contrary to the expectation of their enemies, and such as
had accused them before with purpose to destroy them. Daniel.
The like happened to Daniel in the reign of King Darius. For the evil that
his adversaries intended against him, in the end fell upon their own heads;
and all the complots and proiects they had laid and devised, served to no
other end, but to make this servant of GOD better known, and his virtue and
constancy to be the more honored and reverenced, bringing him into the grace
and favor of the King, to make him in far greater reputation, then ever he
was in Babylon. Men may then have malicious minds, and they may, as they
daily do, threaten the Church: seeing they have no power to execute their
tyranny, unless it pleases GOD to give them leave, and that the effect of
all their counsels does depend of his divine providence, which guides and
rules all to the profit and commodity of his children, we have no greater
occasion to fear them, then we have to hope and expect for some good at their
hands. The confidence which we repose in them is always vain, for that they
neither can nor will do any good. And the fear we have of them is very
foolish, for that they cannot hurt us, what will and desire so ever they have
thereto.

We believe and confess all this, when so ever we here it spoken of. We must
needs co^de^ne our selves of cowardelines, seeing so many reasons and examples
will not encourage us.
And oftentimes while we have these considerations in our hearts, we imagine
that though all the world should assail us, yet we would be invincible. And
for all this, as soon as we hear any noise or bruit, though it be a false
alarm, our courage presently fails us. We are like unto the hare, whom, as
the tale goes, the fox reproouing on a certain time for his great cowardice,
saying, that considering he had such harness, such strength, and agilitie of
body, he might fight with the fiercest and cruellest beasts of the world; and
therefore his friends wondered that he should be so fearful and timorous,
running away at the barking of every little dog: whereto the hare answered,
that he could not deny but that which he spoke was true, and that
oftentimes, when he considered so much with him self, he was fully resolved
to fight with the dogs, and resolutely to withstand the^: but yet he had
found by experience, that his heart would not serve him: for as soon as he
heard the hou^ds in the woods, he presently forgot all his strength, and
remembered nothing but running away. This may be excusable in a hare, which is
but a poor beast: but in a Christian, who ought always to remember the word
of God, who should meditate day and night in his law, and have it continually
before his eyes: and furthermore who has the Holy Ghost as a sealed writing,
which does continually suggerate and teach him what so ever is necessary to
comfort him: it is a marvelous shame and infamy to be so fearful without
cause, and to forget that help and strength in his need, The fear of the
judgments of God upon whose faithful promisewe ought to lean, should chase
away all fear of the rage of our enemies.
which is most available against all power and puissance what soever.

But I pray you, let us consider our folly yet a little more. What is it that
we are afraid of? that mortal men, who have no power of them selves, should
beat us and whippe us for speaking and defending the truth; and in the mean
while, we never remember, that for concealing and dissembling of it, God
threatens to kill us, who has power and ability to cast both body and soul
into hell. If I should ask this question, whether the King or some petty
gentleman were most to be feared, every man could answer me very readily. But
demanding the same thing, as touching God and man, every one is whist, and
says not a word. O Lord, how sottish we are! Do we not know what to love, or
what to hate? what to follow, or what to fly? what to hope for, or what to
fear? Let us further consider what injury we offer unto God; which is far
greater then that which should be offered unto a captain, who has the keeping
of some frontiere town, of whose fidelity we doubt not, neither that he will
deliver it to the enemy. For if we would doubt of the truth of any such man,
there were always sufficient reason why we might do so, considering that
naturally we are not only liars, treacherous, variable, and inconstant, but
also covetous: and therefore subject to be easily corrupted. Which can not
possibly agree with the nature of our God. Whereupon it follows, that they
blaspheme him, and offer him unspeakable injury, that will call his truth
into question, fearing least he should break his word, or that contrary to
his promise, he would deliver his children into the hands of their enemies.

But some will answer, and say, Seeing we must needs die, martyrdom is most
honorable, and nothing more glorious then to die in the time of persecution.
do we not know that Christians have been banished, imprisoned, whipped, and
scourged, and the most of them most cruelly executed? Which I confesle to be
true, and that it is appointed by the ordinance of God, that before we can be
glorified with Christ Jesus, we must suffer in the world with him. But what? In
flying of persecution, do we avoid death, or if we do fly from death, does
it not follow us? and if it does hunt after us, can we hide our selves so
cunningly, that it shall not find us? If then we must needs die; is it not
much better that we should end our lives honorably in the wars, then
cowardly in our beds? Let us consider a little the great love that God
shows us. If he would he might make us die as dishonourably, as those, that
were drowned in the universal flood, or consume us, as he did the Sodomites,
or cause the earth to swallow us up, as it did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, or
make lice to eat us, as he did Herod: he might justly do it, and our sins
have infinitely deserved it. But having respect unto his only mercy, according
unto his wonted manner, as he has covered the loath somnes of our sins,
with the righteousness of his Son Christ: so likewise has he vouchsafed to
hide the indignity and shame of our deserved death, causing it to be written
upon our tombs, and in the histories, that we are slain for his word, and for
the witness of Christ Jesus, which is such an honor, as all the sufferings in
the world do not deserve.

S. Augustine comparing in one of his epistles, The excellency of the truth of
God and dignity of his Church is such, as we ought to defend them, even with
the loss of our lives.
Christian verity to Helein, says one thing that is well worthy to be often
remembered, and that is; that the one of them is far more beautiful, then the
other. And if then there were a hundred thousand Greeks, that exposed them
selves to all dangers, in defense of the honor and beauty of Helein: What
shall Christians do for the eternal word of God, upon the confession and
knowledge whereof, their life and happiness does wholly depend? Moreover it
has been always esteemed and commended for a very honorable thing, in all
magnanimious minds, to die for their countries: how precious then is the
death which we suffer for the building of the Church of God: and how
profitable unto us is that blood, which we spill to water the roores thereof,
to the end that the young plants and nurseries which are there, may fructify
and grow the better?

But do we give our lives for nothing? The great reward we have of God for a
small gift.
Truly we have great occasion to pray heartely that we may exchange this
worn and torn life, for an immortality, which is made of such durable and
excellent stuff, that shall never be consumed nor worn out. Do we loose
much, if we leave an old and stinking prison (for what else are these earthly
bodies) to gain an everlasting habitation in the heavens? If we should not
excuse this exchange with the magnificence and exceeding bounty of our God,
he might be thought to be but an evil husband, to give away so much, and
receive so little? We have nothing then to say for our selves, why we should
not (following the example of Saint Paul) run with patience the race that is
set before us, Hebr. 12.2.
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, and despised not the shame, and is set
at the right hand of the throne of God. Iam. 4.7.
Let us resist the devil, as Saint James says, and he will fly from us. For
he is of the nature of the crocodile, that is very fierce in pursuing of such
as run from him, and a stark cowarde to those that pursue him.

If men of war be in any strong and well defenced cities, Those that are in
the Church of God, are invincible.
they scorn and mock those that come to besiege them: what shall we do then
being in Jerusalem, that is to say, the Church, which is the best walled, the
best provided, and the most carefully guarded of all others? for he that keeps
it, sleeps neither day nor night. If of old time those soldiers that were
under the leading of Alcibiades, were accounted invincible; what shall we
think of those that are under the conduct of Christ Jesus? The Martyrs of our
Lord and Savior (says Cyprian) may be slain, but they cannot be overcome but
are invincible: for that they are not afraid, nor terrified with death. Let us
say then of the tyrants and persecuters of Gods children, as Socrates said of
Anytus and Melytus, that they may kill us some time, if God will give them
leave, but they shall never be able to hurt us.

Contrariwise, The Church of God is purified, amended, and repaired by
afflictions.
there is nothing that does more profit the faithful, either for the
mortifying of vice that is in them, and to exercise them in all kind of
virtue, then afflictions, and that continual war which they have with Satan
and his ministers. We are like unto incense, which never smells well, unless
it be cast into the fire: or to metals, which are never well purified before
they have been in the furnace: or to wheat, which is never clean, before it
be well threshed and fanned: and to be short, there is nothing according to the
word of God that does more increase and strengthen our faith, then crosses and
afflictions. There is no question, but that he which shall read the histories
of all times, shall easily see, that the Church of God ever flourished more in
adversity, then in prosperity. Having then hitherto declared, A conclusion of
what so ever has bin spoken against the fear of persecutions.
that we ought neither to fear nor flee martyrdom, considering the care
which God has over us, and the weakness and imbecilitie of our enemies to hurt
us, and the force which we have to resist them, and that great blessing and
happiness which we may look for in the kingdom of heaven, if we suffer
tribulations here upon earth for righteousness sake, and the defense of the
truth: we may conclude, that according unto the example of the Lacedaemonians,
all this great army of the whole universal Church, ought to be divided into
three bands: whereof the first, which is the old fathers reigning now in
heaven with Christ, may say: we have been valiant and courageous, to fight
the battles of the Lord: the other which is of young men, who are lusty, fresh
and strong, ought to say: that we are ready to follow you, and resolute for
to abide all dangers, to continue and maintain them still: and the third,
which is of young children, shall say: we will continue them after you, by the
power and favor of him, who has endued our graundfathers in old time, and
you at this present, with such courage and magnanimity.

It is now high time to draw to an end, The last part of this book, which is
divided into four especial branches.
and to speak of the last of these fears, which we have: which is, of
spiritual things; as, of the judgment of God: of eternal death: of the
devils, and of sin. Notwithstanding, before I go any further, I must
admonish the reader of this one thing: That whatsoever I shall speak, touching
the diminishing of the fear of these four things, it does nothing
appertain unto infidels and fleshly minded creatures: whose consciences do
sleep in sin, and are possessed with a lethargy, and a blockish
forgetfulness of all their transgressions, never so much as once thinking of
them, much less sorowing for them, but study and devise altogether how to
live at their ease and pleasure; and there is nothing that they are so careful
of, as to avoid all things what so ever may hinder their joys and delights.
There are some also, who hearing any mention made of the threatenings of God,
and the torments of hell fire, mock and scoff at both the one and the other:
whereby they evidently declare the small account they make of either, and the
cold affection they bear toward the knowledge of God, and the meditation of
his law. Before these and such like swine, I mind not to cast these precious
and inualuable pearls: knowing very well, they will tread and trample them
under their feet, and that what so ever can be said, will be but for the
increase of their impiety, and multiplying of their sins. But I speak now
unto such as are unfeigned Christians, who carry with them a reverend regard
of Gods word, and have an assured confidence in his promises, not with purpose
to sooth them up in their sins, to flatter them and lay cushions under their
elbowes, not to excuse their faults, or to encourage the^ to go on forward
in their wicked ways, and so to procure the heavy wrath of the Almighty to
fall down upon them in the day of the Revelation of his justice: in a word, it
is not to harden the heart of the obstinate to despise his mercy, his patience
and long suffering, wherewith he does provoke us daily and hourly unto
repentance and amendment of life: but this is to comfort them, and to raise
them up, and, as it were, to lift up their consciences, when as they are
pressed down with the weight of their sins, and with the fear and terror
they have of the terrible and fearful judgments of God for their
transgressions. The drift then and whole scope of this discourse, is to give a
little breath unto poor and tired souls, which groan under the burden of
their sins. For both Christ Jesus, his promises, his Gospel and al his
co^solations serve especially to this end, to vnburthe^ those that are laden,
to comfort the weak, and to heal the broken hearted.

Now of those 4 things before remembered, The remedies against the fear of the
anger of God. 1. Promises that we shall not be condemned. Chap. 3.17, 18. Romans
5.16. Chap. 8.33.
the greatest and that which we are most afraid of, is the terrible wrath of
God. For the fear we have of death and of the devil proceeds of nothing but
this, that we think they are the ministers and executioners of his judgments.
Against this fear we may oppose all those comfortable sayings following. God
(says S. John) sent not his Son into the world that he should condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved. He that believes in him
shall not be condemned. And S. Paul says, that the fault came of one offense
unto co^de^nation, but the gift is of many offenses to justification. And in
the same epistle in another place: Who shallay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is
dead, yea or rather which is risen again: who is also at the right hand of God,
and makes request also for us. Can we have a greater assurance that we shall
not be accused, or if we be, that we shall be acquired and absolved, Testimonies
of the love that God bears us in his Son.
then by the mouth of the Judge himself, and by the testimony of his holy
spirit, which is so often mentioned in the holy Scriptures? Next unto these, we
may observe all the places both of the Old and new Testament, where there is
any mention made of the mercies of God, and the reconciliation that is between
him and us by the mediation of his son Christ. Chap. 9.6.
Esaias says, unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given: and the
government is upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name Wonderful, Counselor,
The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The prince of peace: the increase of
his government and peace shall have no end. Chap. 53.5.
And the same Prophet speaking of the death of Jesus Christ, says, that he was
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities. The chastisement
of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Which Jeremy
also utters of him: Chap. 23.
In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely. Chap. 1.23.
S. Matthew says, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son,
and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us.
We may not forget that which the angels said in praising of God for his birth:
Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God in the heave^s, peace in earth, and toward me^ good will. And
that which John says touching the love of God to ward the world, Chap. 3.16.
that he has given his only son, that whosoever beleve in him should not
perish, John 16.27.
but have everlasting life. As also Christ tells his disciples, that the
Father loves the^, because they had loved him, and had believed that he came
from God. And that of Paul, Romans 1.17. Chap. 3.21, 22.
The righteousness of God is reveiled from faith to faith: as it is written, the
just shall live by faith. And in the same epistle, But now is the righteousness
of God manifest without the law, having witness of the law and of the prophets:
to wit, the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon
all that believe. For there is no difference: for all have sinned, and are
deprived of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace, through
the rede^ptio^ that is in Christ Jesus, Chap. 5.8, 9, 10.
who^ god has set forth to be a reco^ciliation through faith in his blood. And
furthermore God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet
sinners Christ dyed for us; much more being now justified by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we
shall be saved by his life. And to the Ephesians he says, Chap. 2.11, 12, 13,
14.
Remember that you being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, and called
uncircumcision of them, which are called circumcision in the flesh made with
hands, that ye were (I say) at that time without Christ, and were aliauntes
from the common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenants of
promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world. But now in Christ
Jesus, ye which once were far off, are made nere by the blood of Christ. For
he is our peace which has made of both, one, and has broken the stop of the
partition wall. And in the beginning of the same Chapter. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.
You has he quickened that were dead in trespasses and sins: wherein in time
past ye walked, according to the course of this world, and after the prince
that rules in the air, even the spirit, that now works in the children of
disobedience: among whom we also had our conversation in time past in the lusts
of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh and of the mind: and were by
nature the children of wrath as well as others. But God which is rich in mercy
thorough his great love wherewith he has loved us, even when we we were dead by
sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved, and
has raised us up together, and has made us sit together in the heavenly
places in Christ Jesus, that he might show in the ages to come, the exceeding
riches of his grace through his kindness to wards us in Christ Jesus. For by
grace are yesaued through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of
God. Not of works lest any man should boast himself. And to the Colossians he
says. Chap. 1.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, and by him to
reconcile all things unto himself, and to set at peace through the blood of
his cross both the things in earth, and the things in heaven. And you which
were in times past strangers, and enemies, because your minds were set in
evil works, has he now also reconciled in the body of his flesh through
death, to make you holy, and unblameable, and without fault in his sight, If
you continue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moved away from
the hope of the gospel, whereof ye have heard, and which has been preached
unto every creature which is under heaven. 1. Epist. 2.4, etc.
And to Timothy he says: God would that all men should be saved, etc.

Furthermore, the better to assure us against the justice of God, The
satisfaction of Christ Jesus.
we must consider of the satiffactio^, which his Son and our Mediator has
made unto him for us: and the daily intercession, whereby he does continually
turn away his anger from us, and defends our cause, to keep us in favor
with his father. Finally we ought to arm us with this article of our faith, as
with an armor of excellent proof, that the Father has given all power unto
his Son, His intercession, and that our advocate shall be our judge.
and that he shall come in the latter end to judge both the quick and the
dead. I would know now if our consciences should be troubled with the fear
and apprehension of Gods judgments; having before hand, first so many promises
and assurances that we shall not be condemned: Secondly, so many testimonies
of his love, which he has declared and does declare toward us, not only in
words but also in deeds, and those so evident, that we need never doubt of
them: Thirdly, his Son to be a Mediator between him and us, who dyed, and
was sacrificed, who has made intercession, has all power and authority, who
is a King and a high Priest to reconcile us unto God his Father, and to quench
whatsoever may kindle the wrath of God toward us: Fourthly, seeing our
advocate shall be our judge, who can not be denied of any thing whatsoever he
shall ordeine and stablish in favor of his children. The infinite mercy of
God toward us declared unto us many ways.
If unto these we will add the mercy and favor of God, wherewith the whole
world, and especially his house, is fully replenished: and consider withal that
we are his children and his inheritance; that we are members, flesh, and bone
of his only beloved son; that we are his people and his servants, and he our
Lord and King; and that we are poor infantes, and he our gardein and tutor;
that we are his beloved spouse, that is, his love and delight; that we are his
treasure and his precious Jewels; that we are his house and garden of
pleasure; that we are his kinsemen and near acquaintance, and that he has
created us after the similitude of his own image: If we would consider all
this and that we are his very heart, and the apple of his eye: Is it possible
that ever we should imagine him to be a cruel and an inexorable judge? we
would surely on the contrary seek for him, love, and embrace him as a very
loving, The undoubted truth of God.
gracious, and a pitiful Father. We would not fear lest he should judge us:
but we would hope to judge the world with him. And wherefore serve the Gospel
and so many comfortable sermons, which have bin preached unto us of the grace,
mercy, and favor of God, by his Prophets and Apostles? what profit also should
we reap of the alliance which is between him and us, His alliance.
and that Christ Jesus is come into the world to die, and to shed his blood
for the ratification thereof? what gain by the faith and hope of his promises?
Our faith and hope.
what reward and recompense for all those afflictions and miseries, which we
endure in this world for the defense of his truth, shall we look for after
this life, if at our departure God should suddenly confound us in his
judgment? Furthermore, what advantage should we have, by being at the right
hand of Christ Jesus at the latter day, and that there be a separation between
the sheep and the goats, if al should be sent to hell? where should be the joy,
comfort, peace, and the glory which God has promised unto his people? who will
believe also that Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom, that the thief
entered into paradise with Christ Jesus, that the heave^s were opened to S.
Steven for to comfort him, and to receive his soul, if indifferently both the
believer and unbeliever after their departure were condemned? Were it not in
vain and a marveilous abuse, that the son should bear the name of Jesus,
and of a Savior, The name, the obedience and merits of Christ Jesus.
if we should be condemned by the father, and tormented by those punishments we
have deserved by reason of our sins? And as concerning him: should not he
have done very unwisely to have suffered him self to be accursed for us, and to
endure the punishment due unto our iniquities, if he were not able to deliver
us? why should he pay our ransom, if he should not come out of captivity? why
should he spill his blood, and pay for that which he had not taken, (as the
Prophet says) if it were not available to acquit us? We must necessarily then
conclude one of these 3 points: either that Christ Jesus has not made a full
satisfaction for us, or if he has, that we shall not be condemned; or if we be
condemned, that God is not righteous in his judgeme^ts. But it were horrible
blasphemy to think that the Father were unjust in his judgments, or to say,
that the Son had not paid whatsoever was due for us: and therefore we may
safely say, that we need not fear the wrath of God, or his sentence at the
latter day, seeing we live and die in the faith of the death and resurrection
of Christ Jesus his son: but we may boldly present our selves before his
face, and beseech him as did David, that he would not enter into judgment with
us, assuring our selves of the rest, and that in the name and mediation of his
Son, he will absolve us from al those offenses, whereof we are accused,
either by the devil or our own consciences. For the wrath of God is only laid
up for those, Our repentance and humility.
who with an obstinacy and an impenitency of heart provoke and procure it, and
by reason of their continuance in sin, do as it were force him to
impatiencie: and not for those, who will turn unto him with all their hearts,
and commit both themselves and their causes into his hands, and refer all
wholly to his mercy. His judgments are not prepared, but for such as will exalt
them selves and lift up their hearts against him, presuming of their own
wisdom, power, righteousness and holiness: whereas on the contrary, his mercies
are evermore ready for such, as seeing them selves naked and without any
comely ornament, do humble them selves before his majesty, and have no other
refuge but only to his grace and favor, which they beg and crave at his
hands in the name and merits of Christ Jesus. The fatherly chastisements of God
upon his children.
If he threaten us, to what end is it? Is it not (I pray you as S. Gregory
says) for fear lest we should sleep in our sins, and lest for want of
watching and waking he should come and surprise us, and take us in disorder,
and so be compelled to execute his vengeance against us? If then he be angry
with his children at any time, it is but to chastise them: if he rebuke them,
it is but to admonish them of their duties: if he threaten them, it is but to
bring them into the right way. We must needs then for these reasons alleged,
both in his threatenings, rebukes, chastiseme^ts, and judgments acknowledge his
great love and affection to wards us, patiently hearing them, and willingly
embracing them as things most necessary and profitable; and which do
especially tend to our salvation, as well as his promises. For seeing no man can
certainly trust in the mercies of God, if they do not fear his threatenings: are
not his rebukes then as necessary and as profitable for us to keep our hearts
in his fear, His mercy mixed with his justice.
as his promises are to nourish our hope? It is very true, that if god in
judging of us should lay away his mercy, that his judgment would be very
terrible and fearful. For (as S. Augustine has most excellently said) woe be
unto all our righteousness, if it be examined without favor and morcy. And
herein there is a notable point to be considered, and that which may minister
exceeding comfort unto us, that his mercy is for ever upon all those that
fear him, and that Christ Jesus our judge is not come to search and examine our
lives, as the same holy Doctor says, but to make us taste of that fruit which
he has purchased for us, eue^ the remission of our sins by his death upon
the cross. The charity of Christ toward us.
And wherefore has David said, that grace and mercy is in his lips, if it
were not to assure us that no word shall pass from him, but for our comfort and
consolation? and if we have found much sweetness in him, when as preaching in
this world, he promised life everlasting, may we not look for more in his
kingdom, where he has promised the full fruition of al joy to those which shall
persevere in his ways unto the end? and therefore it is that Paul has said
also, that by Jesus Christ and the hope we have in his righteousness, The free
access we have unto God our father.
we have a free access unto god the Father: to give us to understand that we
need not be so afraid to present our selves before him, as malefactors and
offenders are before the Judge, but rather to desire to approach to him, and as
earnestly to seek for him as children do for their parents, of who^ they are
tenderly beloved, and of who^ they are assuredly persuaded they shall be most
lovingly embraced. And if we have any consideration, shall we not think that
there can be nothing more profitable for us the^ the day of judgment; and that
whe^soever he shall prepare to come, that we shall have good cause to lift up
our heads, seeing the time of our redemption to be so nere? The remembrance of
the latter day and of our full coniunctio^ with Christ Jesus.
For the^ our innocency, which as yet is obscured, shall be made manifest, and
shall shine as the sun at noone day: at that time our life which is yet hid in
Christ Jesus, shall be laid open to the great glory and hope whereto he has
called us, when as through our knowledge and faith in his Gospel he has made
us his children. Then shall we hear the sweet voice of our savior. Come ye
blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world. The^ being anointed with the oil of gladness, we shall go with
chereful cou^tena^ces into heaven, and there receive the crown of immortality
which is laid up for us; then all the books and the treasures of the wisdom of
God shall be opened for us. And as there shall be nothing so secret, The
inspeakeable joy we shall have in the heavens.
but shall be made manifest unto us, so there shall be nothing so dear and
precious, but shall be given unto us. Then the face of GOD, which we behold in
this life in his word and sacraments, shall be plainly showed unto us: and
there shall be nothing that shall hinder our sight from beholding of it at our
ease and pleasure; that thereby we may become most happy and blessed for
ever. Then shall all our enemies be confounded, and in stead of that they have
tyrannised over us in this world, we shall judge the^ with Christ Jesus our
head, being placed in great honor in the company of his Apostles and all
his Elect children. Then shall the Trophies of our Captain be erected in
heaven, and his great victory shall be known throughout all the world. Then
shall there be an everlasting peace in the Church, and the Devil shall be
chained and thrown into the botto^les pit for ever, and never be permitted to
trouble the children of god aftewards. Considering then the great profit and
commodity which God has laid up in the world to come for all such as fear
him, we ought to long for it, and desire it as the day of our salvation.

And surely we may fear eternal death as little. The second articie
propounding the remedies against the fear of eternal death. 1. The promises
of God touching life everlasting. Chap. 5.24 Chap. 11.25
I always understand thus much: if we be the members of Christ Jesus, united
and conjoined unto him by his spirit and by an unfeigned faith. And therefore
because this is the most horrible and terrible fear that can be, it is
requisite, the better to strengthen us against it, that we often remember those
notable and comfortable sayings of the Scripture. And first of all that of S.
John. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in
him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation;
but has passed from death unto life. And again, I am the resurrection and the
life: He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and
whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die. Chap. 10.14, 15.
And in another place. I am the good shepherd and know mine, and am known of
mine. I lay down my life for my sheep. Chap. 15.22 Verse. 54, 55, 56, 57.
And in the Epistle to the Corinthians. For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive. And a little after; Death is swallowed up into
victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The
sting of death is sin: and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be
unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Chap.
5.1.
In the second to the Corinthians. We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of God, that is, an house
not made with hands, but eternal in heaven. Chap. 14.13
And like wise in the Revelation. I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Write,
blessed are the dead which hereafter dye in the Lord. And these places shall be
sufficient touching the simple and bare word of God, which is most plain and
evide^t, and forcible enough to cleanse us from this fear of death, if we will
once be assuredly persuaded thereof in our hearts. But being so dull headed as we
are, and so unfit to receive the truth; it is very good that with the
aforenamed places of Scriptures, we also join these reasons which follow, to
comfort and strengthen us the more. We must then consider, that it is
impossible we should perish, An assured faith in his premises of life
euerlasling.
having faith; if we will constantly persevere and keep it unto the end: for
that it is the seed of life, as contrariwise infidelity is the seed of
death. As then the infidel can not live, because of his infidelity, which
separateth him from God: so likewise the faithful man can not die, so long as
by the means of his faith he is conjoined and united unto him. Moreover, faith
does lay hold of the word of God; which word quickneth that which is dead, and
calls those things that are not, as though they were. As then we are not
afraid, The immutable truth of God.
that heaven should fall down upon us and ouerwhelme us, or that the earth
should open and swallow us up, though either of them have no other foundation
but only this word to hold them up: so likewise shall we not need to be
afraid of death, having this divine and heavenly word in our hearts, which is
the fountain and welspring of our lives. Furthermore, if we have faith, The
grace of God.
we have also the grace and presence of God: we are his children and household
servants, we have his spirit in which all things consist. Having all this,
shall we be afraid of death? shall we be afraid either of darkness or cold, so
long as we are in the sun? or of dryness, so long as we have a spring of
waters in our bellies? or of poverty, so long as we have all the gold mines of
the world in our possession. By faith also we are made members of the body of
Christ Jesus, The life of Christ Jesus is in us, who are his members.
bound and tied unto him with a most sure knot: by reason whereof, we do
participate of that life, which distilleth from his divinity into his
humanity. As then our head had no occasion to fear death, having life in him
self: so likewise have we no cause to sear death, having life through him.
For as the sap comes from the root of the tree, and spreads it self
into the branches; and as in a man's body the life flows from the heart into
all the other members: so likewise does life flow from Jesus Christ into all
them, who by a lively says do remain in the union of the Church. S. Paul
making a comparison in the epistle to the Romans, between our first father
Adam, and our Savior Christ Jesus, says, that as death has power over all
the children of Adam, for that they are partakers with him in his sin: The
comparing of the effects of the first and second Adam in us.
so likewise every one that is united to Christ Jesus by faith, shall be made
partakers of his righteousness, and consequently of life everlasting. For the
experience which we have of death, to the which we are subject, as children of
Adam and inheritours of his misery, is not more certain, then the assurance we
have of eternal life, to the hope whereof we are called by the knowledge of
Christ Jesus, and the grace and mercy, which the father has showed unto us by
his means. And we need not dout no more of our resurrection, then we do of
his: either of sin or of death, which through the disobedience of our
forefathers, has bin spread abroad among all his posterity. As then, it would
be thought a damnable and intolerable pride for any man descended of Adam, and
stained with his corruption, not to fear death and destruction: so likewise
would it be an intolerable distrustfulnesse for an other, being regenerated
by the spirit of God, and united to Christ Jesus by that faith which he has in
his promises, to despair of life everlasting. And seeing there is no danger of
death, but where there is sin: Our faith and belief touching the forgiveness
of sins.
why should a true Christian be afraid, considering the assurance he has that
his sins are forgiven him: seeing that the lamb which takes them away, has
been sacrificed for the remission of them: and like wise considering the mercy
and infallible truth of God, wherewith he has bound him sefe to give unto him
whatsoever he asks. The article of the resurrection of the flesh.
S. Paul says in the first epist. to the Cor. that if there were no
resurrection, the faith of all Christians, the preaching of the Apostles, and
what so ever else Christ Jesus had done for our redemption, were altogether in
vain and unprofitable. For what do we believe, but that which they have
preached unto us? What have they preached? but that Christ Jesus is come into
the world, that he was despised, that he was dead, and raised up again, to pull
us out of the tyranny and slavery of sin and of death, and to purchase for
us life everlasting? Let us con clude then, that if these things were not done
in vain by Christ Jesus, nor preached in vain by the ministers of his
Gospel: they may well take away from us that fear which we have of death, The
hope of life everlasting.
and assure us that we shall live continually in the kingdom of heaven with
God and his angels. And wherein should Christ profit us without this hope?
should we not be the most miserable men of the world? For what other reward do
we look for of all those injuries, wrongs, banishments, losses, imprisonments,
deaths, and of all those horrible cruelties, The profession of Christian
religion.
that tyrants do daily invent against us, but this everlasting life and
blessed immortality which is promised us in heaven? and without this,
Christians were the most miserable men of the world. For to what end leaving
all superstitions and false religions, should they so constantly betake
themselves unto that of Christ Jesus, if it were not for the assurance which
the holy Ghost has given them, and imprinted in their hearts, that he is there
life and Savior? Baptism.
Why are they baptized in his name, if they were not washed by him from every
damnable spot, and what so ever may seem filthy in the sight of God? The
supper of the Lord.
Why do they eat his flesh and drink his blood, if it be not, for that they
believe, that this is the true bread descended from heaven, and appointed of
God for the nourishment of their souls? Why do they confess and maintain,
Salvation sought only in Christ Jesus.
that there is no other means of salvation, but by him; refusing all other, as
vain and unprofitable, were it not that they are certainly persuaded, that to
believe this in their hearts, and to confess this with their mouths, is most
necessarily unto life everlasting? What should it profit them to be accounted
Abraham's children, if they were not blessed in his stead? And to what purpose
should they be of the sheepefold of Christ Jesus, if he would not give unto
them life everlasting, and would not preserve them, as well from death, as from
al other things, what so ever may take them forth of his hands? Wherein should
he pleasure them, if they were not persuaded, that he were their light, and
that it is necessary to be guided by him, least they stumble and fall in the
darkness of this world? Wherefore should they seek for him, when they are dry,
if he were not the fountain of life, and were not able to give them of the
water thereof, to quench their dry consciences? All his benefits.
What profit shall we reap by his observation of the law, and his obedience
unto God his father, even unto the death of the cross, that he might make us
free from the ourse, whereunto we were subject: that he has satisfied for us,
and that in dying he has fulfilled and accomplished what so ever was requisite
for the validity of the testament of our father; if, notwithstanding all these
things, we were always in danger and fear of death, and that the hope which
we have of life, should be yet doutfull and hang in suspense? We may see by
that which has been already said, that all the benefits of Christ Jesus,
with the hope we have reposed in them, shall be made unprofitable, if we be
not delivered from the peril of death, and so consequently from the fear
thereof: which is nothing but a vain and sottish terror of mind wherewith we
are daunted, for want of a due consideration of that which has been before
spoken.

I know well that our nature is foulded and wound up in this cloth of
mortality, Our life is hid in him.
whereto it is subject by sin. We perceive nothing of all that which has
been said: and when as we consider of it, The life of Christ Jesus appeared in
his death, to assure us that death has no power to extinguish the life of him
in our selves.
we can not perceive in our selves, neither within nor without, the life which
is there resident and remaining. But for all that, we must think that it lies
hidden there, and that as yet, the place serves not for the manifestation
thereof. Who would have judged that Christ Jesus should ever have been the
spring of our life, and that it should never depart from him, no more then the
light and heat departs from the fire, when as hanging upon the cross in the
midst between two the eues, he yielded up his life into the hands of his
Father, and was buried, and that in all things he showed him self to be the
very image and pattern of weakness and infirmity? and yet notwithstanding that
was enclosed in him, that within three days after did so lively show it self:
when as in despite of death and all his enemies, he raised up himself by his
own power. Who would think in winter, when as the trees are bare and naked,
and when as the sharpnes of that cold season has plucked off all their
leaves, their blossoms, and fruits, leaving them nothing but an old and soar
skin or coat, as it were, to cover them, which seems to be quite dead and
withered: who would think, I say, seeing them in such a bare estate, that
there were any more life in them, and that they should flourish and wax green
again, yea blossom, bud, and bring forth in their time and season, as we
see they do every year? When as we handle the small kernels of any grain,
Diverse similitudes.
can we perceive any thing, or know we any reason how it should take root,
grow, and fructify as it does, when as it is sown in a good ground, and in a
convenient season? When as we see an egg, can we perceive any of the feathers,
flesh, or bones of the chicken that is therein closed? or do we see any of the
fire that is in the flint. As then, though there be life in these things
aforenamed, yet it is not sensible, nor apparent: so likewise is it with the
faithful, The assurance of our salvation through the innumerable promises of
Christ Jesus.
during their continuance in this world, and with that which they draw and
receive from the grace of God, by the means of Christ Jesus, and the faith
which they have in his promises: and yet notwithstanding they are as certain or
more certain, as the things which we see before our eyes. For as long as the
word of God shall be the word of life, and that his promises shall be infallible
to so many as believe in them, as long as Jesus Christ which was yesterday, to
day, to morrow, and for ever, shall be the bread of life, and the light to so
many as will follow him: as long as God who dwells in his Church as in his
house, shall be the God of the living, and a quickening to so many as believe in
him: so long as his glory and love, whereof all true felicity depends,
shall never be wanting to his children, and that the aliance which he has
made with his people shall be firm and assured: so long as those who believe
in him, shall not be confounded and deceived of their hope, and that faith
shall have this excellent effect, to justify those in whom so ever it is
rooted and grounded: as long as the remission of sins, the sanctuary and
refuge of the Church, shall be freely promised and performed by the mercy of
God, and by the most precious blood of Jesus Christ, to so many as shall
desire it: so long as the obedience of the Son of God shall be more forceable
to pull Christians from death, then is the sin of our first parents, to throw
them headlong into hell: and, to end all in a word, so long as our King shall
have the keys of life and death, and power to put all his enemies, as a
footstool, under his feet, we need not then be afraid of death, neither
yet, which is more, that ever we shall die: We can not dienor be condemned so
long as our head lives and remains in the heavens.
seeing we are united and firmly coupled unto him by faith. And if we be
afraid, it is out of doubt, either for the want, for the smalnesse, or for the
weakness and debilitie of our faith, which by reason thereof, is not
sufficient, either to assure us from death, or from any thing else that may
hurt us.

If a Christian man, for the reasons before alleged, ought not to fear death;
The third article showing the remedies against the fear of the devils.
he need not likewise fear the devil, who is lord and king thereof, and
therein holds his court and seigneurie. For we fear not the hangmen and
executioners, but for that they have commission from the Judge to execute us,
when as we are condemned before. If then, by the grace and favor of God, we be
made immortal, as we have already declared: why should we fear the devils,
what desire so ever they have to hurt us, seeing they have no power to execute
their malicious deseignes against us? I mean as I have always hitherto
declared, if we keep our selves in the favor of God, through a strong and a
lively faith, presuming nothing of our selves, but wholly submitting us under
his favor and protection. And to the end no man should think, he shall be
deceived by believing of that which I say, I think it good, to set down some
most comfortable and strong reasons, which shall be sufficient to prove, that
we need not be afraid of the devils. The power and strength which God gives
us to resist the devil. chap. 2.14. chap. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.16. Psalm. 91.13.
And first of all sundry places of holy Scriptures, wherein there is mention
made of the force and power which God has given us, to resist them. You are
strong, says S. John, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome
the wicked. And S. Peter says, Be sober and watch, for your adversary the
devil, as a roaring lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour: whom
resist steadfast in the faith. And S. Paul says, Above all take the shield of
faith, where with ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And David
in the Psalm. says, Thou shall walk upon the lion and aspe, the yongly on and
the dragon shall thou tread under feet. And when as God promised to all his
children by Moses, that if they would he are his voice, and obey his word, he
would give them the victory over all their enemies: and would so bring it to
pass, that one of them should overcome ten, and ten should overcome a hundred,
and a hundred should vanquish a thousand: which is not only to be understood
of men, but also of devils. For when so ever Satan assaileth us with all his
legions, and that the gates of hell being broken open, The wise conduct and
invincible power of our captain.
all the whole multitude of infernal spirits rush forth to make war upon
us: yet shall they never be able to prevail, so long as we follow the ensigns
of our captain and Savior Christ Jesus. They are mighty, and we are weak
and feeble; they are politic and crafty, and we are plain and simple; they
are painful and vigilant, and we are slothful and sluggish. All this is true:
and it is out of dout, we should never be able to resist them, if we had no
better strength and policy, then our own. But it is not herein that we put
our trust and confidence but we do as David did, when as he went to fight with
Goliath, we leave all these carnal weapons, and we march against our enemies
with no other force, but only with a strong faith, which we repose in our
King, and with the prayers which we make unto the God of hosts, whose strength
and might is always sufficient to keep us from our enemies. For if we respect
power, he is omnipotent; if vigilancie, he never sleeps; if wisdom and
policy, he entrappeth the wise in their own wisdom if number, he is more then
all the creatures of the world. Plutarch in his Apoth.
Plutarch reports that Antigonus marching with a small number against his
enemies, who were exceeding many, one of the gentlemen of his retinue being
astonished at such a multitude, and so warlike appointed, demanded of him what
he would do with such a handful of men? whereto Antigonus answered; what do
you account of me, and how much do you think I alone am able to perform?
giving him thereby to understand, that the principal force of an army
consists in the General. And this is that which may bring exceeding comfort
unto us, when as on the one side we consider the small and weak number of Gods
sheep, which are in the fold of Christ Jesus, and behold on the otherside the
great multitude of ravening and raging wolfes that are without, seeking daily
and hourly how to rent and devour them, all our hope and confidence should be
in the consideration of the mercies, wisdom, strength, courage and vigilancie
of our shepherd, The continual war between him and Satan. chap. 3.14.
who will not spare his derest blood to defend his sheep. We must continually
remember that which is spoken in Genesis of the continual hatred between the seed
of the woman and of the serpent, and withal the comfortable promise that is
made there, that the one should break the head, and the other should have no
power but to the bruise the heel. And though we have no other troops to beat
the wicked, Invocation upon the name of God.
but only this pryaer which we daily make unto God, that he would not lead us
into teptation: shall we be dismayed and think that we are not able to skirmish
with our enemies? What shall we hope for more, Patience.
the^ if with our prayers we ioyn Christian patience, which is a most strong
rampire against all adversities? and with all the grace of God, The grace of
God.
which (as David says) is as a buckler to cover us. Did not Moses overcome
Amaleck with his prayers which he made unto God, whilst the children were
fighting in the valley? Did not Job after he had endured all the assaults of
Satan with his accomplices, Excellent examples to this purpose.
overcame him in the end? Did not S. Paul with the grace of God, valiantly
resist the temptations of the Devil? If then we have faith, prayer, the grace
of God, and patience, we shall not need to fear the violence of the devil,
nor the craft and subtlety of any of his children. The word of God which may
serve both for a buckler and a sword.
But besides all these, we have the word of God, which may serve us not only
in stead of a buckler to defend us, but also of a sword to assail and strike
our enemies. Let us remember how Christ Jesus our head and captain, by the
virtue and power of his holy word, beat, brake, and ouerthrewe that old enemy
of ours, when as after he had fasted forty days, he assailed him twice or
thrice in the wilderness. And we can not but confess, that there is no better
exorcisme to deliver us from all his enchantments, Excellent discourses of the
force of the word of God in all assaults and temptations.
then this. For if he darken the air, and obscure the face of the earth, to
the end to blind us, and to make us go astray; this word shall be always a
lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths. If he would, through his
lying and false persuasions, seek to deceive us and catch us in his snares:
this shall preserve and defend us by the wonderful power and strength thereof.
If by our sins and offenses, whereto he does continually solicit us, he
would, before we be aware, bring us to death and destruction, this word shall
be able to withdraw us from so dangerous a course, and to save our souls. If
with fair promises and goodly offers, he would persuade us to fall down and
worship him, as he did Christ Jesus, that, which forbids all adoration of
any thing saving God alone, will dissuade us from it. If he thinks by
imprisonments, banishments, loss of goods, or any other torments whatsoever,
to fear us and to make us deny our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: that which
David says is more to be desired then gold, Psalm. 19.20.
yea then much fine gold, that which is sweeter then the honey and the honey
comb: which is as a mighty wind that shakes the cedars of Libanon; shall
strengthen us by the power thereof, and shall so comfort us with his sweetenes,
that we shall never be dismaide nor overcome with any violence whatsoever. If
he would closely creep to us, and glide smoothly like a serpent, thinking to
sting us before we be aware; this word which is full of wisdom, with the
spirit of discretion and understanding, which is always communicated unto those
that fear God, shall incontinently advertise us. If by his false Apostles and
Prophets he would seduce us, and bring us into any error or heresy: this
word which comprehends in it both that which God will give unto us, and also
whatsoever he requires at our hands, shall teach us as well what we ought to
hope for, and expect of him, as also what we ought to do to please and content
him: and so instructing us in the rules of our faith, shall stop the passage
of all false and heretical doctrines. And to conclude, it shall so fortify us
on all sides, that the enemy shall have no access to hurt and annoy us. And
we need not then, if (following the counsel of the Prophet we will meditate
thereof day and night, and having once heard it, be careful to lay it up in
our hearts) fear the power of the devil, or any thing that he can devise
against us. Notable examples for the confirmation of the excellent use of gods
word, taken out of the holy scriptures.
Was it Moses rod that divided the red sea, and that plagued the Egiptians?
was it the sound of trumpettes and of rams horns that ouerthrewe the walls
of Jericho? was it the brass wherewith Moses serpent was made which had power
to keep so many as did behold it, from the biting of serpents? was it the
lamps and the pitchers, which Gedeon and his three hundred soldiers carried,
wherewith they gained that memorable battle of the Midianites? was it the jawe
of the ass wherewith Samson slew so many Philistims? was it the sling and the
stones wherewith David overcame Goliath? was it the cloak of Elias and Elisha
that divided the waters? No verily, all the power which these had to work such
miracles, proceeded from the word of God, by which they were called thereto,
and sanctified to so wonderful effects? What wind is there so strong that is
able to overthrow a house, that is builded upon a rock? What arrows so sharp
as are able to pierce such harness of proof? or is there any canon so
forcible as to make a breach in the heart that is defended with such a rampart?
Let the devils then rage and storm as much as they will: let them plant their
battery on what side they list: let them undermine and use all the policy
they can to overcome us, yet shall they never be able to hurt us, if we be
armed and defended with such weapons as are before remembered. And therefore we
ought to lay away this vain and foolish fear we have of them, and of their
power: and assure our selves, if we keep good watch, and march orderly in our
ranks: they shall be sure continually to be overcome and shall run away with
shame and confusion in all encounters with us.

But some will say, How our first father was overcom by Satan, yet we which
have received such grace by Christ Jesus shall be invincible.
our first father Adam, who had received such an excellent measure of knowledge
and understanding, and of many other graces and gifts of God, and who had no
evil and wicked concupiscences in his heart to turn him away from that, which
was good, and to persuade him to follow their counsels: was notwithstanding
circumuented, and in the end overcome, to the utter ruin of himself and al
his posterity. It is true, and all this happened by reason he turned away his
heart from God, and from the commandment, which he had given him, under the
obedience whereof he should have lived in a most blessed and happy estate, and
would follow his own fantasy For in stead of the hope he had conceived, that
by this means he should become a God, of a man he became a devil; of virtuous,
most vicious; of a sound man, very sickly; of contented and merry hearted,
sorrowful and covetous; of immortal, mortal; of wise, foolish; of the friend
of God, an enemy to all goodness: and in a word, of happy, which he might
well perceive being in his grace and favor, being once separated from his
presence, the most accursed and unhappy creature that could be. Insomuch, as
it was a wonderful miracle and a notable example of the grace and favor of
God toward him, that he fell not wholly into desperation, after such a
marvelous change and alteration of his estate and condition. Neither do I
doubt, but that if we should trust in our own power and strength as he did, we
should be sooner overthrown then he was, considering that our infirmity is
far greater then his. But that which makes us invincible not only against
the devil, but also against all the world and al other enemies whatsoever, is
the grace of god, which is far more abundant in us through Christ Jesus, then
ever it was in our first parents. For as S. Augustine says, God gave unto him
only the power to remain in that purity wherein he had created him, if he had
would: but he gave him not the will, but left that in his own counsel, either to
remain or depart from that integrity wherein he had created him, as should seem
best unto himself. Now that which he has given us in the favor of Christ
Jesus, is far more excellent and much greater. For with the power, he gives us
also the will to do well, and causes us by the operation of his holy Spirit,
to love and embrace those things with great and fervent zeal, which we know
to be agreeable unto his blessed will: neither can we be diverted from this
desire by any concupiscence or temptation whatsoever. Behold then that, which
makes us so hardy and bold to resist the devils: who out of doubt would be
too strong for us, if we should meet them in the field with our own forces:
but we being covered with his wings, and under the protection of Christ Jesus,
and as members of his own body covered with his armor, wherewith he has
destroyed the building of Satan, and spoiled him of his weapons: who by his
holy word when as he was in the world, made him come forth in despite of him,
out of the bodies whereof he had taken possession, we need never fear, that,
being thus appointed, we shall be overcome or vanquished, if we persevere in this
faith unto the end.

Now for that we fear not the devils, but because we are afraid of death by
reason our consciences do accuse us, The 4. article setting down the remedies
against the terror of sin, and of a guilty conscience.
that we are sinners, and in so doing set before our eves the wrath and
judgment of God upon all such as transgress his commandments, we must before
we canfully and perfectly quiet a Christian man's conscience, and deliver him
from the fear of the judgments of God, from death, and the devils which do
continually torment him, assure him of the remission of his sins, which make
him afraid of those things before rehearsed. And to work this excellent
effect, we must first set down those notable and sweet sayings in the
scriptures, where god speaks of that mercy he will show for the merits of
Christ Jesus unto all sinners, that are heartily sorry for their sins and
iniquities, and do humbly crave pardon at his hands. As first of all, that
which is written in the first epistle of S. John, the blood of Christ Jesus
cleanses us from all sin. Chap. 1.7. Chap. 2.1.2.
And again we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and
he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world. Chap. 1.15.
And in the first Epistle to Timothy, This is a true saying, and by all means
worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.
And in the Acts of the apostles: Chap. 13.
To him give all the prophets witness, that whosoever believes in him should
receive remission of their sins through his name. Chap. 1.29.
And in the Gospel of S. John. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world. Chap. 19.10
And in Saint Luke. The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which
was lost. Chap. 9.13. and 11.28.
And S. Matthew says. I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to
repentance. And again, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, Chap.
4.25.
and I will ease you. And to the Romans. He was delivered to death for our
sins, and is risen again for our justification. Chap. 54.5. Dan. 9. Matthew. 1
2. Tim. 2. Ephesians. 5. Hebr. 8.11.
And Esaias says. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. And in the Revelation. He has loved us and washed us
from our sins in his blood. Which thing is also declared in many other places
of the scripture, and most notably in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Know the
Lord, for all shall know me from the least of them to the greatest of them:
for I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and I will remember their
sins and their iniquities no more.

Next unto the word of God, for the comfort and consolation of our
consciences, Twelve reasons added to the testimonies before rebearsed. 1.
Justifying faith. Chap. 4.
we may likewise add these reasons following. First of all, that we can not
be Christians without faith, and that there is no faith without righteousness
for this is the principal and chief effect of all other: and as S. Paul
proves in many places of his Epistles (and especially to the Romans) he which
works not at all, but only believes in him that justifies the sinner, his
faith shall be accounted unto him for righteousness. Now we cannot be
accounted righteous and sinners both together: for these are flat contrary and
can not be in the same subject both at once. We may then safely conclude, that
either we are without faith: or if we have faith, that our sins are forgiven
us.

Secondly, Our union with Christ Jesus the bead of the Church.
we must remember, that we are members of the body of Christ Jesus: that is to
say, of his Church which he has sanctified, made holy, and without blemish in
his sight. Which can not be without the grace and mercy, which God vouchsafed
through Jesus Christ, whereby he has pardoned and forgiven us all our sins.
For indeed we are not irreprehensible in his sight: which thing the Church it
self does testify, as well by the confession of her faith which she makes
daily, as also by her prayers, desiring very instantly that her trespasses may
be forgiven her. It must needs follow then, that if she be holy, as it is in
one of the articles of our faith, that it is not in regard of that excellency
which is in her self and in every one of her members, but in respect of the
grace and mercy of God, who will not impute her sins unto her.

Thirdly, we must not think that Christ Jesus is come into the world in vain:
Jesus Christ has not taken our nature upon him for nothing, nor is not dead in
vain.
or that God his Father had appointed him to take upon him the nature of a man,
thereby to become mortal and subject to many passions to no end nor purpose:
and that he himself would have suffered so many shameful and ignominious
reproaches, such wrongs and injuries, such grief and vexation of mind, and in
the end so cruel and fearful a death without some very great and urgent
occasion. Can we allege any other cause hereof, but the pity and commiseration
that both the father and the son had of us, and of that miserable estate and
condition wherein we were. For which cause the one of them was induced to
pardon our offenses by his mercy, and the other to die for us, to the end,
that he might satisfy for us, and so get pardon for our sins. If then the
end of the in carnation of Christ Jesus, and of the eternal counsel of God be
the deliverance of his elect, and the remission of their sins, we must
conclude, that both of them were frustrate of their purposes, if our sins be
still retained; and if both their intents be accomplished, that then our
offenses are pardoned. Fourthly, The mystery of our baptism.
we must regard and consider what is the mystery and signification of our
baptism. And that God has so expressly commanded, that so many as will be
adopted for his children, should be washed with water and baptized: for if the
grace of God and the blood of Christ Jesus, whereby we are spiritually and
inuisibly washed from our sins, are represented unto us in this holy and
visible sacrament, and ceremony: if moreover God has ordained that it should
be perpetual and continue for ever, and be observed in his Church, to the end
that by this means he may assure all the members thereof of his grace which
he offers them, to cleanse them from their filthiness: we might infer,
that if our sins were not forgiven us, he should be unfaithful, and should
abuse us wonderfully, solemnly to promise us a thing, which he neither can nor
will perform and accomplish: And furthermore, that our hope should be in vain
to trust in his promises. So long then as God shall be true and eternal, and
the trust and confidence which we have in his word and mercy, shall be certain
and infallible, Christians need never doubt of the remission of their sins.

We must also further consider, that the end why the supper of the Lord is
instituted, The institution of the supper of the Lord.
was for nothing, but to put us remembrance of the death and passion of Christ
Jesus, and to set continually before our eyes his blood, wherewith the new
counnant is ratified and established. Now then, it was convenient, that in that
league and alliance, which God has made with his people, that he should write
his laws in their hearts, and forgive their sins and iniquities, and never
remember their transgressions any more: and therefore we may conclude, that if
they were not quite abolished, and blotted out of Gods book, the covenant and
alliance should not be strong; and that all this bread and wine which we
receive at the Lords table, should be but signs of mockery and deceit.

The mercy of God also is a very forcible argument to persuade and assure us of
the remission of our sins. The mercy of God. Psalm. 33.57.103.
For David says not without good cause in his Psalms, that the earth is full
of Gods mercy, that it shall continue for ever and, that it reaches unto the
heavens. And S. Paul says, that he is the father of mercies and the God of all
comfort and consolation. Giving us thereby to understand, how merciful he
shows himself unto his children so long as they are in this world, where
they are environed about with all sorts of miseries, the principal of which,
is sin. It is requisite then, that God should pardon us: for if he should
impute out sins unto us, the earth (contrary to the prophecy and revelation
of the holy ghost) should not be filled with his merits, but with his curses
and maledictions. And as touching himself, he should rather be accounted a God
of wrath, of anger, and vengeance, then a God of mercy: for that sin, if it
be not pardoned, and the wrath of God thereby appeased, can bring forth nothing
but torment and misery.

The reason also that is drawn from the faithfulness of God to prove the
remission of our sins, The faithfulness of God Chap. 1.9.
is no less available then the former. For if (as S. John says in his first
Epistle) in acknowledging our sins, he promises to pardon and forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, we ought to believe him.
But if we doubt, it is either by reason we think he will not stand to his
promise, nor be so good as his word: or else for that we think he is not able
to perform that, which he speaks: or else that he is altered and changed,
and repents him of that which before he had said: or else that our incredulity
has abolished that faithful and sacred promise which he has made unto us
either of which we can not do or think without most horrible blasphemy, and
most execrable impiety. If then we will retain a holy opinion of our God as we
ought to do, Psalm. 130.7, 8
we must both living and dying believe assuredly that which David says: that
mercy is with the Lord, and with him is great redemption: and he shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities.

Moreover, if we can not have any remission of our sins, The force and
efficacy of the prayers of his children.
to what end do we so earnestly, and so heartily crave at the hands of almighty
God, that it would please him to forgive us our sins, and to remove out
iniquities out of his sight? he has promised that in seeking for him we shall
find him, and in asking of whatsoever is necessary for us, that we shall obtain
it: and likewise that his ears are always open and ready to hear the
petition^ of all such as put their trust in him: and that whosoever will call
upon his name faithfully, shall be saved. And therefore not doubting of his
promises, we daily beseech him to forgive us our debts: should we not then be
notably deluded, if he would not vouchsafe to hear us? and should it not be a
flat mockery, first to command us to pray, and secondly to promise to hear our
prayers, if when we have made our petitions unto him, and that he has heard
us, he will notwithstanding do nothing for us.

Furthermore, why is it said in the scriptures; If we should not be closed from
our sins and healed of our infirmities: the name of physician should be
unfitly given unto Christ.
that God heals us of our infirmities? why also has Christ Jesus among other
his titles named himself a physician? was it because he had power to beale the
diseases of the body, or rather for that he could cure the soul? if is be so.
I would demand if there be any greater or more dangerous disease then sin? or
what is there, that ought sooner to move him to pity us, or what greater
occasion can be offered him, to she we his skill, his dexterity, his care and
diligence toward us? Let us then either conclude, that he is no skillful
physician either for the body or for the soul* or else that we may assure our
selves, that he will purge us from our faults, heal al our infirmities, and
give us a free and full remission of our sins, in the obtaining whereof, we
may be certain to come to perfect health and everlasting happiness.

To what end also serves the gospel, if it were not to cleanse us from our
sins, The preaching of the gospel.
and to reclaim us from our vain and foolish conversation? Is it to no end
that it is called the word of grace, of reconciliation, of salvation, and of
life: and is the title of glad and joyful news falsely applied unto it? why
should we thank S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles for preaching of it, or
Christ himself for bringing of it? what a folly, or rather, what a madness
were it, to suffer so much unquietness for preaching of it, and spreading of
it abroad among all nations: or to endure such torment and martyrdom for the
profession and defense thereof? or (to be short) what commodity shall we get
by hearing of it, by meditating of it, and laying of it up in our hearts as
incorruptible seed: or to sell all that we have, and buy this precious and
most excellent treasure and pearl, if it were not in the end commodious for
us, able to save our souls, and to cleanse us from all our sins?

In like manner, if our sins were not forgiven us, what difference should
there be between us and the devils? The difference between the children of God
and of the devil, which would not be, if god did not pardon our sins.
or what had we more then they, that we might insult over them? for if we will
consider our own nature, it is altogether filthy and polluted, and without the
great mercy of God, there is no more integrity in us, then is in them. If we
would examine our lives and all out thoughts, our words, our works, and call
the cogitations of our hearts to a reckening, and try them thoroughly, we
should find that we are marvelous obstinate and rebellious enemies to God, and
as badde as they: and that we have nothing whereof we may glory, but only his
mercy, by which it has pleased him to make a difference between us and them,
and to exempt us from their number, giving us for the love and merits of Christ
Jesus, a full remission of all our iniquities and offenses. Whosoever then
would doubt hereof, besides his unthankfulness toward God, in contemning of his
benefits, should shake hands with the devil, and become his friend and
companion.

The last reason to confirm us, that he will pardon our sins, is the
authority which he has given unto the pastors and ministers in his Church,
The authority given unto preachers of the gospel to assure sinners which are
repentant and believe the remission of their sins.
to bind and to lose by the preaching of his word, according unto the
capacities of those, to whom it is spoken: that is to say, in believing to be
absolved, and, in not believing to be condemned: for if that, which Christ
Jesus has said, be true, that is, that whatsoever they bind in earth shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever they lose in earth, shall be losed in heaven: if
in hearing of them we hear him: and contrariwise, if in despising of them, we
despise him: whenever they preach unto us forgiveness of sins in his name,
we ought to receive it as from his own mouth, and to be as certain thereof, as
if we had heard him speak from heaven, where he is now in great glory, and to
doubt no more of the verity thereof, then did the sinful woman, and the man
that was sick of the palsy, when as he said unto him, Go thy ways in peace,
thy sins are forgiven thee. For even as those decrees which are established
in any Court, are confirmed and authorized by the king: so likewise those
sentences and decrees which are pronounced by the Church, and agreeable unto
Gods word, are approved and confirmed by God himself. And thus have I briefly
set down those twelve reasons or arguments to prove that our sins are
forgiven us.

But because there are many weak and scrupulous consciences which will hardly be
persuaded hereof, Remedies against temptations which arise of the consideration
of our sins.
by reason they can not conceive these reasons before remembered: partly by
reason of a natural and superstitious kind of fear, and partly with I know
not what imaginations, wherewith their minds are continually tossed and
tormented, which though they be sometime expelled, yet they presently return
again and minister new occasions of vexation and sorrow: It shall be very
convenient to touch some of them before we make an end of this work, and to
refute them as fully and amply as we may. Against the temptation proceeding of
the great number of our sins.
Some are afraid of the great number of their sins, and think because they
are so many, they cannot be forgiven. But these poor souls never consider
with themselves in the mean time how great the liberality of God is to whom it
is no greater matter to forgive ten millions of crowns then one penny: and they
do not seriously ponder the marvelous efficacy and force of the blood of
Christ Jesus. For if he were ordained to take away the smnes of the whole
world, why should he not be sufficient to heal the sores of particular
sinners? King Manasses confessing before God, that his sins were multiplied
as the sand of the sea, yet notwithstanding desired God to pardon him. And did
not David after that he had publicly acknowledged, that no man could number
his offenses, or declare his transgressions, desire God to forgive him, and to
pardon his secret sins? we imagine peradventure, that he is like unto some
niggardly prince, and that he has certain rules to measure his expenses and
alms deeds, and that he may in no wise pass some prescribed limits: and yet
we do not consider, that if he should deal so with us, that there should be no
man in this world, yea, though Abraham, Job, Daniel, Samuel, and S. John were
alive again, that should not be condemned: because the corruption is spread
over all, and every one is infected therewith. So that then, this being well
weyed, we need never be astonished at the multitude of our sins if we will
flee for comfort unto the mercies of God, and never doubt of his promises.

Others are wonderfully terrified with the greatness of their sins: Against
the temptation proceeding of the greatness of our sins. The first remedy.
but we must think with S. Paul that where sin has abounded, there grace
has abounded much more: and as we see that there is no darkness so thick and
obscure, but the Sunbeams will quickly expel it: so likewise, we must think
that there is no obscurity or darkness in man's mind, but God ca^ quickly drive
it away by his light; nor any malice in his heart, which he can not pardon by
his grace, and correct by the virtue of his holy spirit; nor any disorder in
his nature or life, but that he ca^ easily redress by his divine wisdom,
whenever it shall please him. What shall we think of him and of his power? The
second.
Is there any so ignorant that he is not able to instruct by his wisdom: any so
weak, that he is not able to help by his might: any so sorrowful, that by his
goodness he can not make joyful: or any so poor, that he is not able to enrich
by his liberality? we need never doubt but he is able to pardon the most
grievous faults that ever were committed or thought upon him. The third.
For look how far he is higher the^ we, so far is his mercy above our malice.
The fourth.
He is, as it were, a great and deep Ocean, wherein all the vices, sins, and
miseries of his Church are drowned and swallowed up. And as there is no offense
so grievous, no wickedness so enormious, or crime so detestable and odious, but
that in justice he might punish it. The fifth.
so is there none of these, but by his mercy which is above all he may pardon
and forgive. Was there any corporal disease, though never so desperate, but
that Christ whilst he was here on the earth, was able to cure it? and shall we
think then that there can be any disease of the soul, whereof he has most
especial care, and where in he has most cunning, that can not be healed by his
wisdom and skill? If when he was mortal and clothed with so many infirmities,
subject to so many and such grievous vexations, he was not withstanding able to
raise up the dead, and such as stunk in their graves, as did Lazarus: shall he
not now, sitting at the right hand of God, where he has al power and authority
both in heaven and earth, The sixth.
be able to cure both the diseases of the body and the soul? for the one is no
harder the^ the other. Moreover, if he came into the world to ease those that
are heavy laden, shall the wait and heavy burden of our sins, hinder us from
coming to him? does he make any difference between the sins and the sinners,
when as he exhorts all those, who are a thirst to come unto him, and he will
give the^ of the waters of life, and that freely and for nothing, wherewith they
may quench their thirst? does he except any? why did he say, when as he opened
the book in the synagogue, and read out of the Prophet Esaias: that the spirit
of the Lord was upon him, who had anointed him to preach the glad tidings of
the gospel to the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to
the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, that he should set at
liberty them that were bruised, The seventh.
and that he should preach the acceptable year of the Lord? And to what end
tends the parable of the two debtors, whereof the one ought 500 pence, and the
other fifty? and of the creditour, who having two debtors which had nothing to
pay, forgave them both; if not to show unto us that he is as ready to forgive
the great sins; as well as the small and little ones, to the end, that it
should be an occasion for us, by considering how much we are bound unto him, to
increase our love and affection toward him? Let us conclude then, that there
is no wound so dangerous, but the plaster of Gods mercy, made with the blood
of Christ Jesus his Son, will quickly heal and recover it.

There is another thing also which makes us to doubt of the remission of our
sins; and that is our continuance in them. Against the temptation of our
commuance in sin.
For considering that by reason of the corruption of our nature, which is so
great and so hard to be amended, we can not but think often with our selves of
our great offenses toward god, and fear least he will not vouchsafe to pardon
so many heinous faults, and we are ashamed to beg remission at his hands, and
to confess so daily, so continual, and such obstinate perverseness, as indeed
is in us: and by this means fear and shame do pull us back, This evil is
common unto us with all other men.
as well from that trust and assurance we should have in his mercies, as also
from that boldness and hardines, which it is requisite we would assume,
whenever we appear before him to crave any of his graces. Now the better to
avoid this temptation, which of it self is very strange and forcible, we must
first consider, that it is common unto us with all other men in the world. 1.
Kin. 8.46.
For that as Solomon says, there is no man that lives without sin. For the
Apostles them selves who had such an exceeding care to serve God and to obey
him in all things, and had received such great measure of his graces: Romans 7.14.
yea S. Paul himself who in pouring out his griefs for that sin and wickedness
which he perceived to lie lurking within him, and that a long time after that
he was regenerated, says: We know that the law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin. For I allow not that which I do: for what I would,
that do I not: but what I hate, that do I. If I do then that which I would
not, I consent to the Law, that it is good. Now then, it is no more I that do
it, but the sin that dwells in me. For I know, that in me, that is, in my
flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me: but I find no
means to perform that which is good. For I do not the good thing which I
would, but the evil, which I would not, that do I. I find then by the law,
that when I would do good, evil is present with me. For I delight in the law
of God, concerning the inner man: but I see another law in my members,
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of
sin, which is in my members. And likewise to the Galathians. Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and
these are contrary one to the other, so that we can not do the same things
that we would. We may see then by this confession, that the Apostles, who were
as godly men as ever were, and who had received wonderful mercies at the hands
of God, were not exempted from sin after their regeneration, and that even
the dear children of God are often molested and troubled with the stings and
concupiscences of the flesh, which do maruelously cool the heat of that
affection, which should be in them to the service of God. Notwithstanding al
which, they never give over, but still trust in the mercies and goodness of
their heavenly father, hoping their sins shall never be imputed unto the^, so
long as they lay hold of the merits of Christ Jesus, and instantly crave at
the hands of the almighty, to aid them with the power of his holy spirit, for
the mortifying of their wicked lusts and concupiscences. Which thing S. Paul
does notably declare in the Chapter before mentioned, Romans 8.1.
when as presently after the confession of his infirmity and weakness, he
adds: Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. For the law of the
spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the law of sin
and of death. Albeit then, God commondeth us to pray unto him and he promises
pardon of our sins.
that all our lives long we feel many infirmities, and a marvelous
contradiction in our flesh to the will of God: notwithstanding we need not
doubt, but his grace will assist us: and that the continual prayers which we
make unto him will obtain pardon for us through his great and incomparable
mercy. Saint Cyprian in expounding the Lords prayer says: It is an evident
sign that we sin daily, in that Christ has taught us to pray continually
unto God to forgive us our sins. We may add further, unto the saying of this
holy doctor, that God in commanding us to pray without ceasing for the
remission of our sins, has taught us thereby, that he is willing to hear us
whenever, and as often as we call upon him faithfully. In like manner also in
all places of the scripture whersoeuer there is mention made of his grace and
mercy, His grace and favor continually set before our eyes. Chap. 5.21. Chap.
1.7. Chap. 2.2.
there is always mention made of the time present. As first of all, David
says not, blessed is the man whose unrighteousness has bin forgiven, but, is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered, and, to whom the Lord imputes no sin.
And S. Paul in the second to the Corinthians says, that he has made him to be
sin that knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in
him. And S. John in his first epistle general says: not only that the blood
of Christ Jesus has cleansed us, but that it does cleanse us from all sin. As
also in the second Chapter of the same epistle he does not say, that he has
been, but that he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world. And does not the Apostle
say to the Hebrews, that by one only oblation Christ Jesus has consecrated
for ever those whom he has sanctified? as then sins, infirmities, and
imperfections do continually abide in us, and hang as it were, upon our
shoulders, so long as we continue in this world: so likewise are the mercies
of God always pressed and ready to help and succor us, This grace and favor
endures for ever.
whenever we call upon him, and most available to purge us from all our
iniquities, and to cleanse us from our sins. And to what end is Christ our
high priest, once entered into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us, and by his death confirmed the will and testament of God, if
it were not to this end, to appear and stand before him, Jesus Christ is our
only and everlasting Mediator.
and be an intercessour for us? Has he been, or is he now at this present,
and shall be ever hereafter our Christ, that is to say, our Mediator toward
his Father, to bring us into his grace and favor? Was he the Physician and
Savior of his Church no longer then he walked here upon the earth? or is he
so now likewise that he is ascended into heaven? though he has but once shed
his blood for us, for the satisfaction and remission of our sins, do we not
drink daily thereof in his supper, His word and sacraments do assure us of
the continual remission of our sins.
to the end we may apply it unto our selves, and thereby receive the fruit and
commodity that comes thereof? have we only believed when we were baptized,
and at our first entrance into Gods house: or being once in, do we persevere
unto the end, and fully believe the remission of our sins? If then a
Christian obtains by faith that which he believes and hops for: we need
not doubt, but that if we believe always, we shall always be forgiven, and
that the remission of our sins shall be as durable, as the grace and mercy of
God, the certentie of his promises, the power and efficacy of the death of
Christ Jesus, Such is the faith of the Church.
and the faith of his Church, which are the matter and substance whereof it is
compounded. And therefore as Esau said to his father Isaac, that he had more
then one blessing, so we may be assured at the hands of our heavenly father,
to receive more blessings then one, whose grace and bounty is so abundant, as
that it flows over all, and endures for ever and ever.

Some there are also, Against the temptation proceeding of the distrust of the
mercies of God, and of the opinion that some have, how that he requires of
his children a perfect inherent righteousness.
who distrust and despair of the mercies of God, and are wonderfully afraid,
for that they think that he is always angry with them: being persuaded
that he requires a perfect and an absolute righteousness of all his
children, and that if we will please him, we must observe whatsoever he has
written in his law, doing neither more nor less then he there expressly
commands. Which if it were true, we should have no need of the
righteousness which comes by faith, but only of that which comes of the
law. For as Saint Paul says, those who can fulfill the law, shall be
reputed righteous, and shall live by the works thereof. But because we can not
be justified by this means by reason of the infirmity and weakness of our
flesh, which so hinders us, that we can not accomplish it: and that Christ is
the fulfilling of the law to so many as believe: and for that this opinion is
the principal cause of the reiection of the children of Israel, Romans 9.31.
as Saint Paul witnesses, Who following the law of righteousness, never
attained thereto, because they sought it not by faith, but by the works of the
law: For they have stumbled at the stumbling stone, as it is written, Behold,
I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and a rock to make men fall, and every one
that believes in him, shall not be ashamed. It is very requisite then, as well
for these three considerations, as also for many others, and especially for the
quieting of the conscience, which in many fearful natures and religious
persons is exceedingly more tormented herewith then with any thing else, Three
especial considerations.
to know first of all how to please God, and to do those things which are
agreeable unto his will and commandment. Secondly, to know those things
wherein the righteousness and perfection of a Christian does especially
consist. And thirdly, what the reason is, why after our regeneration, we do
still continually, and shall so long as we live feel so many infirmities, so
many rebellions and disordered motions in our flesh. As concerning the first,
God does not require, What it is that we ought to do to please God.
that we should be without carnal desires, worldly affections, and fleshly
concupiscences: but that we mortify our flesh according unto that grace which
it pleases him to vouchsafe us, by the working of his holy spirit. He does
not require that there be no filth upon us, but that we be careful to wash
our selves from all impuritie. He does not require that we should be
without sin, but that it should have no such domination and rule over us,
that as slaves well affectioned to the service of their masters, we should
likewise be ready to obey it in the lusts and the concupiscences thereof. We
must from day to day seek to put off the old man and cloth our selves with the
new
He has not ordained, that so long as we are carnal and sold under sin,
there should be no evil in us, which so long as we are here, can not be
separated from us: but we must make war against sin, we must not like of
it by any means, but we must hate it, and we must groan under the burden
thereof, humbly confessing all our sins unto God, and heartily crave pardon
for them: and further, that we must not give over our members to work
iniquity, and to be, as it were, the armours of all kind of impiety: but we
must continually put off some of our old rags, and turn our selves into our
shirtes: and herein we must be like vno a broched vessel, whereat we must
draw continually, 1. Cor. 5.7.
until all be out. We must be still purging out the old leaven, that we may
be a new lump. In a word, so long as we are here, 1. Ioh. 1.8, 9.
he would not have us quite without sin, for whosoever thinks so, makes
God a liar, but that we should humbly acknowledge and confess our sins: and
for the rest, that we should persuade our selves, that he is faithful and
just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. As
concerning that which is good, he would have us to carry an earnest affection
toward it, Romans 7.
and to delight in it: and that though we find an insufficiency in our selves
to do good, yet at the least, that we should be willing thereto, and also that
we should approve and consent unto that law which is good and holy, and to the
commandment which is just and righteous. And in a word, Phil. 3.13, 14.
that after the example of Saint Paul, we should forget that which is behind,
and endeavor our selves unto that which is before, and follow hard toward the
mark, for the prise of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Behold then
briefly, that which briefly God requires of us, touching the care we ought to
have in fleeing of vice, and in following of virtue: who if he will not approve
of our service, unless it be wholly agreeable and conformable to his law, we
may conclude that then he shall have never a servant in the world. For as Saint
Peter says, Acts. 15 10.
This is a yoke which neither the Apostles nor all the holy fathers and
Patriarchs were able to bear: which thing they themselves confessed: as
Abraham, Genesis 18.27.
who standing before God, acknowledged that he was but dust and ashes. And
David says, that his sin was continually before him. And Job, Psalm. 51.5.
Job 9.3. Dan. 9.5.
that he could not answer one thing of a thousand. And Daniel seeking the Lord
by prayer and supplications, with fasting, sackecloth and ashes, says, we have
sinned and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea, we have
rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments: for we
would not obey thy servants the prophets, which spoke in thy name to our Kings,
to our princes, and to our fathers, and to all the people of the la^d. O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame and confusion. And
Paul confesses that he had bin a blasphemer, 1. Tim. 1.13. Verse. 14.
a persecuter and an oppressor, and was at that time, when as he made that
confession, the chief and principal of al sinners. And to be short, if we read
over the whole scriptures, we shall find that the most holy persons that ever
were, have showed both by word and writing that they have bin grievous sinners,
and that it was impossible by reason of their natural corruption to fulfill the
Law of God. What shall we say the^ of our selves, Secondly we must acknowledge
that we are marveilously degenerated from the piety and vprightnes of fore
fathers.
who are so bad and of so small account in respect of those ancient fathers, and
who have so far degenerated from them, both in regard of our religion, our
policies, and ceremonies, that we may justly be said, not to have so much as a
ha^dful of their piety, faith, righteousness, virtue, and equity, and do
rese^ble the^ no more then old ruins do beutiful and stately buildings? How
then (say I) shall we, who are in such a piteous case, be so bold as to lift up
our heads so hie, and promise unto our selves such strength and ability, that
we dare so much as think that we are able perfitly and absolutely to keep and
observe the Law of God? For though we did shine as bright as the moon and
stars, yet should not we be clear in Gods sight. What shall we do then, who
are but worms and dust? O the mad presumption and intolerable pride of men,
who being as wicked as the Devil, Thirdly to avoid the bypocrisie of such as
justify themselves. Sozom. 1. book, chap. 21.
do notvvithstanding imagine that they are able to attain unto the perfect
righteousness of Christ Jesus the son of God: which they must needs do, out
of doubt, if they vvil fulfill the law. It is reported in the Ecclesiastical
history, that there was one Accesius a disciple and follovver of the heretic
Novatus, and a stout maintainer of his masters heresies, who defended before
the Emperor Constantine, that after we had once received the remission of our
sins in Baptism, we are bound from that day forth under pain of
damnation, so exactly and so strictly to keep the Law, that we must omit no
more thereof, then did Christ Jesus: otherwise we shall never obtain any
mercy and favor at the hand of God. Whereupon the Emperor, who was a very
wise and virtuous prince, answered, If this be true, Accesius, thou may make
thee a ladder and clime to heaven alone: giving us thereby to understand, that
it was impossible for any man to attain unto such perfection; and that there
is no man (except Christ Jesus, James. 3.2.
who was conceived by the holy Ghost, and never knew sin) which does not
offend (as Saint James says) in many things: and therefore by consequent if
he will be saved, must needs have a Mediator and an intercessor for him. We
may conclude then, that God does not require such an absolute perfection and
purity in man, as that he should be without all sin: for that can not be in
any but in the Son of God Christ Jesus; but that we will be careful and
desirous to attain to a holy and pure life, and be continually striving
against sin, and bend all our affections to true holiness. And if it shall
happen at any time, (as often it will, considering our own imperfections and
ignorance) that we go astray: that which he requires of us in such a case, is;
that with all humility and hearty sorrow we acknowledge our faults, and that
as we are daily and hourly ready to renew our transgressions, so we should
continually by our repentance, and by our hearty and earnest prayers renew
the grace and favor of God toward us.

It may appear then by that which has been said already, Wherein the
righteousness and perfection of Christians consists.
that the righteousness and perfection of Christians consists of two parts.
First, in confessing that we are sinners before God, and that we repose all our
confidence and trust in his mercies. And secondly that we be desirous to serve
him, and be obedient unto his holy commandments, in as great measure as it
shall please him by his grace and holy spirit to aid and assist us. Excellent
sayings of S. Augustine.
S. Augustine in reasoning against the Pelagians, has many notable and
excellent sayings to this purpose. As first, that our life may be termed
perfect and upright: if we understand that to attain unto this perfection, it
is requisite, that in what age or degree of virtue soever we be, we must
always consider our own imperfections in our hearts, and humbly acknowledge
them with our mouths. Sundry notable comparisons of this Doctor for the
confirmation of this point.
we do not depart from it) falling into that horrible and fearful pit of
death and destruction, wherein we were before. Besides these worthy sayings
of this holy Doctor, which are very pregnant and plain for the confirmation
of that which we have said before, touching Christian righteousness, he sets
down also many excellent comparisons, whereby he does most lively set forth
the truth hereof. And first of all in his book of the City of God, comparing
it with the Sanctuary of the Romans, he says, that even as their city was
peopled in the beginning, by reason of that freedom and impunitie, which
Rhemus and Romulus proclaimed and offered to all malefactors, which would
come and inhabit there: The Church is an assembly of sinners, which God does
sanctify and justify.
So likewise the Church of God is builded and gathered of all nations of the
earth, by a general pardon which God does offer unto so many, as will enter
and dwell therein: with this condition, that they must desire it, and trust to
obtain it by his mercy through the merits of his Son Christ. Whereby we may
gather that to speak properly and truly, the Church is nothing else but an
assembly of idolatours, blasphemers, infidels, rebels, ungrateful, disloyal
and barbarous men, murderers, thieves, usurers, slaunderers, backebiters, and
such like people, to whom God has freely given his grace, thereby to save
them, in forgiving their offenses, and releasing that punishment which was due
unto them for their sins. And again writing upon one of the Psalms, Psalm.
31.2. The diseases which he healed, and the dead which he raised up.
he compares God unto a skilful Surgeon, and a Christian unto a man that is
most grievously and daungerously wounded, saying, that as a maimed man, who
desires to be healed, and to recover his former health, must not hyde his
wound but make it known unto the surgeon, who by washing thereof, and laying
his plaster to the sore, does in a short time heal it and make it as sound
as his other parts. So likewise if we will heal the maladies and diseases of
our souls, we must lay them open in Gods sight by a true and hearty
confession, and he must apply his plaster, that is, his mercy and a general
pardon which he must give us for all our faults and iniquities. In another
place he likeneth our redemption to the deliverance of the people of Israel,
How that we are delivered and maintained by the power and grace of of God, as
were the children of Israel.
when as they were in captivity in Egypt, and says, that even as when they
were delivered from the place where they had bin captives, their enemies which
pursued them, were drowned in the red sea. So likewise in Baptism, which is
the beginning of our redemption, our sins are washed away by the blood of
Christ Jesus. After that they were entered into the wilderness, before they came
into the promised land, they were constrained to fight with hunger and thirst
against heat, against those solitary deserts, against Amalek, against venomous
serpe^ts, and other in numerable temptations: so likewise after that we have
bin called and sanctified, before we can enter into that eternal glory and rest
which we hope for, we must first fight against the devil, the world and our
own concupiscences. If at any time they were bitten with serpents, they had no
other means to heal and recover them selves, and to keep them from their
venim, but to lift up their eyes, and to look upon the brazen serpent, which
Moses by the commandment of God had erected to this purpose. So likewise if
we be stung or hurt either by our enemies, or by the inordinate lusts of our
faith, whereby we lift up the eyes of our hearts to behold Christ Jesus
hanging upon the Cross: We may behold in this similitude our righteousness
very excellently and very fitly described, and that the greatest part thereof
consists in the grace and mercy of God, which it pleases him to bestow
upon us, not only when he calls us, but also ever after so long as we live
in this world, pardons our transgressions by his great goodness, and for
the love of his only Son by whom we are commended and reconciled unto him.
Of the thief that was crucified who by his faith obtained mercy at the hands
of Christ Jesus.
He also sets down another comparison very fit and agreeable to the same
purpose: and that is of the two thieves, who suffered with Christ, by the which
(says he) al men both the godly and the ungodly are represented. If one should
examine the lives of these two poor and wretched thieves, there would be found
small difference between them. For both of them were very wicked and naughty
persons, and such as had deserved death by the laws. In like manner there is no
difference between the elect and the reprobate; for both of them are vicious,
not only by nature, but also in conversation. Psalm. 14.1. Romans 3.10.
And there is not one (as David says, and likewise Paul) that does good, and
that has not deserved a shameful death at Gods hands, if he should deal as
men deserve. There is then no other distinction between them, but that which
distinguishes the malefactors. For as the one was saved for that he did first
acknowledge and confess his faults, and then that he to whom he confessed the^
was willing to pardon them: so likewise the difference between the elect and
the reprobate is this, that the one do acknowledge their sins and are
heartily sorry for them, and withal do continually cry unto Christ Jesus,
seeking for help at his hands who was crucified for them: whereas on the
contrary, the other will not acknowledge their own weakness, and therefore they
grow so proud, and are puffed up with such a conceit of them selves, that they
give them selves to all kind of sensuality, and wholly delight in things of this
world, and so in the end do die both impenitent and obstinate sinners, neither
do they know Christ Jesus, but rather contemn and despise him, as that proud
and mallepert thief did: yea they bark and bay at him, even as dogs do at
such as are not of their acquaintance.

This comparison then made by this holy and excellent Doctor, tends to this
end, to show us, that we are righteous as the thief was righteous: that is to
say, by confession and repentance of our sins, and by the remission that we
obtain by a lively faith in Christ Jesus. And as our forefathers who were very
wise and well advised in many things, have always attributed unto him these
two names, good, and Thief, and that after his death, when as he was now
glorified, and reigned in Paradise with Christ Jesus, signifying by one of the
said names what grace and favor God had showed him: and by the other, the
quality and desert of his own sin. By the same reason may we term
Christians, either good murderers, good idolaters, or good whoremasters, or
good slaunderers, or good sinners, according unto the sin whereto they have
been most addicted. For in thus doing, we always give the glory of their
justice and righteousness unto the grace and favor of God. And to humble them
withal, we put them in mind what punishment they should have, Is that of
the moon which borrows her light of the sun.
if God should deal with them according unto their desartes. Now because the
greatest and the best part of the righteousness of all Christians do lie and
consist in Imputation, that is to say, in that God by the merittes and
obedience of his Son Christ, does hold and account them just and righteous,
whenever they appear before him in judgment: this learned and godly father
does compare the Church in another place to the Moon: and says, that, as
that is of it self dark and obscure, having no other light but that which is
borrowed of the Sun: so likewise the Church has no other righteousness, but
that which is communicated to it, by the death and merits of Christ Jesus,
from whom she is no sooner severed, but forthwith she is eclipsed, and
remains in her natural darkness and blindness, which is far more
fearful, and is much thicker then that of the Moon, when it is declined from
the Sun. We may then fully resolve, being enduced thereto by so many
excellent sayings and fit comparisons of this ancient Doctor, that the first
and principal part of our righteousness is in this, that it pleases God to
be merciful unto us, and to forgive us our sins for the love of his Son
Christ, in whom alone we ought to put our whole trust and confidence, so long
as we are laden with this heavy burden of corruptible and sinful flesh.

Now as touching the second, Of the obedience which we owe unto God.
which is the obedience and service we owe unto God, and which we ought in
all faithful manner to perform unto him, after that he has once received
us into his house, it consists (as Saint Ambrose says) rather in a holy
affection, then in any real and essential effect. For all that we can do,
or rather all that the grace of God works in us so long as we are in this
world, is a desire to serve and obey him: and when soever we fail hereof to
make us heartely soric for it, and in the acknowledging of our sins, to make
us return to him, and humbly to desire and crave his mercy and pardon for
them, and that it would please him to vouchsafe to take pity of us. We are
herein very like unto sick persons, who desire nothing so much as to be in
health, and to recover their former strength: and therefore they are very
careful to observe all the rules of physic, and whatsoever else they think
may be availeable for the recoverie of their strength and health: and yet for
all that they can not be so careful nor so watchful over them selves, but
that oftentimes they fall into their diseases again, and must needs have the
help of the physician.

In like manner considering the feebleness, and weakness of our souls, and
their variable and uncertain disposition, we had need to meditate
continually in the Law of God, which is the regiment of their health, and
strive (according to that measure of grace which he has given us by his holy
Spirit) to observe and follow it in all points so far forth as possibly
we may. But although we studdie by all means that may be to do so, yet can
we not be so precise herein, neither yet so provident, but that we shall fall
into many grievous diseases, and therefore we must (when we have done what we
can) have our recourse unto this excellent and sovereign receipt of the mercy
of God, who will have pity upon us, when as he shall consider that it proceeds
not of any intemperance or evil diet that we keep, but of a natural
infirmity that is in us, that we fall so often into our old diseases.
Another similitude declaring what obedience God requires of us.
For we must not imagine that he is like unto some cruel and heard hearted
creditour, which will not release one penny of that which is due unto him, but
will have all paid and that to the uttermost farthing. He is merciful unto
almen, yea to his enemies, and therefore he will not be cruel and unmerciful
unto his children, and we may be well assured, that as he has showed himself
unto our fathers, so he will be unto us, and therefore al though in stead of gold
which we owe him, we have nothing but iro^, yet must we pluck up good hearts,
and carry such as we have to him, and be certainly persuaded, that he will
have greater regard unto his mercy in bearing with our poverty and want of
ability, then to his justice in requiring of us, whatsoever is due unto him:
always remembering this, that we must not be idle and careless. For if he
once perceive that we are careful, and that we will take pains and do what
we can to pay him that which we owe, and as our power and ability will serve
us, he will take pence for teasters, and shillinges for crowns, and will
receive a little for all that we owe him, and will accounte us righteous, if
he once see in us a will and desire to do that which is good and pleasing in
his sight. A third fimilitude.
Even as we commonly accounte a good traveller, not only him that has
already gone his journey, but also such an one as is ready pressed and willing
to go forward in his way. The conclusion then of this second point is this,
that to be accounted righteous before God, it is not requisite that in all our
thoughts, counsels, desires, words, works, and generally all our whole
conversation, we should be so upright and conformable unto his will and Law,
that we should not omit any thing of whatsoever is commanded us (for that is
impossible, considering the great and wonderful corruption of our nature, and
the miserable and wretched estate wherein we are) But it is only required of
us, that we should humble our selves and acknowledge and confess that we
are miserable and wretched sinners, as we have already prooved: And next unto
this, that we repose our whole trust and confidence in his mercies and
promises which he has made unto us: A summarie of the obedienc, ewhich God
requires at our hands.
And thirdly, that we present our selves before him in the Name and Mediation
of his son Christ Jesus, and for his sake crave remission and forgiveness of
our sins: And finally, the the better to make manifest such great and
exceeding bounty and goodness toward us, we must consecrate the rest of our
lives to the praise and honor of his Name, and seek the advancement of his
glory so much as we may: humbly beseeching him to continue his gracious and
loving favor toward us, and to wink at such faults as he daily finds in
us, and to accept of our good wills as of sufficient duetyes, and to take the
great and exceeding displeasure we have with our selves for our manifold
transgressions, as a full and absolute satisfaction for all our sins.

It remains now that we understand what the reason is, The reason why that
after our regeneration, we still feel so many infirmities and rebellious
motions against God.
why that when he has called and regenerated us, he will not vouchsafe us such
grace and favor, as to keep us in his ways, and to make us so perfect and
absolute, that there be no more any repugnancie or contradiction to his will
and pleasure: that is to say; that we neither think any thing in our minds,
nor love any thing with our hearts, nor yet suffer our senses to delight in
that which is not consonant and agreeable unto his laws and commandments.
Many and especially such, as are most afraid to offend him, and are best
affected toward his service, do think with them selves, that if they could
obtain such mercy at his hands, that they should be most happy and fortunate,
yea, and that then they should live a very angelical and holy life. Which I am
persuaded is most true: And I must needs confess, that there can be no
greater felicity, then to love God with all our hearts, with all our souls,
and with all our strength. But seeing that both experience, and the Scripture
teaches us, We are not yet capable of so great a good, neither is it expedient
that as yet, we should have the fruition thereof.
that he will not bestow such grace and favor upon us, and therefore that it
is impossible that we should attain unto any such perfection so long as we
are in this life, I say, that we ought to be content with such graces, as it
pleases God to bestow upon us, and assuredly to believe and persuade our
selves, that we are not capable of so excellent and precious a treasure.
Moreover it were not profitable for us, that so great a reuenew should be
committed into our hands, seeing as yet, we are wards and under age, besides
our small discretion in the using of such great wealth, so long as we are
conversant among such wicked company as is in the world, and ruled by the lewd
counsel of our corrupt flesh. Let us, I pray you, consider this also: that if
so be our first father Adam, who was created in such integrity and perfection,
and in whom the graces of God shined in most bright and beautiful manner, was
not able to resist one small and light temptation in Paradise, where he was, as
it were, hedged about with the favor and love of God: what shall we do, who
live in this wretched and miserable world, where we are assaulted on every side
with so many and so furious temptations? and if he, who was clothed with such
costly and precious garments, and wrapped up in the manifold blessings of God,
would notwithstanding through a devilish presumption, and a most cursed
ingratitude, forgot him of whom he had received so many excellent benefits: is
it possible that we should be better advised, and more sufficient to keep our
hearts and minds from this pride and presumption? By reason of our infirmities
we do the better understand what need we have of the righteousness of Christ
Jesus. August. upon the 29. Psalm.
And hereby we may gather how expedient it is for us, and how necessary for
our salvation, that God, after he has regenerated and renewed us, should
notwithstanding still suffer many infirmities to dwell in us, to the end they
may minister occasion, and be a means to humble us, and to make us acknowledge
that we have no other righteousness, but that which lies in Christ Jesus, and
in the remission of our sins: nor any other hope to be saved, but by the only
grace and mercy of God. S. Augustine comparing Job with Adam, says, that Job
sitting upon the dunghill, did valiantly resist both the woman and the devil,
and therefore was with great honor received into Paradise. We cannot too often
remember these two examples, seeing they teach us, that there is nothing more
forceable, or more available to humble us and keep us in true fear of God,
then infirmities and temptations: whereto we cannot but acknowledge our selves
to be very subject. For pride, which was the first sin wherewith we were
infected, is also (as the same holy Doctor says in many of his books) the
last corruption which departs from us, and there is nothing in this world
that we are so long in learning of, nor so difficult for a man to practice, as
to be humble, lowly, and to think basely of himself. For what poor beggar or
botcher is there, that is not somewhat conceited of himself, or that has not
some opinion of his own person? and how ca^ it be but that we should account
and esteem of such things as are of prise with the world, The due
consideration of our pride, draws us to humility, which is increased by the
graces and gifts of God.
seeing we boast and brag oftentimes of that which is discommended among men,
and thought to be very vain and vicious? For we see there are many that
delight in dancing, some in dicing and carding, others in swearing, drinking,
ruffling, and quarrelling, yea, poor men do often glory in their poverty,
and vant of their patched cloakes. Seeing then, that this cursed pride has
taken such deep root in our hearts, that it is a difficult matter to pluck
it out, either by instructions, threatenings, commandments, or any
remonstrances what so ever, I am verily persuaded, that among the manifold
testimonies and innumerable proofs, which God has given from time to time of
his great wisdom and divine providence, and those excellent graces which God
has and does daily bestow upon us, this is not the least: that after he has
called us to the knowledge of his Son, and united us unto him by that faith
which we have in his Gospel, he has still left several infirmities and
sundry great imperfections inhabiting and dwelling in our flesh and by this
means we are the more apt to be partakers of his mercy with a joyful
remembrance and an assured persuasion of his grace and favor toward us. And
furthermore, with these cursed and damnable relikes of sin, which do
exceedingly abound and flow in us, he does correct and rebuke this proud and
swelling humor which has bin the overthrow both of men and angels, making of
this miserable and wretched estate of ours, as it were, a tryacle and
preservative against misery. A similitude.
For even as the apothecarie makes a receipt of serpents skins, which is very
available against their venomous bitings and poisoned stingings: so likewise
does our good God compound and make a most excellent medicine of our sin and
iniquity, to preserve us (as we have said already) from this dangerous
infection of pride: and wills that according to the example of him that was
sick of the palsy, An excellent allegory.
we should continually carry our beds upon our shoulders, after that we have
bin once healed: not only to the end we should remember that grace and mercy
which he has showed us, but also that we should be mindful of that favor and
love which he does daily show us in healing us by the continual pardoning of
all our sins and offenses: and herein he does imitate those surgeons, An
other similitude.
who keep an issue at their soars, deferring to heal and cure them, for that
they would have the diseased person still to seek to him. Let us now consider
of that which has bin spoken, as well touching that duty which God required
at our hands, as also that righteousness and perfection which is requisite for a
Christian, and what the occasion is, that we are still clogged with these
infirmities and imperfections, and we shall easily discern, whether there be any
other ways to come into the grace and favor of our God, then by observing of
his commandments and statutes: and likewise whether we have any such great
cause to fear and tremble as we do, when we enter into the consideration of
our manifold sins and imperfections.

Some others there are, Against the temptation proceedi^g of the fear and
horror of Gods judgments. Psalm. 143. The first remedy.
who in remembering their horrible and fearful offenses, do utterly despair
of the remission of them, for that they are persuaded, that God will examine
every thing that is amiss very straightly and very severely. Which if he
should do, every one (as David says) should be found culpable, and be in
danger to be condemned and destroyed. But we have showed before, that there is
no condemnation to such as are in Christ Jesus; and not only no condemnation,
but also no accusation which shall prejudice them, seeing that God on the one
side justifies them, and Jesus Christ on the other side, is dead and risen
again, and become a Mediator and an intercessour for them. And that this is
true, it does manifestly appear by the examples of such as are dead already,
as also what shall be the estate and condition of the children of God, after
their departure out of this life. Examples for the proof of that which we have
said before.
Was not Lazarus his soul immediately after his death, carried into Abraham's
bosom? Did not the thief the same day that he was hanged, enter with Christ
Jesus into Paradise? Was not S. Steven received into heaven presently after he
was stoned to death? Which examples have been left unto us in the Scriptures,
not only to declare the great goodness and mercy of God toward them, but also
to manifest what grace and favor he is purposed to bestow upon all true
Christians, whose lives and actions shall be no more examined, then were those of
the persons before mentioned. And we must not think, that he entertaineth them
otherwise, By similituds
then a loving father does his children, when as they come to his house, or
that he speaks of any thing, but that which may minister comfort and
consolation unto them. For he will say unto them, By testimonies.
as S. Matthew reports: It is well done, good servant and faithful: thou have
been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much: enter in to thy
masters joy: Or else, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom
prepared for you, from the foundations of the world: for I was hungry, and ye
gave me meat, etc. Whereby we may gather that nothing shall be remembered, but
only that little good which they have done: all their evil works shall be
either buried in the bottom of the earth, or drowned in the depth of the sea,
that they never come forth into judgment to accuse them: yea, all those
writings and informations which may in any wise hurt or testify against them,
shall be cancelled and torn in pieces. We then, who are justified by his grace,
need not fear the rigor and severity of his judgments, or despair of the
remission of our sins, but the consideration of them is very fearful to the
wicked, who by reason of their sin and infidelity, are culpable in his
sight. And in deed, we should be so far from being afraid of the judgments
of God, that it should rather comfort and rejoice us. For seeing it is
commended unto us, as one of the articles of our faith, which is contrary to
fear and despair, either we must not believe it, or if we do, it should
tend to our comfort and consolation.

There are others also, Against the temptation which proceeds of the
consideration of extraordinary calamities, which many imagine to be inflicted
upon man through an irreconciliable displeasure of God toward sin. The first
consideration. The second.
who if any new adversity happen unto them, they presently despair of the
graces of God, and think that this visitation proceeds of his anger, and for
some sin, which he lays to their charge, which make them think that he is
like unto a man, of whose love or hatred we conjecture by the countenance and
color of his face. But we are as wonderfully deceived herein, as were Jobs
friends, who used the same and the like arguments, to persuade him that he was
out of the favor of God, and that therefore he was so afflicted and punished
as he was. Which if it were true, it would follow necessarily, first of al,
that these afflictions and scourges should be perpetual, seeing there is no
man so holy, but that he has more vice, then virtue, and more wickedness, then
goodness lying and lurking in him: Secondly, that the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs of Christ Jesus, were the greatest sinners in the world.
For as S. Paul says, they have been beaten, whipped, persecuted, burned,
seared, and cast unto wild beasts: The third.
and reputed as the very dung and offscouring of the world: And thirdly, that
if a duersities be apparent arguments of his displeasure, then prosperity must
needs be a manifest and a certain sign of his favor and love toward us:
Whereas the Apostle speaking of the one, says, that it provoke us to
repentance: and making mention of the other: he says, that the rods and
chastisements of the other, are evident tokens of his love. We may then safely
conclude, that these accidental miseries, ought not to make us dout of the
mercy and favor of God.

We are also maruelously disquieted oftentimes, Of the temptation which
proceeds of the comparison between our selves and such as are holy and godly
men. The first consideration.
when as we compare our selves with those who have been, or are at this present
accounted virtuous and godly men. For in reading or hearing of their holiness
and heavenly conversation, and comparing it with our own wicked and ungodly
actions, we can not but acknowledge a marvelous difference between them and
us, and therefore think with our selves, that we are very wicked and unjust. But
herein we are many ways deceived. And first of all, that we imagine that the
righteousness of a Christian does consist in his works, and not in the remission
of his sins. For though that Abraham was charitable, patient, mild, lowly
and careful to do his duty in every thing, yet for all that, he was not
righteous in the sight of God, but only by that grace, which it pleased God to
impart unto him, by imputing unto him the righteousness of his Son, through
the faith which he had in his promises. The second.
Secondly, if we will judge of men's virtues, we must pass over many of their
faults, as their corrupt natures, their vain words, their wicked imaginations,
their leude affections, and polluted hearts: al which we should carefully and
diligently examine, before we can pronounce them righteous according to the
law. Now there is no question, but the most upright man that ever was, has
infinitely transgressed herein, as it may most plainly be proved by their own
confessions: and therefore we must not think, that they have bin exempted from
sin, though that all their faults be not revealed unto us: neither should our
transgressions make us imagine that we are not in the favor of God, as well as
they were, though that our sins be greater in number and more grievous then
theirs. The third.
Thirdly, we err greatly, in that we do not consider, that righteousness,
faith, hope, patience, charity, humility and other virtues, are qualities
which are increased or diminished, or (to speak as the Philosophers do) which
are capable of more and of less. For albeit they have been more charitable and
more faithful then we are, and we less then they: yet it follows not, but
that both the one and the other may be justified by that faith, which it
pleases God to impart unto either, according to that measure and portion which
it pleases him to think expedient, as well for his glory, as for our
salvation. And therefore in regard of these reasons, we must not be terrified
with the consideration of the multitude of our sins, but we must steadfastly
believe that we are the children of God, as well as the Angels them selves. It
is certain that they are the eldest sons (as Philo says) because they have
not sinned at all, but we are the youngest, for that (after the example of the
prodigal child) we do repent us and are heartily sorry for our sins.

There is also one thing more, Against the temptation proceeding of the great
wants that are in us.
which does greatly trouble our consciences, and does often make us doubt
whether we be of the number of Gods children, and that we have the mercy of God
to justify us, or not. And that is: when we do not find in ourselves a
lively and fervent faith, either in praying unto God, or in praising of his
holy name in confessing of his bounty toward us. The better to arm us
against this temptation, The first remedy.
we must understand first of all, that the holiness and sanctity of the Church
is set down and propounded unto us, as an undoubted article of our faith, to
the end that we should not make any question thereof, though it be not so
apparent and sensible, as are the colors and savors of sweet and delightsome
flowers. Even as then we do not think that the fire which is raked up in the
ashes, is clean put out, A confirmation by similitudes.
though that neither the light appears, nor yet the heat thereof can be
discerned: and as that tree is not dead, which in winter has neither leaves,
blossoms, nor fruit upon it, nor yet any other thing which may be as a sign
of the life that is hid within it: so likewise may not we be said to be without
faith, for that sometimes it seems to be buried and smothered in us.
Secondly, The second remedy.
we must consider that the spirit of God is like unto a wind which blows
when and where it lists. Seeing then, that we are very unfit to set forth the
praises of God, unless it pleases the holy Ghost to open our lips, and that
our pipes cannot resound these wonderful graces which we have received, if God
him self do not set them in tune, we must patiently wait for the time, wherein
it shall please him to enspire us, and take heed that we do not refuse it when
soever it pleases him to offer it unto us, or be slack in asking of it, when
we feel such cold and frosen affections within us.

My purpose and intention has bin hitherto, A brief sum of this whole
treatise, divided into 7. books.
to show the great and wonderful distemperature of our unruly and disordered
passions; and as plainly as I could, to decipher unto every one, the manifold
dangers whereinto they violently drive us, if they be not bridled with the
rules of reason, and, as it were, tamed and made gentle by discreet handling.
Imitating herein the Lacedaemonians, who were accustomed to make their slaves
drunk, and afterward to show them to their children, that they seeing their
filthy behavior and loathsome countenances, might be the rather induced to
avoid all intemperance what soever. In like manner my whole scope and purpose
has been in this discourse, to show, what disorder and confusion unruly
desires and untamed humors have bred and hatched in all such persons, as have
been slaves to their own affections, to the end, that every one that hunger
and thirst after a peaceable and quiet estate, may plainly perceive, that there
is no other means to attain their wished end, but only to curb them short,
and ride them with a sharp bit, for that they are very headstrong and unruly
jades. For even as a gold ring does not so soon touch a goutie or diseased
finger, A fit similitude.
but that presently it causes great and intolerable grief: so likewise the
humors, riches, pleasures, and profit of this world, do nothing else but
molest and trouble our minds, either with ambition or covetousness. Which
passions are even as pricks and eating soars or ulcers at the heart, which
bite and gnawe continually, never suffering it to take rest, or to live at ease
and contentedly. An other similitude.
And herein they do somewhat resemble our fevers or agues, the heat and cold
whereof, though they be internal, yet are they more extreme and more painful
to be endured, then the coldest or whotest season of all the year. In like
manner there is no fire what so ever, whose heat is so forceable, as is the
scorching flame of our own concupiscences. We must then take all the pains
that may be to quench it: which we shall effect in time, if we do carefully
remember, and diligently put in practice that which has bin before rehearsed.
For even as it fares with these great mastifes which we nourish, the better
to keep our goods from stealing and pilfering away, Plutarch in his treatise
of the contentation of the mind.
though they bark never so fiercely, yet if they be rebuked by the master of
the house, to whose voice they are accustomed, they will presently desist and
leave off from further stirring: so likewise the most furious and violent
passion that may be, will soon be quiet, if they be accustomed to be rebuked by
reason, and not suffered to bark and bay at their own pleasures. But above al
things we must seriously pray unto the Almighty, as we have said already in the
beginning, to vouchsafe us continually the aid and comfort of his holy
spirit, that thereby we may be enabled to master them. For if it pleases not
him to open our eyes, The true and effectual means to reap commodity by
that which has been before spoken
and vnstoppe our ears, we shall never be able of our selves either to see or
understand his truth, neither will our hearts be fit to receive the print
thereof, if they be not mollifyed and softened by the working of his holy
spirit.

It remains now that we be humble and earnest suitors unto him, that it would
please him for his son Christ Jesus sake, to enlighten the eyes of our
minds, that we may perfectly see the vanity of those things which we so
carefully follow, and the true perfect happiness of that which we so warily
shun and eschew. And furthermore that he would vouchsafe to turn our hearts
from all such things as may in any wise molest and disquiet us, and that by
the direction of his holy Spirit, we may seriously seek after that which is
always accompanied with an assured rest and a joyful contentation.

To the King of Kings, immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be all
honor, glory, praise, and dominion now and for ever, Amen.
FAVLTS ESCAPED.
Fault Correction 21 drawn read driven 51 the three 54 tyranous tyrants 55
who which 55 Ariflides Aristides 57 in by 82 stupititie stupiditie 86 resolved
dissolved 89 cassered cassed 97 ole old 111 the three 124 noxious obnoxious 135
ever never 137 and to 155 captiued captiuated 109 ruins rumes 171 hare Heart
171 harnes horns 184 he we 189 overcame overcome


