THE COPY of a Letter written out of Scotland, by an English Gentleman of
credit and worship serving there, unto a frind and kinsman of his, that desired
to be informed of the truth and circumstances of the slanderous and infamous
reports made of the Queen of Scotland, at that time restreined in manner as
prisoner in England, upon pretense to be culpable of the same.
WHereas you require me, to send you mine own knowledge and the truest
in^ormatio^ that I can otherwise get, touching yt troth or untroth of
thinfamous reports made of the Queens Majesty of Scotland, for and about the
death of the Lord Darley her late husband: understand you, that albe it your
request may do much with me, yet when I have gone about to accomplish the same,
I find the entreprise thereof greater, then perhaps it seemed to your self: the
practice of the matter consisting in many parts depending o^^ upon an other
from sundry ye^res past, so secretly contrived that now some difficulty is it*
to boult out the truth, and withal the particularities and circumstances so
intricat, that it would require the labor of a better penman, then my self, to
set out the same.

And that which I have do^^ albeit I began it at your request, yet when I had
entered to inform my self of the bottom thereof, I began then to think, that
even for duty and conscience sake, I was bound to bestow therein a little more
pain, regarding the terrible sequeles and lamentable conseque^ces, which I
might perceive were intended to be grounded and builded upon such forged
foundations and malicious inventions, as I plainly discovered from time to time
to be newly contrived, not only first against her Majesty's self, but then also
against her said husband, and every other good servant and subject, that could
not be hoped to be won to the Aduers party: I mean James Steward bastard
brother to the Queen, Priour of S. Andrew. Who though he had been created by
her Earl of Murrey, and advanced to more then 25. thousand pounds Scottish of
yearly revenue, had yet his eye bent upon such a mark and end, as few or
none of long time were able to epsy: that is to say, an aspiring ambition to
usurp ye Croune of the Realm unto himself, so as whiles they y^ first set him
on work, suborning him to take the matter in hand, and still supported him in
the same, thought thereof to serve their own turns, and least intended that,
which he most eyed: even so did he likewise in his course and path, by
acceptinge their pensions and so much of their counselles, as made for his
turn, served him self, and made his profit of them.

And now for the more plain, orderly and compendious opening of the matter, I
have thought good, so to frame my speech, as if my self were the answerer of
the Objections, and to divide the same into four parts or chapiters. In ye
first I will place the Answers to certain frivolous presumptions, that seem to
be gathered out of some infamous libel, or slau^derous pamflet that has been
set forth against ye Queen, and showed in sundry Course of Princes abroad:
whereby they labor to induce some show of likelihod, that ye Queen's Highness
might be co^senting to the murder of ye Lord Darley her late husband: whom they
themselves cruelly made away, as in ye course and process of ye matter shall
clearly appear. And in that part also shall ensue vehement presumptio^s on the
contrary side, that makes it more tha^ probable, that it could not possibly
be, that her Brace could be consenting thereunto.





such respect, as is convenient to some of the parties yet living, with a short
remonstra^ce of Gods wonderful workinges therein, in merciful preserving the
innocent Lady and her dear son, in discovering the drift of those most
lewd and vile practices, and due pu^nishment already taken upon some of the
Malefactors.

The answer to certain f^iuolous surmises made by the slaunderers, whereby they
labor to insinuate some likelyhod, that the Queen of Scotland should be
consenting to the murder of the Noble prince the lord Darley her late husband,
together with other vehement presumptions produced in her defense to the
contrary.

CAPVT. 1.




To the former of these two ghesses it is answered, Answer to the ^^^st.
that though there had been once in very deed some unkindness between them, by
reason of the Lord Darley being abused for want of years and experience, by
the subtle practices of the crafty fore the Earl of Murrey and his
Accomplices, who sought to kindle in the mind of that noble young Gentleman an
ambitious desire to aspire to the kingdom, and to conceive unkindness in the
Queen, for that having made him her husband, she did not also forthwith make
him king of her Realm, having therefore persuaded him, to join with them in
the murder of David her faithful Secretary (whom they made him believe to be
his hinderer) and in the undutiful and insolent restraint of her person: yet
the said Lord Darley sone after finding his own error, and perceiving, that
their attempts tended to farther and worse end then at the first pretended,
and being ashamed of his very evil and unkind dealing, through evil counsel,
toward her Highness, to whom he was so singulerly bound, reconciled him self in
such hearty sort to her Grace, and so discovered unto her all the
design^mentes, that he knew of the said Murrey and his Accomplices: that al
thing past being remitted, there renewed between them as hearty love, as ever had been, according to the old and true saying: Amantium irae amoris redintegratio
est. And thervpo^ (for proof that the reconciliation was unfeigned of her part)
by her excellent wit and policy first she saved both him and her self, by
making shift secretly in the night to escape out of the chamber: where after
the murder of David they had rudely thruste her being great with child, and
detained her imprisoned with no small danger of her life.

Moreover her Highness hearing not long after, that upon his arriual at Glasco,
he was fallen sick, forthwith repaired to him with all speed, cumforting and
cherishing him in all she could, till she had recovered him: and even so
likewise at Edenborough she kept cu^pany with him, and tenderly cherished him
even to the very last hour that ever she saw him, so that long before his
death there was not only a perfect reconciliation between the^, but such
hearty and faithful love, as no practice that Murrey and his fellows could
make, was hable eftsoon to work any breach between them. Which considered,
and being notoriously known to be true, a man may with Terence truly say to
the suggester of that presumption: Non sat commode
Diuisa sunt temporibus tibi*
Daue, haec.


To the second presumption by the flau^derers alleged, in that he was not so
solemnly buried, as was convenient: it is answered, that his body was
honorably enbalmed, seared, and interred bysides king James the v. her Graces
father, and was accompanied to that place with Justice Clarke, the Lord of
Traquar, and many other Gentlemen of reputation. The ceremonies in deed were
(against her Graces will) the fewer, because the most part of her Council were
Protestants, who could abide no ceremonies, and some of them had before
interred their own Noble parents without accustomed solemnities and
ceremonies. if she had been guilty of his death, to have cloked the same with
solemn funeralles: which has been, and is a thing very usual and common in
such cases.

The two simple presumptious of the Adversaries being thus truly answered, I
will now lay forth certain others on the other side of far more weight, to
show, that it was neither likely, nor almost possible, that her Highness could
be consenting to that foul murder of her dear husband.

First, because that Sex to win the hearts of her enemies (of whom she had
before pardoned some more the^ once) could by any likelyhod fall upon the
sudden from the height of so excellent virtue, as she was renoumed for through
Christendom, to the deep pit of such horrible sin and cruelty: as to murder
her own husband, a noble and goodly young Prince whom she so tenderly loved.
For that as good men assisted with Gods grace, do daily rise as it were by
degrees from virtue to virtue: so no man becomes upon the sudden, of
excellent virtuous, extreme vicious, but descends rather by diverse stepps
from worse to worse, before he come to the hiddeous bottomme of such
unnatural cruelty, as uneath a Tygre, or any other savage beast would have
used toward her make.

Secondly if her Highness had

Thirdly she would not consent for want of experience and stayed wisdom: yet
she nothing doubted, but he would in time prove a noble, wise and virtuous
Gentleman, and that she should with her dutiful and loving behavior toward him
sone win and reduce him from those small ouersights, which his tender mind
corrupted with evil counsel, had fallen into, whereof she saw in him already
a modest mislyking, and thereby great cause to hope as she did. But that every
way how so ever he should at any time forget him self, yet she would never
wittingly commit thing, whereby she should on her part, seem in any respect
unmindful of her duty toward him, whom she did and would heartily love, not
doubting of the like in time at his hand toward her.

Fourthly, it is to be considered, Cassius, in examinyng and considering, Cui
bono? which in such coniecturall causes may give great light of the truth, by
noting, whether part, the accuser, or else the accused, were like to take most
benefit by the fact.

It is certain, that her Highness could gain nothing thereby, but the heavy
displeasure of God, and perpetual infamy to her person: without the
hasarding whereof she had good and orderly mean, by due course of law, to
have been rid of him, had she been so disposed. But by the dispatche of him
in that sort, the Earl Murrey gained first to be revenged of him for
reuolting from him, and disclosing to the Queen his most traitorous
conspiracies and unkind practices ageynste her Highness: to whom the said Earl
was for her great liberality and bountifulnes toward him so singulerly bound.
He geyned also that notable occasion, which he had long sought, to draw the
Queen into slander and mislike with her best frinds: which was one principal
step toward the end, whereunto his ambitious mind tended.

The answer to the two principal points, whereupon the slaunderers do most
stiffly rely, as the chief colors of any probability in their most
slanderous accusation of the Queens Highness, together with certain most
notorious and clear prouses of her Graces innocence, in procuring, allowing,
or so much as foreknowing any whit of that horrible fact.

CAPVT. 2.
BYsydes the coniectural presumptions Objections.
before remembered two especial things are there (say they) so notorious to
convince her of procuring the murder: that she nor any her frinds can ever, as
they think, be hable to avoid them.

The first is a letter of her man: who was sent with the said box to the Earl
his Master, from Sir James Balfore Capte^ne of Edenborough Castle.



This is (say they) in the judgment of all the world such a testimony against
her, as there is nothing to be said unto it.

These in deed carry a great show, and give a very hollow sound: but so does
the empty run, if it be knocked on, yea it gives a greater sound, then that
which is full of good wine. So does the Cannon charged only with powder, make
as great a noise, as that which shoots forth a stone, and battereth the
sturdy bulwark.

But first for answer of your letter, which you make such price of, and have
so often showed both in the Court of England, and in all other places, where you
have come, as it might be wondered, that it should not be worn in pieces with
often handling long care this time, if you had not some extraordinary mean to
preserve or renew it: I pray you, let me demand of you, what date bears
the letter? None, you say. No does? Well, go to, perhaps it might be forgotten.
Whose name is subscribed thereto? None. No is? Why, how should the Earl then
know, whence it came? well enough, you say, by the hand which was her own and
so well known. Why? (...) might she as well have ^ouentured the subscribinge of
her name, as the writing of the letter with her own known hand. But had it,
trow we, any superscription? Truly to say, it had none neither. How know you
then, that it was written to the Earl Bothwel, and not as well to any other man?
The messenger (you will say) knew well enough, to whom he should deliver it. That
man be, but how know you? Have you at any time spoken with him, that was the
bearer thereof to the Earl? It is well known, ye neither, have, nor could:
syns there was never any such messenger, nor ever any such letter sent by her
or received by him, as shall hereafter plainly enough appear. But this
letter, I doubt not, co^^eiuing such secrets, was fast and cunningly sealed. In
good sooth, men say that have seen it, there is no show, that ever it was
sealed, or fast closed. A foul oversight truly. You may see, the old saying
is true, that often times haste makes waste. But what good luck had you, so
luckely to light on this letter, so long after: syns there is special request
made therein to the receiver, presently to burn it, after he had read it? Well,
let us consider yet a little better of this dealing, and confer the times:
perhappe we may thereby find some more light in the matter.

This letter (you say) was taken upon Dugglish among other letters sent in a
box from Sir James Balfoore the Captain of Edenborough Castle. When? Forsooth
after you had taken arms against the Queen and Bothwel, and driven them both
to flee. But who can believe you herein? Isther (I pray you) any probability or
likelyhod, that either the Earl would send to the said Sir James, who assisted
yt faction against the Queen with the strength and force of Edenborough Castle,
and had driven from thence the very Earl him self? Or is it likely, that the
said Sir James would for goodwil seek to co^uey any such thing to the Earl,
whose open enemy he was? Is this likely? Is it credible? Nay, would he not
rather have kept it for evidence against the Queen and the said Earl Bothwel
for some color and excuse of y^ undutiful reuolte made by himself, and the
rest of you against her highness, being his and your lawful and natural
Soueraign? May it not once again be said well and truly to y^ forster in of
this false die?

Non sat co^mode Diuisa sunt temporibus tibi, Daue, haec.

Can any wise man think it likely, that the Queen having always showed
herself so modest, so circumspecte and wise, would write any such letter with
her own hand, as might by any possibility be produced against her in such
evident sort to touch her honor? Or if she had been so void of grace, of her
wo^ted woma^ly shamefastnes, and of al regard to her honor, as she could have
condescended to write any such letter, was she so sodeinly become so simple of
wit and he also, y^ both they would have suffered that letter to remain exta^t
to the peril of them both, namely since the Earl was (you say) expressly
required in the same, forthwith to burn it? But yet it is her letter, you
say. How prove you it? Or is your credit such that you think men must needs
believe it, because you say it? The Civil Law, by which your Country is
governed, says: Scia^t cu^cti ac cusatores and? In English thus.

Let al accusers know, that they must bring to publik notice only such thing,
L. fin. C. de probat.
as is confirmed by apt, lauful and sufficient witnesses, or laid forth with
open documents and demonstration, or plainly unfolded by vndoubtful prouffes as
clear as the day light.

This rule in the trial of criminal causes is to be observed toward the
poorest and most abiec^ person that lives. Let us see then, whether you have
observed it toward your Sovereign. You produce to defame her, a letter, which
you say she wrote with her own hand to y^ Earl Bothwel: which letter yet
bears no date, no subscriptio^, no superscription, no seal, no one word in
it of co^mandme^t to commit the vile murder or any other cruel fact, or
importing any liking, or so much as knowledge of any such fact before don. But
you say, it has in it these suspicious words: our affaiers. As though the
Queen had no affaiers to imploie her faithful and foretried subect but in the
murdring of her husband, which you guess she me^t by those words. O impudent
and unkind subjects, that be not ashamed, if she had written any such thing, so
measure and construe the meaning of your most virtuous Sovereign, by the
vicious co^cepts that possess your own unnatural and dishonest minds! But
who was the bearer of this letter? Of like, the man in y^ moan. For he that you
would needs face to be the bearer, took God and his conscience to record at
his death, that it was utterly untrue. So does y^ Queen her self, protesting
upon her honor and faith, that she never wrote that letter. So did her Highness
Commissioners at York, openly producing, for proof that it was forged, two
other letters written in her name with her hand notably counterfaited by one
among you, whom for some respects I will forbear to name.

There is recorded by Valerius Maximus, Lib. ^. cap. 7. de fiducia sui.
of a noble Roman, whose name was M. Aemilius Scaurus, a man of great credit,
and service in the common wealth, that was accused by one Varius a vile person
of no credit or account: to whose accusation the Noble man would vouchsafe no
other answ^^ but thus: He says it: I deny it. Upon which only answer, the
people of Rome, being present, did not only with one voice presently acquit y^
noblema^: but forthwith theifel upon y^ accuser, and forced him out of y^
place, nor without some danger of his life. Such was the credit of that
Nobleman, and such the Noble consideration of that grave and well advised
people: y^ his only denial weied down all that the other had craftily forged,
and was esteemed for sufficient matter both to acquit ye accused, and to
condemn the accuser. The like with as good reason might have been don in this
case, upon the only denial of this most noble Queen and renoumed Lady. But
thus much I thought not amiss to set down in answer of this point of the
supposed letter, for the full satisfiyng of the curious.

Now to the answer of the and grace. But for the clear opening of that drift,
it is to be known and deeply considered, that the Earl Murrey, having as it
may seem, sucked a traiterons mind even with the milk of his lewd mother,
prefixing to him self, that nothing could better serve to the advancement of
his traitorous designements, then to bring the Queen into slander and
obloquie of the world, and thereby to alienate from her the minds of her frindes
and subjects: found now, that the next part he had to play, was to work, if
he could by any policy, such a fetch, as the Queen might be brought
ignora^tly to match herself in marriage with one of the murderers. He
therefore laid al his irons in the fire, and least no stone unremoved, or way
unattempted, to persuade her both by earnest letters, (which her Highness has
yet to show signed with his own hand, and with the hands of diverse Noble
men, and others his Confederats) as also with diligent and daily solicitations
otherwise (namely by one of their conspirac^^ then placed about her for that
purpose) to take to husband the said Earl Bothwel, whom (to remove al struple
they the Conspirators them selves had acquitted by their verdict, of the
murder, whereof he was somewhat suspected: having also prepared an open way to
that part of the Tragedy, by procuring a divorce alitle before, at the suit of
ye old Countess of Duntley, between the said Earl Bothwel and his wife* her
daughter, for that they were so nere of kin, as with conscience (forsooth)
they might not continue together. Pretending farther unto the Queen, that
bysides ye divorce before lawfully passed (as they said) God had also taken the
said Lady Bothwel to his mercy, so as to appearance there remained no
impedimente, but that her Highness might marie him. And so they earnestly
advised and prayed her Grace to do, as the only manne, that for his
Nobility, wisdom, valiantness, and many other virtues, they all judged the
fittest husband in the Realm for her Highness, and most likely by his
wisdom to stay the troubles, yt were like to grow by ye diverse factions,
that were among ye noble men: who would souer be appeased, and commit their
differents to be compou^ded by him, then by any stranger, whose rule they
should perhaps not be very apt so willingly to brook.

The Queen seeing this their earnest suit, with their most faithful promises
(as they seemed) of willing service and most assured loialtie to the uttermost
of their power, in case she would take the said Earl Bothwel to her husband,
myngled also with some threats, if she should refuse so to do: and withal
calling to her mind the sodeine and diverse vprores and seditions already made
against her, the cruel murder of her Secretary in her own presence, the late
strange and most lamentable murder of her husband, the diseumforte, distress
and desolate estate wherein she presently stood, the Earls actiuitie in
martial affaiers, the good and faithful service done by him to her mother and
her self: fearing also some new stir and immine^t troble, if she should deny
and refuse this so earnest suit made unto her by her Nobility (though she were
always before that time very wise, circumspect and prudent in all other her
doings: yet being a woman circumuented by so many crafty heads, and tossed
with diverse cogitations, never being openly or privately so much as once
admonished, that he was in troth guilty of the murder (which seeing and
hearing, as she saw and heard, she found no manner cause to suspect) and
bring in the mids of these careful thoughts, was met one day, as she was
ryding upon the way toward Kircliften, by the said Earl armed and accompanied
with men of war, and by him taken from her company, and perforce carried to
Dunbarre Castle, where what with fair means, and what with setting before her
eyes many immine^t dangers, if she refused, and being destitute of al counsel
or advise, and of all presence and access of any of her faithful servants or
frinds, at ye last she assented (at y^ suit made by himself, and so many other
of the Nobility) to that pretensed marriage. The consummation whereof, the
Confederates had not so sone compassed, but forthwith they proceeded to the
next Act of their Tragedy, giving out bruits into al Countries, yt she had
caused her husband to be murdered, and married ye murderer, which for yt it
stood not (forsooth) with their honor to endure, they presently took arms, and
ef^sones rebelled against their said Sovereign, bl^nding and be witching ye
world for ye time, with the probability of their assertion much increased by
that her pretensed marriage: whereof themselves were only yt procurers, as before
they had been of the murdering of her Secretary and her husband.

Thus do you see, how this good Lady has been handled, and how easy a matter
it is for a number of subtle and crafty heads, to overtake and deceive a good,
mild and well meaning Lady destitute of counsel. For her faithful cou^sellers
seeing the number and puissance of ye contrary faction so great, and by Knoxes
pulpit alarmes daily so increase, taking a fair warning by ye secretaries end,
durst not once quitche, or give unto her Grace such sound advise, as their
duties required But hereof enough. Let the Co^spirators make now what they can
of the pretensed marriage: the more they talk thereof, the more they do manifest
to the world their own most shameless impudency, in turning now to an
argument of suspicion against the Queen, that which them selves so busily
contrived, and unnaturally executed. Whereof their own letters, hands, and
seals remain witnesses void of all suspicion.

Thus having answered these two their chief and principal Obiectio^s, to wit,
of the letter and of ye pretensed marriage: I wi lay forth before you certain
clear proufes and notorious testimonies of her innocence of that case of the
murder.

First understand you, that a servant of the Earl Bothwel being executed for
the murder, confessed in the hearing of five thousand people and mo, that
Murrey and his Complites were the principal counsailers and assisters with his
master in that murder, and that so his master had told him: and confessed also
to have seen the Indentures, wherein the Conspirators had bound them selves
each to other, to make away the Lord Darley upon the first opportunity that
might be offered.

Also John Hay of Tallowe, Pourie, Dugglish and Paris being al put to death,
for that they were the executioners of that murder, did al and every of them
severally at their death, protest upon their consciences, as they hoped to be
saved at the latter day, that not only the Queens highness was utterly
innocent and unwitting of the Lord Darleys death, but that the same was
committed chiefly by the counsel, invention, and drift of the Earl Murrey, and
some others, whose names I spare for just respects.

nulla circuitione vsus, that the said Earl was of counsel to the murder of
the Lord Darley.

And afterward at York did the like openly in presence of the English
Commissioners, to the face of Murrey, and of the other (whose name I will
forbear to express, in hope of his repentance) and there protested, that he
well knew, the Queen to be utterly giltlesse and innocente of the matter,
nobly demanding the combat of them both in that quarrel.

Thirdly, when the Confederates taking arms, and assembling people against
their Queen, whom they falsely charged with diverse crimes without care of
their conscience, allegiance, the offense of God or regard to any other honest
or duetiful respect, being carried hedlong with a furious desire only to that
end, whereto their restless ambitious heads had so long before bended their
Macheuelian practices.

The Queen seeing this, assembled likewise a strong army of her faithful
subjects, to repress these Rebels. Wherevpo^ they perceiving her Heighnes to
draw fast toward them, sent to her from Edenborough (where by the favor of Sir
James Balfore the Ca^^ellan they had assembled them selves and their power) a
Noble man yet living, who in ye names of all the lords and other confederats,
did most humbly upon his knees assure her Highness of the security of her
person, of the safety both of her life and honor, and of al loialtie and
obedience at their hands, if it would please her Grace, to forbear force, and
to come peaceably into the town of Edenbrough, and join with them in
searching out and po^nishing the murder of the Lord Darley her late husband:
the revenge whereof (they said) was the only cause of their assembly, and that
in so doing her Highness should find them al there as ready to serve her to the
sheding of their blood, as any in her own army there present.

The good Queen hearing this their humble suit, and thinking them to have
meant as plainly and honorably as she did, loath (if it might be avoided) to
see such effusion of the blood of her subjects, as was like otherwise to
follow, and being armed with the secure testimony of a giltlesse conscience,
having there withal a mind no less desirouse in deed to see the horrible
murder of her late most dear husband boulted out, and duly punnished, as so
heinouse a crime deserved, then they in words pretended to have, carriyng with
her the innocency of her own conscience, yielded over soon to this the^
fraudulent suit: and so leaving her power, made repair into the Town of
Edenborough, where when she was arrived, expecting to have been in solemn and
dutiful sort received by the Lords according to the said Noble man's
words and pretensed promises made in all their names, her Highness to her
great amasinge, found all contrary. For her adversaries proudlye remaining in
her Graces Palace* (whereof they had possessed themselves) seeing now the
pray in their hands, which they had so long hunted after, and whereon they
intended to feed their bloody and ambitiouse minds, were so far from doing
that which they had promised, and she expected, that they caused her to alight
at a marchantes house, and there rudely and homely using her Grace all that
day, ye next night made her privily and spedely to be co^ueied in disguised
apparel to ye strong Castle of Loghleuen: where, within a few days she was
dispoiled of her Princely ornaments, and clothed with a course broune ca^^ocke.
And though the good Lady full often remembered unto them their faithful promises,
and made most pitiful and earnest intercession, that she might be brought
before the Counsel, to have her cause justly examined: yet for all this could
find no manner favor or justice at their hands.

The said Earl Murrey then having brought his reckenings to this pass,
presently without shame or farther cunctation, boldly usurped and intruded
himself into the government of the Realm, for the which his ambitious and
traitorous mind had so long and so greedily thirsted.

The Queen seeing these things, and being therewith not a little astonished,
repented, though to late, her so quiet relenting to their suit, and ouerquicke
crediting their feyned humble promises: when she was in case well enough by
force to have suppressed them. But this her doing gave ye^ a most clear and
notorious testimony to the world of her innocent conscience, tender care of
her subjects lives, and a plain honorable mind far from craft, and much
farther from such blooddy and cruel malice, as could give consent to the murder
of her husband, whom she so dearly loved.

This her guiltless innocence was yet more notoriously testified, when her
Highness being by the merciful providence and mighty hand of God delivered out
of the strong Castle of Loghleuen, environed with a broad large water,
furnished with great guard and numbers of soldiers, and whereof the Lord of
the Castle himself* being Murreys half brother did every night kept the keys*
when, I say, she being thus miraculously delivered and offered by diverse her
own subjects, to be trustely co^ueied into their qua^ters, where they would
warran^ her Grace safely to remain and a^ liberty to have gone freely to any
forreyne Prince, at whose hands she might well hope for aid in her just cause,
ageyn^^ her unnatural subjects, namel^ in France, where, while she^ was Queen,
she had by h^^ many virtues gained great^ love and estimation, and where the
worthy Cardinal of Loraine, and the reast of her Noble Uncles, bare under the
young King and his mother the chief swey in the government of the Realm: did
yet for the more notoriouse clearyng of her self, and notifiyng of her
innocence to the world, choose voluntarily, to make her repair into England,
where she knew were the Earl of Lineux, and the Noble Princess the Lady
Margarete, her late husbands father and mother, who (she trusted) would not
see the blood of their dear son unrevenged: where also she knew were a
worthy sort of Noble men, who would by all likelihood afford their
traueile in the indifferente examination of the cause, and therevppon finding
out the truth, would do justice to the guilty for the murder of their Noble
countrieman, and see the innocent both preserved and revenged. How could her
Highness give a more notable testimony of her innocence and most guiltless
conscience!

Fourthly, see how wonderfully parties against her (who had not at al come out
of Scotland to charge and accuse her, but upon the assured hope and promise
made unto them by the English authority) should be first heard, and al their
accusations at their desired length, opened and declared, before any of ye
Commisioners of ye Queen of Scotla^ds part should be heard, or suffered to
answer any point or article of their accusatio^s, until ye same were fully and
wholly given in all at length against her. Which accusations and presumptions
that they the party rebels minded to exhibit, being supposed to be matter
sufficient to occupy the Commissioners some days, and to spend so much time,
as might give unto the world a show and pretense of an indifferent proceeding,
it was then farther promised unto them, and agreed between the English
Governors and the Scottish Rebels, that their accusations being once heard,
and enrolled, and a short word or two suffered to be spoken for a show by the
Queen of Scotlands Commisioners, that then the ^^glishe Commissioners should
make some quarrel, and feine some cause to arise, to break of, and to make an
end of all that Colloquie and Commission. Which horrible confederacy of
partial proceeding notwithstanding, the said Englsh Commisioners were yet so
moved with that which fell out before them to ye manifest prouf of ye Queen's
innocence, and of the deep malice of her accusers (so far from their conceived
opinion and expectatio^s) that their former wrong co^cepts grounded upon y^
false rumors and other mischievous practices of her adversaries, began
generally to cease so farforth as they became to pity her case, and made
earnest request, y^ she might be restored to her Croune. And certain Noble
men (you know whom I may mean) having before spoken very broad and largely
against her Highness, did then clean alter the course of their talk, being
sorry for that, which they upon to light credit had said before. Also the
principal of the very Commissioners themselves, to wit, the Noble Duke of
Norfolk a right high and excellent Prince, the chief Peer of the Realm of
England, conceived so great liking of her Graces innocence and virtue, which
fell out apparent by that which was there uttered in the course of the matter
debated before his excellency, and the rest of the Commissioners, that upon
his report made thereof to the State and Counsel of England: and by the
motion and advise of sundry of the Counsel and Nobility, he began to
bethink himself of matching with her in marriage: and upon good consideration
of her well proved honor and innocence, desired at length nothing more, then
that his hap might be so good, to match in marriage with so virtuous a Lady.
And shortly after, love farther kindling and increasing in his noble mind
toward her, not blinded with affection to her beutie, whom to this hour he
never saw, but inflamed with the just love and liking of her singular virtues,
which he saw there suffciently testified: he became by means, not only a
suter for himself, but diverse others also of the chief Nobility of England,
seeing how honorable and convenient to the parties themselves, and profitable to
both Realms (standing in terms as they do) that match were like to prove,
became also in his Graces behalf humble suitors unto her Highness. Which could
not have happened, if upon the examination and hearing of the cause, there had
fallen out any suspect or probability of truth, in the vile matters and
objections surmised against her by her adversaries. For it is nothing likely,
that his Grace abounding, as he does, in wisdom, wealth, power, general love
of his countriemen, and in manner with all other worldly felicity, would seek
to match in marriage with one, that had justly remained in any suspicio^ of
having murdered her former husband.

Thus does the wonderful goodness of God daily appear toward the innocent
wronged and oppressed, that humbly resign themselves and their cause into his
hands. For how could any man almost with or devise more manifest and notable
things to happen for the no^orious discovery and testimony of the Queens
innocence in the fact wherewith she has been by her ambitious and ingratful
enemies so slanderously charged, then these, which have since happened?

But now, since we see her Highness so fully cleared, it shall not be amiss, to
note, what vehement presumptions, nay what open prouffes and clear arguments
have on the other side fallen out in the course and handling of these matters,
against the accusers, to convince even themselves of guilt, in conspiring,
procuring and compassing that cruel murder, whereof they thought to auert the
suspicion from themselves, by laying the same to the charge of the innocent
Queen.

Certain vehement presumptions with most clear and evident proufs, that the
accusers of the Queen, namely the Earl of Murrey and certain other of the
chief of his Confederats, were the deuisers, procurers, and some of them the
very executioners of the murder of the Lord Darley.

CAPVT. 3.
AS the Earl of Murrey and his accomplices, could never to this day by any
threat, promise of pardon, favor and reward, or other practices (whereof it is
known he used many) procure any one, not so much as a condemned person,
directly to charge or accuse ye Queen of consenting, or so much as any
foreknowledge of ye murder: so without any such practice, God has of his
justice so appointed, that diverse persons at sundry times and places have
voluntarily and of their own knowledge constantly charged the Earl Murrey and
other his confederates therewith.

But before I come to that point, I will reduce to you in some order, diverse
other things that went before: which when you have read, and advisedly
considered the same, you shall (I doubt not) easily be induced to think, that
those direct testimonies succeeding against Murrey and the rest of his
confederats, were like enough to be true, and so are in deed found to be, and
daily more and more confirmed by Time the mother of Truth. It shall not be
impertinent therefore in this place somewhat to note the causes, that moved the
Earl of Murrey to seek and procure ye death of the Lord Darley.

The first and original cause was the great and exceeding ambition, which
appeared wholly to possess the lewd mind of the said Murrey, aspiring greedily
to the Croune and government of that Realm: of which his inordinate ambition
if any man doubt, let him first know, that he was so far blinded therewith, that
he was not ashamed to make open and direct suit to the Queen in the time of
her first widowhood, to intaile the Croune of Scotland to him, (though he were
illegitimate and incapable thereof) and to the blood and name of the Stewards,
dissuading her in all he might, from all manner of marriage. Which things are well
known to most of the Nobility of that Realm. But when he saw that devise
would not take place, for that the Queen being young, and having no child,
desirouse (as was both natural and dutiful for the quiet of the Realm) to leave
an heir of her own body to reign after her, if so it should please God, was
determined to march herself in marriage with the said Lord Darley, being a
goodly young Prince, descended (as her self also was) of the Royal blood of
the aunciente Kings both of England and Scotland, and next after herself and
his mother, the next Heir in appearance to the Croune of England: Murrey seeing
this match to fall out very ill for his purpose, and the worse, because such
a young and beautiful couple, were not like to be long without children, he
first determined and practiced to have killed both the said Lord Darley and
his Father, and to have imprisoned the Queen in Loch^euen, and himself to
usurp the regiment of the Realm, as since he did. But the marriage being
sole^nised, before he could conveniently execute that his devilish intent, and
the same (as God would have it) being disclosed: so great was his malice and
ambition, that not being ^able any longer to contain or dissemble the same, he
then brake forth into open rebellion, showing him self with his Co^plices in
arms against the Queen his Sovereign and his most loving and bountiful
sister, by whose liberality he might dispend well xxvi. thousand pounds by
year after the rate of their money, and next unto herself ruled and commanded
the whole Realm.

And to win the moo to his faction, took hold and occasion of the
reuocacion she had made of the Acts and Alienations (of things perteining to
ye Croune) made in her minority (which al Princes of Scotland may justly do,
when, or before they come to the age of five and twenty years) prete^ding
that she meant to pluck from every man all the possessions of the Church and
Croune that he and the rest of the Nobility had gotten into their hands:
which amounted to more then two parts of three, of the revenues of the whole
Church and Croune of Scotland.

But his forces being by her highness loyal subjects sone broken, he fled into
England, where while he remained, he busily solicited and earnestly sued for
aid against his Sovereign.

Yet during the time of his remaining there, two things did he finely
cumpasse: the one was his own pardonne at the Queen's hands by the intreati^ of
such friends as he found in England, ye other the murder of David the Queen's
Secretary* whereof by his letters he gave a plat ^o certain of yt co^federats
yet living, and so earnestly solicited ye same, that it was executed in such
horrible sort, as ye world knows, in ye Queens own presence, at what time
she being great with child, laboring all she could by entreaty, to save
his life, had a charged pistolet bent against her, and was threatened, it
should be presently short of at her, if she would not quiet her self.
Which barbarouse fact used toward her, in the case she was in, gave unto
Murrey a special hope, that either she, or her child, or both, by that
sudden fright and fear should perish and miscarie.

This Secretare being thus dispatched, whose wisdom and fidelity, was no
small let to their desig^^^ mentes, Murrey the ^^rye next day even at his
^ue (as they say) for assisting of his Confederates if need were, entered
into Scotland, and presented him self with as smoothe a countenance in the
Queens presence (of whom he was gratiousely pardoned) as though he had
neither benne of counsel of that fresh slaughter of the Secretary, nor of
any other traiterouse attemptes against her Highness (such was h^^ noble,
curteouse and merciful ^^ture) kindly welcomed and lovingly received him
again, freely remitting all that was past.

Which when the Lord Darley saw, he much misliked, and repined thereat, fearing
that h^ would be (as afterward he wa^ in deed) revenged upon him: because he
finding by the danger, which both the Queen and him self stood in at the
furiouse murder of David, that there was a farther fetch in the matter, then
the bringing of the Croune and government to him (which in secret conference
and practice with him, was their pretense) did not only forthwith reconcile
himself to the Queen, but disclosed to her Highness, all the confederats in
that conspiracy, whero^ h^ ^onfessed the said Murrey to be the head and
principal.

Therefore doubting, tha^ when Murrey should hear of this, he would also
seek upon his person a bluddy revenge, as he had trained him in blood before:
he determined, to prevent the said Earl, and to kill him first. Which his
determination he opened to the Queen, and though earnestly she dissuaded him
from it: yet through fervent fear of his own life, and want of experience,
vndis^retely disclosed it to so many, that it came at the last to Murreys ears.

But he having a much more crafty head, then ye young Lord Darley had,
dissembling that he had any intelligence hereof, began then to hasten as much
as he could, the dispatche of the said Lord Darley, whereof he had before laid
the plat with his confederates, but chiefly with ye Earl Bothwel, whom at
his departure from the court toward France (for the subtle fox to abuse the
world would himself be out of the Realm when his devises should be
executed) he had put in trust as his singular and most especial and secret
friend, with the whole order of that affair, promising him (in reward of his
pains to be taken in the dispatche of the Lord Darley) his counsel and
furtherance in all he could, to marie with the Queen: wherein the crafty
Fox foresawe and intended, as has since appeared, the destruction both of the
Queen and him, and thereby an open way for himself to atteine the goal of
the regiment of that Realm, which since he has usurped.

Here you see a concurrence of two causes that moved Murrey, to con^riue the
murder of the Lord Darley. First, an ambitiouse hope, by taking him away, to
atteine with much more ease, the Croune, which was the mark he shot at: the
other, a fear that he had to be himself murdered by the said Lord Darley, if
he did not find some mean to prevent him.

Now remains it to be proved, that as Murrey was moved by these apparent
causes, to procure this murder: so in deed he was the procurer of the same.

For proof whereof: first it is to be known, that he to avoid said to the
Lord Darris: This night, ear morning, the Lord Darley shall lose his life.
which words the said Lord Harris, being of such honor and credit, as is
well known, did ^t sundry times, auow openly to the Earl Murreys face, and is
yet living ready to auow the same.



of some of his principal confederates, then banished into England for the
slaughter of the Secretary: without whose assistence, for their great courage
and wit to execute, his practices went but lamely forward.

Fourthly,

Fifthly, of the said Earl Bothwel, and other mischievous practices mingled
with pretensed humility and with covert terror, they had persuaded and
procured her Highness to marie him.

Then, when it was for her to late, and for them ^umpe in the nicke, they
sodeinly with open mouth blased abroad and published, that the Earl Bothwel
(forsooth) with whom the Queen had married, was the principal murderer of the
Lord Darley, whose death it came now sodeinly upon them, and much touched their
honor (as they said) to see revenged. And there upon presently brake they
forth again into arms against their Queen, whom^ when up seined submission
and false promises (as has been showed before) they had frandulently gotten
into their hands, and unnaturally cast into prison in Lochlenen (where the
^ewed mother and bastard brother of the said Murrey were dwelling): they little
then cared for pursuing or hurting the Earl Bothwell. For they permitted him
to remain there quietly in the Country certain months after, and to pass
safely whither he would, according to their former promise made unto him in
their names by a Noble manne yet living: who, when he was sent from Edenborough
to the Queens Camp, to persuade her Majesty, to lay arms aparte, and
peaceably to enter Edenborough, as is before remembered, took the Earl
Bothwell by the hand, and drawing him aside, abussed him, to depart for a
time, faithfully promising him, that no man should pursue or follow him.

by Ihon Hay of Tallow, Powrie, Dugglish and Parris at the time of their
deaths, as has been showed before.

Lastly, showed to the English Commissioners.

Now see how wonderfully God has wrought herein. If such vehement
presumptions as are before remembered, could be slightly past over, as things
that rather make likely, then clearly prove true yt which is gathered thereof:
yet is it not to be mistrusted, but so many witnesses directly accusinge Murrey
and his accomplices, at the hour of their death, Murreys foretelling the night
when the Lord Darley should be killed, the flat and weighty testimony of
the Noble Lord Harris yet living, and lastly the Indenture of that traitorous
conspiracy, signed and sealed with the known hand and seal of the Lord
Murrey and his Confederates, will fully satisfy all men ye have their common
sense, and give them matter enough clearly to see, who were the procurers of
that horrible murder, whereof the guilty malefactors have so unnaturally
slandered their good and guilelesse Queen.

I could here touch diverse points by the way, to wit, C. Qui accula^ non
po^ l Iniquu^ Et L. fin. L. Qui accu^at. ff. d^ accusat.
the inualiditie of the Accusers for the just and lawful exceptions, that the
Queen ^ughte take against every of them by the Law, which gives to the
simplest defendant that may be, the benefit and advantage of lawful exceptions,
not only against the accuser, but against the witness and Judge. Al which
three parts, that is to say, to be accusers, witnesses, and Judges also, they
them selves have taken upon them in this Tragedy.

And farther, if the Queen had been guilty, as she was not: yet ought she
not by them to have been deposed, no more then David was, when he had committed
both murder and adultery, or numbers of other Kings and Princes in the like
cases.

Further, that subjects ough: not for any cause, of their own private
authority, to lay violent hands on their anointed Prince. That their manner
o^ proceedidg having been altogether dishonest, and contrary to the law of God
and man, has made their doing evil, unjust and impious, Quia forma dat esse
rei: with diverse other such matters, which of purpose I omit, as not
necessary in this case, where the principal is so fully answered, as the
Queen or her frindes need not to flee to the advantage of those helps.

Praised be God, yt truth has yeelde^ such abundant and notorious prouffes of
her innocence, and their guilt, that her Highness may, has from the beginning,
and yet does offer to stand and join issue with her accusers, upon the
principal point by them most falsely and impudently laid to her charge.

A Capitulation of the Acts and parts of this Tragedy hitherto, without
producing all the Actors, diverse of whose names are for good respects to be
suppressed.

CAP. 4
THis Lord James, bastard brother to ye Queen of Scotland, and by her natural
goodness advanced to the Earldom of Murrey, to possessious and liuelyhod of
six and twenty thousand pounds by the year, to the whole government and
rule of the Realm next to her self (as has been showed before) being yet
pricked forward with an ungrate and ambitious mind, with the lewed inclination
he drew by kind out of his unchaste mother, and by the instigation of the
Diuel^, that would not suffer him to go on in the Ecclesiastical and religious
life, wherein he was once entered, and in some degrees professed, determined by
one mean or other, to make him self King of that Realm.

Toward the bringing of which his designment to effect, he first practiced, to
stay the Queen from marriage, and to entaile the Croune to him and to the name
of the Stewardes. Which devise not succeeding to his fancy, he determined, to
interrupt her marriage with the Lord Darley (whereof he saw her resolved) by
procuring the murder both of him and the Earl of Lineux his father. But God
preserving them, the marriage was solennized and consummate.

Then, seeing no way so likely to advance the desired success of his wicked
enterprise, as to devise some mean, to breed debate and misliking between the
Queen and her husband: he practiced, to put into the head of the said Lord
Darley a great desire which he and others of the Nobility had, to see the
Croune set on his headde, for that they wisshed (said he) rather to be
governed by a man, then altogether by a woman, declaring unto him, that many of
them did marvel, that there appeared in her so little regard to his Lorship,
as having worthily made him her husband, she would yet so unworthily suffer
him to remain in place of a subject: or so little magnanimity in him, that
giving all other ways sufficient show and testimony of a noble courage, he
could so meekely bear that dishonor, whereof yet he could not much impute
the fault to the Queen (who seemed in her very loving use toward him
otherwise, to reverence and regard the Nobility of his Roial blood and
excellent gifts of nature worthy in deed of any Monarchy) as to the envious
and spiteful secret working and persuasion of David her Secretary, a crafty
fellow, and as Murrey said, neither frind to his Lordship, nor to any of the
Nobility.

The young Prince hearing this, and lacking in deed no courage or greatness of
mind, but some ripenes of judgment (for want of years and experience) to
discern whereto this tale and devise tended, being easily circumuented by
this old crafty fox, and long practiced traitor, gave sone an inclining ear
to this his smooth talk, which showed outwardly, a great estimation of the
said Lord Darleys person and virtue, with a loving desire of his advancement.

Wherefore to make short, this young Lord having the same by diverse means
inculcated into his head, sometime by scorneful reproaches uttered to him by the
way of mirth, of his to base suffering such contempt, and sometime by subtle
persuasions and earnest instigations of sundry the Confederates: in the end,
the unfortunate young Lord was brought first to use stra^genes toward the
Queen, and sone after to join with yt Confederates that were wroughte by
Murrey to become the butcherly murderers of this poor faithful Secretary, in
whose body the said Lord Darleys own dagger was found sticking among a
number of other deadly wounds, wherewith he was there miserably stabbed, in the
very presence of the Queen his Maistres, being great with her first and only
child, and indeuouring herself by entreaty, and otherwise (as she was hable)
to save him, til by a charged Pistolet bent towars her (as was showed before)
she was also put in fear of her life, and violently thrust, not into her own
priui^ chamber, but into an other, with only one of her Gentle women to wait^
upon her.

Murreys ^nterprise being thus far ^duanted, he thought (this stumbling
block of the wise and faithful Secretary being remou^d, and therwithal so
notable a cause of unkindness cast between the Queen and the said Lord
Darley) he needed not much to doubt, but that he should well find the means,
shortly to bring to pass, that the said Lord Darley being now nusseled in
blud, should be wrought for geine of the Croune (which seemed offered unto him)
to dispatche also the Queen her self, or at the least, to give his consent to
the destroiyng of her.

But God otherwise disposed. For this Noble young Gentleman, by the secret
instinct of nature, and of Princely mind he drew with the Royal blood of his
Noble Mother, began even forthwith to repent, and to abhor the foul fact
he had committed. And there upon finding his own fault, and sou ashamed
thereof, he presently entered into the chamber, where the desolate Queen
kneeled in fear of her life, moorning his ingratitude, with the loss of her
old faithful servant the Secretary, and in humble and most feruente prayer to
God, to defend and preserve her and the infant in her womb, from the cruel
hands of those traitors, whose bloody daggers she looked presently to feel
also in her own body.

When he, being touched with remorse and with the grace of God (obtained, as it
may well be thought, with the pearcing prayer and abundant tears there poured
forth by that good and virtuous Lady) entered into the chamber: he presently
fell down on his knees before her Highness, asking mercy and pardon for the
great errors he had committed, with sufficient show, yt he was now heartily
sorry therefore, and gave very faithful assurance, that he would from
thencefoorth, unfeignedly be to her Highness such, as duty and her exceeding
kindenes and demerits toward him had justly bound him.

To make short, the good Queen, seeing this notable change so suddenly to
happen somewhat beyond her expectation: first most humbly thanked God (whom
she saw to be the only Author thereof) then lovingly embracing her sorrowful
husband, she not only pardoned sweetly all his former unkindness, and
grieuouse offenses committed against her: but seeing (better then he did) the
present danger wherein they both stood, she forthwith by her excellent
wisdom devised and put in execution such politik^ mean, as wherewith she
saved that night both him and her self by escaping away in disguised apparel.

The Earl of Murrey seeing then (contrary to his hope) this reconciliation
between the Queen and the Lord Darley: imagined, as it followed, that all
his traiterouse practices would be discovered to the Queen, and resolved with
him self, that now there remained no way for his own safety, and to advance
the desired end of his traitorous purpose, but to make short work, and to
get the said Lord Darley to be dispatched out of the way. And that being
done, he doubted not, by one devise or an other, to make a hand also with the
desolate Queen, or at the least to get her by some good coulor deposed, and
himself placed in the Roial seat and government of that Realm.

This mischeuous denise how he compassed and atcheued even to his mind, the
world has seen, and the process of this discourse has before opened. I will
therefore (desiring herein to be as short as I may) forbear the repeating
thereof again in this place, and proceed to the next Act of this Tragedy.

Yet one thing farther may I not omit to show, what faith and fidelity was
in this Traitor Murrey: who seemed now to have cast away al shame, al regard,
not only to God and his Prince, but also of his own honor, fame and credit.
For after all things brought to the terms you see, even as he would have it:
yet could he not by any means bring these things to such pass, but that
diverse yet of the principal Nobility of Scotland favored the Queen, and
remained her faithful and loyal subjects, soliciting daily by all means
they could (for by force they were not hable) to compound these great
garboiles and troubles, and to procure by some treaty, the delivery and
reducing of their Queen, whom bysides their duty of allegiance, they
singulerly loved and honored for her liberality, clemency, wisdom, and
other singular virtues.

They having therefore with earnest solicitation procured, that Murrey was at
the last content to come to a parlee with them, and to give them safe conduct
(which he did, with such other assurance by promise confirmed by oath and
writing, of free passing and repassing with safety, as they thought
sufficient, and so might, if there had been leaft in him any honor, honesty,
fear of God, or shame of the world) behold, even in the midst of their talk
and conference about pacification of their great troubles, he caused violent
hands to be suddenly laid on the Duke of Chastleroy, the most Noble and
principal Peer of that Realm: and on that grave, stout, and faithful Noble
man the Lord Harris, In Cronograp. Pontaci Burdeg.
and cast them both into close and straight prison, contrary to his promise,
faith, safe conduct, and assurance given unto them.

What Turk would so have used himself? How evidently did this part show, that
he was rather of a Punike, then of a Christian^ faith? How truly says the
wiseman; Prouerbior. 18.
Impius, cum in profundum venerit, contemnit: sed sequitur eum ignominia and
opprobrium. The wicked man, when he is come to ye bottom of iniquity,
becomes unpude^t: but shame and reproach follows him. Which you shall soon
see verified in this man, who se^ed now to think him self in such security,
as he contemned al honest respects, conscience, honor, honesty, faith, fear
of God or any other thing that good men use to regard in all their actions.

This bastard Earl having now by these blouddy and faithless steps atteined
to yt absolute regiment of ye Realm of Scotland, by the murder of David the
Secretary, of that goodly young Prince the Lord Darley, the traiterouse
imprisoning o^ the Queen his Sovereign, the shameful slandering of her, and
the violente pulling from her, and sea^ing into his bloody claws not only all
her ^ewels and treasours, but her dear child also and only comfort, now
remaining to take his turn the same way his father was sent, ere he should
grow up to any years and discretion to take notice of these things: it
remained, that God (having for such causes, as to his providence were best
known, permitted this wicked man, being leaft over to his own lusts, thus
far to proceed in his mischief) would now both by show of his mercy and
justice, give matter to the fourth Act of this Tragedy.

He therefore casting down from his high heavenly Throne a pitiful eye, and
enclining his merciful ear to the ^uefull lamentations of this woeful,
innocent, and desolate Lady criyng to him day and night for some comfort and
redress of these so many and so intolerable wro^gs done unto her, did first of
his Divine mercy and compassion miraculousely deliver this pretiouse Jewel,
this Noble and innocent Queen, out of ye strongest prison of Scotland,
thoroughly furnished with numbers of soldiers, enuironned with large deep
waters, and guarded by the very brother of this traitor Murrey, with the
assistence and lewd advise of their dishonest mother.

This being done by Gods wonderful providence, the Queen tendering not so
much the recovery of her Croune, as her honor and fame, by that wretched
Murrey and his Accomplices so shamefully touched, and unjustly impaired with
many, that knew no more o^ these deep practices, then that that was openly
given forth (to her slander) by the said Murrey and his fautors, and now
^f^soues poursued by the said Murrey by violence and force of armed men to
have been murdered in open field, if by the slaughter and death of many her
faithful subjects her own life had not been redeemed: she laying aside al
other respects took her way into England* where the Father and Mother of her
murdered husband dwelt, by whose means and good assistence she nothing
doubted^ but to get this soul matter indifferently examined, the truth to be
boulted out, and thereby her innocence made clear to the world, by the just
revenge that the Noble men of that Realm, assisted with her own loyal
subjects in Scotland, would take upon those her rebels and most unnatural
murderers of her dear husband.

But when her Highness coming with this honorable intent, was by Gods guiding
safely arrived in England: behold, she being at her first landing ge^tly
received, was (alas) soon after apprehended, and after a sort, cast there
again into prison. So great was the solicitation of her Adversaries, and so
great an impression had the slanderous bruits and traitorous practices of the
said Murrey and his friends made there in the minds not only of the Noble
men, but almost ^f all others generally.

Howbeit God that knew the secrets of al, after this notorious show of his
merciful compassion by the miraculouse delivery of this innocent Lady out of
the hands of her greatest ennemies, that intended her death, into a more mild
prison, where she was safe from such blooddy attemptes (which she did with
reason fearfully expecte in the other every hour) permitted Satan sone after
to pay certain the principal instruments and adua^cers of this his service
with their due deserved hire. For first he suffered a spirit of phrenesie to
enter into ye person of that Noble young Prince the Earl of Arrane eldest son
to the Duke of Chastleroy: which Earl of Arrane being in France of great
estimation for his goodly person, wit, courage, and nobility, and having there
great charge, credit, and very honorable interteinement, was by this traitor
Murrey, and an Ambassador then liggier there (whom I will forbear to name) so
finely practiced with (being promised, y^ if he would join with Murrey in
these atte^pts, he should have in England and Scotland dubble the interteinment
he h^^ there, and perhaps marie with ye best in England, whereof they gave him
diverse ways no small show of great likelihod) yt he unwisely condescending
to their lewd counsel and crafty persuasions, leaft the very honorable estate
and interteinment that he had in France, and becoming upon these hopes one of
Murreys confederates, repaired into Scotland, and sone after into England. But
finding in time, that things fell not out to the answering of his hope, and that
he failed both of the wife and double interteinment that was promised him: he
fell byside him self, or rather stark mad, and so living certain years, at
the last he died in plain Lunasie, and in very miserable case.

An other great man yet living, a principal member of this conspiracy, is
displaced of the regiment (which, next Murrey, he looked for) by such as h^
thought had favored him and his doings.

But yet more notable was the payment, that by Gods sufferance, the Devil gave
of deserved hire to his principal servant the Earl himself. For h^ being now
in his chief pride, enjoying al his desires, and thinking himself to have
made so sure with all his Adversaries, that he needed not to fear by them any
disturbance of his great felicity, was suddenly stricken, as he rode in the
midst of his Guard, with two or three pellets that were at once shot at him by a
Gentleman (no Papist, as the world knows) to whom he had in his late
government done in private very great and insolente injuries. And with the blow
falling presently from his horse, sone after he gave up his sinful ghost
amidde his tyrannical government of that Realm in all causes both spiritual
and temporal, whereunto he was climmed by such means, as ye have heard before.

Herevppon the Nobility there, are fallen also among themselves to such
dissen^ion, and all the subjects to such a lawless loosenes (while each man
attending chiefly to yt increace of his faction, malefactors are rather
cherist^d and borne out in all their enormouse factes, then any one justly
punnished and brideled by due course of law) as is like shortly by confusion to
breed the utter ruin of that Realm.

For such is the natural agreement between the ^ead and the members, and such
the secret instinct between the true lawful Prince, and the multitude of
loyal subjects, as while their true and natural head is detained from them,
and they neither will, nor can in reason, yield to the regimente of any usurper,
there is not to be hoped or looked for any other, then such invasions as they
have already tasted, and finally in short space a final ruin and desolation
of the whole Realm of Scotland.

Behold herein the merueilous justice of God, not only in notorious permitting
the just punnishment by speedy death of the chief particular Authors in this
to true a Tragedy: but in suffering these plagues to light also on ye whole
Realm, where such foul attemptes could find not only free course, but
abettors also and partetakers in such disloyal enterprises and wicked
proceedings.

Of which their desolation and plagues, when they have struggled al they can
one against an other, yet can they not hope for any other stay, til they
uniting themselves again in the fear of God and mutual accord, do by all ye
good means they possibly may, seek to be reconciled in all humble, dutiful and
unfeigned sor^, to their lawful, natural, and most gratiouse Queen: and to
procure the reducing and restoring of her to her liberty, honor, and
kingdom, whereof by the very lewd practices before laid forth and well known
to the world, her Highness has been, and presently is, so wrongfully deprived.

And now, good Cosine, having accomplished your desire, and also satisfied mine
own duty and conscience in revealing unto you the truth of these matters, for
so farreforth as I take on me to say, forasmuch as oftentimes it happens,
that such a private conference grows in time to be made more common, and
coni^cturing by the manner of your earnest and curiouse demand, to have it
with all such circumstances and particulars, as I could learn, that your
meaning might be (perhaps) in time to make it more public and common to
the world, then yet you would be acknowen of to me: and considering, that
thereby it should be by all likelyhode most conversant with the Nobility and
Gentlemen of this Nation of Scotland: I have therefore thought it convenient,
unto the end of this Letter or discourse to add these few words, as a brief
Exhortation unto them, unto whom for many respects I wish well, and have
compassion of their error, and do not doubt (for the good natures that I know
to be in sundry of the chief of them) but that they will both take it well,
and in time as they may, apply them s^lues thereunto. And thus I bid you right
heartily farewell.

AN EXHORTATION TO those Noble men of Scotland, that remain yet mainteiners
and defenders of the unnatural and dishonorable practi^es against the Queen.
AND now, my Lords of the Realm of Scotland, you that ^^ue unadvisedly (...)
your selves to be made the instruments and iointworkers of these mischieffes
by the crafty persuasions of th^^ ba^tard Earl, and are yet by other corrupt
and indirect means induced to persist and continue in the maintenance and
defense of the same: to you I will now be hold for a few words to direct my
speech.

If the just consideration of the subtle persuasions and deceitful pretenses
made unto you from time to time by the said Earl Murrey, who never opened unto
you the fine, end, nor mark of his traiterouse ambitiouse mind, that aspired
to usurp the Croune of that Realm, as more then manifestly appeared before he
died: if those false guiles, I say, now so evident in all your eyes, suffice
not to resolve you of the vnlefulnes of your procedings past in prosecuting of
this enterprise, and now at length to desist therefro: yet let the just end and
the sudden fearful fall of that Earl, in the midst and height of his pride,
be unto you al a spectacle and an example of Gods terrible justice, and
righteous revenge, that never fails at one time or other to fall upon the
Authors and woorkers of so horrible and monstruouse attemptes, how long soever
they be sometimes differred and delayed.

Consider (I beseech you) more advisedly then you have done, the very nature
and quality of these your actions and attempts: and way how far they pass
the limits of all honor in your selves, how they exceed the bounds of all
duty to God, to your Prince, and to your Country, and how they surmount the
cumpasse of al reason, civility, and human nature in the judgment of the
whole world.

And when you have considerately bethought your s^lues upon these your errors,
and have seen how meruelousely you have been abused by that false Traitor,
first to enter, and since to walk and wade forward in that lothesome and
odiouse bypath of undutiful disobedience, and unnatural treasons: you are not
(I trust) so utterly graceless, nor so deeply drowned in the dongeon of
insensible darkness, but that some remorse you shall feel, and motions of
repentance, for your so great ouersightes both toward God and your Prince. And
let your passed experience of your traueile and turmo^le so many years
continued, teach and assure you, that the farther you proceed in this vile
course, the more shall you still find of that, which you have hitherto found.
That is to say, that both your selves, and your whole natural Country, by
this your fault, shall sink daily deeper and deeper, as it were, into a
bottomless Gogmyre of infamouse calamities to horrible to be heard of.

Out of which to raise and recover your selves and your Country, there is none
other way leaft you, but again to untwist the threde, that your selves have
helped to spinne, beginning first with vnteined contrition, and calling to God
for mercy and forgeuenes for these your great outrages, and acknoweledging
withal, (as the truth is in deed) that since you first fell from him, and
forsook the true faith of your noble Progenitors (which for fleshly liberty
and covetousness of the Church goods you first abandoned) that by this
spiritual blindness wilfully embraced, you had never since ye grace to esteem
Civil justice, nor to observe the common obedience that al subjects, both
Christian, and Ethnical are borne in, and bound unto.

And secondly, with all humility and faithful meaning, to confess your
errors and faults unto the Queens Majesty your Sovereign, and to crave for
the same her gracious pardon, with promise and performance, by your faithful
vttermoste service in her obedience, even to the shedding of your bloods at her
commandment, to redubbe and acquit to your powers, your offenses past. And
if any respect of pride, wilfulness, corruption by reward, or unlawful oath or
promise shall withholde you yet any longer from the same, bysides yt ruin that
you see your Country suffers, the weakening and consumption of your
Nobility and people, the lying waste and vnoccupying of your natural soil, the
extinguishment of justice, and the unbridled educatio^ of your youth in all
unlawful liberty and mischief: bysides all these (I say) behold with what
eyes the whole world abroad, Christen and Heathen, must look upon you: upon
your selves, I say, y^ are the contriuers thereof, and what the present
tongues and pens of all sorts of men must say of the same.





same, neither with so many friendly treaties and amicable meetings, as among
your selves have been made for ending of this controversy, neither yet with
any counsel or authority foreine or domestical) you could never yet reduce
your selves to accord upon any other Prince or form of Regimente, that could
continue six months together, without being dissolved by some of your selves
that were parties unto it?

Is there any among you so that man's nature takes in conuersing friendly one
with another?





If none of all these do yet suffice, to persuade you to retire in time from
these your insolences: then behold, I beseech you, how manifestly to the eyes
of all the world the wisdom of God confounds your practices, and his
merciful providence conuinceth your folly. For, see you not, that even now
amids these your unlawful labors to renounce your obedience, and whiles you the
natural subjects of her Majesty have done your uttermost, and yet do still
turmoile (without pretense of just cause) to depose and deprive your undoubted
Soueraign, eue^ now, I say, whiles you are warmest in working of this, behold,
the Royal Nobility and people of England, in number far above you, and your
equalles at least (in every degree) both in living, in parentage, and in all
other gifts of God and of nature, and (who might in comparison of you be
accounted but as strangers or enemies to her Majesty your Sovereign) do with
one uniform mind adore and embrace her, and with all due devotion account her
for their Queen in succession, when God shall so dispose.

Close therefore no longer your eyes so obstinately against Gods wonderful
work. You plainly see, that whom you would spot and defame, God will have
cleared and showed to be guiltless: whom you with armed forces did imprison
and restrain, God set at liberty without any other hand or mean, then of
her own wisdom and policy: and whom you her subjects and vassalles would
dispossess of a meaner kingdom, unto which she was borne, God will have
advanced by strangers to a far greater and more ample Dominion.

If this much you see not, behold then the blindness of heart you are entered
into, and see the plain reprobate sense, unto which ye justice of God has
delivered you over: and if you see it, and will yet persist in it, though Gods
grace fail you, let yet ^he vain fame of the world and the idle reputation of
men, somewhat move you. Suffer not your selves from me^ to be changed into
unreasonable beasts, and to be accounted savage and wild, woodde or stark
mad, as al they are, that being once unawares stepte over the shoes in an
unsavory place, will yet run headlong forewarde, til he sink in the same over
headde and cares, rather then he (...) in time retire, and cleanse his shoe
again.

It is human to fall and to err, but it is devilish to persist and continue.
It is no shame to return from evil, but the shame is to defend evil, and
wilfully to rest therein. You have forsooth examples enough, that inuincibly do
prove, that there is no time past for your recovery, if you will. For many are
there yet living among you, that once were parties with you, whom Gods grace
and their own honors and wisedoms have brought to see their error, and to
refourme ye same: whereby they are every way restored both to their Princes
favor, and to their own reputation in the judgment of al men. Fear not
therefore, nor forbear not any longer to follow their example, and to take
that safe way, that they have trodden before you, which is safe and assured for
your selves presently, for your families and successions to come, and for your
souls eternally.

If you think the weight of your crimes to be more heinous, then can easily
be pardoned: behold your Sovereigns clemency, that singularly shines among
and above al other her princely virtues, wherewith she is abundantly adorned. I
need not in this to spend many words, the examples thereof are so many, so
fresh, and so sufficiently testified by the experience of many of your selves,
upon whom she has exercised and put in ure the lesson of the Gospel, Matt. 18.
that teaches none end to be of forgeuing offenders, that do in time duly
seek it.

Neither are you ignorant, that of herself she is both grateful of nature, and
wise in policy: by both which she must of necessity be induced, both heartily
to forgive them that now heartily turn unto her, and to see that the state of
her Realm, and of her own person also are presently such, that as it were in
deed no policy for her to do otherwise, so may your fidelities and services
now stand he in such stead, as may justly deserve the pardon you crave, and
bind her in honor to remember them for ever.

If Gods holy word (which you pretend to adore) do manifestly threate^ a
terrible revenge to them that grieve and oppress the widow or orphane (were
they the poorest that may go on the ground): And if the state and dignity of
Gods anointed be so sacred in his sight, that he forbids the same once to
be ^ouched: shall these your insolences then against your Sovereign in her
desolate widdowhood escape vnpunnished, she being ^ch a Queen, as for whom it
seems that even from her birth not Scotland alone, but England, France, and
Ireland to have seemed to contend which of them should have her for their
Gouernesse and Queen: yea, whom God himself (foreknowing by his Divine
prescience, what a Paragon of virtue she should prove) seems verily to have
appointed to be Queen in time of all sower Realms.

Finally behold, what has been the event and success of al such seditious
conspiracies in all times and ages before your days. Peruse ye Histories both
of your own, and of all other Countries. And if you little esteem the memory
of things far past, behold the experience of these present days. Look into
all Countries and Nations near adjoining unto you, and you shall find, that
none of them has escaped from rebellion and intestine sedition within ye time
of your own memories, nor that yet they are clearly delivered of the dregs
of the same. And what has (I pray you) ensued thereon? They have kept in deed
a great stur for a time, but what have the Authors and mouers gained thereby,
other then their own utter ruin and infamy for ever? And what is become of
that they have striued for? When they have long contended mutually emonge them
selves, and when each has spilled much of others blood, and many an honest man
dead in the quarrel: the matter for the most part remains as it was, and
little or nothing bring they to pass of the huge alterations that they attempt,
nor never shall, thereof assure you.

For the Majesty of God that is ever one and the same, never prospers ye
unlawful attempts of Subjects against their Princes, enterprised by private
authority. Let Machiauel say what he list, and believe him who will: ye that
are his disciples, to your own perditions you shall find the end as I tell you.
For bysides that Divine authority so promises it, and worldly experience so
teaches it, very reason also shows, that it can be none otherwise. For where
the foundation is faulty and hollow, the more weight that is heaped and
builded thereon, the sooner it brings the whole to ye ground. And what has been
the foundation of al these your garboiles, oath your selves do know, the world
sees, and I have briefly told you, as this place will permit. Whereupon to
build and heap on, any more of y^ kind of stuff, you shall ^inde it not only
vain and fruitless, but plainly pernicious, and to work your own
destructions.

Al men that have either learning, wit or common sense, discovering daily more
and more the infinite calamities, and the very gasping death, as it were, of
their whole Nation and Country fast to approach by mean of these vprores and
sturres, already do, and daily will wax weary thereof, detest the cause, and
give you over in the plain field: and so would have done (no doubt) ear
this, if the sweet taste of forcine rewards had not holden them more, then any
devotion they have now to you or your cause.

If still you depend and hope upon other Princes assistence: that will but
deceive you. For as it is not vnknow^n, from whence you have had your supporte
hitherto: so does all the world well know withal, that for others own policy
only, and not at all for yours, you were at the first suborned, and ever since
maintained, to do, as you have done: and to be but the ministers and
instruments in deed of their private practices, that neither long shall need
your ministry therein, nor shall not for ever be hable to sustain you in the
same, but shall and will, care it be long, even for their own better policy
also, jointly with all other Princes abroad, abhor and detest the perilous
president, that herein you give to the great multitude that are subjects borne
every where.

And albeit some of them do for the time serve themselves of you: yet doubt
you nothing of it, but that even they that so do, see well enough, know right
well, and judge both you and your doings to be as they are, and will no longer
spot and distaine their Princely personages and honorable vocations with the
maintenance of so dishonorable attemptes, and of so daungerouse examples to all
Monarks and Kings: no longer, I say, then whiles of mere necessity, they shall
think them selves thereto constrained by their own policy, but shall then
leave you in the midst, and let you go as you are, to your own perpetual
infamies, and to the rasing and extirpation of your names and succession for
ever, if you do not revoke your selves, and retire in time: which that you may
do, God of his mercy grant you the grace, etc.

FINIS.

